20150 99850237 15424
THE Resolued Christian, exhorting to Re∣solution. Written, To recall the Worldling, to comfort the Faint-harted, to strengthen the Faithfull, and to perswade all Men, so to runne, that they may obtaine. By Gabriel Powel. The night is past, and the day is at hand, let vs there∣fore cast away the workes of darkenesse, and let vs put on the armor of light. Rom. 13.12. LONDON Printed by V. S. for Thomas Bushel, and are to be sold at the great north doore of Paules. 1600.
To the right honorable Sir Tho. Egerton knight, L. Keeper of the great Seale of England, one of her Maiesties most honorable priuie Councell. RIght Honorable, I make bolde to pre∣sent vnto your Lo. patronage this smal Trea¦tise: the Subiect whereof, affoording store of wea∣pons, to fight against the allurements of the world,
the frailty of the flesh, and the feare of death, is ney∣ther triuiall nor vnprofi∣table: the maner of hand∣ling, furnished with sen∣tences of holy Scripture, fraught with exampls, & garnished with variety of familiar similitudes, not affected nor vnpleasaunt: the Vse, to recall the vn∣ruly worldling, to comfort our distressed frend, & to
solace our owne soules, ve∣ry fruitfull & necessary: & the End, to strengthen the faithful, to arme them with Faith & Patience, against the serpentine as∣saultes of the Children of Babylon (who long since haue heated their furnace hoter than that of Na∣buchad-nezzars, wherin they are ready to throwe all those that will not fall
downe and worship their golden Image) a strong & necessary prouision. Thus not doubting of your Lo. good liking, & acceptance hereof, such is your zeale to Vertue and Piety: and humblie entreating that your L. good fauor which hath bene so much enlar∣ged towardes Doctor Po∣wel my Father (who now with the Lorde hath rest
from his labors) wil not be straightned vnto vs, his poore Children: I beseech the Lord Iesus blesse your Honour, and make you zealous more and more, for the Gospel: giue you a swift foote to hunt out the Bulles of Basan, and the wily Fox-cubbes that de∣stroy the yoong Ʋines: heape vppon you his bles∣sings spirituall and tem∣porall,
that in a good hope you may runne your race, and in the end, obtaine the high price of your calling. Your Lordships to commaund, Gabriel Powel.
To the Reader. Resolute, or Not-resol∣ued Christian, seeing Delight is the onelie marke that the Humors of our Age do aime at: Behold (Man described, the World displaid, Death vnmasked, Feare dis∣pelled, Temptations retented: the Sicke comforted, the Pri∣soner cheered, the Faint-hear∣ted strengthned, the Afflicted solaced, the Strong embold∣ned,
the Persecuted encoura∣ged, and Persecutors warned) an effectuall, delightfull, and sweet baite, to allure all men to Resolution, very wholesome, profitable and ne∣cessary.
The Arguments of euery Chapter and Section, of both the Bookes. Chap. I Of the Miserie of Man. Sect. 1 Of the miseries and calamities of this life. 2 Of the miserable nature and condition of Man. 3 Of the miseries incident to the seuerall Ages of Man. 4 Of the miseries of all estates. 5 Of mans three cruell enemies which further and encrease his miserie. 6 Why God would haue our life to be so miserable as it is. Chap. II Of Death. Sect. 1 What Death is, and of the necessitie thereof.
2 Of the vncertainty of the houre of death. 3 That death is to be desired of the godly. Chap. III The causes why Man doth feare death. Chap. IIII Of the first cause that maketh death feareful to a worldly man, which is, the losse of honors, wealth, pleasure, &c. And the Remedies against the same. Sect. 1 How farre we ought to be addicted vn∣to the world. 2 A Remedie against the temptation of worldly honors and preferments. 3 A Remedie against the temptation of
worldly riches and wealth. 4 An other remedie against the same temptation. 5 Testimonies out of the word of God, a∣gainst the vanitie of worldly wealth. 6 A remedie against the temptation of worldly pleasures. 7 A remedie against the temptation of vnwillingnesse to forsake Wife, Chil∣dren, and Friends. 8 That though a man die in debt, yet hee should not feare Death. 9 Testimonies out of the holy Scriptures, touching the care that God hath ouer Widowes and fatherlesse Children. Chap. V Of the second cause that maketh death fearefull to a worldely man: which is, the paines and sicknesses which come before or accompany Death: And the remedies against the same.
Sect. 1 Vnmortified men no fit inhabitants for the heauenly Ierusalem. 2 That sickenesse and tribulation is a to∣ken of Gods loue. 3 That God hath appointed his holy An∣gels to guarde and preserue vs in our sicknesses and troubles. 4 Comforts taken from the consequents following death. 5 Testimonies out of the holy scriptures, that God is alwayes ready to help and assist them, that seeke vnto him in the time of affliction and miserie. Chap. VI Of Patience. Sect. 1 An exhortation to Christian Patience, after the example of Christ our saui∣or. And how the wicked behaue them∣selues in their afflictions.
2 How the godly behaue themselues in their sickenesses and other calamities whatsoeuer. 3 That extreamitie of paines shoulde not cause vs to be impacient. 4 That no man may asswage his griefe, by laying violent hands on himselfe. 5 That our impatiency doth prouoke God the more to punish vs. 6 Testimonies out of the holy scriptures exhorting vnto patience. Chap. VII Of the third cause that makes a world∣ly man to feare death; which is, the want of Faith and Hope. And the remedies against the same. Sect. 1 That Faith is grounded vpon the faith∣full promise of Almighty God: and of the excellent effects of the same. 2 Remedies against the weaknes of faith
3 That though a man presently feeles not the peace of conscience; nor hath a liuely apprehension that he is the child of god, yet he may haue true Faith. 4 That god dooth oftentimes suffer his Children to be in a maner desperate; and yet raiseth them vp againe. And how we may know if we haue any faith 5 That the least measure of true Faith that is, or can be, is effectuall to salua∣tion. 6 Testimonies out of the worde of God, concerning life euerlasting, vnto the which the Faithfull do come by death. Chap. VIII Of the fourth Cause that maketh Death fearefull to a worldly man: which is, his guiltie conscience, and the feare of Gods iudgements and punishments. And the remedies a∣gainst the same.
Sect. 1 That God is ready to forgiue our sins, and to receiue a repentant sinner into grace and fauour. 2 That the faithfull ought not to feare damnation, forsomuch as they be the children of God. 3 That the members of Christ ought not to feare death and damnation, because Christ their head hath vanquished and ouercome them already. 4 That Forgiuenesse of sinnes, is not a common benefite, as the secure and carelesse christian imagineth. 5 What we must doe for the obtaining of the remission of our sinnes. 6 Testimonies out of the worde of God concerning the forgiuenesse of sinnes, promised to all such, as, cleauing fast to the merites of Christ only, are truly penitent.
The Arguments of the Chapters and Sections of the second Booke. Chap. I A Remedie for vnpenitent and obsti∣nate Malefactors, that by the Magi∣strate are adiudged to die. Sect. 1 That there is a God. 2 That the soule of man is immortall. 3 The wrath of God against the trans∣gressors of this Commaundements. 4 Transgressours of euery one of the ten Commaundements, and their punish∣ments. 5 God his punishments vpon sinners at the day of Iudgement, with an exhortati∣on to Repentance. Chap. II Comforts for the broken-hearted and penitent Malefactors, that by the Magistrate, are adiudged to die.
Sect. 1 That iudgement commeth from God. 2 Particular directions for the distressed partie. 3 How the place of Peter is to be vnder∣stood, where he saith, Let none of you suffer as a murtherer or as a theefe, &c. And that God sometimes doth call men by this meafnes. 4 That the multitude of our sinnes should not make vs faint-hearted. 5 That late repentance is good, if it be true repentance, and how a man may iudge, whether his repentance be vn∣fained, or not. Chap. III comforts for such condemned per∣sons, who feare and dread the rigor of the punishment they are enioy∣ned to suffer. Sect.
1 What a man must do to be eased to the painefull apprehension of death. 2 How God ordinarily behaueth himself towards the Elect in this life. 3 That the continuance of tormentes, should not make vs afraide or vnwil∣ling to die. 4 That God oftentimes dealeth more mercifully with vs, then we doe per∣ceiue he doth. Chap. IIII Comforts for persons wrongfully con∣demned to death. Sect. 1 That because we haue deserued death by our manifold sins, we ought to die willingly, though otherwise wee be in∣nocently condemned. 2 That we must not reuenge our wrongs. 3 Comforts taken from the examples of
them that haue beene innocently ad∣iudged to die. 4 Comforts taken from the example of our sauior Christs innocent suffering: with a briefe declaration of the same. Chap V Comforts for such as suffer persecution or death, for the Testimonie of a good conscience in matters of Reli∣gion or Iustice. Sect. 1 Whereof it commeth that the wicked doe persecute the godly. 2 That we must patiently suffer persecu∣tion and affliction for Religion or Iustice sake: and why? 3 That it is a blessed thing to suffer per∣secution for Religion or Iustice sake. 4 Of the benefites that the Crosse or af∣fliction bringeth vnto vs.
5 That our afflictions are foreseene, and appointed by God, and therefore to be taken in good part. 6 That wee ought not to bee dismaide at persecution, forsomuch as our cause is good. 7 That their estate is very daungerous that neuer suffer affliction. 8 That whosoeuer will bee ashamed of Christ, Christ will be ashamed of him. 9 That worldely pleasure, wealth, &c. shoulde not withdrawe vs from the confession of the trueth. 10 Conscience in religion must not bee dissembled. 11 Against the offence of the yeelding of time-seruers, though they be better learned and wiser then we be. 12 That though the world condemne vs for fooles, and too nice, yet wee must not take the start of profession. 13 That imprisonment for the testimony of a good conscience, is not thral∣dome
and bondage, but rather liber∣tie and freedome. 14 That increase of torments should not feare vs, but rather comfort vs the more. 15 That God loueth vs neuer the lesse, though hee suffer vs to taste of his cup, but rather, that he doth loue vs the more. 16 That burning aliue is not so extreme a torment, as commonly it is thought to bee. 17 That the patience of the saints is not Stoicall indolencie. 18 That we must not be dismaide, though friends forsake vs: and that we must not yeeld vnto their vngodly sug∣gestions. 19 That the pretence of nourishing of wife and children (when they haue no other meanes to liue) is no cause why we should deny or dissemble the knowne trueth.
20 That the Lord will not faile his chil∣dren in these daies, no more then he did in times past, in the olde Testa∣ment, and in the time of the Primi∣tiue Church. 21 That we should not be dismayd at the faces, behauior, and maiesty of mor∣tall men. 22 Comforts against the dulnesse of spi∣rite, and vnfitnesse to suffer. 23 What a great dignitie Martyrdome is. And how we should not think our selues vnworthy to suffer for Christs sake. 24 What the enemies of the trueth pro∣cure vnto themselues by persecuting and murdering of Gods children.
THE FIRST Booke of the Resol∣ved Christian. Chap. I. Of the miserie of Man. Of the miseries and calamities of this life. Sect. I IF they be miserable, thatLuc. 16.19 luc. 19.42 see not their owne miserie: howe muchLuc. 6.24.25, 26 more miserable are they that are so farre in loue with this mortall and transitory life, that were they sure to liue alwayes in this worlde, they would not set aMat. 6.21 luc. 12.19 poynt by the kingdome of God! These be they,Phil. 3.19 whose end is damnati¦on, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is to their shame, which mind earthly things: These be they,1. Lo 2.16 whom the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, do rather allure to2. Tim. 4.10 loue & like this world, than theLuc. 16.25 pains of euerlasting mi∣series to come, may cause to abhorre & loathe it: And these be they, who neuer tasted itPsalm. 34.8 how
sweete the Lord is, nor theCor. 2.14 spirituall consolation and ioy of the godly2. Pet. 2.12 But as naturall bruit beasts led with sensualitie, and made to bee taken and de∣stroyed, speake euill of those things which they knowe not, and shall perish through their owne imagination.Psal. 50.22 Oh consider this ye that forget God, lest he teare you in peeces, and there be none that can deliuer you.Rom. 3.2 God is true and righteous; if you will not turne,Psal. 7.12 he hath whet his sworde, he hath bent his bow, and made it readie:Psal. 68.21 Surely God will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairie pate of him that walketh in his sinnes:Psal. 9.17 The wicked shall turne into hell, and all nations that forget God;Zeph. 1.18 ezech. 7.19. neither shal their siluer or gold, be able to deliuer them, in the day of the Lords wrath, but that theyZeph. 3.8 shall be deuoured by the fire of his iealousie. Away then with prophaneSyrac. 19.5 pleasure, despise theseEccl. 1.2 vaine delights, & contemne this2. Pet. 1.4 wretched worlde: of whose1. Io. 5.19 miserie,1. Thess. 5.2 vncertaintie,1. Cor. 7.31 frailtie,Iona. 2.8 changes and chances, not onely the sacred Scriptures doe crie out against, but also many wise and learned Philosophers, though Pagans and Ethnikes, haue left sufficient testimony.Iam. 4.4 The amitie of the worlde is the enimitie of God: whosoeuer therfore will be a friend of the world, ma∣keth himselfe an enemie of God.Eccl. 1.14 I haue considered (saith Solomon) all the works that are done vnder the Sunne, and beholde, all is vanitie, and vexation of the spirite. For proofe hereof to insist onely
in the best creature in the worlde, for whose sake all things were made, to wit MAN,Gen. 1.27 cre∣ated after Gods owne image: who when hee hadGen. 3.6. renounced his former integritie, into whatRom. 3.16 calamities and miseries he fell, it is im∣possible to vtter. For Nature being fallen through the offence of the first Man, and defi∣led through Sinne, the punishment thereof hath redounded vnto allRom 5.18 posterities the seede of Adam: So that Nature, which at the first wasGen. 1.27 made good, perfect, & righteous, is now be∣come soGenes. 6.5 vaine, soIam. 4 9 miserable, soPsal. 62 9 fraile, and so1. Cor. 15.42 corrupt, in as much as the motion left vn∣to it, tendeth alwayes vnto euill and inferior things. Of the miserable Nature and Con∣dition of Man. Sect. II RIppe the whole condition and state of Mankinde, and then you shall partely perceiue the frailetie thereof. Man isGen. 2.7 made of the earth,Psal. 51.5 conceiued in sinne, andIob 5.7 borne to paine. Man isEccl. 9.3 euillRom. 7.24. wretched,Iob 15.16 fil∣thie,Psal. 14.1 corrupt and abhominable, doing nothing that
is good,Rom. 6.12 mortall,Psal. 62.9 vaine andEsa. 9.17 vnprofita∣ble,Psal. 62.12 vanitie, altogether lighter than vanitie,1. Kin. 8.46 sin∣full,1. Cor. 15.19 miserable,Gen. 18.27 dust and ashes,1. Cor. 15.42 43 sowne in cor∣ruption, dishonor and weakenesse,Ier. 17.9 deceitfull,Iob 1.21 na∣ked,Eccl. 9.3 subiect to death,Ephes. 2.1 dead in sinne,Rom. 3 4 a liar,Esay 9.17 an hypocrite,Rom. 8.7 an ennemie vnto God, a creature thatIob 15.16 drinketh iniquitie like water, aGen. 47.9 pilgrime,Esay 40.6 grasse,Iob 8.9 ignorant, a1. Chro 29.15 stranger and soiourner, ofIob 14.2 no conti∣nuance,Psal. 18 5 compassed with the snares of death, 2. Sam. 14.14 wa∣ter spilt on the ground.Iob 25.4 By birth vncleane, aEphes. 2.3 child of wrath, aLuc. 13.27 worker of iniquitie,Rom. 3.13 an open sepul∣chre,Iob 25.6 a worme, theEsay 51.8 meate of wormes,1. Mac. 2.62 doung and wormes,Rom. 3.23 depriued of Gods glorie, aIob 7.7 winde,Gen. 27.2 ignorant of the time when he came into the world, and when he shall depart, aIere 10.14 beast by his owne knowledge,Gen. 6.5 from whom nothing can pro∣ceede but that which is corrupt, aEsay 14.19 rotten carkasse,Psal. 146.3 in whom there is no help,Ro. 7.18 in whom dwelleth no good thing. Man is compared vnto thePsa. 49.12 foolish beasts, toEsay 51.12 grasse, to aIob 14 2 floure that fadeth, to aEsay 41.2 scattered stubble, to aIob 14.2 shadowe, toIob. 8.9 yesterday and toPsalme 62.9 vanitie. ThePsalme 89.45 daies of his youth are shortned, and he is couered with shame.Psalme 60.11 His helpe is vaine,1. Corinth. 3.20 his thoughts are vaine, his
Psal. 146.4 thoughts perish: HisIere. 17.9 heart is wicked and deceit∣ful,Eccl. 9.3 ful of euil and madnes. HisPsal. 39.11 beautie consu∣meth as a moath: hisRom. 3.13 throat is an open sepulchre; he vseth his tongue to deceit, the poison of aspes is vnder his lippes: hisRom. 3.14 mouth is ful of cursing and bitternes; hisRom. 3.15 feete are swift to shed bloud; The  feare of God is not before his eies;Rom. 3.18 he shallEsay 40.6 va∣nish as the grasse. The1. Pet. 1.24 glorie of man is as the floure of grasse, thatIob 14.2 vanisheth as a shadow, theEsay 51.8 moath shall eate it vp: hisEsay 64.6 righteousnes is as fil∣thie clowtes. HisWisd. 2 1 life is short and tedious, itWisd. 2.4 pas∣seth awaie as a trace of cloude, as the mist, as aWisd. 5.9 post that passeth by,Wisd. 5.10 as a shippe that passeth ouer the waues of the water; as aWisd. 5.11 bird that flieth through the aire, as anWisd. 5.12 arrow that is shot,Wisd. 5.13 as soone as wee are borne, we beginne to drawe towards an end.Wisd. 2.4 Our name shalbe forgotten in time, and no man shall haue our workes in remembraunce. MansIob 7.1 daies are as the daies of an hireling, as1. Chro. 29.15 a shadow, asPsal. 78.39 a winde that passeth and commeth not againe, as aPsal. 103.15 floure of the field, as aPsal. 39.5 spanne long, as aIob 20.8 vision of the night, as a dreame, theyEsa. 64.6 fade like the leafe,Iob 7.6 swif∣ter than the weauers shuttle; they areIob 14.1 full of trou∣ble,Genes. 3.17 full of sorrow,Iob 7.16 vanitie,Ierem. 17.9 deceitfull,Esay 40.17 no∣thing, yea lesse than nothing: whereuppon Solo∣mon sayd well,Eccl. 4.2 The dead are better than the liuing.
Of the miseries incident to the seuerall ages of Man. Sect. III. THe Prophet Ieremie crieth out,Iere. 20.18 How is it that I came forth of the wombe, to see labour and sorrow, that my daies should be consumed with shame! How much more cause haue we,1. Cor. 15.19 (miserable creatures) to crie out of ourRom. 3.16 ca∣lamities, who werePsal. 51.5 conceiued and borne in sin, seeing Ieremy complaineth so much, be∣ingIere. 1.5 sanctified in his mothers wombe? OhPsal. 62.10 vaine, miserable, and vnhappy Men! Before we sinne, we are straitRom. 5.12 fastened to sinne, and before we can offend, we are fast bound with offence.Ezech. 18.2 Did not our Fathers eate the sower grape, and are not the teeth of the children set on edge therewith? Consider, O Man, from whence thou camest, blush whither thou go∣est, and feare where thou liuest; we are begot∣ten inPsal. 51.5 vncleanes, brought forth withGen. 3.16 throbs and throwes, and nourished inEphes. 6.12 darkenes: we began our tragedy withWisd. 7.3 nakednes & weep∣ing; we continue our parts, withSyra. 40.1 paine and vexation, and with sorrow and miserie wee must take our farewell; our beginning isGen. 3.16 la∣mentable, our continuanceEccl. 9.3 wretched, and our departure greuous. The whol life of man, is beset and encountred with three capitall e∣nemies,
Iob 14.1 Paine,Rom. 7.24 Care andcor. 10.12 Sorrow; paineHeb. 12.11 pincheth vs, careSyra. 30.22 consumeth vs, and sor∣row2 Cor. 7.10 Miseries of Infancy. shortneth our daies. There is no age of Man free from affliction and miserie.Ioh. 16.20 In his Birth; Intollerable is the Mothers paines, and infinite are the Infants miseries; who com∣meth into the world, crying & weeping, poor, naked, weake and miserable, without speech, knowledge or strength to go: no sooner is the babe borne, but strait he is bound hand and foote, and cast into a cradle as into a prison, prefiguring the seruitude that hee is to suffer. Then entreth he into Childhood,Miseries of Childhood. and beginneth to warre with the lacke of reason, and to fight against his owne follie; not knowing what he is, where he is, whence, nor for what he came. Nowe must hee be kept vnder the feare of the rod, and learne some liberall science, or some mechanicall art, whereby to maintaine his life heereafter. Then commeth Youth, rash,Miseries of Youth. head∣long, venterous, voluptuous, foolish, prodigall, passionate; In this age he commeth into great dangers, fighting against the desires of the flesh, against fond affections, and vaine imagi∣nations, which cause the mind to wauer, to be vnconstant, and to be carried away with sun∣dry phantasies; In this age hee becommeth a drunkard, a gamster, a quarreller, and often∣times to be cast into prison, to be hanged, to
loose his goodes, and to cause his Parentes to end their dayes in sorrow. Then hath hee to encounter with Manhoode;Miseries of Manhood. to this age is inci∣dent the charge of wife & children, the main∣tenance of family and care of posterity. Some∣times he is besieged with desire and couetous∣nesse, sometimes with feare to loose his goods, and other infinit such vanities and afflictions. Then lastly commeth Old-age stealing on,Miseries of Old age. vn∣perceiued, wherein Man receiues many incu∣rable woundes, as baldnesse, bleared eies, deaf eares, wrinkled browes, stinking breath, trem∣bling handes, faint spirites, leane cheekes, cor∣ruption of stomacke, gowty legges, with many more miseries innumerable, which neuer leaue to vanquish the body, to disquiet the minde, & to wound the conscience. And thus are wee tossed all the dayes of our life with griefe, cō∣passed with cares, and ouer-whelmed with ca∣lamitie. Our Infancie is but a dreame; our Childhoode but follie; our Youth madnesse; our Manhoode a combate; our Age a sicke∣nesse; our Life miserie; and our Death hor∣ror: we lament in the first minute, and rue to the last moment. Which way can we cast our eyes, but that we shall finde cause of lamenta∣tion and heauinesse? If wee beholde the hea∣uens, from thence, for our sinnes, we were iust∣ly banished; If we looke vpon the earth, there
we are imprisoned; on the right hand, we haue the Saints, whose steps we haue not followed; on the left hand, the wicked, whose race wee haue pursued: before vs, wee haue our death ready to arrest vs; behinde vs, our wicked life ready to accuse vs; aboue vs, Gods iustice ready to condemne vs; and vnder vs, hell fire ready to de∣uoure vs. Of the miseries of all Estates. Sect. IIII. AS Man in respect of his age isPsal. 62.10 vaine &1. Cor. 15.19 miserable, so also is he, and that much more (if it were possible) in respect of the qualitie and condition of his life and cal∣ling. For there is no estate, calling or degree exempt and free from vanitie and miserie; all areWisd. 13.1 vaine, all areIoh. 16.33 vexed, all areIob 14.1 tormen∣ted with worldly tempests, all doEccl. 9.3 suffer the dolefull blasts of calamitie. Beginne with the stowtest Champion, the mightiest Monarch, the greatest Emperour or Prince that euer li∣ued on the earth, & come down to the poorest wretch, and meanest miser in the worlde, and you shall finde that all, of all sortes, Poore and Rich, Seruant and Maister, Married and Sin∣gleman,
Subiect and Prince; to conclude, the Bad and the Good, tormented with temptati∣ons, tossed with tempests, disquieted with ad∣uersity, and therefore most fraile, most misera∣ble, yea nothing but miserie.Miseries of the Poore. The Poore man, he is prest with famine and thirst, supprest with sorrow and heauinesse, and opprest with colde and needinesse. He is in great disdaine, hee is dispised and contemned, buffeted and scorned; he lieth groueling at the Rich mens feete, and dying at their heeles, as they go in the streets, and yet vnregarded. He is shunned of his bre∣thren, loathed of his friendes, and hated of his neighbours. To aske for Gods sake, he is of∣tentimes ashamed, if he will not aske, he is pi∣ned, and therefore meere necessitie constray∣neth him to begge. He accuseth God of vn∣righteousnes and parcialitie, because he diui∣ded not the goodes of this world equally: He blameth his neighbour of vnmercifulnesse and crueltie, because he releeueth not his necessi∣tie; he fretteth and fumeth, he murmureth and curseth: whereupon it was saide,Syra 40.28 Miseries of the Rich. It is better to die than to begge. The Rich man, he is ouer∣throwne in his aboundaunce, hee is puffed vp with vaineglory, hee putteth his trust & con∣fidence in his goodes and wealth, whereupon he braggeth and boasteth: Hee swelleth with pride and disdaine; and yet labour in getting,
feare in possessing, and sorrow in loosing, doth euer trouble and disquiet his mind. ForMatth. 6.21 Miseries of Seruants. where the treasure is, there will the heart be also. The Seruant, or Bondman is loaden with labor, wea∣ried with watchings, and worne with slauery: He is beaten with stripes, spoyled of his sub∣stance, and burdened with sorrow. The Mai∣sters offence is the Seruants paine, & the Ser∣uants fault is the Maisters prey: If hee haue wealth, he must spend it at his Maisters plea∣sure, if hee haue naught, then must his labour make a painefull purchase. O most miserable and irkesome condition of seruitude!Syrac. 13.20 As the wilde Asse is the Lions prey in the wildernes, so are the poore men the meate of the rich. The Maister,Miseries of Masters. he euer liueth in feare lest the treacherie of his seruants shorten his daies. If he be gentle, then is he contemned, if seuere, then is he hated; for Curtesie bringeth contempt, and crueltie breedeth ha∣tred. The Singleman,Miseries of Single-men. hee fighteth against fond desires, and fleshly lust, for that vnquiet Iebu∣site will hardly be restrained.Matth. 19.11 All men cannot receiue the gift of continencie, saue they to whom it is giuen. Satan kindleth the fire of Nature in them with the blast of fraile suggestion, wher∣by the feeble and weake minde is secretly saw∣ced with amorous desires,Miseries of Married men. and the body made prone to perdition. The Married man, he is at his wits end, as they say, euer burning in ielou∣sie:
feare of loosing his goodes doth vexe him; losse of riches maketh him tremble; and the charge of houshold doth diuide him diuersly. He labors to discharge his wife, to prouide for his children, and to pay his seruants hire: And therefore the burden of wedlocke is greeuous & miserable.Miseries of Subiects. The Subiect, he dependeth vppon his Prince, hee must be carefull to obey; if his Soueraigne frowne, he must stoop & crowch; he must employ his goodes and his life also, in defence of his King, yea he must becom a mar∣tiall man, and liue in a miserable moode, ma∣king his onely felicitie, of other mens miserie. The King,Miseries of Kings and Princes. hee liueth in continuall feare of the treacherie of traitors; hee is set vpon a hill as it were a marke; a small warte deformeth a Princes face, and in a King an errour is despe∣rate; he eateth the bread of affliction, and his drinke is care and sorrowe. Wherevppon an heathen Historiographer maketh mention of a King, to whom the Scepter and Crowne were offered, who before hee wore it, tooke the Crowne in his hand, and beholding it a while, cryed out saying; Oh thou golden Diademe, if man knewe the miseries and griefes which thou bringest, there is none that would stoope to take thee vppe from the grounde! shewing thereby, that the life of Kings is lesse happy, than that of the Subiect and Priuate manne.
The Badde, they liue in miserie;Miseries of the Wicked.Esay 48.22 There is no peace sayeth the Lorde vnto the wicked. TheEsay 66.24 mar. 9.44.46 and 48. deut. 26.65 worme of conscience shall neuer die, and the light of Reason shall neuer be darkened. As they haueEsay 1.2, 3 iere. 2.5 forsaken God, so hath GodOse. 4.6 forsaken them, andRom. 1.24 1. thess. 2.11 delivered them vp into a reprobate sense, that they might do such things as bee not conuenient; for whome theIud. verse 13 Miseries of Good men. blackenesse of darkenesse is reserued for euer. The Good, they are, as it were, in a continuall furnace, by reason of persecution and crosses, they sustaineHeb. 11.37, 38 mockes and stripes, fetters and imprisonments, some were stoned, some cut in peeces, some tempted, some slaine with the sworde, &c. Looke Heb. 11.2. Cor. 11.29 Who is weake and they are not weake? Who is offended and they burne not? To conclude then,Syrac. 40.1 Great trauell is created for all men, and an heauie yoke vpon the sonnes of A∣dam, from the daie that they goe out from their mo∣thers wombe til the daie that they returne to the mo∣ther of all things. Behold the miserie of mortall men! behold their vanitie! thought consumeth them, heauinesse harmeth them, pensiuenesse doth possesse them, terror doth turmoile them, feare putteth them out of comfort, horror doth afflict them, affliction doth trouble them, and trouble maketh them sad and heauy.Iob 10.14, 15. If I haue sinned (sayth Iob) then thou wilt straightly looke vnto me, and wilt not hold me guiltlesse of mine
iniquitie: if I haue done wickedly, woe vnto me: if I haue done righteously, I will not life vp my head being full of cenfusion, because I see my affliction. Of mans three cruell Enemies which further and encrease his miserie. Sect. V MAn, besides that he is exiled from Para∣dise, miserable by nature, andEphes. 2.1 vnable to stir either hand or foote, to get out of his miserie, haue three cruell enemies, sauage and bloudie Tyrants, that continually labour to captiuate him in his wretchednesse, yea, to bring him from temporall into eternall thral∣dome: These are the Flesh,The three prin∣cipall enemies of Man. the World and the Diuell; the Flesh earthly and voluptuous, the worlde vaine and curious, and the diuell euill and malitious. These three enemies assaile and tempt vs, sometimes couertly, sometimes openly, but alvvaies malitiously. The diuell being the principall Captaine of this cursed crue, trusteth much vpon the help of the Flesh, because a domesticall enemie is apter to hurt: The Flesh also hath entred league with the World, being her greatest friend; and both haue shaken hands with the Diuell: and so do
all three ioyntly conspire our subuersion. The Flesh beingPsal 51.5 borne and nourished in sinne,The Flesh. defiled from her beginning, but much more corrupted by euill custome: she eagerlyRom. 7.21 co∣ueteth against the spirit, she dayly murmureth against subiection, she suggesteth wickednes, disobeyeth reason, and is not restrained with feare. A greeuous combate and great dan∣ger it is to wrastle against our familiar foe, es∣pecially we being1. Chro. 29.15 Strangers, and she a Citi∣zen; for shee dwelleth in her owne countrey, whereas wee are but pilgrimes and exiled persons. The Worlde,The World. while withSyrac. 19.5 pleasures without it delighteth vs, inwardly it deceiueth vs; it killeth our soules while it flattereth our fantasie: for when it mooueth vs to settle our affections in these inferiour things, what doth it but perswade vs, with a golden hooke to fish in a filthy puddle, where nothing can be gotten but venomous vermine? and with Syrens sweete notes wooe vs into the salt sea of perdition? All the fauours and friendly countenances which the worlde doth yeelde, are but the kisses of an enemie, that vnder a deceitfull sweetnes it may shrowd most bitter poyson. The Diuell that crookedGenes. 3.1 serpent,The Diuell. the arch-enemie of man-kinde, vnto the flesh and the world ioyneth his force; them he hel∣peth, them he furthereth, them he vseth, hauing
no other desire, businesse, or studie, but to en∣trap and to destroy our soules. This is hee that speakes suttlely, that temptes guilefully, & deceiues malitiously; he insinuateth euil mo∣tions, suggesteth venomous cogitations, and procureth lusts; he stirreth vp broyles, foste∣reth hatreds, and moueth desires of Reuenge; he beateth vs with our owne staffe, bindeth vs with our own girdle, laboring that our flesh, which was giuen vs for a helpe, might be the cause of our fall and ruine. Great is the ha∣zard in sustaining the continual incounters a∣gainst the diuells deceitfull guiles; whom not onely his suttle nature, but also the long pra∣ctise and exercise of his malice hath made craftie. How little cause then haue we to ioy in this life, in which wee haue to struggle hourely, with so mightie, peruerse, and maliti∣ousEphes. 6.12 enemes, which can neuer be so ouer∣come, but that after a litle respite, they return, and bid vs a new battaile, and that with such varietie and change of forcible temptati∣ons, that they put vs in contiuall anguish of mind?
Why God would haue our life to be so mise∣rable as it is. Sect. VI THe causes of these calamities are many, and of many sortes; but the maine cause is Sinne:Lam. 3.39 lam. 1.5 Man suffereth for his sinne.Sinne the cause of miserie. Yet the same causes of affliction are not alwayes found to be in the Servants of God, as are in the wicked. To speake nothing in this place of the vngodly sort; God correcteth his children in this worlde, and1. Pet. 1.7 1. pet. 4.12 prooueth their faith by many and sundry troubles, crosses, afflictions and miseries; partly, that knowing the calami∣tie & miserie of this present life, they might be1. Pet. 5.6 psal. 30.7, 8 prouoked, the rather speedily to flee to his mercie for succour; and partly, that thereby they mightColoss. 1.24 become like vnto their Master & Head Christ Iesus, and die to sinne, and rise vp to newnesse of life, that hereafter they mayRom. 8.17 2. tim. 1.8 liue and raigne with him eternally. Mothers and Nurces, when they would weane their suckling babes, vse to annoynt their breasts with bitter mustard; euen so doth God powre mustard, that is, miserie, vpon the breasts of this life, vnto which we are so much addicted, to weane vs from it; that knowing the miserie thereof, as by experience we are dayly taught; & considering the same, as of dutie we ought,
we should withdraw ourIob 31.24, 25 trust from tempo∣ralities, and contemne transitorie trifles, rai∣sing vp our hearts to contemplate things morePhil. 3.20 diuine and heauenly. Mariners, when they saile peaceably, the winde being prosperous, the weather seasonable, and the ayre quiet and temperate, doe giue themselues to ban∣queting and fables, and being carelesse, voyde of feare and danger, doe passe the time, some∣times by musicke and play, sometimes by re∣sting and sleeping: But when a sodaine tem∣pest doth arise, then at last, doe they call for helpe from heauen, and incessantly they crie vnto God for their deliuerie and saftie. Euen so we, rocked in the cradle of Prosperitie, doe giue our selues to idlenesse and pleasure, but being stricken with aduersitie, we are warned of our dutie: which may be proued by the ex∣amples of2. Sam. 11.4 2. sam. 24 10 Dauid and2. Kin. 21.3 2. chron. 33.12 Manasses, who in prosperitie offended God greeuously, but in aduersitie liued very godly and vprightly. And this is the reason why God would haue vs in this vale ofPsal. 23.4 miserie, to bee soEsay 51.21 miserable, so1. Tim. 6.7 needie, soApoc. 3.17 poore, soIob 1.21 beggarly, soRom. 8.37 weake, soPsalme 38.3 sickly, and of noIob 14.2 continuance; to with∣draw and alienate our hearts and minds, from the inordinate affections, desire and loue, of this so loathsome a life, that we should sigh for the kingdome of heauen, as being1. Chro. 29.15 soiourners
on earth, and no Cittizens, wayfairing men, and in continuallIob 7.1 warfare: yet notwithstan∣ding there are not a few that be vnwilling to leaue this life, and to forsake the world, lusting still like hogges to wallow in myre. But what would these do if all our whole life were sweet and pleasant? would they then, trow you, ex∣chaunge it for heauen? would they contemne it for Gods sake? or would they say with Paul:Rom. 7.24 O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the bodie of this death? I desirePhil. 1.23 to be loosed & to be with Christ. No, no, they had rather whine after theExodus 16.3 num. 11.14 flesh-pottes of Aegypt, then passe through the desart into theExodus 3.8 land that floweth with milke and honnie. Oh thrise happie is that man who viewing these worldly miseries lifteth vp himselfe aboue himselfe! And in∣deede, what comfort can a man reape in that place, that isIo. 12.31. gouerned by the Prince of dark∣nesse, and (for the most part)Luk. 16.25 peopled with his rebellious and contentious children? VVhere vice is aduaunced, vertue scorned, the bad re∣warded, and the good oppressed? VVhat qui∣etnesse or contentment can be enioyde where the1. Iohn 5.1 paines be infinit, common, and intollera∣ble; theIohn 16.33 pleasures few, rare, and damnable? where2. Chro. 20.37 familiaritie breedeth vexation to the mind, enmitie to the body, and daunger to the soule? where want is miserable, plentie full of
perill, and a man on euery side assaulted with vnplacable ene∣mies? Chap. II. Of Death. What Death is: and of the necessitie thereof. Sect. I Death, what it is.DEath is the seperation of theLuke 23.46. acts 7.59 soule from the body, with the dissolution of theGenesis 3.19 body vntill theEsay 26.19 resurrection, as aRom. 6.23 punishment ordeyned of God, and imposed on Man, for his sinne. For when God had set∣led Adam in Paradise, a place of pleasure, gi∣uing him such libertie as these wordes doe im∣port,Genesis 2.16 Thou shalt eate freely of euery tree of the Garden: Yet lest hee should presumptuously equall himselfe with his Creator, he gaue him this bridle to champe on;Genesis 2.17 But of the tree of knowledge of good and euill, thou shalt not eate of it, for in that daie that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt DIE THE DEATH. Adam had soone forgotten this saying, thou shalt die, and harkned
vnto that lying speech,Genesis 3.4 yee shall not die. TheGenesis 3.6 Man gaue eare to the woman, the woman to the serpent: they eate of the excepted tree,The fall of Adam soLuke 6.39 the blind led the blind, and they both fel into the ditch. Here lieth the matter a bleeding, this is the old sore bred in the bone, that will neuer out of the flesh. O Adam, what hast thou done? Hast thou tasted of that fruit whereof God said vnto thee,Genesis 3.17 The miserable estate of Adam Thou shalt not eate of it? Oh how wert thou bewitched? Thou wast once in the state of grace, but now thou art in dis∣grace: thou wert once the child of God, but now in danger, for ought thou knowest, to be the child of the Serpent. God did once care altogither for thee, thou wast warme without apparell, naked without shame, satisfied with∣out labour, thy meate was put into thy mouth: but now thou must be pinched with cold, and scorched with heat, thou must trauell hard, and in theGenesis 3.19 sweat of thy browes, thou must eate thy bread. Whilst thou keptst thy selfe within thy compasse, thou wast an happie Adam: oh thanke God for that! now beeing in miserie, thou art accursed and vnhappie; thanke thy selfe, thy selfe-will sinne for that! could not blessings allure thee, nor threatnings compell thee to obedience? O thanklesse Adam! sweet meate must haue sower sawce. Thou art sicke Adam, thou art sicke vnto death, thou hast
prouoked the wrath of God, and caused him to open his cup of curses; thy disease is despe∣rate, and therforeGenesis 3.17 Thou shalt die the death, that double death, the due reward of thy sinne: for thou art become theRom. 6.16 sworne seruant of sinne and bondslaue of Sathan. Hee is Gods friendIohn 14.15 that fulfilleth his commaundement; but thou Adam, hast broken the commandement; ther∣fore thou art Gods enemie.1. Iohn 3.8 He that committeth sinne is of the diuell; Thou Adam hast commit∣ted sinne; therefore thou art not of God. Hee that sinneth, is the seruant of sinne: Thou hast sinned Adam; Therefore thou art out of Gods seruice. He that is the seruant of sinne, must be payd with the sinnes wages: but thou arte the seruant of sinne Adam; therefore thou shalt die the death; forRom. 6.23 the wages of sinne is death. O lamentable fall!The posterities are guiltie of Adams sinne. O pittifull case! the wrath of God ouerrunneth the wholeRom. 5.12 world for thy disobedience, thy treason hath attainted al thy children, thy whole bloud is corrupted, thy fall redoundeth vnto vs that come of thee. A∣las! How shall we doe? Adam is dust, hated of God, and ashamed of himselfe; he is cursed, he is sicke for sinne, he is dead, twise dead, sub∣iect to mortalitie, and subiect to eternall dam∣nation: his Children be in the same case. But wo vnto vs, we are so benūmed of our sences, that we feele not the sting of Death fixed in
our flesh; the impostume of sinne lieth so hid∣den in our hearts, that we thinke our selues whole and sound, as though we should neuer die. Thy incredulous and rebellious brood, O Adam, will not acknowledge their corrup∣tion and mortalitie; such, and so great is their selfe-loue, and pride of heart! Thou art our Father, wee bee thy Children, the Children cannot but beleeue their Father speaking the truth of his own knowlege & experience. Cry out then, O father Adam, teach thy children to know themselues, blow thy trumpet, com∣mand silence, tell vs, in what case thou stan∣dest, and what Inheritance thou hast purcha∣sed for vs. Thus saith your Father, O ye chil∣dren of Men, consider his sayings, listen, giue eare;Matth. 13.9 He that hath eares to heare let him heare. I Adam the Father of all Nations, was once a free-man, a blessed man, the child of GOD; the mercy of God embraced me on euery side; in the earth there were blessings for me, ingra¦ued as it were, in the hearbs, flowers, and frites; yea, in the heauens & waters I saw in∣numerable tokens of Gods loue towards me: But alas! wretch that I am, when I was inPsalme 49.20 honor, I forgot my self, I denied God my ser∣uice, yea, I obeyed his enemie; and therefore now am I accursed, and debarred of all my former blessings, I am become a bond-man, a
cursed creature, the seruant of sinne and satan. I haue sinned, I haue sinned, my sinnes are in∣finite; the first,The branches of Adams sinne. Idolatrie, second, Pride, third, Incredulitie, fourth, Contempt of God, fift, the prophanation of Gods name, sixt, Murther, seuenth, Auarice, eight, Theft, ninth, euill con∣cupiscence, tenth, Ambition, &c. Alas! I sincke in sinne, I am ashamed of my naked∣nesse, I tremble at Gods voyce. O Death, O Graue, yours is the victorie! I and my wife are become a cursed couple; yea, not only we, but all our posterities; we be the roote, they are the braunches, if the roote be bitter, the branches must be so also: we be the fountain, they are the spring, if the fountaine be filthy, so must the spring be:Adams legacies to his children. Sin and Corruption be the riches that we bequeath vnto our children: Rebellion is the inheritance that we haue pur∣chased for them. Such as the father is, such be the children, for we are all of the same nature, and haue eaten the sameEzech. 18.2 sower grape.Rom. 5.12 By one man sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne, and so death went ouer all men, in whom all men haue sinned. There are two kindes of Death, bodily, and spirituall. Bodily death (which is called the first, because in respect of time it go∣eth before the second) is the separation of the soule from the body.Hebr. 9.27 It is appointed vnto men that they shall once die: herevpon the Prophet Da∣uid
calleth death1. King 2.2 the waie of the whole earth;Psal 89.48 what man liueth and shal not see death?Eccl. 9.5 the liuing know that they shall die, saith Solomon. Spiritu∣al Death, which is termedApoc. 2.11 apoc. 20.14 apoc. 21.8 Difference be∣tweene the first and second death the Second, is the seperation of the whole man, bodie and soule, from the fellowship of God. The first is an en∣trance to death, the second is the accomplish∣ment of it: the first is temporarie, the second is eternall: the first is of the bodie onely, the se∣cond is of both body and soule: the first is common vnto all men, the second is proper to the repro∣bates. Of the vncertaintie of the houre of Death. Sect. II. DEath which is most2. Sam. 14.14 psal. 45.10 certaine, is most vncertaine, in respect of the time, of the place, and of the kind of death; for no man knowes, when, where, or how he shal die.Eccl. 9.12 Man knoweth not his time, but as the fishes which are taken in an euill net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the children of men sna∣red in the euill time, when it falleth vpon them so∣dainly.Iames 4.13 Go to now, ye that saie, to daie or to mor∣row we will go into such a cittie, and continue there a yeare, and buy, and sell, and get gaine.Iames 4.14 And yet
ye cannot tell what shall be to morrow: for what is your life? it is euen a vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and afterwards vanisheth aware:Iames 5.9 Behold the Iudge standeth before the doore. Well may we be compared vnto men scaling the walles of a Beseeged cittie, at whom the cittizens dis∣charging their peeces, encounter their assault with darts, stones, and other munitions, the better to defend themselues, and to offend the enemie; who as they be wounded, fall downe, some from the top, some from the midst, and some at the bottome of the wall; some being wounded with gun-shot, some with darts, and some with stones. Euen so fareth it with the men of this world, who while they labour to clime vp vnto the high state of Honour and Wealth, Death tumbleth them downe, some from the highest degree of honour and riches, some from a middle or meane estate, and some very poore; some in their old age, some in their youth,What makes death terrible. and some in their infancie. Nothing makes death terrible and tedious, but want of consideration of it; the old man hath it right before him, the yong man hard behind him, and all men dayly ouer them, and yet we for∣get it. If a man were tied to a stake, at whom a most cunning Archer did shoote, wounding many about him and neere him; some aboue him, some right against him, some vnder him,
and the miserable wretch himself so fast bound that it were not possible for him to escape; would it not be deemed madnesse in him, if in the mean while forgeting his miserable estate, he should fall to bib and quaffe, to laugh and to be merrie, as though he could not be touched? Who woulde not iudge such a manne quite out of his wittes, that did not bethink himselfe how to escape, or if that were impossible, that did not prepare himselfe vnto death? And are not we to be accounted stark mad, who know that the most expert Archer that euer was, or can be, euen God himselfePsalme 7.12 hath bent his bow and made it readie. Yea he hath sent his darts of death already, vnto them that are aboue vs, that is, vnto our ancestors and elders; and now one while he shooteth at them that be right a∣gainst vs, that is, our Equalls in age; another while he hitteth very neere vs, when he taketh away our Fathers, Mothers, or Brethren; on the right hand hee woundeth our friendes, on the left hand our ennemies, and vnder vs such as be yonger then we: If among so many arrows of death, we leade in the meane time a wicked life, as though we should euer escape, who would not say, that we were Lunatique and Mad-men? like one that would go into a Tauerne, and call for wine in great quantity, and there quaffe and carowse, hauing neuer a
pennie in his purse to paye the reckoning? Oh then, let vs remember that we are fast bound vnto the stake of mortalitie, that it is not possible for vs to escape the darts of death: but that one time or other, we shall be deadly wounded, though we escape for a short time! God would haue the houre of our death hid from vs, that being vncertaine when to depart this life, we might at all times be found ready to die. Therefore a good christian ought al∣waies to acknowledge the goodnesse of God, to turne from his sinnes, and not to deferre his conuersion vntill the houre of death,Mat. 24.42 marke 13.35 luke 12, 40 Watch therefore (saith our Sauiour) for ye know not what houre your Maister will come. Is there any that knoweth better, what we haue to doe, then he that is theIohn 5.22 mat. 16.27 Iudge of our cause? Weigh his rea∣son, because you know not the houre when your Maister will come, therefore watch eue∣ry houre; bicause you know not the day, watch euery day; because you know not the weeke, watch euery week; because you know not the moneth, watch euery monneth; because you know not the yeare, watch euery yeare: for though you do not certainly know when God will call for you, yet be ye sure that he will do it sometimes. Kings and Captaines doe set continuall watch and ward, to guard their frontier townes and castles against the inuasi∣ous
and incursions of the enemies; for no o∣ther cause, but only for that they do not know when their enemies will giue the assault: and ought we to be lesse carefull for the castle of our soules, then they for their earthly castles, considering that herein consisteth the saluati∣on or damnation of our soules for euer? Let vsLuke 12.40 watch therefore continually (as Christ counselleth vs) to the end we be not vnprepa∣red,Syrach 14.1 Remember that Death tarrieth not, and that the couenant of the graue is not shewed vnto thee. That death is to be desired of the godlie. Sect. III WHat Sailer, hauing escaped the dā∣ger, of the tempestuous and boiste∣rous waues of the Sea, reioyceth not when hee commeth to the desired hauen where he would be? What Traueller, hauing passed many daungerous wayes, is not glad when he draweth neare towardes his owne country? And we being wayfaring men,Genesis 47.9 pil∣grimes, and meere1. Chro. 29.15 hebr. 11.13 strangers in this world (as isCap. 1. Sect. 2 before declared) should reioyce and be merrie drawing towards that ioyfull eternall
1. Thes. 1.7 apoc. 14.13 rest prepared for vs before all worldes. TheExodus 3.8 num. 13.27 children of Israel could not enioy the pro∣mised land flowing with milke and honny, till they had passed ouer the riuer Iordan; and we cannot come to our1. Pet. 1.4 inheritance, to our eter∣riallHebr. 4.3.9 rest andPsalme 16.11 pleasure, vntill we passe the narrowes ofHebr. 9.27 death. What is death then, to a christian man, but theHos. 13.14 1. cor. 15.54, 57 passage and way that leadeth from prison to libertie, from miserie to happinesse, and from bondage to blessednesse? Great are the profits,That death brin∣geth vnto the faithfull great profite. First, Because it free∣eth vs from paine and infinite are the com∣modities, that death bringeth vnto the faith∣ful. 1. It setteth our soules at libertie and deli∣uereth them from infinite calamities, from errour, sorrowes, griefes, troubles, anguishes, dreames, feares, passions, suspitions; beside sin, ignorance, envie, hatred, distrust, ambition, and from other the like tribulations and afflictions, that dayly disquiet, torment, and vexe our soules, whiles they are weakened in the loath∣some prison of our sinfull, mortall and cor∣ruptible bodies. It deliuereth also our bodies from infinite and innumerable dangers, wher∣vnto they are subiect as well on sea as land, as in any other place whersoeuer they con∣uerse; from all aches, paines and diseases, as fe∣uers, consumptions, &c. which doe weare and consume vs with intollerable & fearful griefes, from the paine & necessitie of trauelling & la∣bouring;
and finally, from that perplexitie that we haue to search and to seeke after the means how to be nourished, clad, lodged, and proui∣ded of all those things that are needefull to maintain this miserable life.Secondly, Bicause it dischar∣geth vs from of∣fending God. 2. It dischargeth and putteth vs out of all danger of sinning any more, and of being tempted of the diuell, of the world, & of our own lust, concupiscence, inborne-corruptions, and rebellions of the heart, which neuer cease to prouoke vs to the doing of euill, which incessantly stir vs vp, to offend God, and so to procure vpon our selues the curses of he law. What a miserie it is, to be in subiection to sinne on this manner, appeareth by earnestnesse and feruencie of Paul, who with great zeale and vehemencie, with deepe sighs and grones, desired of God, that he might be2. Cor. 12.7, 8 deliuered from that pricke which wounded his flesh, which was the angell of Satan that did buffet him. And after the long and lamentableRom. 7.14 to the 23 complaint that he made of the law that was in his members, stri∣uing against the law of his spirit, and leading him captiue vnto the law of sinne, he bursteth into this patheticall exclamation,Rom. 7.24 O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the body of this death! If a man would inuent a torment for such as feare God, and desire to walke in newnesse of life, and to haue part in theReuel. 20.5, 6 first
Resurrection, he cannot deuise a greater then this tryannie of sinne to be exercised, tormen∣ted, and tempted with this vnhappie Iebusite, the rebellion of his owne flesh. O happie therefore and blessed death, that dischargeth vs from such a cumbersome, cruell, and yrke∣som bondage! 3.Thirdly, Because it separa∣teth vs from the company of the wicked. It deliuereth vs from the com¦pany of them that are2. Tim. 3.2 louers of their owne selues, couetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to parents, vnthankeful, vnholy, without3 natural af∣fection, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, no louers at all of them that are good;4 Trai∣tors, headie, high minded, louers of pleasure more then louers of God:5 hauing a shevv of godlinesse, but haue denied the povver thereof. Who can ex∣presse what a miserie it is to be enclosed and enuironed with the professed and sworne ene∣mies of the Gospel of Christ Iesus, and of his church, which are accursed goates, dogges, Woolues, Rauens, Kites and Cormorants, de∣spising God and his graces, curious persons, rash, outragious, prophane, blasphemers, ha∣uing neither faith nor feare, law nor consci∣ence to represse and restraine their malice? What a torture is it to a godly mind, to liue in the middest of such a froward and peruerse generation, to be an eie witnes of their abho∣minable impietie, to be an eare-witnes of the abominable blasphemies, they belch & breath
out against the maiestie of God? Would not this sight and sense make a man weary of his life? Would not he say with Dauid,Psalme 120.5 Woe is me that I remaine in Meshech, and dvvell in the tents of Kedar.6 My soule hath too long dvvelt vvith him that hateth peace. Elias seeing the idolatrous practises of the Israelites, and the strange cru∣elties of Achab and Iesabel against the prophets and seruants of God, went apart into the1. King. 19.4, 5 Fourthly, Because it pre∣uenteth the mi∣series to come. Wildernesse and desired to die. 4. It preuenteth the miseries that are to come.Esay 57.1 The righteous perisheth and no man considereth in his heart, and mercifull men are taken avvaie, and no man vnder∣standeth that the righteous is taken avvaie from the euill to come. Paul saith, that some are1. Corinth. 11 30, 32 a∣sleepe that they might not be condemned with the world. So2. Kin. 22.20 Iosias was taken away that his eies shuld not see all the euil that was to come. 5. It giues an entrance to the soule,Fiftly, Because it is the gate that letteth the soule in into heauen. that it may come into the presence of God, and see him1. Cor. 13.12 face to face, and Iesus Christ in his glory, which sight so rauisheth the Angels, & all the blessed spirits in heauen, that they desire nor can vvish for any more ioy or contentation but onely in that.Psal. 16.11 In thy presence (saith the Prophet) is the fulnesse of ioy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for euermore. If to heare and see king Solomon vvere thought so great a matter, that the1. King. 10.3 Queen of Saba hauing a trial of his vvis∣dome,
and1. Kings 10.5 noting the comly order, and great port of his house, being as it vvere rauished & besides her selfe, brake out into these vvords:1. Kings 10.8 Happie are thy men, happie are these thy seruants, vvhich stand euer before thee and heare thy vvise∣dome. What a thing shall it be to behold the gloriousExodus 33.20 face of God, that euerlastingPsalme 147.5 vvise∣dome, that infiniteDeut. 10.17 greatnesse, inestimablePsalme 45.2 beautie, and to enioy the same for euermore? The consideration of this ioy, made Paul to say,Phil. 1.23 I desire to be dissolued, and to be vvith Christ. And thus it is manifest that vve ought not to feare death, but to desire it rather, to be thank∣full to God vvhen it shall please him to send it vs, to embrace it vvillingly, & to reioyce; con∣sidering on the one side, the miseries, griefes, and displeasures of this life, from vvhence it deliuereth vs; and on the other side, the com∣fort, ioy, & contentment of the euerlasting life vvhervnto it leadeth vs. Wherevpon Solomon saith,Eccles. 7.3 the daie of death is better then the daie that one is born. And an heathen Philosopher could say, O ignorant men of their ovvn misery! why praise ye not death, as the best inuentiō of na∣ture? vvhich bringeth felicity, expelleth misery, finisheth & endeth the labors & toyles of age, preuenteth the perils of youth, to many is a re∣medy, to some a vvish, and to al an end: vvhich deserueth better of none then of him to vvhom it commeth before it be called for.
Chap. III. The Causes why man doth feare Death. Death feareful vnto the volup∣tuous worldlingHE which counteth his happinesse and felicitie, in the fruition of worldly things, greatly feareth Death, as that which depriueth him of his pompe & prefer∣ments, of his honors and high calling; robbeth him of his iewels and treasures, of his riches and possessions; spoileth him of his pastimes and pleasures, of his ioy and merriments; exi∣leth him from his countrie and friends, from his wife and children; and vtterly bereaueth him of all his worldly wishes, and hearts de∣light. Which Syrach noting, sayd: O Death,Syrach 41.2 how bitter is the remembranee of thee, to a man that liueth at rest in his possessions, vnto the man that hath nothing to vexe him, and that hath prosperitie in all things!Death painefull vnto the health∣full and faint-hearted. Many likewise doe stand in feare of Death, when they call to mind and consider, that they must suffer those most strange and in∣tollerable pangues and agonies in the flesh, commonly comming before, or at least ac∣companying death, whensoeuer it commeth.
Others also stand in aw of death,Death terrible vnto the doubt∣full and wauering man. bicause they are destitute of firme hope, of true and stedfast faith. They behold death in the mirrour of the Law, where it sheweth it selfe vnder a most terrible shape, like a Sargeant armed with the anger of God, and the curses of the Lawe, comming to arrest and to cite them to appeare before the tribunall seate of God, to heare the dolefull sentence of damnation, denounced a∣gainst the wicked transgressors of Gods Law. Which fearefull apprehension of death, sur∣chargeth many, and presseth them downe into the bottomlesse gulfe of desperation.Death horrible vnto the wicked and faithlesse. And fi∣nally, death is dreadfull and fearefull vnto ma∣ny, by reason of their guiltie consciences: For as the Apostle saith.Rom. 2 9 Tribulation and anguish shall be vpon the soule of euery one that doth euill,Rom. 2.15 their conscience bearing them witnesse. When the incorrupt Iudge commeth to iudge sin∣ners, although any man would neuer so faine, hide and conceale his sinnes and enormous deedes from men, yet can he neuer hide them from his owne conscience, accusing and cry∣ing out vpon him, night and day, at home and abroad, shewing vnto him the greatnesse of his offences, and the grieuousnesse of the punish∣ment due vnto the same. Hereunto also doth concurre the iudgement of God, and the feare of hell-fire, which causeth the remembrance
of death to be bitter vnto worldly men.2. Cor. 5.10 rom. 14.10 We must all appeare before the iudgement seate of Christ (saith Paul) that euery man may receyue the things which are done in his body, according to that hee hath done, whether it be good or euill. And Christ saith.Mat. 12.36 Of euery idle word that men shall speake, they shall giue accompt thereof at the day of iudgement.Iohn 5.29 dan. 12. And they shal come forth that haue done good, vnto the resurrection of life, but they that haue done euill, vnto the resurrection of condemna∣tion.Matth. 25.41 And these shall go into euerlasting paine, and the righteous into life eternall. So then wee see 4. causes why worldly men feare death. First, the losse of their honours, riches, pleasures, and friends. Secondly, the painefull pangues which come before, or accompany death. Thirdly, want of faith and hope. Finally, their guiltie consciences, and feare of Gods iudgements and pu∣nishments Chap. IIII Of the first Cause that maketh Death fearefull to a worldly man, which is the losse of honors, wealth, pleasure, &c. And the remedies against the same.
How farre we ought to be addicted vnto the worlde. Sect. I Man is a Creature endued with a rea∣sonable soule, (a Soule of noble sub∣stance, of exceeding beautie, inspired by theGenesis 2.7 Father, redeemed by the1. Pet. 1.19 Sonne, sanctified by the1. Cori. 6.11 holy Ghost, and beautified with theGenesis 1.26 image of the whole Trinity; a Soul created, to liue with angels, to enioy the loue and felloship of an eternall Spouse, to be a Ci∣tizen of heauen, to inherite a kingdome, and e∣uerlastingly to triumph in royall dignitie) to the end, that hauing a celestiall beginning and heauenly originall, hee should despise and sette light by theseMatt. 6.19, 20 inferior and terrestriall things; and that his1. Iohn 5.20 minde beeing by nature loftie, should not be depressed with the waight and burden ofColoss. 3.1 earthly and base drugges: but ha∣uing his eyes shut, and his eares deafe, against these worldly vanities, should (contemning, or rather forgetting all humane toyes) lift vp his heart, and with his cogitations and affections bePhilip. 3.20 conuersant in heauen. As for the world, that at theIohn 15.19 beginning, cheereth, enricheth,
and honoreth his friend, & in the1. Cor. 6.2 end leaues him, poore, miserable, and in a damnable e∣state, (much like a Peacocke, that with the stately fanne he maketh of his owne feathers, adorneth his fore-parts, but leaues his hinder∣parts naked and vnseemely) man is but aGenesis 47.9 tra∣ueller therein, and no dweller. We are1. Chr. 29.15 hebr. 11.13 stran∣gers and way-faring men, as it were in com∣mon tents or Innes: for our whole life is no∣thing else then aWisd. 5.13 way or course vnto death: wherefore as trauellers, if peraduenture by the way, or in their lodging, they meete with any profitable spoile, straightway they refuse and reiect it, as superfluous, and too heauie a burden for them to beare: if they come to any place of pleasure or pastime, they set light by it, and depart, their necessary affaires requiring haste in their iourney: and on the other side, if they light on an ill Inne, or lodging, where they are badly entertained, they patiently for∣beare it, knowing they must depart the next day after, where they shall be better vsed, in an other place. Euen so ought we to bePsalme 62.10 1. corint. 7.31 addicted to the loue of these worldly honors, possessi∣ons and pleasures; and to care for no more wealth and goods, then what is necessary, for our iourney and voyage; the rest we ought vt∣terly to1. Ioh. 2.15, 16 iames 4.4 neglect as superfluous, and too hea∣ny a burden for vs to beare, or rather we ought
to contribute them with our fellow-trauel∣lers, who are in neede and miserie amongst vs: neither let vs giue eare to the inticingPhil. 3.8 syrach 19.5 plea∣sures of this world, lest they trouble vs in our course; so shall we trauell peaceably, without care and trouble, and at last, arriue at that honorable hauen, where we tend vnto. A remedie against the temptation of worldly honors and preferments. Sect. II THe world is couched in1. Iohn 5.19 wickednesse, and drenched in sinne, it1. Iohn 2.17 passeth away and the lustes thereof:1. Iohn 2.15 if any man loue the world, the loue of the Father is not in him; be∣causeIames 4.4 the amitie of the worlde, is the enimitie of God, whosoeuer therefore will be a friend of the world, maketh himselfe an enemie of God. But weIohn 15.19 They that dote vpon the world are the slaues of Satan. are not of the world, to the end we should not be envvrapped and enfolded in the same con∣demnation with the world. The Diuell is theIohn 14.30 iohn 16.11 Prince of this world, therefore if we loue the world, and the things that are in it, we are subiects and slaues vnto the Diuell. Wee can not be the Seruants of Christ vnles theGalat. 6.14 world be crucified vnto vs, and wee vnto the world.
O then, let vs vvith the Apostle esteeme of the vvorld, and all the glory and honour of it, but asPhilip. 3.8 losse and dongue! Let vsColoss. 3.1. seeke those things. which are aboue, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God! OurMat. 6.21 heart ought to be vvhere our treasure is; and where is our treasure but in heauen? OurColoss. 3.3 life is hid with Christ in God;Coloss. 2.3 in whom are hid all the treasures of wisedom and knowledge. O let vs not sell our birthright, for a messe of potage, asGen. 25.34 Esau did! Let vs esteeme more of the holy Land, then of theExodus 16.3 num. 11.14 flesh∣pots and onyons of Egypt. Is it not better to beIohn 4.10 nourished in the house of our Father with the bread of Angels, then with theLuke 15.16 Prodi∣gall-child, to liue among swine, with shales and huskes? Is it not better to be saued withGenesis 19.16. Lot, in running out of Sodome, then withGenesis 19.26 Lots wife, lusting and longing after infamous and filthie pleasures to perish?Psal. 94.8 Vnderstand then yee vnwise among the people; and yee fooles, when will yee be wise? How long will ye takeEsay 5.20 light for darkenesse, and darkenesse for light? sowre for sweet, and sweet for sowre? good for euill, and euill for good?Luke 16.15 That which is highly estee∣med among men, is abhomination in the sight of God. We must not therefore be sorrowful or agrie∣ned, to leaue the honours and promotions of this world, which cause vs to prouoke God, to disdame our neighbours, and to forget our
selues, yea, to worship and adore the diuell, who euer kisseth where he meaneth to kill, gi∣uing his guests a draught of deadly poison in a golden cup, and in a stately ship wafting his passengers vpon the rockes of eternall ruine. The pleasant sauour of the cup inuiteth, but the sweete taste of the poyson choketh. The diuell like an Eagle houereth in the ayre, as though his onely delight were to view the Sunne, and to looke towards heauen; where∣as in deed, he is a greedy kyte, bearing a raue∣ning minde, that hath his eyes alwayes fixed vpon the earth, watching his time when he may best seize vpon his prey. He is much like a Thiefe, who when by open violence he can not catch his bootie, seeketh by shrowding himselfe in the vallies, bushes, and darkenesse of the night, to take the poore traueller vnpro∣uided, and so to spoile him of his goods: so the diuell when he seeth, that by open pursuit, he cannot ouerthrow vs, he couertly coucheth himselfe, in the shadowes and briars of world∣ly honors, and other delightsome allurements, thereby to entrap vs, ere wee espie his traines. Worldly Honor is one of the principall snares whereby he inueigleth our soules, which sure∣ly cannot be desired of Gods children, because it is giuen vnto the wicked for wicked causes: soNum. 24.11 Balac a wicked king, thought to pro∣mote
Balaam a wicked Prophet, vnto honor, for his wicked cursing and falshood. 2. Be∣cause it is not durable, being founded vpon the false foundation of inordinate loue or lucre; soHester 3.1 Magistratus virum indicat Ahashuerosh honoured Haman the Aga∣gite; and 3. because it is damnable, causing him that is soPsal. 49.18, 20 honoured, to be blinded, to be ingratefull, and to forget himselfe. Bucephalus the horse of Alexander the great, so long as he was naked, woulde suffer any man to backe him; but if he were furnished with the royall saddle, bridle, and other furniture, then grew he so proude, that no man might ride him but the King: so many, who in their meane calling were modest, humble & vertuous, by increase of honor, haue changed their modestie into ar∣rogancie, their humilitie into pride, and their vertues into vices: so that worldly honor, may well be tearmed; The Chaire of Iniquitie. A remedie against the temptation of worldly riches and wealth. Sect III WOrldly wealth, is not2. Cor. 6.10 the true ri∣ches of Gods children, nor the1. Pet. 1.4 in∣heritance that Iesus Christ hath purchased for them: for hisIohn 18.36 kingdome (which
is the riches which we expect) is not of this world, but spirituall and heauenly. Iesus Christ isMatth. 27.11 King of this Kingdome; but what temporall goods hath he purchased or possessed, being in this world; whereas he had not so much, as the littleMatth. 8.20 birdes and foxes had? hee had neither nest, nor hole to hide his head in. And the A∣postles, who are theMatth. 19.28 Peeres and Princes of this Kingdome, what reuenues or possessions had they in this world? Peter said vnto the lame creeple,Actes 3.6 Siluer and gold haue I none. Paul also saith, we are1. Cor. 6.10 as poore, and yet make manie rich, as hauing nothing, and yet possessing all things. So then,Apoc. 21.7. &c the glory, the power, the estate, the ri∣ches, the wealth, the pleasures, the peace, and all the felicitie wherewith God enricheth his children, are notIohn 18.36 earthly and corruptible, subiect vntoMatth. 6.19 theeues and rust; but1. Cor. 5.1 heauenly, spirituall, and durable, which God giueth vn∣to vsEsay 55.1 freely, without money, or any thing else. These are the goods which we are to esteeme, and to make much of; the Grace of God, our Adoption, Faith; the Word of God, Hope, Loue, Patience, Humilitie, and especially thePhilip. 3.9 Righteousnes of Iesus Christ, which is the Fountaine, from whence all the rest of Gods graces, fauors and blessings, that he bestoweth vpon vs, do flow, and are deriued vnto vs: this is our wealth, our chiefe felicitie, and1. Cor. 1.30 end of
our blessednesse. As for worldly riches, Iesus Christ affirming that theyMatth. 13.22 choake the good corne of Gods word, insinuateth that they are like a wanton strumpet, who by her beautie al∣lureth men to lust after her, and depriueth such as giue themselues to enioy her, of all vertue, honor, & honestie; and like vnto wine, which by the sweetnesse thereof enticeth man to ex∣cessiue drinking, yet withall, it taketh the man from himselfe, that is, it bereaueth him of his senses and reason. As those mountaines that containe mines of gold and siluer, are other∣wise barren and vnfruitfull: so they that haue riches, and vaines of gold and siluer, are bar∣ren and vnprofitable to the seruice of God and man; for riches do breedeLuke 12.19 pride and arro∣gancie, pleasures and pompe, contempt of o∣thers, and forgetfulnesse of God. They may be compared to wild beasts, whom a man can hardly take, and when he hath taken them, he must take great care how to keepe them from doing mischiefe. They are as pleasant wine to a drunkard, and as a sword in a madde mans hand, to vse rather to hurt, then to do good.Prou. 28.20 He that maketh haste to be rich, shall not be in∣nocent, saith Salomon; for as thornes are hard∣ly gathered without pricking of the hands; so cannot riches without wounding of the con∣science. As he that trauaileth in the raine, shal
hardly escape wetting, or hee that walketh in the Sunne eschew heate; so it is almost vn∣possible for a rich man to auoid vice and cor∣ruption by his riches: whereupon Christ spea∣keth,Marke 10.23 How hardly do they that haue riches enter into the kingdome of God! and, though hee ex∣poundeth this speech afterwardes, saying,Marke 10.24 Children, how hard is it for them that trust in ri∣ches, to enter into the kingdome of God! Yet hee addethMarke 10.25 It is easier for a cable-rope to go through the eie of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of God: declaring how difficult it is for a rich man to escape confidence in his riches, and consequently to enter into the kingdome of God. Wherefore then should we be so loath to forsake those things, which are so farre from giuing contentment, and ma∣king vs happie, that contrariwise they engen∣der a thousand sorrowes and cares, and so make vs most miserable & wretched? O let vs take no more care, but for what will serue our turne for1. Tim. 6.8 food and rayment, hauing alwaies in mind the parable of him that saidLuke 12.19 Soule, thou hast much goods laid vp for manie yeeres, liue at ease, eate, drinke, and take thy pastime: who for putting trust in his riches, is iustly con∣demned.
Another Remedie against the same Temptation. Sect. IIII. MOreouer, we must consider, that theseProu. 22.2. 1. Sam. 2.7 riches & worldly possessions, which we loue so heartily, be not our owne proper goods, but lent vs; ouer which we areLuke 16.2 Bayliffes and Stewards, and not Lords and Masters: which when the time of our steward∣ship is expired,Psalme 109.8 others must dispose and rule. For GodGenesis 1.1 created heauen and earth;Psalme 24.1 the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the world, and they that dwell therein: Therefore God him∣selfe is the true and properGen. 14.22 owner of our ri∣ches and possessions, and wee, the inhabitants of the earth, are the Bayliffes and Tillers of the same. And lest men shoulde suppose, that the earth becommeth fruitfull by their manu∣ring, and husbandrie, it bringeth forth nothingPsalme 147.8 without the dewe of heauen and raine. Whereupon, to bring vs to the acknowledge∣ment hereof, GodLeuit. 23.10 deut. 26.10 required of the children of Israel, the first fruites of the land, which he had giuen them; thereby signifying, that hee himselfe was the proper Lord of their wealth and possessions, and that they were the rulers
and disposers of the same vnder God. Now then, seeing theseIob 1.21 riches are not our owne proper goods, we must further acknowledge, that we must beLuke 16.2 accountable for the least far∣thing which we haue receiued of God; after what maner we came by it, how and to what vse we haue bestowed and spent it? They that haue receiued most, must make the greatest ac∣compt, and of those that haue receiued least, the accompt shall be lesse. This doctrine is plainely declared, in the parable of theLuke 16.1 Rich∣man, and the Steward; wherein is shewed, that no man, of what state or condition souer hee be, is Lord of his owne riches or substance, but the steward and disposer of it, accounta∣ble vnto God for all things: for at the day of iudgement, euery man shall heare this voyce speaking vnto himselfe,Luke 16.2 Giue accompt of thy stewardship. Wherefore it behooueth men, so to possesse their riches, that their richesPsal. 62.10 pos∣sesse not them, and so to dispose of themselues, that they be as ready and as willing, to1. Cor. 7.30, 31 leaue them, as to receiue them; and toIob 1.21 blesse the name of the Lord, as well in the one as in the other, as Iob did. Looke lib. 2. chap. 5. Sect. 9.
Testimonies out of the word of God, against the vanities of worldly wealth. Sect. V IOb, He hath deuoured substance,Iob 2.15 and he shall vomite it, for God shall draw it out of his belly. If I had made gold mine hope,Iob 31.24 or haue sayd to the wedge of golde, Thou arte my confidence: If I reioyced because my sub∣stance was great,25 or bicause mine hand had gotten much. This also had bin an iniqui∣tie to be condemned, for I had denyed the God aboue. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shal I returne thither.Iob 1.21 When the rich man sleepeth,Iob 27.19 he shal not be gathered to his fathers. Dauid, Be not vaine,Psalme 62.10 if riches en∣crease, set not your heart thereon. They trust in their goodes,Psalme 49.6 and boast
themselues in the multitude of their ri∣ches. Yet a man can by no meanes redeeme his brother,7 hee cannot giue his raunsome to God. Solomon, The treasures of wicked∣nesse profite nothing.Prouer. 10.2 Riches auaile not in the day of wrath.Prou. 11.4 He that trusteth in his riches shal perish.28 Better is a little with the feare of the Lord,Prou. 15.16 than great treasure, and trouble therewith. An heretage is hastily gotten at the be∣ginning,Prou. 20.21 but the ende thereof shal not be blessed. Better is the poore that walketh in his vprightnesse,Prou. 28.6 than hee that peruerteth his wayes,Prou. 23.20 though he be rich: he that maketh haste to be rich, shal not be innocent. Vanitie of vanities,Eccles. 1.2 all is vanitie. He that loueth siluer,Eccles. 5.9 shal not be satisfi∣ed with siluer, and he that loueth riches, shalbe without the fruit thereof: This also is vanitie.12 There is an euil sickenes that I
haue seen vnder the Sun, to wit, riches re∣serued to the owners therof for their euil. Ezechiel, They shal cast their siluer in the streetes,Ezech. 7.19 and their golde shal be cast farre off: their siluer and their golde can∣not deliuer them in the day of the wrath of the Lord, they shal not satisfie their soules, neither fil their bowels, for their ruine is for their iniquitie. Amos, They know not to doe right,Amos 3.10 saith the Lord, they store vp violence and robbery in their palaces. Woe to them that are at ease in Tsion,Amos 6.1 and trust in the mountaines of Samaria. Micah,Micah. 6.10 Are yet the treasures of wic∣kednesse in the house of the wicked? and the scant of measure which is abhominable? Zephaniah, Neither their siluer,Zeph. 1.18 nor their golde shall bee able to deliuer them from the day of the Lordes wrath. Iesus Christ,Matth. 6.19 Lay not vp treasures for your selues vpon the earth, wher the moth and canker corrupteth, and where theeues
digge through and steale. But lay vp trea∣sures for your selues in heauen, where nei∣ther the moath, nor canker corrupteth, and where theeues, neither digge through nor steale. You cannot serue God and Riches.24 A rich man shal hardly enter into the kingdome of heauen.Matth. 19.2324 And againe I saye vnto you:Marke 10.24, 25 luke 18.24, 25 It is easier for a cable rope to go through the eie of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of God. The cares of this world,Marke 4.19 matth. 13.22 luke 8.14 and the deceit∣fulnesse of riches, and the lustes of other things enter in, and choake the word, and it is vnfruitfull. Woe bee to you that are rich,Luke 6.24 for you haue receiued your consolation. Take heede and beware of couetous∣nes;Luke 12.15 for though a man haue aboundance, yet his life standeth not in his riches. Read the parable folowing in the same place, and thinke on it. Paul,1. Cor. 7.29 And this I say, Brethren, be∣cause
the time is short, hereafter that both they which haue wiues, bee as though they had none: And they that weepe, as though they wept not,30 and they that reioyce, as though they reioyced not: and they that buy, as though they possessed not. And they that vse this world,31 as though they vsed it not: for the fashion of this worlde goeth away. We brought nothing into the world,1. Tim. 6.7 and it is certaine that we can cary nothing out. Therfore when we haue food & raiment,8 let vs therewith be content. For they that wil be rich, fall into temptation and snares,9 and into many foolish and noysome lustes, which drowne men in perdition & destru∣ction. For the desire of money is the roote of all euill.10 Charge them that are rich in the world, that they be not high-minded,1. Tim. 6.17 & that they trust not in vncertaine riches, but in the li∣uing God, which giueth vs aboundantly all things to enioy. That they doe good,18 and be
rich in good works, and ready to destribute and communicate:19 laying vp in store for themselues, a good foundation against the time to come, that they may obtaine eter∣nall life. Iames,Iames 5.1 Go to now ye rich men, weepe and howle for your miseries that shal come vpon you:2 your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moth-eaten:3 your gold and siluer is cankered, and the rust of them shalbe a witnes against you, and shal eate your flesh as it were fire. Iohn,1. Iohn 2.15 Loue not the worlde, neither the things that are in the world: if any man loue the worlde, the loue of the Father is not in him:16 For all that is in the world (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life) is not of the Father, but is of the world.17 And the worlde passeth a∣way, and the lust thereof: but he that ful∣filleth the will of God, abideth for euer.
A remedie against the temptation of worldlie pleasures. Sect. VI SOmeEccl. 1.2, 3, 4 &c. seeke after the pleasures and con∣tentment of their flesh; some delight in buil¦ding of mansions and great houses; others take pleasure in faire gardens, orchards, allies, and arbors; some proudly attire themselues, o∣thers delight in adorning their houses; some take their felicitie in eating & drinking; others in pleasant companie, where they may laugh and be merrie; some loue to dance and to dal∣lie, other to transcend the bounds of honestie: Of these and such other wanton worldlings Solomon saith,Eccl. 11.9 Reioice O yong-man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheere thee in the daies of thy youth, and walke in the waie of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eies: But that after-clap, that dolefull Item marres the market, but know, that for all these things, God will bring thee to iudgement. Then, who will not shiuer in himselfe? who wil not willingly forsake those plesures, whose end and fruite is,Rom. 6.21 The danger of worldly pleasures shame and dishonor, penury and losse of goods, which bring infinite sick∣nesses vnto the body, and vnto the spirite dul∣nesse & blockishnesse; which bring a contempt of vertue and honestie, a hatred of true religion and of God himselfe; which make men effemi∣nate, wanton, disdainefull, yea, and so besot∣ted
that they are like vnto beasts? plesure & so∣row are twins, for Pleasure is no sooner hat∣ched, hut Repeutance is at hand ready to sup∣plant her; and therefore it is like a smile which presently is turned into sorrow and teares; or like a dreame, the ioy whereof at a mans wa∣king vanisheth away: so pleasure flieth and sli∣deth away, leauing rather cause of repentance then occasion of remembrance. It may bee compared to a painted sepulcher, faire with∣out and foule within; to pills, outwardly faire∣ly guilt, and rowled in sugar, but within full of bitternesse; yet pilles doe vent and purge the body, but pleasures corrupt and poyson both body and soule. They resemble the Syrens, beautifull aboue, but if you look on the hinder part, they haue the taile of a Scorpion, which giueth such a sore stroke, that it benummeth our bodies, and stingeth our soules to death. They are like venome or strong poyson, tem∣pered with hypocras or sweete milke. Pleasure is a gulfe or fire that deuoureth a mans sub∣stance, defileth his body, and killeth his soule; It is a path to all wicked practises, and the cause why the worde of God doth notLuke 18.14 fru∣ctifie in our hearts; forRom. 8.8 they that are in the flesh cannot please God,Rom. 6.16 know ye not, that to whomsoeuer ye giue your selues as seruants to obey, his seruants ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of sinne vnto
death, or of obedience vnto righteousnesse? Now let vs enter into our owne hearts and consci∣ences, let vs examine our selues whether we take more delight in those things wherewith the diuell is most delighted, in lasciousnesse, in pride, in quaffing, and other sinnes, then in ho∣nest behauiour, in humilitie, in sobrietie and in godlines? If we find our selues subiects and slaues vnto these satanicall suggestions, thenRom. 6.23 death and damnation is our due, then our lodging, our pallace, and our mansion-house shall be in that place which burneth with fire and brimstone, where isMatth. 25.30 howling and cry∣ing, weeping and gnashing of teeth, where theEsay 30.33 luke 3.17 vnquenchable fire of Gods furie contiunaly burneth, where theEsay 66.24 incurable worm of consci∣ence euer stingeth, & where theLuke 16.23 vntollerable torments of desperat minds alwaies continue. PleasureEsay 1.4 prouoketh the anger of GOD, itEsay 59.2 separateth his loue from man, itIeremie 5.29 hasteneth his iustice, itEsay 59.13 procureth perpetuall destructi∣on. Pleasure was theGenesis 3.6 bane of Adam and his posteritie, the destruction of theGenesis 7.17 old world, the ouerthrow ofGenesis 19.24 Sodom, the ruine of theGenesis 34.27 Sichemites, and the perdition of theIudg. 20.35. Benia∣mites: why then should we be so besotted with these worldly pleasures, seeing by death we shall enioy eternall and euerlasting ioyes in heauen?
A remedie against the temptation of vnwillingnesse to forsake wife, children and friends. Sect. VII Howsoeuer we be left and forsaken, or rather sequestred and separated from our vviues and children; yet are we not forsaken ofEsay 41.9 esay 54.10 God, & of his Sonne Iesus Christ our Sauiour,Iohn 6.37 Him that commeth vnto me (saith Christ) I cast not awaie.Iohn 6.39 This is the Fathers will which hath sent me, that of all which he hatth giuen me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it vp a∣gaine at the last daie.Iohn 10.28 And I giue vnto them eter∣nall life, and they shal neuer perish, neither shall anie plucke them out of mine hande. As Elkanah sayde vnto Annah:1. Sam. 1.8 Why weepest thou? am not I better vnto thee then ten sonnes? So, why should we be sorie to leaue wife, children and friendes? Is not Christ better vnto vs then ten wiues, so many children, so many friends? Yea, then ten thousand times so many?Deut. 33.9 He that saith vnto his father and mother, I see you not, and to his brethren, and to his owne children, I know you not, he obserueth the worde of the Lorde and keepeth his couenant. Wherevpon Christ saith,Matth. 10.37 He that loueth father or mother more then me, is not worthie of me: and he that loueth sonne or daughter more then me is not worthie of me:Matth. 10.38 and he that taketh not vp his crosse and followeth me, is
not worthie of me:Luke 14.26 if anie man come vnto me and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and chil∣dren, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his owne life also, he cannot be my Disciple.How we must hate our parents. Howbeit we must remember that this hate is the hate of dissimu∣lation, not of persecution, the hate of auoy∣ding, not of annoying, the hate of godlinesse, not of cruelnesse; when we doe not giue eare vnto them, or regard their Syren-like perswa∣sions, when they seeme to withdraw vs from the seruice of God, and from doing of such things as he commaunds. Moreouer, we must consider, that we, our wiues, our children, and frends, are al, as it wereGen. 47.9 heb. 11.13 trauelers going forth of this world, we take our voyage together, and if we goe a little before, they shall shortly folow after. Wherefore, as at the beginning of our mariage or acquaintāce, weMatth. 19.5 left father & mother, and did cleaue to our wiues: so now it ought not to grieue vs to leaue them, and to returne vnto God, who is better vnto vs then father, mother, wife, children, friend, or any thing else. That though a man die in debt, yet he should not feare death. Sect. VIII Obiection.
O But my debt is great; if I die now, then when I am dead, my creditors wil come and seize vpon al that I haue, so cruel they are, and so mercilesse, and so shal my poore wife and children be vndone for euer: Oh I woulde God I might liue to be out of debt, and leaue my wife and children free, though I left them little or nothing beside. Alas, how shall I doe? Nay, how shall they doe? Little I haue, and euen that little shal be taken from them: my wife shal be constrained to bestow her selfe against her owne liking, and contrary to her affe∣ction, euen for very neede: and my children shall either begge, or endure some seruile slauerie, vnder some rigorous and cruell masters and mistresses. This is it that tor∣menteth my heart, this pincheth me sore, and pearceth euen my very soule, when I thinke of it: and how can I but thinke vpon my deere & neere ones both night & day? Answere. YOu cannot commit your wife and chil∣dren into the hands of a more faithfull
Guardian and Ouerseer then God is. Hee will take them into hisPsal. 146.9 deut. 10.18 psa. 9.9 ps. 10.17 psal. 68.5. pro. 22 23. malac. 3.5 protection, he promi∣seth that he will haue a particular care ouer them, he will defend and maintaine them a∣gainst all oppressors, & wil powre out a feare∣full vengeance vpon the wrongs, outrages, and iniuries that shall be done vnto them, he will neuer forsake them. O then be not discoraged, faint not,Psal. 55.22 Cast thy burden vpon the Lord (sayth Dauid) and he shall nourish thee, he will not suffer the righteous to fall for euer.1. Pet. 5.7 Cast your care vpon him for he careth for you, saith the Apostle.Iob 39.3 psal. 147.9 luke 12.24 He feedeth the yong rauens,Luke 12.27 he clotheth the lillies, how much more will he feede and clothe his children? What can care profit you? What can thought auaile you?Luke 12.25 Which of you by taking thought (saith Christ) can adde to his stature one cubite?26 If then he be not able to doe the least thing why take you thought for raiment?29 Therefore aske not what shall ye eate, or what ye shall drinke:30 your father knoweth that ye haue need of these things. Let this stay and strengthen you, let this al∣waies comfort and cherish you, that God isPsalme 68.5 mat. 6.9 luk. 11.2 galat. 4.6. deut. 32.6. esay 63.16 2. Esdr. 12.29 1. corint. 6.18 matth. 23.9 your father, yea the father of your wife and children, that he knoweth your case, and what you and yours haue neede of: therefore he wil in due time prouide all necessaries for his chil∣dren; for he is both willing and able to doe it, and his care shall effect that that yours neuer
can. See the experience hereof in the like case, and be comforted by it. One of the2. Kings 4.1 sonnes of the Prophets, being in debt, not by reason of any vnthriftinesse, or prodigalitie (for he was a man that feared the Lord) but by the hand of God: died, leauing his poore wife and children to the cruelty of the Creditor, who came fierce∣ly to take away the childrē from their mother, to answere the debt by bondage. This was a heauie crosse to a man that feared the Lorde, to liue in debt, and to die in debt; especially when debt to his poore wife and children was so daungerous. Well, how did the poore widow and the orphans? How escaped they this dan∣ger? Euen the mercifull prouidence of God, which isPsalme 37.25 euer good vnto them that feare him, so increased that little2. Kings 4.7 oyle which she had in her pitcher, that it payd her Creditor, and yeelded her maintenaunce to maintaine her selfe and her children: Now then thinke vpon this comfortable storie, and know, that God is not the God of this man alone, nor of this wi∣dow and orphans onely, but he is your God, and the God and Father of all the faithfull. Wherefore grieue not to die, seeing God will haue it so; committe your vvife, children and friends vnto God, and he vvill protect them:Psalme 23.1 they that haue the Lord for their Shepheard, shall want nothing.
Testimonies of holy Scripture, tou∣ching the care that God hath ouer widowes and fatherlesse children. Sect. IX MOses,Exodus 22.22 Ye shall not trouble any wi∣dow, nor fatherlesse child. The Lord doth right vnto the father∣lesse and widow.Deut. 10.18. Thou shalt not peruert the right of the stranger,Deut. 24.17 nor of the fatherlesse, nor take the widowes rayment to pledge. When thou cuttest downe thine haruest in thy field,19 and hast forgotten a sheafe in thy field, thou shalt not goe to fetch it, but it shall be for the stranger, for the fa∣therlesse, and for the widow, that the Lord thy God may blesse thee in all the works of thine hands.20 When thou beatest thine O∣liue
tree, thou shalt not go ouer the boughs againe, but it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherlesse, and for the widow. When thou gatherest thy vineyard,21 thou shalt not gather the grapes cleane after thee, but they shall be for the stranger, for the fatherlesse and for the widow. Cursed be he that hindereth the right of the stranger,Deut. 27.19 the fatherlesse and the widow. And all the people shall say, So be it. Iob,Iob 24.3 They leade away the Asse (spea∣king of the wicked) of the fatherlesse, and take the widowes Oxe to pledge. If I restrained the poore of their desire,Iob 31.16 or haue caused the eyes of the widow to faile.21 If I haue lift vp my hand against the fatherlesse, when I saw that I might helpe him in the gate:22 Let my arme fall from my shoulder, and mine arme be bro∣ken from the bone. Dauid,Psalme 9.9 The Lord will be a refuge for the poore, a refuge in due time, euen in affliction.
Lord thou hast heard the desire of the poore,Psalme 10.17 thou preparest their heart, thou bendest thine eare to them. To iudge the fatherlesse and poore,28 that earthly man cause to feare no more. Behold,Psalme 33.18 the eie of the Lord is vpon them that feare him, and vpon them that trust in his mercy:19 To deliuer their soules from death, and to preserue them in fa∣mine. The poore man cried,Psalme 34.6 and the Lord heard him, and saued him out of all his troubles.9 Nothing wanteth to them that feare him. They that seeke the Lorde,10 shall want nothing that is good. I haue bin young, and am old:Psalme 37.25 yet I saw neuer the righteous forsaken, nor his seede begging hread. Do right to the poore and fatherlesse,Psalme 82.3 do iustice to the poore and needy. Deliuer the poore and needy:4 saue them from the hand of the wicked. The Lord keepeth the strangers,Psalme 146.9 he re∣lieueth
the fatherlesse and widow: but he ouerthroweth the way of the wicked. He is a Father of the fatherlesse,Psalme 68.5 and a Iudge of the widowes, euen God in his holy habitation. Salomon,Prouerbs 23.10 Remoue not the ancient boundes, and enter not into the field of the fatherlesse:11 for he that redeemeth them, is mightie, he will defend their cause against thee. The Lord will defend their cause,Prouerbs 22.23 and spoyle the soule of those that spoyle them. Isaiah,Esay 1.17 Learne to do wel, seeke iudge∣ment, relieue the oppressed, iudge the fa∣therlesse, and defend the widow. Ieremiah,Ieremie 22.3 Thus saith the Lord, exe∣cute ye iudgement and righteousnesse, and deliuer the oppressed from the hand of the oppressour, and vexe not the stranger, the fatherlesse, nor the widow. Leaue thy fatherlesse children, and I will preserue them aliue,Ieremie 49.11 and let thy wi∣dowes trust in me.
Zechariah,Zechar. 7.10 Oppresse not the widow nor the fatherlesse, the stranger nor the poore, and let none of you imagine euill a∣gainst his brother in your heart. Malachi,Malach. 3.5 I will come neere to you to iudgement, and I will be a swift witnes. a∣gainst those that vexe the widow and fa∣therlesse, and oppresse the stranger, and feare not me, saith the Lord of hostes. Iesus Christ, I say vnto you,Matth. 6.25 be not carefull for your life, what ye shall eate, or what ye shall drinke, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more worth then meate? and the body then rayment?26 Behold the foules of the heauen, for they sowe not, neither reape, nor carrie into the barnes, yet your hea∣uenly Father feedeth them: Are ye not much better then they?28 And why care you for rayment? Learne how the lillies of the field do grow, they are neyther wearied, nor spinne. Yet I say vnto you,29 that euen Sa∣lomon in all his glory, was not arayed like
one of these.30 Wherfore, if God so clothe the grasse of the field, which is to day, and to morrow is cast into the ouen, shal he not do much more vnto you, O yee of little faith? Therefore take no thought,31 saying, What shal we eate? or what shal we drinke? or wherewith shal we be clothed?32 (For after these things seeke the Gentiles) for your heauenly Father knoweth that you haue neede of all these things.33 But seeke ye first the kingdome of God, and his righteousnes, and al these things shal be ministred vnto you.Iohn 14.18 I wil not leaue you fatherlesse, but I wil come to you. See Matth. 23.14. Paul,Philip. 4.5 The Lord is at hand: be nothing careful, but in all things let your requests be shewed vnto God, in prayer, and suppli∣cation, with giuing of thankes. Let your conuersation be without co∣uetousnes,Hebr. 13.5 iosh. 1.9 and be content with those things that you haue, for he hath sayde, I will not faile thee,Hebr. 13.7 psal. 118.6 neyther forsake thee. So that we may boldly say; The Lord is my helper.
Iames,Iames 1.2 Pure religion and vndefiled before God euen the Father is this, to visit the fatherlesse and widows in their aduer∣sitie, and to keepe himselfe vnspotted of the world. Chap. V. Of the second cause that maketh death fearefull to a worldly man, which is the paines and sicknesses which come before or accompany Death. And the reme∣dies against the same. Vnmortified men, no fit inhabitants for the heauenlie Hierusalem. Sect. I. WHen a Condemned-man is retur∣ned to prison, all his mind runneth vpon death, he detesteth his former life and conuersation, he prayeth earnestly vn∣to God, and regardeth no worldly pleasure, soft bedding, delicate fare, or costly apparrell: Yea, if he be a man that feareth God, all his
Philip. 3.20 cogitatiōs are bent to life euerlasting, greatly reioycing that he is so neere theMatth. 25.34 heauenly kingdome, that he may take possession of his1. Pet. 1.4 inheritance. And is not theHebr. 9.27 sentence of death passed vpon vs, the first daye that wee came into this world? Be not our soules in our bodies, as in a prison? Do not we onely expect the time of our execution? How commeth it to passe then, that we do not feele, or shew vs rea∣dy, & prouide our selues to die, as doth the pri¦soner that hath receiued his sentence from an earthly Iudge? Why do we fixe our whole de∣light on the world, why do we so much en∣cumber our selues with earthly businesses, and why do not we willingly embrace death, that by it we may take possession of our inheri∣tance? O let vs not build where wee cannot long continue, let vs make our prouision that we may liue where we shall remaine for euer; let vs not forget heauen for earth, the soule for the bodie, and heauenly treasures for earthly goods▪ for one moneth or day, for one houre or minute, let vs not depriue our selues of thatMatth. 25.21 euerlasting ioy that shal neuer be takē frō vs: let vs endure stormy weather for one moneth, that we may haue a thousand miliōs of yeeres of faire weather: let vs patiently beare theActes 14.22 tri∣bulation of one day, which will breede vs ex∣ceeding great consolation for euer: let not the
paines of one moment of time fray vs from ta∣kingLuke 12.32 possession of our kingdome, lest we shal be cast for euer into theMatth. 25.30 kingdome of darke∣nesse. In a temporall building, the stones must be broken, hewne, and squared, ere they be fit to make vp the worke. The Corne must be threshed, winowed, and purified, before it be ready for good bread.2. Kings 2.11 whirle winde must first blow ere Elias be rapt into heauen. And we must be cut, hewn, & squared vvith a number ofActes 14.22 2. timot. 3.12 luke 9.23 marke 8.34 tribulations, sicknesses, and disea∣ses, before vve can be made fit & liuely stones for the heauenly Hierusalem. The very victu∣alls vvhich nourish and maintaine vs come to very great loathsomnesse, before they doe vvoorke their perfection in vs. From life they are brought to the fire, and cleane altered from that they vvere vvhen they vvere aliue, from the fire to the trencher, from the trencher to the mouth, from the mouth to the stomack, & there so boiled & digested, before they no∣rish, that vvhosoeuer savv the same, he vvould loathe & abhorre his ovvne nutriment, before it come to full perfection. And so must those children vvhom God delighteth in, be mang∣led and defaced in thisIohn. 16.33 1. iohn 3.13, 14 vvorld, vvhich is the kitchin and mill to boyle and grinde the flesh of Gods children in, till they attaine their per∣fection in the vvorld to come: and as a man
looketh for the nourishing of his meate, when it is full digested, and not before: so must vve looke for our saluation, when the trouble∣some turmoiles of this vvorld are passed, and not before. Ravv flesh is not meate vvhole∣some for man; and vnmortified men be no creatures fitte for God. That sicknesse and tribulation is a token of Gods loue. Sect. II Affliction, what it is vnto the godly.THe holy Scriptures plainely testifie, that the paines and pangs of Death, or what∣soeuer dolorous sickenesses, or other grieuous maladies we suffer either before or with death, are no other thing in vs christi∣ans, then the rod of our most mercifull and lo∣uing father; wherewith he correcteth and cha∣steneth his children, either to amend in vs whatsoeuer offendeth his Maiestie, lest we pe∣rish; or else to trie our faith and patience, that we may be found vnreproueable, laudable, & honorable before the tribunall seate of Iesus Christ, the Iudge of the world, at his second comming.Hebr. 12.5 proue. 3.11 My sonne (saith he) despise not the chastening of the Lorde, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him.Hebr. 12.6 For whom the Lorde loueth,
he chasteneth and he scourgeth euerie sonne whom he receiueth.7 If ye endure chastening, God offereth himselfe vnto you as vnto sonnes; for what sonne is it that the father chasteneth not?8 If therefore ye be without correction whereof all are partakers, then are you bastards and not sonnes.9 Moreouer, we haue had the fathers of our bodies which corrected vs, and we gaue them reuerence: should not we much rather be in subiection vnto the Father of Spirits, that we might liue?10 For they verilie for a few daies chaste∣ned vs after their owne pleasure, but he chasteneth vs for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holinesse.11 Now no chastesing for the present see∣meth to be ioyous, but greeuous; but afterward it bringeth the quiet fruite of righteousnesse vnto them which are thereby exercised.12 Wherefore lift vp your hands which hang downe, and weake knees:13 And make straight steps vnto your feete, lest that which is halting be turned out of the waie, but let it rather be healed. Hitherto out of the Scriptures. An excellent comfort, and a soueraigne salue for all them that are in such a case, visited with the hand of God, & tempted with this temp∣tation. TheExodus 3.2 Bush which Moses sawe in Mount Horeb, burned, and yet consumed not; so must the faithfull be tried in the fire of af∣fliction, but not destroyd. They are compa∣red toCantic. 2.2. lillies growing among thorns, because they are placed in the midst of tribulation: to
Luke 22.31 wheat, because Satan will sift vs as men sift wheat, and as wheat is flailed, so the world afflicts vs: and toIohn 15.5 vine branches, for as Vines being let out at large, in small time becomeEsay 5.6 wild and fruitlesse, so we being giuen ouer of God, and left to runne after our owne lust, are easily allured; but being pruned and dressed as their nature requireth, they bring forth greater and sweeter grapes; so we being kept in awe, and obedience by the band of affliction and sicknesses, wil bring forthPsalme 23.4 fruit, both in quan∣tity more abundant, and in quality more sweet and pleasant. Thus then, that carefulIohn 15.1 Hus∣band-man euen GOD our Father, pruneth his vines that they may beare much fruite. Wheerevpon the Prophet Dauid maketh a so∣lemne protestation, declaring what good affli∣ction wrought in him,Psalme 219.71 It is good for me (O Lord) that thou hast corrected me,67 for before I was affli∣cted, I went wong. And in another place,Psalme 23.4 thy rod and thy staffe haue comforted me. That God hath appointed his holie Angells to guard and preserue vs in our sicknesses and troubles. Sect. III
WHat a comfort is that vnto vs, that in all our tribulations and sicknes∣ses, yea, in the verie sorrowes and pangs of death, Almightie God hath giuen his holy Angells charge to direct our pathes, and toPsalme 91.1 keep vs in all our waies, as he hath promi∣sed in his worde.Exodus 23 20 Behold I send an Angell be∣fore thee to keepe thee in the waie, and to bring thee to the place which I haue prepared.Psalme 34 7 The Angell of the Lord pitcheth round about them that feare him and deliuereth them. Examples hereof, we haue in the holy Scriptures plentifull:Genesis 19.15 Lot when Sodom and Gomorrha should be de∣stroyed was by Angelles conducted and brought thence, and so, he and his Daughters escaped the daunger.Genesis 16.7 The Angell of the Lord comforted Hagar Saras maide, flying from her Dame, into the Wildernesse, and pre∣serued her from present perill.Genesis 32.1.2 Iacob in his iourney towards Mesopotamia, when he was in danger by the way, the Angells of God met him, which Iacob called Gods hoast. The An∣gellsExodus 14.19 and 23. and 32 conducted the children of Israel in the desart. Troupes of Angells in the likenesse or horsemen and charets of fire, defended Elisha the Prophet, against the king of Siria. And when his seruant was afraide and saide vnto him;2. King. 6.15 Alas Maister, what shall we doe?16 He an∣swered, Feare not, for they that be with vs are more
then they that be with them. An Angell preseruedDan. 3.25 Shadrach, Meihach and Abednago in the middest of the firie furnace, so that the fire had no power ouer their bodies; andDan. 6.22 deliuered Daniel from the Lions mouth. An Angell from heauenLuke 22.43 appeared to our Lorde Iesus Christ, in his passion, comforting him.Luke 16.22 And Angells carried the soule of Lazarus into A∣brahams bosome. There are other infinite ex∣amples tending to this purpose, which for bre∣uitie sake I omit. Now therefore, seeing we are thus graced by God, what remaineth but that we patiently beare thePsalm. 23.4 heb. 12.5 pro∣uerb. 3.11 rod of our heauenly Father layde vpon vs, and like obedientHebr. 12.7 chil∣dren kisse and embrace the same, when it is of∣fered vs, that we may be found ready to suffer all temptations and trialls, wherewith it shall please the Lord to exercise vs, hauing sure trust and confidence, that he whichMatth. 27.35 mar. 15.27. luke 23.33. ioh. 19.30 suffered and wasMatth. 4.1 tempted, is able toHebr. 2.15 deliuer them that suffer and are tempted out of trouble, daunger, and afflicti∣on. Comforts taken from the consequents following Death. Sect. IIII.
COnsidering, that after sickenesse follow∣eth Death, and after death ensueth eter∣nall life, and euerlasting felicitie: why should we be so faint and so weake in sickenes? Let vs plucke vp our hearts therefore, that are afflicted with paines, and call to remembrance the life, and ioyes of heauen, that are reserued for all them that patiently do suffer here with Christ. Let vs consider, that Christ himselfe suffered farre greater & heauier torments then we do, who saith,Lam. 1.12 Haue yee no regard, all yee that passe by this way? Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like vnto my sorrow.Iohn 15 20 and 13.18 matth 24.9. mar. 10.24. The seruant is not greater then his master. Oh, let vs therefore take our visitation in good part, and the Lord, when he shall see his good time, wil send vs helpe and comfort; onely let vs submit, and commit our selues to his heauenly protection and will.1. Corin. 10.13 There is no tentation hath taken you, saith the A∣postle, but such as appertaineth to man, and God is faithfull, which will not suffer you to be tempted aboue that you be able, but will euen giue the issue with the tentation, that yee may be able to beare it.2. Pet. 2.9 The Lord knoweth to deliuer the godlie out of ten∣tation.Apoc. 2.10 Feare none of those things which thou shalt suffer; (saith Christ) Behold, it shall come to passe, that the diuell shall cast some of you into prison, that yee may be tried, and yee shall haue tribulation ten daies: Be thou faithfull vnto the death, and I will
giue thee the crowne of life. Furthermore, wee must cal to mind, that the Lord neuerPsa. 33.18.19 leaueth them that faithfully serue him, and commit themselues altogither into his custodie, but keepeth themZach 2.8 as the apple of his eye.Zach. 2.5 Hee will be as a fire round about them, that no∣thing do them hurt. Whereupon Dauid could say of his owne experience,Psal 23.4 Though I should walke through the valleie of the shadow of death, I will feare no euill, for thou art with of death, I will feare no euill, for thou art with me, thy rodde and thy siaffe, they comfort me. And to the end that the Lord might make vs certaine of his helpe and comfort, he earnestly exhorteth vs, to call oftentimes vnto him, and to sue for helpe, saying;Psalme 50.15 Call vpon me, in the daie of trou∣ble, so I will deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. And againe,Psalme 91.15 Hee shall call vpon mee, and I will heare him, I will be with him in trouble, I will deli∣uer him, and glorifie him. So knowing assuredly, that the Lord will helpe vs at the last, in his good time, according vnto our owne desire, if we patiently beare in the meane time, what∣soeuer his gracious goodnesse shal lay vpon vs; It remayneth that we haue an inuincible cou∣rage against all aduersities, and sicknesses what soeuer, patiently expecting the reward of our hope,Rom. 8.18 For the afflictions of this present life, are not worthie of the glorie which shall be shewed vn∣to vs.
Straungers that are euill intreated in a for∣reine land; where they soiourne, hauing pa∣rents, friends, and great possessions in their na∣tiue soyle, being now vpon the point to returne into their owne countrie, are vndoubtedly ex∣ceeding glad; for euen already they seeme, in a maner to see their houses, landes, and posses∣sions, to talke with their parents, friends, and acquaintance; and to enioy their wealth al∣ready. Euē so also, if we cal to mind, that here we are2. Chro. 29.5. soiourners and strangers, veryIohn 16.33 hard∣ly intreated by the worlds friends; hauing in heauen, our own countrie, great riches of eter∣nall treasures, aMatth. 23.9 heauenly Father, that deare∣ly loueth vs in his beloued Sonne, and many louing frends, our eldestRom. 8.29 brother Iesus Christ, and all the holy Angels and Saints in glory, and an vndefiled1. Pet. 1.4 inheritance holy and im∣mortall: If we consider, that we are at the ve∣ry point, going thither, to take possession of ourLuke 12.32 kingdome and royaltie, we cannot chuse but be exceeding glad thereof, euen rauished with a feruent desire to be lifted vp thither, with Paul,Philip. 1.23 desiring to be loosed, and to be with Christ. For shall not the feeling of so grieuous, and so ma∣ny bodily afflictions, whereto we are subiect in this strange land, and of the mortal wounds our soules do daily receiue by offending God, cause vs earnestly to desire, and feruently to
pray to be deliuered from the same? especially considering2. Cor. 5.1 we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we haue a building gi∣uen of God, that is, an house not made with handes, but eternall in the heauens? Shall not the incom∣prehensible excellencie of the glory and dig∣nitie, which we shalApoc. 22.5 enioy in the kingdom of heauen, encourage vs to enter in thither, though the entrance beMatth 7.13 narrow and straight? And shall not the certaine and assured know∣ledge of the renewing of our bodies being1. Cor. 15.52 ri∣sen againe immortall, like vnto the glori∣cus body of Christ, and ioyned to their san∣ctified soules; and then of the1. Thess. 4.17 translating of the same into the kingdome of God our fa∣ther, aboue all heauens, where we shall see the1. Cor. 13.12 face of God, as the Sunne in his brightnesse, and enioy the effect of the prayers of Christ Iesus our Redeemer, made in our behalfe, whē he said,Iohn 17.24 Father, I will that they which thou hast giuen me, be with me, euen where I am, that they may behold that my glory, which thou hast giuen me; moue and stirre vs vp to take possession of ourEphes. 1.14 inheritance, beeing now offered vnto vs? When Iesus Christ hath1. Cor. 15.28 rendred vp the kingdome to God his Father; then shall God the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, be vnto vs all in all; we shall be replenished and satisfied with such aIohn 17.13 fulnesse of life, glory,
and ioy, so as we shall not be able to desire or to haue any more: euen as vessels cast into the sea, being so filled with water, that they can desire or hold no more. We shall beApoc. 21.7 inhabi∣tants, and citizens of that holy Citie, which is ofApoc. 21.18 pure gold,Apoc. 21.2% which hath no need, neither of the Sunne, nor of the Moone, to shine in it, for the glo∣rie of God shall light it, and the Lambe is the light of it. And finally, we shall be in the fellowship of Angels, shining as theMatth. 13.43 Sunne in his pride, and rauished with ioy that shallIohn 16.22 neuer be taken from vs. Testimonies out of the holy Scrip∣tures, that God is alwaies ready to helpe and assist them, that seeke vnto him, in the time of afflicti∣on and miserie. Sect. V IOshua, The Lord said vnto Ioshua,Ioshua 1.1 saying: Arise, goe ouer this Iordan,2
thou and all this people, vnto the land which I giue to the children of Israell: I will be with thee,5 I will not leaue thee, nor forsake thee;6 Be strong, and of a good courage. Dauid,Psalme 33.18 Behold, the eye of the Lord is vpon them that feare him, and vpon them that trust in his mercie: To deliuer their soules from death,19 and to preserue them from famine. I sought the Lord and he heard me,Psalme 34.4 yea he deliuered me out of all my feare. The poore man cryed,6 and the Lord heard him, and saued him out of all his troubles. The eyes of the Lord are vpon the righteous,15 and his eares are open vnto their crie. The righteous crie,17 & the Lord heareth them, and deliuereth them out of all their trou∣bles. The Lord is neere vnto them that are of a contrite heart,18 and will saue such as be afflicted in spirit.19 Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord deliuereth him out of them all.20 Hee kee∣peth
all his bones, not one of them is bro∣ken. Reade the seauen and thirtieth Psalme throughout, and you shall find therein excellent comfort. The Lord is neare to all that call vpon him, yea to all that call vpon him in truth:Psalme 145.1 he will fulfill the desire of them that feare him:19 he also will heare their crie,20 and will saue them. The Lord preserueth all them that loue him. Isaiah, Behold, God is my saluation,Esay 12.2 I will trust, and will not feare, for the Lord God is my strength and song: and also is become my saluation. Thou art my seruant,Esay 41.9 I haue chosen thee, and not cast thee away.10 Feare thou not, for I am with thee, be not afraid, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee and helpe thee.13 I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying vnto thee:14 Feare not thou worme Iacob, and ye men of Is∣rael; I will helpe thee, saith the Lord and thy redeemer, the holy one of Israel.
Feare not,Esay 43. for I haue redeemed thee, I haue called thee by name, thou art mine: when thou passest through water,2 I wil be with thee, and through the floods, that they do not ouerflow thee. When thou wal∣kst through the very fire, thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle vp∣on thee. Tsion said,Esay 46.14 the Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forsaken me. Can a woman forget her child,15 & not haue com∣passion on the sonne of her wombe? though they should forget, yet will not I forget thee.16 Behold, I haue engrauen thee vpon the palme of mine hands. Ieremiah,Ieremie 32.2 Thus saith the Lord, They shall come weeping,9 and with mercie will I bring them againe. I will leade them by the riuers of water, in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble, for I am a father in Israel. Iesus Christ,Iohn 16.33 In the world, you shall haue affliction, be of good comfort, I haue
ouercome the world Feare none of those things which thou shalt suffer.Apoc. 2.1 Be faith∣full vnto the death, and I will giue thee the crowne of life. Paul, God is faithfull,1. Cor. 1.13 which will not suffer you to be tempted, aboue that you be able, but will euen giue the issue with the tentation, that yee may be able to beare it. If wee suffer with Christ,2. Tim. 2.12 wee shall raigne with him. Peter,2. Pet. 2.9 The Lord knoweth to deliuer the godly out of tentation. Chap. VI Of Patience. An exhortation to Christian Patience after the example of Iesus Christ our Sauiour. And how the wicked behaue themselues in their afflictions.
Sect. I CHristian Patience,Patience what it is. is a1. Pet. 1.6 1. thess 1.4. moderation and tolerance of our euils, expressing in out∣ward actions, a spirit of contentment and gladnesse, that striueth so well and maisteseth in such sort, the sence of nature, whichHeb. 12.11 shun∣neth griefe, that in the end, it worketh in vs anIob 13.15 affection of pietie and godlinesse ioyned with a free and cheerefull minde, vnder the yoke of obedience of the will of God, through aHeb. 3.6 cer∣taine expectatiō of things promised, & causeth vs to iudgeHebr. 12.8 Impaciencie, to be contumacie and rebellion to this diuine wil; and sufficient of it self, to make a man to be called, wretched. Of this sort was the Pacience ofIob 2.10 iames 5.11 Iob, who seemed as it were, to take pleasure in his affli∣ctions, as the Salamander that delighteth to bathe his limmes in the burning flames. But especially such was the Patience ofMatth. 11.29 Iesus Christ our Sauiour, the only example and true patterne of perfect Patience, whoPhilip. 2.8 became obe∣dient vnto the death, euen the death of the Crosse: For behold, hanging vpon the same, he ope∣neth fiue fountaines streaming out with his guiltlesse bloud, and sheweth vs his whole bo∣die all goary with lashes, and shall not this en∣courage vs, patiently to endure all tribulation, and to warre against our desires and vaine ap∣petites, when they withdraw vs from triall, to
delight and pleasure? When our foote is prick∣ed (much more the head or heart) al the whole bodie is so disquieted, that we wish rather for the Chirurgion to lance vs, then for any plea∣sures to delight vs.The true mem∣bers must needes haue a fellow-feeling of the sufferings and aches of the Head. and can we (if we be true members indeede) endure to see Christ our Head, so cruelly pricked and crowned with thornes, but that we must needs be more wil∣ling to sorrow with our Head, and to be lan∣ced for his sake, then to leane vnto worldly solaces which he contemned? It is an vnde∣cent thing to haue a daintie member vnder a thornie head. Shall Christ our onely Lorde with theIonas 3.5 King of Niniuie, mourne in sacke∣cloath and ashes? Shall he with1. Sam. 14.4 Ionathan venture to climbe most craggie and dangerous rockes, to fight alone with a whole troope of Philistines: shall he climbe vp to mountLuke 23.33 Cal∣uarie loaden with a heauy Crosse vppon his wounded shoulders, to encounter the diuel & al his vassals? Shal he fall on the most rigorous sword of his owne iustice for our sinnes? And shall we for whose sakes all this was done, vn∣naturally and vngratefully refuse to follow his2. Pet. 2.2 example? and to suffer any thing for his sake, that hath suffered so much for vs? Alas! we are they, that deserue to sit withIob 2.8 Iob in the ashes, to mourne inIonas 3.5 sacke cloth with the Niniuites, with naked knees to creep vp the1. Sam, 14.4 craggy rock
of affliction, to hazard our liues amongst a thousandIohn 18.3 blades and torments; finally to im∣brace the ruefull sword of Gods iustice and re∣uenge, and to fall vpon the same; such and so great are our enormous and horrible sinnes! O sencelesse and benummed hearts and soules of ours, if at the consideration of so heauy and lamentable a sight, of so great and glorious be∣nefites, can not finde any scope or field of sor∣rowe and thankfulnesse! But yet if any grace remaineth in vs, let vs be sorrie for our want of sorrow, and bewaile our vnthankfulnesse, let vs patiently endure some affliction for Christ his sake, that we may beare his2. Corin. 11.23 marks in our flesh, lest we fall into a carelesse securi∣tie, or into a desperate madnesse, and be de∣priued of the infinite and endlesse blessings that Christ hath purchased for vs. Farre other effect tooke Christs sufferings in Paul, who being a perfect scholler in this doctrine, would haue no other Vniuersitie but Hierusalem, no School but Caluary, no Pulpit but the Crosse, no letters but Christs wounds, no Commaes but his lashes, no Colons but his thornes, no Periods but his nailes, and no Lesson but5. Goriach. 2.2 Christ Iesus and him crucified. In this Schoole we may learne by ChristsIohn 19.23 nakednes, how to cloath vs, by hisMarke 15.17 thorny crown to adorne vs, by hisIohn 19.29 gall and vinegar to diet vs, by his
Luke 23.34praying for his murderers to reuenge vs, by hisIohn 19.18 hanging on the Crosse to repose vs, by his painfull and bitterMar. 15.37 death to esteeme the plea∣sures of this life; briefly, by his life and death, we may learne how to behaue our selues in al troubles and afflictions. See lib. 2. Chap. 4. Sect. 4. Many gape for ChristsMat. 19.16 kingdome, but hate hisMat. 19.22 Crosse, breathing after prosperitie, but abhorring aduersitie, and loath to enter in at theMat. 7.13 straight gate. Many would reioyce with Christ, butMar. 10.35 mat. 26.56 none will sustaine his affli∣ctions. Euery man would eateIohn 6.26 bread with him, but few wil taste of hisLuke 22.57 cuppe. Finally, many would loue him whileMarke 10.37 prosperitie doth last, and while they may receiue anyIohn 6.14, 15 comfort at his hands: But who is he that will follow and embrace the shame of hisGalat. 3.13 Crosse? Many loue to wallow in their owne lusts, hating cor∣rection and reformation of their lewd beha∣uiour, who when they feele the waight of the rod, are ready toGen. 4.13 renie and to open their sa∣crilegious mouthes euen against the Almigh∣tie, not knowing in the meane time, or rather not beleeuing, that the Holyghost accompteth them happy and blessed, who suffer the trial of the Lord patiently:Iames 1.12 Blessed is the man that in∣dureth temptation, for when he is tried he shall re∣ceiue the crowne of life, which the Lord hath promi∣sed to them that loue him. But they that loue the
Lorde Iesus vnfainedly,1. Pet. 2.21 follow his steppes, and leane to him, aswel in a duersitie, sorrow, and miserie, as in the time of prospetitie: for this1. Cor. 13.5 loue seeketh not her owne things: and they who seeke for pleasure, ease and rest; who fol∣lowe Christ in prosperitie, but leaue and flie from him in aduersitie, may well be termedHeb. 12.8. Bastards andIoh. 10.12, 13 Hirelings, such as loue them∣selues and their own filthieIoh. 12.4.5 lucre, and beast∣ly lusts better then they do Christ. These men when theyMatth. 13.21 Iuke 8.13 feele any smart of affliction, doe presentlyGen. 4.13 crie out, that it had bin best if they had neuer bin borne, or els destroyd as soone as they were borne a wicked saying, vnworthy to be heard in a christian mans mouth. No doubt but these impatient worldlings do1. Ki. 21.27, 29 de∣sire the help and fauour of God, but it is onely because of the extremitie which they suffer, theyActes 8.24. desire Gods fauour, bicause they would escape his rod, and therefore these be their or∣dinary wishes; Oh that I were well againe! oh that I were rid of this paine! oh that I were ea∣sed of my sicknesse or sorrow! whereby it ap∣peareth plainely, that, so they might haue their health, and liue at their hearts ease, they would set little by the help or fauor of God. Yet some of them are so farre blinded in the pit of impa∣tiency, that they sticke not to offer violent hands vnto themselues, and to shorten their
owne liues, as didIudg. 9.54 Abimelech,1. Samu. 31.4 Saul,2. Sam. 31.23 Ahi∣thophel,1. Ki. 16.18 Zimri, andMatth. 27.5 Iudas Iscariot, rather then by liuing, they would be compelled to suffer any longer, some small sicknesse or other calamitie, or abide the tants of the opē world. I speake not this because I allow of that vnsa∣uorie opinion of stoicall Indolencie, or lacke of griefe; for there is no such cheerefulnesse re∣quired of vs, as should take avvay all sense and feeling of griefe and bitternesse: for so there should be noApoc. 13.10 patience in the Saints suffering of the Crosse of Christ, vnlesse they vvere both invvardly and outvvardly vexed (Which follie seerefuted, lib. 2. Chap. 5. Sect. 17.) but because the vvicked, impatient of a little affliction doe runne into such ex∣tremities. How the godly behaue themselues in their sick∣nesses and other calamities what∣soeuer. Sect. II VVHen the godly and sincere wor∣shippers of God do feele the sharp∣nesse of pouertie, the sting of infa∣my, the pain of diseases, or the horror of death; their courage2. Sam. 16.10 iob 2.10 quaileth not, but ratherActes 116.25 ierem. 10.19 kicke
all desperation aside; because they vnderstand that they must manfully in faithActes 3.41 beare al sorts of crosses and euills: they find such svveetnesse in the fauor and grace of God, that for the de∣sire they haue to the same, they are content, not onely to bePsalm. 119.71 depriued of al their vvorldly delights and earthly pleasures, but also toHeb. 3.6 suf∣fer the rod of their heauenly father, and pati∣ently to endure the vvaight of the Crosse laid on them. As the natural child loueth his father intirely; and though his father beate him, yet he doth loue him neuerthelesse; so the childrē of God being2. Pet. 1.4 of a good nature, do loue God their father vvithMatth. 22.37 all their heart, vvith al their strength; and if he beate and correct them, yet they cease not to loue him stil, and in loue they performe their obedience vnto him continu∣ally, saying vvith Iob,Iob 13.15 Though he slaie me yet will I trust in him. And therefore they arme themselues vvith Patience and Hope. By Pa∣tience theyPsalme 119.71 vanquish themselues and their affections, they ouercome all calamities, and stand stedfast with a quiet mind, and wel dis∣posed with a resolute heart to beare, and for∣beare. Now their Hope vpholdeth christian Patience, which isHeb. 3.6 iames 1.6, 7 The difference betweene Faith and Hope. an assured expectation of those things which are truely and expresse∣ly promised of God, and beleeued of vs by faith. For there is a mutuall relation of Hope
to Faith. FaithRom. 4.3 beleeueth that God saith truth, HopeHeb. 3.6 looketh for those things which Faith hath beleeued: FaithIohn 3.16 beleeueth that eternall life is through Christ our Sauior prepared for vs, and that2. Tim. 2.12 if we suffer with him, we shall raigne with him; HopeRom. 4.20.21 expecteth and pati∣ently waiteth to receiue in due time the thing that God hath promised vnto vs; howsoeuer in the meane time it be tossed with aduersities: Hope vanisheth not away though it seeth not what it hopeth for:Hope is of things absent. It quaileth not, although things fall out cleane crosse and contrarie.Rom. 4.20 Abraham hoped that God would keepe hisGenesis 12.7 promise with him, although he saw not the meanes. He hoped also he should possesse the promised land, although as yet he enioydGenesis 25 not one foote of it, but saw it inhabited ofDeut. 7.1 mighty Nations.1. Sam. 13, 14 Dauid hoped he should be King of Israel, and yet he was continually in1. Sam. 19.1 and 24.1, 2, 3 danger of his life, by reason of the tyrannie of Saul. And the faithfull in a constant Hope of their deliuery, lay all their sicknesses and troubles vpon the shoulder of Patience, and say with Ieremie, ThisIeremi. 10.19 is my sorrow and I will beare it. They will not faint in aduersitie, for then theirProuer. 24.10 strength were small; nor want comfort in trouble; forProuer. 15.15 A good conscience is a continual feast. They will not breake the Lords bonds, for then they were like thePsalme 2.3 heathen, but waite
for his leasure forEsay 28.16 Faith maketh no haste. That extremitie of paines should not cause vs to be impatient. Sect. III Obiection. Oh my sicknesse is greeuous, and my paines extreame! I can take no rest neither day nor night, such is the rage and vio∣lence of my disease. Answere. CHrist telleth his Disciples,Matth. 16.24 luke 9.23 If any man will follow me, let him forsake himselfe, and take vp his crosse, and follow me. Consider here, how mercifully the Lord deales with vs; He tels vs the worst first, he sheweth vs what we should trust to. First then, we mustMatth. 16.24 fol∣low him, and then we shallMatth. 20.21 marke 10.37 sit with him, at his table. The maner of Gods proceedings, is to send good after euill, as he madeGenesis 1.3 light after darkenes; to turne Iustice into Mercie, as he turnedIohn 2.9 water into wine. See Li. 2. Cap. 3. Sect. 2 We must go through aActes 14.22 sea of troubles, before we come to the hauen of rest. As the beasts
were first killed and then sacrificed, so must we be first killed, and then sacrificed.The affliction of the godly what it is. Sicknesse and affliction is the knife of corection, to lop off the rotten twigges, to prune and dresse vs. It is the cords to bind the ram vnto the Altar; the chariot to carie our thoughts into heauen; the hammer which squareth the rough stones till they be plaine, smoothe, and fitte for the temple; the messenger which is sent to compell them to the banquet, which will not come be∣ing inuited. As the rod maketh the scholler ap∣plie his booke; so vnder the Crosse we applie our selues vnto wisedome. But (say you) the rod wherewith I am beaten is sharp, and the paines in∣tollerable. Surely,Hebr. 12.11 no chastising for the present see∣meth to be ioyous, but greuous; but afterward it brin∣geth the quiet fruite of righteousnesse, vnto them which are thereby exercised. Behold1. Pet. 2.21 heb 12.2 Christ suffe∣red, leauing you an ensample that yee should follow his steppes:Hebr. 6.12 Others of Gods Saints also suffe∣red great torments, troubles, temptations, and greeuous afflictions, whoHebr. 11.36 were tried by moc∣kings and scourgings, by bonds and imprisonments:Ibid. 37 they were stoned, they vvere hevven asunder, they vvere tempted, they vvere slaine vvith the svvord, they vvandred vp and dovvne in sheep skins, &c being destitute, afflicted, and tormented. And what is it that you suffer being compared with their torments & trials? See lib. 2. chap. 5. Sect. 14. & 15
Be patient then, call into mind such as haue indured greater and more grieuous pains then you, and so shall your griefe seeme lesse vnto you. To be altogither without sicknesse, trou∣ble, or some crosse, lookeIob 7.1 not for while you liue in this vale. Looke not for ease and qui∣etnesse vpon theIohn 14.27 iohn 16.33 earth, nor among men, but in1. Thess. 5.23 philip. 4.7 God alone, for whose sake you must1. Cor. 13.7 suf∣fer al things, euenRom. 8.35 tribulation, or anguish, or per∣secution, or famine, or nakednesse, or perill, or sworde. Wherefore once againe be strong, courage your selfe, and confirme your imbecilitie with the sweete promises of the Lord, who1. Cor. 10.13 is faith∣full and will not suffer you to be tempted aboue that ye shall be able, but will euen giue the issue with the temptation, that ye may be able to beare it. The LordReu. 3.11 wil come shortly, andReu. 2.10, 23 26. reu. 3.5 giue you a great reward, and willReu. 7.17. reu. 21.4. esay 25.8 wipe away all teares from your eies. See lib. 2. Chap. 5. Sect. 14. That no man may asswage his griefe by laying violent handes on himselfe. Sect. IIII. Obiection. OH, but it hath tormented me thus long; and it is like to continue lon∣ger
then I can beare it. I am, as it were, a marke set vp to shoote at; Well may I say with the Prophet; Mine eye,Psalme 31.10 my soule, and my body are consumed with griefe; my life is wasted with heauines, and my yeeres with mourning, my strength faileth for my paine, and my bones are consumed.11 I am a reproach among all mine enemies, but especial∣ly among my neighbours; and a feare to mine acquaintance. O heauie and hard saying,Matth. 16.24 Take vp thy crosse and follow me. Answere. YEa, but this is much heauier and harder;Matth. 21.41 Depart from me ye cursed, into euerlasting fire, which is prepared for the diuell and his angels. They which follow Christ in taking vp their crosse in this worlde, haue no cause to dread the sentence of eternall damnation in the world to come: For2. Tim. 2.12 If we suffer with him, we shall raigne with him.Psal. 112.6, 9 Surely he shall neuer be moued, but the righteous shall be had in euerlasting
remembrance; his horne shall be exalted with glorie. As it is pleasant and praise-worthie vnto men, to haue their children resemble them; to haue in their of-spring expressed the future image of their owne fauour; So doth Christ delight to see his diuine prowesse & generositie set forth in his childrens actes and practises, especially to see in vs the skarres, wennes and warts of his vexation and paines; which the more they deface vs in outward shew, the more they beautifie vs in soule; and the more vgly they make vs in the preposterous iudgement and glorious they render vs in the sight of God. As the scarre of a wound in the childes face, which he hath suffered in his fathers quarrell, though it disfigure his fauour, is a more edging whetstone of fatherly affection in the Parent, then if it were absent, because it yeeldeth a perpetuall testimonie of a dutifull and louing child; So God, more desirons to haue vs af∣fectionate, then fortunate children, delighteth more in our patient sufferings, sicknesses, and afflictions for his sake, which are assurances of our loue towards him, then to see vs swimme in his temporall gifts. Hee praiseth more theIonas 4.11 Niniuites in sackecloth, andIob 2.8 Iob in the a∣shes, then either of them in all their pomp, and glory of their riches, wherefore then should
we crie,2. Kin. 4.40 Death is in the pot, seeing Christ Iesus our Prophet hath seasoned it, not with a little flowre or meale, but with his owne blood? He hath broken the ice, he hathGalat. 3.13.14 fanctified our af∣flictions, hee hath sweetened all our paines with the excesse of his vnspeakeable loue: Hee hath giuen vs such a president andI. Pet. 2.21 example, in suffering for vs, as it must needs seeme little, whatsoeuer we suffer for him. Let vs not be dismayed therefore with our crosse & afflicti∣on; let not the extremitie of the paynes, the sharpenesse of our miseries, nor the continu∣ance of our sickenesse daunt our courage: wee are notMatth. 10.24 better then our Master, who suffered farre more then we must, nor wiser then God himselfe, by whoseProuer. 14.31 prouidence, this afflicti∣on fell into our share. Yet you say, your paine is like to continue longer then you shal be able to beare it. But how can you remoue it from you?Of Selfe-murder Will you offer violent handes vnto your selfe? Will you cut asunder that which God hath ioyned, as did2. Samu. 31.23 Achitophel,1. Samu. 31.4 Saul,Actes 1.18 Iu∣das and Pilate? Thinke you to get ease by shortening your owne life? Nay, so farre shal you be from finding of any ease or rest, that by so doing, these your temporall (or rather mo∣mentanie) afflictions, shall be turned into e∣uerlasting torments, in the vnquencheable flames of hell fire. Man was not borne of his
owne pleasure, neither must he die at his owne lust. It is writtenExodus 20.13 Thou shalt not kill. If wee may not kill an other, much lesse may wee kill our selues. God willGenesis 9.5 require our blood, yea at our owne hands, if wee be guiltie of such an vnnatural murther. God hath madeGenesis 9.6 man after his owne image, and we must not deface the image of God; which if wee presume to do, we are guiltie of horrible murther. And to that you say, you are forsaken of your friends; Christ Iesus will neuer forsake you:Iohn 6.37.39 Him that commeth vnto me, (saith he) lneuer cast away.Iohn 10.28 No man shall plucke you out of his handes. That our impatiencie doth prouoke God the more to punish vs. Sect. V. Obiection. GOd forbid I should make my selfe away, that was no part of my thought, but my meaning is, that my afflictions and paines be so great, so extreame and so in∣tollerable, that I cannot beare them pa∣tiently.
NOt patiently? Alas, whom hurt you by your impatiencie, but your owne soule? Can your impatiencie alter the will of God, or change his purpose? No verily; Yea,The hurt of im∣patiencie. by your impatiencie, you make your owne case worse; as wel by the inward griefe, which vexeth and tormenteth you, as also, because thereby you tempt and prouoke the Lord, and pull downe his wrath vpon you. As earthly Parents, when they perceiue their children to be brought in good order, subiection and obe∣dience, by their correction, do then cease from beating of them: So our heauenly Father, when he seeth vs patient, andNum. 21.7 humble in our affliction, is moued to pitie, so as hee turneth our troubles into kindnesse and doing vs good; whereas on the contrary side, by our impati∣encie and stubbornnesse, hee is compelled to lay more grieuous punishments vpon vs. Also as Kings and Captaines, do more gently en∣treate those enemies, that haue willingly yeel∣ded themselues into their grace and fauour; then such as be taken captiues, by force of doubtfull fight: Euen so doth God deale more fauourably with those, who patiently humble themselues vnder his hand, and submit them vnto his corrections, then with such, who be∣ing
ouer-mastered with sensualitie and pride of heart, doe continually prouoke him, and prepare themselues to hold out, and still to re∣bell and resist his holy will. God would not haue vs perish with the wicked, and therefore he1. Cor. 11.30 32 chastiseth in vs, whatsoeuer hee seeth a∣misse, euen in this world; so that his rods and corrections are testimonies, that hee accoun∣teth vs his lawful children, and notHebr. 12 bastards. We see if two children striue togither, and if a man comming by, take one of them, and beat him, leauing the other, we will iudge straight-way, that this man is the father of that child he corrected, and that the other appertained not vnto him. And this is it that the Apostle Peter meaneth, when hee saith, that1. Pet. 4.17 Iudge∣ment beginneth at the house of God; shew∣ing that they are his children and household seruants, which are afflicted in this life. Wher∣fore, if Carpenters strike with their hatchets vpon peeces of Timber, to smooth and plaine them: if Masons polish the stones with the strokes of an hammer; wee gather, that they would employ them to some building: Euen so, if God lift vpon vs his hatchets and ham∣mers of tribulation, let vs assure our selues, that he hath chosen vs, to put vs in the building of his holy1. Cor. 3.9 Temple; and so that wee are his deare and welbeloued children. Let vs suffer
our selues to be guided by him, that is infinite∣lyPsalme 147.5 wiser then wee, andIohn 3.16 loueth vs better then we loue our selues. As in running a race, the agilitie & goodnes of the horse is knowne; the strength and courage of the man in the combate, the sauour and qualitie of many drugges in rubbing, bruising, or casting them into the fire, as wee do incense; the starres which appeare not by day, shine in the night; So the faith, the zeale, the constancie, the pa∣tience, and other vertues which God commu∣nicateth to his Elect, which are hid in prospe∣ritie, do manifest themselues in afflictions. And therefore the Apostle saith,2. Cor. 12.10 I take plea∣sure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in per∣secutions, in anguish for Christs sake, for when I am weake, them am I strong. Now the Lorde would make knowne your patience, your faith, and other vertues; and will you, kicking against the pricke, complaine of your ex∣treame handling? Surely if you do so, you are1. Cor. 15.9 vnworthie the least of all Gods comforts yet hath not God so dealt with you, he giueth you not what you haue deserued; nay, he leaueth you not without comfort, he will not that hisEzech. 33.11 works should perish; wherefore you must thinke that he dealeth with you, according to his infinite mercy, as a most gracious and lo∣uing father; who will not that you shoulde
1. Cor. 11.30 32 perish with the wicked,Hebr. 12.6 humbling you therefore, to make you a worthy Citizen of his heauenly kingdome. To conclude, when you say the Lordes prayer, you say,Matth. 6.10 Thy will be done. Now the Lordes will is done towards you, and will you shew your selfe rebellious and disobedient vnto his will? So your heart denieth that, which your mouth vttereth, and saith vnto you, in your eare; Ah Hypocrite, if thou mightest choose, thou haddest rather that thy will might be done, then that the will of God should be done.1. Pet. 5.6 Humble your selfe there∣fore vnder the mightie hand of God, that he may ex∣alt you in due time.1. Cor. 10.13 There hath no tentation taken you, but such as appertaineth to man, and God is faithfull, which will not suffer you to be tempted, a∣boue that you be able, but will euen giue the issue with the tentation, that yee maie be able to beare it.Luke 21.19 By your pacience possesse your soules saith Christ. Testimonies out of the holy Scriptures exhorting vnto Patience. Sect. VI SOlomon,Prouerbs 16.32 He that ruleth his owne minde, is better then he that winneth a
cittie. Waite vpon the Lord,Prouer. 20.22 and he shall saue thee. Isaiah,Esay 28.16 Thus saith the Lorde God, Behold I lay in Sion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation. Hee that beleeueth shall not make haste. Yet therefore will the Lorde wait,Esay 30.18 that he may haue mercy vpon you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may haue com∣passion vpon you: for the Lorde is God of Iudgement; blessed are all they that waite vpon him. Ieremiah,Lam. 3.26 It is good both to trust and to waite for the saluation of the Lord. Iesus Christ, Resist not euill,Matth. 5.39 but whosoeuer shall smite thee on thee right cheeke,luke 6.29 turne to him the other also.Matth. 5.40 And if any man wil sue thee at the law, and take away thy coate, let him take thy cloke also. And whosoeuer wil compell thee to go with him a mile, goe with him twaine.41 But that which fell on good ground are they which with an honest and good
heart heare the worde and keepe it,Luke 8.15 and bring forth fruite with patience. By your patience possesse your soules.Luke 21.19 Paul,Rom. 5.3 Wee reioyce in tribulations, knowing, that tribulation bringeth foorth patience:4 and patience experience, and ex∣perience hope:5 and hope maketh not asha∣med. Reioycing in hope,Rom. 12.12 patient in tribulati∣on, and continuing in prayer. In al things we must approue our selues as the ministers of God,2. Cor. 6.4 in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses. Let vs not be weary of well doing,Galat. 6.9 for in due time we shall reape, if we faint not. Wee our selues reioyce of you in the churches of God,2. Thess. 1.4 because of your patience, and faith in all your persecutions, and tri∣bulations that ye suffer:5 which is a token of the righteous iudgement of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdome of God for the which ye also suffer. Ye haue neede of patience,Hebr. 10.36 that after
ye haue done the will of God, ye might re∣ceiue the promise. Cast awaie euerie thing that presseth downe,Hebr. 12.1 and the sin that hangeth so fast on: let vs run with patience the race that is set before vs, &c. Reade out this 12. Chap. Iames,Iames 1.3 Knowing that the trying of faith bringeth forth patience:Iames 57 Be patient therefore brethren vnto the comming of our Lord. Be ye also patient therefore,8 and settle your hearts, for the comming of our Lord draweth neere. Peter,1. Pet. 1.13 Girde vp the loynes of your minde, be sober and trust perfectly on the grace, that is brought vnto you by the Re∣uelation of Iesus Christ. For herevnto are you called, for Christ also suffered for vs,1. Pet. 2.21 leauing vs an example that we should follow his steppes. Humble your selues therefore vnder the mightie hand of God,2. Pet. 5.6 that he may ex∣alt you in due time. And with knowledge,2. Pet. 1.6 tempe∣rance,
and with temperance patience, and with pacience godlinesse:8 for if these things be among you, and abound, they will make you that ye shall neither be idle, nor vn∣fruitfull in the knowledge of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ. Iohn,1. Iohn 3.2 Deerely beloued, now are we sonnes of God, but yet it doth not appeare what we shall be: and we know, that when he shall appeare, we shal be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Here is the patience of the Saints,Apoc. 14.12 here are they that keepe the commandements of God, and faith of Iesus. Chap. VII. Of the third cause that maketh a worldly man to feare Death, which is the want of Faith and Hope. And the remedie against the same.
That Faith is grounded vpon the faithfull promise of Almightie God and of the excellent effects of the same. Sect. I VErelie verelie I saie vnto you (saith Christ) that ye shall weepe and lament, and the world shall reioice; and ye shall sorrow,a Iohn 16.20 but your sorrow shall be turned to ioy. Who would not hasten to ioy, and who would not wish to want sorrow?22 I will see you againe, and your hearts shall reioice, and your ioy shall no man take from you. Wherfore seeing to see Christ, is to reioyce, and seeing we can haue no perfect ioy vntil we see Christ; what blindnesse, and bloc∣kishnesse, yea, what madnesse is it, to loue af∣fliction, and to be so much addicted vnto mi∣serie and worldly teares; and not rather to ha∣sten to that ioy that shall neuer be taken from vs? Yet this commeth to passe, because we want Faith and Hope, because we beleeue not those things to be true, which God promiseth, there∣by making God1. Tim. 2 (who cannot lie) to be false and1. Iohn 5.10 a lier, like our selues. If a graue, laudable, and honest Man, should promise vs anie thing, staitway we should beleeue him, nei∣ther would we think our selues to be deceiued by him, who we knew, would stand to his tackles, and performe his promises. Now God
speaketh to vs, and dare we (faithlesse wret∣ches) with an infidel-like & vnconstant mind doubt of the performance and trueth of his promises?Rom. 3.4. God forbid, yea, let God be true, all men a liar. So then God promiseth vs (when we de∣part this life) immortalitie and eternitie: and wil we doubt of it? This is to be altogither ig∣norant of God, this is to offend Christ the Lord and Maister of all beleeuers, with the sin of incredulitie, and this is, being in the church, and in the house of faith, to forsake the church, and to denie the Faith. Well was the Prophet affected, who saith:Psalme 42.1 As the Hart braieth after the riuers of water, so panteth my soule after thee, O God:2 My soule thirsteth for God, euen for the liuing God when shall I come and appeare before the presence of God?Psalme 73.25. Whom haue I in heauen but thee, and I haue desired none in the earth with thee?26 My flesh faileth, and mine heart also, but God is the strength of mine heart, and my portion for euer. And therefore in a full assurance and perswasion of the loue of God towards him, and of the truth of his promises, he breaketh out in admirati∣on, saying:Psalme 16.11 Thou wilt shew me the path of life, in thy presence is the fulnesse of ioy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for euermore.Psalme 17.15 I will behold thy face in righteousnesse, and when I awake I shall be satisfied with thine image. How far are we from this holy affection, from this christian confi∣dence,
and godly ioy? And all because we haue neither Faith nor Hope.Ephes. 2.8 By Faith we are sa∣ued.Hab. 24. rom. By Faith we are iustified.Actes 15.9 By faith we are regenerated.Heb. 10.38, 39 By faith we saue our soules.Rom. 5.2 By faith we haue accesse vnto this grace vvherein vve stand.Ephes. 3.12 hebr. 10.22 By faith vve call God our Father. By faith vve receiue those blessings which God bestoweth vpon vs in the Gospel.Ephes. 3.17 By faith vve receiue Christ. By faith vve make the merites of Christ to become our ovvn me∣rites.Galat. 3.14 By faith vve receiue the promise of the holyghost.Coloss. 2.12 By faith we rise agam with Christ. By faith euery man is assured of his ovvne ele∣ction.Coloss 2.7 By faith vve are vnited vnto Christ. By faith vve are the members of Christ.Ephes. 3.17 By faith Christ dwelleth in our harts. By faith vve eate the body of Christ, and drinke his bloud.1. Pet. 5.8, 9 By faith vve resist the diuell.Galat. 3.26. By faith vve are the sonnes of God.Hebr. 4.2 By faith the vvord of God is made profitable vnto vs.Ose 2.20 By faith God ioy∣neth vs vnto himselfe.Rom. 11.20 2. cor. 1.24 By faith vve stand.1. Tim. 3.13. By faith vve get our selues a good degree in pro∣fessing the Gospel of Christ.Philip. 1.25 actes 16.34 By faith vve haue ioy.Hebr. 11.1 By faith vve see inuisible things.1. Ioh. 5.4.5 By faith vve ouercome the vvorld.Math. 8.10 matth. 9.22 matth. 15.18 dan. 6.24 By faith vve obtain also corporall benefites.Luke 17.19 By faith are the gifts of God sanctified vnto vs.Hebr. 11 For their faith were our fathers the Patriarkes, &c, commended. Our faith profiteth the posterities, as did the
faith of Abraham,Iames 5.15 the faith of them that pray for the sanctification of infants that are bap∣tised, for the conuersion of sinners, for help vn∣to the sick and vnto the afflicted with any mi∣serie, shall not want his effect. Finally, Fayth obtaineth earthly blessings and benefites vnto the wicked, as the faith of Elijah obtained rain for wicked Achab and other infidells. How then can we want faith, without which we are neither regenerated, iustified, nor saued?Hebr. 11.6. with∣out Faith it is impossible to please God. Out of Faith issueth Hope,Hope what it is , which is a present feeling of the thing we long for; and this nourisheth and preserueth faith to withstand any resistance, & to reuince any oppositiō that shalbe against vs. Hope cannot be seperated from Faith,The affinitie of Hope with Faith. yea, such as our Faith is, such is our Hope. If we haue no Faith, we haue no Hope, and a waue∣ring faith, maketh a blind hope; if our faith be firme, so will our hope be. Faith is an assurance of the loue of God in Christ: hope is a constant apprehension and feeling of the ioy and glory, which by that loue shall be giuen vnto vs. If we be assured that God loueth vs, which pro∣ceedeth of faith, so are we also assured that god wil saue & glorifie vs, which commeth of hope. O then, let vs hold fastHebr. 3.6 the confidence and reioi∣cing of our hope vnto the end.Ia. 1.6 For he that wauereth is like a waue of the sea, tost of the wind and carried
awaie.Iames 1.7 Neither let that man (saith Iames) thinke that he shall receiue anie thing of the Lord. Let vs not, like hyrelings and prentises, score vp our yeeres looking for freedome, as being weary to serue the Lorde, in suffering any thing any longer. Let vs be wise-harted, & in theHebr. 6.11 assu∣rance of our hope trample death and damnati∣on vnder our feet, let vs stil crie.Apoc. 22.20 Euen so, come Lorde Iesus. It is reported of the swannes, that they die singing: and we like swannes in the as∣surance and liuely confidence of the fauor and mercies of God, should prepare our selues to die, reioycing and singing. Remedies against the weakenesse of Faith. Sect. II THe Lord like a most bountiful and mag∣nificent King, will be angrie if any man will aske a small thing at his handes: be∣cause (such is his magnificence) hee had rather giue things of great worth then of small value: his goodnesse is infinite, heWisd. 11.21 loueth al the things that are, and hateth none of them what he hath made:Wisd. 11.23 he loueth the soules of men. Wherevpon it com∣meth to passe, that vve can no sooner wish for
eternal life and true felicity, but he is as ready, (yea, and much readier then a man can wish) to giue and bestow the same vppon vs. Why then shuld we mistrust our saluation, or doubt of the sweet promises of God in Christ reuea∣led in his holy worde? That we might be hap∣pie, he created vs of nothing, and being lost, he restored vs to life by the death of his best Belo∣ued, and only begotten Son: and being redee∣med (1. Pet. 1.18 not with corruptible things as siluer and gold,19 1. Cori. 6.20.1. cor. 7.23. heb. 9 14. 1. ioh. 1.7 reuel. 1.5 but with the precious bloud of Christ as of a lambe vndefiled and without spot:) he made vsTir. 3.5, 6, 7 gal. 4.7. ro. 8.17 heires, reuel. 1.5 heires, by the law of adoption of the kingdom of hea∣uen; yea, fellow-heires with Christ Iesus. And this so great a benefit, which now by our hope we possesse, if vveLnke 13.23. striue manfully and1. Tim. 6.12 2. tim. 4.7 fight a good fight, vve shal shortly possesse indeede, and receiue a crovvne of righteousnesse vvhich the Lord vvill giue vs, for so he saith,Reu. 2.10 Be thou faithful vnto the death, and I wil giue theo the crown of life. Furthermore, if Christ Iesus our Sauiour hath sought for vs vvith so great studie and in∣deuor, vvhile as yet vve vvere hisRom. 5.10 enemies and fled frō him; if he boght vs for so great a price, to the end vve should not loose eternall life, vvhen vve vvere quite lost; how much more vvil he novv make vs partakers of that felicity, vvhich vve desire for, and breathe after so much? Let vs cal to mind his svveete and com∣fortable
promisesIohn 10.11 I am that good shepheard,27 my sheepe heare my voice, and I know them, and they fol∣low me.28 And I giue vnto them eternall life, and they shall neuer perish, neither shall anie plucke them out of mine hand. That though a man presentlie feeleth not the peace of conscience, nor hath a liuely apprehension, that he is the child of God, yet he may haue true Faith. Sect. III Obiection. Alas, I haue no faith at all, I am not assured that I am the childe of God; My conscience hath no rest, I feele no grace of the holy Ghost in me, nor any true tokens of faith, I haue a liuely sense of the rebellion of my heart, and of my lewd conuersation. God cannot wincke at sinners, except hee should be vniust; and surely by this my incredu∣litie, I wholy renounce and reiect the
grace of God. How then shall I stand before the face of God? how shall I stand before the tribunal seat of Christ Iesus? Oh vnhappie death then, that leaueth me in this perplexitie! Answere. GOD is not onely aPsalme 68.4 Lord, and a iustPsalme 26.1 The difference betweene vnfaith fulnes and weak∣nes of Faith. Iudge, but also a louing & most mer∣cifull Father. Your faith is only weake, you are not vnfaithfull. And great is the diffe∣rence, betweene vnfaithfulnesse, and weake∣nesse of faith. The vnfaithful manPsalme 2.3 careth not for his saluation; heeRom. 2.4 reiecteth the grace of God; or els reiecting the saluation which is in Iesus Christ alone, seeketh saluationLuke 18.11 rom. 9.32 other where. But the faithfull man,Psalme 42.1, 2 desireth and longeth for saluation; hee acknowledgeth no other, but that which is inActes 4.12 Christ Iesus one∣ly: he seeketh it in him, and would faine be as∣sured thereof. What though you feele not that peace and ioy, in the holy Ghost, so mani∣festly, as faith at last bringeth forth the same? Was not this the complaint ofPsalme 22.1 Dauid? Yea, of Christ himselfe;Matth. 27.46 My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Whereby it is manifest, that they were without the apprehension and fee∣ling of fauour and ioy. Content your selfe
with this then; If you desire to haue the fee∣ling of the assurance, that you are the child of God; if you pray vnto God, that you may at∣taine the same; euen thisGe. 20.2. to 18 gen. 22.16.18. 2. sam. 11.15. 2. sam 12.9. 1. king. 21.10.19. rom. 9.16. 2. cor. 3.5. philip. 1.6 philip. 2.13 desire and prayer, are vndoubted testimonies, that the spirite of God is in you, and that you haue faith alrea∣dy, though it be but weake and feeble. For this desire is not a fruite of the flesh, but of thePhil, 2.13 spirit, which1. Iohn 3.24 dwelleth in you. And this praier also is the worke of the holy Ghost, who prayeth for vs, and in vs, with groanes andRom. 8.26 sighes, which cannot be expressed. As a woman that feeleth the mouinges of a childe in her wombe, though they be but small and weake, is assured that she is with child: So if we haue these good motions & desires, let vs not doubt, but that we haue thePhilip. 2.13 2. cor. 3.5 holy spirit of God, dwelling in vs, (who is the1. Cor. 12.3, 4 author of them) and so consequently, that wee haue also faith. Furthermore, if you delight not in these infir∣mities, in your doubts, feares, mistrusts, to nourish them, but areLuke 17.5 sorrowfull for them, and resist thē to your vttermost power: then is there aRom. 7.23 battell within your members, be∣tweene the spirit and the flesh, betweene faith and mistrust. So that you may be assured, there is faith in you, but assailed with doubts, and that the spirit fighteth against mistrust, and laboureth to ouercome it: And that these
doubts, incredulities and mistrustings, are the fierieEphes. 6.16 dartes which Satan throweth against your faith; which warding off the blowes as a buckler, will at last thrust them backe, and quench them alto∣gither. That God doth oftentimes suffer his children to be in a manner desperate, and yet raiseth them vp againe. And how we may know if we haue any Faith. Sect. IIII. Obiection. Oh, but there was neuer none of the chil∣dren of God, in this case, euen quite destitute of the feeling of that sweete ioy, the peace of conscience, passing all vnderstanding, wherein I am; If Gods purpose were not, to condemne mee, I perswade my selfe, he would neuer lay this crosse vpon me. What is this want of feeling, this dulnesse of spirit, these terrours of the minde, but sure argu∣ments and signes of vnfaithfulnesse, and
incredulitie, and euen the very begin∣nings, and certaine flashings of hell fire? Answere. MAke not your state worse then it is, I pray God open your eyes, that you may see, that they that are with you, are moe, then they that be against you, as2. King. 6.17 E∣lisha prayed for his seruant. Was not Dauid assaulted with great feares and doubts, with mistrust, and dulnesse of spirit? What else meaneth hee, by the sore and grieuous com∣plaint that he maketh, where he saith;Psalme 77.7 Will the Lord absent himselfe for euer? and will he shew no more fauour?8 Is his mercie cleane gone for e∣uer? doth his promise faile for euermore?9 Hath God forgotten to be mercifull? hath he shut vp his tender mercie in displeasure? Whereupon, hee (as a desperate man) said;10 This is my death. Now then, where was in Dauid the apprehen∣sion & feeling of his faith? and yet for all this, he had not lost it; yea, there was no mirrour of faith better then in him. So all these com∣plaints, were but the representation of feare and despaire assailing his faith, and fighting a∣gainst it. Also, how weake and small was the faith of the Apostles, when they didMatth. 17.23 luke 9.45. not vn∣derstand that Christ must die and rise againe?
And when they wereMatth. 26.31 mar. 14.27 offended at Christ, andIohn 16.32. marke 14.50 forsoooke him, so that Peter himselfe alsoMatth. 26.70 marke 14.68 renounced and denied him? yet they were not altogither without faith, howbeit then, it were very small. For Christ had reprehended them before, for the weakenesse of their faith, when he called them, not infidels, butMatth. 8.26 mar. 4.40. luke 8.25 feare∣full, and men of little faith, shewing, that they had some faith, though but a little. Where∣fore, if you faith be as weake as a bruised reed; and if it doth but smoke onely, yet haue a recourse vnto Christ, cast your selfe vpon him, and he will saue you.Esay 42.3 matth. 12.20 A bruised reed shall he not breake, and the smoaking flaxe shall hee not quench. as Esay sayeth: There are degrees in faith, for Paul saith; By the Gospell,Rom. 1.17 the righteousnes of God is reuealed from faith to faith: that is, from the weaker faith, to the stronger faith. Many of Gods children are like vnto the blinde man, whose eyes Christ opened,Marke 8.23 and asked him if he saw aught:24 and hee looked vp, and said, I see men, for I see them walking like trees. And when Christ25 made him looke againe; he was restored to his sight, and saw euery man a far off clearely. To conclude, as true and naturall fire is knowne by the flame and heat, which are the effects and operations of it, for where these are, there must needs be fire; And, if the flame become weake, yet the heat shall suf∣fice
to assure vs, that it is naturall, and not a painted or counterfeit fire. So,The will of any man is counted by God for the deede it selfe, as appeereth, Genes. 20.1 to 18. Gen. 22.16.18. 2. Sa. 11.15. 2. Sam. 12 9. 1. Ki. 21.10. 19 if this fruit of your faith be weake, to feele peace in your con∣science, yet if you feele the other effect of faith, which is, a desire to the workes of the spirit, to walke in the obedience of God; this fruit of your faith, is to you, a sure and cer∣taine testimonie, that it is in you; though it be but weake and feeble. That the least measure of Faith, that is, or can be, is effectuall to saluation. Sect. V. Obiection. But what assurance and comfort of sal∣uation, ean such a faith, so weake, so feeble, and so small, giue me? The temptations wherewith I am assaulted, are strong and manifold, but my faith is weake and little. Alas, how can a little and weake faith resist such great and strong temptations? how can it quench these fierie darts of Satan?
wherewith I am pearced and sore wounded? What comfort may I looke for by such a faith? Answere. EVen this comfort, the assurance of your adoption. For, so you haue butMatth. 17.20 one sparke of true faith, and the least measure of grace, that is, or can be, euen that is effectu∣all to saluation. And you must consider, that to speake properly, it is not faith, but1. Tim. 1.15 matth. 9.13 marke 2.17 Iesus Christ, which saueth vs, sauing, in as much asEphes. 3.17. galat. 3.14. col. 2 7. rom. 5.2. hebr. 2.4. rom. 1.17. galat. 2.20. ephes. 3.12. hebr. 10.22 faith is the instrument, whereby we ap∣prehend, and, as it were, the hand, whereby we take hold on Christ. As by the apple of our eye, though it be but little, we see a great mountaine; So by our faith, though little, we take and receiue whole Christ. A man that is in a close roome, if he see the light of the Sun shine through a little hole, yet he may assure himselfe that it shineth on the whole house: So, if wee see but a little beame of the Sunne of righteousnesse shine vpon vs, wee may assure our selues, that the Sonne of life shineth vpon vs in his brightnesse, which manifestly decla∣reth, that we are the children of God. Now then, as this ought greatly to comfort you, in the weakenesse of your faith; so ought it to be
a sharp spurre, to inforce you to grow in faith, and dayly and hourely to pray with the Apo∣stles,Luke 17.5 Lord encrease our faith: that so at length, you may feele so much the more cleerely, and liuely, the peace and ioy of your conscience, by the assurance, that you are the childe of God, you may the more strongly resist all temptations, and glorifie God. Testimonies out of the word of God, concerning life euerlasting, vnto the which the faithfull doe come by death. Sect. VI DAuid, How great is thy goodnesse,Psalme 31.19 which thou hast laide vp for them that feare thee! and done to them that trust in thee! They shall be satisfied with the fatnesse of thine house,Psalme 36.8 and thou shalt giue them drink out of the riuer of thy pleasures.9 For with thee is the well of life, and in thy light shall we see light.
Blessed are they that dwell in thine house,Psalme 84.4 they will euer praise thee. The voyce of ioy and deliuerance shall be in the tabernacles of the righteous,Psalme 118.15 say∣ing, the right hand of the Lord hath done valiantly. Isaiah,Esay 35.10 esay 51.11 The redeemed of the Lorde shal returne, & come to Tsion with praise: and euerlasting ioy shall bee vppon their heads; they shall obtaine ioy and glad∣nesse, and sorrow and mourning shall flie a∣way. They shall not be hungry, neither shall they be thirsty,Esay 49.10 neither shall the heat smite them, nor the sunne; for he that hath com∣passion on them, shal leade them, euen to the spring of waters shall he driue them. Ioy and gladnes shall be found in Tsion, praise,Esay 51.3 and the voyce of singing. Ʋiolence shall no more be heard in thy land,Esay 60.18 neither desolation, nor destruction within thy borders: but thou shalt call sal∣uation thy walles, and praise thy gates.
Reade further vnto the end of this Chapter. Thus saith the Lord:Esay 65.8 18 I will create Ieru∣salem as a reioycing, and her people as a ioy. And I will reioyce in Ierusalem,19 and ioy in my people, and the voyce of weeping, shal be no more heard in her, nor the voyce of crying. Reade the Chapter throughout. As one whom his mother comforteth,Esay 66.13 so will I comfort you, and ye shal be com∣forted in Ierusalem. And when ye see this,14 your heart shall reioyce, and your bones shall flourish like an hearb. Ezechiel, Thus saith the Lord God,Ezech. 34.11 behold, I wil search my sheepe, and seeke them out.12 As a shepheard searcheth out his flocke when he hath bin among his sheepe that are scattered, so will I seeke out my sheepe and will deliuer them out of all pla∣ces, where they haue beene scattered in the clowdy & darke day. And I wil bring them out from the people,13 and gather them from
the countries, and will bring them to their owne land, and feede them vpon the moun∣taines of Israel, by the riuers, and in al the inhabited places of the countrie.14 I wil feed them in a good Pasture, and vpon the high mountaines of Israel shall their folde bee, there shall they lie in a good folde, and in fat pastures shal they feed vpon the moun∣taines of Israel. Iesus Christ,Matth. 25.31 When the Son of man commeth in his glory, and all the holy An∣gels with him, then shal he sit on the throne of his glory:32 And before him shal be gathe∣red all nations, and he shall seperate them one from another, as a shepheard seperateth the sheepe from the goates.33 And he shall set the sheepe on his right hand, and the goates on the left:34 Then shall the king say to them on his right hand, Come yee blessed of my Father, take the inheritance of the King∣dome prepared for you from the foundation of the world. In my fathers house are many dwellingIoh. 16.2
places, if it were not so I would haue tolde you: I go to prepare a place for you.3 And if I go to prepare a place for you, I wil come and receiue you vnto my selfe; that where I am, there ye may be also. Ʋerely verely I say you,Iohn 16.20 that ye shall weep & lament, & the world shal reioice; and ye shal sorrow, but your sorrow shal be turned into ioy.21 A woman when shee tra∣uelleth, hath sorrow, because her houre is come: but as soone as she is deliuered of the child, she remēbreth no more her anguish, for ioy that a man is borne into the world. And ye now therefore are in sorrow;22 but I will see you againe, and your hearts shal re∣ioyce, and your ioy shall no man take from you. Paul,1, Cor. 2.9 The things which eie hath not seene, neither eare hath heard, neither came into mans heart, are which God hath prepared for them that loue him. Peter,2. Pet. 3.13 We looke for a new heauen and a new earth, according to his promise,
wherein dwelleth righteousnesse. Iohn,Apoc. 21.4 And God will wipe away all teares from their eies, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there bee any more paine, for the first things are passed: And he that sate vpon the throne said;5 behold, I make all things new. Chap. VIII Of the 4. cause that maketh Death feare∣full to a worldly man; which is his guil∣tie conscience, and feare of Gods iudge∣ments and punishments: And the re∣medies against the same. That God is readie to forgiue our sinnes; and to receiue a repentant Sinner into grace and fauour. Sect. I AGainst this, and the like temptation, there is no better remedie, nor more effectuall, then an a vpright, godly and religious life,
which consisteth in the obseruing and doing of Gods will.Rom. 2.13 Not the hearers, but the doers of the law shall be iustified.Ioh. 8.51 If anie man keepe my worde (saith Christ) hee shall not see death. But because1. Kin. 8.46 2. chron. 6.36 eccles. 7.22 there is no man that sinneth not; forProuer. 20.9. who can say, I haue made my heart cleane; I am cleane from sinne:1. Ioh. 1.8 if we say, that wee haue no sinne, we deceiue our selues, and there is no trueth in vs. Therefore now it remaineth, that you repent, and be sorie for your sinnes, whereby you haue transgressed the law of the Lord, of∣fended his Maiestie, and prouoked his wrath; that now at last you forsake your olde wayes, and purpose to leade a godly life hereafter, if it shal please the Lord to raise you vp againe; and lastly, that you lift vp your heart, and boldly approach vnto the heauenly throane, humbly confessing your offences, and with a sure and firme confidence, in the merits and passion of Iesus Christ, craue pardon for the same. For God is ready to receiue againe into grace and fauour, any penitent sinner: Yea, with faire words he allureth vs to come vnto him, and with sweet promises he prouoketh vs to repen∣tance.Ezech. 33.10 As I liue, saith the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turne from his waie, and liue.1. Iohn 1.9 If wee acknowledge our sinnes, hee is faithfull and iust, to forgiue vs our sinnes, and to cleanse vs from all vnrighteousnesse.
The beginning of saluation, is the acknow∣ledging of our sinnes, and to require pardon of him, who freely forgiueth all sinnes,Matt. 11.28 Come vnto me, all ye that are wearie and laden, and I wil ease you. Christ being not requested,Luke 19.5 lodged at the house of2 Zacheus the publican, who3 desired onely to see him, as he passed by; af∣firming, that that same day9 saluation was come into his house; To shew that Christ is more willing and ready to receiue vs, then we are to aske it at his handes:10 matth. 18.11 For the Sonne of man is come to seeke and to saue that which was lost. This then being true; And seeing in a thou∣sand places of theMath. 9.12.13 luke 1.74. psalme 119.12, &c. holy Scriptures, it is wit∣nessed, that to the penitent Christian, all his sinnes and debts are forgiuen, by the meere mercie and grace of God; that they are co∣uered and forgotten; that they are pardoned and remitted; that they are not imputed, but cast afarre off and hidden: it followeth, there is no more the anger of God towards you, (if you be penitent.) Why then should you feare his iudgements, and the torments of hell fire? There is no death, where there is no sinne; forRom. 5.12 by sinne death entred into the world; andRom. 6.23 the wages of sinne is death. As righteousnesse is the seede of life, and the cause why God iustifieth vs; So sinne is the seed of death, and the cause why God condemneth vs. Now euery seede
bringeth foorth fruite according to his owne qualitie and kinde, as wheate bringeth foorth wheate, and so of all the rest. But where there is no seede sowne, what fruit is there to be ho∣ped for? So we, hauing no sinne, ought not to feare and stand in dread of the fruite thereof, eternall damnation, and so consequently, why should we feare the anger and iudge∣ments of God? That the faithfull ought not to feare damnation, for somuch as they be the children of God. Sect. II AS it is vaine and foolish, to feare sick∣nesses, when wee are most healthfull; and most ridiculous to feare pouertie, when we haue plentie and aboundance of all things: Euen so is it meere folly to feare the iudgements of God, when we be not in daun∣ger to fall into them at all. There is no cause then why we should be afraide to die, perse∣uering constantly in the faith of Iesus Christ: For the nature of faith, as soone as it is recei∣ued into the heart, is properly to encourage, animate, and quicken the same.Hab. 2.4 rom. 1.17 The iust shall liue by his faith, saith the Prophet Habacuk.
This faith caused the Prophet Dauid to say;Psalme Albeit I walke in the middest of the shaddow of death, yet will I not be afraide, for thou Lord art with me. Yea the Lord by the Prophet Hoseas de∣clareth, that the faithfull shall haue God al∣lied and ioyned to them.Hos. 2.19 I will marrie thee vnto me for euer, yea I wil marrie thee vnto me in righte∣ousnesse, and in iudgement, and in mercie, and in com∣passion:20 I vvil marrie thee vnto me in faithful∣nesse.Iohn 14.23 He that loueth me (saith Christ) keepeth my vvord, and I and my Father vvill come and dvvel vvith him: Herevpon we are called,1. Cor. 3.16, 17 1. cor. 6.19 2. cor. 6.16 the Tem∣ples of the Holighost. Now then seeingRom. 8.31 God is with vs, who can be against vs? Furthermore, God adopteth and reputeth vs for his owne children:Gal. 3.26 You are the children of God by faith.iohn 1.12 Christ hath giuen power to all them which receiue him, and beleeue in his name, to be the sonnes of God. So, being theRom. 8.17 galat. 4.7 children of God, we are also heires and felow-heires with Iesus Christ; being children, we are set free from sinne, death, condemnation, bondage, the rigour of the law, and all the forces of the di∣uell: being children, we are Christes brethren, and the houshold of God, and in Gods house death dwelleth not, but in the house of satan. And to conclude, being the children of God, God is our father: But can a father hate his owne children? that were against nature.
Wherefore God loueth vs with a true and fa∣therly loue. The Apostle saithRom. 5.8 God setteth out his loue towards vs, seeing that while we were yet sin∣ners, Christ died for vs:9 Much more then being now iustified by his bloud, we shalbe saued from wrath through him.10 For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his son: much more being reconciled we shall be saued by his life. What man is he then, that considering these reasons, assureth not himselfe of the fauour of God, and remoueth not all feare, which he hath of Gods iudgements, and consequently of death? That the members of Christ ought not to feare death and damnation, because Christ their head, hath vanquished and ouercome them alreadie. Sect. III WE are the1. Cor. 6.16. members of Christ, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, yea one with him. Christ ouercame death, and should we feare the same? He ouer∣came it not onely for himselfe, but for vs also: Hee which hath ouercome death for vs, shall ouercome it also in vs; vvhy then should we feare his sting? Christ spoiled and vanquished
satan, that old serpent, the Prince and Lord of Death; and why should we feare his power? Christ accomplished and fulfilled the lawe; vvhy then should we feare the iudgements of God? Christ by his perfect obedience, fulfilled his fathers will, appeased his wrath, satisfied his iustce, and abolished the curse of the law, which is death, according as it is said,1. Cor. 15 O death I will be thy death. He died, that we might liue: he rose againe, that we might be iustified. So then he is our Pastor, we neede not feare to be taken out of his hands. He is our Aduocate, we neede not dread damnation. He is our Mediatour, we neede not feare the wrath of God. He is our Light, we need not feare dark∣nesse. He is our Shadow, we neede not feare the heate of hell fire. He is our Iugde, we need not feare that sentence shall be denounced a∣gainst vs. Wherefore let vs cast off all feare, and horrour, of death, hell, and damnation, which not hauing any power ouer the head, cannot haue any ouer the members. That the Forgiuenesse of sinnes is not a com∣mon benefite, as the secure and care∣lesse Christian ima∣gineth.
Sect. IIII Obiection. Me thinkes it were needelesse for you to trouble your selfe so much about this point, for I feare not the iudgements of God, especially considering that my sins are forgiuen me; For where there is no sinne, there can be no condemnation (as you noted very well before:) And that my sinnes are pardoned, I know right well, considering it is but a common be∣nefite, and therefore easily obtayned. Answere. TRue it is indeed, if our sinnes be pardo∣ned, we shall not come into iudgement,Psalme 32.1.2 for hee is blessed, that is eased of that burthen. But such is the securitie & presump∣tion of men in these dayes (who neuer knew what sinne meant) that they esteeme little or nothing of the forgiuenesse of their sinnes, i∣magining it indeed, (as you say) a common benefite, and easily obtained: whereas, if they were prickt but a little, with the feeling of the
smart of their sinnes, they would esteeme of the pardon of them, as of the greatest treasure that can be; they would sell all they haue to buy it, and choose it before tenne thousand worldes.How miserable Man is, without remission of his sinnes. For without this blessing, man is more miserable, and more wretched, then the vilest creature that euer was, or can be. For when the bruite beastes die, there is an end of their miserie: but when men die, without the remission of their sinnes, there is the beginning of their woe, of their endlesse torments in that lake, which burneth with fire and brimstone, with Satan and his Angels; first in the soule onely, vntill the day of iudgement, and then, both in body and soule, for euer and euer. Oh (saith one) if a sinner damned in hell, did know, that hee had to suffer those tormentes there, no more thousand of yeeres, then there be sandes in the Sea, and grasse-pilles on the ground: or no more thousand millions of ages, then there be creatures in heauen and in earth, he would greatly reioyce thereof; for he would comfort himselfe at the least, with this cogita∣tion, that once yet the matter would haue an end. But now, this word NEVER, breaks his heart, when hee thinketh on it; and that after a hundred thousand millions of worldes there suffered, he hath as farre to his end, as he had the first day of his entrance into those tor∣ments.
Now then, if these things were well considered, & weighed in the ballance of rea∣son, then should the drouzie Christian finde his state fearefull, and then would he acknow∣ledge what, and how great a blessing is the Remission of sinnes. What we must doe for the obtaining of the remission of our sinnes. Sect. V Obiection. Alas, now I know my state is fearefull in∣deede, I feele the sting of sinne wounding my conscience, and piercing my very soule. The law doth accuse and con∣demne me, the iust and seuere wrath of God is ready to take vengeance of me. Oh by what meanes, and how shall I procure pardon of my sinnes at Gods handes? Answere. THe LordePsalme 103.10 dealeth not with vs after our sinnes, neither doth he reward vs according to our iniquities.11 For as high as the heauen is aboue the earth, so great is his mercie towardes them
that feare him.12 c As farre as the East is from the West, so farre hath he remoued our sinnes from vs. The onely meanes to procure the pardon of sinnes at the hands of God, is the death and passion of Christ: forRom. 4.25 Christ died for our sinnes.1. Iohn 1.7 The bloud of Iesus Christ his Sonne, cleanseth vs from all sinne.1. Pet. 1.18 Wee were redeemed with the precious bloud of Christ, as of a lamb vndefiled and without spot. So then, as1. Ki. 20.32 Benhadad the king of Syria, when he was discomfited and ouercome by the king of Israel, by the counsell and perswa∣sion of his seruants; who tolde him, that the kings of Israel were mercifull men; sent men cloathed in sackcloth, with ropes about their neckes, to intreate for peace and fauour: and when the king of Israel saw their submission, he made couenant of peace with him. So, see∣ing we, by our sinnes doe iustly deserue death, hell, and condemnation, it standeth vs vpon to come into the presence of God, and to humble our selues before him, continually crauing and intreating for the pardon of our sins, through the merites of Iesus Christ, and no doubt the Lord will graunt our request, and be at peace with vs; for the Lord our God is a most mer∣ciful father.Psal. 32.5 Confesse and acknowledge your sinnes vnto the Lord, and hee will forgiue you. YeaEsay 1.18 though your sinnes were as crimson, they shall be made white as snow, though they were redde
like skarlet, they shall be as wooll.Rom. 8. There is no con∣demnation to them that are in Christ Iesus. And that we should be sure of the pardon of our sinnes, whereof God giueth vs a dislike and true abhorring, the Lord would haue it an Ar∣ticle of our faith, so that we should not bee sound christians, if we beleeued it not. See li. 2. cha. 2. sect. 4. &. 5 Testimonies out of the word of God, concerning the forgiuenesse of sinnes, promised to all such as cleauing fast to the merites of Christ onely, are truly penitent. Sect. VI MOses, I am the Lorde thy God,Exodus 2.2, 5 6 shewing mercie vnto thousands, to them that loue me and keepe my comman∣dements. The Lord, the Lord strong,Exodus 34.6 mercifull and gratious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodnesse, and trueth.7 Reseruing mercy for thousands, forgiuing iniquity, and trans∣gression,
and sin:9 Pardon our iniquitie and sinne, and take vs for thine inheritance. Dauid,Psalme 25.10 All the pathes of the Lorde are mercie and trueth vnto such as keepe his couenant and his testimonies. He that trusteth in the Lord,Psalme 32.10 mercie shal compasse him. I will sing the mercies of the Lord for euer:Psalme 89.1 with my mouth will I declare thy trueth, from generation to generation. For I said,2 Mercie shall be set vp for e∣uer, thy trueth shalt thou stablish in the very heauens.3 I haue made a couenant with my chosen, I haue sworne to Dauid my seruant. Thy seede will I stablish for euer,4 and set vp thy throne from genera∣tion to generation.30 But if his children forsake my law, & walke not in my iudge∣ments: if they breake my statutes,31 and keepe not my commandements:32 Then wil I visit their transgression with the rodde, and their iniquitie with strokes.33 Yet my louing kindnesse will I not take from him,
neither will I falsifie my trueth.34 My co∣uenant will I not breake, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. As a father hath compassion on his children,Psalme 103.13 so hath the Lord compassion on them that feare him. With the Lord is mercie,Psalme 130.7 and with him is great redemption. The Lord is gracious and mercifull,Psalme 145.8 slow to anger, and of great mercie. The Lord is good to all,9 and his mercies are ouer all his works.14 The Lord vpholdeth all that fall, and lifteth vp all that are ready to fall. Hee healeth those that are broken in heart, and bindeth vp their sores.Psalme 147.3 The Lord delighteth in them that feare him,11 and attend vpon his mercie. Isaiah, Though your sinnes were as crimsin,Esay 1.18 they shall bee as white as snow: though they were as red as skarlet, they shall be as wooll. Therefore will the Lord waite,Esay 30.18 that
he may haue mercie on you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may haue com∣passion vpon you; for the Lord is the God of iudgement. Blessed are all they that waite for him. I,Esay 43 25 euen I am he that putteth away thine iniquities for mine owne seke, and will not remember thy sinnes. Thou art my seruant,Esay 44.21 ô Israel, forget me not:22 I haue put away thy transgressi∣ons like a clowde, and thy sinnes as a mist, turne vnto me, for I haue redeemed thee. There is none other God beside mee,Esay 45.21 a iust God, and a Sauiour, there is none be∣side me. Looke vnto me, and yee shall be saued:22 all the endes of the earth shall be saued. Reade the 53, Chap. of the suffe∣rings of Christ, for your singular com∣fort. This is vnto me as the waters of Noah, for as I haue sworne,Esay 54.9 that the waters of Noah should no more goe ouer the earth,
so haue I sworne, that I will not be angrie to thee, nor rebuke thee:10 For the moun∣taines shal remoue, and the hilles shal fall downe, but my mercie shal not depart from thee, neither shall the couenant of my peace fall away, saith the Lord, that hath compassion on thee. Let the wicked forsake his wayes,Esay 55.7 and the vnrighteous his owne imaginations and returne vnto the Lord: and he will haue mercie vpon him, and to our God, for he is very ready to forgiue.8 For my thoughts are not as your thoughts, neither are your wayes my wayes, saith the Lord.9 For as the heauens are higher then the earth, so are my wayes higher then your wayes, and my thoughts aboue your thoughts. Ieremiah,Ieremie 3.8 Turne thee againe vnto me, saith the Lord: And I wil not let my wrath fall vpon you, for I am mercifull,12 saith the Lord, and will not alway keepe mine anger. O yee disobedient Children,22 returne, and I wil heale your rebellions.
If this Nation,Ieremie 18.8 against whome I haue pronounced, turne from their wickednesse, I will repent of the plague that I thought to bring vpon them. I know the thoughts that I haue thought towards you,Ieremie 29.11 saith the Lorde, euen the thoughts of peace, and not of trouble, to giue you an ende, and your hope:12 Then shall you crie vnto me, and ye shall go and pray vnto me, and I wil heare you. Behold,Ieremie 31.31 the day is come, sayth the Lord, that I will make a newe couenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Iudah. I will put my Law in their inward partes,33 and write it in their hearts; and wil be their God, and they shal be my people.34 And they shal teach no more, euery man his neighbour, and euery man his brother, saying Know the Lord: For they shall all know me, from the least of them vnto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: For I will forgiue their iniqui∣tie, and wil remember their sins no more.
Ezechiel,Ezech. 18.21 If the wicked returne from his sinnes that hee hath committed, and keepe all my statutes, and do that which is lawfull and right, he shal surely liue and not die.22 All his transgressions that hee hath committed, they shall not be mentio∣ned vnto him, but in his righteousnesse that he hath done, hee shall liue.23 Haue I any desire that the wicked shall die, saith the Lord God? Or shall he not liue if hee re∣turne from his wayes?27 When the wicked commeth away from his wickednesse that he hath committed, and doth that which is lawfull and right, he shal saue his soule aliue. Because he considereth,28 and turneth away from his transgressions that he hath committed, he shall surely liue and shal not die. Returne therefore, and cause others to turne away from all your transgression,30 so inquitie shall not be your destruction. Cast away from you all your transgressi∣ons,31 whereby you haue transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit,
for why will yee die, O house of Israel? For I desire not the death of him that dieth,32 saith the Lord God, cause there∣fore one another to returne, and liue yee. You shall knowe that I am the Lorde when I haue respect vnto you for my names sake,Ezech. 20.44 and not after your wicked wayes, nor according to your corrupt workes: O yee house of Israel, saieth the Lord God. As I liue,Ezech. 33.11 saith the Lord God. I de∣sire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turne from his way, and liue: Turne, turne, from your euill wayes; for why will ye die, O ye house of Israel? Hosea,Ose. 6.6 I desire mercie and not sacri∣fice. I wil not execute the fiercenesse of my wrath;Ose. 11.9 I will not returne to destroy Ephra∣im; for I am God, and not Man. Ioel.Ioel 2.12 Now the Lord saith, turne you to me with al your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping,13 and with mourning. And rent your heart and not your clothes, and
turne vnto the Lorde your God, for he is gracious and mercifull, slow to anger, and of great kindnes, and repenteth him of the euill. Ionah,Ionah 4.2 I know that thou art a graci∣ous God and mercifull, slow to anger, and of great kindnesse, and repentest thee of the euill. Micah, Who is a God like vnto thee that taketh away iniquity,Micah 7.18 and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his he∣ritage! he retaineth not his wrath for euer, because mercy pleaseth him. He wil turne again and haue compassion vpon vs,19 he wil subdue our iniquities, and cast off all their sinnes into the bottome of the sea. Zechariah,Zechar. 1.3 Thus sayth the Lorde of hostes, Turne vnto me saith the Lord of hostes, and I wil turne vnto you saith the Lord of hostes. As I thought to punish you when your fathers prouoked me vnto wrath,Zechar. 8.14 saith the Lord of hostes, and repented not:15 So againe
I haue determined in these daies to doe well vnto Hierusalem, and to the house of Iudah; feare yee not. Malachi,Mala. 3.7 From the dayes of your fa∣thers, ye are gone away from mine ordi∣nances, and haue not kept them: returne vnto me, and I will returne vnto you, saith the Lord of hostes. Hezechiah,2. Chro. 30.9 The Lorde your God is gracious, and mercifull, and will not turne away his face from you, if ye conuert vnto him. Iesus Christ,Iohn 6.37 All that the Father gi∣ueth me, shall come to me: and him that commeth to me,38 I cast not away. For I came from heauen, not to do mine own wil, but his will which hath sent me. And this is the fathers will which hath sent me,39 that of al which he hath giuen me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it vp at the last day. I am the resurrection and the life:Iohn 11.25 he that beleeueth in me though he were dead,
yet shal he liue. And whosoeuer liueth and beleeueth in me shall neuer die.26 Peter,Actes 10.12 To him giue all the Prophets witnesse, that through his name al that be∣leeue in him, shal receiue remission of sins. The Lord is patient towardes vs,2. Pet. 3.9 and would haue no man to perish, but would all men to come to repentance. Paul,Rom. 10.12 There is no difference between the Iew and the Grecian: for he that is Lord ouer all, is rich vnto all that call on him.13 For whosoeuer shal cal on the name of the Lord, shal be saued. This is a true saying,1. Tim. 1.19 and by all meanes worthy to be receiued, that Christ Iesus came into world to saue sinners.1. Tim. 2.4 Who will that all men shall be saued, and come vnto the knowledge of the truth.6 Who gaue him selfe a ransome for all men. Iohn, If we acknowledge our sinnes,1. Iohn. 1.9 he is faithfull and iust to forgiue our sins, and to cleanse vs from all vnrighteous∣nesse.
If any man sinne,1. Ioh. 2.1 we haue an Aduo∣cate with the Father Iesus Christ the iust: And he is the reconciliation for our sinnes,2 and not for ours onely, but also for the sinnes of the whole worlde. The end of the first Booke.
THE SECOND Booke, of the Resolued Christian. Chap. I A Remedie for vnpenitent and obsti∣nate Malefactors, that by the Magi∣strate are adiudged to die. That there is a God. Sect. I TO goe about to proue, that there is a God, would be dee∣med a labour woorthie of laughter, being a thing kno∣wen of it selfe, and percei∣ued of euery man by com∣mon sence, as if a man should take vpon him to enlighten the Sunne with a candle; or to prooue that the fire is hotte: were it not that our miserable and thrice-wretched age hath hatched those2. Pet. 3.3 Contra negan∣tem principiae non est dispu∣candum. Mockers who in denying a thing so certaine, doe shew themselues vn∣worthy of all conference, as contēders against their owne knowledge and conscience. The
sole representation of so hideous a blasphemie, might suffice to pierce our soules, & to cause vs to sweat euenLuke 22.44 water and bloud, for an∣guish that the world could afford any so abo∣minable monsters, as should denie that there is a God: or call in question the2. Tim. 3.16 Great mysterie of godlines, which is God manifested in the flesh, iusti∣fied in the spirit, seene of angels, preached vnto the Gentiles, beleeued on in the world and receiued vp in glorie. This is a fearfull and iust iudgement which God executeth vpon those, whose harts and minds are so deepely plunged in fleshly pleasures, that they neuer thinke vpon God, as if there werePsalme 10.15 no God at all; vpon those, who, to the intent they might practise all abomina∣tions, vncleannesse, and wickednes, with lesse remorse, haue maliciously striued to choake vp these remainders of the image of God in them, That there is a God, that he is iust, and that the soule is immortall: and vpon those that con∣temne the treasure of the Gospell, that trample vnder foote theHebr. 10.29 most pretious bloud of Iesus Christ, that scorne the simplicitie and con∣stancy of the faithfull, in refraining from euill, vppon their confidence and assured hope in God, and for feare of his name, whole iudge∣ment shall be more horrible then that ofMatth. 10.15 So∣dom and Gomorrha. To the end therefore to arme the Elect against such diuilish temtation, and to make those inexcusable that suffer them
selues to be deluded by this pernitious Para∣doxe, we will produce against them sundrie witnesses out of the large volume of GodsActes 4.17 rom. 1.20 creatures, which manifestly testifie that there is a God, against whom no exceptions can be taken. What man is he that comes into a wil∣dernesse or desart place,The first argu∣ment that there is a God, taken from the crea∣tures. and there sees a house gallantly built, finding there no liuing crea∣ture, besides birds and beasts, wil not present∣ly conceiue that there either are, or haue bin some men that builded the same, imagining it to be impossible, that either birdes or beastes should reare such a building: Euen so when we behold the wonderfullRom. 1.20 frame of the whole world, the heauens beautified with the Sunne, the Moone and the starres; the earth garnished with herbes, plants, and other creatures; the sea with fish; Man indued with vnderstanding and reason, brought into this world as into a pallace, abounding with all goodnesse which may bring delight and contentment; and here enioying so many creatures, in such numbers and diuers sortes: who will not presently con∣fesse that the creatures that be in it, could ne∣uer make it, and that it could not make it selfe, and therefore that the Maker of it must needs be God? Thus then the vniuersall world in e∣uery part thereof exclaimeth against the A∣theists, that ther is a God, the Maker & Gouer¦nor of it. If this wil not suffice to proue there is
a God;The 2. Argument from the generall consent of al peo∣ple and nations. we will further produce for witnesses, all people and nations of the world, euen from the creation vntil this day, who with one as∣sent acknowledge that there is a God; notwith∣standing that they conceiued it diuersly, ac∣cording to the diuersitie of their owne imagi∣nations; which diuersitie also manifestly euin∣ceth, that it is not a doctrine onely traditio∣nally deliuered from people to people, but also bred and brought vp with euery of them in their owne selues. Within these two hundred yeeres, there haue bin discouered many vn∣knowne nations, among whom some haue bin found to liue without law, without King or Ruler, without house, going starke naked, yet none without some kind of religion, and an as∣sured perswasion that there is a God;Religion naturall but not true reli∣gion. to shew vn∣to vs, that it is not so naturall vnto a man, to be sociable, to clothe himselfe, and to liue ci∣uilly, as to know that there is a God the author of his life. Wherevpon an heathen Philosopher said,1 Cic. lib. 2. De Nat. Deorum It is a matter borne with man, and grauen in his soule, to beleeue that there is a God. And bee not these Atheists men, and therefore endued with this natural knowledge that there is a God? What shall we say more? The very diuellsIam 2.19. beleeue that there is a God,The third Argu∣ment from the confession of di∣uells. and tremble, saith Iames. Hereof we haue many testimonies, a∣mong the writings of the heathen; Apollo the great God, or rather diuel of the Ethniques,
being vrged to tell what he was, and whether there is a God, being as it were, vpon the Racke, maketh this answereProclus in Ti∣maeum. Lactant. lib. 1. cap. 7; The Diuels which haunte, Both Sea and Land; Are tamed with Gods scourge and band. Therefore the Atheists, are more incredu∣lous then the Diuels; and lest they should trē∣ble with the Diuels, they labour to choake vp all remembrance of God; howbeit when God doth extraordinarily manifest himselfe by the effects of his power, in thunders, lightnings, or earth-quakes, experience teacheth, that these monsters are the very first that with trembling and terrour do crie out, confessing that there is a God. There be many other argumēts to proue that there is a God, which for breuitie sake I o∣mit, adding only one more, to wit,The fourth argu∣ment from the authoritie of the holy scripture. the Autho∣ritie of the word of God, which containeth in∣finite, most euident and cleere testimonies of sundry sorts, to proue that there is a God; which are able to satisfie any man whatsoeuer, if he be not wilfully blinded, as indeed all Atheists be. But here they take exception, for they deny that the scripture proceeded from. God,That the scrip∣tures proceeded from God. affir∣ming, that there is no truth in it, which mon∣strous blasphemie, if they still auouch, must needes be maintained, euen against their owne consciences, if they wil consider but these rea∣sons
folowing. First, In other Bookes, there are counsels,The first reason. exhortations, & reasons to perswade; In the Scriptures wee haue absolute and ex∣presse commaundements; which prescribe a law, not only to the body, as other bookes do, but also vnto the minde, to the cogitations and affections of the soule: they labour wholy to exalt God, and to humble man, shewing him the multitude of his sins, and the punishments due vnto the same, and yet teach an assured re∣medie how to escape the daunger: so that man finding himself worthy of al miserie, doth ne∣uerthelesse find himselfe ioyfull in the midst of all his afflictions, expecting a crowne of glory: such effects no other booke can work: therfore the Scriptures must needs be of God, who be∣ing a Superior, hath authoritie to commande; who only hath dominion ouer the Soule, and knoweth the affections & passions of the heart. Secōdly,The second rea∣son. in the scriptures there are prophecies of things which mans vnderstanding could neuer foresee, the fulfilling of which is many times noted, sometimes a hundred yeeres, a thousand, yea three thousand before they came to passe: they entreate of the history from the beginning of the world, with the doctrine which euer continued in the church, yet there is no contradictiō, either in the history or do∣ctrine; where other bookes beginning their hi∣story much later, containe infinite contradi∣ctions and other vanities: also the stile of the
holy scriptures is simple, without affectation, and yet it1. Cor. 2.4, 5 pierceth the hart and conscience, which no other writing, no not of the best O∣tors in the world can doe; and therefore the Scriptures must of necessitie be of God, who foreseeth and knoweth all things, who is euer constant, and who guideth the heart and conscience. Lastly,The third reason. of al other bookes the diuel hath most endeuoured, to falsifie, to corrupt, and to abolish the most holy Scriptures, yet haue the same bin most miraculously preser∣ued in their integritie, by his prouidence, who is the Authour of the same, for the confession and maintenance of the doctrine whereof in∣finite numbers of men, Princes, Magistrates, Artificers, Husbandmen, learned & vnlearned haue forsaken all; yea life it selfe and suffered such torments, as were intolerable to any that were not sustained by the diuine Power: Be∣hold, so many millions of Martires witnessing with one assent, that the holy Scriptures pro∣ceede from God. To conclude therefore, let vs abhorre such wicked cogitations, let vs beleeue that there is a God, a Creator, a Redee∣mer, and a Sanctifier, who by hisProu. 15.3 prouidence guideth the whole world, who will punish all Atheists, and other infidels withMatth. 25.41 vnspeakable and incomprehensible torments to continue for euer, and who wil giue vnto his elect and faithful children aApoc. 2.10 crowne of life.
That the soule of man is immortall. Sect. II. HAuing confessed that there is a God: it followeth consequently, that wee con∣fesse him to bee iust,Hebr. 11.6. a rewarder of eue∣ry man according to his deserts. Now the A∣theists haue a second shift, to confirme them∣selues in their wickednesse, and that is, to deny the immortalitie of the soule; affirming that it is all one with the bodie, and that it dieth with the same: which assertion, or rather blasphe∣mie, is most false and absurd. For if the soule were the bodie,That the soule is no part of the bodie. or any part thereof, it should growe with the same, as the other partes of it doe; and the greater that the body were, the greater also should the soule be. But expe∣rience teacheth the contrarie; for when the bodie is at a certaine stay, and increaseth no more, then doth the soule most grow, and they that are strongest of mind, are cōmonly wea∣kest of bodie; and the soule is seene to bee ve∣rie liuely in a languishing bodie, and to grow the more in force, by the decaying of the body, that is, to increase the more in power & ver∣tue. Therefore the soule groweth not with the
body, and is not the same nor any part there∣of. Againe, if the soule were the bodie, then should she loose her soundnesse with the bo∣die, so as the maimed in bodie should feele a maime in his soule, the sicke should be sicke in his reason, the blind should haue a blind soule, and the lame a lame soule. But experience tea∣cheth the contrarie, wherefore the soule and the body be not all one,That the soule is a substance. neither is the soule a qualitie which hath his being in another thing; but a substance or life which causeth another thing to be, a forming substance, and a sub∣stantiall forme, which perfecteth the bodily substance, which outwardly seemeth to haue so many perfections; yea a spirituall and not a bodily substance, which comprehendeth hea∣uen and earth, time past, present, and to come, and is present in diuers places at once, which a bodie cannot doe, because it hath certaine dimensions; it cannot comprehend any thing which is not proportioned according to the greatnesse and capacitie thereof: and therefore it is manifest also, that the soule is not any ma∣teriall thing, because matter receiueth not any forme or shape, but according to his owne quantitie, and but onely one forme at once, whereas the soule receiueth all formes with∣out quantitie, come there neuer so many at once, or so great, yea though they be contra∣rie formes. These things considered, why
should we thinke, that the thing which becom∣meth the stronger by the weaknesse of the bo∣dy, and which is aduanced by the decay of the bodie, should returne to dust and die with the bodie? yea what is it that can kill the soule? Not contrarietie, for she allodgeth all contra∣ries equally in her selfe, yea in whom contra∣ries abandon their contrarietie: Not want of food, for she feedeth on the whole world; yea take the world from her, and shee feedeth at greatest ease most agreeable to her owne na∣ture: Not violence, for the soule cannot bee pushed at neither inwardly nor outwardly: Nor Death it self, for she seeketh life by Death. There is nothing then, that hath power against the soule of Man; and therefore it is immortal. Moreouer, who is that Man that desireth not immortalitie? How could he desire it if he vn∣derstood not what it is? None of vs coueteth to be beginning-lesse, for wee cannot compre∣hend what it is, yea when we thinke vpon eter∣nitie without beginning, wee are at our wits end; because none of vs is so, nor can bee: Whence comes this, but that our soules hauing had a beginning, cannot conceiue an eternitie without beginning, can yet being created im∣mortall, they doe well conceiue an euerla∣stingnes without end? If there be any that stil persist in their Atheisme, it cannot be but that they doe it against their owne conscience, for
it is euen against the law of nature, against the consent of all people and nations in the world, who euer beleeued the immortalitie of the soule, yea and against the voice of God himselfe, who in his holy word expresly testi∣fieth, that his soule is immortall. Christ reaso∣ning against the Saduces, maketh this argu∣mentMatth. 22.32 I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob, God is not the God of the dead, but of the liuing. Ergo, Abraham, Isaac, & Ia∣cob doe liue; wherefore the soule must needs be immortall. The testimonies of holy scrip∣ture which confirme this point are infinite, which (for breuitie sake) I omit; Besides which testimonies, the immortalitie of the soule is al∣so proued most manifestly in many examples,Exod. 3.15, 16 namely inGen. 5 24. Henoch, inGen. 25.8 Abraham, inGen. 35.29 I∣saac, inGen. 49.29 Iacob, inExod. 3.15, 16 the apparition of God vn∣to Moses, by whichMat. 22.31 Christ prooued the re∣surrection, and that the godly being dead, doe liue in God; inNum. 16.32 Korah and his complices, in1. Sam. 28.11 Saul, for if he had thought that Samuel tou∣ching his soule had beene dead, he would not haue had him raised vp; In2. Sam, 12.23 Dauid, in the Kings, who are said to haue slept with their fa∣thers, to wit,1. King. 14.31 Rehoboam,1. Ki. 22.50 Iehoshaphat,2. Kin. 8.24 Io∣ram,2. King. 10.35 Iehu,2. King 14.29 Ieroboam,2. King 15.22. Manahem,2. King 15.38 Io∣tham,2. King. 16.20 Ahaz,2 King. 20.21 Hezechiah,2. King. 21.18. Manasseh,1. King. 15.8 A∣bia,2. Chro. 26.23 Vzziah. Also in them that were raised vp from the dead, by1. King. 17.22 Elijah, by2. King. 4.35 Elisha, by
Iohn 11.43Christ, byActes 9.40 Peter, byActes 20.10 Paul; And in2. king. 2.11 Elijah, inIohn 19.27. Iob, ing Nabuchadonozor, inMatth. 27.50 Christ, inLu. 16.22, 23 Lazarus and the rich glutton, in theLuke 16.9 vniust Steward, in theLu. 23.42, 43 Thief hanging at Christs right hand, and inActes 7.59 Stephen. If as yet there be any doting heads which doe doubt of, or deny the immortalitie of the soule, they are vnworthie to beare the name of Men, being very beasts, and plagues of a Christian Common-wealth, woorthie to loose their liues; For it cannot be but that they who denie this Trueth, do lacke all honestie and shame, and are readie to practise any mischiefe or villanie whatsoeuer. The wrath of God against the Transgressors of his commaundements. Sect. III. THe Lord himselfe diuided his lawes in∣to to two principal heades or tables; wher∣of the first teacheth vs the loue of God, containing all duties of pietie and religion in the foure first commaundements, and the lat∣ter, the loue of our neighbours, containing all duties of iustice and honest dealing in the sixe last commaundements. Now God isDeut. 4.24 hebr. 12.29 exod. 20.5 a consu∣ming fire and a iealous God;Deu. 10.17 A great God, mightie
and terrible, aHebr. 10.30 God of reuenge,Esay 30.27, 28 whose pre∣sence is so hote, that no man is able to abide it, whose lips are full of indignation & wrath; whose breath is a vehement flood,2. Esdr. 8.23 whose looke drieth vp the depths; whose wrath maketh the mountaines to melt away.2. Esdr. 8.21. Before whom the hoast of the Angels stand with trembling.Iob 26.11 The pillers of heauen tremble and quake at his reproofe. Such aDeut. 10.17. mightie God is he, that with a whirling wind and outstretched arme, he willMalac. 3.5 come in per∣son and confound all the deuises of the vngod∣ly: Such aDeur. 4.24. iealous God, that whosoeuer sin∣neth, he will strike him with terrible plagues: and such aDeut. 32.4. iust God, that hee will not suffer the wicked to liue.Psalme 5.4 Hee is not a God that lo∣ueth wickednesse, neither shall any euill dwell with him, and therefore there is nothing more odious vnto him, and more contrarie vnto his nature then sinne.Sinne how odi∣ous it is in the sight of God. It is a daungerous & dread∣full darknesse that no light can illuminate, and an extreame cold that no heat can abate; So must it needs be an odious thing that an infinit loue hateth, a filthie thing that an infinit good∣nesse detesteth, and a vile thing indeed, that Omnipotencie cannot doe; Such a thing is sinne. If there were any goodnesse in it, then should God in some respect, loue it, approoue it, and be the authour of it, but this is it that God doth loath and abhorre, as that which is most detestable and loathsome. Wherfore wil
we suffer this vgly deformitie to fester in vs? why doe wee delight so much in loathsome∣nesse, euen in that which maketh vs loath∣some and hatefull vnto God? The Diuell in his nature, is more amiable then Man, beeing of a nobler substance, of higher excellencie, and endued vvith greater prerogatiues then vve; yet vvho knovveth not, that GOD hateth him,The Diuell hated onely for sinne. for no other cause, but onely for sinne? When we make a comparison of a thing that is euill in the highest degree, vve can find nothing to liken it vnto, vvoorse then the di∣uell, & hauing named him, vve thinke to haue reckoned the last and greatest euill that is or can be imagined: yet as bad, odious, and de∣testable as he is;Sinne is more o∣dious than the Diuell. more odious and detestable is sinne, vvhich is the onely cause of his odious∣nesse; of vvhich if he vvere rid, he vvere a more excellent, glorious, and louely creature than any mortall man. Moreouer, so much doeth God detest sinne, that to satisfie his infinite iustice and vnplacable vvrath, conceiued a∣gainst sinners, for the punishment of sinne, hee ordained,The wages of sinne. not onely all miseries, calamities, hazards, incumbrances, and afflictions vvhich are any vvay incident vnto this life, beeing so many in number, so grieuous in qualitie, and so common in experience, but also eternall tor∣ments and tortures in hell; in respect vvhereof, all the miseries of this life, are but small re∣semblances
semblances and fore-running signes. Yea in this vvorld for the trausgressions of one or a fevv, he oftentimes plagueth a great number.Gen 3.17, 18 For the sinne of Adam death conquered the vvhole vvorld. For sinneGen. 7.4, 12 the old vvorld vvas ouerflovvne, and all drovvned, eight persons onely excepted. And for sinneGen. 19.24. Sodom and Gomorrha, and the citties adioining vvere de∣stroied by fire and brimstone. For theGen. 34.27. rape of Dinah, the vvhole race of the Sichemites vvere vtterly spoiled: and for theIudg. 20.35 abusing of the Le∣uites vvife, the vvhole crue of the Bemamites, to the number of fiue and tvventie thousand and a hundred men vvere destroled. TheExo. 14.27, 18 E∣gyptians for persecuting of the children of Is∣rael, vvere ouervvhelined vvith the red sea. For the offence ofNum. 16.30, &c. Korah, Dathan, and Abi∣ram, their houses, vviues, children, goods, and cattell; yea all that euer they had vvere svval∣lovved vp of the earth. For theIosh. 7.25, 26. sacrilege of Achan, his Sonnes, his Daughters, his Oxen, his Asses, his Sheepe, his Tent, and all that he had, by the Israelites vvere burnt vvith fire, & himselfe stoned to death. ForExod. 32.4 vvorshiping of the golden calfe, there vvere slaine of the children of Israel aboutExod 32.28 three thousand men. All theNum. 13.4 Searchers of the land of Canaan, vvhichNu. 18.29.32 caused the people toNum. 14.1.2 murmure (ex∣ceptNum. 14.38 Caleb and Iosua) vvereNum 14.45 slaine before their enemies. TheNum. 21.6 Israelites vvere destroied
by fierie serpents, for murmuring against the Lord. And becauseNum. 25 2.3. Israel sacrificed vnto Ba∣al-peor, the Lord commaunded Moses to take al the heads of the people, & toNum. 25.4. hang them vp before the Lord against the Sunne; for their Ido∣latrie andNum. 25.1. whoredome committed with the daughters of Moab, thereNum. 25.9. died of the Chil∣dren of Israel foure and twentie thousand of the plague: and for the pride of2. Sa. 24.13.15. Dauid in numbring of his men, there died in three daies seuentie thousand men. Transgressors of euerie one of the ten Commaun∣dements, and their punish∣ments. Sect. IIII THE first Commaundement is,Exod. 20.3. Deut. 5.7 Thou shalt haue none other gods before mee; the which, when the people of Israel trans∣gressed,iudg. 2.12.13 following other gods, seruing Baal and Ashtaroth,Iudg. 2.14. the wrath of the Lord was hot a∣gainst Israel, and he deliuered them into the handes of Spoilers that spoiled them. The second Com∣mandement is,Exod. 20.4 Deut. 5.8 thou shalt make thee no grauen image, &c. which when the wicked hipocrite Ieroboam had broken, in making1. king. 12.28 two golden calues, the one in29 Bethel, and the other in Dan,
and32 causing the people to worship them, it was said vnto him,1. king. 14.10 Behold I wil bring euil vpon the house of Ieroboam, and will cut off from Ierobo∣am him that pisseth against the wall, &c. And Baa∣sha smote all the house of Ieroboam, he left none aliue to Ieroboam, vntill he had destroide him according to the word of the Lord, which he spake by his seruant Abiah the Shilonite. The third Commande∣ment is,Exod. 20.7 Deut. 5.11. thou shalt not take the name of the Lorde thy God in vaine;Leuit. 24.16 He that blasphemeth the name of the Lorde, shall be put to death; wherefore they stoned theLeuit. 24.23 Blasphemer in Leuiticus 24. Sanecherib King of the Assirians, for his blasphemie, described in 2. King. 18.30. was2. king. 19.37 killed by his owne sonnes Adramelech and Sharezer: and the Angell of the Lord smote of his men, a2. king. 19.35 hundred fourescore and fiue thousand. The fourth Commaundement is,Exod. 20 8 Deut. 5.12 Remember the Sabbaoth day, to keepe it holy: which when aNum. 15.32 man brake, in gathering stickes in the wildernesse:36 All the congregation brought him without the hoste, and stoned him with stones, and he died, as the Lord had commaunded Moses. The fift Commandement is,Ezod. 20.12 Deut. 5.16 Honour thy Father and thy Mother, which2. Sa. 15.10 Absalom transgressing, in rising in armes against Dauid the king his own father, was u hanged,2 Sa. 18.15 slaine,2. Sa. 18.9 and17 cast into a pit. The sixt Commandement is,Exod. 20.13 Deut. 5, 17 Thou shalt not kill; which whenGen. 4, 8 Cain had violated, in murdering his brother Habel, God said vnto
him,10 What hast thou done? the voice of thy bro∣thers bloud crieth vnto me from the earth;11 now therefore art thou accursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receyue thy brothers bloud from thine hand: and at last he was killed also byGen. 4.24 Lamech his nephew. The seuenth Commā∣dement is,Exod. 20.14 deut. 5.18 Thou shalt not commit adulterie:Num. 25.9 Foure and twenty thousand of the children of Israel perished,Num. 25.11 because they committed whoredom with the daughters of Moab. The eight Commādement is,Exod. 20.15 deut. 5.19 Thou shalt not steale:Iosh. 7.21 Achan when he had stolne a Babilonish gar∣ment, and two hundred sheckles of siluer, and a wedge of gold of fiftie sheckles weight, he, and his24 sonnes, and his daughters, and all his substance were25 burnt and stoned. The ninth Commādement is,Exod. 20.16 deut. 5.20 Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy Neighbour:Hest. 3.8 Haman the Agagite when he had by false accusation, obtained a12 decree of king Ahashuerosh, that al the Iewes should be put to death,Hest. 7.10 was hanged vpon the same gallows which he had prepared for Mordecai. AlsoDan. 6.4 The rulers and gouernersDan. 6.24 which had accused Da∣niel, were brought and were cast into the den of the lions, they, their children, and their wiues, and the lions had the maisterie of them, and brake all their bones in peeces ere euer they came at the ground of the den. The tenth Commandement is,Exod. 20.17 deut. 5.21 Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours house: t Ahab trans∣gressed this when he commanded Naboth the
Izreelite to be put to death, and tyrannically u possessed his vineyard,16 which he refused to1. King. 21.3 sell vnto him, and himselfe was afterwardes1 king. 22.34 flaine in battell fighting against the1. king. 20.1 king of Siria. God his punishments vpon sinners at the day of iudgement: with an exhortation to Repentance. Sect. V NOw, you see what it is, to breake the Commaundements of allmighty God, the breach of the least whereof, is recom∣pensed withRom. 6.2.3 death; and that not of the princi∣pall partie onely, but also oftentimes, of all his Children and familie; with the vtter subuersion and destruction of al his goods and substance, that so his memorie might be quite razed out. How is it then, that you are so secure in your greatest danger, that you take no thought for your own soule; making no conscience of these weightie matters, that so neerely concerne your saluation? Did you know, what a mon∣strous thing sinne is in it selfe, and how horri∣ble vnto the sinner, surely you would not, with so small remorce, solace and delight your selfe therin. You shal vnderstand then, that the LordDeut. 3 4 most iust, to satisfie his infinit and vnplacable
wrath conceiued against sinne, hath ordained for sinners, not only tēporal death of the body, but eternall torments both of body and soule, in thatApoc. 21.8 vnquenchable lake, prepared for the Diuell and his Angells.2. cor. 5.10 We must all appeare before the iudgement seate of Christ, that euerie man may receiue the things which he hath done, whether it be good or euill.Rom. 2.11 God is no accepter of persons, who if he2. Pet. 2.4 spared not the Angells that sinned, but cast them downe into hell, and deliuered them into chains of darkenesse to be kept vnto damnation:5 Neither hath spared the old world, but saued Noah the eight person, a preacher of righteousnes, & brought in the floud vpon the world of the vngodly:6 And turned the citties of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes, con∣demning them, and made them an example vnto them that afterward should liue vngodly. haue not we iust cause, if we perseuere in our sinnes, be∣ing thus forewarned, that we shall not escape his seuere iudgements?Rom. 15, 4 Whatsoeuer things are written afore time, are written for our learning; perswade your self therefore, that he is the same God still, and that he hateth sinne as much as euer he did.Ezech. 18.4.20. Deut. 24, 16 2 King. 14.6 2. Chro. 25.4 Ier. 31.29.30 The Soule that sinneth shall dies the lord saith so, who cānot lie, in whose lips there was neuer guile,Rom. 2.3. Thinkest thou that thou shalt escape the iudgement of God? (saith the Apostle)4 Or despisest thou the riches of his bountifulnesse, and patience, and long sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulnesse of God leadeth thee to repentance?
5But thou after thine hardnes & hart that cānot re∣pent, heapest vnto thy selfe wrath, against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the iust iudgement of God;6 who will reward euery man according to his workes:7 that is, to them which seeke eternall life, glorie, honour, and immortalitie of well doing:7 but vnto them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey vnrighteousnesse, shall be indignation and wrath:9 Tribulation and anguish shall be vpon the soule of euerie man that doth euill. Thus you heare what rewarde your impenitencie and wilfulnesse shall purchase for you; euen the wrath of God, anguish, and death it selfe;Hebr. 10.27 a fearefull looking for of iudgement and violent fire, which shall deuoure the aduersaries, wherein sin∣ners shal be in that perplexity (being swallow∣ed vp of torments on euery side) that they shall neuer haue any sparke of hope of their release∣ment: for they shall suffer an end without end, a death without death, a decay without de∣cay; because their end euer beginneth, their death alwaies liueth, and their decay neuer ceaseth: But they are alwaies healed to be new wounded, alwaies repaired to be new de∣uoured: they are a perpetuall prey neuer con∣sumed, eternally broyling and neuer burnt vp, euer dying and neuer dead. Repent therefore in time, that you may escape these horrible torments, humble your selfe in the presence of Gods maiestie, craue pardon for your sinnes,
accept this time of repentance, which the Lord now vouchsafeth you, take the opportunitie while it is offered, confesse your fault, and no doubt, but the Lord will shew you mercie, ac∣cording to his promise.Ezech, 33.11 As I liue saith the Lord I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turne from his way and liue.Ezech. 18.32 u For I desire not the death of him that dieth saith the Lord God. In this life, God giueth mercie to them that aske it in faith.1. Tim. 2.4 Who will that all men shall be sa∣ued, and come to the acknowledging of the trueth. Step thereforeHebr. 4.16 boldly vnto the throne of grace, that you may receiue mercie, and find grace to helpe in time of neede. In the world to come, there is no place of repentance, for there God appea∣reth in iudgement, requiring an accompt of all mens doings, yea,Math. 12.36 of euery idle word that they haue spoken in this world.Ioh. 5.29 Dan. 12.2 And they shall come forth that haue done good, vnto the resurrection of life, but they that haue done euill vnto the resurre∣ction of condemnation. ThereforeEsay. 55.6 seeke the Lord while he may be found, call ye vpon him while he is neere.7 Let the wicked forsake his waies, and the vnrighteous his owne imaginations, and returne vnto the Lord, and he will haue mercie vppon him; and to our God, for he is verie readie to forgiue.
Cap. II Comforts for the broken-harted and penitent Malefactors, that by the Magistrate are adiudged to die. That Iudgement commeth from God. Sect. I MIserie commeth not forth of the dust,Iob. 5.6. neither doth affliction spring out of the earth. (saith Eliphaz) wherefore you must thinke that this deserued Crosse now layd vpon you, cōmeth from God: forPro. 29 26 Euery mans iudgement commeth from the LordIob 5.17 Behold, blessed is the man whom God correcteth; therefore refuse not thou the chastising of the Almightie.18 For hee maketh the wound, and bindeth it vp; he smiteth, and his hands make whole. The Loue, wherewith God loueth vs,Cant. 8.6. is strong as Death, so that it appeareth vn∣to the worlde, as though the Loue of God were miserie, death, and destruction, whereas vnto vs it seemeth mercie, life, and blessednes. For1. Cor. 11.32 whē we are iudged we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the world.
So then, vnder punishment, you may behold mercie, vnder correction, peace, and vnder death, life; whereby it will come to passe, that you shall not iudge hardly of your state, it shal not seeme miserable and fearefull vnto you, but that you may be able to vnder-go your crosse, and patiently to suffer it. SeeingIob. 14.5 mans daies are determined, and the number of his mo∣neths certaine, and that he hath his bounds ap∣pointed him, which he cannot passe: Consider that your glasse is runne out, that your pilgri∣mage is at an end, & that your appointed time is now come, be not agrieued therefore to die, be content to render vp your life againe vnto him that gaue it you. As you were not borne at your ovvne pleasure, so shall you not liue at your ovvne lust: Conforme your vvill therfore vnto the vvill of God, and sayLu. 22.42 Father, thy wil be done, and not mine. For seeing it is the vvill of God that you should drinke of his Cup, vvhich he hath filled for you, pray that you may sup it vp with patience, and continuance in the faith of Christ vnto the end, that so you may passe through it to euerlasting life: where your tears shall be turned into triumph, & your disgrace into glorie; where your comfort shal be with∣out crosse, and your repose without trouble. Who would not reioice therfore, quietly and patiently to die, seeing Death is the passage from this world to the next, from the earth to
heauen, & from al the present aggreeuances, to all comfortable happines? Wel may the bruit beast feare to die, whose end of life is their conclusion of being. Well may the Epicure tremble, who with his life looketh to loose his felicitie. Yea, well may the faithlesse and vnre∣pentant sinners quake, whose death is the be∣ginning of their damnation. But seeing the Lord hath vouchsafed you a penitent and be∣leeuing heart, goe on boldly and receiue your portion in the land of the liuing, where you shall liue euer. Particular directions for the distressed partie. Sect. II. SEeing it is the good pleasure and will of God to lay this crosse vpon you, that for a while you should beare the same, doe not excuse your selfe, nor make your fault light to the world, dissemble it not as though you were guiltlesse and innocent, as though you had not deserued this punishment laid vpon you. Cast away theseGen. 3 fig-leaues, they will not couer your shame. AndIosh. 7.19 giue glorie vnto the Lord God of Israel, make confession vnto him, and shew vs now what thou hast done, hide it not from the peo∣ple. Say with Achan,20 Indeed I haue sinned against
the Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus haue I done. Hee gaue God the glory, and so departed (no doubt) in Gods mercie: so also shall you do, if you wil follow his godly steps: lay open your heart this day, search your thoughts, and giue God the glorie. Conceale not the trueth, dissemble not with Malefactors, doe not exte∣nuate the heinousnesse of your crime, the Lord is a searcher of the heart & reines. Seeing God hath brought your Offence to light; Seeing he hath ordained the Magistrate, who isRom. 13.4 the Mi∣nister of God, to take vengeance on him that doeth euill, to punish you, giue praise and thankes vn∣to God; thinke it better to bee shamed here, then hereafter before all the world, & before all the hoast of heauen; far better it is, to bee punished here, with a temporarie punishment, than in the world to come to be tormented in hell, with euerlasting and endlesse tortures. Also, if you haue at any time confessed any thing to charge the innocent, for the clearing of your selfe, thereby to escape and bee at li∣bertie, or for hatred and malice, burden not your selfe therewith, giue glorie to God and confesse the trueth. If you haue hindered any man, by taking away of his good name, restore it him againe to your power. If you haue hurt any man in his goodes, restore it vnto him a∣gaine, as much as you are able, and be truely sorrie in your heart, for that you are not able
to make restitution of the whole. If you know any Malefactors, Theeues, Murderers, Trai∣tors, &c. be not partaker of their sinnes, but certifie the Magistrate of them. And so pray to God for mercie, that he wil giue you true and faithfull repentance, that hee will not suffer your heart to be bent to any vngodly way; committing your selfe wholly vnto his mercie. How the place of Peter is to bee vnderstood, where he saith, Let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Theefe, &c. And that God some∣times doth call men by this means. Sect. III. Obiection. The Apostle saith, Let none of you suf∣fer as a murderer, or as a theefe,1 Pet. 4.15 or as an euill doer, or as a busie-bodie in other mens matters: Thereby indeed, condemning all such as die so. Now, a∣las! I die as a murderer, Traitor, Theef, &c. an euill doer, I am in this num∣ber here condemned.
Answere. THe Apostle condemneth not such; On∣ly he giueth the Christians a Caueat, that none of them suffer as a Malefactor, for then could they notGalat. 6.14 glorie in their suffe∣rings, For (as the same Apostle saieth) This is thanke-worthie, if a man for conscience toward God endure griefe,1. Pet. 2.19 suffering wrongfully. For what praise is it, if when yee bee buffeted for your faults? be∣cause1, Pet. 2.20 they should haue deseruedly incurred the punishment laide vpon them; they should not suffer for the name of Christ, but for their owne deserts; which yet is so farre from con∣demning a man, if he take his punishment pa∣tiently, that it is a means of his reclaiming into the sheep-fold.Luc. 23.40.41 You haue for exāple the good Theefe, who had liued very wickedly, and committed many heinous facts, for which he was iudged to die by the magistrate. Yet this punishment vnto him was the meanes to bring him to Christ, and to know. God, whereby he receiued spirituall comfort, that the innocent lambe which suffered with him Christ Iesus, would43 pittie his miserie, forgiue him his sinnes, and bring him into Paradice his hea∣uenly kingdome: whereas otherwise he should neuer haue forsaken his wicked life, but conti∣nued his course and runne on the high way to
perdition. And so peraduenture had it beene with you; you would haue runne on the race of wickednes, & gone forward in your sinnes, and still continued in that vngodly course, without all repentance or godly knowledge, vnder the fearefull wrath of God. But now, by this meanes, he recalled you againe, hee made you know your selfe, hee brought you to re∣pentance, and to the knowledge of his Sonne Iesus Christ our Sauionr, wherein if youApoc. 2.10 con∣tinue vnto the end, you shal receiue the crown of life. Consider therefore, how louing a Fa∣ther the Lord is vnto you, and what a mightie God is he that can bringEsa. 42.16 light out of darke∣nesse, that can make bad things good, and that will to his, turne all worst things to theRom. S. 28. best. By this meanes God hath hindered Sathan of his purpose, who now made full account to haue kept you in his kingdome for euer; for he hath made you of the bondslaue of Sathan, a liuely member of Iesus Christ; of the childe of darknesse, the child of light and euer∣lasting blisse. That the multitude of our sinnes should not make vs faint-hearted. Sect. IIII.
Obiection. Yet (me thinkes) I am a rebellious wretch, abounding with a whole sea of iniqui∣ties. I feele my selfe laden with a huge companie of horrible sinnes, whereof euē the very least, is sufficient in iudge∣ment, to throw mee downe to the euer burning lake. My owne conscience doth beare witnesse against me, of my mani∣fold and innumerable transgressions, of my securitie and senselesse blindnesse, committing sinne after sinne, both noto∣rious to the world, and horrible before God. The thoughts of my heart rise vp in iudgement against mee: The vanitie of my life condemneth me: The wicked∣nesse and heinousnesse of my horrible deeds reiecteth me from the Lords eies: All my wicked thoughts, wordes, and deeds, with the inward corruption of my nature, doe lie heauie vpon mee, and with their intolerable weight, do euen presse my soule downe to hell.
Answere. FEare not for al this, forRom. 5.20 where sinne aboun∣deth, there grace aboundeth much more. Where there is the knowledge and feeling of sinnes, there is the remission and pardon of hem:Lament. 3.29 The goodnes of God toward sinners. The Lorde is good vnto them, that trust in him, and to the soule that seeketh him. This infinite goodnes of God, is manifestly declared in the Scriptures, that we should euer thinke on the ame, and haue Hope,Math. 19.17 Luc. 18.19 Mar. 10.18. there is none good but one, uen God, who isPsal. 73.1 good to Israell, yeaPsal. 119.68 good and gracious:Nahum. 1.7 The Lord is good, and a strong hold in he day of trouble, and he knoweth them that trust in him. So then, God being good in nature and essence, and that onely good, he is ready to communicate his goodnesse with the humble and penitent soule, that groneth and sigheth vnder the burthen of iniquitie, whose hart and hands be bathed in the bottome of repentance; f in faith, with a sure confidence in Christs me∣rites he require the same.1. Ioh. 1.9 If we acknowledge our sinne God is faithfull to forgiue vs. Next his goodnes followeth his Loue, which is so great owardes vs, that King Dauid beeing rapt with admiration of the same,The loue of God towards sinners. saith;Psal. 8.4 What is man say I, that thou art mindful of him, and the sonne of man that thou visitest him?Psal. 103.13 As a father hath compassion on his children, so hath the Lorde
compassion on them that feare him. In the Prophe∣cie of Esay, this loue of God towards vs is compared to the loue of a mother, that most tenderly embraceth her owne childe, which loue is the heartiest of all other.Esa. 49.15 Can a woman (saith he) forget her child? and not haue compassion on the sonne of her wombe? (as who say, No;) though they should forget, yet will I not forget thee saith the Lord of Hostes: thereby declaring that God doth loue vs more tenderly then doth the naturall mother loue the fruite of her owne wombe. And this declareth the feruencie of Gods loue towardes vs, in thatRom, 8.32. he spared not his owne son, but gaue him for vs all to death.Ioh. 3.11 For so God loued the world, that he hath giuen his onely begotten sonne, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him, should not perish, but haue euerlasting life.1. Ioh. 4.10 Herein is loue, not that we loued God, but that hee loued vs, and sent his Son to be a reconciliation for our sinnes. SoEphes. 2.4 God which is rich in mercie, through his great loue wherewith he loued vs.5 The mercie of God toward sinners. Euen when wee were dead by sinnes, hath quickened vs togither in Christ, by whose grace yee are saued. Out of this goodnes and loue of God springeth his infinit and mar∣uellous great mercie towards vs.Lamen. 3.22 It is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his com∣passions faile not.Psal. 130.7 Let Israell waite on the Lorde, for with the Lord is mercie, & with him is great re∣demption;8 And he shal redeem Israell from all his iniquities. How many, or how great our sins
be (so they be not sins against the holy ghost) it maketh no matter, for sinne cannot so abound, but that the goodnesse, loue, and mercie of God, purchased for vs by the obedience and righteousnesse of Iesus Christ, doth much more abound. Christ is stronger then the diuell, and his workes are more effectuall and forcible to saue vs, then are the workes of his enemie the Diuell to destroy and ouerthrow vs: his holi∣nesse and righteousnesse hath more power to iustify vs, then hath Sinne to condemne vs; and his integritie to wash vs, then the foule spirit to defile vs. This is he that is theLuc. 11.22 stronger man which bindeth and ouercommeth the strong man: he taketh his armor from him wherein he trusted, to wit, Sinne, Death, and the Law: So that now the diuell hath no more power to hurt vs, neither by sinne,1. Ioh. 1.8 for Christ hath u wa∣shed vs in his bloud, and cleansed vs from all sinne; not by death, for Christ when he was dying, hath1. Cor. 15.4 swallowed it vp into victorie; nor by the law, for Christ hath fullyMath. 51.4 satisfied it, in fulfilling the same, and in submitting him selfe vnto that curse that was ordai∣ned for vs. That late Repentance is good if it bee true Repen∣tance: and how a man may iudge whether his repentance be vnfained or not Sect. V.
Obiection. Late Repentance, is seldome or neuer true Repentance: Alas, hitherto I wallowed in wickednesse all the dayes of my life, and now I cannot sin as in former time, by reason that my libertie is restrained, or that I am not mine owne man. I left not sin before sin left me: I feare lest when I die, this my late repentance di∣eth with me. For it is very iust, that he that contemned God in his life, should be contemned of God in his death. It is the iust iudgemēt of God on the wicked, that dying, they shuld forget thēselues, who liuing, did forget God. Answere. INdeed your case is no lesse daungerous then common: For the men of this our yron age do offer the flower of their youth to the diuell, and bring the lame and rotten sacrifice of their old age to God. In a word, whē they cannot serue the diuell, they will be content to
serue God. These frame a kinde of repentance vnto themselues which may iustly bee suspe∣cted. Yet notwithstanding enter you into your owne heart, and see whether you be truly sor∣rie that you haue mispent your time, whether you hate those sinnes you haue cōmitted with a perfect hatred, for that thereby you haueEphe. 4.30 grieued the holy spirit of God, & prouoked him to anger, and not so much for feare of his re∣uenge and wrath to bee powred vppon you. Whether if you were your owne man againe, you would commit the like. Whether you are not willing to bee reconciled to your ad∣uersaries, to make restitution and recompence of such goods as you haue wrongfully gotten and detained. Or, if you bee not able to re∣store, whether you doe not acknowledge the fault; Whether it doth not grieue and vexe your very soule, to see and to heare the horri∣ble sinnes & outragious blasphemies that men commonly commit and belch out against the Maiestie of God, who hath bin so louing and so good a Father vnto them: and therefore, whether you will not vse any lawfull meanes to refraine and punish these notorious sinners and Malefactours (whether it bee by confessi∣on, iust accusation or detection, or any other good and godly means) for the glorie of God, and the peace of the Church. If you find your self thus affected, thē doubt not but that your
repentance is vnfained and true, howbeit it be late: Better late than neuer, the Prouerb is. Con∣sider that the Promise of remission of sinnes in Christ, is made without any tearme of time: And therefore late repentance may bee true repentance.Ezcch. 18.21 If the wicked will returne from all his sinnes that he hath committed, and keepe all my Sta∣tutes, and doe that which is lawfull and right, hee shall surely liue, and shall not die.22 All his trans∣gressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned vnto him, but in his righteousnes that he hath done, he shall liue.23 Haue I any desire that the wicked should die, saith the Lord God: Or shall hee not liue, if hee returne from his waies? If Sathan stand before you, and accuse you of your va∣nities, and lay before you, the daies of your loosenesse, despaire not. Haue you spent thirtie yeeres in vanitie? nay, haue you spent fortie or threescore, yea threescore and ten, or four∣score? despaire not: Reserue the rest of your daies, yea, if you haue not daies, reserue the rest of your houres, of your halfe houres, of moments, for Iesus Christ, and hee will make much of them: they are theZach. 3.2 brand taken out of the fire, and theApoc. 3. remnant which is left. Though there be no light in your candle, yet if it doeth but smoake, Iesus Christ will not put it out; he will not quench the sparckles that are left in yourEsa. 42.3 flax. Is your strong man become a reed, yet Christ wil not breake that, such is his mer∣cie.
Oh, haue you a remnant left, euen a little remnant: and is that readie to die?Apoc, 3.2 yet bee a∣wake, and strengthen the things which remaine, that are readie to die, and Christ will saue you. It came no sooner into theLuc 15.17 Prodigall childes heart, to goe and see his father; he had no soo∣ner directed his20 feet towards home, but his father ranne to meet him, embraced him, and receiued him with22 great ioy. Euen so doeth Christ, we are no readier to leaue and forsake our sinnes, and to sue vnto Christ for mercie, but he is as readie to pardon and forgiue vs, and to graunt mercieMath. 11.21 Come vnto me all yee that are wearie and laden, and I will ease you. Heere you may cast anchor, in this port you may rest your selfe: now let theMath. 7.25 waues beate, let the winds blow, let Sathan assault you, yet are you harmelesse, your rocke is vnconquerable.Rom 8.31 Christ is on your side, what can preuaile a∣gainst you? not sands nor rockes, not stormes nor tempests, not windes nor waues, not fire nor water, not all the powers of Sathan, nor theMath. 16.18 gates of hell.
Chap. III. Comforts for such condemned per∣sons, who feare & dread the rigor of the punishment they are enioyned to suffer. What a man must doe to be eased of the painefull apprehension of death. Sect. I. AS God in this life doth punish the trans∣gressions of his seruants with temporall punishments, lest they should be1. Cor. 11.32 con∣demned with the world: So now on your part, seeing you haue broken his lawes, and that the Magistrate hath found you out in your sinnes, the Lorde will no longer forbeare the punish∣ment due vnto your desert; which certainely is very necessarie for the saluatiō of your soule, for so much as God turneth all thinges to theRom. 8.28 best for them that loue him, although your corrupt iudgement and fraile flesh may perad∣uenture iudge otherwise. Now then learne to be wise, and take counsell what is best to bee done. The worst that your sinnes can doe vn∣to you, is to lay vpon you, the iustRom. 6.23 reward of death. The remedie is, of necessitie to make a
vertue, and to beare that wisely which you must needs abide. If you will haue the heart that shall contemne the force of death, pre∣pare your selfe, not in your owne wisedome, which you haue found to be foolishnes alrea∣die, for it hath deceiued you, but in the wise∣dome of the Lord, that your hope may be sure. Aboue all things, striue to attaine vnto true re∣pentance, the first part whereof must bee an2. Sa. 24.10 Iosh. 17.20 Acknowledge∣ment of sinne, the first part of true repentance. humble confession of whatsoeuer thinges your conscience can vtter, more then is reuea∣led. Wherefore speake openly the trueth, con∣ceale nothing, and so shall you shunne the di∣uell, who euer is an enemie vnto trueth.Prov. 28 13 He that hides his sin (saith Salomon) shal not prosper, but he that confesseth & forsaketh them shall haue mercie. If we will find forgiuenes of our sinnes, let vs cast off the cloakes of shame, and confesse before heauen and earth, that wee haue sin∣ned, and what we haue done. God will onceApoc. 20, 12 reueale the secrets of all hearts, but if wee speake the trueth now, and shrinke not, then shall we reioice that there is nothing of ours hid. Better ten thousand times to receiue the reproach of flesh, and glorie of the Lorde, than to turne away for one houre, and after∣ward receiue euerlasting confusion. Iohn Bap∣tist preached to such asMath. 3.6 cōfessed their sinnes. When the lost Sonne calledLuke. 15.21. heauen & earth to witnesse his great iniquitie, then he found
hope of pardon. When the good Thiefe that was hanged with Christ, had confessed in the hearing of all the Iewes;Luk. 23.41. We are rightly pu∣nished, and receiue things worthie of that wee haue done; then entred he into Paradise. It was the practise of old Adam toGen. 3.8 hide his sin, but you are borne anew; this was theGen. 4.14. sin of Caine, but you are of a better stocke. And therfore if you haue bene partaker of any coū∣sell, disclose the conspiracies of the wicked, vn∣burden your own conscience, make your hart glad, cast off the burden of your secret sinnes, purge the eies of your mind, that you may see Christ; let true and vnfained repentance breake forth in holy confession, shame the Lords ene∣mies, and make the Church of God reioice: and loe, your death will bee comfortable vnto you, the holy spirit of God will strengthen you and hold you vp, you shall not bee dismaide, your1. Cor. 10.13 temptations shalbe no greater then you shall be able to beare, and to ouercome them: and then shall you be blessed, then shal the clo∣sing of your eies, bee the beginning of your light, and then shal death be your en∣trance into life. How God ordinarily behaueth himselfe towards the Elect in this life.
Sect. II. Phisitians are wont to giue bitter potions & sharp medicines to their curable patients; But vnto him that is vncurable, they giue what potion the Patient himself affecteth and liketh best:1. Cor. 11.32. Euen so God doth chasten & cor∣rect his elect children, and doth iudge them here, that they bee not condemned with the world; whereas he letteth the reprobate run on in his owne lust, whither his fancie will leade him, that his iudgement and condemnation may be the greater.Psal. 89 30 If his children (meaning Dauids) forsake my law and walke not in my iudge∣ments.31 If they breake my statutes and keepe my commandements.32 Then will I visit their transgres∣sion with the rod, and their iniquitie with strokes▪ And again,Reuel. 3.19 Pro. 3.11 Heb. 12.5 as many as I loue, I rebuke & chasten. And for the Reprobate he saith,Psal. 81.12 I gaue them vp vnto the hardnesse of their heart, and they haue walked in their owne counsels: Which is a certaine and vnsallible token of their condemnation. Wherefore humble your selfe vnder Gods rod, and submit your necke vnder his yoke, knowing that he dealeth mercifully with you, as a kinde and louing Father. Though the as∣sault of death bee strong, violent, and bitter, to the triall of your faith, yet call to minde that Christ hath ouercome death and hell, hee hath broken the strength of this battaile, hee hath confounded the captaine of this hoste,
and set vppe the songs of triumph vnto all be∣leeuers, that we may haue the fulnesse of ioy, and say with gladnesse;1. Cor. 15, 55 O death, where is thy sting? That the continuance of torments should not make vs afraid, or vnwilling to die. Sect. III. Obiection. Alas, the torments which I am enioined to suffer, are intolerable, I shall die of a lingring death, how shall I bee able to endure it? If I should die quickely, it would not grieue me so much. Answere. YOur lingring from Resolution doeth ag∣grauate the greatnesse of your deferued punishment, whereas if you were prepa∣red and resolute, your paines would not seeme halfe so grieuous vnto you. Wherfore for your comfort, and that you may attaine vnto this resolution, I will insist vpon one example, and apply the same vnto you particularly, if you will giue eare and marke it well. Dauid the King2. Sa. 24.2 sent Ioab to number all the people of Israell and Iudah, from Dan euen to Beer-sheba;
3Ioab would disswade him from his purpose:4 Notwithstaending the Kings word preuailed against Ioab and against the Captaines of the hoast, so saith the Text. Well, the people were9 numbred, and God was11 therefore offended. Now to you: When you were first tempted to com∣mit such an heinous offence and foule deed as you haue done: Doubtlesse the spirite would haue disswaded you from your euil intent, and your conscience did pricke you, and shew you the grieuousnesse of the fact, notwithstanding you gaue no eare to Ioab, to the spirit, and to your owne conscience: but wilfully, hauing no regarde of your honestie, and credit, neither weying the anger of God, committed your selfe to the daunger, and perpetrated the fact, wherefore God is iustly offended with you. Then followeth the intent. What was Da∣uids intent when hee caused the people to be numbered? Surely he meant no harme, but of Policie to number them,2. Sa. 24.2 to know the num∣ber of the people, that he might know his power. But what was your intent? The betraying of your country; the destruction of your Prince; The murdering of your Brother; the rob∣bing of your neighbour; or such like? You can∣not denie it: So then, if God was iustly angry with Dauid, how much more might he iustly condemne and vtterly forsake you? your fact being farre more horrible and wicked, then
was the offence of Dauid. Now to Dauid a∣gaine; When2. Sa. 24.9. Ioab deliuered the number and sum of the people vnto the king, all was well, thought Dauid. But alas, good man, it was not long ere God had awakened out of his sleepe, and be∣gan to bestirre himself. How then fared it with Dauid? then Dauids heart smote him, saith the text. Thus we see when sinners promise most ease and rest, most quietnesse and plentie of Peace vnto themselues, euen then beginneth the tragedie, when it is least looked for. His heart was smitten: Oh in what a case was hee then! his heart aked, his spirite groaned, his soule bled, for sorrow that he had so grieuous∣ly offended the Maiestie of God; his consci∣ence cried out against him, Who can declare what things he felt within? yet was not his sin so grieuous as yours. But what did he in this a∣gonie? did he despaire? No, he humbled himself before the face of god, & acknowledged his of∣fence, saying,2. Sa. 24.10 I haue sinned exceedingly in that I haue done, Therfore I beseech thee now Lord, take away the trespasse of thy seruant, for I haue done very foolishly. You heare how he stepped vnto the heauenly throane, humbly confessing his trespasse, and desiring forgiuenesse and mercie, and therfore obtained mercie. But I pray you, when you had committed the deed, did you not thinke that all was well, that it should ne∣uer haue beene knowne? Ah, but sweet meate
must haue sower sauce. Well, when GOD had awakened, when you were taken, what remorse of conscience did you suffer? were you disquieted in spirit, and sorrie you offen∣ded God, as Dauid was? If you were not, you ought to bee, the Lord giue you grace to doe so. It remaineth then, that you prostrate your self before the face of almighie God, acknow∣ledging your offences, and craue mercie and pardon for the same by the merits of Christ, and doubtlesse you shal haue mercie as Dauid had. But how had Dauid mercie? The Lorde condemned him not (as he might iustly haue done) neither did hee vtterly forsake him, yet he punished him, & that most grieuously, with temporall punishment, by an offer that was made. For2. Sa. 24.11. The worde of the Lorde (saieth the text) came vnto the Prophet Gad Dauids seer, say∣ing,12 Goe and say vnto Dauid: thus saith the Lord, I will offer thee three things, chuse thee which of them I shall doe vnto thee.13 so Gad came vnto Da∣uid and shewed him, & said vnto him, wilt thou that seuen yeares famine shal come vpon thee in thy land, or vvilt thou flee three moneths before thine ene∣mies, they follovving thee, or that there bee three daies pestilence in thy land? Novv aduise thee, and see, vvhat ansvvere shall I giue to him that sent me?14 And Dauid said vnto Gad, I am in a vvon∣derfull strait. Let vs fall novv into the hande of the Lord (for his mercies are great) and let mee not
fall into the hand of man. Thus we see how Da∣uid, when hee heard the definitiue sentence of punishment denounced against him, when hee was in a hard straight, did not fret and fume, stampe, and stare, & crie out against the Lords iustice, neither did he shew any token of im∣patiencie, but wholly recommended himselfe vnto the Lord, with a firme faith, and a liuely hope, (2. Sa. 24.14 for his mercies are great, saith he) Blessed Dauid therefore. Euen so, it is not for you to bid the Lord battaile (as it were) by your im∣paciencie, by your wailings and weepings, by your mutterings and murmurings, or by any other your discontentments, but after the ex∣ample of Dauid, commend your selfe into the Lords hands, and trust in his mercies, for his mercies are Great. Now to the punishment.2. Sa. 24.15 So the Lord sent a pestilence in Israel, from the morning euen to the time appointed, & there died of the peo∣ple from Dan euen to Beer-sheba, seuentie thousand men. A grieuous certainly and bitter punish∣ment, Yet your punishment is lesse, although your offence were greater. Wherefore you are to thanke God, and greatly to praise his holy name, for that he hath shewed you more and greater mercie, then hee hath shewed to his owne seruant Dauid.
That God oftentimes dealeth more mercifully with vs, then we do perceiue he doth. Sect. IIII. Obiection Yea, But Dauid himselfe died not, the plague did not touch him, and therefore my punishment is greater, and far more grienous, then was his. Answer. CErteinly the punishment due vnto your transgression and offence, is, or should be greater, then that which was due vnto Dauids, if the Lord in his iustice should deale with you; yet haue not you so grieuous a pu∣nishment enioyned you to suffer, as Dauid had; the Lord therein dealing more mercifully with you. Touching that you say, Dauid him∣selfe died not; true it is indeed, and yet was his punishment neuer the lesse, for so much as Dauid was a King; and vnto Kinges the liues of their Subiects are as precious and deare, as their owne liues, yea and more too; for the King often times, putteth himselfe & his King∣dome in danger, in the defence of his Subiects. Yea, the holy ghost saith, that2. Sa. 24.17 Dauid spake vn∣to
the Lorde (when he saw the Angel, that smote the people,) and sayde; Beholde, I haue sinned, yea, I haue donne wickedly: But these poore Sheepe, what haue they donne. Let thine hand, I pray thee, be a∣gainst me, & against my fathers house. Therby de∣claring the care, that he had, for the preserua∣tion of his innocent Subiects, yelding himselfe to suffer the punishment due vnto his offence. So then, by this example, you see how God punisheth the breakers of his ordinances and lavves in this world, with temporarie punish∣ment, to the1. Cor. 11.32 end he may find nothing in them worthie of blame or reuenge, in the worlde to come. Wherfore you must not iudge harder of your case, then you haue cause: you are but one step from the heauenly Ierusalem, & that is, to die willingly & wel: speake forth the secrets of your hart, & giueIosh. 7.19 God glory: commit your self wholy vnto his wil whom you haue offended, euen God, and aske forgiuenesse and pardon, through the merits of Iesus Christ our Sauior, & you shal find comfort in your sufferings, and afterward, euerlasting happinesse;2. Sa. 24.14 for his mercies are great. Chap. IIII Comforts for persons wrongfully con∣demned to Death.
That because we haue deserued Death by our mani∣fold sinnes, we ought to die willingly, though otherwise we be innocently condemned. Sect. I Whosoeuer shal consider what man is in himself, cannot iudge otherwise, but that, if he endure all the mise∣ries of this life, and eternall torments in the world to come; he suffereth no more then he hath deserued, being as it were the sworne e∣nemie of God, at vtter defiance with him,What Man is in himselfe. euer contradicting and repugning his holy will: for our senses are swords to fight against him, our words blowes, and our workes wounds; yea our body, that should be the temple of the ho∣ly Ghost, is a sinke of al vncleannesse; our soule a most riotous and rebellious enemie vnto God; our vnderstanding, quicke to represent vnto the Will, instruments of sinne; our will a common Curtesan, coueting and lusting after euery offer that she liketh; our memory, a regi∣ster of wickednesse, for our sinful thoughts and fantasies to feede vpon: finally, what part of our body, what power of our soule, whereof God hath giuen vs the vse, but we daily abuse to his dishonour? warring against him, with his
owne weapons, and imploying our life, moti∣on, and being, to the continuall prouoking of him in whome weeAct. 17.28 liue, moue, and haue our being? howbeit indeed we do but throw dust at the sunne, which lighteth in our owne eies, & kicke against the pricke. You must not ther∣fore complaine of your rough handling, no not thogh you were worse dealt with, for so much as you haue deserued, not only temporal death of the body, but also eternall damnation, both of body and soule, by your greeuous sinnes, whereby you haue offended the Maiestie of God, and prouoked him to anger: let vs not say I am innocent, I am righteous, I haue not done any thing worthy of death. O let vs not play the Pharasies! The wages of sinne is Death, if we die,Rom. 6.23 then haue we but our desert, for we cannot denie but that we haue sinned. There is no righteousnesse in Man. This was the fooles-paradise into which theGalat. 3.1 Galathians were brought, who sought their perfection in the flesh. Take heede then, Paul counteth thee a foole that goest this way to worke. This is a stolen feather, it belongeth to a better Bird: it is the armes royall of our grand Captaine Ie∣sus Christ, it is the ensigne wherewith he tri∣umphed ouer his enemies:Ioh. 8.46 Which of you can rebuke mee of sinne? Oh let vs not rob Christ of his honour! let vs not make gods of our selues; forMar. 10.18 Luke. 18.19 who is good but God! let vs not forget
whose children we be! O earth, earth, that thou shouldest thinke so well of thy selfe!Prou. 20.9 who can say, I haue made my hart clean, I am clean from sinne? The more we seeke to cloke our sinnes, the more they do appeare. Wherefore, so iudge you of this your punishmēt, as of the rod of our heauenly Father chastising your sinnes, which you ought to beare patiently, magnifying the Lordes goodnesse and mercies towards you, for that he correcteth you but with a temporal punishment,1. Cor. 11.31 if we would iudge our selues (saith Paul) we should not be iudged:32 But when we are iudged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we shuld not be condemned with the world. Yet notwith∣standing concerning this fact which is falsely imputed vnto you, for which also you are in∣nocently adiudged to die; happie are you and blessed, and blessed shal be your portion, if you suffer this your iudgement willingly and pati∣ently;Math. 5.10 Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousnesse sake, for theirs is the kingdome of hea∣uen: He hath spoken it that will neuer change. Take it patiently then, for1. Pet. 2.20. this is acceptable vnto the Lord: Murmure not, howbeit you be ignorant of the cause of your punishment; know that you are punished iustly by this, in that you are iudged by him, whose iudge∣ments can neuer be vn∣iust.
That we must not reuenge our wrongs. Sect. II. THough others bee guiltie of this your iudgement, suffering and death, as be∣ing the principall Actors, Procurers, or Fauorers of the same; yet you must willingly forgiue them, and in any case beware that you doe not breathe after Reuengement:Hebr. 10.30 Deut. 32.35 Rom. 12, 19 Vengeance belongeth vnto me, I will recompence, saith the Lord. It is Gods office, we must not in∣trude our selues, we may not vsurp Gods of∣fice.Hebr. 10.30 The Lord shall iudge his people. We must not be our own caruers, we must not reuenge, but leaue it vnto God and to his ministers, whom he hath appointed to execute iudgemēt and iustice;Syrac. 28.1 He that seeketh vengeance shall finde vengeance of the Lord, and hee will surely keepe his sinnes.2 Forgiue therefore thy Neighbour the hurt that he hath done to thee, so shall thy sinnes be forgi∣uen thee also when thou praiest; saith Syrach, ac∣cording to that of our Sauiour Christ,Math. 6.14 If yee forgiue men their trespasses, your heauenly Father will also forgiue you.15 But if you doe not forgiue men their trespasses, no more will your father forgiue you your trespasses. So farre should wee bee from reuenge, that wee ought to pray for our ene∣mies. Moses, when the Children of Israel had
euill intreated him, & murmured against him; when they were plagued therefore, hee praied vnto the Lord, saying,Exod. 32.32 If thou wilt not pardon their sinne, I pray thee rase me out of thy book which thou hast written. Christ also, when his enemies persecuted and crucified him, cried to his Fa∣ther, saying,Luke. 23.34 Father forgiue them, for they know not what they doe. Thus did Christ, and thus he commanded vs to do,Math. 5.44 Loue your enemies, blesse them that curse you, doe good to them that hate you, and pray for them which hurt & persecute you. Ste∣phen that holy Martyr, when hee was stoned to death,Act. 7.60. he kneeled downe & (as a faithful ser∣uant of Iesus Christ) cried with a lowde voice, Lord, lay not this sime to their charge. Thus you see that you must not hate them, that apprehen∣ded and accused you, albeit falsely, nor them that iudged & condēned you, though wrong∣fully, neither yet your executioners; but you must loue them, and pray for them:Leuit. 19.18. Deut. 22.1 So God cōmanded, soMath. 5.44 Luc. 6.27 Christ prescribed, soLuc. 23.34 Christ himselfe did, so didExod. 32.32 Moses, so didAct. 7.60 Stephen, so did1. Cor. 4.13 Paul and others. Wherfore should not you follow their precepts & examples? If you be a Disciple, you must follow your maister; If you are a Seruaunt, you must obey your Lord: and if you be the Child of God, you must do like Gods Children, you must follow their steppes: not forgetting how daungerous it is to auenge our selues, forMat. 7.2 with what measure
yee mete, it shall bee measured vnto you againe; as appeareth in the Prophecie of Ezechiel?Ezec. 25.12 Thus saith the Lord God, Because Edom hath done euill, by taking vengeance vpon the house of Iudah, and hath committed great offence, and reuenged himself vpon them:13 Therefore thus saith the Lorde God, I will also stretch out mine hand vpon Edom, and de∣stroie Man and Beast out of it, and I will make it desolate,14 &c. u and they shall knowe my ven∣geance, &c. Reade out this Chapter. Comforts taken from the examples of them that haue beene innocentlie adiudged to die. Sect. III. Obiection. Alas, I haue great wrong, and am very hardly dealt withall; I am falsely accu∣sed, violently apprehended, wrongfully imprisoned, and innocently condemned to die the death. Ah hard and heauie case! Answere. TRue it is: I grant your case is hard and heauie, but yet not so hard, nor so heauie as you take it: you say you haue great wrong, and are very hardly dealt with; admit
this, so were al the Prophets, and Apostles, and generally, all Gods children before you: you are falsely accused, so were1. King. 21.10 Naboth,Dan. 6.13 Daniel and others: you are violently apprehended, so were they also, so wasGen. 39.17 Ioseph before them, and infinite others: you are wrongfully impri∣soned, so were they likewise, so wasMath. 14.3. Iohn Baptist: lastly, you are innocently adiudged to die, so were all these, Noah, Daniel, Iohn Bap∣tist, andAct. 7.57 Stephen, yea all the Prophets and A∣postles. Wherefore your case is not so lamen∣table as you take it, for it is a common thing in the scriptures, among the children of God, to see the iust oppressed by the vniust, to seeHab. 1.13 the wicked deuoure the man that is more righteous then he, & to see the innocent and holy man put to death by the enemies of God, and of the Crosse of Christ. Now it remaineth that you doe like one that hath his house a fire, burning all in a flame, so that it is vnpossible to be ex∣tinguished or quenched; who will throw out and fetch from thence al his treasure and iew∣ells, that so he may with them build another house. So must you doe, let your old ruinous house burne, let it perish, seeing it may not be otherwise, onely thinke and bestirre your selfe how you may saue your treasure and your iewells; I meane your soule, by a true and con∣stant faith in Iesus Christ our Redeemer, that so at the resurrection of the iust, you may come
vnto a new house, that cannot perish, but re∣maineth immortall for euer; for then you shall haue an incorruptible and a glorious body, which shall not be subiect to griefe, paine, sor∣row, neede, and trouble, but shall enioy euerlasting peace and bles∣sednesse. Comforts taken from the example of our Sauiour Christs innocent suffering: With a briefe de∣claration of the same. Sect. IIII. Obiection. Yet me thinkes I can hardly brooke these wrongs, for they are intolerable. Who can beare so many iniuries? so many re∣proches? yea the shame of the world and death it self, hauing committed nothing worthy these iniurious dealings? if I were a Malefactor, it would not grieue me to be vsed thus. Answere. YEa then should it most of all grieue you, for you could not haue so much comfort, &Gal. 6.14. ioy in your suffrings, hauing deserued
the same: whereas now being innocently con∣demned, you may reioyce in your afflictions,1. Pet. 4.13 in as much as you are partaker of Christs sufferings. Looke vpon him and follow his steps: Who was more honorable or mightie then he? who was veryMat. 1.23 God, euen thePsalme 2.7 iohn 3.16 Son of God,Phil. 2.9 who being in the forme of God, thought it no robberie to be equall with God. Who was more innocent then he? (Esay 53.9 1. pet. 2.22 1. iohn 3.5 He did no sinne, neither was there guile found in his mouth) euen by the confession of the Iudge himselfe who condemned him, Pilate I meane, whoMat. 27.24 tooke water and washed his hands before the multitude saying, I am innocent of the bloud of this IVST MAN: looke you to it. His whole life was nothing but a perpetuall suffe∣ring, wherein he wasIoh. 4.6 wearied,Mar. 21.18 hungred, andIoh. 19.28 thirsted; he wasIoh. 2.13 banished,Mat. 11.18 slandred, andMat. 22.46 luke 3.29 persecuted; he wasLuke 4.1 tempted, heMat. 5.2 fasted andMat. 26.40 watched; heMar. 6.3 labored,Luke 4.31 preached, andLuke 22.44 prai∣ed; heMatt. 26.38 sorowed,Mar. 14.33 grieued, andLuke 22.44 sweat water & bloud; yea, he that isHebr. 7.26 holy, harmelesse, seperat from sinners, & made higher then the heauens, wasMat. 20.49 betraide by Iudas,Mar. 14.50 forsaken by his A∣postles,Mat 26 57 apprehended by the Souldiers, with∣out causeMat. 27.40 exclaimed against, wrongfullyMat. 26.60 ac∣cused, and vniustlyMat. 27.24 condemned to die; being haled fromMat. 27.19 seate to seate, as if he had beene some notorious Malefactor, and fromMat. 26 56 Iudge to Iudge, yet suffered he all thingsMat. 27.2 patiently. He suffered many1. Pet. 2.23 taunts and checkes, hee
wasLuke 23 29 stripped,Mat. 27.28 buffeted, andMat. 27.30 spit vpon he wasLuke 23.64 blindfolded,Luke 23.29 mocked, and disdainful∣lyLuke 23.29 crowned with thornes:Mat. 27.30 He wasMat. 27.35. he becameMat. 27.29 tormented, andIoh. 18.25 wounded; he becameGal. 3.13. accursed of God,Mat. 27.46 sustained his wrath at last, being the1. Pet. 1.19. innocent Lambe of God, being theIoh. 1.4. Lord and giuer of life, and beeing theActes 10.42 Iudge of the quicke & the dead, hePhil. 2.8 died a most shamefull death, hauingMat. 27.24 sentence therevnto at the hands of a most false Iudge, a painted wall, one that had more respect to the commō applause of the malignant, than vnto iustice. What christian heart can thinke much to suf∣fer, being moued by this example of him that suffered so much for hisCol. 1.21 enemies? He hath gi∣uen vs such a1. Pet. 2.21 president, in suffring for vs, as it must needes seeme little whatsoeuer we suffer for him. There is no greater entisement vnto soue,It is a hard heart that cannot re∣quite loue with loue. then to preuent the louer; and too hard is that heart, that if it would not request loue, is not contēt at the least to require it: where was euer any that either sought so much, or bough so deare, the loue of any creature, asIoh. 15.13 galat. 2.20. ephes. 5.2. Christ did ours? What hath a man more then riches, honour, and life? All this did Christ spend in winning of vs; as for his riches, he thatIoh. 1.3. crea∣ted all things, was borne and died naked; con∣cerning his honour, he thatPhil. 2.9. thought it no rob∣berie to be equall with God, was sorted and exe∣cuted with theeues; touching his life, hee
that isIohn 1.4 Lord of life, was bereaued thereof by a most vilde, dispitefull, and shamefull death. Shall the loue of a mortall Friend, not onely moue vs, but enforce vs to loue him againe? shall his perills for vs make vs eager of perills for him? because thereby, both our loue to him is best witnessed, and his loue to vs most con∣firmed? and shal not this loue of an immortall Louer, who tendereth vs more then our selues, and in all respects deserueth to haue his loue counteruailed; shal it not, I say, be able to en∣flame vs, with desire to suffer with him, and for him; to testifie our affection, with continuing the same in the midst of our afflictions what∣soeuer? Let not therefore the crosse aduen∣tures that betide you, dismay you; let not the crueltie of your enemies, the sharpnesse of your miseries, the continuance of your afflicti∣ons, daunt your courage. Folow the example of your grand Captaine, who1. Pet. 2.23 when he was re∣uiled, reuiled not againe; when he suffered he threat∣ned not, but committed it to him that iudgeth righte∣ously. Why should you complaine of your bad vsage, seeing your Lord and Maister was thus cruelly handled? Is theMat. 10.24 luke 6.40. ioh. 13.16 ioh. 15.20 Disciple aboue his Maister? or the Seruant greater then his Lord? If they haue done thus to theLuke 23.31 greene tree, what shall be done to the drie? If Christ hauing deser∣ued nothing, did suffer so horrible, so bitter, and so grieuous torments, why should we his
seruants, who haue so often by our enormous sinnes, and wicked deedes, offended God, and prouoked his wrath against vs, and so often de∣serued hell; why should we, I say, repine, frown and grudge to suffer some small punishment, seeing it be the Lordes will we should doe so? Yea, why doe we not suffer any temporall af∣fliction willingly, cheerefully, and patiently? Chap. V Comforts for such as suffer Persecuti∣on or Death for the testimonie of a good conscience in matters of Reli∣gion or Iustice. Whereof it commeth that the wicked doe per∣secute the godly. Sect. I AS the Shippe, while it roueth vpon the maine sea, much like a castle, or a com∣mon-wealth standing by it selfe, hauing all the sailes hoised vp, swolne with the wind, and the banners displayed; with a very pom∣pous and magnificent shewe, daunceth and skippeth vpon the waues, alluring euery pas∣senger
senger to behold, and admire her pride: but when she is come to the hauen, the sailes being gathered, the banners taken in, and the ankers cast, she lieth quietly in the rode, the searchers ransake her, and force her to pay custome; then is she little regarded or set by: Euen so fa∣reth it with the children of God, when they roued in riot, and sailed vpon the swelling sur∣ges of worldly vanities, following the tyde of a consciencelesse course, ranged at their plea∣sure without controllment, and had the fauo∣rable gale of authority to waft them forwards, and the seemly saile of Honours and Pomp to make them daunce and skippe; then were they admired of the people, and esteemed as excel∣lent personages, honest men, and good fel∣lowes; but now yeelding at length vnto the calling of God, hauing retired themselues into the port of a religious Profession, of a holy and innocent conuersation in the feare of God, they are straightly searched and sacked, their sailes gathered, their wind be come boisterous and tempestuous, their glorie disgraced, and themselues exposed to infinite and innumera∣ble calamities, and little or nothing esteemed. TheIoh. 9.6, 18. blind-man, so long as he continued in his blindnesse, was neuer molested nor called in question: but so soon as his eyes were ope∣ned, then both he and his parents were pre∣sently conuented. TheIoh. 55 lame cripple that was
diseased eight and thirtie yeeres, had layn long at the Poole Bethesda, and all that while no man rebuked him; but so soone as Christ had8 cured him, as he did execute his commande∣ment, the Iewes10 reprehended and rebuked him for carrying his bed on the Sabboth day. So the diuell seekes to blast our Religion and profession in the bud,The diuell enui∣ous of our wel∣doing. before it grow either to flower or fruite, and therefore doth he conti∣nually persecute vs, which notwithstanding is a very good signe, that we are deliuered out of his power, otherwise he would neuer pursue vs so hotly. So then, seeing we are in the right way, let vs runne on, and constantly continue our course vnto the end: they that will take the start of profession, are like wilde coltes that are frighted with shadowes, seeing they feare tribulation in this world, which indeede is but a shadow, in respect of that in the world to come. It is not for him that wil be a christian, to regard the standers and scornings of men, or to abandon his holy profession for their sakes, seeing it is but a slender excuse, to alleadge the feare of wordes of a subiect, as a iust impedi∣ment, of not performing our duty to our soue∣raigne. It were a great folie of the blind, to de∣ride and scorne others, because they see; or for the criple, to contemne those that are sound of limmes, because they limp not: but much more sottishnesse were it for a man that seeth, to goe
blindfold, or to put out his eies for the blinde wretches scoffing; or for the sound man to halt or maime himselfe for criples sayings. He that leadeth an holy life, and walketh vprightly in the feare of God, is despised and scorned of him that followeth after vanitie, and treadeth infamous pathes: butPsalme 2.4 he that dwelleth in heauen shal laugh them to scorne, the Lord shall haue them in derision. When wee giue our names vnto Christ, and become his Disciples, then doe we enter into a rough profession, (like a grape to the vine-presse) that is bound to be at conti∣nuall defiance and enmitie, with the vanities, pleasures, and praises of this world; and there∣fore, what can we looke for at the hands of the worldes friends, but hatred and persecution? The more the waues and billowes beate a∣gainst the rocke, the more are they broken, and turne into a vaine some or froath, and yet the rocke neuer the weaker. So let the malice of our Aduersaries rage against vs, our rocke is vnconquerable, if we cleaue vnto it; hurt them selues they may, but cannot harm vs; the IewsActes 7.54 their hearts brast for anger, and they gnashed their teeth at Stephen, and yet was he nothing moued or terrified at their furious spight: we must make no more account of the obloquies and reproches of our enemies, then this holy Martyr did of the malice and madnesse of the Iewes.
That we must patiently suffer persecution and af∣fliction for Religion or Iustice sake, and why? Sect. II. COunterfeit gold feareth the touchstone; If we feare triall, it is because wee are counterfeits, full of incredulitie & vn∣beleefe. If we had builded vpon the1. Cor. 3.11 founda∣tion Christ Iesus,12 gold silver & precious stones, we should not be afraid that our works should bee made manifest in the day of the Lorde: but being perswaded in our conscience, that we build with hay,Ibid. straw and stubble, we cannot chuse but bee timorous and fearefull to come neere the fire, lest there should bee any triall made of our workes, or that our faith shoulde melt away in temptation, as waxe against the Sunne, and thereby make it manifest, that it was a false and counterfet beleefe. The house that is builded on a Rocke, will not feare the fall of raine and haile, or the blasts of winde, or the beating of the waues: The medowe or field which hath sufficient moisture, will not feare the drought and heate of sommer; Nei∣ther will the tree that is planted by the water side, feare lest his leafe wither: nor wee feare the brunt and heat of persecution, if our faith be strong and liuely, especially considering how prositable & necessarie they are vnto vs.Affliction is Christs liuerie. Affliction is not onely the liuerie and cogni∣sance
sance of Christ, but the very principal & roiall garment which himselfe was clad with in this life: A souldiour reioiceth to put on his Cap∣taines harnesse; and a Disciple cannot mislike to be like his maister: In vaine doth he claime the name of a Christian, that will not imitate Christ. If we be christians, Afflictions must be our coate, and Persecution our liuerie. Hee is an vndutifull & vngracious childe that is asha∣med of his Father; hee is a malapert seruaunt, that refuseth to weare his Maisters liuerie: and he of all others, a most vngratefull creature, that doth not willingly & ioyfully accept the liuerie of God his maister. Vriah the Hittite, when Dauid bade him2. Sam. 11.3 goe into his house, and wash his feete, and so to take his ease, he like a true Israelite answered,1 The Arke, and Israel, and Iudah dwell in tents: and my Lord Ioab, and the seruants of my Lord abide in the open fields: shal I then goe into mine house to cate and drinke, and lie with my wife? By thy life, and by the life of thy soule, I will not doe this thing. Hee thought it an odious thing, to haue better lodging than the Arke of the Lord, the Captaine of the hoste, and his fellow-souldiours, and therefore hee lay not on a soft bed, but on the ground,9 at the doore of the kings palace: So our Arke, euen our Captaine Iesus Christ, and our fellowe∣souldiors the Martirs, lay on the bare ground, and suffered great afflictions and persecution;
and wil we looke to lie and to fare better than they did? Shall Christ lie in the manger, and we ruffle it out in our pallaces? shal he mourn in sackcloth, and we bathe in pleasure? Shall hee fighting in our defence, bee wounded and crucified among theeues; and shall we disport and so lace ourselues with fond and vaine de∣lights? Shall he bee pierced through with the sworde of Gods iustice for our sinnes, and shall wee bee vnwilling to suffer any thing for our selues? Oh vnnaturall Children that wee are! that hauing before our eies the most blou∣die slaughter of our Sauiour, we being by his bloud like Pelicans younglings, reuiued and raised to life from death, will not yet learne the greatnesse of Gods loue, nor consider how greatly we are bound vnto him, & how much we ought to suffer for his sake, that regarded not his owne life, to saue vs. See li. 2. ca. 4. Sect 4 Whatsoeuer we suffer for him, it is much lesse then hee suffered for vs, so that it is vnpossible for vs euer to come out of his debt.Note. Wee owe our selues wholly for our first making, and what can wee adde more for our redeeming, especially seeing we were not soreasily redee∣med, as we were made? In our Creation Christ gaue vs our selues, in our Redemption he gaue vs himselfe, thereby restoring vs to our selues: Therefore thus giuen at the first, and restored againe when we had lost our selues, wee owe
our selues for our selues; and wee owe our selues twice. But now what shall we repay vn∣to our Lord for himself? thogh we could repay our selues tenne thousand times, what are we in comparison of Christ the Sonne of God? So then, though we had as many liues to spend as drops of bloud to shed, wee could not re∣compence his loue: & how willing then should wee be to say with Peter,Math. 26.35 mar. 14.31 Though I should die with thee, I will in no case denie thee: and withIoh. 11.16 Thomas, Let vs also goe, that we may die with him. The seruant for fortie shillings wil hazard himselfe in his Maisters perils, and fight his quarels; and the dogge, an vnreasonable crea∣ture, by the instinct of nature, for a bone or a crust of bread, will runne vpon the sworde in his Maisters defence, though the daunger bee neuer so desperate. And shall we be more vn∣thankefull than a hireling? and more vnnatu∣rall than a bruit beast? and that towards him that hath beene so boun∣tifull vnto vs? That it is a blessed thing to suffer persecution for Religion or Iustice sake.
Sect. III. THe long and continuall experience of Gods children subscribeth vnto this trueth of the holy scriptures,Actes 14.22 that we must through many afflictions enter into the kingdome of God. This is the Lot of the faithful. So theHebr. 12.2 au∣thor and finisher of our faith, Christ Iesus himself wasMat. 5.48 made perfect. Into hisRom. 8.29 similitude we are likewise predestinate, that we should first2. Tim. 2.12 die with him, and then raigne with him, for2. Tim. 3.12 all that will liue godly in Christ Iesus shall suffer persecution. Let vs not refuse therefore that con∣dition of life, in which we haue the fellowship of all the Saints of God; but let vs remember, that our Maister Christ hath straightly char∣ged vs,Luke 9.23 mar. 8.34 if we will be his Disciples, there is no remedie, we must needes take vp his Crosse dayly, and follow him.Mat. 5.10 Blessed are they (saith our Sauiour Christ) which suffer persecution for righteousnesse sake, for theirs is the kingdome of hea∣uen:11 Blessed shall ye be when menreuile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of euill against you for my sake falslie.22 Reioyce and be glad, for great is your reward in heauen, for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.Luke 6.22 Blessed are ye when men hate you, and when they seperate you and reuile you, and put out your name as euill, for the son of mans sake.23 Reioice ye in that daie, and be glad, for behold, your reward is great in heauen. So saith
Christ, who is the truth it selfe, and cannot lie. And so say the Apostles after him:Iames 1.12 Blessed is the man that endureth temtation (that is, affliction or persecution whereby the Lord trieth him) for when he is tried, he shall receiue the crowne of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that loue him.Iames 5.11. Behold we count them blessed which endure.1. Pet. 3.14. Blessed are ye if ye suffer for righteousnesse sake.1. Pet. 4.14. If ye be railed vpon for the name of Christ, bles∣sed are ye, for the Spirite of God resteth vppon you. Wherfore, if it be a blessed thing to suffer per∣secution, for the name of Christ, and for righ∣teosnesse sake, as no doubt it is, & that a great blessing, yea the greatest of all, to wit, euerla∣sting vnspeakable ioy and felicitie in the king∣dome of heauen, where we shall see God euen face to face in his glory: why then should you faint vnder the Crosse which God hath layde on you? Why do ye not rather reioyce (as the Apostles did) for that you areActes 5.41 counted worthie to suffer for Christs sake. You are brought into the stage of Martyrdome, to fight for the crowne of eternall life. Fight manfully for the crowne of saluation, take courage and patience; it is better to die a thousand deathes, then to be seperated from the Lorde; if youMath. 7.32 confesse Christ boldly before men in earth, Christ will confesse you before his Father which is in hea∣uen; where Christ shall say vnto you, as the man saide vnto his good and faithfull seruant:
Matth. 25.21 Thou hast beene good and faithfull in little, I will make thee ruler ouer much: enter into thy Maisters ioy. Of the benefits that the Crosse or affliction brin∣geth vnto vs. Sect. IIII. WHerefore should we be dismaide? and why should wee feare the brunt of persecutiō, or the waight of the Crosse; seeing wee are so many waies comforted and eased by the same? There isActes 14.22 gal. 6.14. luke 24.26 no way, nor path vnto life, but by the crosse. Oh how glorious is that Crosse, which brin∣geth the bearer of it to so glorious a ende! The Crosse doeth make for theRom. 8.28 psalme 119.71 reuelat. 3.10 good and sal∣uation of the Elect: it maketh vs happie andMatth. 5, 10.11 iam. 5.11. 1. pet. 3.14. 1. pet. 4.14 blessed. And what greater happines can there be, than to bee at conformitie with Christ, which the Crosse1. Pet. 4.13 doeth worke in vs. The Crosse bringethRom. 5.3. iam. 1.2, 3. patience, it1. Pet. 1.7 trieth our faith, itRom. 5.4. confirmeth our hope, it causeth vs toNum. 21.7 nehem. 9.27. psalme 119.71 Esay 26.16. Hose 6.1 ac∣knowledge our sinnes, and to flie vnto God for helpe and comfort. It maketh vs to feel and to know our owne imperfections, frailtie, and miserie, & thereby the necessitie of Gods help, protection, and succour, to supplie our wants. The Crosse to Gods children is a most sure
Prou. 3.11.12 hebt. 12.6 1. pet. 2.19, 20 testimonie of the loue of God: and hee that beares the Crosse, shall haueLuke 6.21 math. 5.4. ioy & comfort at the last; yea he that patiently endureth the crosse, shal receiueIam. 1.12. 2. tim. 2.11. matth. 5.12. reuel 2.10 the crowne which the Lorde hath promised to them that loue him, for vpon him the1. Pet. 4.14 spirit of God resteth. Hee that beareth the Crosse,1. Cor. 11.32 shall not be condemned with the world. By the Crosse weePsal. 119.67 learne what obe∣dience wee owe vnto God. The Crosse doth beget in vs,Psal. 119.71 hatred & contempt of the vani∣ties of this present life: ItActes 14.22 inuiteth and stir∣reth vs vp to the meditatiō of the life to come: It maketh vs to know our enemies, and to per∣ceiue the pestilent venome of Sathans malice against our good and happie state: It causeth vs to looke better to our paths, and toEsay 26.9 amend our liues. The Crosse is theZach. 13.9 furnace, in which God fineth and purifieth his gold: It is the mould into which God casteth his children, to frame them and to make them like theRom. 8.29 I∣mage of his Sonne Iesus Christ. The Crosse is the suite and liuerie that Gods children are clothed withall, in this vale of wo and misery. And lastly, the Crosse is the earnest and be∣ginning of all consolation and glorie. How is it then, that we feare and flie from the Crosse, that is so many waies profitable vnto vs? Let vs be constant and firme, and feare not the blasts of persecution, nor the stormes of affli∣ction; Let vs be like vnto thatMatth. 7.24 wise man,
that builded his house vpon the rocke, which the25 raine and winde could not beate downe, because the foundation thereof was laide sure vpon a rocke. Let not the windes of trial blow downe our building and faith in Christ Iesus, that firme1 Cor. 3.11 foundation & sureMat. 21.40 corner-stone; neither shall it (be ye sure of that) if we haue builded well and rightly as we should. That our afflictions are foreseene and appointed by God; and therefore to be taken in good part. Sect. V IF you would consider three things, you would not maruell so much at your crosse and persecution: first, what you be: not coun∣terfeits, not hypocrites, not worldlings, not the children of satan: but Gods elect, a chosen ge∣neration, and the children of the most high. Secondly, where you be. Not in heauen but vp∣on earth, not at home, but in a strange country Thirdly, amongest whom you are. Euen in the midst among your enemies, asMat. 10.16 luke 10.3 sheepe among the wolues, being assaulted on euery side, on2. Cor. 6.7 the right hād, & on the left. And now, is it maruel, that Gods children, being in a strange cuntrie, and amongst their enemies, shal be persecuted?
No surely, it is not: neither doth this your af∣fliction come by hap hazard (as they say) but by the good prouidence of God, as Christ, and his Apostles by the same spirit foretold, sayingMat. 10.17 Beware of men (saith Christ) for they will deliuer you vp to the councells, and will scourge you in their sinagogues.18 And ye shall be brought to Gouernors and Kings for my sake, in witnesse to them, and to the Gentiles.21 And the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the Father the sonne, and the children shall rise against their parents, and shall cause them to die.22 And ye shal be hated of al men for my name, but he that endureth to the end, he shall be saued.Mat. 16.24 If anie man will follow me, let him forsake himselfe, and take vp his crosse, and follow me.25 For whoso∣euer wil saue his life, shal loose it, and whosoeuer shal loose his life for my sake shall find it.Ioh. 16.20 Ye shall weepe and lament, but the world shal reioice, but your sor∣row shall be turned vnto ioy. It were infinite to cite all places of holy Scripture which might be aleaged for confirmation herof. I wil aleage one place more out of the Reuelation, which is this.Reuel. 2.10 Feare none of those things which thou shalt suffer, behold, it shall come to passe, that the diuel shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shal haue tribulation ten daies be thou faith∣full vnto the death, and I will giue thee the crowne of life. HereHebr. 12.2 the author and finisher of our faith Christ Iesus, euenReuel. 2.8 he that is first and last, which was dead, and is aliue, exhorteth and stirreth vp
his souldiers to be of good courage, and to prepare themselues vnto the spirituall battell: For he saith, Feare not, not only by perswasions (as earthly captains do) but by giuing strength, so that let all the diuells in hell come, when he saith, Feare not, we are safe enoughRom. 8.31 If God be on our side, who can be against vs? What an excellent consolation is this, euen to forewarne vs of dungers to come, and to bid vs shake off all feare? The diuell shall cast some of you into prison, saith he, thereby shewing who is the principall author and factor of persecution, the diuell: to the end we may know, that we haue not to deale withEphes. 6.12. flesh and bloud, but with the prince of Darknesse, wherefore our weapons must be spirituall and not carnal; for although the Magistates do seeme to doe it, yet are they but the diuells instruments: he sets them a worke, he inflameth their hearts, he is the bel∣lows to blow vp their wrath against the poore members of Christ; and therefore, seeing we combate with such a captaine, we must take theEphes. 6.16. shield of Faith; and the17 sword of Gods spirit, or else wee cannot fight long without some grieuous wound. But doth the Lorde giue vs vp altogither into the handes and power of the diuell for our ouerthrow and destruction? No; that ye may be tried saith he. Oh sweete com∣fort! Wee must suffer affliction, not for any harm to vs, but for our great good and singular
commoditie.Iames 1.2 My brethren, count it exceeding ioie, when ye fal into diuers temptations, saith Iames. Why so, a man might say? Peter answereth,1. Pet. 1.7 that the triall of your faith, being much more precious then glde that perisheth (though it be tried with fire) might be found vnto your praise, and honour, and golrie, at the appearing of Iesus Christ. So then we must be cast into the fornace of af∣flictions, to haue the drosse and mixture burnt out, to be fined, and to bee made more pure, cleare, and bright. Is not this a good comfort! Who will not reioice in that which is for his great good? yet howbeit, we see, and feele by experience, that afflictions doe vs good, our fraile nature will hardly endure themHebr. 12.11. long, we waxe soone wearie, and are ready to faint, if we thinke them like to continue long. How long then shall we abide in the firie furnace of afflictions? must we remaine there a thousand or a hundred yeares? euen this time, beeing compared with eternitie, seemeth but a mo∣ment, and indeed is but very short. But must we continue there so long? No; wee shall bee afflicted for the space of tenne, not yeares, nor moneths, nor weekes, but daies, You shal haue tribulation ten daies (saith the Lord.) Sweeter and sweeter! For ten daies (saith he) thereby denotating some short continuance of time. Oh good God! wilt thou that the wicked bee punished in hell fire for euer and euer, and that
not for triall, but for torments; and that thy children suffer, not to torment them, but to try them; not in hell, but in this worlde; not the paines of hell, but a little affliction, for such a short time; no longer than tenne daies?Iob 1.21 Bles∣sed bee the name of the Lord. Oh, how much are we beholden vnto thy gracious and merciful goodnes therfore! The Lord make vs thanke∣full for these comforts. Now seeing the time of our triall is so short, what followeth? shall we be restored againe to our former estate, li∣bertie, and health of bodie? No, What then? The Lord saith, Be thou faithfull vnto the death, and I will giue thee the crowne of life. Sweetest of all!Psalme 8.4 What is man (Lord) that thou art mindfull of him, and the sonne of man, that thou visitest him? Shall wee bee crowned kings to raigne with Christ for euer after such triall? O Blessed shal that triall be, whose end is such a blessing! yet note, that this promise is not absolute, but dependeth vpon a condition. If thou continue faithfull vnto the death. If we fight valiantly vn∣der Christs banner for a while, & then faint, and bee ouercome, what shall it profit vs? If we put our hand to the plough & looke backe, what shall it auaile vs?Luke 9. Such a one is not fit for the kingdome of heauen. But if we will bee con∣querours, wee must perseuere vnto the death. Wee must continue still,Math. 24 Hee that continueth vn∣to the end, he shall be saued, saith Christ. If wee
yeeld vnto the enemie, if wee stoupe to sinne, if we consent to the world, and giue place to the diuell, we are not worthie to be crow∣ned with the crowne of life. That we ought not be dismaied at persecution, forsomuch as our cause is good. Sect. VI. THe equitie of the quarrell honoureth the combate, and the goodnesse of our cause assureth vs of finall victorie. A circum∣spect and wise ship-master, when he goeth to the sea, and launcheth out from the shore, lay∣ing aside the remembraunce of his wife and children, of his house and family, employeth his body and mind, strength and wit, onely to the due performance of his office, in resisting the stormes, in auoyding the daungers, and in directing his shippe to the intended hauen. When we are lanched out of the port of earth∣ly prosperitie, wee must set aside all worldely cares, and display the saile of our soules vppon the maste of the crosse and afflictions; we must betake vs to the tackling of constant profession of the Gospel of Christ, and keepe our hand vpon the sterne of godly and religious con∣uersation; & being seperated from the world, we must lift vp our eies to heauen, and direct
our course by the motions of the starres and Planets, I meane by the examples of Christ, and other the childrē of God: so hauing Christ for our Pilot, and the inspirations of the holy Ghost for our gale, we may safely sail through the stormes of persecution, passe the rockes of alluring occasions, auoide the shipwracke of a good cōscience, ouercom the surges of world∣ly pleasure; and finally, arriue at the hauen of life,The might and malice of our e∣nemies ought not to daunt our courage. and port of perfect felicitie. Our enemies are mightie, their force very great, their van∣tage not vnknowne, their malice experienced, their torments to flesh and bloud intolerable; yet our Captaine hath alwaies conquered, our cause was euer aduanced, and our predeces∣sours with the losse of their liues confounded their aduersaries. Wherefore should we haue lesse hope of victorie, than they had? Wee ga∣ther our flowers of thornes, and of briers we reape our fruite; If the staulke wounde, the flower healeth; if the reaping be troublesome, the fruite will be the more delight some. Wee must not think that the sea is not deep, because the shores be shallow, nor denie heauen to be cleare, because it is sometimes ouercast with cloudes, nor the earth to be fertill, because it is in some places vnfruitfull: so wee must not thinke that the haruest of a good conscience is lost, though it be interrupted with some sor∣rowfull showres. We are Christians, a chosen
generation; wee fight against the worlde and Prince of darkenesse, a strong aduersarie; our quarrell is the defence of Christs Gospell, an honourable cause; our Captaine is Christ Ie∣sus, a victorious champion; our banner is the Crosse, a heauie burden; our armour is pati∣ence, an vnconquerable shield; our battaile persecution, a sharpe skirmish; our victorie death, a bitter potation; and our triumph martyrdome, a comfortable affliction. That their estate is verie dangerous that neuer suffer affliction. Sect. VII. AS it is a blessed thing to suffer persecution or affliction (as isSect. 3 before declared) and a sure token and signe of Gods fauour and loue, according to that,Hebr. 12.6 Whome the Lord lo∣ueth, he chasteneth: So is it a most ruefull scourge of God, and a token of a reprobate soule, to be suffered to enioy continually all sorts of delights, and to haue no crosse to tra∣uerse our comforts, according to that saying, No greater temptatiō than neuer to be temp∣ted:Esay 5.6 I will laie my Vineyard waste, it shall not be cut nor digged, and so shall it waxe wilde, fruitlesse, and full of weedes. The Oxen that
are designed to the slaughter, are suffered to runne and range at their will in pleasaunt pa∣stures; but those that are appoynted to liue, are sent to the plough, yoked, and dayly tired: Euen so are the wicked giuen vp to their own hearts desires, and permitted to walke in their owne counselles.Psal. 81.12 They are not in trouble as o∣ther men, neither are they plagued with other men. ThereforePsal. 73.5 Pride is as a chaine vnto them, and Crueltie couereth them as a garment:6 Their eies stand out for fainesse:7 They haue more than heart can wish. But the faithfull are loaden with la∣bour, wearied with watchings, being daily af∣flicted and persecuted. The Theeues liue in delights, and of other mens spoyle; they wal∣low in wealth & pleasure, till they be brought before the Iudge: so doe the wicked, till the time of their account come: but then shal they be throwne into flouds of fire: for there shall come a iudgement that shall make the wicked to wither, and the faithfull to flourish. Bet∣ter it is to be chasticed with Gods children, than to be spared and pampered with the vas∣sailes of Sathan; better to be cut and pruned with the fruitfull vines, than to be layd waste with that which is wilde, and in the ende, to be quite cutte downe, to make fewell for the fire.When sinners be most miserable. Then are sinners most miserable, when they are left in their sinnes, without correcti∣on. The Oake is of a stately growth, full of
faire leaues, casting a pleasant shadowe; yet the fruite thereof serueth but for swine. The Temples of the Aegyptians are very stately & sumptuous buildings, garnished with varietie of marbles, pleasant portraitures, and curious workes, and al the rowmes adorned and dec∣ked with gorgeous furniture, and great maie∣stie: But if a man goe into their secret chap∣pels, and view the god for whose honour all this is vsed, hee shall finde some vgly viper or crocodile, or some other venomous serpent: So is it with the men of this world, their hou∣ses are costly and glorious; their garments and attires, faire and pretious; their bodies personable and comely: but enter into their inmost roome, and consider what is harbored therein, and you shal find within all this pomp and brauery, a monstrous vgly creature, a sin∣full soule in the state of damnation, drowned in security, and in all vice and wickednes. The fish will merily floate, and turne to and fro, & leape at the baite, and reioyce if hee catch it; when wil the fisher pull his line, and the hooke will fasten in the fishes guils, so that the poore fish is taken:Eccl. 9.12 So are the children of men snared in the euill time, when it falleth vpon the sodaeinelie: then for libertie shall they reape restraint, and for their dainty bits, eternal torments. Wher∣fore God chasteneth his children in this life: and if they cannot bee wonne with easier re∣medies;
medies; when he seeth them runne astray, he holdeth them back with the hard bit of aduer∣sitie, and hedgeth them in with the thornes of tribulation. The vanities of this world cast vs into such a delightsome frenzie, and lull vs so dangerously asleepe, that many in a frantike fit of licentiousnesse, runne headlong to perditi∣on, and while they reioyce, they raue; and ma∣ny in a carelesse and secure kind of life, sleepe themselues to death, like wounded wretches sleeping in their graues; and therefore God scourgeth his children with the rod of tribula∣tion, to temper and stay the raging moodes of the frantike, & to rowse the dead sleepers out of their lethargie▪ See lib. 1. Chap. 5. Sect. 2. That whosoeuer will be ashamed of Christ, Christ will be ashamed of him. Sect. VIII. SVch was the excessiue loue of Christ, thir∣sting for the saluation of mankind, that he hath shewed vs his feete nayled, to attend our comming; his side open, to giue vs ente∣rance; his armes stretched out, ready to em∣brace vs; his head enclined, to affoord vs the kisse of peace; his eies shut, to all our offences;
his eares vnstopped, to heare our petitions; his hands open, to inrich vs with gifts; and a mul∣titude of bleeding wounds, to shew vs how in∣tirely he loued, and how dearely he bought vs. But many, like the stiffe-necked Iews, nothing moued with this his excessiue loue, contemne all his muiting, being, not onely dull and deafe at his calling, but with sauadge and barbarous crueltie with their speares of sin, they wound &Hebr. 6.6 crucify againe to thēselues the son of God, as much as in them lieth. Many are ashamed to confesse Christ and his Gospel in the pre∣sence of his enemies, and before them that haue authority & beare the sway in this world; little regarding, or rather contemning the threatnings of Christ.Matth. 7.32 Whosoeuer shall confesse me before men, him will I confesse also before my Fa∣ther which is in heauen.33 marke 8 28 luke 9.26 luke 12.8 But whoseuer shall denie me before men, him will I also denie before my father which is in heauen: and that of the Apostles2. Tim. 2.12 if we denie him, he will denie vs. O let vs consider this, and be not afraid to confesse Christ bold∣ly, though it be with the danger of our libertie, or life it selfe. For Christ will render venge∣ance to them that hated his Gospel, they shall know whose word and trueth it was, which they haue so dispitefully reproched & denied.Psalme 11. Vpon the wicked shall he raine snares, fire, and brimstone, and stormie tempest, this is the portion of heir cup. But you that can find in your hearts
to suffer persecution for the testifying of Christ and his truth; it is a2. Thess. 1.5 sure token of the righteous iudgement of God, that you may be counted worthy of the kingdome of God, for the which ye also suffer.6 For it is a righteous thing with God, to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you:7 and to you which are troubled, rest with vs, when the Lord Iesus shall shew himselfe from heauen with his mightie Angel:8 In flaming fire rendring vengeance to them that do not know God, and which obey not vnto the Gospel of our Lord Iesus Christ,9 which shall be punished with euerlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glorie of his power. Heauen is like vn∣to a2 Esdr. 7.6 cittie builded and set vpon a brode field, full of all good things.7 The entrance thereof is narrow, and in a daungerous place to fall, and there is fire at the right hand, and a deepe water at the left.8 And there is but one path betwixt them, euen betwixt the fire and the water, so that there could but one man go there.9 If this cittie were giuen vnto a man for an inheritance, if he neuer went thorough the pe∣rill before it, how could he receiue his inheritance? Wherfore, seeing the way isMatth. 7.14 narrow and strait, that is, full of troubles and affliction, that leadeth into heauen, that most ioyfull and pleasant citie of euerlasting life: let vs not stag∣ger or looke backe, but goe forwards through thicke and thinne, yea, euen through death it selfe; for it is he that leadeth vs to our iour∣neyes end, it is Death that brings vs to the gate
of euerlasting life. Let vs not be afraide then to die; blessed is that death that leadeth to so ioyfull a end. That worldlie pleasure, wealth, &c. should not with∣draw vs from the confession of the truth. Sect. IX. Obiection. Alas! am I so foolish as to forgoe so many goodly manors, such faire liuings, such costly treasures, vpon a conceit onely, or an opinion touching Religion! How can I away with the losse of these pleasures which I may enioy for a long time, euen at my hearts ease? What? Shall I cast my selfe wilfully away? I obtained of late an honourable Office, and enioyed the same for a short time: hitherto I haue got little or nothing by it; now the profit commeth in, and shal I leaue that so soone which I haue gotten so hardly? Oh precious iewells and rich pearles!
haue I enioyed you but for such a short time, and now must I leaue you, and know not who shall possesse you! No, no, I cannot do it, I may not, I meane not. Answere. SAtan suggesteth these worldly toyes into your mind, to the end you should consent vnto him (who enuieth your happie e∣state, and would faine haue you wrapped in the same condemnation with himselfe) and fal down & worship not the Lord, but theReuel. 12.3 dra∣gon, the old serpent the diuell, that greatReuel. 13.1 beast and his image, & so commit fornication with theReuel. 17.3 whore of Babilon, togither with the kings of the earth, with theReuel. 9.3 Locusts and other false Prophets, that you should reioice and be plea∣sant with her, and bee drunken with the wine of her fornication. Shal worldlyEccl. 1.2 vanitie cause you to forgoe your euerlasting habitation?Mar. 8.36 What shall it profite a man though he should win the whole world, and loose his soule? Remember that1. Iohn 2.17 this world passeth away, and the lust thereof: and thatEccl. 2.1 to take pleasure in pleasant things is va∣nitie. In the Ocean sea, of foure ships not one doth miscarrie; and in the sea of this world, of many foures not one is saued. This worlde is theIohn 14.30 iohn 16.11 kingdom of Satan, what seruant of god cā
haue any pleasure and delight to liue in Satans kingdome? It is a place of banishment; can a∣ny bee so vnnaturall and so senselesse, as not willingly to forsake banishment? Is it better to hang alwaies in hazard, then once to fall for felicitie? We are promised, that here we shall be persecuted andMatth. 10.22 hated of the world; that wee shallIohn 16.20. weepe and liue in33 sorrowe, that wee shall be despised, contemned, and scor∣ned; that wee shall be vexed in bodie & soule: But in the next life, we are assured that our re∣ward is great, our ioy without sorrow, & our comfort without Crosse: But if wee sowe in sinne, what can we looke to reape but miserie? If vanities will be our traffique, griefe will bee our gaine; If we will haue our life to bee dele∣ctable, our decease will be damnable: whereas on the contrarie side, the children of God sow in teares, and therefore shall they reape in ioy; in earth they haue paine, and in heauen pay∣ment; their life is miserable, and theirPsalm 116 15 death precious in the sight of the Lord. They looke on the world, and see it like a sea, where ma∣ny trusting to the waues, are drowned, some are beaten with the billowes against the stonie rockes; others laboring to attain to the shores, some by the helpe of a seely planke, some by some fragment of a broken ship, many forced to saue themselues by their onely hands; and many ouercome with the surges, haue yeelded
vp the ghost; and a multitude of dead carcas∣ses left to the waters rage: Amongst others, they see thēselues tired out, not with the sma∣lest stormes, and their hold to bee very fickle: and therefore what greater comfort can there befall them, then to be quickly landed in a safe port, where beholding vnder them, the perils escaped, they may the more reioyce at their at∣tained securitie! They looke on the poore, and their life is lead in such agonie, contempt, and needines, that it maketh euery one to loathe it. They behold the rich, their felicity is folly, and their ioy vanitie. They consider the Po∣tentates of the world, and they are poore in their riches, abiect in their honours, and dis∣contented in their delights; and therefore they hsten to their repose, and swiftly runne ouer the cares of this life.Wherefore God bstweth tem∣porall blessings vpon vs. Againe, you must vnder∣stand, that God bestowed your riches, digni∣tie, and office (which you imagine to be such a precious thing) yea and your life also, vppon you, as loue-tokens; to giue you a taste of his Loue towards you, and to winne your loue towards him again. Now doth God try your loue, whether you set more by his tokens, or by himselfe. If for your tokens, that is, your li∣uings, dignities, and lifes sake, you will for∣sake the Lord, and follow the world and Sa∣than; then wil God cast you off, and giue you your inheritance with Sathan, among the chil∣dren
of vnbeleefe. For what is your loue but a whorish loue? whereas on the contrarie side, if you goe on manfully, and feare not to con∣fesse Christ, (which is not a vaine conceit or opinion touching Religion; but a full and assu∣red perswasion of the truth of Christs Gospel, that hee is the Son of God who came to saue sinners) then for these earthly and corruptible drosse, you shall receiue heauenly and vncor∣ruptible treasures: for gold you shall haue glo∣rie, for earthly mannors, heauenly mansions, for siluer that perisheth, solace without end; for rusty riches roiall robes, mirth without me sure: pleasure without paine, and endlesse ioy which shall neuer be taken from you. See lib. 1 Cap 4. Sect. 3.4. & 5. Conscience in religion must not be dissembled. Sect. X. Obiection. I will keepe my conscience, faith, and reli∣gion close vnto my selfe; I will inward∣ly and priuately worshippe God in spi∣rit and truth: and outwardly I will bee no open medler, nor transgressour of
common order; so shall I be suffered to liue peaceably: At least I will doe so for awhile, vntill these stormes of per∣secution cease & be ouerpast: Now the way is foule, I cannot trauell. These stormes shall haue an end, weeping may abide at euening,Psalme 30.5 but ioy com∣meth in the morning; and then I will shew my selfe, and be zealous and for∣ward in my profession. Answere. O abhominable deuise! O palpable blind∣nesse! you are called in question for your conscience,Conscience in religion not to be dissembled. to render a1. Pet. 3.15 reason of your faith, and to confesse Christ; and how can you bee a keeper and an obseruer of the common order? Peraduenture you will say, I will denie Christ with my tong, and confesse him with my heart. But that will not serue the turne: IfDan. 3.18 Shadrach, Meshac, and Abednego had done so, and followed your wicked de∣uise, Nabuchad-nezzar had not28 confessed the power of God. A man must not1. King. 18.21 halt be∣tweene God and Baal; for God abhorreth two men in one. Christ wil not part the spoile with his mortall enemie the Diuell, either hee will haue all, or loose all. Hee will not permit you
to serue the Diuell with your bodie, and hee stand contented with your heart & soule: But hee will be glorified both in your bodies and in your soules. Our bodies1. Cor. 6.13 15, 20 are for the Lorde, and we mustMatth. 22.37 loue him with all our hart, with all our soule, and with all our minde. God created, not onely the soule of man, but also the bodie, and requireth the seruice and obe∣dience of both: hee will not onely looke vpon the soule, but will also beholde the qualities and the actions of the bodie. Hee made all, he hath bought all, he hath1 Pet 1.19 dearely paid for all; and therefore good reason it is, that hee1. Cor. 6.20 re∣quire all. Hee will haue both heart and hand, minde and tongue, bodie and soule: therefore stand to it stoutly, and feare not, the victorie is yours alreadie, if you faint not. And for that the stormes are great, & the way foule, let not that moue you. For all the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, had as stormie a weather and as foule a way as you haue. Yea Christ himselfe had no better, but much more rough and fou∣ler. I hope you will looke for no better then they had. Wherefore goe after your Maister Christ, not sticking at the foule way and stor∣mie weather.Eccl. 11.4 He that obserueth the winde, shall not sovv (saith Salomon) and he that regardeth the clouds shall not reape. Surely Sathan sugge∣steth vnto you, that you should stay till the stormes be ouer-past, not for your good, not
that you should not be wet to the skinne, but that the time might ouerslip you, to your de∣struction; for then the night will approach, that you cannot trauell, or the gates will bee shut vp and locked before you come, that so you might lodge without, in a wretched and loathsome lodging; take heed you yeelde not vnto these deuillish motiōs, beware of Satans subtilties, & giue no eare to his entisemēts. Ha∣nibal whē he had obtained the victory at Can∣nas; If he had gone strait to Rome, by all mens iudgements he had taken the cittie. But forso∣much as he did defer it vntill the next day, the Romanes hauing recouered their force again, he was shut out and deserued to heare this op∣probrie.Vincere scis Hanibal, vti victoria nescis. In matters of faith there must be no delayes. * O Hanibal, thou knowest how to get the victory, but yet thou hast not learned how to vse the same. If delaies be thus dangerous in ciuil affaires, then how much more dangerous are they in matters that concern our saluation? Wee must not dally with repentance; we must not contemne the callings of God: We must not despise the voyce of Wisedome, lest when weProuerbs 1.28 call vpon her she shall not answere, and seeke her earely,Hebr. 12.17 we can not find her. Esau shall seeke Re∣pentance, yea, euen with teares, but shall not find Repentance, no not though his hart break: Iudas shall repent his treacherie,Matth. 27.3 but shall not find the comfortable face of Repentance, no not though heMatth. 27.5 actes 1.18 hang himselfe: and therefore
it is not good to procrastinate and prolong the time, lest weEphes. 4 30 grieue the holy spirit of Iesus, but let vs boldly conesse his name:Psalme 95.78 To daie if ye will heare his voice, harden not your heart. Against the offence taken from the yeelding of time∣seruers, though they be better learned and wiser then we bee. Sect. XI. Obiection. You see many good and learned men, farre better learned then I am: they recant and yeeld vnto the time, and they know well enough what they doe; if it were such a daungerous thing to turne, I per∣swade my selfe, they would neuer doe it: what neede I be more scrupulous then they? Especially seeing I am not compa∣rable to them, either for knowledge, or experience.
Answere. NOw indeed, while the wind of persecu∣tion is stirring, the Winower commeth with his fanne in his hand, to see who is blowne away like light chaffe, and who resi∣steth the blast, like massie and good wheat. That which lieth hidde in the greene blade of corn, is displayed in the ripe eare; that which is concealed in the flower is vttered in the fruit. Many beleeuers are deemed equall, whome persecution proueth of vnequall faith,The constancie of the faithfull is tried by persecu∣tion. triall sheweth what was hid in the blade, and what concealed in the flower:Matth. 7.20 matth. 12.33 by their fruite you shall know them, saith our Sauiour. Many floures promise abundance of fruit, but when they are put to their proofe by stormes of winde, very few perseuere to their full growth; so many seeme faithfull in the calme of the Church, but when the blasts of triall do bluster against them, few are found to bring forth fruite. The skill of the Pilote is not knowne vntill the tempest ariseth, neither the Captaines co∣rage till the warre beginneth, nor the true pro∣festors of the Gospel till the persecuter rageth. Persecution is the shovel which purgeth the Lords floore, fanning the confused heape of Beleeuers and Infidels, and seuering the corne of the faithfull professors, from the chaffe of faithles deniers. This is the water, at which
our heauenlyIudg. 7.5 Gideon trieth, who are fit soul∣diers to discomfit the hoast of Midian, and he seuereth those which shall bowe downe their knees, for greedines and thirst of worldly va∣nities, from such as reach with their hand, so much onely as their necessitie requireth; of whome7 the Lord saide, By these three hundred men that lapped will I saue you. Those learned men (whome you speake of) are these greedy guttes, and thoseIudg. 7.3 Knowledge with∣out Faith and Constancie in practise, how vaine it is. timorous souldiers, whose harts fainted, they are blinded by the malice of Sa∣tan, destitute of the spirite of God, and true knowledge. The knowledge they boast of, is ignorance, the learning they pretend them∣selues to haue, is madnesse, and the Religion whereof they seemed to make so much profes∣sion, was but hypocrisie; and therefore their wisedome is like2. Sam. 11.14 Vriahs letters which he caried against himself: for it leaues them with∣out excuse, and witnesseth against rheir owne soules, because they knew theirLuke 12.47 Masters wil, and did it not. Follow you not their steps, and treade not in their paths, lest you be ouerta∣ken and beaten vvith many stripes. You are one of them (though vnlearned, if you will be con∣stant) of whom Christ reioyced, thanking his Father, saying,Matth. 11.25 Father, Lord of heauen and earth, I thanke thee that thou hast hid these things from the wise, and men of vnderstanding, and hast reuea∣led them to babes; euen so Father, because it pleased
thee. Looke not what this man or that man doth, but looke still, and behold the marke you shoote at, or else you loose your game. He which runneth at the gleue, looketh not on the standers by, he goeth not this way or that way, but keeping his straight course, beholdeth the gleue, and looketh on them that runne af∣ter him, that they ouertake him not, and haste∣neth to ouerrake them which be before him. So must we do, we must leaue looking on them that will not run with vs, the race to heauenly blisse, by the path of persecution; but we must march on forwards, and hasten after our fel∣low-souldiours, still looking on the gieue, that is,Hebr. 12.2 Iesus Christ, the author and finisher of our faith, who for the ioy that was set before him, indu∣red the Crosse and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. Care not for the furie of the persecutors, despise the rage of the persecuting Priestes, the Ministers of the Diuell; and call to mind, that it is the part of christians to be persecuted, but to persecute the Christians, it is the very office of Pi∣late and Caiphas. That though the vvorld condemne vs for fooles and too nice, yet vve must not take the start of profession.
Sect. XII. Obiection. The ignorant doe condemne vs, they think it folly to stand so much vppon pointes and termes, and to make so great ac∣count of gall: many muse at our mad∣nes, that most willingly feed on Samsons honny-comb, when it is taken out of the Lions mouth; they wonder at our nice∣nesse, and precize scrupulositie, that we refuse to doe like other men, whome they say to be as good as wee. Answer. WE must not regard the Sardoicall laughters, or rauing scoffes of the wicked; a sensuall manRom. 8.5 vnder∣standeth not the things that be of God. One that knoweth not the vertue of herbes, when he walketh in the fields or vallies, without any regarde, treadeth vnderfoote whatsoeuer groweth in his waye, making no more ac∣compt of one hearbe then of an other. But if hee come into a Phisitians house, where he seeth many, not onely wholesome hearbes.
but to his thinking, strong and vnsauourie weeds, hee neuerthelesse conceiueth that there is some secret vertue in them, to cure diseases: and if he see the experience of their operatiō, much more accounteth hee of them; so that whereas before hee trampled with contempt vpon them, now hee would bee as carefull to gather them: So one that knoweth not the vertue, ioy, and honour of the crosse, of chains and prisons for the testimonie of a good con∣science, despiseth and abhorreth them as con∣temptible and dishonourable things, & laugh∣eth at such as embrace them: But if hee come once to the schoole of our heauenly Phisiti∣on,Psalme 34.8 and taste how sweet the Lord is, and there see and view the straunge operation of these things, (which now so much he contemneth) not onely in Christ himselfe, but in Iohn Bap∣tist, in Paul, and others; then can he not chuse but haue them in great estimation, and be rea∣dy, if occasion serue, to try the force of them in his owne selfe, if need require, howsoeuer the ignorant iudge of them as vnprofitable & vn∣sauorie weeds, and badges of disgrace. Wee know, or may know, that the flower of Iesse gaue forth his most pleasant sent, and came to his full growth in this world vpon the Crosse. Wee know that the fruit of life was not gathe∣red without thornes, and wee know that gall was giuen in extremitie to the most experien∣ced
and perfect taster, and that the honny∣combe was not eaten till after his resurrecti∣on, when it was in a maner, fetched out of the Lions mouth, whom he had by his death vi∣ctoriously foiled. If two keies were offered vs, the one of gold set with Diamonds, rubies, and pearle, curiously wrought, and hanged by a chaine of great price; the other of olde rustie Iron, vnhandsome, and shapelesse to beholde, tied in a rotten coard; & yet this the true keie to infinite treasure, and the other to a sinke of despaire; which of these two keies were in rea∣son to be desired? This rustie keie is affliction and persecution: the golden keye is worldely prosperitie: by the keyActes 14.22 of trouble and afflicti∣on wee enter into heauen: and this other key, is theReuelat. 9.1 key of the bottomelesse pit: for many haue gold and siluer in abundance, and yet are reprobates and wicked cast-awaies. Christ allotted to his children, the crosse, to the re∣pentant theefe, Paradise; to the sinner, heliwe are the children of God; let vs embrace the crosse; let vs acknowledge our profession, and not be ashamed of our inheritaunce, which Christ hath allotted vnto vs. We must say with Paul,Galat. 6.14 The world is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the worlde. See Sect. I.
That imprisonment for the testimonie of a good conscience, is not thraldome or bon∣dage, but rather libertie and freedome. Sect. XIII. Obiection Oh, but the Prison is fulsome and loath∣some, libertie is sweet & pleasant. Who can abide to be pestered with such close aire? Who can endure to sitte in the stockes both day and night in a darke dungeon all alone, without ease or rest? eating the bread of affliction, and drin∣king the cup of care and sorrow? to sit stil moping al day long without either light or fire? Answere. THe birds beeing vsed and naturally de∣lighted with the full scope of the ayre, though they be neuer so well fed in the cage, yet are they alwaies poring at euery cre∣uise or crannie, to see whether they can get forth and escape; for they vnderstand not, that
in the cage, they are safer from the kite, hawke, and fowler, then abroad: neither marke they the benefit of their assured repaire from harde weather and woorse food. So many, bearing the liuerie of Christs name, doe affect dange∣rous libertie, making no account of the benefit of a prison in a good cause; they consider not how many perils of their soules are cut off by imprisonment; nor perceiue how highly their spirituall well-fare is aduanced. Let vs not be like senselesse birds, but let vs rather immitate them in another propertie, which is, that in the cage, they not only sing their narural note, both sweetlier and oftner then abroad, but learne also diuers other far more pleasant and delightsome. So must wee both keepe & oft∣ner practise our accustomed exercises of Reli∣gion, and besides, learne other more, both for our owne comfort, and the example of others. When may we better giue our selues to praier and meditation, then when we are sequestred from the distractions of vain companie; when theExod. 16.3. num. 11.14 onyons, garlike, and flesh-pots of Aegypt, are farthest out of our sent and sight; When our eies be not troubled with impious and wicked sights; when our eares are not annoy∣ed with the bloudie outcries & horrible blas∣phemies of prophane men; when we are quit from many scandals, and seuered from occa∣sions of diuers temptations? If the Prison re∣straine
vs of temporall comforts, we shall ob∣taine eternall: if our bodie bee chastised, our soule is cherished; the pining of the one, (in this case) is the pampering of the other.The world a more dangerous and loathsome bondage vnto the children of God, than the prison. If wee compare the world with this prison, wee shall finde rather that wee are deliuered out, then committed into prison. The darkenesse of the world blindeth and inueagleth the very hearts of men; this doeth blinde but our eies onely: The chaines and shackles of the worlde doe fetter and entangle our soules; these, our bo∣dies onely, they sette our soules at libertie. Worldly stockes and snares doe captiuate the conscience; these our bodie onely. The odour and stench that the world breatheth, is ribal∣drie, carnalitie, blasphemie, and all kinde of brutish behauiour, which infecteth and poiso∣neth the minde: this our bodie onely. The world hath infinit multitudes of prisoners and guiltie persons, which shall be2. Cor. 5.10 rom. 14.10 iudged before the tribunall seate of Christ Iesus, and receiue the sentence of condemnation: but wee are translated from that prison into a place of pre∣seruation, which if it be cumbred with darke∣nesse, wee haue Christ the true light to enligh∣ten vs: and if heere we be affrighted with ex∣pectation of Iudges, our selues hereafter shall1. Cor. 6.2 iudge the Nations. Let them complain of the difficulties of the prison, that haue fastened their affections vpon worldly vanities: Let
them complaine of darkenesse, whose light is the world; & let them complaine of bondage, whose death it is to be restrained from world∣ly plesure. But theGalat. 6.14 world is crucified vnto vs, and we vnto the world; Our darknesse is clee∣rer than the light of the worlde, and brighter than the sunne it selfe; and wee are at libertie in the spirit, to serue our Redeemer in trueth and righteousnesse. Kings courts must yeelde to the glorie of a prison: For as the Princes presence honoureth the basest cottage, & ma∣keth it more esteemed and resorted vnto, than the most stately buildings: So the presence of Gods prisoners in the most infamous dungeō, maketh it a stately Court, a resort of Angels, and a Paradice where God himself delighteth to walke (who taketh pleasure in the patience and constancie of his afflicted seruants:) and they by those fetters & chaines are more rich∣ly adorned, than they coulde bee with any princely or imperiall robes. It was a singular fauour to be an Apostle, an Euangelist, it was a great prerogatiue to bee rapt into the third heauen, to heare such things as are vnlawfull for man to speake, and it was a rare priuiledge to speake with strange tongues, and to heale al manner of diseases: yet not like vnto these: He was whipped with many stripes, cast into pri∣son, and stoned for the testimonie of Christ: Insomuch, that the apostle, for the former pre∣rogatiues,
had the2. Cor. 12.7. Angell of Sathan sent to buffet him, lest hee should waxe proude with the multitude of reuelations: But for those ex∣cellent priuiledges he breaketh out in excee∣ding ioy, sayingGalat. 6.14 God forbid that I should reioice but in the Crosse of Iesus Christ, whereby the worlde is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the world: as did the other Apostles, whoActes 5.41 reioiced that they were counted worthie to suffer rebuke fot Christs name. Great Princes and Noblemen, when from inserior dignities they are enhaun∣ced to more honorable titles, they alwaies in their letters, omitting the other, set downe their principall stile, proper to their newe at∣chieued preferment: Euen so did the Apostle Paul, for hee writing vnto Philemon, omitteth his vsuall stile ofRom. 1.1 1. cor. 1.1 2. cor. 1.1. &c. Paul the Apostle (or seruaunt) of Iesus Christ, and beginneth his Epistle withPhilem. verse 1. Paul a prisoner of Iesus Christ, as being a more glorious title, & a more excellent stile. Wher∣fore, let vs not be dismaied, but comforted in our present estate. If wee bee despised by the bad, we are honoured by the good; if men dis∣grace vs, the Lorde will praise vs. Now let the worldely gallants flatter themselues with the vaine conceit of libertie, let them tri∣umph in their chaines of gold, in their iewells of pearle and precious stones, in their stately robes and costly attires. Let them boast of their freedome, when euery threed and orna∣ment
about them is a manifest signe of their captiuitie, when their tongues are thral to po∣tentates eares, their actions and behauiour framed to the liking of great personages eies, and their sense, bodies, and mindes, seruile to their owne sensualitie. As for vs, a thousand times hapie are we, whose prisons are proofes, whose chaines are pledges of immortalitie. Let vs remember the gole, and we shal comforta∣bly runne ouer the race. Let vs not regard so much where we are, as where we shall be; nor thinke so much of the comforts we want, as of the comforts we shall haue. Let vs not grieue at the company from which wee are barred, but reioyce in that wherevnto we are prepared. That increase of torments should not feare vs, but rather comfort vs the more. Sect. XIIII. Obiection. Oh my affliction dayly increaseth, I was roughly dealt withall heretofore, and hardly intreated: But now my sorrowes encrease, my aduersaries rage the
more, my Keepers doe me all the spite and iniurie they can: foode is kept from me, saue onely what I am permitted to haue, to keepe breath in me, for my greater torment: I am kept in a close dungeon, loaden with more yron then I can beare. Answere. IF a thou be faint in the day of aduersitie, thy strength is small, saith Solomon. As long as the lion hath his prey in his pawes, he can dally and play with it, but if he see any offer of escaping from him, then forthwith he fixeth his clawes in the flesh: So the diuell little ca∣reth, to bite or barke at those, that be his hou∣shold seruants, vntill such time as they begin to waxe strangers vnto him, and the more he seeth them to rebell against him, the more endeuoureth he to ouerthrow them; for such he little careth to molest, of whom he findeth himselfe in quiet possession.Exod. 14.9 Pharao neuer persecuted the Israelites so fiercely, as when they were going out of Aegypt.Genesis 31.23 Laban neuer pursued Iacob, till he departed from him Ho∣lofornes said vnto Iudith,Iudith 11.1 I neuer hurt any that would serue Nabuchodonozor the king of all the earth. The Pirates, while they know the ship to
be emptie, they let it quietly passe, but when it is furnished with rich marchandise, then they assault it with all violence: so, while men run by an irreligious and vngodly path the high-way to destruction, the diuell letteth not their course; but when they are inriched with grace, and leade an holy & harmlesse life, he straight giueth the onset with tribulation. The Thiefe commeth not into sties and kennells to seeke his prey, for he knoweth there is nothing to be found but mire and filth: but his haunt is to the rich chests and coffers of iewels and plate. They that haue nothing in them but sin and wickednesse, lie open alwaies vnto Satan, and he knoweth they haue nothing in them worth the robbing: But those that cleanse their soules from sinne, and fill their coffers with the iew∣ells of godlinesse and vertue, are a prey that he longeth to get. He well knoweth that such as are out of Gods fauour, may be wonne with∣out strokes, and that he is able with euery push to lay them groueling in what sinne himselfe listeth: But when he findeth one, endowed with grace, and armed with godlines against his encounters, vpon him he commeth with sad blowes, and by all sleights and violence endeuoureth to ouercome him. A paper-wll he breaketh with one knocke, but when he findeth a strong rampier or bulwarke, there he planteth his batterie, and vseth all possible en∣gins
to ouerthrowe it: But alas his force is but feeble, his engins too weake, and his po∣licie very shallow, to batter downe the Ada∣mant rocke of Faith, and therefore he doth but spurne against a thorne. Onely let vs be faithfull and of a good courage, for our Cap∣taine is faithfull, (he1. Cor. 10.13 will not suffer vs to be tempted aboue that we be able to beare it) and couragious, he hath conquered death, hell, and satan for vs already: if wee will not faint nor turne backe, he will also conquer them in vs. Let not the violence or multitude of tor∣ments affright vs, we haue but one life, and we can loose but one.1. Sam. 17.49. Goliah was as much hurt by Dauids little stone, asIudg 16.30 Samson by the weight of a whole house:1. Sam. 4.18 Eli had as much harme by falling backward, as2. King. 9.33 Iesabel by being thrown out of a high window; and they that stonedActes 7.59.60. Stephen to death, tooke no more from him, then an ordinarie sicknesse did fromIohn 11.14 Lazarus, and doth daily from vs all. One death is no more death then another, and as well the easiest as the hardest taketh our life from vs. And indeed our torments (how great and grieuous soeuer) can not be so great, nor so grieuous as those which the Saintes of God in former ages suffered. Of the fathers of the old Testament the Apostle saith, that someHebr. 11.35 were racked;36 and others tried by mockings and scornings, by bonds and imprisonmnt:37 They were
stoned, hewne a sunder, tempted, slain with the sword; they wandred vp and downe in sheepe skins and goat∣skinnes, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented.38 Whom the world was not worthie of: they wandred in Wildernesses and mountaines, and dens, and eues of the earth. And in the time of the Primitiue Church the godly were thrust out of their houses, spoiled of their patrimony,The affl ctions and persecution of the Christians in the Primitiue church. loaded with yrons, and locked in prisons, deuoured by wild beasts, slaine with the sword, and burned with fire. There can hardely be inuented any cru∣eltie, or new torments, which these holy Mar∣tyrs haue not endured. They were beheaded, burned, hanged, pressed to death, rosted on spits, broiled vpon gridyrons, boyled in hot oyle and in scalding lead, throwne downe from high mountaines vpon sharp stakes, torne with wild horses, rent a sunder with the vio∣lence of bowed trees, throwne to the beasts, condemned to toyle in the mettall-mines, thrust through with speares, brained, racked, prickt with pen-kniues, their eies boared out, their tongues cut, their armes, handes, their legges and feete, and al their members disfi∣gured with varietie of punishments, their bow∣ells dismembred, and themselues famished to death. Yet they feared no death, they were dis∣maide at no crueltie;The Patience and Constanie of the Christians. the tormented stoode stronger then the tormentors, and their beaten and torne members, ouercame the beating and
tearing hookes: and what is it that we suffer, if it be compared with their sufferings? Euen nothing, or very little. And why should we feare man, that are feared of the Angells, for we shall iudge the verie Angells, that are fea∣red of the diuells; for ouer the diuells we haue receiued authority, yea that are feared of the whole world, for we shall iudge the world? Let vs therefore, with our whole might, arme vs vnto this cumbate: the Persecutors when they wound vs most, are deepliest wounded; & when they thinke most of al to be conquerors, then are they most conquered; for we shall walk vpon the Basiliske and adder, and stampe vnderfoote the lion and the dragon. See lib. 2. Chap. 3 Sect. 3. That God loueth vs neuer the lesse though he suffer vs to taste of his cup; but rather that he doth the more loue vs. Sect. XV. Obiection. The Lord permitteth others to liue at ease in prosperitie, they haue the world at will, they want not the comforts of this
life, and yet it is certaine that God lo∣ueth them as his owne children, (being so indeede) and that with no lesse affe∣ction, than he doth them whom he scour¦geth with aduersitie: alas! I would, if it had pleased the Lord, so that he would spare me for this time; specially conside∣ring how vnfit euery way I am for the triall. Ansvvere. WEe are euer prone to prie into the state and condition of other men, (such is the peruersenesse of our nature, and the weaknesse of our faith) that wee wholly forget or neglect our owne. Wee iudge euery mans case euer better than ours, and suppose that all others haue the worlde at will (as they say) sauing our selues: Whereas indeed, there is no child of God, that is always without his crosse (either inward or outward) for how else coulde that saying of Christ bee verified,Iohn 16.20. In the vvorld you shall haue sorrovv: howbeit the temptation of one is greater and heauier than of another? As it can of no rea∣sonable man be construed but in good part, to binde and keepe in awe, yea to whip and beat the mad-man, when hee falleth into his rage, likewise to pinch, nip, & wring, yea with hote
irons to burne the sicke of the lethargie, when hee entreth into his deepe sleepe: So it cannot be thought, but that God doeth the parte of a mercifull father, when with the scourges and hote irons of affliction, hee either correcteth our former, or preuenteth our future infirmi∣ties. Not euery one that spareth, is our friend, nor euery one that striketh, is our foe.Prouerbs 27.6 The wounds of a louer are faithfull. Hee that bindeth the Franticke, or wakeneth the sicke of the le∣thargy, thogh to both troublesome, yet to both is he very friendly. As a mother desirous to af∣fectionate her child to her selfe aboue al other, maketh all of her houshold to vse it currishly in shew, that finding no good entreatie of any but of her, it may the willinger repaire vnto her: So God suffereth vs of the world, the flesh, and the diuell, to be molested, that we may onely acknowledge him, and come vnto him, as our chiefe refuge and succour. The di∣uell kisseth where he meaneth to hurt, he tem∣pereth poison in a golden bole, and in a sump∣tuous ship, wafteth his passengers vpon the rockes of destruction. But God taketh a con∣trary course; for as the husbandman doth lop the vine, lest all the force should vnprofitably be spent in leaues, and the roote be thereby weakened, the fruite be, neither so much, nor so pleasant, as otherwise it would so God like a carefull keeper of our soules, lest our whole
mind should be imploied in vaine superfluous pleasures, he cutteth them from vs, that our wittes which should in them without profit be defused, being kept within compasse by trou∣bles, may be fitter to worke and bring forth fruites of faith to the working of our eternall saluation. Where God purposeth to heale, he spareth not to launce, he ministreth bitter sit∣tops to purge corrupt humors; and sends em∣bassies of death and reuenge where he mea∣neth to bestow eternall life and perfect felicity.Gen. 42.9 Ioseph accused his brothers as spies, when he meant them least harme, and restrained littleGen 44.15 Beniamin as guiltie of theft, whom he knew ful wel to be a guiltlesse innocent. He that had seeneGen. 39.20 Ioseph in prison.Hester 5.14 Mordecai with his gibbet before his eies, andDan. 6.16 Daniel in the lions den, would haue lamented their case and fea∣red their further misfortune: But had hee knowne that Iosephs prison should end in aGen. 41.40. princedome, Mordecai his perill inHester 6.10 royall preferment; and Daniels danger inDan. 6.26 great cre∣dite, he would rather haue thought them much beholding to God for their ensuing felicitie, then greatly to be pittied for their present di∣stresse. The Lorde oftentimes besetteth his sweete fruite with rugged leaues, with sharp and pricking thornes, that the hardnesse to at∣taine them, may make them the more prized, and the remembraunce of former aduersitie,
may make the comforts following more de∣lightsome. The benefite of a calme weather is most desired, and best welcome after a boiste∣rous tempest; health is neuer so much esteemed as after a great sicknesse; and al pleasure is most plesant to those that haue bin least acquainted with it, and most troubled with the contrarie.Prouerbs 27.7 Vnto the hungrie soule euerie bitter thing is sweete, saith Solomon. Greeue not at your persecuti∣on then, and say not, I am vnfit for the triall: for if the Potter tempereth his furnace agree∣able to his vessell, that he mindeth to frame: If the Gold-smith vseth great care, not to haue his fire too great or too little, for the quantitie of his mettal. If the Carrier haue a regard not to loade his beast with more then it is able to beare: How much more warie is God, in not suffering vs to be tempted aboue our strength? But if our temptations encrease, he is faithful, and1. Cor. 10.13 will not suffer vs to be tempted aboue that we be able, but will euen giue the issue with the temptation, that we may be able to beare it. That burning aliue is not so extreame a torment as commonly it is thought to be.
Sect. XVI. Obiection. The bitternesse of the punishments, that I am enioined to suffer, doth so terri∣fyme, that I know not scarce what to doe, I shall be burned quicke. Oh, how shl I be tormented, in that dolorous kind of death! Thinke you that I may patiently beare the rage of the fire? I am perswaded that my paines shall bee so grieuous, that I cannot either keepe my minde quiet and patient, or remem∣ber and thinke on Christ, so that in that anguish and agome, I shall quite forget my Sauiour: And what shall become of me then? How can I resist the tempta∣tions of Sathan? who then (no doubt) will be very busie about me. Answere. CIcero, an heathen Philosopher, saith, that in India, when any man was dead, and his carcasse readie to bee burned; his wines (for there they had many wiues) con∣tended
among themselues, who should bee burned with him. And shee whom hee loued best, hauing vanquished the rest, was cast quick into the fire with the bodie of her dead hus∣band, and burnt; the other being full of sor∣row, for that they were ouercome, departed with great moan and lamentation, wishing ra∣ther to haue beene burnt, then to liue. And shal we be afraide of burning, seeing we are certain of that which they hoped for? Die once you must, whether you will or no, (how soone, God knoweth) seeing then you must die, will you not die willingly for Gods sake, especially considering that they are thrice happie, whom God vouchsafeth such an honourable death? Shall not wee for Gods sake suffer that which diuers Pagans suffered for their countries sake? Curtius feared not to die for the city of Rome, Mencotheus for Thebes, nor Codrus for A∣thens. These heathnish examples might make Christians ashamed, if they be so cowardly as to feare death. Burning is not such a grieuous punishment as you imagine, for God is1. Cor. 10.13 faith∣full, he will lay vpon vs no more than wee can beare.Esay 43.1 Feare not (saith the Lord by Esay the Prophet) for I haue redeemed thee, I haue called thee by thy name, thou art mine:2 when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the flouds, that they doe not ouerflow thee. When thou walkest through the very fire, thou shalt not be
burnt, neither shall the flame kindle vpon thee (for thy destruction)3 I am the Lord thy God. And for the better confirmation hereof, many ex∣amples both ancient and late might be allead∣ged, onely I will content my selfe with one or two, which happened in these latter yeeres, in the time of king Henry the eight, and Queene Marie. M. Iames Bainham, holy Martyr,Actes and Mon. part 2. page 939 of the last editi∣on. Col. 2 ha∣uing sentence to bee burned, for the constant confession of Christ Iesus and his Gospell, as he was at the stake (in the yeere of our Lorde, 1532) in the midst of the flaming fire, his arms and legs beeing halfe consumed, spake these words: O ye Papists, behold, ye look for mi∣racles, and heere now yee may see a miracle, for in this fire I feele no more paine, than if I were in a bed of dowlne; but it is to mee a bed of roses. In like manner, in the time of Queen Marie, M. Thomas Hawkes,Actes and Mon. pag. 1446. Col, 26 a faithfull seruant of Christ and holy Martyr also, hauing iudge∣ment to be burned for the same cause: At what time he should be burnt, some of his familiar friends, being terrified and feared with the sharpenesse of the punishment that he was go∣ing to, priuily desired, that in the middest of the flame, hee would shewe them some token (if hee could) whereby they might bee more certain, whether the pain of such burning wer so great, that a man might not therein keep his minde quiet and patient: which thing he pro∣mised
them to doe, and so secretly it was a∣greed, that if the rage of the paine were tolera∣ble, and might be suffered, then hee should lift vp his hands aboue his head towards heauen, before he gaue vp the ghost. Now then, when he was at the stake, and the fire set vnto him; In which when hee continued long, and when his speech was taken away by violence of the flame, his skinne also drawne together, & his fingers consumed with the fire, so that now al men thought certainly he had bene gone, sud∣dainly, and contrarie to all expectation, the blessed seruant of God,A token giuen in the fire, that burning is not so intolerable a paine as men commonly thinke. being mindfull of his promise before made, reached vp his handes burning on a light fire (which was maruellous to behold) ouer his head to the liuing God, and with great reioycing (as seemed) strooke or clapped them three times togither. At the sight wherof there followed such applause and outcrie of the people, and especially of them which vnderstood the matter, as the like hath not commonly beene heard. And so the bles∣sed Martyr of Christ straightway sinking into the fire, gaue vp his spirit, in the yeare 1555. Iune. 10 By these examples, among a thousand which might be alleadged, you see that bur∣ning is not such extreame paine, as you tooke it, and so must we thinke of all other worldly torments what∣soeuer.
That the patience of the Saintes in not Stoicall Indoencie. Sect. XVII. Obiection. Me thinkes by your allowance of the for∣mer of these two examples you allea∣ged, that you allow of stoical indolencie; for you seeme vnto me to require uch cheerefulnesse of vs, as should take away all sense and feeling of griefe and bit∣ternesse: I doe not thinke indeede, that any of the Stoikes themselues, (no not the seuerest Censurer among them) were so deuoyde of affections, as they would haue other men to be. Answere. WHat the Stoikes held, or how they were affected, it skilleth not vs to know. I alleaged the example of M. Iames Bainham, to this end, to set forth the loue, mercie, and faithfulnesse of God towards his children; for one while he deliuereth them out of trouble, an otherwhile he letteth them taste of Christs cup, yet he standeth at their
elbow (as it were) to comfort them, and toIude verse 9 rebuke satan; who now especially, tooth and naile, seeketh by all meanes possible, to de∣uoure the poore innocent Members of Christ, who through many afflictions, do labour ve∣ry earnestly, to enter into the kingdome of heauen. But whether they doe suffer or not, the Lord is euer1. Cor. 10.13 faithfull towards them that loue him, and turneth all things to theRom. 8.28 best vnto them. I vtterly dislike & condemne that blockish conceit, that would haue men to be without all affection; howbeit of late it hath beene newly furbished, by certaine vpstarte Stoikes.Affection doth rule all our acti∣ons. For Pleasure and Griefe doe rule our actions, & there is no man, but either affecteth or eschueth things for the one or the other. In the sea, if the winds blow not, the shippes are constrained to lie still, being not able to stirre from the place where they are: So our nature, if all affections cease, cannot, nor shal not bee able to turne either to the right hand, or to the left, no more than if we were in a palsie, which takes away the vse of our whole body. Wher∣forePlato in Phile∣bo. Plato called them the sinews and strings of the minde: giuing vs to vnderstand, that as the bodie is moued and guided by the sense, so is the minde mooued and ruled by affecti∣on: andPlut in Tract. de virt. moral. Plutarch saith, they are the handles of Philosophy, for men would neuer loue it, if they had not some sparkes (as it were) of some
shame, desire, reputation, ambition, pleasure, or sorrow, which stirre them vp therevnto. I know they obiect that these affections are the causes why wee fall into diuers vices;Obiection. If there were no loue, there would be no louers. But these men doe as they did, who mainteined,Answere. that wee neuer ought to ride post, for that some haue catched falls thereby; or that wee must not sing, because somtime we fall into discord. Must wee cut off the leg, because it halteth? so, must we take away all affections of nature, bicause they allure vs vnto vice? Nay, rather if we feele our affections ouer-strong and forci∣ble, we must keepe them vnder, that they trou∣ble vs not, tempering them with reason, and not clearely extinguishing the same. But to come neerer to the matter, and our purpose: To beare the crosse patiently, is not to bee al∣together senselesse,What it is pati∣ently to beare the crosse. & vtterly bereft of all kind of feeling; seeing our Sauiour himselfe, not in words onely, but with his own example al∣so, vtterly condemned this Stoicall indolen∣cie. For heIohn 11.33 groaned and35 wept, both at his owne, and other mens calamities, and taught his Disciples to doe the like,Iohn 16.20. Verily, verily, I say vnto you, that you shall weepe and lament. And lest any man should blame them for weeping, hee pronounceth them happie;Matth. 4 Blessed are they that mourne, andLuke 6.22 weepe. And no maruell, for if teares be misliked, what shall wee thinke of
the Lord himselfe, who oftentimes wept? If al feare proceedeth of vnbeleefe, what shall wee iudge of that horrour wherewith Christ him∣selfe was stricken? If wee mislike all sorrowe and sadnesse, how can wee like of that, where the Lord confesseth that hisMatth. 26.38 soule is heauie to the death? Thus I speake, to the intent I might reuoke godly mindes from desperation, lest they cease to seeke after patience, because they cannot vtterly shake off the naturall motions of heauinesse and sorrow; which must needes happen to them, which of patience doe make a kinde of senselessenesse, and of a valiant and constant man, a senselesse blocke, or stone, without passions. The scripture doeth praise the Saints for their patience, while they are so afflicted with the sharpnesse of persecution, as that thereby their courage is not vtterly quai∣led, nor themselues faint & comfortles, but fil∣led with spirituall ioy. We must labor to tame & bring vnder, al the ill motions of our minds to the ordinance of the Lords holy will, and not vtterly to quench and shake them off. That wee must not be dismaide though friendes for∣sake vs: And how wee must not yeeld to their vngodly suggestions.
Sect. XVIII. Obiection. My familiar acquaintance haue quite for∣saken me, and they who heretofore de∣lighted in my companie, haue now con∣ueighed themselues from mee. My friends are very earnest with me, both day and night to relent, and to reuoke my former confession: I am very loath to displease them in any thing, rather I will indaunger my selfe, than anger thē. And surely if I should persist and hold out (no doubt) I shoulde bring my Fa∣thers hoare head with sorrowe to the graue, and that before his time, hee would take the matter so grieuously. Answere. IT is the propertie of the diuell and his in∣struments, to feede like storkes vpon the ve∣nomous and euill affections of men: they onely take pleasure to see vs in sinne; but if we amend and betake our selues to some better course, then they reioyce at our calamities.
As rauens and vultures, straight smell out a dead carrion, when it is corrupted, and draw vnto it, by the vnsauorie stench, wherein their delight is, but the sound bodies, they neither sent nor seeke out: so the wicked are ready to flocke about vs, so long as we are in the stench of sinne, and corrupted with vice, because they themselues delight therein. But if we be sound and whole, and haue cast from vs that carrion whereof they are so eager, they neither smel vs, nor seeke vnto vs, but rather auoid and hate vs. The sauour of godlinesse striketh them dead; and though in the winter when the vine is bare they could lie vnder it, yet in the spring when it beginneth to flower, they like serpents are striken dead with the sent thereof, and there∣fore what maruell is it if they mortally hate it? As for your friends, who (you say) labour to haue you reuoke your former confession: an∣swere them as Christ answered Peter in the like case.Matth. 16.23 Get thee behind me Satan: Thou art an offence vnto me, because thou vnderstandest not the things that are of God, but the things that are of men: for herein they are your foes. Now the Lord hath opened your eies, and enlightned your heart, that you might know the trueth: and wil you against your owne conscience denie the knowne truth? Ah, do it not, lest thereby you displease God, and fall into his hands, which is horrible to Hypocrites.Matth. 10.33 luke 12.9 Whosoeuer (saieth
Christ) shall denie me before men, him will I also de∣nie before my father which is in heauen.Mar. 8.38. luke▪ 9.26. Whoso∣euer shall be ashamed of me and of my words, among this adulterous and sinfull generation, of him shal the sonne of man be ashamed also, when he commeth in the glorie of his father with the holie Angells. Forget not these things, but consider of them. If your friends will be displeased and angrie at your constancie in the trueth, remember that Christ said,Matth. 10.34 luke 12.51 thinke not that I am come to send peace into the earth, I came not to send peace, but the sworde;Matth. 10.35 luke 12.53 For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law: where∣fore it is no maruell if you be at oddes with your friends and kinsfolkes. You say, you may not displease your father, you loue him so well. But Christ saith,Matth. 10.3 He that loueth father or mother better then me, is not worthie of me.Luke 14.26 If any man come vnto me and hate not his owne father and mo∣ther, &c. he cannot be my Disciple. We must not for the loue of Parents or friends denie or dis∣semble the trueth of Christs Gospel: forHebr. 6.4 it is impossible that they which were once enlightned, and haue tasted of the heauenly gift, and were made par∣takers of the holy Ghost:5 and haue tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come:6 If they fall away should be renued againe by repen∣tance, seeing they crucifie Christ againe to themselues, and make a mocke of him.Hebr. 10.26 For if we fall willingly
after that we haue once receiued and acknowledged that truth, there remaineth no sacrifice for sinnes;27 But a fearefull looking for iudgement, and violent fire which shall deuoure the aduersaries.2. Pet. 2.21 It had bin better for them (saith Peter) not to haue acknow∣ledged the way of righteousnesse, then after they haue acknowldged it, to turne from the holie Commaunde∣ment giuen vnto them. Wherefore in any case thinke vppon your selfe, and sticke not boldly to confesse Christ, at al times, and in al places; for2. Tim. 2.12 If we denie him, he wil denie vs. That the pretence of nourishing wife and children, (though they haue no other meanes to liue) is no cause why we should denie or dissemble the knowne truth. Sect. XIX. Obiection. Alas! I grant all these things to be true: yet it is commonly saide, Necessitie hath no law, my state and affaires are such, that I must either vndo my selfe and mine, or else I must needes straine, yea and doe quite against my knowledge and conscience. For you shal vnderstand
that I haue many children at home, small God wot, suckling infants, a lame, impotent, aged and sickely wife beside. We are a great number, very poore and beggarly, hauing no manner of thing wherewith to preserue our liues, but onely what I get and win by my dayly la∣bour. Now if I leaue them they must needes starue for lacke of foode, they cannot goe to begge (if that were law∣full) nor stirre from the house, such is their infirmute and weaknesse. Alas sir, what shall I doe in this case? For God and Nature committed the charge and care of them into my handes. Answere. YOur estate is lamentable, and grieuous I must needs confesse, yet no other then very often happeneth to a godly man, the childe of God. Of you and such like spake our Sauiour Christ in the Gospell, when hee prophecied (among other thinges) of the de∣struction of Ierusalem, and of the ende of the world, calling you great bellied and trauelling women, and women that giue sucke to young infants, saying (lamenting and not cursing)
Luke 21.23 mat. 24.19. mar. 13.17 VVe be to them that be with childe, and to them that giue sucke in those daies: thereby meaning all persons, (men and women) that (their ne∣cessarie affaires so letting and hindering them) cannot confesse Christ boldly if need require; nor flie from the infection, of the poisoned and pestiferous plague of Antichrists abhominati∣ons. Yet step vnder the veile of Gods worde, there you shall finde comfort, and be resolued what to doe in this case. There you shall find, that if you looke for the life to come, and the blessed resurrection, you must in any case free∣ly and boldly confesse Christ and his Gospell, whatsoeuer shall betide you. But what shall I doe to my wife and children (say you?) These and all other your cares you must commit to God, and trust in him,1. Pet. 5.7 Cast all your care vpon him (saith the Apostle) for he careth for you. The good c shepheards,1 Luke 2.8 assoone as the Angels tolde them, that Christ was born at Bethleem, strait being filled with spirituall ioy,16 went to see and visit him. They demanded not, who shall keepe the wolfe from the sheepe in the meane while? they reasoned not of it, but committed their sheepe and al other things vnto his graci∣ous tuition, whose commandement and will they obeyd. Do you so likewise, take example of these good shepheards; aske not, what shall become of my wife & children? commit them, and al other things vnto Gods mercifull pro∣tection,
and he will care for them; and prouide for them in the time of dearth. It is commonly seene, that when all humane & worldly com∣fortfaileth, in the greatest extremitie, when the danger is at the highest, then vnto his chil∣dren, after his accustomed mercy putteth he to his helping hand, and deliuereth the partie from danger. Innumerable examples hereof haue we in the holy scriptures. In what extre∣mities were theGen. 31. & 32 Patriarkes very often? and especiallyGen. 39.20 Ioseph? and how often were theyGen. 31. & 32. gen. 41.40 deliuered? in what danger wasExo. 2.14.15. Moses when he was faine to flie away for his life? and yet how he wasExod. 3.10 restored againe, in what straites were theExod. 14.9 people of Israel, beeing com∣passed on euery side, on the one side with the maine hoste of their enemies, and on the other side with the maine sea, so that they had no∣thing to looke for, but present death, either by drowning, or else by the sworde of Pharao? and yet in this extremitie, they wereExod. 14.30 deliue∣red. And afterwards, when they were in greatIudg. 2.14 miserie, how wonderfully did God deliuer them, by the hands of the Iudges?Iudg. 3.9. Othniel,Iudg. 3.15. Ehud,Iudg. 3.31 Shamgar,Iudg. 4.4 Deborah,Iudg. 6.14 Gideon,Iudg. 11.6 Iphtah,Iudg. 16.30. Samson and others? What shall I speak of the deliuerie of1. Sam. 18.11 1. sam. 19.11 Dauid in his extream persecutions? And of the Prophets,2. King. 1.9.11 Elijah,Ierem. 37.17 ierem. 38.10, 11, 12, 13. Ieremie,Dan 6.16 dan. 14.29, 31 Daniel,1. King. 22.27 Micaiah,Iona. 2.10 Ionah, and others, whome the Lord mightily deliuered
from extreame miseries? O but (you will say) these were of the olde Testament. What? is not God the same God still? is hee a change∣ling? is not he as good vnto the people of the new Testament also? Reade the Acts of the A∣postles, and you shall see that hee is as good, and the same God stil. Who deliuered theActes 5.19 A∣postles out of prison, but he? Who deliueredActes 12.8 Peter the same night (miraculously by the ministerie of an Angell) that Herod had ap∣pointed to slay him? Who turned the hearts of theAct. 16.35, 39 Magistrates, when they came to Paul and Silas, requesting them to depart in peace, after they had scourged them, and laide them in the inner prison fast by the heeles in the stockes? Who deliueredActes 23.24 Paul frō the hands of the Iewes, when they had sworne that they would neither eate nor drinke, vntill they had slaine him? Verily God, and none else; It fol∣loweth then that you put your whole trust & confidence in his mercie, and he will deliuer you. That the Lorde will not faile his children in these daies, no more then he did in times past, in the olde Testament, and in the time of the primitiue Church.
Sect. XX. Obiection. Ʋerely I beleeue these things, & acknow∣ledge them to be true. Yet they are spe∣ciall miracles, which god wrought for the deliuerie of those ancient Fathers and Apostles in the beginning & infan∣cie of the Church, whenas the Gentiles and Nations were to be conuerted vnto the Christian Religion, which miracls are now ceased; So that my case remai∣neth the same it was before. Answere. SVrely this is not true that you say, for euen since the Apostles time, God shewed his power in the deliuery of his seruants from the hands of their enemies, as may bee seene in the Tripartite and Ecclesiasticall Histories of Eusebius, Zozomenus, Socrates, & others. And touching our times, there is no doubt but that God worketh and faileth not his seruants at any time, when need requireth, forsomuch as the Prophet Dauid saith,Psal. 102.25. Thou (Lord) hast aforetime laide the foundation of the earth, and the heauens are the workes of thine hands.26 They shall perish, but thou shalt endure: euen they all shall wax olde as doeth a garment, as a vesture shalt thou chaunge them, and they shall bee chaunged.
27 But thou art the same, and thy yeares shall not faile. Wherfore, what the reason is, that wee see not in these days so many miracles, I know not; whether it be, that our sight is not so clear, or that wee haue not such faith as they had, whom God deliuered in times past: or that (as you said) after the time that God published his doctrine, so many miracles do not appeare, or whether there be any other reason, god know∣eth: yet you know that the Lorde wanteth no power to deliuer his people, no more at this present, then he did in times past: & you know also, that all things come to passe by the proui∣dence and fore-appointment of God; and that God turnes al things to theRom. 8.28 best for his elect. Wherfore repose your whole trust in God, & cast all your cares vpon him, as the1. Pet. 5.7 Scripture biddeth you, & he wil not fail, neither you nor yours in the time of need, onely confesse him boldly, serue him onely, and loue him heartily. That we should not be afraid at the faces, behauior, and maiestie of mortall men. Sect. XXI Obiection. But alas sir, Our aduersaries beare such a maiestie in their manners, and such gra∣uitie
in their words; they are so terri∣ble and cruell in their dealings, with such sterne countenances, and bigge lookes: they vse such reprochfull, scorn∣full, and slaunderous wordes, that they face me down quite, as though my cause were not good, or I guiltie of some hei∣nous crime. And further, I am afraide I shall not be able to aunswere them in such points as they will examine mee, not that I mistrust the goodnes or truth of my quarrell, but because, I fear me, they shall dash mee altogether out of countenance. Answere: THe red-hote iron being put into the wa∣ter, maketh a great noise, and seemeth to doe the water great harme, whereas in the end we finde the fire thereof quenched, the force of burning lost, the heate abated, and the water little or nothing woorse. Like this bubling is our aduersaries triumph ouer vs; for though they face vs downe, though they in∣sult against vs, yea though they imbrue their bloudie fists in our bleeding woundes, and make, to the eie, a great shew of victorie, yet
when it commeth to the proofe, God wil shew by a ruefull experience, that all the noise that they make, is but a sound of their owne quen∣ching, fall and ruine: and our estate not hurt, but bettered by their seueritie.Math. 10.28 luke 12.4 Feare not them which kill the bodie (saith Christ) but are not able kill the soule, but rather feare him, which is able to destroy both bodie and soule in hell. So then let Sa∣than fume, let hell roare, let the worlde rage, and all worldlings fret neuer so much, yet, be yee sure, no man can take vs out of our hea∣uenly Fathers hands, for he is greater than al:Iohn 16.33 In the world you shall haue affliction (saieth our Sauiour) be of good comfort, I haue ouercome the world. When the persecutors imprison our bo∣dies, they serour soules at libertie with God; when they throw vs down headlong, they lift vs vp; when they persecute vs, wee flourish; when they tread vs downe, we grow vp; when they despise vs, wee profit; when they hurt vs, we ouercome; when they seem to conquer vs, then are we most constant; and when they kil vs, thē they bring vs into euerlasting life, from earth into heauen, from labour to rest, from temptations to quietnesse, from tormentes to delights, from worldly laughters to a crowne of glorie.The nature of true religion is to encrease by persecution. Here may wee behold the force and nature of the Christian religion, which beyond all naturall course, and aboue all the reach of mans vnderstāding, increaseth by that means,
by which all other things are suppressed, wee haue no other way to roote out sinne & wic∣kednesse,Violence of Tor∣ments the onely means to suppres impietie and wic∣kednesse. and all kinde of impietie, no meanes to abolish lewd behauior & disorder amongst men, but onely violence of torments & cruell punishments: for the feare of seuere chastise∣ment maketh men to bridle their vntamed af∣fections, and if any be executed for great e∣normities, his sin dieth with him, and seldome leaueth hee any posteritie, that by his death is not rather dismaide nor encouraged to follow his euill example. But in this quarrell of our faith it hapneth quite contrarie: for as a good slip beeing grafted in a sower tree, bringeth foorth neuerthelesse sweete fruite agreeable to his owne kinde; and the sap of the same roote, which in the crab is sower and bitter, in the apple of the slip is most pleasant and delight∣some, and though it be loathsome in the one, it allureth in the other:The contrary ef∣fects of Punish∣ment in the God∣ly and Wicked. So happeneth it to Gods Saintes, beeing put in the Persecutours handes. For their odious and intollerable crueltie, whē it is practised vpon malefactors, breedeth terror, and feare, and horror for the wicked fruites, for which they are punished: Yet in the faithfull and Religious, the same bitter torments being practised vpon them, are the meanes working in them by a true faith in Christ, to worke the pleasant and goodly fruits of their saluation; not onely most acceptable
vnto God, but able to allure mens hearts to taste of the same. Concerning that you say, you are affraide you shall not bee able to answere your aduersaries: Feare not, onely set God al∣waies before your eies, and let your whole care and study be how to please him, for he shall giue you suchLuke 21.15. wisedome, that the ene∣mies shal wonder at, and euen be ashamed & confounded. Consider how Moses behaued himselfe before Pharao king of Aegypt, in his glorious maiestie and power; he, hauing the Lord alwaies before the eies of his faith, spake boldly through the might of Gods spirit wor∣king in him, to the great terrour and astonish∣ment of the terrihle and cruel enemies. Wher∣fore study not what you shall answere, but speake boldly that that God shal put into your mind. Consider what Christ saith;Matth. 10.18 ye shall be brought to the gouernours and kings for my sake, in witnesse to them and to the Gentiles.19 luke 22.11 But when they deliuer you vp, take no thought how, or what ye shall speake: for it shall be giuen you in that houre what you shall saie.Matth. 10.20 marke 13.11 For it is not ye which speake, but the spirit of your father which is in you.Luke 21.15 I will giue you a mouth and vvisedom, vvhere-against all your aduersaries shall not be able to speake or resist. Rest vpon this promise of the sonne of God, he is faithfull, and will not breake promise.
Comforts against the dulnesse of spirit, and vnfit∣nesse to suffer. Sect. XXII. Obiection. Yet I would very fain that it might please God to deliuer me, by some good meanes or other, out of my Persecutors hands: For me thinkes, I am out of heart, and doe not feele the comfort of the spirit as I was wont heretofore. I am euen as it were a blocke, and if I were enforced at this instant to suffer triall, (as surely my time is very short) I think I shuld be very vnwilling to endure it, as a beare to go to the stake. Alas! how shall I suf∣fer the rage of the fierie flames, and the terrours of death, being thus lumpish, and heauie, and quite destitute of all spi∣rituall comfort! Answere. CErtainely God loues you neuer the lesse, though you presently suffer for Christs cause, than if he should deliuer you. In all ages God vseth his elect after the manner,
which seemed best vnto his secret & vnsearch∣able wisedome: Some he deliuered, others he suffered to taste of Christes cup; who not∣withstanding were as deare vnto him, as they whom he deliuered: Yea verily, it seemeth that he better loueth, and doth more for them that suffer, then for the rest; for he standeth by them being tormented, hee strengthneth them in faith, and maketh them perfect; when as hee doth but giue vnto such as he deliuereth some longer respite, and leaueth them in daunger to fall in the like perill againe. But you say, you feele not the comfort of the spirit as you did heretofore. Let not this terrifie you, nor make you affraid, for commonly it happeneth thus vnto Gods children. Certainly Dauid was in a grieuous case, when he cried,Psal. 119.81 My soule fain∣teth for thy saluation:82 Mine eies faile for thy pro∣mise: vvhen vvilt thou comfort me?83 for I am like a bottle in the smoke; and when he cried so often,Psal. 119.25, 107.154 Quicken me according to thy vvord:88.159 Quicken me according to thy louing kindnesse:149 Quicken me ac∣cording to thy iudgement. And Dauid (you know) was the child of God, and receiued comfort a∣gaine. This also may be notably seene in the late example ofActs and Mon. pag. 1555. Col. 2. of the last edition M. Robert Glouer Martyr, in the time of Queen Marie, who after he was condemned by the Bishop, and was now at a point to be deliuered out of this world, it so happened that two or three daies before, his
heart being lumpish and desolate of all spiritu∣all consolation, felt in himselfe no aptnesse nor willingnesse, but rather a heauinesse and dul∣nesse of spirit, full of much discomfort, to beare the bitter crosse of Martyrdome ready now to to be laid vpon him. Wherevpon the fearing in himselfe lest the Lord had vtterly withdrawne his wonted fauour from him, made his mone to some friend of his, signifying vnto him how earnestly he had praied day and night vnto the Lord, & yet could receiue no motion or sense of any comfort from him. Then his said friend comforted him with Gods promises,The Lord for a time may with∣draw his com∣fort, but at length he visiteth againe his seruants. assuring him in the truth thereof that he should receiue comfort, when the Lord saw his due time: and therefore desired him, whensoeuer any such feeling of Gods heauenly mercies, should be∣gin to touch his hart, that then he would shew some signification thereof, whereby he might witnesse with him the same; and so departed from him. Now the next day, when the time came of his Martyrdome, as he was going to the place, and was now come to the sight of the stake, although all the night before praying for strēgth & corage, he could feel none, so dēly he was so mightily replenished with gods holy comfort and heauenly ioyes, that he cried out clapping his hands to his said frind, & saying in these words; He is come, he is come, &c. and that with such ioy and alacritie, as one seeming ra∣ther
to be risen from some deadly daunger, to libertie of life, then as one passing out of the world by any pains of death. So hee died, be∣ing burnt for the testimonie of Iesus Christ, in the yeare 1555. Septemb. 20. And this exam∣ple most excellently declareth, how shrewdly a childe of God may be humbled and shaken, but neuer finally forsaken. ForIohn 13.1 whom the Lord loueth, he loueth vnto the end.Iohn 6.37 Him that commeth vnto me (saith Christ) I cast not away. Where∣fore be patient, and comfort your selfe, for thePsalme 23 Lord wil not absent himselfe for euer.Psal. 27.14 Hope in the Lord, be strong, and hee shall comforte thine heart, and trust in the Lord; saieth Dauid. No doubt, Dauid could tell what the children of God must doe in this case, himselfe beeing so often plunged in this pit. The sunne doth not alwaies shine vnto vs, for it is often couered with mistie and darke cloudes, yea and euery day it setteth, and doth (as it were) take his leaue from vs as though it came no more. Yet we see those cloudes vanish away in time, and the cheerefull rising of the sunne followeth his heauie setting. The sap of the tree doeth not alwaies ascend to make it greene and flourish∣ing; but sometimes it descendeth, yet it is not quite gone, but hideth it selfe in the roote for a time, and afterwards it returneth againe. So fareth it with vs, we doe not alwaies feele the comfort of Gods Spirit, which bringeth the
sweet sappe of spiritual ioyes vnto our soules, but sometimes it withdraweth it selfe from vs for a time; then doe the blustering stormes of temptation shake off our leaues; yet neuerthe∣lesse, the foundation of our hope standeth fast, our saluation is rooted in Christ, the Spirit is not quite gone (though it leaueth vs to our selues for a time) but will returne againe, and make vs greene and flourishing. The Mother after shee hath felt her childe once to mooue, doth alwaies hope the best, though euer it mooue not, and when weakly it stirreth, shee hopeth that it shall haue greater strength in due time. So must wee, if wee haue once felt and tasted of the sweet ioyes of the Spirit; let vs euer hope the best, and if we earnestly desire the same againe in more aboundance; let vs be sure the spirit stirreth in vs, and that in due time it will shewe it selfe in his full strength, euen to the saluation of our soules. Wherefore the children of God be sometimes dull. You shall vnderstand also, that if the chil∣dren of God did neuer fall, if wee hadde a liuely apprehension of spirituall comfortes al∣waies, then would we not make such account, and esteem so much of the sweet power of the spirit, as now we doe; yea peraduenture wee would imagine that it were naturally ingraf∣ted in vs, which is powred by meere grace; neither would we be so much thankefull for it vnto God, as now wee bee. Wherefore the
Lord for a while withdraweth his spirite from vs, that it may bee the better welcome, and sweeter when it commeth. Therefore sticke to it constantly, for it cannot bee but that the Lord will at the last satisfie your desire, with plentie of consolation, seeing your cause is so iust and true.Phil. 1.6 And I am perswaded of this same thing, that he that hath begunne this good worke in you, will performe it vntill the day of Iesus Christ.Rom. 11.29 For the gifts and calling of God are without re∣pentance. After winter commeth summer: after a foule day commeth a faire.Psal. 30.5 VVeping may a∣bide at euening, but ioy commeth in the morning. What a great dignitie Martyrdome is: and how we should not thinke our selues vnworthie to suffer for Christs sake. Sect. XXIII. Obiection. The Lords name be blessed for al his com∣forts; Now I am fully resolued willing∣ly to suffer the extreamitie of such tor∣ments, as my persecutors shall impose vpon me, bee they neuer so cruell and bloudie. Yet me thinkes, I am not wor∣thie
to suffer for Christ, and the veri∣tie of his Gospell, to lay down my life in so good a quarrell; considering mine owne wickednesse, how I haue beene a great offender of Gods Maiestie, a wic∣ked transgresser of his most holy and iust lawes. Yea there is neuer a branch of his commandemēts, but I haue most wilfully violated, and daily infringed. Alas! I tremble to thinke of my former life, which before man was vniust, and in the sight of God vngodly. This is it that now troubles my conscience. I can hardly bee perswaded that the Lorde will vouchsafe such notorious sinners as I am, so great dignitie, as to suffer for his name; considering that the Apostles (which were holy and harmeles men) greatly reioyced for this honour, for that they were counted worthie to suf∣fer any thing for Christ.Actes 5.41 And shall I thinke my self worthie of the prehemi∣nence which was giuen vnto them?
Answere. SVrely there is no greater preheminence in Gods Church, then to bee a Martyr, nor more renowmed dignitie, than to die for the profession of true Religion. It is the noblest act of magnanimitie, seeing death is the har∣dest thing that nature cā ouercome; The prin∣cipallest act of obedience, seeing it is so highly commended in Christ, whoPhil. 2.8 became obedient to the death, euen the death of the Crosse. And the profitablest act (of all that may be wrought by our meanes) vnto the Church of God, whose glorious course is fitly expressed in the Silke-worme,The Martyres compared to the Silke-worme. which first eating it selfe out of a little seede, groweth to be a small worm, afterward when by feeding a certaine time, vppon fresh and greene hearbes, being waxed of a greater size, it eateth it selfe out of the other coate a∣gaine into a case of silke: which when it hath once finished, in the end casting the seede, for many young to breed of, and leauing the silke for mans ornament, dieth all white and win∣ged in shape of a flying thing. So the Martyrs first breake out of the dead sleepe of originall sinne, by repentance and faith in Christ; by feeding on the Sacraments & leaues of Gods word, they grow to more ripenesse, casting off the coate of worldly vanities & earthly cares, and are cloathed with the silke of religion and sinceritie of life, in which worke, perseuering
to the ende, euen then when persecution is greatest, they finally (if neede require) shedde their bloud, as seed for new off-spring to arise of, and leaue the silke of their godly and ver∣tuous examples, as an ornament and mirrour for the Church, & so departReuel. 7.14. out of great tri∣bulation, hauing made their long robes white in the bloud of the lambe, beeing winged with the innocencie of their hands, cleannesse of their hearts; by a liuely faith in Christ, they flie andPsalme 15.1 Sanguine fun∣data est Ecclesia, sanguine creuit. ascend into the Lordes tabernacle, where they rest vpon his holy mountaine. Wherefore, though the ripe fruite of the Church be gathered, yet their bloud engendereth new supplie, for it in∣creaseth the more, when the destruction and rooting out thereof is violently procured. It is like the bush that burned, and was not con∣sumed. It is found by experience, that who∣soeuer suffer (though hee suffer for his offence) is pittied, and vnnaturall miserie (though de∣serued) cannot but breed remorse and tender∣nesse in the beholders. But now, when such mē as be innocent in their conuersation, vertuous in their liues, learned and graue personages, (or sober and godly youthes, vertuous & ho∣nest Matrons) shall with comfort offer them∣selues to extremitie, reioice when they are tor∣mented, goe to death as they would goe to a banquet, haue compassion vpon their perse∣cutors and executioners, and sing Psalmes in
very flames; when such as neither want digni∣ties to withdraw them, nor friends and family to pul them back; nor cruel enemies to afffright them; shall be ready to change their dignitie with disgrace, to forsake their friends, and giue themselues into the hands of their mor∣tall enemies, onely for the testimonie of a good conscience in the defence of the truth; men must needs thinke:The Sufferings of the Saintes breed Remorse & work conuersion in the Beholders. This is a thing worthie to be knowne, and some vertue that deserueth deep consideration, for which a man is content to suffer death. They want no means to search out the truth, hauing both read and heard what can be said on either side: They want not wit and iudgement, to discerne the good from the bad, being persons knowne to be of deepe insight & discretion: They cleaue to the word of God only, and embrace the same, making it the onely touchstone of truth, and the rule of their conscience: They haue no pleasure in paines, nor any temporall allurement to moue them to vndergo so great miserie. Yea, they haue many delights, honors, & promotions, to withdraw them from it. Surely, therefore it is that they find it necessarie to do this, and that their saluation lieth vppon it, or else flesh and bloud could neuer digest these so heauy cala∣mities; for otherwise for altering opinion, or speaking a word, they might easily auoide it. So then, this is the comfort of them that suffer;
That their death is the meanes to raise many from death;The vertue and efficacie of Mar∣tyrdome. and their patience maketh euery one inquisitiue of their religion, and desirous to know what quarrell they maintaine, and vpon what grounds; then whē they know the truth, by and by they imbrace it, though it be with the losse of their lands, liberty, and liues.No man ought to thinke himself vnworthy to suf∣fer for Christs sake. Now to come nearer to your temptation; no doubt (being a grieuous sinner) you are vnworthy, yea farre vnworthy to yeeld your life in such an honourable cause. What then? you are re∣quired to yeeld a reason of your faith; wil you play the Hypocrite and dissemble the same? or the Apostata and denie it? so should you adde sinne to sinne: For what greater sinne is it then to denie Christ Iesus and the trueth of his Gospel? The Lord keep his children from such impiety. What were they (yea, euen the Apo∣stles themselues) whom God had chosen in the beginning to bee the witnesses of his trueth, and to carrie his name before the world; but men subiect to sinne and imperfections as we likewise be? God chose them first, yea, when they were his enemies: & so likewise of his sin∣gular goodnesse and infinite loue, he hath cho∣sen you to be one of his witnesses also; For he that is Lord ouer all, is rich vnto all that call on him:Rom. 10.12. Rich vnto al, he excepteth none,God is no accep∣ter of persons. nor accepteth persons, but receiueth al, euen al that with vn∣fained repentance turne from their sinnes, and
by a liuely faith imbrace his mercies in Christ. Wherfore meditate not so much on your sins, as you do on the salue of sinne, Iesus Christ our Redeemer and Sauiour; magnifie the mercies of God and praise his holy name, for that in the merites of his Son, he hath chosen you, and accounted you worthy, not onely to beleeue, but also to suffer for Christs sake. What the enemies of the truth procure vnto them∣selues, by persecuting and murdering of Gods children. Sect. XXIIII. Obiection. Now for my owne part, being satisfied of all scruples and doubts, touching this point (be it spoken with due acknow∣ledgement of praise vnto God;) seeing we reape such excellent fruit and so many benefits by Martyrdom; and that our Persecutors are the meanes of our sufferings, might they not come vpon vs, and saye vnto vs, in this, or such like speech? Why then complaine you of
your persecution, if it be so glorious and so beneficiall vnto you? you should loue those by whom you are so much benefited. If we pleasure you, thanke vs, if we profite you, we cannot doe but well in continuing our course. I pray you resolue me of this one point, and then an end. How may we answer such as wil so obiect? Answere. WE may answer them briefly, in our Sauiours owne wordes,Matth. 26.24. marke 14.21 luke 22.22 Surely the Sonne of Man goeth his way, as it is written of him: But wee be to that man by whom the sonne of mn is betraide; it had bin good for that man, if he had neuer bin borne. Being souldiers by profession, we are glad we haue such occasion to fight in defence of the truth, and yet we are heartily sorrie to see them bid vs battaile, by impugning and persecuting the same. Howso∣euer it goeth with vs, we are sure of the victo∣rie: If we haue the vpper hand we haue con∣quered satan, and chased him out of his haunt, to the confusion of all superstition and idola∣trie; If we be oppressed and murdered for our faith, then do we also ouercome by our true faith in Christ, who will receiue vs vnto him∣selfe,
and giue vs the crowne of life; so also we confirme our religion to our posteritie, and seale it with our bloud.The Danger that Persecutors do in curre by Persecu∣tion. Wherefore, smal is the hurt that they do vs, yea, it is an vnspeakable benefite, but vnknowne is the miserie that they worke vnto themselues, though they see it not, or wil not see it: For they plucke vp the sweete flowers, and leaue the stincking weeds; they cut off the fruitfull braunches, and let lette those that be rotten and withered alone; they burne the corne, and spare the stubble; they put Noah into the arke, and drown them selues, whose being amongst them kept them from the deluge; they thrust Lot out of Sodom that kept the citty from burning; they oppresse Moses, who should wrestle with Gods anger, and keepe it from them: And therefore putting the true Christian Professors to death, they digge their owne graues, and cut off the shot of the anchors that should saue them from ship∣wracke. It were great folly for a King that de∣sired peace, to abuse, disgrace, and torment the ambassadors and seruants of a Monarch migh∣tier then himself, and then to send them home, thus cruelly intreated, to vtter their wrongs. Yet this is the folly and sottishnesse of all Per∣secutors,The follie of Per∣secutors. who thinke it necessarie for their peace, to impouerish, spoile, and torment, the Ambassadours of Iesus Christ and seruants of God, and then by barbarous and sauadge mar∣tyring
of thē, to send them to heauen, there to be continual sollicitors with God for reuenge against their murders; stil crying,Reuel. 6.9 vnder the altar, with a lowd voice, saying.10 How long Lord, which art holy and true: doest not thou iudge and avenge our bloud on them that dwell on the earth? The Conclusion. THus, (good Christian Reader) now at length, vpon the earnest intreatie of such Friends, as haue most interest in my La∣bours, haue I published this smal Treatise, be∣ing first penned for their priuate behoof onely; whereunto I was the more willing to conde∣scend, because I feare, or rather, foresee that the firie Triall, whereof Peter speaketh, ap∣procheth, which the faithful are very like short¦ly to endure, for Iudgement beginneth at the house of God. Now then, as these Discour∣ses are published for thy good, to teach thee with ioye and comfort, to acquit thy selfe like a valiant Captaine of Christ Iesus in the day of battaile; So I hope that thou also wilt iudge charitably of my Christian-care to pro∣fite the Church of God, vnto whose seruice I haue wholy addicted my selfe, (if thou vnder∣takest the person of a Censurer, and not rather of a Scholler) and take this my Mite, with
as cheerefull minde as it is meante thee: Which, if Curtesie can not compel thee to do, yet will Christianitie force thee; forsomuch as the Apostle saieth, that the Members of Christ be wise and of a good Nature. Finally, this onely I am to certifie thee of, that when I pen∣ned the fift Chapter of the second Booke; there came vnto my handes a paper-booke, written (as it seemeth) many yeeres agone, without either name or title vnto it; which partly trea∣ted of the same argumēt I handled there: a few reasons whereof, being penned in defence of Superstition, I haue (iustly) challenged for true Religion. And so, (good Reader) if thou shalt reape any comfort by this Treatise (as no doubt thou shalt, if thou wilt reade it, not with preiudicate affections, but with a meeke and humble, that is, with a Christian Spirite; re∣membring, that God giueth grace vnto the Humble) giue glorie to HIM alone, who is the Auctor and Fountaine of all Good∣nes, euen GOD, blessed for euer. LONDON. Apr. 25. A.D. 1600. Amen; Praise, and Glorie, and Wisdome, and Thanks, and Honor, and Power, and Might, be vnto our God for euer-more, Amen. Reuel. 7.12. FINIS.
