21053.7 33143118 28240
FOrasmuch as I haue lately seene two Letters vnder the hande of the late Lord Bishop of Couentrie. and Lichfield, and now Lord Bishop elect of Norwich; the one dated 22. Septembris 1617. and the o∣ther 6. Nouembris following, directed to the seuerall Archdeacons, Ministers, and Churchwar∣dens of the same Diocesse for supplying of the wants and defects of Bibles of the new and last translation, being of the greatest letter and larger volume, as also Bookes of common prayer, in such Parishes as they were Wanting. In which businesse his Lordship was pleased to imploy this bearer William Bramsgroue, who hath already taken much paines therein. And for that I haue receiued credible information, that many parishes within the sayd Diocesse, are yet vnfurnished of the sayd Bookes, notwithstanding strict order by me giuen, in the late Metropoliticall Visitation, holden there for the now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and since that also by the late Lord Bishop of Couentrie and Lichfield, for the prouiding there∣of. I therefore as Vicar generall to the sayd Lord Archbishop, being Custos spiritualitatis sede vacante, for the better seruice of Almighty God, and edification of the people, haue thought meet to prouide for the perfecting of that good work so well begun, and to that purpose do heereby will and require you to make diligent inquirie, in euery parish within the sayd Diocesse, of the defect and want of the sayd Bookes; and once more to admonish the Minister and Churchwardens of euery parish, to prouide the same with all conuenient speed, which if they shall refuse or deferre so to doe, then foorth with to returne their names vnto me, that if by my ordinary Iurisdiction, they will not be brought to supplie that defect and abuse, that then by power of the Commissioners Ecclesiasticall or otherwise, they may be inforced thereunto; wherein, God willing, I will not faile to take a strict course, betwixt this and the beginning of Michael∣masse Terme next. And for that I finde by experience, that the people for the most part within that Dio∣cesse, are growne into extremes, that is to say, some so prophane or otherwise so backward in religion, that they haue no regard of comming to Church, to heare diuine Seruice and Sermons on Saboath dayes and Holy dayes; some others so precisely curious, that they will bar his Maiesties Subiects from all law∣full recreation on those dayes, though it be after Euening Seruice and Sermon ended, it shall not be amisse as you trauell for the dispatch of your other businesse, that you deliuer to such Churchwardens of euery parish, within that Diocesse for their better direction in this behalfe, this small Treatise; (Conteining his Maiesties declaration to his Subiects concerning lawfull sports to be vsed) as shall be willing to receiue the same. And I require you to make returne of the due execution heereof, at or before the beginning of Michael∣masse Terme next. Giuen at London this 5. of Iune, 1618. THO. RIDLEY. To William Bramsgroue of the City of Litchfield Yeoman, an Officer to the Prerogatiue Court of Canterbury, being by me specially sent to view and furnish the defectiue Chur∣ches and Chappels, with such bookes as are commanded by publike authority; and to certifie accordingly.
