21085 99851199 16465
THE Most royall and Ho∣nourable entertainement, of the fa∣mous and renowmed King, CHRISTIERN the fourth, King of Denmarke, &c. who with a Fleete of gallant ships, arriued on Thursday the 16. day of Iuly 106. in Tylbery-Hope, neere Grausend. With a relation of his meeting, by our royall King, the Prince and Nobles of our realme: the pleasures sundry times shewed, for his gracious welcome, and most famous and admira∣ble entertainment at Theobalds. ƲƲith the royall passage on Thursday the 31. of Iuly, thorough the Citty of London, and hono∣rable shewes there presented them, and maner of their passing. By H. R. AT LONDON Printed for H. R. and are to be sold by William Barley, dwelling in Gracious streete, neere Leaden Hall gate. 1606.
To the Right worshipfull and most worthy fauourer of all vertues, Sir Thomas Smith Knight, all increase of wor∣ship in this life, and after death the ioyes eternall. RIght worshipfull: as I was in the time of your worshipfull father, for many great fauours bounden. so haue I euer deuoted my selfe and all my abilitie, to your wor∣ship, and all the rest of his wor∣shipfull progenie. Amongst all which, your selfe, whose vertues God hath regarded, and the Prince worthily respected: I haue in my chee∣fest thoughts sought, to acknowledge my dutie, and to manifest my zeale to that worshipfull house; from whence you proceed. And albeit, to mine owne know∣ledge, you haue beene a spectator of those things, wherewith I now make bolde to present you: yet thereby I haue thought to manifest my loue, and humbly beseech you, that you vouehsafe the accep∣tance thereof. (The rather) for that it concerneth the honours done by our King, vnto his most deere be∣loued brother: all which, your selfe being better
acquainted with, then many others; that by fostering it, your honoured name shall be had in acceptance, with many thousands of this realme, whose desues are great, to heare the truth of al these honourable en∣tertainements giuen and receiued. Thus humbly commending my selfe vnto your worships fauour, and humbly crauing pardon for my presumption, I cease from your further trouble, and and rest in all humble duty at your seruice. Ready for euer to be commanded: Hen. Robarts.
The royall, rare, and most hono∣rable intertainment of the famous King, Christi∣erne the 4. King of Denmarke &c. since his first arriuall on shore, the 17. day of Iuly 1606. WHen it pleased GOD, to place the Imperiall crown of this most blessed, and famous kingdome, on the head of our most glorious and renowned soueraigne King Iames, it was not a little admired amongst the commons of this land, the honors done his high∣nesse, by most Christian Kings, and Princes, who by their Ambassadours, as from France, Spaine, Italy, Denmarke, Holland, and others, not onely presented their honourable loues, and ioy for his happinesse therein, but desiring peace with his people and state, with loue in all honour to be continued amongst them and their nations. Their honourable and Christian request, his Highnesse with all honor embraced, with such kingly conditions, loue, and fame, to him and his subiects, as all the Kings and Potentates of the
world may admire, and his owne people ioy in such honoured peace. For thereby haue our Marchants sure and safe trafficke to all nations, and they to our land, where they trade at their pleasures. Since when, diuers nations, which with good regard of those blessings, God hath endued this Realme withall, and the troubles of their owne countries, preferring their quiet, aboue their na∣tiue countrey, wealth, and friends, haue left their home-borne regions, and placed themselues hero with their families: where they liue free from those dangers they were subiect vnto, vnder the gouernment of a most religious and honourable King, inioying their wealth without feare, and resting in all tranquillitie of minde, and securitie of their estates, praise God for his excellent Ma∣iestie, that so carefully tendereth their liues and safeties, as his owne peoples. Peace and all happy tranquilitie, with so ma∣ny countries being established, and his Maiestie enioying the blessing of the most high God that placed him, Ambassadours from state to state, oftentimes passed, whereby the Kings from farre, receiued ioyfull tidings of his royall gouerne∣ment, health, and welfare, and his Maiestie like∣wise, from them and their kingdomes. The affi∣nitie of bloud, and desire of true brotherly loue to be continued; which Loue is the true Loade∣stone that draweth friends, and moueth the heart
to desire the company, which they most honour and esteeme oft, as we haue read many famous examples of all estates, aswell Princes, as others. But in mans memory hath not beene heard, (nor hearing) with more reioycing seene, so are and most excellent a simpathie of true and hono∣rable loue, as is most apparent, by that most roy∣all King Christian of Denmarke: who nothing re∣garding the dangers of the seas, nor any other accidents, albeit he did often times heare of the gracious and happy estates of our dread soue∣raigne King Iames, his Royall and most estee∣med Princely sister Queene Annc, Prince Henry and their royall issue, that such is his great desire and Kingly affection, that no report what so euer could satisfie his Kingly minde, but in per∣son aduentured, to be partaker of their most roy∣all presence, and to participate with them and their maiest call companies, wherein no doubt a most honourable and true combined royall minde is expressed. For which honourable intention, his ships of great strength were prepared, & 2. Pinnases: the Admirall wherein his owne person came, being a most huge ship, is esteemed of 1500. Tunnes: which ship is so adorned with rich gold and ve∣ry excellent workemanship, as many thousands vpon report therof, of purpose haue gone to Grauesend, where shee doth yde, to view her. Besides, the beautie and riches of this great ship,
she is appointed with most huge ordinance, men and victualls, sit for so Kingly a presence. The rest likewise accordingly complete, all riche in Ordinance, men and munition. The Kingly attendants of his person, and all others of his traine, furnished in apparell very riche and most beautifull, euery one in his estate and place: his Counsell and chiefe men, very de∣cent after their countrey fashion, richly decked in silke with gold and siluer lace, Iewels and chaines of rare estimation. His Pages, and garde of his person, in Blew Veluet laide with Siluer Lace, for their best sute, and one sute for to exchange of other silke: whi∣tish coloured Hattes, with bands embrodered: most of them, either white or blew stockins: his Trumpetors in white Satten Dublets, Blew Vel∣uet hose trimd with silke and siluer lace, watched cloakes guarded with sundry colours, & white Hattes with Blew silke and golde bands embro∣dered: his common garde of Souldiers, with Muskets furnished, very riche: white Fustian dublets, watched hoase with white and Blew Lace, loose Cassockes large and faire, like our foot-mens coates, with white and Blew lace, Hattes with bands suted like: and all his com∣mon souldiers, in cassocks and hoase of watched colour: the maister and his mates, Gunners and chiefe officers, being very riche in their apparell, his Trunckes and other prouision for carriage,
couered with redde Veluet, trimmed with blew Silke and Golde lace: his Sumpter clothes and couerings to couer his lading, of redde Veluet, with blew silke, and gold lace, all made after the English fashion. For the gouernment of his followers of all sorts, according to his Kingly pleasure, he ordai∣ned a Marshall, who had vnder Marshals many, with great charge from his Maiestie, that if any man of his company should be drunke, or other∣wise to abuse himselfe in any maner towards Englishmen, or his owne followers, to be puni∣shed sharply. such is the royall care and honor of his excellencie, which is duely executed. All things being ready for the voyage, which with great care of all his officers was accom∣plisht, after a most honourable order taken for gouernment of the Kingdome in his absence, the winde seruing fitly, and a heauie parting of the Queene his honoured and most gracious Mother, with the States and chiefe of the land, with teares of sorrow plentifully shed of his lo∣uing subiects, and their hearty prayers zealous∣lie made to GOD, for the prosperous successe of his Maiestie at Sea, and happy arriuall to his desirous Porte, he bad them all farewell, leauing them to their charge, and betooke his royall person to the mercy of GOD, that guideth heauen, and earth, and seas, and in all dangers protecteth his people.
And by Gods prouidence, who sendeth winds at has pleasure after some more then ordinary  of our dread soueraigne and his peo∣ple   coming,  royall fleete had sight of  , and in safety eed the same, bea∣ of Thams, beholding & with g pleasue admiing, the sweet and pleasant  ad lay of the Land, not desing to , to  his exellent person, vntil the Kings maiestie our soueraigne came. But appli∣ed wih hs shipping, so high as Tilbury hope, a roade some two or three miles distant from Gsd, a Port towne in the county of Kent. Where some small way off the roade, more nere the towne, they came to anchor, whereof our gracious King being, by poasts aduertised: ha∣uing his Bages ready▪ who being a King reple∣nished with all Kingly curtesie, well considering of those great trauells, this Kingly brother had vnder gone, to see his Highnesse, the Queene, and their honourable progeny, without long stay this mirrour of all hnour, King Iames ac∣companied with the Prince, his counsell and many of the nobility of the Land, with great store of Countiers which gaue their attendance, tooke their Barges towards Tlbury, where the King in his ship attended his Kingly com∣pany. The Denmarks looking earnestly now for the comming of the King, with his com∣panie.
When they came sayte with the townes end at Grauesend, they from the shippes discried the barges, and gaue notice there of to the King and presently at the command of the Lord dmirall of the fleet, the company was by the Boatswains whistles called vp, and in all the gallant manner that might bee, each man in his Liuery, making a gallant shew, and noyse of Trumpers, after the sea manner, and meeting of friends The Tack∣lings, toppes, and euery part of the shippe, was so replenished with men, that hardly might you decerue the ropes, or see the shippes sides. The King ariuing at the shippes side, was in∣tertained most graciously by the Denmarke king to his shippe, with the Prince, Nobles, and Gen∣tlemen of his traine. Which by King Iames, the Prince, and Nobles, was againe requited with Kingly embracings, and most honourable entertainement to this Country. Like honou∣rable fauours and geat welcomes were made his followers, by the Counsell of England, and thes; to the great ioy of all the beholders. One house and something more beeing spent with great delight aboard the shippe: these famous Kings Ioyed in each others company. The Tide seruing, they set foreward to the Court. The two Kings and the Prince in his barge, were placed, and the Noblemen of England
courteously entertained into their companies, the Noble men, and best of the King of Den∣marks traine. The Barges falling off from the shippe, after they had owed some small way. The Admi∣tall discharged such a thundering peale of Or∣dinance, whereof many are Cannones of brasse, as the smoake dimmed the skies, and their noyse was heard a farre way off: after her, the vice and reere Admiral, and so all the rest, which made a long peale cuery shippe taking his turne very orderly in exceeding good sort. By this time they came to the blocke-houses situat neere Grauesend, who followed, in dis∣charging their Ordinance in like manner, with such good industry and care as was very well commended, and highly praysed of both kings and their companies. This honorably welcome giuen and receiued, they passe the riuer, till they came to Greenewich: where the royall Court of England lay. All the way passing, the royall King of Denmarke, with many louing fauours shewed his hearts Ioy in imbracing the noble & most honourable Prince Henry. Being now on our English land, a more kinde welcome was againe begun, to all the strangers. To behold the multitudes of people which came to see them, was admirable: especially, hauing so small knowledge of the Kings ar∣riuall.
In royall manner they entred the Court at Greenewhich, where our gracious Queene Anne lay. vnto whom, you neede not doubt, but this happy tidings, and Kingly brothers compa∣ny was most pleasing and ioyfull: as appeared at their most royall and kingly meeting, of these most great Princes brother, and sister: whose trauells he holdeth for pleasure, and therein ta∣keth great comfort, inioying the sight and wel∣fare of so high and mighty a Princesse his deare siste. Queene Anne, and so toward and happye islue of their loynes, as were present, that in that in them and their presence no Monarch of the earth might thinke a more happier content∣ment. This night being Friday at night, and the. 7. day of Iuly, the royall Kings reposed them∣selues in the Court, & Satterday all day and night, with great welcomes and ioy of either of them. On Sunday the 19 day, King Iames, accom∣panied with his brother of Denmarke, and No∣bility of both kingdomes, verye rich in their courtlike attire, The King being in English fa∣shion, went to the Chappell, where they heard a learned Sermon, preached by the Reuorend Father, the Bishop of Rochester. By all the way as they passed and returned, the Royall King with admiratiō, gaue great & honorable regard
to the multitude of people there present: The honorable state, and gallant managing of the Nobilitie, and Courtiers, with the rare compa∣nie of Gentlemen Pensioners, and the Garde in their riche Coates, as hee wondered highly, at that rare and most high seruice and sumptuous attendance. The time of dinner being come, the Garde of our King appointed to giue their attendance, on the Gentleman Sewer, carryed vp his King∣ly vvands, where wanted not any thing, that could possibly be gotten, with Wine and Beere, plentifull, all serued vp in most honourable man∣ner, with the noyse and excellent Musicke of Drummes and Trumpets, which mooued his Highnesse to much delight. This myrror of esteemed grace and honor, King IAMES, the glory of all Christendome, for receiuing forraine estates, so entertained this pusant King his brother, in person accompa∣ning him, in all royall pleasures delighting him, and most plentifully feasting him, as shall neuer be rased out of memory, so long as the world shall haue any being. But the Chronicles of these two vnited and famous Nations, to the end of all ages ensuing, shall record the honors giuen and receiued, betweene these two most famous and royall Brothers, Kings of England and Denmarke.
The dinner finished, & the first Sunday, after his comming to the Court, innumerable was the num∣bers of Cittizens of London, as well of the better sort, and gentrie, as the Commons, & other adioyning pa∣rishes, and townes, which flocked therherto see the Parsons of these two beloued and famous Kinges. The sight of which people, might cause the greatest Prince in the world to admire them, and in their ad∣miration, to reioyce in so faire and pleasant a sight, of so many well demeaned people, but more in the true loues to them. Both which was the cause of their com∣ming thether. This Sunday spent in Gods praises, and their com∣fort. On Munday in the forenoone being the 20. of Iuly. These gracious Kinges accompaned with our Royall Prince, and manye Honorable persons moste ritchly mounted on Steedes of great prise, and furni∣ture fayre, hunted in the Parke at Greenewich, and kil∣led two Buckes. Afternoone, their high estates, went to Eltham a house of his Maiesties, some two miles distant from the Court, where in the parke they hunted with great pleasure, and killed three Buckes on Horse∣backe, be∣ing followed with many companies of people, which in their loues, came to see them: whereof a greate many, not vsed to followe such pleasures as hunting, especially being on foote, thought not on their paines but in ioy of their hearts, (which no doubt was plea∣sing
vnto them, they endeuoured with all their power to follow after their horses, as neuer wearied in the view of so royall company, thinking themselues most happy (of many other) to behold so rare & excellent a sight, two kings & a prince. & surely in the opinion of many, their royal persons might take great pleasure to heare their continual cries to God for his blessing, and to preserue them, their states and dignities, from all mallice and traytors practises, for euer. The Sun growing nearer to his place of rest, their pleasures finished, and they returned themselues to the Court, all the way pacing easilye, that the people might the better obtaine their desires in beholding of them. This first dayes pleasure with greate delight finish∣ed, they reposed themselues vntill Thursday the 24 of Iuly, at which time the morning beeing fayre, everye man in his place gaue their attendance, the Barges wayted for their Majestyes, which about a x. of the clocke came abrood them, accompained with his Brother the King & Prince, & were rowed to Black-wall, where their Coaches with their traine, attended their comming, with such multitudes of peo∣ple as were not to be numbred: at the landing there of his Highnes, the Merchants shippes which ancored in the roade these, discharged such a peale of ordinance, as gaue greate contentment to that royall compa∣nye.
There hence they set forwardes the way that leadeth to Stratford, and so to Theobals twelue miles distant from London a famous and most delightfull house of the Right Honorable Earle of Salsburie, all the way met with great companye of people, which saluted them and prayed for their happines, but moste especi∣ally vntill they came three or foure miles frō London, all which way was so replenished with men and women of good sorte, some on foote, some on horse∣backe, and some in Coaches, that there was hardlye way left for their royall companie to passe them, such is the loue of this nation to the King and his Louers and friendes, and in their loue, their desires so great to beholde their delights, that no paine (whatsoeuer) but they esteeme as pleasure, to inioy it, especiallye to beholde so honorable and heauenly sight, two anoyn∣ted kinges, and so royall a Prince, whome God in his greate mercie euermore preserue, and keepe from all Trayterous practises, and other euils. A men. Before these Royall persons came (neere the house of Theobals) there was strewed in the high∣wayes aboundance ofleaues, coloured greene, cut like Oaken leaues, on euery one of which was written in large Romaine Letters of golde, (Welcome, Wel∣come) which beeing presented to their Majesties, they praysed the deuice, and found their welcomes as great to them and theirs, as was spoken of. At this moste beautifull house, after their welcomes
giuen by this moste bountifull Earle, Patrone of that famous place, they spent their times foure nights and dayes, where they receiue many great delights in hun∣ting in the Chaces & Parkes neere adioyning, where they killed store of Deere, with great pleasure. Some other times they spent in vewing the admi∣rable pleasures that place affordeth, beholding in great delight the sweet groaues, gardens, and walkes, which with such rare workmanshippe is so beautified, and for varyetie so exceedeth, that time stealeth too fast a∣way, for the beholders, especiallye where Iudici∣all eyes dooth take pleasures therein, so rich, rare and of such exquisite perfection is that place, that a man may fayle in discribing the same, but cannot suddainly be wearyed with manye times viewing & reuiewing thereof. On Sunday they rest from their pleasures, giuing the honor of that day to him that sanctified the same, and hearing learned Sermons. Amongst all the thinges which was to be noted at this honorable place, during these two royal Kinges stay there, this I may not ouetpasse. The house bing twelue miles off from the Citie of London, not-withstanding the distance of the places, the great aboundance of people, whch came from London, to see these two royal kings & Prince, wereso¦many, that a man may wonder at, but not certainely re∣posse the high wayes thether, day nor night, neuer
free for multitudes of People, going and comming in such greate companies, that all the Townes and Villages adioyning, were so replenished with people, that there was not lodging to bee had for many com∣mers thether, not victualls for their moneyes, wherof many of good sort complained, & might haue fasted, had they not beene prouided for in that honorable house. Such was the bountie of this Noble Earle in his large allowance to all Officers for that time, that Beefe, Breade, Beere, Wine, and other Vyandes, was not denyed to any that were either acquainted in the house with the Officers, or anye their friends which wold seek it, as many sound to their great com∣fort and honor of the honorable Patrone of that house. The foure dayes appointed for the stay of this royall companye there, brought to end with many delights and pleasure, to Gods glorie and their Gra∣ces good contentment. On Munday, being the 28. of Iuly, after dinner, they leaue that place, retourning gracious thankes to this worthie Earle for their cheere and pleasures, whch being truely considered of, may deseruedlye bee spo∣ken off in all honour in the Courtes of the mightiest Potentates. As the Strangers, Partakers of both pleasures and cheere, to their great honor doth appliud and for e∣uer will commend in all places the renowned Earle
and his most kinde & royal entertainmēt, they recei∣ued at this famous house of Theobals by his bounue. The same night they returned againe to Black∣wall, and from thence to Greenewich, where our gracious Queene Anne (the hearts delight of these two royall Kings) kept her Court, vnto whose gra∣cious and moste louing companye they were wel∣come, where, to the protection of the God of all glory and peace we leaue them, who euer defend them and all theirs. Thu haue I brought to end the first welcome & ariual of this famous stranger King, with his begin∣ning of progresse to Gods glorie, their great plea∣sure, and content of manye thousands, whose desires were inriched with beholding their persons. At this place of Greenwich they repose themselues vntill Thursday, which was the 31. of Iuly, and the day appointed for their comming through the citty, where they spent the time in solacing themselues, with her gracious Maiesty, the Prince and Nobles of his court. About two of the clocke in the after noone, the tide seruing them to goe to London, these two Royall Kings accompained with the Prince, and Honorable priuie Counsell, the Lordes and estates of the Land, & a moste worthy company of Knightes and Esquires, The Kinges Barges giuing their attendance, their roy∣all persons came aboorde and were rowed towards London.
By the way as they passed, they were saluted with great peales of Ordinance, from the Merchants ships which ridde in the Thames, the gunners of them so carefully applyed their busines, that they were highly commended for their care: And their owners which were at charge thereof, had thereby great commen∣datiōs. With these delights and other musicall noyse of Drums and Trumpets, they passed on vntill they came to the Tower-wharsse, where those moste graci∣ous Kinges and Royall Prince landed. There they made no long stay, but as sudainely as the Traine could bee marshalled according to their auncient manner, they set forwards, where the kinges was entertained by that worthye Magistrate Sir Leonard Hollyday, Lord Maior of the honorable Ci∣tie of London, who deliuered the Sword vnto his Highnes, who graciously receiued it, and then pro∣ceeded. The Marshals of the Cittie first, who had with great care, & deserued cōmendatiōs for their trauailes, from the morning verie carely rid vp & downe the Cittie, carefully ouerseeing the multitudes of People which came to be partakers of these royal sights, who by the straight cōmaun demēt receiued from the Lord maior and Aldermen for the peoples safeties, that no harme might befal any of the cōpanies: so highly, & with such great regard did they apply themselues in placing and gouerning them, that thereby much harme was pre∣uented,
which might otherwise haue happened by the vnruly multitude, as is oftententimes seene at such times and places. The Marshals had allowed for their attendance 12. men, suted in yellow Fustian, with ash coloured hats, red bands and red scarfes, and each a up-staffe in their hands. Next them, two trumpetters of his Maiesties, after whome followed the Knight-Marshals men of his highnesse houshold, a famous & most worthie knight Sir Thomas Vauisor. These his followers were all suited in clay collour cloakes, streamed with siluer lace, white Doublets and greene hose, with white hattes, the bandes rowled white and greene, and guarded in the brimme with greene silke: of this company was twen∣tie three persons: Then followed the Messengers in their coates very richly embrodered to the number of fourteene, then a Harrold of armes, After whome followed his Maiesties Trumpetters, led by their Serieant in a cloake of Carnation Veluet, bearing the siluer Mace of his office, and the rest of his company to the number of xiiij in their liuerie coates, verrie rich and well mounted. Thē followes the kings of Denmarkes Drume riding vpon a horse, with two Drums one of each side the horse necke, whereon hee strooke two little mallets of wood, a thing verie admi∣rable to the common sort, and much admired.
Then follow the Denmarke Kinges Trumpeters, beeing aleuen in all, decently attyred after our Eng∣lish fashion, in Cloackes of Watched, guarded with blacke and striped white; Blew Veluet Hose, and white Satten Doublets trimmed with Siluer Lace; White Hattes, with Bandes imbrodered with Gold. With this companie, the Kinges Guarde began to come forwarde; which marched Souldier like by the sides of the Traine (for a time) to keepe the way. After them, more Harroldes, in their rich Coates; Then the Kinges Gentlemen, and Courtiers, being most gallantly mounted, and rich in their Apparell. Then a troope of most gallant Knighes: of whose riches a number may admyre: of whom, many of them wore strange Fethers, of rich and great es∣steeme: which they called, The Birdes of Paradice. These passing on, follow the Knightes of the Bathe, so richly garnished both in Apparell, riche Iewelles, with gallant Horses, and costly furniture, that all the Princes of the world may admire to heare thereof: But more, to see the most exceeding rich∣nesse, and most gallant personages of them. Then follow more Harroldes: the worshipfull Deane of his Maiesties Chappell, and one other with him. Then Barrons, and the Nobilite of Englande, of the younger fort; very rich, and well attended vpon: The Maisters of his honorable Court of Requestes. Then the Sargiants at Armes, with their riche
Maces, in number nine. Then the reuerent Lord Archbyshop of Canter∣burie his Grace, the Lord Byshop of London, and others. Then the right Honourable Earle of Salisburie, and other Earles, both of the Counsell, and others: amongst whom, were placed in great honour, the Lordes and chiefest of the Demnarke Kinges Nobi∣litie and Counsell: who wore the most part of them, rich Iewels on their left Breastes: all men of great grauitie, and seemely personages. Then came the right honorable Earle of Not∣tingham, Lord high Admirall of Englande, who car∣ried the Sword: and betweene two other two, the Lord Mayre of London, who carryed a Mace. Then came the most gracious Prince HENRIE, whose sweete, and most Maiesticall grace and fa∣uour, the whole company with due honour to his Grace, did applaude, and pray for his most gracious Father, and all theirs, in all health to continue. Then follow these two famours Honours of Estate and Maiestie, the two KINGES, our dread Soueraigne, and his beloued Brother, Christiane the fourth King of Denmarke: who regarding more the true loue of their Nation, then gorgious Apparell; whereof they haue plentie: yet in their Peasures, they contented them selues in plaine Suites to be at∣tyred: But rich in Iewels, them selues not farre vn∣like; and their Horses neere couloured and suited.
About whom on the sides, marched e Denmarke Guarde, suited in Watched Coates  Hose, Souldier like, laced with white and  Laces whitish Hattes, with blew Bds, and gu Halbardes. These two most famous Brother Kinges, ryding in such loue, and in Maiestie so surpassing, did so ioy the heartes of their Subiectes, and the whole world may admire: yea, such was the honour of this day in London, and exceeding ioy, to beholde these two famous Kinges, and their vnitie, as will, while they haue any beeing, neuer be rased out of me∣morie. These royall Kinges passed, after them followed the right Honorable Earle of Worcester, one of his priuic Counsell, and Maister of the Horse. After whom followed his Maiesties Gentlemen Pentioners; who made a most honorable and great shew, such was their riches both of men and Hose: amongst all which, their rich Searses and Fethers; which made a glorious shew, was to be admyred▪ which were thus suited: Their Fethers yellow and redde, their Scarsses very large, laced with faire gold Lace at each end. Next to them, the King of Denmarkes Guarde marching three & three Souldier like: After whom, came our gracious Kinges Guarde, in their riche Coates; to the number of 180. or there aboutes: whose comely personages, and seemlinsse in Ap∣parell, doth so amaze the minde of all Strangers com∣ming
into this Land, as they be admired at, in all christian Kinges Countries, for their Persons, ciuill gouernement, and kinde entertainement of Sraun∣gers. The Traine thus marching, as I haue described, rid on til they came to Cheapside: al the way as these two famous Kinges passed from the Tower-hill, stood the Companies of London, in their Lyue∣ries Gownes, and Hoodes: for whom there was Places double rayled; which was hanged with blew Broad-cloth; and the Rayles garnished with Aunci∣ents very richly guylt with the Kinges Armes of England; the Auncients of Silke of each Hall, with Streamers and Pendants of their Armes, and seue∣rall Fellowships, the better to be knowen. The Windowes and Penthouses richly decked with Arrace, and other costly hanginges. With great admiration, passed these famous Kinges, till they came to Cheapside, viewing the numbers of people, which stood in Windowes, the Streetes, and other places, shewing louely and gra∣cious aspectance of their loues, by their fauourable countenance. In their passing at the great Conduit in Cheapside, was made with greene Boughes, a very artificiall Arboure, which was garnished with all sortes of de∣lightfull Fruites. In this Arbour was placed most
sweete Musicke; which greatly delighted the hea∣rers, and no doubt pleased his Maiestie. At the little Conduit as they proceeded, there was erected a most stately Pagant; such as for the rare deuice and beautie, was, and is to be admired, and hath seldome been seene: a matter of such state, and rare edifice, in so short time to be accomplished, the workmen and plotters thereof, hauing not past twelue dayes of respit, after their first warning. Heere these most famous Princes, and most ad∣mired Kinges stayed, beholding the deuises, and rarenesse of the same: vnto whom were deliuered (in name of the Lord Mayre and his Brethren the Aldermen, which stood neere them in their Scarlet Gownes, and all the Commons of the Citie,) a most pleasing speach: which ended, the Kinges gaue the Citie thankes, and proceeded, till they came to Paules Churchyard. Where at the Schoole of the Worshipfull Com∣panie of Mearcers, called Paules Schoole, there were other delightfull speaches deliuered: to which they graciously harkoned, and honorably accepted. Then rode they on without stay, to Fleete Con∣duit, which was garnished sweetely: on the toppe was placed delightfull Musicke; and were presented with other speaches, which was graciously accepted. When they came to Saint Dunstans Church, they
were presented with a noyse of Cornets, which she∣wed their cunning to be excellent, and very plea∣sing to both their Maiesties. Heere-hence they proceeded to Temple-barre: where his Maiestie, and his brother King, giuing many thankes to the Lord Mayre and Citzens, for their great charge and paines, deliuered the Sword to the Lord Mayre; and rode on their way to Somer∣set House: wherere they reposed themselues that night, and to their Gracious further pleasures. The Lord Mayre returning, was mette by the Sheriffes and Aldermen of the Cittie, who accompa∣nied him to his house. Thus finished this dayes worke, to Gods glorie, their Highnes great delight: which the omnipotent giuer of all grace, and preseruer of his, euer encrease, and protect them, and all their royall progenie from all detestable practises in this world: and in the last, Heauen be their inheritaunce. Amen, Amen. FINIS.
