21785 99841985 6608
Adams Garden. A MEDITATION OF thankfulnesse and praises vnto the Lord, for the returne and restore of Adam and his posteritie: planted as flowers in a garden, and published by a Gentle-man, long exercised, and happilie trained in the schoole of Gods afflictions. Abacuck 2.4. Behold, saith the Lord, he that exalteth himselfe, his minde is not vp∣right: but the gentle and meeke is blessed, and hee shall inherite the earth. Matth. 5.5. Esaiah 1.18.19. Come now, and let vs reason together, saith the Lord: If thou consent and obay, thou shalt eat the good things of the land. Esaiah 40.30.31. Bu euen the yong men, that put confidence in their owe strength; those shall faint and bee wearie, euen the yong men shall stumble and fall. printer's or publisher's device LONDON Printed by Thomas Haueland. 1611.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣NORABLE AND RENOWNED, George, Earle of Downbarre: Lord Howme of Ber∣wicke: Lord Norham: Lord-High-Treasurer of Scotland: One of the Lords Lieutenants of the middle shires of great Britaine: Lord-Gouernour of the Towne and Garrison of Berwicke: Knight of the most Honorable order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of his Maiest∣ies most Honorable priuie counsell in both Kingdomes: Thomas Sauile wisheth all true Honour and Magnanimitie of mind, in the course of his Rule and Estate; which may be a perpetuall peace vnto his desires. MAy it please your Lord-ship, I was bold (of late) to present you a little pamphlet of my writing; which you did please so verie fauourablie to accept (with declaration of your happie delight in such things) as hath incouraged me to rippe vp all my faculties, and deepest comprehensions, to offer your Lord-ship a further view, of such my poore bla∣sted gatherings, as may sort to the same end with the former. Verie great surelie, is the loue and seruice I owe your most Honourable selfe, and euer must: For whether I regard, the wonderfull degrees of your Ho∣nourable,
gentle (and not vainelie exalted minde) in speeches, and affoorded graces by countenance and acceptation; or that which is much more, your open hand and purse vnto my fainting estate (a fauour which I protest, I neuer tasted from any other Noble∣man of the world:) for my good Lord, it is wel knowne till of late yeeres, that my times haue beene disposed and spent in giuing and not taking. I must therefore and doe deuote my selfe, to loue and admire your Lord-ship before the rest. Bee pleased therefore (my beneficiall Lord) to receiue this poore pawne of my resigned affections; and take view how strange pre∣parations the Lord quilteth vpon the orphaned, such as hee doth correct; euen to make them finde light in darknesse, and much confidence of reioicing in their forsaken and abandoned estate. I am bold to put vp∣on your Lord-ship, the broydure of not being vainelie exalted; a true note of your wisdome, and that you know your selfe, state and calling, (and whatsoeuer in this mortalitie) fading, euen in Kings and Monarchs of the earth, the period vncertaine of dissolution: o∣therwise, if the Lord should afford you all the works of his hands, in full fruition, and withdraw his coun∣tenance and presence from you; all you enioy in the world, shall bee found but comfortlesse comforts, when the change (which certainelie doth attend all mortalitie) shall bee designed. It is the heart that the Lord respecteth and accepteth; and being resigned and ankored in his will, hee will loue and establish the proceedings thereof, for his verie owne delight in what alteration or change soeuer: So that what sick∣nesse, trouble, greefe or crosse, may befall you, they
shall but be as his messengers, to bring you a seale and assurance of his fatherlie indulgence and care; and that hee will haue your heart himselfe in keeping (be∣use with him there is no change at all) and so will build you vp, vnto that assurance of hopefull expe∣ctation, wherein you shall find prepared, all peace, pa∣tience, perseuerance, and what in the world may bee most desired, for the type of euer-during feli∣city: which the Lord in all his fauourable enlargements giue you. And so I praie pardon. A gentle-man long trained in her late Maiesties ser∣uices, vnder that euer famous Lord-Treasurer Burleigh: Now your Lord-ships faithfull seruant Thomas Sauile.
To the Christian Reader. MY kind gentle Reader, wee say in the en∣terprises terprises and preuailings of Armes, such a Captaine did such a seruice, where not the commander, hut the Souldiers did the atchieue. I now in this booke in∣ferre Adams returne, by a contrarie di∣uert; where not Adams progenie but Adam alone made the breach, by open offence; yet the penaltie sorteth vpon all his attainted posteritie by propagation and line of blood: and as his guilt is theirs, so his returne descendeth vnto them, as the souldiers bee sharers in the Captaines preuail∣ings. This exercise therefore I call Adams Garden, be∣cause it proceedeth from the restored Armie of his peculiar quarter, by the happie second Adam, euen by his renew∣ing affordings, who is the Creator, Restorer, and Re∣pairer of the whole attaindor. It is not needlesse, but (a∣las) verie needfull, that men should dwell in deepe cogitation thereof, and still exercise their thoughts in the wonderfull dispersed storme of such a penaltie, to the end the Crowne of so bountifull receiued enlargement, might more sensiblie settle in their hard and vnprepared faculties. Oh that same Censure of a Father, touching fruition of our perishing de∣lights: Oh, I say, that it might bee as trulie verified vpon our often meditation of Adams happie returne, by dwel∣ling in the gardens of our open acknowledgements for the Lords exceeding patience, to pardon, call, and enforce our
fathers happie repaire! His words be these: Facilè enim cor humanum, omnibus quae frequentat, adhaeret ad, vt vix aut nunquam sine amore valcant possi∣deri. So I wish that our frequent dwelling in thankefull care and obedience might once beget the setled zeale and stable wrestling strife of loue and admiration in vs, for so high shrined a state and prerogatiue, by restoring and par∣doning. But wofull, and strong, and resisting, is that re∣ceiued nature, and combat from our first stirpe, for vanish∣ing things; and too too sl to subscribe the sighings of the spirite and gronings of grace in vs, to enioy the birth of a more holie renewment. Our desires bee called the birth of the soule, and the creations of God, which shall not perish. But how should wee assure our selues heereof? being still dull, dead, and so slow, to striue for our crowne: wee haue all the encouragement that a gracelesse froward creature can require: wee haue God to prepare our hearts and heare vs: Psal. 10. ver. 17. wee haue Iesus Christ to receiue and embrace vs: Matt. 11. ver. 28. wee haue the Com∣forter to lead vs aright: Ioh. 14. to aske and present our desines, from his owne vnspeakable sighings and gro∣nings; because wee know not what to aske as wee ought: Whereupon another Father calleth our praiers, Arma cae∣lsti: qu stare nos faciunt, et fortiter perseuerare: hnt manimenta spiritualia & tela diuina: because our prs bee not ours, but the vehement desires of the spi∣rit. As for vs; Quod postulamus, idem ipse donat, qui dat vt postulemus. Alacke, that wee haue no more con∣science, to hold fast and enioy the Lords gentlenesse and fa∣miliaritie with vs. What are we, if he please to depart from vs, and leaue vs to an accusing conscience? nay, what is the greatest Menarch in the world? Oh heauy state well known
vnto manie! and in mercie something vnto the author heer∣of. If the Lord doe set vp but one of our sinnes to pursue vs, nay but one of our cogitations to accuse vs, and depart from vs; wee shall find such a flame of burning, vnrest, & torment in our thoughts, as to beseech him returne againe and helpe vs, and take from vs all those worldlie priorities and shrined vanities of our abundance,, which haue seduced and snared our faculties, in verie eminent and high de∣grees of consuming torments: But men bee secure, and by fulnesse and immunities, their disease is growne so remedi∣lesse, as hardlie to beleeue there can bee any such miserie in mortalitie. But I choose rather to lament their estate, then conuince their presumptuous opinions; and therefore will cut off, and leaue all redresse vnto him that is both able and willing, to worke for his owne; and will call in his time those that bee appointed, by what motion, change, or crosse soeuer may please him best. To this gentle mercifull Lord, I doe recommend thee patient Reader, and this my poore labour, as a seruice to superionrs; my loue to equals and familiars; and a compassionate well wishing vnto all that loue the comming of the Lamb, euen the Lord Iesus.
The Contents of the booke in generall. The former booke of Adams returne, doth consist of open acknowledgements, vnfolding the secret still liuing presumption and inherent leprosie in his posteritie: which (to auoid distaste) the Author acteth in his owne rebelli∣ous selfe, resembling Dauids pene∣tentiall, & sorrowing Psalmes of humiliation. This garden doth by open shew, enlarge and demon∣strate, such exercises and renewed effects of the happie returne, as the writer did receiue from the second Adam, & the Lord pleased to afford vnto him from cogitation and admiration of so happie a change: Resembling Dauids illumination and cheered estate of thankefulnesse, in his Psalmes of consolation. Gather flowers of each rowe some, And make a posie' gainst Master come: And hee will smile vpon thy choice, And thanke thee with a gentle voice. Ablessed thing to make him smile, Who neuer heere in his exile, For thirtie yeeres did one smile shew: Let him now see thy Lilies grow.
ADAMS GARDEN. I. OH my most mercifull Lord, who hast enforced my returne, after my running away from thee, euen by the call of thy tender compassions, whereby I was won∣derfully affrighted & confounded, out of mine owne guiltie wounded consci∣ence, for disobaying thy word; & there∣by losing thy freelie bestowed glorious garden vpon mee: and now at the last, doest exercise me in my desires of thank∣full obedience, for so great a fauour and deliuerance recei∣ued; to plant and present (for thy delight) euen a new se∣cond Garden, (far exceeding that of Eden) out of the choice of thine owne created flowers in my verie sinnefull heart, where thou hast pleased to leaue, some little sparks of the first creation. II. Good Lord helpe mee, to plant, to square, and frame eue∣rie quarter; in such seemelie sort and proportion, as beeing furnished with varietie of thy sweete and fragrant created flowers, I may please thee, and vndergoe my calling, to digge and delue still, by penaltie from the first Adam, and may bee acceptable and delightfull vnto thee, in and by the second Adam; euen to make an habitation, where thou and the Lambe may please to dine, and sup, and euen dwell still.
III. Nothing is hid from thee, thou readest in the tables of my heart, and well seest how my compunction, and sorrow for abusing thy fauours, euen load and presse mee downe: yet heerein bee pleased, to enlarge my cheere and confi∣dence, that much greater is the glorie of my returne and re∣paire, then was the fruition of Eden to Adam. IV. For therein, as wofully appeareth, I had power to lose, both garden and blessing; and indeed was no more but a priueledged creature for a time, made of clay, dust, and the basest earth; but now thou hast otherwise bewtified and shrined mee, by thy loue vnto mee. V. And of thy free mercie and gratious bountie, now hast giuen mee a dignitie, prioritie, and priueledge; whereby I am not onelie set free, from satans subduings, the worlds snarings, & deaths woūdings, (to hinder my now happy cal∣ling & progresse) but am in those combats of theirs, made an open cōqueror ouer thē al: for thou hast affoorded me a dig∣nitie, farre exceeding my first Creation: So that I cannot be mooued, though I bee shaken and tossed, to trie my victo∣rie ouer them: for what conquest, without opposition and combate? VI. Now I can lose my kindred and garden no more: Now I can fall finallie no more: I can lose my vnion with Christ Iesus no more, nor bee separated from him any more: So true it is, that whom thou calledst, thou hast iustified and glorified: whereby, I am in thee so highlie aduanced; as not onelie to bee Lord of all the workes of thy hand; but con∣queror of all enmitie arising against thy blessed will: yea,
euen of that proposed enmitie, which must continue till there bee no more time. VII. So that, not onelie his descending and death is mine; but his Rising and Ascending also: yea his verie righteousnesse, is mine by imputation; whereby I am able to satisfie the whole lawe, out of my owne crucified flesh, in and by him who loueth mee. Who or what shall I feare now? since all the world trembleth at his voice, who speaketh and ruleth, out of my verie flesh. VIII. O mercifull Lord, bowe downe and heare my crie and sighes, for obedience and humilitie, that the knowledge of this happie vnion, make me not bold, but onlie in the causes of thy glorie, against that deuouring Satan, that I may once deale large spoiles, from that conquest which thou wilt giue mee ouer him, euen for thy names sake, and in fauour of this thy new reconcilement and couenant, which thou hast made betwixt thy Christ and my sinnefull soule. IX. For alasse, hee smarteth when I draw penaltie vpon me by disobedience: In all my troubles he greeueth with mee and is troubled with mee. For so long as this vnion lasteth (which is foreuer) that Christ Iesus is my head and I his member, how can it bee, but hee endureth my miserie euen with mee. X. Oh wonderfull and vnspeakable bountie! a secret hidde from many. Hee hath not onelie made mee Lord ouer the whole earth, but by his consecration hath communicated his glorious and passible spirit, to bee wounded for my declinings. Oh hearts of men and women, where be they?
Oh, that loue of Marie was great and sweete: Tell me, saith she, where they haue laide him, that I may fetch him. Oh seeking, Oh hungrie, Oh bedroughted zeale, to drinke deep in the fountaine of his vnspeakable kindnesse! Marie, saith hee, Rabbonie, saith she: Oh harmonie! indeede sweete har∣monie: Seeke thou my face: I will seeke thy face O Lord. Ps. 27 XI. O Lord increase my faith, that once I may be swallowed vp, by sense and sweete power of thy sauing health; let it conuince and mollifie my stonie and drowsie heart, by thy helpe O Lord; and let euen shame driue mee into admirati∣on of thy exceeding compassions. For, hast thou not O Lord, made thy selfe my most mercifull father? Christ Ie∣sus my happie Redeemer? The Holie Ghost my euer pre∣sent Comforter? The Angels my ministring spirits? All thy creatures my seruants? The earth my soiourning place? & the heauens for my home? What couldest thou haue done more to thy friend? and yet I liue at a wofull enmitie with thee, and by open frailties am euen enuious of thy glorie. XII. Oh how trulie (though most vnworthily) may I say againe and againe, all the workes of Gods hands be mine, and I am Christs, and Christ is Gods, to the euerlasting glorious ad∣miration of his grace and goodnesse? and yet I sinne still, prouoke him still, and euen crucifie the Lambe still, & make the Comforter weepe still: For to dwell in my former diso∣bedience, what else is it, but euen to call Christ againe vnto death, and euen fight against his Resurrection? XIII. Alas for pittie, that neither the experience of his goodnes will hold mee in obedience, nor the feare of his greatnes rouse mee from securitie. Returne O Lord and bee mightie in mee, for thy names sake: Let thy face shine vpon mee,
let thy presence breath life and strength into mee, that I may bring glorie vnto thy name, in making knowne by the moderate and holie vse of this my life, that it is another life I looke and attend for; in regard whereef I desire to be strip∣ped of all those impediments (how delightfull soeuer vnto nature) that may debar and stop my neere familiaritie, with thee most mercifull Lord, and the gentle Jesus, by the mini∣sterie of the Comforter. XIV. Oh that I could find the state of my happinesse, by rea∣son of thy promises, and bee more deeplie touched there∣with, and sing with Ezekias: The Lord hath saide it, and the Lord hath done it. Hee hath knitte the care of his people, e∣uen vnto the glorie of his name; and for my encourage∣ment and comfort, professed, that as hee will not giue his glorie and name to be polluted; no more will he forget to shew mercie vnto his people, euen vnto me. XV. Renew mee therfore O Lord for this thy names sake, and establish a right and stable iudgement in me of this thy mer∣cie: and when thou hast renewed mee, doe not then I be∣seech thee forsake me; but put a bridle in my mouth to the end I may by abstinence, keepe my selfe in modestie and feare, ouer my euill heart; and free mee from surfetings and vaine perswasions, which pricke mee forward to voluptu∣ousnes, that in a godlie care to serue thee, still admiring thy face, which beholdeth me continuallie in all my waies, I may zealoushe set spurres to the flankes of my slothfull and impure negligence, to awake and rouze mee from secure sleeping and sitting in thy displeasure, with this carelesse and vnreformed world. XVI. Appease therefore all countenance of thy Iudgments (for
passed offences) O mercifull Lord; and now be pleased that I deale with thee vpon a new couenant, to seale vp the cer∣taintie of my interest in thy promises, euen in a deuoted and resigned preparation vnto thy will. I confesse that I haue deserued most iustlie, to bee totallie and finallie cast away, and raced out of the Record of the liuing: But seing J haue a long while called vpon thy goodnesse; euen for thy ex∣ceeding gentlenesse, O Lord, I beseech thee deliuer me from all those euills which do enuiron me: For behold (my gra∣cious Lord) I doe (thou knowest) lead my life in a most pi∣tifull manner, for that I cannot serue thee as I would: I de∣sire nothing but to please thee; and on the contrarie, my wicked nature lusteth continuallie to greeue thee. This I call and feele a most miserable life, my gracious Lord, which receiue mercifullie into thy pittie, and redresse compassio∣natelie of thy grace, euen when it may best please thee, for all thy mercies sake. XVII. O mercifull Lord, who hast vouchsafed to vnseale the eies of my vnderstanding, to see the mysterie of my Re∣demption and Returne: make me O Lord to tast the fruits thereof, which (flourishing vpon the tree of the crosse) shall with the force thereof, quicken and giue life vnto my faint∣ing dead soule. Preserue and warrant me for euer from the ruine, which hath so miserablie brought together the race of mankind, and ouerflowed them by disobedience. XVIII. Establish in my heart, O Lord my God, an habitation for thy holie Spirit; to the end I neuer heereafter, breath or vt∣ter forth any thing but tending to thy praises; and let thy will bee alwaies printed in my mind, and thy glorie grauen vpon my lippes, that my lippes being opened my mouth may shew forth thy praise.
XIX. I doe humblie thanke thee my mercifull Lord, for my Election, Calling, Creation, Redemption, Regeneration, Iustification, Sanctification, Preseruation, Glorification, Resurrection, Righteousnes: But most especiallie, for that most ancient loue of thine, wherein thou hast continuallie watched ouer mee, gathered me with thine arme, and car∣ried me in thy bosome, in such exceeding loue and care; as when I had bestowed all my daies in open disobedience, & was vtterlie vndone by my fraile delights; euen then in a verie moment, thou brokest the heauens and scatteredst the cloudes to come down and plucke me out of the mouth of the deuouring Dragon, taking mee by the hand, and gi∣uing me this large time of repentance, to the end I should declare thy name vnto my brethren. XX. Nay, my mercifull Lord, more then this, thou hast not onely seene my vnrighteousnesse, and been patient euen to be prouoked by me, but hast couered my open offences from the eies of men, and kept me reputed as vnspotted and blamelesse in the world, when many a time for my wilfulnes in many things thou mightest haue inflcted an open and fearefull penalty vpon me: Thus most gratiously preuen∣ting in thy vnspeakeable fauour that the blemishes of my fraile youth, should not scandall or defame thy calling, and the most humblie desired Returne of my Age. XXI. It is verily true indeed that I haue sinned most vnwoo∣tedly and audaciously: I lay open vnto thee and the whole world the very bottome of my heart: Thou knowest my whole life, I haue sinned in the sight of Heauen and Earth, I will neuer stand in defence or pleade excuse before thee,
For my grace and pardon is in thy hand onely, and I looke for peace and redresse onely from thee. XXII. For thou hast granted vnto me, behold a token of thy owne bloud sealed in the image of my flesh; which for my Redemption thou hast imprinted in the weakenesse of my substance: So that now thou requirest nothing but obedi∣ence and loue; and alasse I grieue thee day by day, blas∣pheme thee day by day, and euen weary my selfe in the waies of darknes and shadow of death. And what haue I gai∣ned by al those my carelesse actions, and proceedings wher∣of I am now ashamed? XXIII. Truely O Lord, I gaine euen this, to giue open sentence against my selfe for abusing thy mercies, and account my selfe that vntimely fruit that shameth the tree that bore it, and the earth which nursed it, and the heauens which ripened it. Therefore O Lord I will take vp my Crosse in penalty, and where others look for their fruit after the bud∣ding and blooming times, I will looke for mine after the fall of leafe: for after the leafe of this body shall be gathered, I hope that my soule shall budde in a new fruit and bee cloa∣thed againe with the Verdure of Immortality. XXIIII. Behold therefore O Lord, that the open acknowledge∣ment of my sinne, I presently beare vpon my head & as men who fetch water at a well doc put the mouth of the bucket downe, and close it vp; so will I my gracious Lord keepe si∣lence vnto thee. For he that will ascend must first fal downe, and to kisse the heauens, he must first kisse the earth, and he that will haue a Crown with God must be first beaten and wronged with men.
XXV. And now my most gratious God, to the end I may ap∣peare so honourably apparelled as such a magnificence de∣serues to see immortality, I beseech thee throw downe the huge mountaine of my sinnes, and burie them in the cen∣tre of the earth, and separate me for euer from mine iniqui∣ties, which at this present I do repudiate, and sweare a per∣petuall diuorce betweene them and my soule. XXVI. Thou knowest most mercifull Lord, and hast taught mee to know, that the humble and iust man is the very tutor of nature, restrayning and moderating all natural appetites by stability and wisedome. And since I would thus preuaile a∣gainst nature, wilt thou not, (O Lord) which vnderstandest the bottomlesse pitte of Hell, wilt thou not heare my poore fainting desires, which by sighing reacheth and beateth the heauens, and wherewith I haue long entreated thee? Shall all the world heare me but thy selfe alone? Oh no my God, thou hast too long stretched out thine arme now to reect me, when J aske nothing but to glorifie thee. XXVII. Alas my sweet Lord, I haue setled my whole power and strength vpon the loue and obedience of thy countenance, which I haue so many times prouoked: and if thou please not to assist me in this seruice, alas what manner of fight shall I e able to make against the strong enemies of my soule? O p ttifull pittifull will be my preuailings; nay my assured backslidings. Say therefore vnto my soule, I will not faile thee, I hold thee by thy right hand, and thou shalt neuer be forsaken.
XXVIII. Thou knowest, O Lord, men haue had mee in great re∣regard, and loe how now I am desputed and befoiled with their scorne and contempt: for in stead of sorrowing with me they haue coniured against me, and doe adde sorrow vn∣to my heauines, and make me a laughing stock and a matter of derision, saying, verily he can neuer rife. Again, He called vpon God very much indeed, and see what he hath gained. But I will be still; for the daies be euill, and my silence shall speake vnto thee by continuall desires, sighes and groa∣nings. XXIX. Yet doe I not for all this lose my hope; no no my good God, for thy power is infinit, and thy mercy vnmeasurable, which wil spread it selfe euen as a roabe ouer such as trust in thee, and the Lambe shal know the roabe by thy righteous∣nesse therof, and shal say, thou art mine O despised Iacob, O thou Castaway Sion, whom no man regardeth: I haue cal∣led thee by thy name, thou art mine, feare not, thou shalt not perish, though they fall on euery side of thee. XXX. Heereupon, mercifull Lord, I gather courage and assu∣rance that thou hast not lifted thy selfe vpon so high and eminent a place to dismay thy seruants, but that they might see thy ouerruling power and hand of their propiti∣ation farre beyond the touch and controll of man, yea of al Monarchs, for the better assurance and confidence of thy ser∣uants, for their reioycing and hope by the priority and pre∣heminency of their election: for they must follow the lamb and see his face, that their ioy may be full. XXXI. O thou most mercifull Lord which doest not remember
wrongs, hast seene the dangers which by violent sway of sinne I haue cast my selfe into, forgetting all thy mercies, prouoking thy glorious face, traducing the Redeemer, and greeuing the Comforter: O returne and make hast O Lord for my recuring and cleansing from this huge prouocation, euen for thy gentlenes, and because thou hast spared mee thus long, and now beginnest to touch my heart. XXXII. I did neuer so soone thinke to confesse my sinnes, but thou presently gauest pardon: I did neuer so soone returne vnto thee as thou wast ready to offer thy selfe vnto mee: I did neuer make open or secret acknowledgement of my de∣serued penalties, but thou didst remit them presently: I haue taken the rods to haue scourged my selfe, when thou hast pluckt them out of my hand: I did thinke thou wouldst haue proclaimed warres, and behold open peace and pardon brought me, with charge and trust to trimme vp and keepe the mansion of my soule heereafter for thee, and to feare nothing but sanctifie thy name in my heart; for thou wilt be a refuge vnto me, therefore I feare not all changes. XXXIII. Oh what an acceptable sacrifice before thee is a broken and contrite heart, that out of the voice of a iust man pas∣seth aboue the heauens, & the sweet sighing comforter pre∣senteth the same before thee. This humble acknowledge∣ment from a wounded heart in the sinner wilt thou neuer reiect, because thou findest in this state the greeued image of the lambe, from which thou canst neuer turne thy face. XXXIIII. And further, mercifull Lord, my hope receiueth good reliefe, because the Saints (which are the holy men and wo∣men
liuing) haue praied, doe pray and will pray for mee; those are they which do beseech thee for me. Oh it is time that they doe attend thee for me, since impiety of my hart hath so blinded my senses by euill thoughts, that my soule cannot lift vp her selfe towards heauen, nor stretch out her hand vnto thee, who art onely both able and willing to deli∣uer and ransome the Captiues that sit in darknesse and deep discourage. XXXV. Therefore hast thou prouided that such as thou vouch∣safest to come neere vnto thee by faith and holinesse of life, may pray and beseech thee, that thou wouldest satisfie my soule, and purge my thoughts so preseruing & warran∣ting me foreuer from that ruine and calamitie which hath so miserably imbondaged and pinioned together the race of transgressors, and holden them in irkesome slauery, as chained and designed to a great and irkesome Capti∣uity. XXXVI. As for my selfe, who am mine owne Capitall enemy, I haue neuer had skill or will to pray for my trespasses, but euen wandred in dreadfull expectation vnder a heauy bur∣then: yet heerein I am somewhat cheered, that by this expe∣rience of my estate thou hast let me see what a blacke and foule conscience I haue, and hast mollified my heart that I might lodge contrition in my soule, to obtaine grace and fauour with thee, that in thine owne time, merciful Lord, thou wilt please to purge and wash it. XXXVII. Thou O my good God which hast beene from all eter∣nities, art neuer changed, whereupon it is that wee bee not confounded, but art euer one and the same, without anie
shadow of change: for age & time which consume al things, serue for no other purpose but to confirme thine euerlast∣ingnesse: and men seeme to remaine heere vpon earth, for no other cause, but to behold thy incomprehensible great∣nesse; vnchangeable on the one side, and their certaine dis∣solution, approching out of their mortalitie on the other side. XXXVIII. For a man changeth not his shirt so often, but the earth changeth her inhabitants more often; yet thou my God art euen the same at this day that thou wert at the first, which the heauens and earth continually sing vnto thee; and that neither time past, presēt, or to come, shall euer change thee. XXXIX. Keepe mee therefore O Lord in a stable and sober exer∣cise of my faith and assurance, that I do not wauer or shrink in the stormes of my mortalitie, neither despaire at any time, by sense of apparances, or smart of feelings. For hee which despaireth for his sin (vnlesse thou please to designe that afflictō by desertion, to giue experiēce of faith there∣by) he euen doth giue ouer his soule as already condemned, and is like that abominable vsurer, who hauing sustained some losse in his goods, by and by bereaueth himselfe of his life also: Make thou therefore strong steppes for my faith O Lord, that I neuer dishonour thy name, by the deceit∣full sleights of my senses, but euen stand fast armed with thy promises for euer. XL. And so prepare mee vnto the chastisements of my peace (these same sweete healing potions and appliances) that the smart thereof neuer driue me from thee; but euen rather as the lashes light vpon mee, I may kisse the rod and say it is too little, for I haue deserued much more, but that of thine
owne indulgence and pitie thou sparest me: Giue me there∣fore O Lord to learne obedience by thy stripes; and most welcome and sweete euen shall bee vnto mee thy afflictions, yea, euen the changes of my afflictions, the lot of thy children. XLI Thus instructing and nurtring mee in thy owne most ho∣ly schoole of discipline, let me feele O Lord thy wil, to take more rule and soueraignety ouer my will, then it hath done in former times, that I may tast and experience that plea∣sure, which hee feeleth that is deliuered from the bond of captiuitie, and set at libertie out of prisonne and thraldome wherein his enemies had long held him chained. XLII For thou hast alreadie done verie much for my soule O Lord; thou hast taken and held mee fast by the hand in all my dangers, and set mee gentlie againe in the way of thy will, with greater compassion then euer Paul did embrace Eutychus, and madst mee vnderstand thy will and purpose: Nay thou hast done more then that, for mee thinks thou hast both opened mine eies and the heauens all at once, that I should see the mightinesse of thy glorie, as I do at this present sensiblie feele the goodnesse of thy grace. XLIII Thou hast O Lord made mee se, I say, the mightinesse of that thy power, whereunto no mortall man can attaine without thee: for alasse, should I poore sillie worme thinke, that I am more then I am, to go to seeke for that in the hea∣uens which I cannot well see at my feete? the eies of my body be duskie & mistie, and the eies of my soule be much worse: but thou the mercifull Lord, delightest to bring light forth of darknesse for manifestation of thy power, e∣uen thy blessed power.
XLIV. And mens thoughts are maruellous vncertaine and wa∣uering; for the earthlie and corruptible bodie, dulleth and maketh idle our spirits, and tieth and bindeth our senses fast to the earth: so that without thee my gentle Lord, I can hope for no light heere belowe, to know or discerne any thing aright: But Christ Iesus is the way, the truth life and light, whose renewed obedience is still fragrant in thy pre∣sence; euen hee is my light and portion for euer. XLV. And by him most mercifull Lord, thou doest supplie my wants, and leadest mee by the hand to see the counsels of thy eternall wisdome, and hast heaued & violently mooued my soule to make it capable, and sensiblie to feele thy light and commiseration. XLVI. Wherefore O Lord touching my enemies and those who haue wrongfully oppressed mee, and closed mee in much obscuritie and blemish of estate; I do humblie and with all my verie heart intreat thee for them, that thou please not to blow vpon them the wind and blast of thy curse; but tarie sweete Lord, if so it seeme good to thee, to see if thy patience will bring them to do their duties: nay rather draw them O Lord, to repent their causlesse wrongs orphanings and vi∣olent outrage that they haue committed against me. XLVII. And as for mee, though I bee couered ouer with their wounds, and defamed with their iniurious dealings; yet had I rather haue them subiect vnto thy mercie, then once to feele thy iudgement; and desire of thee, if thou think good, that their vnmercifulnesse vnto mee, might rather serue to trie mee withall, then for their condemnation.
XLVIII. Thou knowest O Lord my desires, & takest view of them out of my most secret priuities and thoughts, and that I ne∣uer called on thee for vengeance for my receiued wrong: No no, the feelings of thy mercies vnto my vnworthy selfe, make mee deepelie desire to bee farre from thinking of o∣thers smarts offered vnto me. Indeed most mercifull Lord, my vowes do importune nothing but thy mercies, and my thoughts are addressed vnto nothing but vnto peace, & re∣conciled brotherlie fellowship. XLIX. The verie end of all my desires O Lord (if thou please I report it) is, that I may passe my daies in seruing thee faith∣fullie, and that thou wouldest grant mee thy holie house to dwell in, euen in the congregation of thine owne chosen wife and spouse the church; and that all the while I am se∣parated from thee, and a great waie off from thy heauenly tabernacle, tied vnto the earth by reason of the counter poise of this my bodie, I might vnite and tie all my thoughts vn∣to thee, & conforme my selfe whollie vnto thy most righ∣teous will. L. Oh blessed habitation, that is able to couer mee from all worldlie passions, from all the lusts of the flesh and assaults of Satan; for there O Lord thou art present with mee, and comest downe from the heauens to keepe companie with mee; and fillest mee with thy selfe that I might bee fenced against sinne, and this my carnall will, and conuerted into a heauenlie, liuing, and quickning spirite. LI. That I may once feele effectually thy maruellous works, comprehend thy mercies, and conceiue of thy power and
almightines: Reueale therefore vnto thy seruant this thy will, & lay it vp in my heart, that I may there keepe it most deerelie, and in the midst of thy church may set vp an altar vnto thee, euen in my mouth, for an offering, vnder the vaile of thy most holie word. LII. And to this end O Lord, I beseech thee helpe mee conti∣nuallie: for as mine infirmitie striueth commonlie against mee, so also haue I neede of continuall helpe on euerie side: Therefore good Lord when thou hast comforted mee, doe still exercise mee and bee with mee, I beseech thee, and tary with mee; knead, mould, and frame this lumpe of earth, e∣uen as thou wilt, to thine owne seruice and worship. LIII. And now my most mercifull Lord, hauing pleased thee, so as thou art reconciled with mee, and I with all mine heart resigned vnto thee, euen to doe thy will: what shall I neede to feare, seeing all the world doth dread and fall down be∣fore thee? that defendest thy seruants, and hast assured mee to watch still ouer mee euen night and daie, and keepe mee vnder the shadow of thine owne wings: thou wilt giue the angels charge ouer mee, that I hurt not my foote nor faint in my way, nor bee wearie in my iourney vnto thy holie hill. LIIII. Thou art the mightie defender of the poore and orpha∣ned; and who is able to resist thy power? Thy forces O Lord are not armies of men, but Legions of Angels: thy mini∣sters are not onelie Princes and Captaines, but thundrings, lightnings, and stormes: thy wrath is not blowes and hurts, but Earth-quakes, swallowing v of Cities and drowning of Countries; so triumphant, victorious, and glorious, art thou in all thy waies.
LV. But my Lord, because thou doest hold backe this thy re∣dressing hand of power and maiestie; comfort me still with a sure hope that thou wilt not forsake me, and giue me such a measure of faith, as may lead mee vnto the hauen of thy promises, and therein compact mee as a stone well squared for the masters building, sited vpon Mount Zion, which shall neuer be remooued. LVI. And me thinks thou saiest vnto me continually, tarie a little, for the time is not yet come that I haue appointed, & in the meane while trust thou assuredly vnto my promises, and looke whatsoeuer wrong, disgrace or affliction, thou shalt beare, I will bee with thee, and giue thee strength to o∣uercom it: thou hauing learned that all things woorke to∣gether for the best, to them that loue mee. I haue not laid thee in the fire to burne and consume thee, but to fine thee, and make thee orient in my sight, euen as the Diamond, by much and often rubbing is more beautifull. LVII. Heereby my courage (O Lord) encreaseth, when I see my selfe thus seconded by thee; and this thy fauour and gentlenesse, doth more embolden mee vnto patience, then all the applause of the people, doth him that fighteth a com∣bat, when he is most strong and lustie in fight, and seeth the victorie alreadie by his fainting aduersarie. LVIII. Certainelie, I know the conscience of an innocent man, that is founded and grounded vpon thy grace (my Lord) is more stable and sure then all the greatest rockes, and can∣not bee shaken or mooued by any wrong, or inflicted vio∣lence whatsoeuer: No no, that mans inocencie is not to be
wounded, with any, or all the practices of the vngodlie, who are forced in the end to retire all wearied, fainting and gas∣ping for breath. LIX. O Lord their wofull plight! they lie groueling vpon their bellies; they bray, grinne, and mutine with verie anger, bereaued of all power; for thou hast broken, both their armes, teeth, and their iawes; and what not? So that the on∣lie weapon left them, is euen a will to continue in euill: A thing so hatefull vnto thy diuine nature and maiestie. O Ephraims God! that thou shouldest take all their iniuties as done vnto thy selfe, and so in thy iustice throw the moun∣taines vpon them, vtterlie to roote out the memorie, of such an vnmercifull, scoffing brood, from amongst men. LX. O Lord what a loue is this, when a father shall not spare his owne onelie sonne, but giue him to bee slaine and tortu∣red, to redeeme the miserie of his slaue! wherefore, O most louing holie one of old; seeing that thou hast pleased to frame and traine mee vp with thine owne hand, bought me with thy blood, and purified mee by thy mercie; forgiue e∣uen now all my presumptuous offences, cancell the hand∣writing of euidence against mee, purge my conscience that it accuse mee not; and since I desire to forsake all the world to enioy thee, thy presence, and promises; I do beseech thee reiect mee neuer, for then will the wicked say, Where is his God, and the promise of his comming? and manie other preiu∣diciall blasphemous speeches, against thy name. LXI. O Lord I haue long since, and euen now doe sacrifice my heart, consecrate my affections, and deuote my thoughts vnto thee, violentlie plucking them out of the bottome of that euill heart of mine; so that my onlie desire now is to
serue thee faithfully with all my whole strength, my soule and spirit, and to loue my neighbour as my verie selfe. But as it is not possible to write any thing vpon writing tables, vnlesse that bee rubbed out, which was written before: Right so, (my mercifull God) vnlesse thou purge and wash this same old besoiled contagion of my heart, it is not pos∣sible to engraue thy word and will in it. LXII. Plucke vp therefore by the rootes those customary pol∣lutions of my wicked vncleane course, and according to thy gratious promises, Make me heare of ioy and gladnes of heart by earnest of thy spirit: Assuring me that my request standeth among the Angels, tendered by the gronings of the comfor∣ter in the name of the Redeemer, and shall haue a gratious answere. Heare therefore O Lord, my groanes and sighes, which doe testifie thy goodnes, and doe publish thy mer∣cies. Encrease my strength and courage, that I may straine my cries and euen mount vp vnto thee; and graciouslie in∣cline vnto the same, that out of a chaunged heart, I may sing a new song of prayses vnto thee. LXIII. Satisfie me O Lord I beseech thee in casting downe all my sinnes vnder thy feete, that no eye may bee able to see them by piercing through the same: for I doe not onely blush to think vpon them, but euen hate my selfe for com∣mitting them: The remembrance thereof grieueth me; the times that I took very vngratiously therein, be as a very vo∣mit vnto my soule, and my thoughts are sore wounded with the heauie representation thereof. LXIIII. Pardon and deliuer me therefore, mercifull Lord, who through frailty haue yeelded my selfe vnto the bondage of sinne, and with the onely twincke of thine eie my manacles
shall flye from my wrests. For when I poore sinner shal once fall downe and lift vp my thoughts heauie and sad before thee, thou doest pittie me, heare and accomplish all my de∣sires, and makest me enioy whatsoeuer J aske: For what is thy delight? But to fill the hungry with good things. LXV. But herein I faile wofully, not for that thou changest thine ancient pittie and purpose, but because I my selfe do keepe no couenant with thee. No no, I doe not that which I might verie well doe, to keepe in the sweet warme worke of grace begunne in my heart, and affoorded vnto mee: whereupon thou mercifully Lord, art euen forced to let me feele the want of the comfort I had, and so J mournefullie and with bashfulnes returne vnto thee, as the tiewant of the schoole doth to be histed at vpon his returne. LXVI. For alasse, my most mercifull Lord, as I haue said before, so againe and againe I testifie: It is my selfe that am an o∣pen enemie to my selfe, by my fraile wandring, vanities and vnstable hart, that in thy very care thou takest mee vppe and correctest me in the open schoole, by disgrace thereof seeking to worke compunction, filiall feare and a more faithfull returne vnto thee my very sweet heart, and to thy holy schoole. But alas I am still weake and wa∣uering, so that if thou shouldest heare my request and for∣giue me when I aske pardone, without correction; alasse let all men iudge what this is else but to pray thee giue mee leaue to continue in sinne still Alas my Lord, my holy one, thou knowest with what greefe I set down this censure vpon my selfe and others; but I dare not but doe it faithfullie, be∣cause I write vnto thee in the spirit of the second righteous Adam, and aue vnto thee all redresse and pitty, euen in the shade of death: for thou wilt doe it in time vnto such as are grieued with their frailties.
LXVII. And therefore my mercifull Lord let not mee be shaken with the rods of thy schoole and academy: but giue mee to reioice in all the stripes of my strayings, yea euen in the changes of my changes, which will keepe mee sweete and acceptable, by the often scowring and purging of that in∣herent corruption, which is diffused and dispersed through my verie marrowe. LXVIII. For otherwise running astray still in a sinfull secure dan∣gerous peace of my affections(such as the world only hath) I shall grow like a puddle, infected with manie foule stremes and stinkes, in thy sacred nostrels: afflict mee therefore my gentle Lord, hold mee fast behind and before, and lay thy hand vpon mee, euen with all my verie heart; for that which thy afflictions take from mee, is nothing but my vanities, and workes of sin and Satan: for the nakeder I am before thee, the more beautifull euer, my gratious Lord. LXIX. So that whatsoeuer thou laiest vpon mee, it is onely to make easie the way vnto thy holie hill, thereto receiue sanctification and holy moderation in all my conuersation: for thou knowest both the daies and liues of all those that depend vpon thee, and wilt guide them in thy waie, & giue vnto them whatsoeuer is needfull: they shall lacke no good thing, but possesse all peace, plenty and ioy in their daies. LXX. For I know that all thy afflictions, as those same happie roddes of thy schoole, they are euer in thy owne most mer∣cifull hands, and measured in all pittifull moderation, both in quantitie, qualitie, and continuance of time: for quanti∣tie, thou propinest to each of thy poore wounded seruants,
a cuppe and portion conuenient for his brusing and incu∣rable disease, whereunto no man can applie a plaster but onelie thou the Lord alone. And as for qualitie; physicke must be a little bitter or else it is of no worth; yet therefore doest thou temper it with the blood of the immaculate lam be, the most happie Redeemer of the world, to make it both settle, nou∣rish, and heale the poore wounded creature. LXXI. And as for time, thou giuest but daies of triall and afflicti∣on, & houres of tentation according to thy good pleasure: and euen in this smal induring, neuer any Goldsmith did so watch ouer his gold in the fire that it wasted not, as thou tendest vpon thy children, that in due season thou mightest draw them out. O that same sweete zealous rebuke of the Lord Iesus vnto Satan! Is not this a brand taken out of the fire? the Lord rebuke thee Satan, euen the Lord that hath chosen Ie∣rusalem rebuke thee. LXXII. Thou hast mercifull Lord made it knowne vnto me, that thy seruant Iaacob wrestled with thee, no longer then vn∣to the dawning of the day; and that thereby I may be assu∣red my troubles haue an appointed time for rest, that weeping may abide in the euening, but ioy commeth in the morning: though Shadrach Meshach and Abednego be cast into the fire, an Angel of thine owne presence shall goe with them, and releeue them in due time: So that neither fire nor floodes shall harme thy afflicted ones, whom thou hast called by their names. LXXIII. For whatsoeuer thou most mercifull Lord, doest exercise thy children withall, it is but to make them know that teir blessednes is prepared in an other place, and laide vp for them from eternitie; And no man shall take them out of the
Lambes hands; for thou Lord who gauest them vnto him art greater then all; and therefore in those same very times, that thou goest away and leauest them to sorrow, yet they shall possesse the inheritance whose riches is infinite: An inheritance which beeing diuided amongst all the children, will continue sound and whole for euer and euer, whose parts shall be as great as the whole inheritance. LXXIV. Make vs strong therefore O Lord, and in admiration of such a high and pretious price, to scorne all the vaine things in the world; all the countenances of men, and the vtter∣most rage of persecuting tyrants: For let Peter, who denied thee by occasion of a weake woman, haue thy presence with him, and he will auowe boldly, the crucified Lambe before those who put him to death; so Lord shew vs the light of thy countenance, and no alteration shall dismaie vs. LXXV. Oh what a spectacle hast thou made for mine eies to be∣hold! nay, I am now so assured of thy mercies, and comfor∣ted by reason of the care I see thou hast of mee; as, though I should see the greatest Armie that possiblie may be prepa∣red, yet would I not be afraid, but stand still vpon the vn∣changeable written word, and my owne happie experience of thy truth, power, and promises, which are euer yea, and amen. LXXVI. O Lord couer mee vnder the grace and fauour of Christ Iesus; make his mercies my buckler and my shield, that I may learne and follow his steppes, and hope in nothing but thy gracious goodnesse, springing afresh out of his conti∣nuallie renewed and fragrant obedience, still orient in thy glorious face; that I may be euer zealous of his will, where∣by the dropping and sweating faintings of my afflictions,
may prepare and establish mee, in the whole accomplish∣ment of my sanctification. LXXVII. For the knowledge and obedience of thy will, my Lord, is all my verie whole desire, and the thing which must lead me, and guide me, through the windings and turnings of the labyrinth of this mortallitie; for this same verie obedience of thy will, is the verie path-way vnto euerlasting life, which I so incessantlie gape and wish for. LXXVIII. Reueale vnto mee therefore this thy will, and laie it vp in my soule, that I may there keepe it most deerelie, and in the midst of the congregation, I may speake of thy good∣nesse and righteousnesse by an open changed and renewed conuersation; rendring all holie acknowledgements of thanks and praises vnto thy name, and thereby bring many children vnto thee, to which onelie end I desire to liue. LXXJX. I know O Lord, that death is the penaltie of originall sinne and disobedience: but since I am now planting a gar∣den for thy delight, for thou saiest, thy heart shall reioice when my mouth speaketh righteous things: spare mee therefore my God, suffer me not to go downe all belowe, but euen at the mouth of darkenes and death, plucke mee out of danger; & mercifull Lord bee content, with my humble abashed and melting heart, without imposing penaltie for my deserued thraldome. LXXX. Heare therefore O Lord my sighes, and take in good part my broken voice, which testifieth thy euerlasting and vn∣changeable mercies: and since thine eare is neuer shut vnto those that call vpon thee sincerelie, & seeke thy face mour∣ninglie,
encline the same thy amiable face and countenance vnto mee: for all sorts of felicities follow thy presence con∣tinualie; afford the same vnto me my deere God, euen vn∣to this wounded heart of mine, and say and speake peace vn∣to mee: behold, I am readie to seeke thy face. LXXXI. O Lord, thou hast promised this mercie of thine, & how often hast thou from thy pittie sustained mee, when I haue spoken neuer a word vnto thee? by hearing my secret thoughts or rather the sighing desires of the spirite, calling vpon thee for grace and strength that I might be deliuered: How manie perils haue I passed, when I did not so much as regard thee, in the violent rage and sway of my miserable youth, euen by thine owne gentlenesse and care ouer me? LXXXII. For since thou art that vncreated word, which hath made all things which doe a parte of thy will, and thy will is a part of thy selfe: doth it not represent it selfe vnto mee as thy face, in such beautifull and excellent lineaments of di∣uinitie in the heauens and earth, as shine most brightlie in euerie part thereof, especialie in the places of thy pure worship? LXXXIII. Alas what daie, time, or instant of my life, should I cease to be waile and sorrow for my sinnes, which haue so much estranged mee from thy grace, fauour, and familiaritie, which the humble and meeke sorte haue with thee their God? whose armes are displaied still, and euer calling, Come, see and tast your rest, and be wearie of your fruitles toiles: and when euer thou pleasest to depart, to take view of our sor∣row and seeking care after thee; thou doest still by the ex∣tent of thy wings, by a secret instinct of grace, to follow thee with our eies, calling come, come, and see.
LXXXIV. O Lord my God, which from the beginning hast reached out this carefull hand of thine vnto the afflicted, which hast alwaies gathered into thy armes the oppressed, & comfor∣ted the iust vniustlie vexed; grant me O Lord both strength and courage, that I may take my spirits againe vnto mee, which are halfe in a dead sleepe and slumber, by the conti∣nuall distractions and vnprofitable cogitations, which my long exile and banishment from my countrie (where I was able to haue done thee some little seruice, and shew loue vnto my neibours) hath made vsuall vnto mee. LXXXV. Grant mercifull Lord, that I may be cheered to glorifie thee with all my heart and spirite, & strangle by the strength of thy voice, the blasphemies and vnrest of the wicked, who goe about to defame thine honour, and make a net for my soule, by speaking euill of thy equall, righteous, and most gentle yoake; and not beeing able to reach vnto thee, yet go about violentlie to rush vpon those thy poore afflicted ones, who desire to liue peaceablie, & serue thee faithfully. LXXXVI. Oh what ransome shall I offer vnto thee for my election (whereby I haue assurance of a more quiet peaceable dwel∣ling heereafter.) Alas, I confesse to my great griefe I haue not one good worke, neither cleane thought, but all adul∣terated and defiled with inherent vnrighteousnes, concu∣piscence, ignorance, and with the contagion of a long au∣daucious prouocation, by open transgression in thy glori∣ous presence: Shall I offer vnto thee the treasures of the earth? no, hell is full of them. No no my mercifull Lord, I faithfullie beleeue thou thy selfe wilt bee the price of my redemption: Thou wilt deliuer thine owne bodie, to ransome thy seruant.
LXXXVII. Thou wilt put vpon thee and cloath thy selfe with the dolours of death, to giue mee the state of immortallitie; for certainerie whereof, thou sustainedst thy hell heere, thy fathers wrath, agonies and bloudie sweate, that! might appeare in thy presence blamelesse and without spot, to the praise of thy euerlasting grace, for euermore Amen.
