21855 99852082 17386
¶ A briefe Treatise agaynst certayne errors of the Romish Church. Very plainly, notably, and pleasantly confuting the same by Scriptures and auncient writers. Compiled by Gre∣gory Scot. 1570 Perused & lisenced accor∣ding to the Quenes Ma∣iesties Iniunction. 1574. ¶Imprynted at London by Iohn Awdeley.
¶The Printer to the Chri∣stian Reader. THough volumes great and learned workes, Of famous men hereof be ryfe: VVherby both Papistes, Iewes and Turkes Haue deadly woundes, for all their strife. And though these sectes haue not such lyfe, In these our daies, as late they had: Yet (gentle Reader) take in briefe, This treatise gaynst these errors bad. VVhich for the truth in playne discourse, And pleasant verse, by sence well tryde, Of such as are learned and wyse: I thought therefore not it to hyde. But publish it, to daunt the pryde, Of them that styll wyll hold the same, Gaynst God and truth, and therein byde, Regarding neither truth nor shame. But chiefely for the symple sorte, This is set forth, in forme most playne, In pleasant wyse, and order shorte, That they may viewe with lesser payne, And in their mynde the same contayne, As for the learned though they know, These errors all, and them refrayne, For others skyll doth this allow.
The Author to me as vnknowne, To thee good Reader I commende, This worke out set, and now forth blowne, Shall shew forth that he dyd entende. VVhich was (I hope) some folke to mende, VVho wander in these errours yll, Thy fauour then to him extende, Accepting this as hys good wyll. And prayse thou God for this his lyght, VVhich in our dayes doth now so shine, VVho opened hath the myndes and syght, Of many learned, for profyt thyne. To God alone therefore resigne, These prayses due, and not to men, Yet in thy praiers haue in mynde, Their good estate, and thanke God then. But chiefely pray thou for those states, By whose good meanes this light we ioy, As namely Prince and Magistrates, VVhich keepeth vs from all anoy. The Pastors eke, for them do pray, And frame thy lyfe in vertues trace, In humble wyse them loue and obay, So shalt thou quyt their laborous case. FINIS.
¶A briefe treatise against certaine errours of the Romish Church. HOw is the faythful City chaungde,Esay. i. e from that it was before? Where righteousnes sometime did syt, now bloudshed raygneth more. Rome once it had renowmed prayse,Roma. i. e. for Truth therein dyd dwell: A faythfull Citie once it was, and others dyd excell. But now vngodlynes doth raygne,Mantua. in Roma. ex primo lib. Syl∣uarum. where fayth dyd then abound: Their wicked and most lothsome liues throughout the world doth sound. Rome is a cage of Birdes vncleane,Apoc. 18. a a sincke of filthy synne: Few errours haue the Church infect, that dyd not there begynne. From thence they spred ouer the earth what place could once be found,Apoc. 18. a, 14. b That frée was from infection? in Europe none was found.
Wher canker once hath taken roote, it créepeth ouer all, Herein that wicked mother churche we may to witnes call. Which once declining from the truth, and from the perfect waye, Hath euer synce mo errours bred, and further gone astraye. Of these errours my purpose is, here brieflie to intreate, But not of all, for that were much, the number is so greate. I meane of such as you your selues, by whom mayntaynd they bee, Gala. iij. a Rom. xj. b Deu. 29. aMight sone perceiue (so plain they are) if eyes you had to sée. This serueth for the ignorant, whom you do most infecte, The learned know your errours well, and haue them all detecte. Deu. xix. b 2. Cor. 13. a Iohn. 8. bThrée witnesses confirme a truth, yet mo that wytnes beare, Thereby you are more guiltie found, your errours more appeare.
The errours be so catholicke, in your religion, That order ther is none at all, but great confusion. Which is the cause that orderlesse, herein I do obserue, Althoughe to some it be offence, lesse blame it doth deserue. Therfore myne entrie wher to make, my mynde is muche in doubt, Suche heapes of errours do I see, your Romish church throughout. ¶Against Images and Idolatrie. BVt worshipping of images, a grose and gréeuous sinne, Because it is a custome old, with it I wyll begynne. In thinges against the law of God if that you do offend, Then pleade you custome commonly, your errours to defend.
But yet such custome here you haue, you may put in your plée. Why should it not take place? it is of suche antiquitie. Euseb. ec∣clesi hist. lib. 7. ca. 14 Hieron. in Iere. ca. 10Welnigh for age it rotten is, your Idols shew the same, The old heathen they vsde it long, from thence this custome came. But chiefely how they first beganne, Genes. 31. cand since haue taken roote, (Although yet some were long before) this briefly shall you note. Wisd. 14. bThe Father mourning for the death of his beloued Sonne, An image to remember him he wild to make anon. In time, this custome so preuaild, incrreasing more and more, That rytes and offerings were deuisde the Image to adore. And tyrantes did by cruell law, compell men so to do, The beutye of the cunning worke, did much intise therto.
Though Father onely for his Sonne, this image did deuise, Of small begynninges yet we sée great mischiefes may aryse. But thoughe Idolatry, among the Heathen thus did raigne: Yet of long tyme in Christ his church, no place it did obtayne. Vntill next after Christ his death, foure hundreth yeares were past, No Image then was worshipped, nor yet in churches plaste. But when the Apostles of the Lord,Euseb. ec¦clesi. hist. lib. 3. ca. 31 and their Disciples true Were taken hence, and few were left their preachinges to renue: The Church began then to decline, true knowledge dyd decay, Then Images crept in withall, and lead them more astray. But as I sayd, these Idols came from Gentiles, that did vse The Images of worthy men,Wisd. 14. b such as them selues did chuse.
Of whom some memory to kéepe, (by errour so deceiued) They honoured their Images, for benefites receiued. These Heathen conuert vnto Christ, Euse. lib. 7. cap. 14.lyke errour keeping styll, They caused Images to make, in signe of their good wyll, Of Christ, of Paul, and other mo, and kept them reuerentlye, Thus first amongest the Christians, began Idolatrye. Nothing in scripture is forbid, so muche as Images, Exod. 33. e.Yet to no synne more prone we be, then to such wickednes. But most vngodly is this worke, wherby you would expresse, The liuing God in outward forme, of grauen Images. Moyses giuing charge hereof, this euyll did forsee, Deut. iiij. cThou heardst the voice of God, he saith no Image didst thou see.
Take héed therfore vnto thy soule, alway remember this, No Image make vnto thy selfe,Deut. 7. d. a damned thing it is. The godhead is not lyke to gold, nor lyke to siluer bright,Act. xvij. It is not lyke to wood or stone. nor subiect to the sight.Exod. 33. d Who hath sene God at any tyme?Iohn. i. b. the workeman did but gesse, When lyke an old man he him made, of bignes more or lesse. Belyke his yeares they now decay,Iob. 10. who can be alwayes yong? His old gray bearde doth séeme to shew he cannot sure lyue long. The glorie of the immortall God,Roma. 1. c. whose shape was neuer sene, To Images of mortall men,Exod. 33. d thus haue you chaunged cleane. But whereof be theyr Images?Esai. 46. b Dani. 14. a Act. xvij. f. Wisd. xv.c. of God they can be none, For he doth lyue euen of hym selfe, and geueth lyfe alone.
Abac. 2. d Wisd. 13. dThe Image hath no lyfe nor breath, nor cannot moue at all, Barn. 6. cIt cannot once get vp agayne, if that it chaunce to fall. 2. Par. 2. bMoreouer God is infinite, and measurde cannot bée, His breadth, his length, how can you shew in mettall, stone, or trée? Iob. 11. bNo carnall substance is in God, such thought haue not in mynde, Iohn. 4. cGod is a spirit, and who can an Image thereof finde? Athana. contra. Gentiū. Esa. xlvi. bNo liknes then there is of God, in image wrought by arte, In substance, nor in outward fourme, nor any other part. Wis. xiiii. aTherfore accursed is the worke, reprochefull vnto God, Actes. 17. fWherby the Godhead you compare vnto a péece of wood. Yet here my meaning is not suche percisely to refuse, All Images of creatures, or none at all to vse.
For caruing and eke painting are good giftes we not denye, In similitudes of creatures, to vse them lawfullye. As Birdes, or beastes and of such lyke as here our eyes do see, Pictures of men some vse they haue, if story written bee. Except some pleasure to the sight, els profit bring they none, If that the storye be not shewed, but Images alone. Of Iesu Christ though man he were, great daunger is therein, To carue or paynt similitude, so proue we are to synne. For humayne body to suche end, our sauiour did not take, That Caruers should lisentiously, such Image therof make. But hauing wrought saluation, the same he tooke away Into the heauen, out of our sight,Actes i. b. vntill the iudgement day.
Iohn. 16. cHis owne Disciples did depende so carnallye vpon Christes bodye when it present was, Luk. 24. gHe did depart anon. Iohn. 16. aIt was not then expedient, his body here to bee, What helpe to faith with carnall eyes Ioh. 20. g.his image now to sée? Esai. 46. b Deut. 4. c.Image at all vnto our God we are forbid to frame, To Christ who is both God and man how may we do the same? Yet be they not his images, for monstrous then he were, For of a thousand, not one lyke another, doth appeare. What great offence, and what abuse, through Images haue béene, Experience doth teache to well, our eyes they haue it séene. The Paynters did to much reproche vnto the Saintes of God, To paynte them so lassiuiouslye, vpon a stocke of wood.
Or if they were playne on the wall, all did with gold so glitter, They lookt lyke wanton Paramours,Barn. 6. a I could iudge them no better. The blessed Virgin in her lyfe, both Peter, and the rest, Had they such precious garments then wherwith they now be drest? These pearles and rings they vsed not, they liued soberlye, But Papists thinke no shame hereof to vphold Idolatrye.Iere. iij. a. Ful wel they know these things intise when all doth shyne so bright,Wisd. xv. a The foolish people thinke it is, a comlye pleasant sight. For this they séeke for cunning men, the Image to set forth, The offerings els, for which they gape, they would be nothing worth. Thus of good creatures,Wisd. 14. b they are made snares to catche men in, Intrapted haue they many one, since first they did begyn.
Epipha∣nius in an Epistle to Iohn by∣shop of Ie¦rusalem.Therfore an Image may not stand, in temples where we pray, Of true religion they haue bene, alway the great decay. Lactant. lib. 2. de origine er¦roris. c. 19 Aug. lib. lib. de. 4. de ciuita∣te dei.Yea no religion can there be where Images be plast, The feare of God they take awaye, and bring contempt at last. Yea of the Heathen some ther were, that could not them abyde, But as vayn workes of Craftes men, they did them oft deryde, Augu. in lib. de ve∣ra religi∣one. Barn. 6. Socrates, he did more esteme a Dog by nature wrought Then Image made, which he despisde euen as a thing of nought. A Dog rather would he worship then Image wanting breath, Wherfore at length the people, did put him to cruell death. Ambr. in lib. 2. de virgini∣bus.When Dionisius went into the temple of hys God Iupiter, where ritchly deckt his gorgeous Image stood.
The Idoll he despised so, he dyd commaund anon, His golden garment to take of, and gaue a woollen one. Saying, that gold in sommer tyme to heauy was to beare, And in the wynter season so, to cold it was to weare. He tooke also from Images great dishes wrought of gold, Which fastned were wtin their hands, their offeringes for to hold, And sayd, he tooke nothing but that the Gods dyd fréely geue, So mocking them, of all their gold, he dyd them thus bereue.Barn. 6. a Though some in churches would them haue no honor being done,Augus. in episto. ad Deogra∣tias. 14. Yet where it standeth so in sight, the Image tempteth soone. As paynted Harlots they allure,Wisd. xv. a their pleasant lookes entise, If that they stand there any while, more euyll wyll aryse.
Herein few can them selues refrayne, so corrupt we be all, Exod. 32. cWithout intising prone we are, into such vice to fall. S. Hierō, Epipha∣nius. &c.Therfore the Fathers would not haue, an Image any where, In churches where the seruice was, nor Picture paynted there. Full well they did the euyll foresée, that shortlie after came, Idolatry would take her leaue, if we would do the same. In the de∣finition of the second Nicene: councell, anno. 781 S. Ierome translateth , si∣mulachris 1. Iohn. 5. & so in sūdry o¦ther places. Erasmus in his anno tacions vpō the, i, Cor, 8But for excuse this is alledgde, that Images alone, They haue set vp within theyr church, but Idols they haue none. But though an Idoll, and Image, do differ in outward sounde, Yet all one thing to signifie, in Scripture they are founde. The one a Gréeke word wel is known the other Latine is, Great difference who els do make, therin they iudge amisse.
Then may we cal them Idols playne, terme you them what you will, Such as long tyme the Heathen vsde, and such as you vse still. What Idoll worship hath bene done, by Infidels before, But to your Idols you your selues, haue done asmuch, or more? Temples they builded for their vse,Actes. xix. e and chappels in likewise, They made them shrynes and alters there for dayly Sacrifice.Acte. xvij. e They bowde their knees and fel down flat,Apocal. ix. d Baruc. 6. a Dani. iiij. a 3, King, 11, b they kist them reuerently, Their goodes they offred, and withall, incense aboundantly. They prayde deuoutly vnto them,Wisd. xiii. d xiiij. a for all kynde of disease, With floures and garlands they were trymd the better them to please. They had also to honour them, their candels burning bright, Which far would haue delyted them, if they had had their sight.Baru, vi, b
But this discomfort Idols haue, and greater they haue none. Baru. 6. b Apoc. 9. d,They be al blinde, and see asmuch, at midnight as at one. Roma. ij. aThese heathnish works compard with yours, wher do they disagrée? Your selues how cā you then discharge of lyke Idolatrye. In the de∣finition of the seconde Nicene councell.Agayne, their Idoles to adore, some of them do denye, They worship God, or els the Saintes, whom they do signifie. But God wyll not be worshipped by Image made with hand, Iohn. 4. aIn spirit and truth do worship him, for so he doth commaund. Augu. in lib. de ve∣ra religio¦ne. cap, 55. Baruc. 2. d Esai. xlij. bNor workship to the Saintes of God, in no wyse may be done, All glory, worship, and honour, is due to God alone. They are they say, but stocks & stones, we know as well as you, Thinke not then that we are so mad to them our knées to bow.
For that you know them so to be, and yet offend herein, This knowledge doth augment your fault.Luke. 12. l. the greater is your syn. The Heathen so know welinough their Idols what they were,Actes. 19. f Euen Images of fained gods which they did worship there.As of Iu∣piter, Apol¦lo, Mer∣curie. &c They were not yet so fond to thinke, that stones or wood so wrought, Could be the gods whom they did séeke, this was not in their thought. The Israelites that made the Calfe,Exod. 32. a they wist it was of gold, For of their earinges it was formde, their eyes might this behold. They did not take that Calfe for God, which did them so deliuer, But as a signe,Exod. 32. e their god in déede the better to remember. Yet were they all Idolaters,1. Cor. 10. a you can it not denay, Though vayne excuses here be made,Augu. in Psal. 113. you be as ill as they.
For though you say you meane it not to th Image that is there. Yet what your meaning is in deede, by this it may appeare. For where no Idoll present is, there present few will bée, To offer, or to knocke, or kneele, there candell none we sée. Therfore since Idoles were remoude, all pilgrimage is gone, Crouches, ships, nor men of ware, the people offers none. Those Idols haue these euils wrought and caused to offend, Destroye them all, and suche abuse, will soone be at an end. But sundrye meanes the Deuill hath taught these Idols to vphold: Gregorius the second.They serue (they say) for Lay mens bookes when they do them behold. Iohn. v, f 2. Tim, 3, d, Roma, j, c Psalm, xix,But knowledge of God and of Christ, the Scripture doth vs teache, His power and wisdome infinite, all creatures do preache.
These are good bookes to learne vpon, these God appoynted hath, But Images accursed are,Deut. 17. c Wisd. 14. a and do prouoke his wrath. If any would be ignoraunt, of God his holie will, These bookes will stand them in good stede, so to continue still. How Christ for vs was crucified, the scripture doth it shew, The Sacramentes in memory, the same doth oft renew. These are true witnesses of Christ, his death they set foorth playne,Galat. 3, a These be good meanes to thinke on him vntill he come agayne. Errour and vanitie is taught,Iere. 10. a Abacu. ij, v by Images of wood, They be all dumme and cannot speake, nor teach ought that is good.Baru, 6, a But when the Pastors waxed dumme,Esay. 56, d and true light did declyne, Their office to those Images, the Pastors did resigne.
For if that preaching had bene vsde, and people trulye taught, Those lying and dead Images, they néeded not haue saught, For Iesu Christ cannot be knowne, by sight of eye so cleare, Rom. x. dBut faith and truth obtayned is, by hearyng of the eare. Augu. in Psal. 113.When th Image stately standes a lost more power it hath to crooke The wretched soule, thē truth to teach to serue for any booke. Athana∣sius cōtra Gentiles.Therfore vnworthie is the worke, vngodly is the intent, To know the liuing God thereby, an Image to inuent. For if a mortall liuing man, whom God him selfe hath made, To know God or remember him, cannot at all persuade: Then dead men carued out of wood, how can they moue therto? Abacu. ij. d Apoca. 9. dThat haue no speeche, no sight nor life to stir them to or fro?
No knowledge then can come thereby nor any good at all,Baru. vj. e wisd. xiij. d 14. b They are most daungerous stomblyng blocks occasion of great fall. Wherfore for warning briefly take, and kéepe it well in mynde, The fearfull cursse that God doth geue in Scripture as we fynde.Deut. 17. d Accurssed be the man that shall a molten Image frame,wisd. 14. In any mettall, or by arte of caruing, do the same, And shall it place, so beyng wrought, in secret corner then, All people with one free consent, shall therto say, Amen.
¶Against the sacrifice of the Masse and the wic∣ked adoration. GOD hath his loue vnto mankinde Rom, , b, Iohn. iij. b. 1. Ioh. 4. bdeclarde in sundry wyse, But most when Christ hys Sonne he gaue for synne a sacrifice. Such was the greuousnes of synne, such wrath it did deserue, No sacrifice that euer was Psa, xiviijcould man from death preserue. Vntyll Christ Iesus offred vp Heb. ix, c, dhis body on the trée, An euerlasting Sacrifice Heb, x, b, cfor all our synne to bée. Apo. xiij. bChrist is the onely Lambe of God, whose bloud was shed for synne, And in full force remayned, since the world dyd first begynne, Hebre, x, a Hebre, ix, f. Heb, vij, dThe sacrifices that haue bene, and offringes long before, They were but figures of this one induring euermore.
This sacrifice was offred once,Hebre. ix.  Hebr. vij. d Christ was the Priest alone, To offer vp him selfe for vs, mo Priestes he néedeth none. How dare you then so wickedly this office to you take,Hebre. v. a To offer vp the Sonne of God new sacrifice to make? Though malice let you to confesse,wisdo. ij. d your errour yet is playne, No Priest on earth ought to presume,Hebr. ix. g to offer him agayne. Both bread and wyne for Sacraments we offer thankfullye,Theodo∣retus in Psal. 110. Heb, xiii. c Phi, iiii, d Psa, xlix, d Rom, xij, a Eph, iiii, e Malac, l, d Apo, viii, a Psa, exli, a We offer almes for the poore, with prayse to God on hye. An offring of our selues we make, renude in hart and mynde, Our praiers so presented be, such offringes do we fynde. To offer these the Priests them selues God doth not onely chuse, For Priestes we all appointed are,i, Pet, ii, b Apocal, i, b such sacrifice to vse.
Hebr. ix. b Esai. liij. b Iohn. x. cBut Christ was neuer offered, nor yet shall be agayne, But once, when he dyd yelde him selfe to death for to be slayne Therefore herein your wycked wyll, your purpose doth bewray, You would againe him crucifye, if in your power it lay. Or els why then do you attempt, to offer so in vayne Hebr. ix. gChristes body? which yet cannot be, except he dye agayne. You say your sacrifice doth purge both synnes of quicke and dead, Hebr. ix. eBut no forgeuenes can there be, except some bloud be shed. Heb. ix. bBy bloud into the holy place, the hye Priest entred in, By bloud our Sauiour purchased remission of our syn. And if your Masse such merite haue for lyuing and for dead, Vndoubtedly Christes sacrifice doth stand in litle sted.
What haue we got by Christ his death but Masse can it obtayne? From syn, from hell, it can discharge, and from etternall payne. Such holynes is hid therein, that onely hearing Masse, No daunger can vs then assaile, all thinges come well to passe. Such Masse we may blasphemous call if blasphemy there be, Yea full of wicked sacriledge, full of Idolatrie. Of all abomination, it is the wicked head, Your god on earth, you néede not looke for other in your néede. The sacrifice of Christ you make no better in effect, Then Oxe, or Calfe, or then the Gaote,Hebr, ix. v. x, b whose bloud are now reiect. For those before were offered, but could not synne remyt,Hebr. 10. Remembraunce onely they did bryng of synnes we dyd commyt.
As féeble make you Christ his bloud from synne vs to redéeme, Els would you not so vertuous your wicked Masse estéeme. Hebr, x, c ix. dBut Christ hath found redemption, that perfect is in déede, For euermore sufficient, none other do we néede. And beyng yet vpon the crosse, our raunsome to fulfyll, And yelding vp the Ghost, such were the woordes of hys last wyll: Mans health and his saluation, Iohn. ix. c Hebr. 10. cit is now consummate, And perfectly is finished, your Masse it comes to late. Hebre. i, c Iohnl, x. c i, Pet, ii,Why do we then his wordes mistrust, a Straungers voyce to heare? And leaue our Christ, who all our syns Esay. liij. bdyd in his body beare? The small vertue of your patcht Masse you might perceiue by this, The oft repeating of the same doth proue how weake it is.
For if it were of such a force, as could remoue our synne, Once being sayd,Hebre, x,  you néeded not agayne it to begynne. This was the cause that sacrifice was often done before,Hebre, x, a Hebr, ix, b Hebr, vii, Because they could no man agayne to righteousnes restore. Besides a number here vntoutcht, this errour is therein,About the yere of our Lord. 1226 Your carnall adoration, which late you haue brought in. Whereby you do with daunger great the Sacramentes adore, The creature for Creator,Roma. i. what errour can be more? What worship due is vnto God, what vnto Christ the Lord, Is not by mans wyll measured,Rom. xv.  ii, Pet, i, d but by Gods holy word. Such straūge worship as you do teach was neuer knowne before, In bread and wine here vpon earth, Christ Iesus to adore.
Mat. 26, c Mar, 14, c Luk xxij, b i, Cor, xi, fTake, eate, and drinke, and do ye this in memorye of me, And this deuyde amongst you all thus oft we charged be. But mention finde we none at all, of honour to it due, This doctrine had not bene forgot, if that it had bene true. i, Cor, xi, fThe Apostle did deliuer all receiued of the Lord, Yet of this adoration, he speaketh not a word. Your ydle braynes hath set aworke, the people so to do, You haue a spirit reueald you this, with many other mo. Iohn. 16. b Galat. j. d,But not the spirit of God, for that, doth alway well agree, With gods pure word that written is, your errours it doth flye. Our sauiour departing hence, hath left a pledge behinde, Of his great loue and benefites, which he wrought for mankynde.
Euen Sacramentes of bread and wine the which our eyes do sée, The vertue of his bodye and bloud, to teach vs sensiblye. By bread our body strengthned is,Augus. in episto. 22. ad Bonifa¦cium. Iohn. vi. f and noorished to lyue, Christes bodye so vnto the soule, the onely lyfe doth gyue. As wyne the hart it doth reioyce, and cherefulnes doth bring, His bloud so comforteth the soule,Iohn. vi. f aboue all earthly thing. Therfore the bread and wyne do beare (we néede not thinke it straunge) The names of thynges they signifye,Gelasius cōtra Eu∣tichen. yet substance doth not chaunge. The outwarde visible Sacramentes, the mouth doth taste alone,Augu. in Psal. 98. But spirituall foode is geuen therby, which faith must feede vpon. Of Christ to be partakers here, it is no let at all,August. tract. in Iohan. 50. Thoughe in his body he remayne, in place celestiall.
The sunne in substance is aboue, yet feele we here below The heate and power therof to worke, on all thinges that do grow. Augu. ad Dardanū . epist. 67So though Christes body be in heauen, yet here if is by grace, Through working of Gods holy spirit, as if it were in place. Phil, iii, dNo carnall presence then beleue, lift vp thyne hart on hye, There woorship Christ on Gods right hand Colo, iii, aif daunger thou wilt flye. These creatures he willed vs, with thankfulnes to take, Luke. 22. bIn memorye of that his death, he suffred for our sake. With Christ his Institution wherein doth Masse agree? What he comaundeth, that you breake and do cleane contrarie. Luk. xxij. bChrist in remembrance of his death, these Sacramentes hath made, But for the synnes of quick and dead, your Masse is dayly sayd.
Christes Supper, both the Sacraments of bread and wyne doth geue, But of the cup, your wicked Masse the faithfull doth bereue. Wher we these sacraments shuld take, as of his onely gift, You offer them to God for synne. as raunsome in his sight. That he was once an offring made, Christes Supper teacheth playne, But Masse doth daily offer him, for Sacrifice agayne. Christes Supper common ought to be, for all to feede thereon,Ieronim{us} in episto. ad Cor. 11. But Masse is priuate to the Priest, to eate and drinke alone. And when he hath deuoured all, (to shew his wickednes In mocking them) with emptie cup he doth the people blesse. You vse the wordes lyke to a charme, as if with your intent, They had ye power substance to chaūge where Christ it neuer ment.
What straunge iesture vse you therin, with turning to and fro? You blesse and crosse on euery syde, you becke and bowe therto. You mocke, you mow, you breath and blow, with coniuring among, No meruel though wōders be wrought your breath it is so strong. You stand some tyme as in a traunce, your fingers in your eare, Psal. lviij.Which signe doth shew you haue no mynd the truth at al to heare. You speake the wordes all to your selfe and that most secretely, Least other should your cunning learn, to make your god thereby. You lift the Sacramentes aloft, aboue your shauen crowne, Then when the Idoll is erect, the people falleth downe. You hang him in a rope of hempe, A signe of small good will, If any daunger make you flye, your god there hangeth still.
And so doth stand in great distresse, him selfe he cannot saue, As Labans gods were stolne from him,Gene. 31. c such help your God may haue. You kéepe him till he mould agayne, wher be you taught these thinges? Then do ye him for synne applye, to such as mony bringes. He was by Iudas sold but once,Mat. 26, b when he did him betraye, Iudas herein you do excell, you sell him euerye daye. Your masse doth darkē Christ his death and driues it out of mynde, If in the same as you do teach, forgiuenes we may fynde. Christes testament of giuing lyfe,Hebre. 8. d 9. d and pardon of our synne, By death it was confirmed once, nothing to chaunge therein. His testament you haue defaste,Hebr. 10. e his death you do denye, For euery Masse doth it not graunt, new righteousnes thereby.
And new forgeuenes of our synne, euen for the worke once wrought, What els do these new testamentes, but set the first at nought? But if you will haue them to stand, and ratifyed to be, Hebr, ix. dTo make them perfect Christ must com yet once agayne to dye. This was ye cause that numbers great your Masse so did embrace, As bringing all saluation, alone in euery place. So beutifull it did appeare, and shined all so bright, The simple man (bewitch) did thinke, it was a heauenly sight. But who so throughly doth it know, and looketh well thereon, A damned thing most detestable, will it confesse anon. These few may serue but for a taste, what of the rest to hold, For of the errours of the Masse, the third here is not told.
¶Against the praying to Saintes. WHat profit of true prayer is,1, King, 1, Psal. 51. d Baruc, 3, no tong can well expresse, What comfort to the heauy soule, opprest with carefulnesse. Thereby our God he present is,Psal. 50,  Psa. 145. d Mat, 26, d when daunger is at hand, Defending and eke strengthning vs, temptacion to withstand. His heauenly grace he graunteth soone,Esay. 65. d Mar. 11. c Heb. iiij, d Math. 7. b if prayer do complayne, Thereby forgeuenes of our synne, and peace we do obtayne. As walles the town doth compasse safe,Chrisost. de preca∣tione. when enmyes force is bent: So prayer doth the soule preserue, when Sathan doth vs tempt. But of all these great benefites, the faithfull you bereue, That in the Saintes of God do teache, the people to beleue.
All contrary to Christian faith, so leading them away, Ieres. 17. e Esai. 49. bFrom God the geuer of good giftes, our onely hope and stay. And so a wicked fayth reposde, then prayer did succéede, Whereby their names were cald vpon for helpe in tyme of néede. By this we know your church to be all false and counterfeat, Apoc. 17. a ij. dEuen that same whore in skarlet red where Sathan hath his seat. Dani. 9. c Esay. 43. aFor wher ye church of Christ remaines there God alone is knowne, His onely name who cals vpon, Baru. 2, dthose people be his owne. But with your Romish church it is Iere, 11, cworsse, then with Iuda was, Because the number of your gods doth all your Cities pas. For no disease nor daunger is, but there was euer one, To whom you did ascribe the power of curing it alone.
Saint Mary and saint Margaret for women great with childe, Saint Barbara from fearfull stroke of thunder, did vs shilde. Saint Loy was leach for al your horse, saint Patricke for your Oxe, Saint Iob he had the onely gift for healing of the poxe. Saint Iohn, and so saint Benedict all poyson could expell, Sebastian, and saint Roche for plage all others dyd excell. Saint Blase for swelling of the necke, Otilia for the sight, Saint Steuen also was prayde vnto, to saue vs in the night. Saint Clement and saint Christofer from drowning could preserue, For payne of téeth the onely prayse Appoline did deserue. For headach Anastacius, Vrbane was God of wyne, For sodaine death s. Marke was sought saint Antony for our swyne.
For ague was Saint Petronell, Cornelis had the skill, Of falling sickenes daungerous, to saue vs from the ill. Saint Valentine for the kinges euyll, saint Laurence for the fyre, All prisoners saint Leonard prayd, to graunt them their desyre. The Hunters had Eustachius, the whores had Magdalene, Vnto saint George in tyme of warre. what seeking hath there bene? These be your gods and many mo, on whom the people call, Ierem. ii. cThese be your stinking cesterns, that no water hold at all. Esa. viij. dWhen you thus ranne lyke Infidels, to seeke helpe at the dead, 4. Kin. 1, aYou thought no doubt in Israell there was no God to dread, Esay. 50. b 59, aYou thought hys power was verye weake and yet do think the same, Esa, xliiii,Els would you not put confidence, in any other name.
But Papistes and the Heathen both, in this faith do agrée, If many gods they haue to helpe, the safer shall they bée. This fond opinion was the cause,Augu. de consensu euangeli starū, lib. 1. cap. 18 the Romaines would not chuse The God of Israel, nor consent his seruice for to vse. For then they knew that for their God him onely they should take,Exod. xx.  Deut. vi. a But graunt they wold not, for one God all other to forsake. The first commaundement doth charge in one God to beleue, To praise him, and to pray to him, all woorship so to geue. These are chief points in seruing God, these thinges if we applye, Or geue to any Saint at all, our God we do denye. Therefore this one thing must you do, if prayer you will make, To Saintes departed, and your selues, to their defence betake:
First find ye meanes to make them gods then all this stryfe shall ende, Such prayer and such seruice done, they may you well defende. Gregory the ix. cano¦nized, saint Dominick and saynt Fraunces An. 1240.Your Pope he can canonize Saintes, your selues do teach it playne, Perhaps he hath euen as great power to make them gods agayne. Vntill you bring this thing to passe, in vayne you call vpon Esay. 63. dThe names of Saintes, for they know not the things that here be done. wisdo. 1. b 1. Kin. 16. b 3. Kyn, 8, f Apoca. ij. fThey know not yet the thoughts of mē, nor power haue they none. To search mās hart, how can they then graunt helpe to any one? This is not to despise the Saintes, Apoc. 14, b Esai. 42. b Aug. lib. de ciuita∣te dei. c. 10 Aug. lib. de vera re¦ligi. ca. 55. Acte. 14. cas you make some beleue, But this vnto God is his due, honour and praise to geue. But you do them most iniurye, for they yet neuer dyd Seeke that belonged vnto God, nor to be worshipped.
Therfore those blessed Saintes ech one in whom you now do trust, When Christ shall come to iudge vs al will then accuse you furst.Iohn. v. And where you make them Aduocates to God in tyme of neede, That through their intercession, we may the better speede: Such intercessors for mankynde,1. Ioh. 2. a Roma. 8. g God hath appoynted none, As meanes to bring vs vnto him, but Iesu Christ alone.i, Tim, 2, b He is the way, he is the doore,Ioh, 14, a by whom we enter all, The doore it serueth for true men,Ioh, x, a, b but theeues doo clyme the wall. As théeues we may you then accompt,Iohn, x, b such false wayes to inuent, If you ment wall, with Christ alone, then would you be content. He is the Mediator of all intercession,Aug. lib. cōtra Par¦menianō, 2. cap. 8. i Ioh, 2, a And not onely (as you do teach) of our redemption,
Of prayse which is perpetuall, you thus do him bereue, And that which was but temporall you are content to geue. Hebre, x, cFor once he wrought redemption, but raigning now on hye, Roma. 8. g 1. Ioh. ij. aHe there remaineth an Aduocate for vs continuallye. The Apostle hauing prayer taught, he sheweth orderly, One Mediatour Iesus Christ of God and Man to be. And least that errour should remayne or any doubt at all, Iohn. ij. aSaint Iohn also, Iesus alone our Aduocate doth call. Roma. 8. gOn Gods right hand he that doth sit, doth intercession make, Angell or Saynt, how can you then for Intercessors take? Exod, 32, f Ephe. vi. c Philip, j, a Gene, 18, cYet prayers which the faithfull make, as long as they do lyue, One for another in distresse for godly we beleue.
But those are wicked which you geue, and offer to the deade, Or when you séeke mo Aduocates, then Christ in tyme of nede. Our onely Priest is in the heauen,Augu. in Psal. 94. and there doth pray for thée, Who here on earth, euen for thy sake contented was to dye. The powre and vertue of his death which did vs all redeeme, This intercession whole doth worke,Hebr, xii. so God doth it esteeme. Then Christ appeareth so for vs, before the heauenly throne, That euen the merit of his bloud,ii, Cor, i, d can speake for vs alone. All promises that God hath made,Iohn. vi,  xiiij. b in Christ he doth fulfill, What thing we aske in Christes name he graunteth with good will.Chriso in homi. de proectu euangelij tom. 6. Ambr. in episto. ad Roma. None other patrone neede we seeke, nor long discourse to make, But if by Christ we come to him, he can vs not forsake.
In him if prayer do not ende, and so with him begynne, Augu. in Psal. 108.Such prayer doth nothing auaile, but turned is to synne. Ambr. de Isaac et anima.He is our mouth, by whom alwaye to God we may be bold To speake, he is our eye also, wherby we him behold. So our right hand he is, wherewith we do our selues present, Ioh xiiij, aThe waye to lyfe they do forsake, that other meanes inuent. Apoc. iij. bThe key of Dauid he it hath, that can both ope and shut, Mat, 28, d Mat, 11, dAll power is his, therfore for helpe to him we ought to suite. Psal. 50. cCall vpon God in thy distresse, seeke his powre euer more, Psa. 105. a Psal, 36.He will defend thee, and thou shalt yeld him the praise therfore. Psal. 18. bHis name it is a towre most strong, to all in tyme of néede, Ioel. ij. g Roma. x. cWho so his name doth call vpon, hath promise for to spéede.
The man is curst that flesh doth take,Ier. xvv. a to be his arme and strength, And in his hart from God the Lord departeth at the length.Psa. 127. e ¶ Against the iustificati∣on of workes. FRom Adam euen as from the roote,Roma, v, c viij. b 4. Esd. 3, c synne hath spred ouer all The braunches that be of his stocke, through that his gréeuous fall. Such is the poyson that from him all mankynde hath receiued, That since we all be borne in synne,Psal. 51. d and so in synne conceiued. Therewith came all our myserye, therewith did enter in Death, both of body and of soule,Roma, v, c Rom. vj. d the iust reward of synne. Then entred hate, and ignorance of God, and all distrust Of heauenly grace and righteousnes, thus Man was spoyled furst.
Ephes. ij. a Gene, j, d 4. Es. 7. d Eccl. 17. aAnd so became the childe of wrath, once loued entirelye. O Adam if thou hadst remaynde in that féelicitie, Wysd, 1, dThen honger, cold, nor yet disease, had neuer man assailde, Roma. v. bThen Sathans power, syn, death, nor hell had neuer so preuailde. Roma. v. bBut fithe the Diuell such wickednes into the world hath brought, Ephe, ij, cAnd so betwixt God and mankynde, such enmitie hath wrought: Of our religion greatest poynt, truly to learne is this, How man to perfect righteousnes agayne restored is. ii. Cor. v. d Roma. v, c Tho. Aq. in episto. ad Heb. 13 Nicol. de Lyra me pistol. ad Phil. ca, 2And how Gods fauour is obtaynd, from whence we were exilde, The meane we seeke to vnderstand, how man is reconcilde. Your Romish church doth falsely teach in workes of men to trust, And righteousnes in vaine to seeke, through merites of the iust.
But Scripture teacheth contrarie,Esay. 43. d Rom. iii, b that righteousnes is none, Whereby man can be iustefyed,Galat. ii. d in workes that here be done. But rightuousnes that shall auayle and euer more remayne,Rom. iii, e Psalm, 118 By faith in Iesu Christ his death,Gala, iii, a alone we do obtayne. Before God he is iustefyed whom God for iust doth take,Phil, iij. b Gala, iii, b Ephesi. i. a Actes, 13, f And doth acquite as Innocent, euen for his mercies sake. This Iustification then is wrought,Ambr. in Psal. 118 serm. 10 Actes. 13, f 2. Cor. 5. d when God doth synne forgeue, And doth impute Christs righteousnes to such as doo beleue. When man to grace God first did call his mercye for to show,2, Tim, 1, c Augu. in Psal. 31. What worke of mā did once him moue such mercie to bestow? He chose vs of his own accord,Esai, 43. d Ambr de vocatio∣ne Gent. lib. 1. ca. 5. not as he did foresée The worthynes of any worke that afterward should be.
Math, 7, cThe tree thus beyng all corrupt, what good fruite can it bring? Iam. iij. cWhat water cleare once can proceede from foule and filthie spring? Psal, 13. aEuen such is man with al his thoughts Rom. iij. b Augus. in Psal. 31.his wordes and workes he hath, All is corrupt, and doth deserue of God nothing but wrath. Apoc. 17. d Esay. 36. c Chriso in episto. ad Rom. ca. 1If any thing be worthy praise, if any worke be good, By grace the same is wrought in vs, the praise is due to God. The natural strength of mans frée wil Ioh, xv, awhereof so much you boast, Phili. ij. bNot one good worke can worke in vs, that fréedome now is lost. Eccle. xv. c Augu. de verbis A∣post. ser∣mo. 2.When man was create, then he had the power of free will, To stand in grace, and had the choise, so to continue still. Augu. in inchir. ad Laurenti¦um. ca. 29But so his will he did abuse, he lost him selfe withall, That ryse he could not by his strength, his wil he made it thrall.
Therefore what Sathan moueth to,Roma, 6, c Gen. viij. d we do it readilye, As captiues all he doth vs leade, Christ onely maketh frée.Ioh. viij. a His holy spirite doth geue the grace all godly workes to chuse,Roma, v, a Gene. xx. Ezech. xj. d Iere. 31. c It is his onely gift also that synne we do refuse. Were it not to great iniurye, the inheritance to clayme, Of landes or goods that were but lent, a while to vse the same? No lesse trespasse it is to God, to challenge as our right,Deut. 8. d The power to worke a godly worke, which is his onely gift.Iames. i. c Then seyng no good worke we haue,Esai. 43. d Iere. 13. d Rom, iii. b what righteousnes can be? What merit, wher nothing doth raign but great iniquitie? Yea though we be regenerate,Iohn. iij. a and borne in Christ agayne, No worke yet here so perfect is,Esa. 64. b Luk, 17, c Gods fauour to obtayne.
Esa. 64. b Psal. 51. cOur righteousnes all stayned is, whose hart is pure within? Who lyueth here so innocent, Iob. ix. cthat dayly doth not synne? Iob. 25. cThe starres that be in firmament, are not pure in Gods sight, Ioel. ij. cThe Sun and Moone comparde to him, at all they giue no light. Iob. xv. b xxv, a Aug. lib. 9. confes∣sionum.Then Man that is corruption, how can he iustefye Hym selfe, when God as iudge shal sit, hys righteousnes to trye? But when we haue done what we can Luk. 17. ceuen then both more and lesse Vnprofitable seruantes all our selues let vs confesse. Our dutie for we haue but done, nothing here can be founde. Of supererogation, in workes that doth abounde. If any thing we do besides, that God doth not require, It is but synne, and doth deserue nothing but wrath and ire.
A frée gift is our rightuousnes,Rom. 6. d. Chris. in episto. ad Rom. ca. 1 Ephe. ii. b Rom. iii. d obtayned all by grace, Least any man should boast him selfe, our workes here haue no place. For where to workes reward is due, there grace is none at all,Gala. v. a The worke once done, the workman may by right for wages call.Rom. iii. a Thus make you God in debt to man, if that without delaye The hyre that we haue labourd for,Ro. iiii. a he do not trulye paye. But those that in ye vineyard wrought a penny did receaue, Not as their labours did exceede, but as the Lord it gaue. So our inheritance in heauen, by promise frée we haue,Gal. iii. c Mercye doth measure all reward,Rom. ix. d no merites can it craue. Their rightuousnes who leaneth to, Christes righteousnes doth leese,Rom. x. a All workes reiecte, the Publicane by faith the Lord did please.Luk. 18. c
Gene. xv. bAnd Abraham his righteousnes by fayth he dyd obtayne, Rom, 4. bBecause to God his promise made constant he did remayne. Rom. iij. dSo fréely are we iustefied by Christes redemption, Through faith sure fixed in his bloud we haue remission. As Iacob did his father please the garment hauing on That was his brothers, and thereby the blessing gat anon: So in Gods presence when we shall at any tyme appeare, Christes righteousnes the garment that we must onely weare. Ambros. lib. 2. de Iacob et vita beata cap. 2.The swéete sauour that Isaac felt our faith doth signifie, The smell whereof so pleaseth God, it doth vs iustefye. Galat. ii, d Ambr. in episto. ad Rom, ca. 3Faith is the hand wherwith we reach forgeuenes of our synne, For this we say our righteousnes onely doth stand therein.
Fayth onely therefore and no workesAugu. in Psal. 31. Chris. in episto. ad Rom. ca. 1 doth synners iustefye, Because Christes righteousnes to vs alone it doth applye. Faith it doth purifye the hart,Acte. xv. b Hebr, xj, a Augu. in Psal. 31. then God doth vs accept, From Faith if they do not procéede, all workes he doth reiect. Abell therefore God dyd regarde,Gen. iiii. a Hebre. xi, his offryng he dyd chuse, But Cain and his sacrifice, as wycked dyd refuse. Yet meane we not of such a Faith, as fruite hath none at all, For that which dead is without worksIame. ii, c true Faith we cannot call. But Faith which is effectuall,Galat. v, a Abacu. ij. a whereby the iust doth lyue, As fire his heate alway doth yeld,Iame, ij, d so good fruite doth it gyue. As tyme doth serue, and néede require,i, Ioh, 3, c Galat. v. a so Faith doth worke withall, Therefore good workes through onely Faith are not destroyd at all.
Iam, ii. c, Galat, v, o Rom. iij. c iiij. aThe company of godly workes, Faith euermore doth loue, But when our Faith doth iustefy, then workes we do remoue. Roma, x, bFor vnto Faith is promised all our saluation, Galat, il, cWhich to obtaine, no works can help, but power of Fayth alone. But here the slaūderous tong doth say, good workes we néede not haue, It is lost labour to lyue well, sithe workes no man can saue. But faithful works they haue this end to glorify our God, Math. v. bWhen other seyng them so shine, his prayse doth spread abrode. Psal, 18, aThe Sun, the Moone, and eke the stars, they all created are, The glory of God throughout the world here dayly to declare. Then might the loue of God alone moue vs continually, Rom. ii. dTo shew forth fruites of godly workes, his name to gloryfy.
Besides the helpe the nedy haue,Mat. 25. by workes commaunded here, Our faith by such hir fruites is knownPhil. 25. d Galat. v. a and lyuing doth appeare. For Faith doth shew obedience,Iam. ij. c in outward righteousnes, Els dead it is and counterfet the faith that we professe. We are now saued from our foes,Luke. i. g from daunger and distres, To serue the Lord without all feare in perfect holynes. Darkenes we are no longer nowEphe, ij, d but cleare light in the Lord, In newnes of a godly lyfei 1, Cor, 6, c Titus. 2, b to walke with one accorde. These may persuade vnto good workes though not to trust therein,1. Pet. 1. c i. The. 4. a i. Pet. 4. a Our calling vnto grace doth moue a new lyfe to begin. And least we should faynt by the way,Hebr. vi. c Phil. ii. c Hebre. x. g Apoc. is. c or thinke our labour vayne, Vnto good workes is promised reward of heauenly gayne.
Esay. 43. dNot for the worke of his reward, nor yet for our desart, Ephe. ij, bBut doth proceede of mere good wyll, not due in any part. Chriso. in episto. ad Rom. ca. 1 Aug. su{per} Ioh. trac. 3For as good workes they be his gift, when God doth them regarde, So doth he crowne his own in vs, when he doth them rewarde. Dani. ix, b Barn. ij. b Apoc. iij. d Osea. xiii. cTo vs nothing belongeth, but shame and confusion, To thee O Lord the praise is due of our saluation. Apoc, iij, dTherefore as we be poore in dede, and destitute of grace, Euen so let vs confesse the same, in truth, before his face. Who craueth almes beyng ritch, of siluer hauing store? All beggers shew their poore estate, thereby to moue the more. Apoc. iii, dSo if we come as ritch in workes to God, how can we speede? i, Pet, v, bSuch beggers proude he doth refuse, to helpe in tyme of neede.
The trée doth lift it selfe aloft, that hath least fruite theron, But where great plenty groweth most it boweth down anon. So are we proude, and yet but poore,Esa, xliii,  Roma. 7. c no goodnes we haue here, Though we lyue well, yet euermore let vs fall downe in feare.Dani, ix, b And so not in our rightuousnes,Baru, ij, d Psal, 50, c but for his mercies sake, To God in tyme of troubles great,Bar, iij, a our prayers we will make. As vnto godly workes in Christ,Ephe. ii. b Ephe. v. d Hebr, xii. g we all be created. So let vs warely walke therein, as God hath ordayned. Forsaking all our former synnes,i, Pet, 4. a renude in hart and mynde, Least vnto Christ our Sauiour,Eph, iiii,  Colo, iii, we shew our selues vnkynde. Who by his death dyd vs redeeme,Gala, 4,  Apoca. v. c ii, Cor, ii, c Roma. 7. not to our selues to lyue, But vnto him, his lyfe for vs, that did so fréely gyue.
Psalm. 67O God be mercyfull to vs, and blesse vs plenteously, The brightnes of thy countenance shew vs continually. Esay. 52.That we on earth thy waies mai learn and euer thinke thereon, And that all nations here may know thy sauing health alone. FINIS. {quod} Grig. Scot. Imprinted at London by Iohn Aw∣deley, dwelling in lytle Britaine streete with∣out Aldersgate. 1574
