21990 23272172 26483
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of great Britaine, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To Messengers, our Sheriffs, in that part conjunctly and severally specially constitute greeting. Forsomuch as in our Parliament holden at Edinburgh upon the Twentie eighth day of June, 1633. the three Estates of our Kingdome of Scotland being assembled, having taken to their consideration the many blessings which this nation doth enjoy under our most wise, happie, and peaceable govern∣ment, whereof each Estate is most sensible, our Royall zeale for propagating the Gospel of Je∣sus Christ, our care for providing sufficient maintenance for the Clergie, our extraordinarie pains taken for uniting the dis-jointed members of this common-wealth, and extirping of all roots of discords, relieving the oppressed, and with so even and fatherly a hand curing the wounds of this common-wealth, as the wisest eye can finde no blemish in the temper of all our royall actions; and lastly, the great comfort they have by enjoying of our presence, pains taken, and expences disburst by Us in this our journey, Have made one voluntarie and free offer of one taxation to be im∣posed, collected, and payed to Us in manner and at the six termes following, That is to say, For the Barons and Free-holders partes of the same taxation Thirtie shillings money to be uplifted of everie pound land of old extent within this our kingdome per∣taining to Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Vicounts, Lords, Barons, Free-holders and Fewars of our proper lands, holden by them im∣mediately of Us▪ and to be payed by them at everie one of the six severall termes following, videlicet, The sowme of thirtie shillings money  feast and terme of Martinmasse in the year of God, 1634. years. The sowme of other thirtie shillings money at the feast and  inmasse in the year of God, 1635. The sowme of other thirtie shillings mony at the feast and terme of Martinmasse in th  1636. The sowme of other thirtie shillings mony at the feast and terme of Martinmasse in the year of God, 1637. The sow  other thirtie shillings mony at the feast and terme of Martinmasse in the year of God, 1638. And the sowme of other thirtie shillings money at the feast and terme of Martinmasse in the year of God, 1639. And for the spirituall men and burrows, partes of the same taxation, that there shall be uplifted of everie Archbishoprick, Bishoprick, Abbacie, Priorie, and other inferiour bene∣fice, and of everie free burgh within this our said Kingdome at everie one of the said six severall termes payment, The just taxation thereof as they have been accustomed to be taxed unto in all time by-gone whensoever the temporall Lands within this our said Kingdome were stented to thirtie shillings the pound land of old extent. And the same taxation to be payed at everie one of the six severall termes above-written. And for inbringing of the  termes payment of our burrowes, parts of the same taxation, Our other letters are direct, charging the provest and bayliffs of each burgh to make payment of the taxt and stent thereof To Our Coor generall appointed by Us for receiving of the same taxation, or to his deputes and officers in his name, having his power  the same, at the feast and terme of Martinmasse, in the year of God One thousand six hundred thirtie years,  of rebellion, and putting of them to our horn. For whose relief OUR WILL IS, and we charge you straitly and command, That incontinent these our letters seene, ye passe, and in Our name and authoritie command and charge the Councell of that our burgh of  To con∣veene with you the said Provest and Bayliffs, and elect certain persons to stent their neighbours, And the same election being made, that ye charge the persons elected to accept the charge upon them in setting of the said stent upon the inhabitants of that our said burgh, and to conveene and set the same, and to make a stent roll thereupon as effeiris, with∣in twentie foure houres next after they be charged by you thereto, under the pain of rebellion and putting of them to our horne. And if they failyie therein the said twenty foure houres being by-past, that ye incontinent▪ thereafter denounce the disobeyers our rebels, and put them to our horne, and escheat and inbring all their moveable goods to our use for their contemption. And like∣wise the said stent roll being made and set down as said is, That ye in our name and authoritie command and charge the burgesses, indwellers and inhabitants within that our burgh, To make payment of their said stent to you our said Provest and Bayliffs conform to the taxt roll to be made and given out thereupon within three daies next after they be charged by you thereto, under the paine of rebellion, and putting of them to our horne. And if they failyie the said three daies being by-past, that ye incontinent thereafter de∣nounce the disobeyers our rebells, and put them to our horne, and escheat and inbring all their moveable goods to our use for their contemption. And if need be, that ye our said Provest and Bayliffs poynd and distreinyie therefore, as ye shall think most expedient, according to justice, as ye will answer to us thereupon. The which to doe we commit to you conjunctly and severally our full power, By these our letters delivering them by you duely execute and indorsed again to the Bearer. Given under our signet at Edinburgh the twentie eight day of June, and of our Reigne the ninth year, 1633. Per actum Parliamenti.
