22162 99849991 15172
The Blazon of Papistes. ¶Imprinted by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be solde at his shoppe without Newgate.
To the Queenes most excellent Maiestie. SAcred, and most excellent Maiestie: May it please the same, to vouchsafe the reading of this Pamphelett, being a toye proper to the time, pleasaunt for your Highnesse veiwe, and most profitable to be vnderstoode. It is cal∣led the Blazon of Papistes: The diuersitie of whose natures being broughte within the method of Armorie are by an Armorist (your faithfull Seruaunt) blazoned accordinglie. For as in that Science the actions, gestures & natures of Beastes, Birdes, and other thinges, by tearmes of Art, are liuely expressed, so in this Sect of Papistry, their actions, gestures and natures compared with like tearmes are in some most pro∣perlie blazoned. viz. A Papist Couchant, A Papist passant, A Papist passant gardant, A Papist Variant, A papist Volant, A papist Seminant, A papist Saliant, A papist Rampant, & a papist pendant. All which if it might please your Maiestie to read and consider of, your Highnesse shall find as much performed in the Totall, as hath bene promised in the Title. Beseeching the Almightie King of Heauen to blesse preserue and keepe thee most worthie Queene on earth. Your Maiesties most humble Seruant & Pursuyuant at Armes, William Seager, alias Portcullis.
A Poem Aenigmaticall vppon the letter P. THe letter P. is most accurst I trowe, Of all the letters in the Christcros-rowe: For that it setteth (as it plaine appeares) The christcros-row togither by the eares, The reason is, this most proud letter, P. Would be aboue both, A. B. C. and D. And would proceed before, E. F. and G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. worthie Q. Seeking the Spoile of R. S. T. and V. (P). The Pope. (The Christcros-rowe.) Christendome. (The letters) perticuler. Signiories, Estates, and Degrees. (Q) The Queene. (R) Religion. (S) State. (T) Truthe. (V) Your Maiestie.
The Blazon. A Papist Couchant is that kinde of man That humbly bowes and bendes at euery becke, He knowes his times and therewith closely can Conserue his credit, and eschewe the checke, And by his chouching saue both head and necke. VVith least suspect and greatest fraude he liues, For in his harte consent to ill he giues.
A Papist Passant. A Papist Passant is of other spright, He is not nice to let his zeale be showne: For he will keepe the Lawes and Statutes right, To make himselfe true subiecte to be knowne. But such ill seeds proues weeds where they are sowne, They play but with the Feathers of Times winges, Hoping for chaunce and therwith change of thinges.
A Papist Passant Gardant. The Passant Gardant Papist as I finde, Is he that lurkes with watchfull Linxes eyne, Wary in wordes, and doubtfull in his minde, Least that his deedes should giue forth any signe, Hating the Church, and Seruice most deuine, Oft chaunging places like a Runnagate, He shunnes the Lawe, and to Communicate.
A Papist Variant. Partie per pale a papist Variant, Variant in showe, and counterchang'de in life, One while papist, another Protestant, Taking the strongest part in euery strife I feare such Ambodexters are to rife, VVho for to keepe their estimation, Resemble Apes in imitation.
A Papist Salliant. A papist Salliant is a publique Foe, A Malecontent, a hoper after harmes, A Libeller, and one where ere hee goe, That harkens after vprores and alarmes. Prest with the first to salie foorth in armes, To rauish, robbe, and rauine fully bent, Making Religion cloake of his entent.
A Papist Seminant. Ioyn'd with the rest of this pernicious broode, Are Seminants calde Iesuites of some, The Deuill sowes these tares among the good, To choake the corne before the haruest come. This weedy seede doth spring from wicked Roome, And scattered heere, to spoyle and ruinate, Our common quiet and our happye state.
A Papist Volant. A papist Volant is that Fugitiue, That flies the Realme (for conscience as they saye) When as in deede tis treason make them striue, For feare of Lawe to flie some other waye, Least that their winges be clipt if they should staye, But honest mindes will such ill Birdes detest, That so vnkindelie doe defile their nest.
A Papist Rampant, A Papist Rampant is à furious Beast That will not let to set vpon the Prince VVith violent handes, or seeketh at the least With forraine force his Countrey to conuince. Such Rampants haue beene rent not yet long since VVhose bloody minds intending bloody floodes. VVere duely drenched in their proper bloodes. D.
A Papist Pendant. Now to conclude a papist Pendant is, Such Malefactors as doe lawe offend: Thinking it conscience for to doe amisse, But Lord vouchsafe their wicked mindes t' amend Or send them all vnto a speedie ende, For of all others of this Romish race, A papist pendant hath his duest grace.
Summa. Of Couchant, Passant, and Passant Gardant, Of Variant, Volant and Seminant, Of Salyant, Rampant and Pendant, Now make th' accompt, & Summa foorth will fall, Not one good Subiect found among them all. FINIS.
