22427 99838370 2746
THE COVNTRY∣MAN WITH HIS HOVSHOLD. Being A familiar Conference, concer∣ning Faith towards God, and Good Workes before Men; fitted for the capacitie of the meanest. By R. S. Preacher of the word at ARLEY. See the Contents more particularly before the Booke. IOSVA. 24.13. But as for me and my house, we will serue the Lord. 1 PET. 2.17. Feare God, & NEHEM. 1.11. Desire to feare him. Imprinted at London by Edward Griffin for Ionah Man at the Talbot in Pater-noster Row. 1620.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR WALTER ASTON, KNIGHT OF THE BATHE & BARONET, AT THIS PRESENT LORD AMBASSADOR FOR HIS MAIESTIE TO THE KING OF SPAINE. AND TO THE LADY GERTRVDE, HIS MOST VERTVOVS AND BE∣LOVED WIFE. R. S. CONSECRATETH THESE HIS MEDITATI∣ONS, TOGITHER WITH HIS BEST WISHES AND SERVICES.
An Admonition to the Reader. I Presume thou knowest very well (good Rea∣der) that as the gifts of Teachers in deliuering are diuers, so are those of the Hea∣rers for conceiuing and profiting. For which cause the Christian Scribe must (as the great Diuinitie-Reader teacheth)Mat. 13.52, bring forth out of his treasure things both new and olde, that is, as I vnderstand it, fit his setting forth of sauing truth af∣ter sundry good sorts to the estate and capacitie of the Learners;Phil. 3.1. . i. mi∣nimè lubricum. and for them it is safe to write the same things vnto them. Thinke me not then to tautologize ouermuch in this Booke, neither yet blame me for lacke of exact method therein. For, besides that a familiar Confe∣rence,
especially of the Country∣man with his Houshold (for whose sake chiefly I publish these my country-meditations) is not so ab∣solutely freed from the one, nor so strictly tyed to the other; note (I pray thee) that my studie and en∣deuour herein hath beene purpose∣ly to convey the truth to the more ignorant and ruder sort in such forme and so many words as I sup∣posed them able to receiue it;Esai. 28.9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. & 9.22. Heb. 5.11, 12, 13. and if they should not rightly conceiue and lay hold on the truth in one place, speech or passage of the Booke, yet in another they might attaine to it, if it shall please the Lord. To which end I haue retai∣ned (chiefly in the weightiest prin∣ciples) some common phrases and kindes of speech vsed in Cate∣chismes, because I take them to be plainest & more generally knowne. Namely, I haue here and there
vsed some answers out of Master William Perkins (of worthy memo∣rie) his Catechisme. And in some three or foure places also I haue imitated others a litle in some re∣spects. The reasons against Tran∣substantiation, and many of those Questions and Answers about fit and worthy Receiuers, and some few about Receiuing worthily are the labours of that judicious man and mine especiall frend Mr A. N. All the rest (so far as I remember)Neither yet hath my paines beene the lesser in those few things that I haue taken from others, as the discreet Reader may easily perceiue by my man∣ner of vsing them. are my poore indeuours, togither with the frame of the whole, so sha∣ped as I thought fittest for my pur∣pose. Indeed when I began with this Worke, I intended onely some briefer thing, as a short Catechisme, but afterwards partly considering the great and manifold necessities of the ignorant, and partly follow∣ing the aduise of diuers godly per∣sons whom I consulted withall, I
haue inlarged my selfe to so many matters as you may see. The do∣ctrine and substance I assure my selfe is sound, and (I am priuie) pro∣ceedeth from a heart that is willing to promote the common saluation,vers. 3. as Iude calleth it. Let it not want therefore (judicious Reader) thy Christian good word, at least let it be free from thy blame, though (it may be) there shall be found some shew of Reason for such censure, considering not onely my defence premised, but also the cause and honour of Him who is too often pierced through the sides of his poore seruants, and fearing the of∣fence of the weake, who (God knoweth) are soone turned out of the way. Albeit, I take, it had bin no great difficultie for me to haue made it both shorter and more me∣thodicall, saue that (if I do not mi∣stake) I iudge this often repeating
the surest or likeliest way to effect my intent and desire. And if God shall moue any few of those Housholders (hearts) who haue hitherto vsed litle or no meanes in this behalfe, to vse this, so that it be with conscience, I haue inough. And why should they alwayesPsal. 2.3. breake Christs bands asunder and cast away his cords from them? Now the Lord of his deere mercy conueyed vnto vs by the blood of of his onely Sonne, by his all-working Spirit, blesse my simple labour, thy fauourable allowance, and euery ones Christian vse of it, vnto his owne praise in the buil∣ding of his Church. Amen. Thine in the Lord, R. S.
The Table of the Contents. THE drift of the Author in this Booke, and concerning the instru∣cting and reforming of the Country-mans-houshould in generall, and par∣ticularly some directions and formes of teaching Children so soone as they can speake, and such as hauing spent a great part of their time in ignorance & carelesness, can repeat some things, as the Creed, the Lords Prayer, &c. but yet vnderstand little or nothing thereof, and therfore cannot put what they say to any good vse. pag. 1. to 59. I The First part, Concerning the Law of
God contained in the tenne Com∣mandements, which are summarily expounded, and the vses of the Law in generall, briefly set downe. pag. 59. to 79. II The second part, Concerning the Gospell, where the Creed is explaned. pag. 79. to 111. III The third part, concerning the Meanes of Grace in generall: And first of the Word of God, and of the Exercises thereof, pag. 111. to 115. Secondly of Prayer, Where. 1: An Exposition of the Lords prayer. pag. 115. to 126 2. Two formes of Prayer for the vse of the Country-mans-House∣hold on worke-daies, the one for the
Morning, the other for the Eue∣ning. pag. 126. to 148. 3. Two formes of Thanksgiuing, the one before meat, the other after meat. pag. 148. to 149. 4. A forme of Prayer for one in pri∣uate, for preparation to the Sab∣bath. pag. 150. to 161. 5. Certayne godly Hymnes or Psalms for priuate vse. pag. 167. to 174. IIII The fourth part, Of the Sacraments of the New Testament p. 174. to 178 1. Of Baptisme. pag. 178. to 182. 2. Of the Lords Supper. pag. 188. to 194, where, of fit and worthy Receiuers, &c. p. 194. to 206. V The last Part, where 1. Of the Practise of the Communion of Saints. pag. 206. to 110. 2. Of the Effects of the foure meanes
of Grace, both in good and bad. p. 209, to 211. 3. Of the consideration of Gods works. pag. 211, to 212. 4. Of Christs Protecting of his Church pag. 212, to 213. 5. Of Christs Disposing of all things to its greatest good, as of Sinne, Af∣flictions, Death, &c. pag. 214. to 221. 6. Of the last Resurrection & Iudge∣ment generall. pag. 221. to  228 7. Of watching. pag. 228. to 235 8. And of Christs full glorifying of his Church in Heauen. pag. 235. The Peroration, or Summe of the whole, composed in easie & plaine meeter. pag. 238. to 254.
THE COVNTRY-MAN WITH HIS HOVSHOLD; Being A familiar Conference, concerning Faith towards God, and Good Works before Men, fitted for the capa∣citie of the meanest. The Speakers conferring be these fiue, The Pastor. Parent. Childe. Seruant. Scholler. Pastor. GOd2 Ioh. v. 10. speed you. Parent. And you also.Act. 16.15. If you haue iudged me to be faithfull to the Lord, come into my house,vers. 9. and helpe
vs, that we may learne and be stirred vp to1 Thess. 2.11. walke worthy of God, who hath called vs vnto his kingdome and glory. Pastor. Indeed I haue often and long time marueiled of the generall-grosse neglect and strangenesse of your selfe & other housholders, in that you haue contented your selues with a bare and fashionable vse of your Ministers la∣bours in publicke, without seeking any fellowship (whiles you are in prosperi∣tie) with them in priuate, as touching the matters of God. Wherein now, at the length, it seemeth, you desire my helpe: For hitherto you and other Housholders haue by your carelessnes this way, not onely hindred and discou∣raged your Ministers in the worke of the Gospell, but also wronged your selues and your owne people (besides the euill example you haue giuen to others) in such sort that neither the ju∣dicious can well tell what to thinke of you, nor yet you your selues (for the greater number I feare) know whether you profit or not by the publike
preaching of the word, though it be both plentifully and fitly set forth of the Ministers, and also ordinarily fre∣quented by you. I say litle of the want, yea & of the alienating of the affectiōs of Loue and Delight, (yea and of Zeale oftentimes) which as they are on the one side procured and nourished by of∣ten societie and familiaritie, and there∣vpon doe much further the soule for the knowledge, beleefe, and practise of Godlinesse; not vnlike to good hand∣maides, who by their continuall indu∣stry do set forward their Mistresse busi∣nesse, and therein promote her welfare: So on the other side, these being wan∣ting or estranged, many good things become vnprofitable, and vsually very wholsome orders and directions are ei∣ther refused, or litle or nothing vsed, and so the soule is neuer the neerer, and it may be the further off from piety; as it commeth to passe by such maides, as either do not minde diligence, or addict themselues to other matters then their seruice, and therefore are so farre from profiting their Mistres, that contrarily,
they do rather incomber her and hin∣deer her good estate. And what disho∣nour the Lord sustaineth by this pro∣fane course, I leaue to be lamented of all those that know what Gods glory meaneth, and haue any feeling of the greiuous and intolerable losse of it. But I pray you what haue you thought ofAct. 20.20, 31. S. Paul his three yeeres diligence at Ephesus by night and day, in teaching and warning euery one of the Church of God with teares from house to house? And what vse haue you made of his plaine exhortation, toHeb. 13.17. obey them that haue the rule ouer you, and to submit your selues; and likewise of his request,1 Thess. 5.12, 13. to know them which labour among you, and are ouer you in the Lord and admonish you, and to esteeme them very highly in loue for their workes sake? Parent. For my part I must confes, that albeit I haue knowne such testi∣monies of holy writ, yet I haue not so seriously considered & applied them to my selfe, as now of late time & euery day more and more I doe. And for o∣thers, I beséech God to moue their
hearts likewise toPsal. 30.1. 1 Cor. 16.15, 16 dedicate them∣selues and their houses to God, that euery one may helpe and labour with you for the entertainment and promoting of the Gospell of Christ. Pastor. Verily you haue caused me much greefe, because through your strangenesse I haue bin but slenderly able to follow the Lords will,Ezek. 34. by seeking out his sheepe, specially those that are lost, feeding them in fat pa∣stures, laying them in good folds, bringing them againe that were dri∣uen away, binding that which was broken, strengthning that which was sicke, &c. And for that I could not approue my selfe to be that good and carefullIohn 10.3, 4. Shepheard, who calleth his owne sheepe by name, leadeth them out, and goeth before them that they may fol∣low him. And withall you haue made me much ashamed that I am so igno∣rant and vncertaine of the particular persons estate in my flocke, and the more, when I thinke of Cyrus the Per∣sian King, of whom it is recorded,Plinie. Solin. Val. Max. & others. that he knew both the faces & names
of all the souldiers in his armie (which was very great) so that he could salute and (as neede required) exhort euery one by name to vertue and manhood, and yet his drift was but for earthly glory and a temporall victorie: But my office is ordained of Christ the Captaine of our Faith, to direct and incourage his Souldiers to get the greatest victorie that euer was or can be, euen ouer the Deuill, Sinne, Death, and Damnation, and to obtaine euer∣lasting glory, and that with Christ the Lord of glory. Howbeit it is come to passe through the subtiltie of Sathan and Mans corruption, in the lacke of a religious & familiar societie betwixt me and my charge, that I haue but litle certaine knowledge of their spirituall estate, and therefore am forced to ex∣pect the lesser fruit of my publike la∣bours, eftsoones censuring my selfe as doing my office but by the halues, onely in preaching a Sermon or two out of the pulpit ech weeke vpon the Lords day, which yet I cannot so pro∣fitably performe in fitting my labour
to their estate, as otherwise I might, to wit, if I and they had such priuate fel∣lowship, as the Lord commendeth vn∣to vs in his holy word. For which and diuers other reasons, I doe not onely seeke and take some likely opportuni∣ties with them, to set on foote this ho∣ly Ordinance of the Lord, but withall I cease not to pray the Almighty, the Author of all good gifts and Father of lights, as well to inable and guide mee with necessarie graces and godly wise∣dome, in some good & constant course, to bestow some priuate paines this way, as to open the dores of my peo∣ples hearts and houses to make some good vse thereof; and I waite for the mercy of God in raising vp some hel∣pers to the same end, and in vouchsa∣fing me some happy entrance into so worthy a meane of his glory, and of our spirituall aduantage, so long as he continueth the earnest desire of my heart in this behalfe, and my godly la∣bours amongst them. For this course that I speake of, and you do now begin to embrace, if it be well performed
and accepted, will (by Gods blessing) make mens houses, yea & the meanest cottages, honourable and reuerend in the account of all godly men, as we doe read that sundry in the primitiue Churches, founded by the Apostles, were adorned by the name ofRom. 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.19. Col. 4.15. Philem. v. 2. Chur∣ches, the worthiest societies of men in the world. Parent. Nay rather, I and my Fa∣milie, and such as we haue béen, haue cause to gréeue and be ashamed for our strangenesse to you, & to whom∣soeuer else might benefit vs in grace, as you haue shewed; yea and to feare lest God in his iustice should cast vs out of the number and reckoning of Christian houses, asGenes. 21.10, 12, 14. Abraham at Gods commandement cast out Hagar and Ishmael out of his house, because we are so far from the2 Tim. 3.5. power of Godlinesse, that we want the forme thereof in our houses, which ought to be (as you haue said) as so many Churches both for the forme and power of godlinesse, vnlesse it shall please God to direct vs to take a bet∣ter
course, and that with spéed, and to blesse it vnto our vse. Wherefore, sir, I pray you let me obtaine your pre∣sent counsell and furtherance to re∣forme my Houshold, and to plant good order therein for this great worke of Gods Holy Gospell: And euen now, if your time and occasions will per∣mit, come in,Act. 10.33. that we may heare all the things that are commanded you of God. Pastor. You speake in fit time, for I am not altogither vnprouided at this present, to confer my small gift vnto you and your houshold.Luk. 10.5. Peace be to this house. Parent. Psal. 129.8.The Blessing of the Lord be vpon vs. Will you that I call in my people, that they may enioy the bene∣fit of our Conference at this time? Pastor. It shall not neede to doe so now, till I haue made a Preparatiue by a course which I haue in hand; and then hereafter by the grace of God we will proceed altogither. My Prepara∣tiue is by this Booke, wherein I haue set downe such informations & Helps,
as I iudge most needfull and fit for such Housholds as yours is. This there∣fore I will bestow on you, vpon condi∣tion you will promise me that you will not be slacke, to vse it in your house, according to the directions thereof, so far forth as you shall finde it vpon iust tryall, to be the truth according to Godlinesse, and conuenient for your estate. For this Booke doth not onely touch the cheifest points of Faith to∣wards God and Good Workes before Men, and that in the plainest manner I could deuise for the vnderstanding of the weakest persons, and breifely expoundeth the Lords prayer, the Ten Commandements, and the Con∣fession of Faith, with the doctrine of the Sacraments, and diuersSee the Table of the Contents. other ne∣cessarie things, but also it prescribeth certaine formes of Prayer & Thanks∣giuing, and some Psalmes or Hymnes, which you may vse for prayer and praise to God, your owne edification and comfort, and the stirring vp of others to seeke the Lord with you. All which things, I desire you, not
onely to read once or twise ouer, (for nouelties sake, as many are wont to do in these dayes without any further vse in a manner) but also to follow the di∣rections and course therein aduised (vnlesse you can meete with a fitter helpe) for your better inabling and drawing on to call vpon and magnifie Gods name, and to confesse his sauing truth of your selues, without the gui∣dance of set formes, and till you can with iudgement make choise of such Psalmes for priuate vse, as are sutable for any condition of minde or bodie you shall be in. Parent. I most heartily thanke you. But (I pray you) do you propose all that you haue written in this booke to be learned by heart? Pastor. No: But my meaning is:  First, that the three formes of Prayer, to wit, two for the working daies, and the the third for the Sabbath, the Ex∣planation of the Creede, and the dire∣ction for singing of the Psalmes be constantly vsed, though they be read vpon the booke, either by your selfe,
or some other of your house, whom you shall appoint, till you or some o∣ther (I say) of your house shall be able either to vse them without the booke, or otherwise to conceiue prayer &c. of your selues, which indeed is the thing that you must principally labour for. Secondly, that all such Questions and Answers as doe passe betweene the Parent and the Childe shall bee learned by heart of all them, whose hearts God shall moue and inable to labour therein, wheresoeuer they be placed in the Booke and in such order as they stand, as also the two formes of thanksgiuing before and after meate. And those things are principall and fundamentall points of Religion, and therefore most needfull to be learned. And thirdly, those Questions and Answers which passe betwixt the Ser∣uant and the Scholler, (wheresoeuer they be throughout all the fiue parts of the Booke) I doe commend vnto the often and diligent reading and no∣ting of the well-disposed, vnlesse it shal
please them of their owne accord to get by heart any choise matter which they shall finde in it to be most for their good. For daily vse and constant practise in reading good matter, (spe∣cially being penned in forme of Con∣ference and pithily) shall by Gods bles∣sing (in tract of time) preuaile much, euen aboue expectation, (though one cannot attaine to learne euery word in order by heart) at least it will bee a Meane to increase knowledge, and to make the Points of Doctrine much easier in hearing the publike Ministery. Now this part of the Conference (I meane betwixt the Seruant and the Scholler) containeth sometimes Expla∣nations, somtimes Reasons, and some∣times Vses of the Points of Doctrine professed in the Conference betwixt the Parent and the Childe, and some∣times markes of sauing grace to direct the weaker sort to iudge and discerne the better of their spirituall estate, and sometimes confutation of errors and taking away of doubts. By Scholler I vnderstand such a one
as can write & read the English tongue in any ready & competent sort, though he want other literature. And because this kinde of Schollers are better fitted to heare the preaching of the word, & to look into the holy Scriptures with more likelyhood of fruit, than others who haue not those gifts of writing & reading, I haue therefore assigned him to make answer to the Seruant (who also by reason of his or her age and ex∣perience for the most part, ought to haue more judgment than the Childe) in points that tend vnto greater perfe∣ction and growth. And withall I haue also brought you (the Parent) in, some∣times asking my helpe, and sometimes conferring otherwise with me, and my selfe (the Pastor) answering your Que∣stions, replying, satisfying your de∣mands, aduising or exhorting in sun∣dry matters and passages of the Booke. Parent. I thanke the Lord for the care you haue had of me and my peo∣ple and such as we are. And I do pro∣mise (by the grace of God) to obserue
your order and directions both for my selfe and all my familie, as also for other my speciall frends, with whom I can preuaile, vntill it shall please God to bring vs to some com∣petent perfection, that we be as good or better than your Booke. Pastor. Well then, remember your promise, and consider that it is impos∣sible for you1 Sam. 2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 22, 23, 24, 25. to seeke and serue the Lord in the Congregation, and yet to to be negligent or prophane in the house. And looke that you breake not off a good course well begun, but hold on with cheerefull resolution and constancie against all temptations and stumbling blocks. And euermore be carefull to proceed with a good and honest heart, neuer seeming before men to be more religious than indeed you are before God, who is the sear∣cher of the hearts. And haue respect to your conuersation, that it be such as mayTit. 2.10. adorne the doctrine of God our Sauiour in all things. And to this good worke of informing & reforming your Houshold, it shall be much helpfull for
you, often and seriously to call to minde,  First, the Commandements which God hath giuen, togither with the Promises that he hath made to the truly obedient in this behalfe: And  secondly, the Examples of the Godly Fathers mentioned in Scripture, who haue practised & furthered this worke, and specially of Abraham, Iosua, and Dauid, whom the Lord made notable patterns for all Christian Housholders to imitate. Parent. I pray you giue me some taste of Gods commandements and promises laid forth to all Houshol∣ders. Pastor. The Commandement or rather Charge that the Lord giueth you is most plainly expressed in Deu∣teronomie. In one place he beginneth thus,Deut. 6.6. These words which I command thee this day shall be in thy heart: And in another, thus,Deut. 11.18. Yee shall lay vp these my words in your heart and in your soule; And then in the former place he pro∣ceedeth thus,Deut. 6.7, 8, 9. And thou shalt teach them diligently vnto thy children, and
shalt talke of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou lyest downe and when thou risest vp. And thou shalt binde them for a signe vpon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets betweene thine eyes. And thou shalt write them vpon the posts of thy House and on thy Gates. His meaning is,Housholders must apply this worke. that because mans heart is scarcely by the greatest and most continuall labor brought into due order & obedience, that  first, for our selues we meditate his word so much the more carefully and earnestly, that we may vnderstand and embrace it in the whole course of our life: and  secondly, that we doe our best endeuour to propogate the do∣ctrine of it from one to another, euen to all posteritie. He saith, Teach them diligently; the Originall hath it thus, 1. Et exacues ea, vel, Et ea acutè ingeres. Tremel. Put them pearcingly, as warriours shar∣pen and whet their weapons to pierce and cut their enimies with more easi∣nesse. Therefore Parents & Houshol∣ders must put Gods word so importu∣nately and fitly vpon their children & people, that there be no failing on
their part for lacke of the best course and manner that may be taken but that the other may receiue it. So then you must carry your selues towards them, as those that will haue no nay, and that whatsoeuer else they entertaine or re∣fuse, this holy doctrine they must needs embrace. Thus the Lord requireth you to be diligently and euermore bent and bu∣sie to accept and promote his word to all your people, and specially to your children, pressing it vpon their consci∣ences, whether you be in rest or moti∣on, and in what place soeuer you be, ta∣king the likeliest opportunities, and vsing your greatest wisedome to make it effectuall in their hearts. To which ends he admonisheth you to haue it in a readinesse in your hearts, as a thing that you alwaies carry in your hands, to be put to present vse vpon ech oc∣casion, and as a thing that is euer to be seene directly before your eyes, and therefore to be alwaies in minde, and neuer to be out of the way,Psal. 18.21, 22. but ready for a continuall rule and constant pra∣ctise
in all your wayes. Then the Promise is added in these word,Deut. 11.21. That your dayes may be multi∣plied, and the dayes of your children in the Land which the Lord sware vnto your Fathers to giue them, as the dayes of heauen vpon the earth: that is to say, Both you and yours who serue the Lord in his word shall prosper and be blessed both here & euer. For the mul∣tiplying of dayes noteth the happines of time and liuing vpon earth; and the Land of Gods promise or oath (which was Canaan) signified euerlasting life. Parent. Shew me likewise the ex∣amples of piety in this behalfe, wt you haue named, & first of Abraham. Pastor. Of Abraham the Lord said thus,Genes. 18.19. I know him, that he will command his children and his houshold after him, and they shall keepe the way of the Lord, to doe iustice and iudgement, that the Lord may bring vpon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him. Lo here Gods own report both of Abrahams course in glorifying God by his children and houshold, & also of his owne gratious
blessing vpon him and his progenie, according to his free promise, besides the present fauour God shewed him, in acquainting him with his secret pur∣pose to proceede against Sodom and Gomorrhe: for which and other causes Abraham is often graced in the holy Scriptures with that speciall title, The Friend of God. Parent. A digression, why Abraham is called, The friend of God.Let me intreat you to de∣clare vnto me more largely & plainly, the meaning of that title which God gaue vnto Abraham, The friend of God? Pastor. For three Reasons.  First, we know it is the manner and dutie of true and louing frends to shew speciall fauour and kindnesse one to another, and to make hearty and vnfained pro∣mise of their mutuall loue as well ei∣ther to other, as to ech others posteritie after them, and to giue credit either to others affections and words, yea and duly and mindfully to performe their promises on both parts, as Dauid and Ionathan did: But wee read in the Scriptures, of Gods singular fauour
and mercy on th'one part towards A∣braham in calling him by his grace to be faithfull,Rom. 4.1, 13, 16. the father of the faithfull, and the Heire of the world, and in ma∣king him great promises to the same and other purposes, and repeating them often vnto him, chiefly concer∣ning the Messias, who should proceed ofMath. 1.1, 2, &c. Gal. 3. & 4. with Gen. 12.15.17. & 22. chap. 2 Chron. 20.7. him and of his posteritie accor∣ding to the flesh, concerning himselfe and his seede both by nature & faith; and by faith (I say) both of Iew and Gentile temporally and eternally; All which God hath performed and will accomplish to the full in Christ the blessed seed: And of Abrahams Faith and Thankfulnesse on th'other part; His Faith, in giuing full trust and cre∣dit vnto Gods loue and promises; His Thankfulnes in behauing himselfe as the speciall friend of God and of his glory throughout his whole drift and course, labouring to promote and maintaine Gods name and seruice vn∣to the vttermost. For AbrahamGen. 12.1, 4, 5, &c. & 17.23, &c. & 18.19. & 22.1, 2. &c, 12. & 24. Ios. 24.14, 15. Esai. 41.8. Iohn. 8. Heb. 11.8, 15. Jam. 2.23. ap∣proued himselfe to be the worthy and trustie champion, propagator and
maintainer of Gods glory and honor, by his faithfull cleauing vnto God, his vprightnesse, his carefull shunning of defection, impugning of Idolatrie, and abhorring of all iniquitie. This then was the speciall frendship betwixt God and Abraham, which was sealed on both partsGenes. 17. by the Sacrament of Cir∣cumcision giuen and receiued, as also by other diuine signes, amongst which that was not the least, that God gaue AbrahamGen. 21.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. a Sonne in his old age, and AbrahamGen. 22. would haue offered him willingly in sacrifice to the Lord at his commandement. Secondly,Philem. v. 17. 1 Sam. 18.3. & 20.14, 15, 16, 17. speciall & inward friends do count ech others friends and eni∣mies common, as we see not onely a∣mongst those that are meerly naturall, but also with those that haue beene the children of grace. Now this we finde also betwixt God and Abraham: For the Lord out of his speciall loue made this promise to Abraham, and to his true seede after him,Genes. 12.3. I will blesse them that blesse thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and euermore duly kept it both
towards him and his wife, and towards his children,Gal. 3.7. of which sort are all they which are of faith. For God did mani∣festly reueale what reckoning he made of Abraham and Sarah his wife their friends and enimies, firstGenes. 12.17, 19. by his se∣uere plaguing of Pharaoh the Aegyp∣tian King & his house for taking Sarai into his house, though none of them abused her, for the Lord preserued her (being his Friends wife) from their fil∣thinesse: And afterwards by his jealous and sharpeGen. 20.3, 7, 17, 18. Psal. 105.15. rebuking Abimelech King of Gerar for the like cause, telling him, that He and all His should surely die, vnlesse he restored vnto Abraham his wife, yea and striking his wife & maid-seruants with barrennesse: but in con∣clusionGen. 20.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. after that he had restored vn∣to Abraham, his wife vndefiled, and shewed other kindnesses both to him and her, the Lord at this his great Friends request, healed Abimelechs wife and maid-seruants, so that they bare children: And as for Abrahams children (the Faithfull) the holy Scrip∣tures and all experience doe euidently
shew the like dealing of God for them. Againe, Abraham declared his loue to his best Friend the Lord, in hating Gods enimies as if they had bin his owne, and so in entertaining, reueren∣cing, and succouring the friends, mes∣sengers, and seruants of the Lord, as his owne, or rather aboue his owne; all which things we readGenes. 14. in the storie of Abrahams slaying Chedarlaomer and the Kings that were with him, who were not onely his owne enimies, but also of Melchizedec the Priest of the most High God, of Lot and others of Gods Church, and consequently of God himselfe;Gen. 24.3. in the storie of his a∣uoyding the mariage of the daughters of Canaan with his sonne Isaac, for the Canaanites being out of the Couenant of God were to be reckoned amongst his enimies; andGen. 14. in the stories of his rescuing Lot, paying tithes to Melchi∣zedec,Genes. 18. entertaining the Angels, and praying for what righteous persons he supposed were in Sodom & Gomorrhe. Lastly, Great and speciall friends are wont to resort and continue much
togither, and therein to conferre fami∣liarly of their most weighty and secret matters and occasions. And I pray you how many apparitions did the Lord vouchsafe to Abraham? How familiarly did the Lord conferre with him at sundry times? And how weigh∣tie and secret were the occasions which they did communicate th'one to th'o∣ther? As namely concerning Abra∣ham and his estate, his wife and proge∣nie, the blessed seed CHRIST IESVS, and all others of Abrahams seede, the matter of Sodom and Gomorrhe, Abra∣hams prayers and thanksgiuings, which vndoubtedly were many and feruent, and finally his meditations vpon the will of God to him reuealed, which in the secret of his soule he spiritually talked of vnto God. For seeing he had that zeale, holinesse and loue, that he did pray so long and so earnestly for the wicked and filthy Sodomites, we may easily iudge how plentifull hee was in his consultations and supplica∣tions with the Lord for himselfe and the rest of Gods Church; and to con∣clude,
what a heauenly fellowship and holy commerce was exercised between them? Parent. But what vse is there of all this to vs? Pastor. Very great, both for our in∣struction and comfort. For if we be faithfull as Abraham was, we ought to be certainly perswaded that the Lord is the same God to vs as he was to A∣braham, though we haue not the like extraordinarie signes and testimonies. The proofes whereof are cheifly two. First,Act. 10.34, 35. Rom. 2.10, 11. 1 Ioh. 1.3, 4. & 4.15, 16, 17. Ioh. 17.20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Gods loue is one and the same towards all his people and ser∣uants in Christ Iesus, whom he gaue vnto the death, aswell for euery one and the least of them, as for any one and the greatest of them. And secondly, the Lord telleth vs in generall, that,Rom. 15.4. whatsoeuer things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might haue hope: yea and specifieth this thing ex∣presly, saying,Galat. 3.9. they which be of faith, are blessed with faithfull Abraham: and
to put vs out of all doubt, he giueth all true beleeuers as friendly and gratious speeches, as he did to Abraham, both in the Old and New Testaments: In the Old, thus he vttereth his minde,Zechar. 2.8. he that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of my eye: In the new, thus,Matth. 18.6. Who so shall offend one of these litle ones which beleeue in me, it were better for him that a mill∣stone were hanged about his necke, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. And how honorable are those ti∣tles,Tit. 1.1. the elect of God,Reuel. 1.6. Kings, Priests,2 Cor. 6.18. Sonnes and Daughters of the Almighty,Heb. 2.11, 12. the brethren of Christ,Rom 8.17. fellow heires with Christ, &c! AndIohn. 15.13, 14, 15. our Sauiour intituleth those for whom hee laid downe his life, who doe whatsoeuer he commandeth them, and to whom he maketh knowne his Fathers will (and those verily are all such as are effectu∣ally called) with this very name, His friends. Wherefore this great title,☞ The friend of God,Rō. 4.23, 24. Psal, 105.6, to 16. was not written for Abrahams sake alone, but for all the beleeuers sakes also, that they being in∣dued with such grace as Abraham was,
might assure themselues that God is their speciall friend, and they his. Parent. What was the example of Iosua? Pastor. Iosuah his example is laid forth for our imitation in these words,Iosua. 24.15. But as for me and my house, we will serue the Lord. For he hauing made most earnest exhortation to the Israelites to feare and serue the Lord in sinceritie and truth, he avoucheth, that though they should generally fall away from God to Idols, yet he and his familie would constantly cleaue vnto the Lord. Which teacheth those Houshol∣ders who are inlightned, that they ought to reforme themselues and their houses, but yet thinke themselues ex∣cused or do deferre the worke, either because other men, and specially their neighbours and friends doe not goe about the same thing, or because they are afraid of the Reproch to be coun∣ted too forward, to acknowledge their errour, and to shake off all these and other their wicked shifts and delayes, learning and practising with Iosua,
whatsoeuer other men doe or not doe, to promote the seruice of God in themselues and in the people of their houses. Parent. And what is the example we haue from Dauid? Pastor. Dauid (a King of gteat e∣state) did solemnly protest and vow vnto the Lord,Psal. 101.2, 3, 6, 7. that he would walke within his house with a perfect heart, that he would set no wicked thing before him, that his eyes should be vpon the faithfull of the Land that they might dwell with him, that he that walked in a perfect way should serue him, that he that wrought deceit should not dwell within his house, and that he who told lyes should not tarry in his sight. By which his course he gi∣ueth a worthy paterne to Housholders, though neuer so great of place and worth in the world, to labour the pra∣ctise of godlinesse in their houshold-conuersation and gouernment with vprightnesse & sinceritie of heart, and to see it likewise practised of all others (abandoning the froward and deceit∣full) so far as possibly they can procure.
Parent. But many of vs that are poore men and simple persons, as Husbandmen, Labourers, &c. do per∣swade our selues that the Examples of Abraham who was a Prophet and great Lord or Noble man; of Iosua, a great Captaine, or rather an Emperor; and of Dauid, a Pro∣phet and King, doe not belong to vs (sillie meane men) for our imita∣tion. Pastor. I know it to be true which you say, for although the Gospell hath shone very cleare amongst vs, and that so long time, as I verily thinke that scarcely any Nation hath had the like, yet England (for the greatest number) is not onely simple but rude, and (for the most part) turneth of all holy ex∣amples from their vse. Howbeit, I would these Objectors would consi∣der, that the Precept of God in this be∣halfe is deliuered generally and inde∣finitely to all without exception of a∣ny, either great or small, noble or vn∣noble, rich or poore, Magistrate or Subiect, Landlord or Tenent, Minister
or Hearer, as we may easily perceiue not onely by the words in Deuterono∣mie aboue recited, but also by Psalm. 78. vers. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, &c. Giue eare, O my people, to my Law, incline your eares to the words of my mouth I will open my mouth in a parable, I will vtter darke sayings of old, which we haue heard and knowne, and our fathers haue told vs. We will not hide them from their children, shewing to the generations to come the praises of the Lord, and his strength and his wonderfull workes that he hath done. For he established a testimonie in Iacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them knowne to their children; That the generation to come might know them, euen the children which should be borne, who should arise and declare them to their children; That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the workes of God, but keepe his comman∣dements, &c. and manyExod. 12.26, 27. Ephes. 6.4. Deut. 4.0. other places. And further, that there are examples of godly Housholders recorded for our imitation, who haue bin of mea∣ner
note for their outward estate in this life, asGen. 29. & 30. chap. Iacob when he was a ser∣uant,Ruth. 2.1, 2, &c. Naomi a poore widow, who sent her daughter in law Ruth (that was one of Christs grand-mothers according to his manhood) to gleane come after the reapers of Boaz, thereby to satisfie their present necessities,2 Tim. 1.5. & 3.15. Lois the grand-mother, and Eunice the mo∣ther of Timothie,Act. 18.2, 3. Aquila and Pris∣cilla the tent-maker and his wife,Act. 16.31, 32, 33, 34. the laylour at Philippi, and diuers o∣thers mentioned in the Holy Scrip∣tures. Parent. But many of our children are so yong and raw, that they can learne litle or nothing, and though they could learne by heart, yet they cannot vnderstand. Pastor. You are deceiued. For if you will dispose your selfe to glorifie the Lord with a godly minde, call vpon him for his blessing, and vse diligence in teaching your children, you shall finde (by Gods grace) that they shall learne euen so soone as they shall be able to speake, and that to begin be∣time
is the surest way to make them vnderstand the soonest, and to further those that do vnderstand already: And finally, that the fruit of it will continue euen in old age, as Solomon saith,Prov. 22.6. Traine vp a childe in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not depart from it. Parent. What is ment by training vp? Pastor. An instructing or Catechi∣singEsai. 28.10. by litle and litle, that is, easily and familiarly,Deut. 32.2. as it were by some small drops, and not a powring in of hard doctrine as by showres, where you are directedMark. 4.33. Heb. 5.12, 13, 2 Tim. 2. 15.24, 25. to vse discretion and meekenesse in teaching your chil∣dren and euery other ignorant per∣son according to their abilitie in hea∣ring? Parent. What do you vnderstand by the way he should go? Pastor. The way that a child should go, is the right manner of leading his life in the seruice of God, righteously and honestly in his society with man, and lawfully in the performance of all
dutie, whereof Godlinesse is the princi∣pall. And this it the lesson I haue euen now laid before you, namely, that The fittest time to learne the feare of the Lord is while we are yong. Wherefore those Parents and Housholders are much to blame,Note what the Prophet Esay saith. Esai. 55.1, 2, 3. who carelesly neglect this first and cheifest care of teaching their peo∣ple to liue vnto God, who yet passe modestie in caring and vrging them how they should liue vnto the flesh and the world. And do not they, I pray you, confute themselues for say∣ing, it is too early to catechise them when they are yong, seeing they judge it the fittest time to invre them to doe somewhat as soone as they can, and do beat into their heads how to get or saue somewhat, and to forecast for a li∣uing in time to come? And doe they not practise their vsuall prouerb, Early sharpe will be a thorne? Except they be such foolish persons as cocker their children with nicenesse, proud raggs, dainty fare, &c, and make them idle drones or worse, whereby they become vnfruitfull for Church or Common∣wealth,
yea oftentimes wasters or ra∣ther destroyers of the good gifts of God, which are none of theirs by right, whatsoeuer title they haue to them by humane lawes and conueyance, but indeed belong to the children of God. Parent. And what is taught, by not departing from it, when he is old? Pastor. Not onely that what thing is taught in youth, continueth in old age, as we may see on the one side in those, that taste in their age of the good things which they learned in their childhood: as on the other side in them that are brought vp in wicked∣nesse, who cast forth the euill sauour thereof in their gray haires, but also that early instructing profiteth both the vnderstanding and the memorie. And therefore it is for the most part that the elder sort that haue not beene informed in their youth, doe learne loddly (as the common saying is,) and remember badly. Parent. Séeing then you haue made it plaine, that Parents must teach or
catechize their children in priuate, as also that it is best to begin with them so soone as they are able to speake or learne any thing, I pray you shew me at what particular times and seasons and how often this labour must be bestowed, and in what manner? Pastor. For the particular times and oftennesse, Solomons Rule (which is generall for all good duties and works of mercy) must be obserued, namely,Eccles. 11.6. In the morning sow thy seede, and in the euening with-hold not thy hand, for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good. His meaning is, that we must exercise our goodnes at all times, without ceasing, so far as we can, and so often as conueniently we may. For we must not thinke that God is tyed to man, or that he will blesse our labour when we do it after a tempting manner once in a weeke, twice in a quarter, or but now and then at our faire leasure, as who should say, God must be at our becke, and that the most necessarie grace of saluation is gotten with litle
ado, where in the meane space earthly things (which are transitorie & some∣times do vs no good) are not obtai∣ned but with great & continuall paines and forecast. But we must learne to serue and waite vpon the Spirit of God for his gratious blessing vpon our dili∣gent vse of the meanes, trying when God will please to worke by our la∣bour, and taking it for his singular fa∣uour and goodnes toward vs, if he will prosper our indeuour at one time or other, or at all times, when we haue constantly done our best from time to time. And if I may giue my iudge∣ment, the fittest and likeliest seasons for your purpose, are, euery night and morning, at meales, and vpon such motions of their mindes (whether proceeding of their owne willingnesse, or arising of the manifestation of any notable workes of God) as your paines may seeme in all reason most likely to take the deeper impression in their hearts. And for the manner, which as I haue shewed must be easie, plaine and familiar for the benefit of the capa∣citie,
so also it must beEccles. 12.10. cheerefull and pleasant (though not without reue∣rence and grauitie) thereby to win and hold the affections and to delight. Parent. In what forme of words do you thinke fit to teach children at the first? Pastor. In the shortest and pithiest Questions and Answers that can well be deuised, which must be strictly ob∣serued and often repeated. And for want of better, you may vse this fol∣lowing, namely, Parent. The first A. B. C. of a Christian Childe.What is your Religion? Childe. Act. 11.26.The Christian Religion. Parent. In whom do you beleeue? Childe. Iohn 14.1.In God. Parent. What is God? Childe. Iohn 4.24.God is a Spirit,Gen. 17.1. Al∣mighty,1 Tim. 1.17. Psal. 90.2. without beginning & with∣out ending. Parent. How many Gods be there? Childe. 1 Iohn 5.7.Onely one God, but thrée persons. Parent. How bee the Persons cal∣led?
Childe. Math. 28.19.The Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost. Parent. Who made you? Childe. Heb. 1.1, 2.God the Father. Parent. Who redeemed you? Childe. 1 Cor. 1.30.God the Sonne. Parent. Who sanctifieth and pre∣serueth you? Childe. 1 Cor. 16.11. & 12.11. Gen. 1.2.God the Holy Ghost. Parent. Wherefore did God make, redeeme, sanctifie and preserue you? Childe. Deut. 10.12. & 32.6.To serue him. Parent. How will God be serued? Childe. Deut. 29.29.After his will reuealed in his word. Parent. How many parts be there of the word of God? Childe. Two parts. Parent. Which be they? Childe. Galat. 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18. Rom. 10.5, 6.The Law and the Gos∣pell, otherwise called, the Couenant of workes and the Couenant of Grace. Parent. And what is meete to teach them in the second place?
Pastor. The Lords prayer. Parent. What next? Pastor. The Confession of Faith, otherwise called, The Creede. Parent. And what afterwards? Pastor. Then you may set vpon the doctrine of the Law contained in the Ten Commandements, which is the first part of this booke of familiar con∣ference that I haue giuen you, and so proceed according to the directions I haue set you downe.2 Tim. 2.7. And the Lord giue you vnderstanding in all things. Parent. But I pray you, how must I deale with them who haue beene neglected to be taught in their youth, and are now come to Mens and Wo∣mens estate, who also are wont (as you said) to learne loddly and remember badly? Pastor. You must take the more paines with such to teach them the true meaning and right vse of the Lord prayer, the Creede, and the Ten Com∣mandements, the words whereof they can babble without vnderstanding; as also you must vse the like diligence
for the doctrine of the Sacraments, ac∣cording to the Conference, or some Catechisme or Treatise made for that purpose. Parent. It passeth my skill to teach some of them any vnderstanding or profitable vse of that which they con∣fesse in words, and specially such as put a confidence in the saying and rehear∣sing of the words,A kinde of Opus operatum. as though there were some secret vertue and efficacie in the words, that of themselues and of the sounding or pronouncing of them do please God, and make them that can and do vtter them to be Chri∣stians, as they doe superstitiously sup∣pose. Pastor. Then I aduise you to fol∣low these two courses, which haue bin sound very profitable with such blinde soules. First, for the vnderstanding and vse of the Creede. Secondly, for Application both of the Creede, the Lords prayer, the Ten Commandements, and the Sacra∣ments.
Parent. What is your course to con∣uey the vnderstanding and vse of the Creede vnto an ignorant soule, that can say the words without sense in himselfe? Pastor. Prouided alwayes that you humbly beseech God to blesse your labour, and likewise that you deale kindly and louingly with such a one, you must vse to reason with him or her (suppose it be your seruant or any other) in as familiar and plaine man∣ner as you can, to this effect, Housholder. The forme of instructing such ignorant soules as are of riper age.In whom doe you be∣leeue? Seruant. In God. Housholder. What is God? Seruant. The Father Almighty. Housholder. How do you know that God is almighty? Seruant. Because he is the maker of heauen and earth. Housholder. In whom do you be∣leeue besides the Father? Seruant. In Iesus Christ. Housholder. Who is Iesus Christ?
Seruant. The Fathers onely Son and our Lord. Housholder. What meane you by, Our Lord? Seruant. That he is our Redéemer and Gouernor. Housholder. How came Christ to be so? Seruant. He was conceiued by the Holy Ghost and borne of the Virgin Marie. Housholder. What did he for vs as he is our Lord? Seruant. He suffered for vs vnder Ponce Pilate. Housholder. Who was Ponce Pilate? Seruant. He was a Iudge that condemned Christ to death. Housholder. To what kinde of death did Pilate condemne our Sauiour Christ? Seruant. To be crucified. Housholder. What is that? Seruant. Hée was lifted vp to a Crosse of wood, and nailed vpon it with nailesThis crucify∣ing was in those times among the Iewes a most shamefull exe∣cution of Male-factors, such as Hanging upon the Gallowes is now amongst vs.. Housholder. How long was he cru∣fied?
Seruant. Till he was dead. Housholder. Wherefore was Christ willing to suffer so shamefull a death? Seruant. For to saue vs from Hell, which we deserued for our sins. Housholder. What did they with Christ when he was dead? Seruant. They buried his bodie in a Tombe. Housholder. How long did it lye bu∣ried in the Tombe? Seruant. Vntill the third day. Housholder. What did Christ then? Seruant. He rose againe from the dead, and so liued and walked vpon the earth againe. Housholder. What did hee after∣wards? Seruant. After forty dayes he as∣cended into Heauen, that is, He went vp into Heauen. Housholder. What doth our Sauiour in Heauen? Seruant. He fitteth at the right hand of God the Father Almighty. Housholder. What is the meaning of that?
Seruant. He is the great King that raigneth ouer vs all. Housholder. How long shall Christ raigne so? Seruant. Till the day of Iudge∣ment. Housholder. What shall he do then? Seruant. He shall come againe to iudge both the quicke and the dead. Housholder. Who are the quicke? Seruant. They that shall be then found aliue vpon the earth. Housholder. And what dead per∣sons shall he then iudge? Seruant. All that haue beene dead before that day. Housholder. In whom doe you be∣leeue else, besides the Father and the Sonne? Seruant. In the Holy Ghost. Housholder. What? Are the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, three Gods? Seruant. No, Thrée persons, but one God. Housholder. Doth no body beleeue thus, but onely you?
Seruant. Yes, the Holy Catholike Church. Housholder. Who are that Church? Seruant. The Saints that dwell vpon earth. Housholder. Why do you call the Saints on earth, Holy? Seruant. Because they are made holy in Christ by Faith and a New life. Housholder. Why do you call the Saints or Church of God vpon earth, Catholike? Seruant. Because they are vniuer∣sally scattered ouer all the world. Housholder. What haue they among themselues? Seruant. A speciall Communion or Fellowship of Loue one with an∣other. Housholder. What benefits doth God by his Holy Spirit bestow vpon these his beleeuing and penitent peo∣ple, for his Sonne Iesus Christs sake. Seruant. Forgiuenes of their sins, the resurrection of their bodies, and the life euerlasting.
Parent. And what is your other course for application of the Creede, the Lords Prayer, the Ten Comman∣dements, and the Sacraments, vnto the capacitie and vse of such ignorant persons? Pastor. Whatsoeuer you shall learne in the preaching of the word, or in the daily reading thereof, that may in∣forme such simple persons in any of those things, you must acquaint them with it, fitting it for manner of speech and words to their abilitie. And so for all the workes of God, his benefits and strokes, you must apply them to their estate, declare vnto them their great & manifold necessitie of sauing grace, and alwayes haue recourse vnto such things as they can say in the Creede, the Lords Prayer, the Ten Comman∣dementsHow euer you doe, you must labour to inform and settle them, on the one side, in the vse of the Law discoue∣ring sinne and denouncing the curse of damna∣tion, and on the other side, in the comforts of the Gospell giuing grace by Jesus Christ, and as∣suring the be∣leeuers and pe∣nitent of eter∣nall saluation. &c. And withall incourage them both to answer your questions, and to inquire boldly, and cheerefully of you what they thinke good, or do make any doubt of. Parent. I trust the Lord will make me mindfull to vse these good helps
which you haue sought out, and fitted for such purposes, as neede shall re∣quire. But I haue a great desire to looke into the substance of the Booke that you haue giuen me, where I hope to finde directions and furtherances for my selfe and those that are better able to learne and practise, than either children or such ignorant persons as we haue last spoken of. Pastor. I doubt not but you shall gaine somewhat by that which hath passed betwixt you & me already since we met togither; albeit indeed the greatest vse be of the points of Reli∣gion, which are handled in the Booke that I haue deliuered vnto you. But because1 Cor. 3.7. neither he that planteth is any thing, nor he that watereth, but God that giueth the increase, therefore you must not presume vpon your own strength, resolution and diligence in vsing this or any other Meane of Grace, neither can you make a right conscience of your promise and dutie to bestow your carefull endeuour in following any good directions, nor looke for any
blessing of God at all vpon your paines, vnlesse you shall make speciall prayer vnto him. For which causes I haue framed you one short forme of prayer to be vsed by you, during your infirmitie at such times as you shall set your selfe in any speciall manner, to learne or teach by heart any part of the booke, when you begin, and I haue copied out on of S. Pauls prayers (with some small addition thereto) for the conclusion of your labour. The for∣mer is placed in the forefront of the conference, and the latter in the end of all. Parent. How much am I and such weaklings as I, bound to praise God for your Loue and Paines, who haue so carefully prouided fit helps for our guidance in our great weaknes,Heb. 6.1. that we may goe on to perfection, if we be not very retchlesse! Pastor. Beware then you bee not retchlesse. Remember Gods promise, thatLuk. 11.9, 10. if you will seeke, you shall finde;Psal. 145.18. and the Lord will be neere vnto you, if you will call vpon him in truth; yea2 Chron. 15.2. with
you, while you be with him,2 Chr. 16.9. for the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himselfe strong in the behalfe of them whose heart is perfect to∣ward him. Who euer sought the Lord in holinesse, and failed of sauing grace, or of any necessarie comfort or succor?Luk. 11.13. Who hath truly desired the Holy Spirit, and our heauenly Father hath not giuen him? Debate the matter with your selfe; Hath God intrusted you with soules, putting them vnder your hands;Gen. 33.5. & 35.2. yea and made you instruments to be∣get soules (the noblest creatures in earth) and will you be carelesse of their eternall saluation? Hath God honoured you with them, and will you not honour God by them? Or, will you seeme to teach them to honour God, and will not your selfe honour God with and amongst them? Do you looke that they should learne the word of God at your mouth, and will you not guide them by your owne conuer∣sation? Will you not commend that vnto them by the liuely and constant practise of your example, which they
may imitate vnto eternall life? What delight, I pray you, hath the Lord in you, that content yourselues to receiue honour and obedience at your peo∣ples hands, andIohn 5.44. seeke not the honour that commeth from God onely? And whatMat. 16.26. can all your earthly meanes ad∣uantage them, when, they want the true treasure? For, cast the eye of your minde, vpon that base esteeme, which the supreme God (the Possessor of Heauen & Earth) hath of that House∣holder & his people, that are prophane and carelesse of true pietie, and vpon that his most fearefull curse inflicted, and to be inflicted on the impenitent and obdurate in their sinne, though they seeme for the present to be in neuer so great safegard and flourishing prosperitie; which curse they cannot any waies escape, but by timely repen∣tance and conuersion vnto God. For as Zophar saith,Iob. 20 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. He shall flee from the yron weapon, and the bowe of steele shall strike him through. It is drawne and com∣meth out of the bodie, yea the glistering sword commeth out of his gall, terrours
are vpon him. All darknes shall be hid in his secret places:That is, The vengeance of God is apt and prone to seize vpon him as vpon its proper and right sub∣iect. A meta∣phor taken from such matter as towe, drystraw, &c. which be∣ing put into the fire, neede no blowing as greene wood doth, but taketh fire and flame straight-waies. a fire not blowne shall consume him. It shall goe ill with him that is left in his tabernacle. The heauen shall reueale his iniquitie, and the earth shall rise vp against him. The increase of his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath. This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the Heritage appointed vnto him by God. Yea and though (as Iob sheweth)Iob. 21.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. their seed seemeth to be established in their sight with them, and their of spring before their eyes. Their houses are safe from feare, neither is the rod of God vpon them. Their Bull gen∣dreth and faileth not, their Cow calueth and casteth not her calfe. They send forth their litle ones like a flocke, and their children dance. They take the tim∣brell and harpe, and rtioyce at the sound of the Organe. They spend their dayes in wealth, Yet in a moment goe downe to the graue: Therefore they say vnto God, De∣part from vs, for we desire not the know∣ledge of thy wayes. What is the Almighty that we should serue him, and what profit should we haue, if we pray vnto him? Lo,
their good is not in their hand. The coun∣sell of the wicked is far from me. How oft is the candle of the wicked put out? and how oft commeth their destruction vpon them? God distributeth sorrowes in his anger. They are as stubble before the winde, and as chaffe that the storme carri∣eth away. God layeth vp his iniquitie for his children: he rewardeth him and he shall know it, His eyes shall see his destru∣ction, and he shall drinke of the wrath of the Almighty. What pleasure then hath he in his house after him, when the number of his moneths is out of in the middest? Wherefore it is your wisdome to fore∣cast what sufficient answer you shall be able to make vnto the Great Iudge at that day, when he will demand, Giue an account of thy stewardship, for thou maist be no longer steward, Luk. 16.2. Parent. But it is a lamentable thing to see how most folkes do reject all this counsell of God which you haue stood vpon, as needlesse, fantasticall, new and vpstart. Pastor. The obiection, (or rather blasphemous slander) that it is need∣lesse,
and fantasticall, hath bin suffici∣ently confuted by the Holy Scriptures, as you haue heard already. The same we may say for their shamelesse cen∣sure, that it is new and vpstart. For be∣sides that the Lord himselfe in his ho∣ly word doth call vpon vs to aske for the old wayes or pathes, where is the good way, and to walke therein, assuring vs that we shall finde rest for our soules, Ier. 6.16. the godly Fathers in all ages haue cryed vnto the people for the same thing: And amongst those that haue laboured in the Church of God since Christ, we may read many wor∣thy testimonies to this purpose, of which I will onely acquaint you with the graue and memorable speech of Chrysostome in his second Sermon vp∣on IOHN:Chrysost. in Joan. Hom. 2. Illud vos admo∣nendos hortan∣dos{que} censeo per∣necessarium, vt quo nunc estis animo perseue∣retis, ne{que} in hoc tantùm con∣sessu, sed domi quo{que} vir cum vxore, pater cū filio, invitem de his frequenter, & vltro citro{que} suam & ferant & inquirant sententiam, ve∣lint{que} probatis∣simam hanc & pulcherrimā in∣ducere consue∣tudinem. Nec mihi quispiam dicat, pueros in his occupari non oportere. Non enim tantùm o∣pus est, vt his vacent admoni∣tionibus, verùm etiam solis. And afterwards: Nonne irā Dei in vos meritò provocatis, cùm caeteris rebus & certo tempore & diligenti curâ adhibitâ in diuinarum rerum dectrinâ pueros exerceri molestū intempestivū{que} ducitis? Nō sic, non sic, inquā, fratres dile∣ctissimi. Haec profecto atas his maximè admonitionibus indiget. Tenera est & citò qua ei instillantur, imbibit, & audita accipit, tanquā sigillo auditus cera, hoc est, puerorū animis, impresso. Praeterea & vita cius in auditu est, & in ipsis ferè in∣anis, vt vel ad virtutem vel ad vitiū facilè pos∣sit deflectere. Si quis igitur eos ab ipsis incuna∣bulis & quaso vitiorum vesti∣bulis ad viam virtulis abstra∣heret, in habitu quodā & natu∣ra rectè viuendi cos confirmaret, ne{que} sponte sua facilè in deteri∣ora prolaberen∣tur, cùm cius∣modi à teneris ad virtutem eos alliceret. &c. I iudge it very necessarie (saith he) to admonish and exhort you, that you would continue in the minde you are now in, and not onely in this assembly, but at home also you would oftentimes speake, reason, and inquire of these things too and fro, one with another (bringing in this most commendable and excellent cu∣stome)
the husband with the wife and the father with the childe. And let none obiect to me, that children ought not to be busied herein. For they haue neede not onely to intend these admonitions, but also to giue themselues to nothing else. And after∣wards, Do you not deseruedly prouoke the wrath of God against your selues, seeing you take certaine times and vse diligent care for other matters, but count it trou∣blesome and vnseasonable to exercise your children in the learning of Gods matters? These things ought not to be so, as you doe, my most beloued brethren. Ʋerily this age (of childhood) standeth in greatest neede of these admonitions. For it is tender and quickly sucketh in whatsoeuer is instilled into it, and what it heareth, it receiueth; and like as waxe taketh the impression of a seale, so childrens mindes doe in hearing. Moreouer their manner of life consisteth much in hearing and they are of that qua∣litie
for the most part, that they may easily be bowed either to vertue or vice. If any then would waine them from their cradles, as it were from the entry of vices vnto the way of vertue, he may settle them in a cer∣taine habit and nature of liuing well, from whence they shall not easily fal back of their owne accord vnto any very bad courses, sithens by such vsage they are allured vnto vertue from their tender age. And vpon Matthew in Sermon 5. he exhor∣teth Housholders to call to remem∣brance and to repeat Sermons (newly heard vpon the weeke day) with their familie at home, before they do busie themselues with other matters. Now then, you must not be discouraged by any such reprochfull termes, from seeking and setting forth the sweet2 Cor. 2.14. sa∣uour of the knowledg of God in your place and calling; for Satan is euer wont1 Thess. 2.18. to labor the hindrance of Gods word by theIude ver. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. vngodly speeches of foolish and malitious persons, as by all other meanes he can vse, whom1 Pet. 5.9. Ephes. 6.10, 11, &c. to 21. 2 Thess 3.1, 2. 2 Cor. 2.11. you must resist by Faith, Prayer, Wisdome and Diligence in all holy meanes vnto
the vttermost of your power, and then surely the Lord will bruise him vnder your feete shortly.Rom. 16.20. To conclude, I require you2 Tim. 4.1. &c. before God and the Lord Iesus Christ, who shall iudge the quicke and dead at his appearing & in his kingdom, that you neither neglect the publike preaching of his word,Act. 17.11 nor the tryall of doctrine by the holy Scriptures, nor yet the pri∣uate reading of the same, vnder pre∣tence of vsing this or any other good Bookes whatsoeuer. For the holy Bible is the Booke of Bookes, whereof I would wish you to read one Chapter at the least euery worke-day morning, and to cause your folkes (euery one both great and small) seuerally to render you a sentence thereof in the euening before you goe to prayers with them,For their rawnesse sake, you may ap∣point ech of them by name some short and pithy sentence out of the Chap∣ter as soone as you haue read it in the morning, and wish them to thinke of it in the day time, that so they may giue you an ac∣count of it the more easily in the euening. remembring that they arePsal. 1.2. Deut. 5.32, 33. blessed who exercise themselues in Gods Law both day and night, to do thereafter. AndAct. 20.32. I commend you to God and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you vp, and to giue you an inhe∣ritance among all them which are san∣ctified.
Philip. 1.9, 10, 11.And I pray God that your loue may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all iudgement, that you may approue things that are excellent, that you may be sincere and without offence till the day of Christ, being filled with the fruits of righte∣ousnes, which are by Iesus Christ vnto the glory and praise of God. Parent. Amen. Pastor. So I leaue you to your Booke:2 Cor. 13.11. Farewell. Parent. 2 Thess. 3.16.The Lord be with you.
THE COVNTRY∣MAN WITH HIS HOVSHOLD. A Forme of Prayer before Conference. Parent. TEach vs, O Lord, by thy most holy Spirit, we heartily pray thée, that wée may know Thée, thy Law, thy Gospell, our selues, our sinnes, and duties aright, and that we may put all to good vse, namely to the glory of thy blessed Name, to the further humilia∣tion, sanctification and true comfort of our owne Soules and Bodies, and to the edification and profit of our Neighbours, through thy onely Son Christ Iesus our Lord and Sauiour. Childe. Amen. Seruant. Amen. Scholler. Amen.
☞ THE FIRST PART. Concerning the Law, or Couenant of Workes. Parent. WHat is the voice of the Law or Couenant of workes? Child. Rom. 10.5. with Mat. 19.16, 17.Do this and thou shalt liue for euer. Parent. Which is the Summe of the Law? Child. Exod. 20.1, &c. Deut. 5.1, 2, 3, &c.The ten Commande∣ments. Parent. Say them. Child. Exod. 20. v. 1.God spake all these words, saying: vers. 2.I. I am the Lord thy God, which haue brought thée out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt haue no other Gods be∣fore me.vers. 3. vers. 4.II. Thou shalt not make vnto thée any grauen Image, or any likenesse of any thing that is in Heauen aboue, or that is in the Earth beneath, or
that is in the water vnder the earth. Thou shalt not bow downe thy selfe to them, nor serue them:vers. 5. For I the Lord thy God am a iealous God, vi∣siting the iniquitie of the Fathers vpon the children,vers. 6. vnto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shewing mercy vnto thou∣sands of them that loue me and kéepe my commandements. III.vers. 7. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine: for the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse, that taketh his name in vaine. IV. Remember the Sabbath day,vers. 8. vers. 9. vers. 10. to kéepe it holy. Six daies shalt thou labour and do all thy worke, But the seuenth day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; In it thou shalt not do any worke, thou, nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, thy man-seruant, nor thy maid-seruant, nor thy cattell, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates:vers. 11. For in six daies the Lord made heauen and earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the seuenth day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sab∣bath
day and hallowed it. vers. 12.V. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy daies may be long, vpon the Land, which the Lord thy God giueth thée. vers. 13.VI. Thou shalt not kill. vers. 14.VII. Thou shalt not commit a∣dulterie. vers. 15.VIII. Thou shalt not steale. vers. 16.IX. Thou shalt not beare false witnes against thy Neighbour. vers. 17.X. Thou shalt not couet thy neigh∣bours house, thou shalt not couet thy neighbours wife, nor his man-ser∣uant, nor his maid-seruant, nor his oxe, nor his asse, nor any thing that is thy neighbours. Parent. But the Papists do not di∣uide the Commandements thus; some of them dashing the second quite out of the Text, and others adioyning it to the first, and so making the first and se∣cond both one: and therefore both sorts of them are forced to diuide the tenth Commandement (as we reckon it) into two, thereby to make vp the number of ten, counting the first mem∣ber
of the tenth for the ninth, and all the other members remaining, for the tenth. Pastor. They do so indeed. But they are confuted by good and appa∣rent reason. For, First, they that quite dash out the se∣cond out of the text of the ten Com∣mandements, are flatly impious, be∣cause they goe about to abrogate andPs. 119.126. destroy that which God would haue continued for the guidance of his people vnto the end of the world, see∣ing at his appointment, Moses wrote it in the Tables of stone, as well as all the rest. And the reason of this their sacri∣ledge, is vile and abhominable, euen to hide their manifold Idolatry, Image∣rie, and other wretched inuentions in the worship of God, which they see cleerely condemned in the second commandement. Secondly, they that adjoyne the second to the first, as a part thereof, do not consider how God himselfe by his Spirit of wisedome hath noted the di∣uersitie of the matter throughout all
the ten, in such sort, that euery seuerall commandement hath one principall verbe, wherein the greatest force of the commandement doth consist, as in a word that beareth the sway through∣out all that precept, or prohibition where it is placed, in the very forefront or neere vnto it, as in the Originall tongue is plaine to the judicious and learned. For there are ten seuerall verbes (for ech commandement one) whereupon the matter and drift of ech commandement doth chiefly depend. Now the verbe of the second, doth ma∣nifestly differ from the verbe of the first, according to the diuers matter thereof: for the first imposeth vpon our soules, that the true God onely must be our God, and thereby exclu∣deth all false Gods or Idols; but the second requireth vs, to take and vse such outward worship onely of the true God, which he himselfe hath prescri∣bed, and forbiddeth to Make or vse any other outward worship of him∣selfe, and all outward worship or ap∣probation of any false God or Idoll at
all. And as for the verbe of the ninth and tenth Commandements (as they diuide) it is but one, as the matter is but one, to wit, that we should not Co∣uet, meaning with an euill concupis∣cence, although the things forbidden to be coueted are diuers, as our neigh∣bours house, wife, seruant, &c. and there∣fore it is but one Commandement. And it is to be noted, that by their manner of diuiding, they might make so many seuerall Commandements, as there be seuerall things forbidden to be coueted; which were absurd. The truth then is that the grosser and more sensible breach of all the particular members mentioned in the tenth Commandement, are forbidden in the fiue Commandements going next be∣fore, and the Lord maketh a Colle∣ction of them all togither, as touching the first hatching and breeding (of those grosser breaches) in our wret∣ched concupiscence, and condemneth it wholly, and apart, by it selfe in this one Commandement, which he hath in most conuenient sort put in the last
place. All which being indifferently weighed, we may not vnfitly say, as our Sauiour in a case not much vn∣like,Math. 19.6. What God hath ioyned togither, let no man put asunder. And this that I haue said is confirmed by the Repe∣tition that Moses maketh of the Ten Commandements inDeut. 5.21. Deutronomie, where the neighbours wife is specified before his house, which at the giuing of the Law recorded in ExodusExod. 20 17. was otherwise. Vndoubtedly, it was to teach vs to referre them both, togi∣ther with the members that follow, vnto one chiefe head or commande∣ment: If it were not so, there might bee giuen an occasion of doubting, which were the ninth commande∣ment, and which the tenth, but now by our diuision all such occasion is preuented. Seruant. What are those words, God spake all these words, saying? Scholler. They are a Preface to all the Commandements following. Seruant. What lesson doe they teach?
Scholler. Deut. 5.28. &c.Because God himselfe deliuered all the commandements with his owne holy mouth, that there∣fore it concerneth mee to learne and kéepe them. Parent. How are the Commande∣ments diuided? Childe, Deut. 10.1, 2, &c.Into two Tables. Parents. What doth the first table containe? Childe. Math. 22.36, 37, 38, 39, 40.My duty towards God in the foure first commandements. Seruant. What is common to these foure? Scholler. Euery one of them haue seuerall reasons added, which in the first commandement goeth before, and in the other thrée doe come after. Seruant. Which is the Reason of the first commandement? Scholler. I am the Lord thy God, which haue brought thée out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Seruant. What doth it principally and generally teach? Scholler. Deut. 6.4, 5, &c.Because God is the
Lord my God, the author of all good gifts and blessings, and the only Sa∣uiour and deliuerer of his people, that therefore I am bound to serue him with all my hart. Parent. Which is the first comman∣dement it selfe? Child. Thou shalt haue no other Gods before me. Parent. What doth the first com∣mandement injoyne? Child. 1 Chron. 28.9. Pro. 3.5.The inward worship of the true God alone, which is both to know him, and also to feare, loue and trust in him, and in nothing else. Parent. Which is the second com∣mandement? Child. Thou shalt not make vnto thee any grauen Image, or any like∣nesse of any thing, that is in heauen a∣boue, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water vnder the earth: Thou shalt not bow downe thy selfe to them nor serue them. Parent. What doth the second commandement enjoyne? Child. Deut. 12.30, 31, 32. Math. 15.9.The outward worship of
the true God only, according to his appointment set downe in the holy Scriptures. Seruant. Which is the reason of the second commandement? Scholler. For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniqui∣tie of the fathers vpon the children, vnto the third and fourth generation, of them that hate me, and shewing mercy vnto thousands of them that loue me and kéepe my commande∣ments. Seruant. What doth it teach? Scholler. Psal. 44.21. & 106.36, 37. 2 Chron. 19.2.That God being jea∣lous of his owne worship, is greatly displeased with all those that do wor∣ship him in a false manner, as the spe∣ciall haters of his name; but that he vouchsafed singular mercy to all them that doe maintaine his pure worship, accounting them his speciall louers. Parents. Why doth the Lord speake so particularly, both of the transgres∣sors of this commandement, as though he had no other Haters but they, and also of the followers of his true wor∣ship,
as though he had no other Louers but they, seeing it is often and plainely shewed in the Scriptures, that all the wicked for their transgressing other commandements, as well as this, are censured to be his Haters or Enemies, and all the righteous hauing respect to other commandements as well as to this, are esteemed to be his Friends or Louers. Pastor. For two causes. First, the Lord would preuent mans erroneous conceipt concerning this commande∣ment aboue all the rest, for man is not onlyExo. 32.7.8. Num. 15.39. Deut. 31.16.29. Esai. 2.8, 9. Gal. 5.16.17, &c. exceedingly prone to Idolatrie, Wil-worship and Superstition through the corruption of his nature, but also his blinde and deceitfull heart,2 King. 18.22.25. per∣uersely iudgeth the follower of Gods true worship to be Gods speciall Ene∣mie, andIud. 17 4, 5.10.12, 13. Iere. 44.15, 16, 17, 18. confidently beareth him∣selfe and others in hand, that by his false worshipping he doth highly please God. Secondly,Deut. 4.23, 24. with Exod. 32.19. Idolatrie is a notable breach of Gods couenant,Ezek. 16. *. Hos. 1.2. & 2.1, , 4.5. whence it is that God abhorreth both Idolaters
and their Progenie continuing in this sinne, as a jealous husband lotheth his whorish wife, and her children,Gen. 17.7. 1 Cor. 11.2, 3. but he embraceth with his loue the true wor∣shippers, and their seed keeping coue∣nant with God, as the husband doth his chaste wife and her children. Parent. Which is the third com∣mandement? Child. Thou shalt not take the name of thy Lord thy God in vaine. Parent. What doth the third com∣mandement injoyne? Child. 1 Tim. 6..To auoyde all dishonou∣ring and abusing of Gods name, in his titles, words and workes. Seruant. Which is the reason of the third commandement? Scholler. For the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his name in vaine. Seruant. What doth it teach? Scholler. Zach. 5.4. Im. 5.12.That God will certain∣ly punish that person in fearfull man∣ner, who dishonoureth his holy name either in word or déede. Parent. Which is the fourth com∣mandement?
Childe. Remember the Sabbath day, to kéepe it holy; Sixe daies shalt thou labour and doe all thy worke; But the seauenth day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shalt not doe any worke, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man-seruant, nor thy maid-seruant, nor thy cattell, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates. Parent. What doth the fourth com∣mandement injoyne? Child. Gen. 2.2, 3. Act. 20.7. &c. 1 Cor. 16.1. Nehem. 13.21. Esai. 58.13.14. Apoc. 1.10.To separate our selues and our people vpon the Lords day from all other exercises, to the seruice and worship of God alone. Seruant. VVhat is the reason of the fourth commandement? Scholler. For in sixe dayes the Lord made heauen and earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the sea∣uenth day; wherefore the Lord bles∣sed the sabbath day and hallowed it. Seruant. VVhat doth it teach? Scholler. Gen 2.2, 3. Exod 16.23, 24, 25, 26, 27.29.Because God himselfe, hauing made all things in sixe dayes, both rested the seauenth from creating
any more,Esai. 56.4.7. & 58.13, 14. with Iohn 20.19.26. and also sanctified the sab∣bath for the vse of his worship, wee are bound to imitate his example in kéeping of the Lords day, assuring our selues that it is the way to true blessednesse. Parent. VVhat doth the second ta∣ble containe? Child. Math. 22.39, 40.My dutie to man in the sixe last commandements,Epbs. 6.2. whereof the first is with promise. Parent. Which is the fifth com∣mandemenr, being the first of the se∣cond table? Child. Honour thy Father and thy Mother. Parent. VVhat doth the fifth com∣mandement injoyne? Child. 1 Tim. 6.1. 1 Pet. 3.7.All speciall duties to man, in regard of his and our speciall cal∣ling and degree, whether Superiors, Inferiors or Equalls. Parent. VVhich is the Promise? Child. That thy daies may bée long vpon the Land, which the Lord thy God giueth thée. Parent. VVhat doth it teach?
Child. Iere. 35.19. with 1 King. 14.12.13. That if I make consci∣ence of this Commandement, my life shall be happie vpon the earth. Parent. Which is the sixth comman∣dement? Child. Thou shalt not kill. Parent. What doth the sixth com∣mandement injoyne? Child. Math. 5.22. Ezk. 33.8. All duties to man in re∣spect of his person, and that both to body and soule. Parent. Which is the seauenth com∣mandement? Child. Thou shalt not commit a∣dulterie. Parent. What doth the seauenth commandement injoyne? Child. Math. 5.27, 28. 1 Thes. 4.4.5. All duties to man in respect of Chastitie. Parent. Which is the eight com∣mandement? Child. Thou shalt not steale. Parent. What doth the eight com∣mandement injoyne? Child. Ephes. 4.28. All duties to man in re∣spect of his goods and maintenance. Parent. Psal. 62.10, 11Which is the ninth com∣mandement?
Child. Thou shalt not beare false witnes against thy Neighbour. Parent. What doth the ninth Commandement injoyne? Child. Matth. 7.1. Esai. 5.20. 1 Pet. 2.23. All duties to man in re∣spect of his good name. Parent. Which is the tenth Com∣mandement? Child. Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours house, thou shalt not co∣uet thy neighbors wife, nor his man-seruant, nor his maid seruant, nor his oxe nor his asse, nor any thing that is thy neighbors. Parent. What doth the tenth Com∣mandement injoyne? Child. Rom. 7.7. Iam. 1 14. To kéepe my heart pure from all sinfull motions, yea though I do not consent vnto them. Parent. What obedience doth God require at your hands to all these his Commandements? Child. Deut. 26.16. & 27.26. Jam. 2.10. Rom. 6.13, 16, 19. Perfect and continuall obedience both of soule and bodie wholly, and of all the powers and members of the same. Parent. Can you keepe Gods
Commandments perfectly and conti∣nually? Child. Genes. 6.5. Psal. 143.2. Rom. 7.23. No, not in the least point; yea and though I doe my vttermost endeuour, yet I breake them euery day in thought, word and déed. Parent. What doe you call euery breach of Gods Law, yea if it be no more but the least want of that which the Law requireth? Child. 1 Iohn 3.4. & 5.17. Gal. 3.10. Rom. 7.7. Sinne. Parent. How commeth it to passe that you are so disobedient to Gods Law? Child. Rom. 5.12, 14, &c. By reason of the corrup∣tion of my nature, which came vpon all mankind through the fall of our first Parents. Parent. Shew me how euery part of man is corrupted with sinne. Child. First,1 Cor. 2.14. the mind is blinded with ignorance. Secondly,Tit. 1.15. the conscience is defiled either with false excuses or gréeuous terrors. Thirdly,Iob 15.16. Gal. 5.24. the will and affections do onely lust after euill, but auoide good.
Fourthly,Rom. 6.19. the members of the bodie do outwardly execute the sinne of the soule. Parent. What punishment hath God threatned in his Law, vnto euery sinner. Child. Gal. 3.10. Deut. 28.15, 16, &c. His curse, which is all miserie both spirituall and corporall in this world, and eternall condemna∣tion in the world to come. Parent. By what meanes are you taught how to escape the curse of God, which you deserue for your sins? Child. Ier. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. Act. 13.38, 39. Onely by the Gospell or Couenant of grace. Parent. Wherefore then was the Law giuen? Child. For two causes. Parent. Which is the first? Child. Gal. 3.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. To terrifie vs and make vs séeke Christ. Parent. Which is the second? Child. Math. 5.17, &c. To be a continuall rule and direction for a godly life, as soone as we beléeue in Christ.
☞ THE SECOND PART. Concerning the Gospell or Couenant of Grace. Parent. WHat is the voice of the Gospell or Couenant of Grace? Child. Act. 16.31.Beléeue on the Lord Iesus Christ, and thou shalt be saued. Parent. How many things are to be considered in Christ? Child. John 1.14. Luk. 4.18, 19.Two, his Person and his Office. Parent. Whereof consisteth his Person? Child. Rom. 1.3, 4.Of two natures, for he is both God and Man. Parent. Why must he be God? Child. 1 Thess. 1.10. Heb. 9.12. 1 Sam. 2.25.That he might be able to sustaine Gods wrath, which was due to vs for our sins, and that he might merit for vs. Parent. Which person of the Tri∣nitie is Iesus Christ according to his Godhead?
Child. Iohn 3.16, 34, 35.The second person, name∣ly, the Sonne of God. Parent. Why must hee be Man also? Child. Heb. 2.16.That he might be fit to sa∣tisfie for man that had sinned. Parent. What is his Office? Child. Iohn 14.6. 1 Tim. 2.5.He is the onely Mediator betwéene God and vs, for our recon∣ciliation vnto him. Parent. How many parts be there of his Mediation? Child. Act. 3.22. Heb. 7.2, 3. Psal. 110. 2, 3,Three, for he is the Pro∣phet, the Priest, and the King of his Church. Parent. What is Christs Church? Child. Ephes. 1.4, 5, 13, 23. Reuel. 17.14. Iohn 17.6, 14, 15, 16.All Gods chosen people called out of the sinfull fellowship of the world and beléeuing in Christ. Parent. How is Christ the Prophet of his Church? Child. Hebr. 1.1. Iohn 15.15. Luk. 10.16. Math. 10.40. & 28.19, 20. Act. 20.20, 27.In teaching vs the whole will of God, both in his owne person when he was vpon the earth, and also by his Ministers from the beginning of the world vnto the end thereof. Parent. How is he the Priest of his Church?
Child. Rom. 8.32, 33, 34.By working the merit of our Redemption, and by making In∣tercession for vs. Parent. How hath Christ wrought the merit of our Redemption? Child. Phil. 2.8.Both by his sufferings, especially his pretious death, and also by his holy life. Parent. How was Christ our Priest by his sufferings, and especially by his precious death? Child. Math. 26. & 27. chapters.He suffered in soule and bodie, yea vnto separation, whatso∣euer we should haue suffred, so sacri∣ficing himselfe for vs. Parent. What did he merit for vs by such his sufferings? Child. Iohn 1.29. Esai. 53.5, 6. Coloss. 1.14. Gal. 3.13. Heb. 10.26.The taking away of our sinnes, and of all punishment due to vs for the same. Parent. What was his holy life? Child. Heb. 7.26. Psal. 40.7, 8, Math. 3.15.He perfectly obeyed and fulfilled the Law of God in all points. Parent. What benefit haue we by his holy life? Child. 1 Cor. 1.30. Rom. 5.18, 19. & 8.3, 4. with Leuit. 18.5.The assurance of perfect
righteousnes and of eternall life. Seruant. Why must our High Priest Christ Iesus, worke the merit of our Redemption in such sort? Scholler. Act. 4.12. 2 Cor. 5.21.Because it was the onely way in Gods wisedome to sa∣tisfie his owne iustice, and to shew mercy, for the saluation of his chosen people. Parent. Whereby doe you know assuredly that Christ hath satisfied the iustice of God, and obtained eternall Redemption for vs? Child. Rom. 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.14, 17, 18, 20. Heb. 9.11, 12.Because he arose from death to life and ascended into Heauen. Parent. How doth Christ our Priest make Intercession for vs? Child. Mal. 3.2, 3, 4. Exod. 28.38. & 29.33, &c. Heb. 4.14, 15, 16. & 12.24.He preuaileth with the Father by presenting the merit of his Passion vnto him, to receiue and con∣tinue vs in the Couenant of grace. Parent. Whereby doe you know this assuredly? Child. Rom. 8.34. Heb. 6.19, 20. & 9.24. Reuel. 1.5.Because he sitteth at the right hand of God his Father, and so is become our continuall Remem∣brancer.
Parent. How is Christ the King of his Church? Child. Luk. 1.32, 33. 1 Cor. 15.25, &c.By ruling it in this world, and glorifying it in the world to come. Parent. How doth Christ rule his Church in this world? Child. First,Phil. 2.13. by working grace in the heart. Secondly,Psal. 121. by protecting and de∣fending it. Thirdly,Rom. 8.28. by disposing all things to its greatest good. Parent. What Graces doth Christ the King of his Church,The first way of Christs ru∣ling of his Church in this world. worke in the heart? Child. Phil. 1.29. 1 Cor. 6.11.Faith and Sanctification or Regeneration. Parent. What is Faith? Child. Eph. 3.12, 17. Rom. 4.18, 21.Faith is a true perswa∣sion of my heart, grounded vpon the Promises of God, that whatsoeuer Christ hath wrought for the saluati∣on of Man, he hath done it as well for me, as for any others. Parent. In what words is Faith in
Christ taught? Child. Gal. 2.20.The Sonne of God hath loued me, and giuen himselfe for me. Seruant. What is the least measure of true Faith that any one can haue, who is of yeeres of discretion? Scholler. Gen. 4.13. Rom. 8.9, 23.24, 25. Ephes. 3.17. Math. 5.6. Psal. 51.8, 9. compared.When one is perswa∣ded that his sinnes may be forgiuen, and withall prayeth from the bottome of his heart, that whatsoeuer els God doth for him, he would forgiue him. Seruant. But when Faith groweth to some strength, how may you know then, that you haue a true and liuely faith? Scholler. First,Rom. 5 1. Gal. 4.6. by the inward peace of my conscience, féeling Gods loue in Christ, and assuring me of the forgiuenesse of all my sinnes. Secondly,Act. 15.9. Rom. 6.19. Iam. 2.14, 15, 16. &c. by my good workes, which are the fruits of a liuely faithSee more of Faith in Part. 4. and in Part. 5.. Seruant. Where are the chiefest points of Faith (as touching the things themselues that are to be beleeued of a Christian) comprised and set all to∣gither
in one short summe, for the help of the more ignorant sort & of weake memories? Scholler. In the Confession of Faith, commonly called the Articles of our Beléefe, and by some, The Apostles Creed. Seruant. Why is it called, The Creed? Scholler. Of the Latine word Credo, which is the first word in this Confession, and signifieth in our En∣glish tongue, I beleeue. Seruant. And why beareth it the name of the Apostles? Scholler. Because it was taken out of the doctrine of the Apostles. Seruant. Vnto whom was it pre∣scribed? Scholler. Vnto euery one to con∣fesse in his owne person, as being in∣déed the Summe of all Religion. Parent. Rehearse the Creed. Child. The forme of Confession of Faith.I beléeue in God, the Fa∣ther almighty, maker of heauen and earth: And in Iesus Christ, his onely Sonne, our Lord, who was conceiued
by the Holy Ghost, borne of the Vir∣gin Marie, suffered vnder Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead and bu∣ried; He descended into Hell; The third day hée rose againe from the dead, He ascended into heauen, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty: From thence he shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead. I beléeue in the Holy Ghost, the holy Catholike Church, the Com∣munion of Saints, the forgiuenesse of Sinnes, the Resurrection of the Bodie, and the Life euerlasting. Amen. Parent. I pray you, Pastor, giue vs a short Explanation of the Creede, which we may vse to read deliberately in our house vnto our ignorant peo∣ple now and than, and at the least vp∣on the Lords day (where better means of edification cannot be had) before or after we haue beene at the publike Ministerie of the word. In which Ex∣planation, we would haue you to di∣rect vs, how to vnderstand and apply, euery seuerall point to ech one of our
selues particularly, and withall set vs downe in the margent, some of the plainest testimonies of holy Scripture, to proue that your exposition is groun∣ded thereon. Pastor. I will, so that you will not forget nor neglect to vse it weekely, till such time as you and your Families be better instructed and setled in the truth. Parent. I pray God make me and my companie not only mindfull and diligent to vse it, but also giue vs grace to profit by it. Pastor. Amen. Now than, a Chri∣stian man or woman, should vnder∣stand and apply to his or her selfe, the Articles of Faith, as if he or she should say a litle more largely, thus: The Explana∣tion of the Creede. The Creed it self being the Summe of the holy Gospell. Forasmuch asHeb. 11.1, 2, 3, &c. Iam. 1, 12, 13. 1 Tim. 1.5. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. true Faith is the onely Mother and ground-worke of all sauing graces, and whereby also they become acceptable to God, and that euery person who looketh to bée saued, must attaine saluation by his
Hab. 2.4. Iohn 3.15, 16, 18. Gal. 3.22, 26. Heb. 10.38. & 11.6. owne faith, and not by the faith that is in any others out of himselfe: And foras∣much as the same true faithRom. 10.10. 2 Cor. 4.13. Matth. 10 32, 33. Act. 8.37. will necessarily shew it self by Confession, I doe here make confession of it with my mouth, as I haue recei∣ued and do stedfastly hold it in my heart, not from the traditions or sayings of men, but as I sée it war∣ranted in Gods most holy word, vnto the praise and glory of God, my owne com∣fort, and the good example of others, in this forme fol∣lowing: to wit, I beleeue in God, the Father Al∣mighty, Maker of heauen & earth. I doe acknowledge and beléeueDeut. 4.39.1 Iohn 5.7. one onely God di∣stinguished into thrée per∣sons,Math. 28.19. the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to beIohn 14.1. & 20.28. my God,Ephes. 1.11. Act. 15.18. & 27.20, 21, 22, &c. who decréed before all worlds,Gen. 1. & 2. chapters. made and fashioned in time,
Act. 4.24, 28. Gen. 14.19. Rom. 11.36. disposeth and possesseth all things whatsoeuer with all their seuerall actions & cir∣cumstances in most holy manner according to his in∣finite power and wisedome, vnto his owne glory, and specially Angels in heauen and Men on earth, who is both willing & able to blesse me,Rom. 8.28. Psal. 115.11, 13, 15. and who I know ma∣keth all things worke togi∣ther for good vnto me, whom he hath called to loue, feare and obey him, maugre all enimies,Iohn 20.17. because hee is Christs father and my fa∣ther, & almighty in strength. Which Father,Gen. 3.1, 7. Iohn 8.44. Rom. 7.12, 23. Deut. 27.26. when wée wretches fel shamefully (be∣cause willingly) from God, vpon the inticement of the Deuill, and inwrapped our selues with vnspeakable guilt, slauerie and woe, re∣belling against the Law of God, which is holy, iust and
good, and lying open to Gods curse for euermore, Iohn 3.16. Rom. 5.12, 13, 14, &c. sent forth for the praise of his glorious grace, And in Ie∣sus Christ his onely Sonne our Lord, the second Person of the Trinitie, euen his onely begotten Sonne to beAct. 2.36. our Lord for our Re∣demption, and so to become our Sauiour, which is ment by the nameMatth. 1.21. Iesus, and therefore heEsai. 61.1, 2, &c. Heb. 1.9. Iohn 3.34. annointed him (for the name Christ signifi∣eth Annointed) with the Spirit aboue measure, that he might be our holyDeut. 18.18, &c. Pro∣phet to teach vs the way of saluation,Heb. 10.12, 14. our mercifull High Priest to offer himself a sacrifice for vs, and ourLuk. 1.32, 33. Psal. 72. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. powerfull King to worke in our hearts his sauing grace, to gouerne vs, to pro∣tect vs, and continually to minister vnto vs all bles∣sings néedfull both for soule and bodie. Who was conceiued by the Ho∣ly Ghost, Borne of the Virgin Marie, Luk. 1.35. & 2.6, 7. Which Iesus Christ to the end he might be
a fit Mediator for vs, Rom. 5.15, 18, 19. & 8.2, 3. tooke the true nature of man vp∣on him in all things, (sinne onely excepted) and so was holily conceiued by the ex∣traordinarie operation of ye Holy Ghost, in the wombe of a Virgin called Marie, thereby sanctifying our sin∣full conceptions, and of her was he borne, and brought forth into the world, after the common fashion of all men,Gal. 4.4, 5. Heb. 2.16, 17. that we might be sure, that by the partaking of our na∣ture he hath communicated himselfe and all his goodnes to vs.Rom. 5.19. Who in the same our nature led a holy life ac∣cording to all Gods com∣mandements, that it might be imputed vnto vs, andEsai. 53. Luk 22.44. & 23.1. &c. Iohn 18. & 19. chapter, withal suffred vnspeakable torments both in soule and bodie, sufficient to haue pur∣ged the sinnes of the whole world, though none but the
faithfull shall receiue any benefit thereby.Deut. 21.23. Galat. 3.13. 1 Thess. 1.10. 1 Iohn 3.8. Was cruci∣fied, Who be∣ing made a Curse for vs, was bound as a guilty per∣son, that we might be loosed out of the spirituall chaine and slauerie of Satan and sinne.Matth. 27. Coloss. 2 13, 14. Phil. 1.29. Gal. 6.14. Ps. 119. 67, 71. 2 Cor. 12.20. 1 Thess. 1.10. Who was condem∣ned wrongfully by ye Iudge Pilate, that we which are guilty of innumerable trans∣gressions, might be dischar∣ged before the Tribunall Seat of Gods fearefull iu∣stice, and who thereupon was most shamefully execu∣ted as a most hainous Male∣factor, notwithstanding he was most iust and innocent, his hands and féete being fastned with nailes to a Crosse, and thereon tormen∣ted till he was slaine, his side pierced with a speare, his blood shed both while he was aliue and dead, dead and buried, and so being truly dead, his bodie
was buried: All which was to satisfie Gods wrath, to wrath, to take the curse which otherwise was our due desert (becauseRom. 5.6, 8, 10. wee were vngodly, sinners, and Gods enemies) to kill and burie all our sins with him,Ephes. 2.16. to reconcile God and vs, to slay the enmitie,Philip. 3.10. 2 Cor. 4.17. and to san∣ctifie and make happy and comfortable all our afflicti∣ons and persecutions.Act. 2.24, 27, 29, 30. Ps. 16.10. Math. 12.40. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55. He descen∣ded into Hell; Yea he abased himselfe yet fur∣ther, euen to the lowest de∣grée of humiliation, conti∣nuing thrée dayes and thrée nights contemptibly in the bands of death, that he might vtterly abolish the sting of death, that he might vtterly abolish the sting of death, and teach vs thorow humi∣liation for our sinnes.Act. 2.24. 2 Cor. 13.4. Iohn 10.18. Not∣withstanding, hauing payed the vttermost price for all our sinnes, and conquered
Satan, Rom. 4.25. & 6.4, 5, 9, 10, 11. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. & 3.21. Reuel. 20.5, 6. Sinne, Hell & Dam∣nation, the third day he rose againe frō the dead, he triumphantly rose againe from death to life vpon the third day, both to assure vs that God will count vs righteous that doe beléeue in his name, and also to quicken and restore vs to a new and holy life, which is the first resurrection.1 Cor. 15.4, 5, 6. Act. 1.2, 3, 4, &c. And so his soule taking his bodie againe and quickning it by his diuine power, he conti∣nued for a season vpon the earth, He ascen∣ded into heauen, andAct. 1.9, 11. Mark. 16.19. Heb. 9 24. Ephes 4.10, 11. Iohn 14 2. & 17.24. Col. 3.2. afterwards did thence gloriously ascend in∣to heauen, to take possession of it in our name, to appeare in the presence of God for vs, and to fill all things and specially his Church with his gifts and graces, thereby to lead it thither, whence by sinne and iniquitie it was banished. And sit∣teth on the right hand of God, ye Father Al∣mighty; 1 Tim. 3.16. Heb. 7.25. 1 Cor. 15.25, 27. There he sitteth at the Fathers right hand, making intercession for vs,
by offering to his Father, Act. 2.33, 36. Psal 110.1. and applying to vs, the me∣rit of his passion: where he hath all power and authori∣tie committed vnto him to be the onely Lord and King for the gouernment of all things vnto the saluation of his people and destruction of his enimies.Act. 3.21. Iohn 17.24. And there he shall remaine, as touching his manhood, vntill the latter day, to the end we might haue assured and constant comfort, because our flesh dwelleth there in the person of our Redéemer. Frō thence hee shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead. Act. 17.30, 31. 2 Cor. 5.9, 10. Math. 25.32. &c. Rom. 2.6. At that day he shall returne to pro∣nounce & execute iust iudge∣ment vpon all mankinde, both the good and bad, whe∣ther dead afore, or found a∣liue at his comming, vnto the praise of his glorious iustice, rendring vnto euery one, according as their workes shall testifie their
faith or vnbeléefe. This Ie∣sus Christ then I acknow∣ledge and beléeue to be both my Sauiour, my Interces∣sor, and my Iudge, vnto whom I earnestly cry,Rev. 22.20. Come Lord Iesus, come quickly,Act. 24.16. with 2 Cor. 5.6, 8, 9, 10, 11. labouring alwaies to haue a cleare conscience, that I may haue boldnes at that day, and so I trust that he will pronounce for me, and make mée partaker of his glory. I beleeue in ye Holy Ghost, And withall I do1 Cor. 6.11. Iohn 14.26. & 15.26. acknowledge & beléeue the third Person of the Trini∣tie, the Holy Ghost, procée∣ding from the Father and the Sonne, to be the Sancti∣fier and comforter of Gods Elect, making effectuall vn∣to them, whatsoeuer Iesus Christ hath wrought & suf∣fred; who worketh and pre∣uaileth in me, which I per∣ceiue not only by the graces ofEphes. 4.22, 23, 24. Rom. 7.15, to the end. true holinesse and righ∣teousnes,
begun and increa∣sing in me, and by my dili∣gent striuing against the remnants of my corruption and lusts, but also2 Cor. 1.22. Rom 8.15, 16, 23, 26. by the earnest of the same Spirit in my heart, inabling me to call God my Father, and to pray with sighes and grones within any selfe for the per∣fect adoption. The holy Catholike Church, And further I do acknowledge aIohn 10.16. Act. 2.42. &c. & 14.22. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. 2 Tim. 3.12. compa∣nie of people called by Gods frée grace in Christ through the power of the Holy Spi∣rit, few in number (in com∣parison of the rest) and ordi∣narily consisting of the baser sort, and the same exercised with many affliction:Deut. 12.30, 31, 32. & 29.29. Ser∣uing God according to his word,Gen. 4.26. Rom. 10.13. invocating his name,Heb. 13.17. submitting them∣selues vnto the Ministerie of the Gospell, andAct. 19.5. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. profes∣sing Iesus Christ in the vse of the Sacraments, Bap∣tisme,
and the Supper of the Lord.Ephes. 5.26, 27. 1 Thes. 4.7. Holy, because both Christs holines is im∣puted to them beléeuing in him, and also for that there doth procéed from their holy faith, a holy life and conuer∣sation. And Catholike, be∣cause this companie of peo∣ple isEphes. 4.12, 13, 16. Iohn 11.52. Esai. 2.2, 3. vniuersally scattered ouer all the world, of whose number (without the which there is no saluation) I doe certainly know and professe my selfe to be one,Iohn 6.27. & 10.27. Act. 2.47. & 24.14. because I féele in my selfe an hun∣gring after the Word and Sacraments, with all other the Ordinances of the Lord, as the meanes of my spiri∣tuall nourishment, and doe willingly submit my selfe to be guided by the spirit and word of God. the Com∣munion of Saints, In which Church I acknowledg1 Ioh. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Psal. 16.3. 1 Cor. 12.26. that there is a partaking of gifts and graces from Christ to
them, Esai. 11.6, 7, 8, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, &c. Col. 3.11.12, 13, 14. & amongst themselues mutually vnto the best good and saluation of euery mem∣ber, which I for my part doe professe and practise, both ioyning my selfe vnto them in all godly exercises and la∣bours, and féeling my selfe vnfainedly knit vnto them in all holy affections & mer∣cifulnesse.Act. 13.38, 39. Psal. 103., 2, 3, 4, 11, 12. Esai. 38.17. Mic. 7.19. Zach. 12.10. Rom. 7.19, 10. Matth. 5.44, 45. & 6.14. Ephes. 4.32. L. 23.34. Act. 7.60. the for∣giuenesse of sinnes, And forasmuch as this onely true Church doth apply Iesus Christs righteousnesse vnto it selfe (euery member particular∣ly) and for his sake (whom they haue pierced by their sinnes) do heartily repent, I do beléeue that God wil for∣giue them their sinnes, and do assure my selfe that hée will forgiue me all mine, for the which cause I cannot choose but be thankfull to the Lord in waging warre against euery sinne, and in forgiuing and praying for
all them that haue vniustly and greatly offended thée, euen my sorest enimies. the resur∣rection of the body, Fi∣nally, I acknowledge and beléeue, that at the last dayIoh. 5.28, 29. Job 19.25. 1 Cor. 15. Eccles. 12.14. 2 Cor. 5.10. Matth. 25. all the soules of the dead shall returne and be put into the very same bodies where∣in they once liued, and so be raised vp to liue againe, and the quicke changed, all in a moment, through the vn∣speakable power of God, to the end they may all come to iudgment wholy both bodies and soules togither, and sen∣tence may bée giuen vpon them: WhenPhil. 3.21. Revel. 0.6. & 21.4. Rom. 6.11, 13. & 1.1, 2 for my part I trust to haue a ioyfull and glorious resurrection my selfe (as all other the faith∣full shall haue, whereof we haue a plaine earnest giuen vs already in the Resurre∣ction of Christ our head) frée from any more miserie and hauing all teares wiped
away from mine eyes, be∣cause I féele my selfe rising daily vnto newnesse of life, and my bodie conformed & sitted in all the parts and fa∣culties of it more and more to serue the Lord, for I know I shall not be con∣demned, because I verily beléeueRom. 8.1.3. 2 Cor. 7.11. Iesus Christ hath béene in a sort condemned for me, and hath made mée condemne my selfe in re∣morce of conscience for my sinnes, to such effect, that I walke not after the flesh, that is, in following and sa∣tisfying the swindge of my naturall corruption, but af∣ter the Spirit, that is, in framing my waies agreable to the gift and state of rege∣neration wrought in my heart by the Holy Spirit.2 Cor. 5.1, 2. &c. 1 Tim. 4.8. Revel. 21.22. & 22.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and the life euerla∣sting, From that day the Godly shall possesse the kingdome of heauen in the presence of
God for euermore,Iohn 10.9, 10, 11, 15, 17, 28. Phil. 3.20. 1 Thess. 4.17. the most happy and blessed life, which God hath prepared for them, and whereof I looke to bee partaker, forasmuch as Christ hath both merited it for me, and wrought so in me, that my conuersation is in heauen, that is, such as tendeth & driueth towards the heauenly glory.Reuel. 22.3. with Luk. 2.14. There shall he be praised of me, and of all other his elect for euer.Rom. 10.10. 2 Cor. 1.20. Apoc. 22.20. Tit. 3.7. Rom. 8.23. Amen. All these things I doe truly beléeue with my heart, and confesse with my mouth, that they are so indéed, and doe desire and waite for the full performance & accomplish∣ment of them vnto the praise and glory of God. Parent. What is Regeneration or Sanctification?
Child. Iohn 3.3. Luk. 3.3, 8. 1 Thess. 5.23.A singular grace of God, whereby I am truly changed from my sinnes, and made the obedient child of God. Parent. What are the parts of Re∣generation? Child. Ephes. 4.22, 23, 24.The mortifying of the olde man, and the quickning of the new. Parent. What is the mortifying of the old man? Child. Rom. 6.3, 6, &c. & 8.13. Col. 3.5. Gal. 5.24.The abating and cruci∣fying of sinne and of the power there∣of, through the vertue of Christs death and buriall. Seruant. How must you vse Christs death that it may slay your sinne? Scholler. Zach. 12.10. Gal. 2.20. Heb. 6.6. 1 Cor. 2.8. with 1 Pet. 4.1, 2.Bethinking my selfe that my sinnes were the very cause of Christs death, I must abhorre to commit new, least thereby I crucifie againe the Lord of life. Parent. What is the quickning of the new man? Child. Ephes. 2.1. & 4.23, 24. Gal. 2.19, 20. Col. 2.12, 13, & 3.1, 2, 3, 4.A raising vp and strength∣ning vnto newnesse of life, with a continuall increase, through the
power of Christs resurrection and life.Rom. 5.10. & 6.4, 5, 9, 10, 11. Seruant. How must you vse Christs resurrection, that you may be quick∣ned thereby to lead a new life? Scholler. 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. Rom. 6.4, 5. with Heb. 6.6. & Pro. 14.31.Bethinking my selfe that Christ triumphing ouer my sins in his resurrection, made me righte∣ous, I am stirred vp vnto a godly life, that I may glorifie & not shame his triumphSee more of Regeneration in Part. 4.. Parent. Notwithstanding all this, do you not sinne daily? Child. Heb. 12.4. Psal. 119.59. & 73.13, 14. Rom. 6.12. Yes, but yet I renew my repentance afresh euery day, and earnestly striue with a continuall en∣deuour against sinne, suffring it not to raigne in me. Parent. What is your continuall endeuour? Child. First,Psal. 39.1. Gal. 5.24. Iam. 4.4. 1 Pet. 5, 8, 9. Rom. 7.17, 18, 19. I watch ouer all my wayes, resisting the lusts of my owne sinfull heart and flesh, the mo∣tions of the Deuill, and the intise∣ments & terrors of the world. Secondly,Act. 9.36. 1 Cor. 15.58. I studie to abound in all good workes, and to grow in grace
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ.2 Pet. 3.17. Seruant. And what is your com∣fort in these your endeuors? Scholler. First,Heb. 6.11. & 13.18. Ps. 19.13 that my consci∣ence doth not accuse me either of wil∣full negligence, or presumption. Secondly,1 Thes. 5.24. 1 Cor. 1.8, 9. my hope is confirmed that I shall conquer sinne, and receiue daily increase for a new life. Parent. What is repentance? Childe. Luk. 3.3, 8. Acts 2.38. & 11.23. Repentance is a setled purpose in my heart, ioyned with a carefull endeauour to leaue all my sinnes, and to leade a new life accor∣ding to all Gods commandements. Seruant. By what notes may you know that you haue Repentance and Newnesse of life? And more particu∣larly, how may you bee sure that you haue truly repented of some sin which you haue committed? Scholler. First,2 Cor. 7.9, 10 Psal. 51.5. Nehem. 9.35. when my heart is vnfainedly grieued with godly sor∣row, euen because I haue disobeyed the Lord my most louing and tender Father in Iesus Christ, though I
should neuer be punished at all for my sinne. Secondly,Psal. 51. Job 42.6 Psal. 19.12, 13 when I am heartily sorry for all my sinnes, as well as for any, especially such as I haue com∣mitted against my owne knowledge, and doe detest and abhorre them. Thirdly,Psal. 40.8. Luke 9.23. Acts 11.23. Iames 5.10. 2 Chron. 30.6, 7 8, 9. when I doe not onely stedfastly purpose, but also diligently and constantly endeuour to follow the will of God both in déedes and suffe∣rings, and that against all temptati∣ons. And fourthly,Phil. 4, 13. Apoc. 1.6. when I féele my selfe more able to forsake sinne, and to embrace righteousnes through Christ which strengtheneth mée.See part 5. pag. 176.177. Seruant. But how must you vtter and testifie your Repentance? Scholler. First,Psal. 32.5. & 51, 3, 4, 14. Prou 28.13. 1 Iohn 1.9. Math. 5.23, 24 & 18, 15, 16, 17 Acts 19.18, 19 Ios. 7.19.20, 21 Iam. 5.16. by a willing and free confession of all my sinnes vnto God in secret, and of those that bee greater offences and scandalous, both vnto God and vnto his Church. Secondly,Luc. 19.8.9.10 Num. 5.5, 6.7, &c. in those that be iniuri∣ous vnto men, I must make restituti∣on vnto the vttermost of my ability.
Thirdly,1 Cor. 7, 35. Hos. 14.8. Psal. 34.14. Mat. 5.28, 29, 30. I must thenceforth fol∣low all the occasions of well-doing, and auoid the euill, specially of that particular sinne, whereinto I haue al∣ready fallen, or am most inclined vnto. Seruant. What speciall helpe doe you vse for occasions? Scholler. 1 Cor. 7.20.24. Psal. 101.2. 2 Sam. 11, 2. I haue euermore a di∣ligent respect to my particular cal∣ling. Seruant. By what rule may you know whether your particular calling be warrantable or not? Scholler. Ephes. 6, 6. 1 Cor. 10, 31. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. Euery calling, whereof the word of God doth set downe the speciall duties, ordinarily seruing to Gods glory, and the benefite of man∣kinde is warrantable, else not. Seruant. And how doe you know whether God requireth you to accept & continue in suchI speak now of priuate cal∣lings or voca∣tions. a calling or not? Scholler. First,2 Sam. 19.33, to 39. by the strength and fitnesse of my minde and bodie to performe the dueties and workes of my calling. Secondly,Gen. 46, 34 Acts 18, 3. by the place, time and vse for it.
Thirdly,Mat. 10.10. 1 Cor. 9.14. by the benefit it ordina∣rily yéeldeth to satisfie the labourers necessitie, if due paines be taken, and a good conscience vsed therein. Seruant. But what if your calling minister not sufficient to satisfie your necessities, though you doe wisely ob∣serue all these rules? May you not leaue your calling in such a case? Scholler. 1 Cor. 7, 20.24. Hag. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, with 2, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.No verily, if I may be suffered to follow it still, but rather looke well that I bee truely reconciled vnto God for my sinnes: And though I be so, yet must I patiently endure the hand of God vpon my labours, and put his most wise and mercifull corrections to a further good vse: pro∣uided (I say) that my calling be such (all circumstances considered) as through the vsuall blessing of God may yéeld competent maintenance to the labourer. Parent. And which are good works? Child. Deut. 5.32. Ephes 2.10. Rom. 14.23. Psal. 119.21. 1. Sam. 15.22. Esai. 29.13.Onely those which are truely grounded vpon Gods word, & the grace and spirit of God maketh me able to doe in conscience of my o∣bedience
vnto him. Parent. Doe you merit or deserue forgiuenesse of your sinnes, or any o∣ther fauour at Gods hands, for your faith, repentance, and good works? Child. No,Phil. 2.13. Ephes. 2.8.9. for it is God that worketh in me, both to will and to doe of his good pleasure, and I am saued by grace. Parent. Why cannot you merit by your good workes? Child. Rom. 7 13, 18 Luke 17.10.Because the very best workes of the godliest man in the world are vnperfect. Parent. How commeth it then to passe that any of your works do please God? Child. 1 Pet. 2.5. Exo. 28.36, 37 38. Mal. 3.17. Math. 3, 17.God is graciously content to passe by the euill, and to accept the good (being the fruit of his owne spi∣rit) for his Sonne Iesus Christ. Parent. Is not your saluation ob∣tained partly by Christs grace, & part∣lie by your owne workes? Child. No,Rom. 11.6. for then grace were no more grace. Parent. Why then must you doe good works?
Child. First and chiefly,Math. 5.16. to glo∣rifie God thereby. Next,2 Pet. 1, 5, 6.7, 8, 9, 10. to get assu∣rance of my owne election: and with∣all1 Pet. 2, 12, 15, &c. for the edification and benefite of my neighbour. Parent. And what doth principally moue your heart to doe them? Child. 2 Cor. 5, 14.The loue of Christ con∣straineth me. Parent. Shall not euery man and woman in the visible Church bee saued by Christ? Child. No,Iohn 3, 3, 5.18, 36. Hebr. 12.14. but those onely who are true beléeuers, and borne anew of the holy Ghost. Seruant. What principall reason is there that vnbeleeuers and vnregene∣rate persons shall not be saued? Scholler. Iohn 3.18, 19, 32, 33. Rom. 1.25, & 3 3, 4. 2 Thes. 1.8, 9, 10. Iude. v. 4. Tit. 1.16. 2 Pet. 2, 20, 21.Because by their vn∣beliefe they doe either refuse as insuf∣ficient the only blessed Meane of their saluation, changing that most vn∣doubted and important promise of God into a lye, or doe otherwise through their vnthankefulnesse, care∣lesnesse or presumption shamefully a∣buse it.
☞ THE THIRD PART. Concerning the Meanes of Grace in gene∣rall, and first of the Word of God. Parent. WHat meanes doth Christ the King vse in working Faith and Sanctification in the heart. Childe. Esai. 59, 21. Ierem. 10.23. Acts 20.32.Partly inward, and partly outward. Parent. What is the inward meane? Childe. Gal. 3.2, 3. Luk. 11, 13. 1 Cor. 12, 13. Gal. 6.1.The holy Spirit, which is giuen by the outward meanes. Parent. What are the outward Meanes? Childe. Ibidem.These foure; First, the Word of God, whereby ordinarilie Faith and Sanctification are begun, & afterwards continually increased. Secondly, Praier. Thirdly, the Sacraments. Fourthly, the Practise of the Com∣munion of Saints, whereby the same graces are likewise increased and con∣firmed. The first out∣ward mean of Grace.
Parent. What is the word of God? Childe. Ioh. 5.39. & 21.31. Iam. 3.17 2 Pet. 1.21. Ephes. 2.20. Rom. 1.2. with Gal. 6.16.The Doctrine of mans saluation written by diuine inspirati∣on, and contained in the bookes of the old and new Testaments, called, The holy Canonicall Scriptures. Seruant. How doe you certainelie know that the Scriptures are the verie vndoubted Word of God? Scholler. Esai. 59.21. Iohn 10.3, 4, 5, 27. & 16.13. 1 Iohn 2.27. 1 Thes. 1.5.Chéefely by the inward perswasion of the Holy Ghost. Parent. How is the Word made profitable vnto your Saluation? Childe. Rom. 10.14. Acts 17.11.Chiefly and first of all, by the attentiue hearing and diligent me∣ditating of it being rightly preached, which serueth to ye begetting of grace.2 Tim. 4. i. 2.3 Luk. 1.3, 4, & 24, 17, to 33. Heb. 5.12. & 6. 1, 2, &c. Psal. 1.1, 2. & 78.3 4, 5, 6. And afterwards, principally by preaching, and then, by Catechesing, Reading, Conferring & Meditating, all for out strengthening & growth. Seruant. How is the Word of God rightly preached? Scholler. Nehem. 8.8. Tit. 1.9. 2 Tim. 2, 15. & 3.16. 1 Cor. 12.8.When the true mea∣ning is plainely giuen, and the profi∣table vse thereof is made and applied to the hearers.
Seruant. What is your attentiue hearing of the Word? Scholler. Acts 16.14. & 17.11. Luk. 8.15. Eccles. 5.1I reuerently marke it with an honest and good heart, prepa∣red to receiue it with zeale and readi∣nesse. Seruant. And what is your diligent meditating of it? Scholler. Psa. 119.155 Prou. 8.34.I doe earnestly call it to minde, carefully search it, and think much vpon it, to the end I may draw it into conscionable practise. Seruant. What need hath a Christi∣an to vse godly meditation? Scholler. Psal. 119.113. & 139.23, 24. Phil. 4.8.Because they are the grounds of all good speech, and of all other holy actions, and in very déed whosoeuer maketh no conscience of his thoughts, maketh no right consci∣ence of any thing at all. Parent. Among the manifold me∣ditations of a Christian, which do you think to be of speciall vse for his good? Pastor. First,Psal. 16.8. Prou 15.3. alwaies to remember that God is present euery where. Secondly,Psal. 89.1. Phil. 1.23. Ioh. 14.1.2. &c. to beare in minde Gods vnspeakeable mercies in Christ, and
particularly the promise and gift of e∣ternall life. Thirdly,Acts 28.26, 27. 2 Thes. 1.8, 9. to meditate often on Gods iudgements, especially those that are spirituall, and vpon eternall con∣demnation, the just reward of the vn∣godly. Fourthly,Ps. 78.1.7.11 & 111.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Dan. 9 11, 12, 13. Act. 4.24, 25, 26, 27, &c. it is good to consider diligently Gods works, both ordinarie and extraordinary, obseruing how they doe seale the truth of his word. Fifthly and lastly,1 Thes. 3, 4. Deut. 32, 29. Eccles. 11.9. 1 Pet. 4.7. Ephes: 5.16. 2 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11 to thinke often of affliction, and chiefely of death and of the last iudgement, studying how to redeeme our time, that we may be pre∣pared with comfort for that great and terrible day. Seruant. What is Catechising? Scholler. Heb. 5.12. & 6, 1, 2. Gal. 6.6. Luk. 1 4. Act. 18.25A plaine & easie instru∣cting of the ignorant in the grounds of Religion, chiefely by Questions and Answeres. Seruant. VVho are bound to Cate∣chize? Scholler. Gal. 9.6. Pro. 4.3, 4. & 31.1.The Ministers in pub∣like, and * the Housholders in priuate.
Secondly, concerning Prayer. The second outward mean of grace Parent. VVhat is Prayer? Childe. 1. Tim. 2, 1. Phil. 4.6.Praier is a religious cal∣ling vpon the name of God, eyther by Petition (which wee commonly call Prayer) or by Thanksgiuing. Parent. VVhat is Petition? Childe. Psal. 6.8, 9, Dan. 9.17, 18. Rom. 8.26.It is our humble entrea∣ting of God for all things which wee desire to enioy. Parent. VVhat is thanksgiuing? Childe. Ps. 16.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Math. 8, 2. 2. Sam. 15 25, 26.It is our rendring praise to God for all the good things which we enioy in déed, or by promise. Parent. What must you doe that you may learne to pray well? Childe. First,Luke 11.1. I must desire God to teach me to pray. Secondly,Math. 6.9.10, 11, 12, 13. I must diligently ob∣serue the directions of Gods Word, and particularly of the Lords prayer. Parent. VVhat is the Lords praier? Childe. That most perfect forme and pattern of prayer which the Lord Iesus taught his disciples.
Parent. Say the Lord prayer? Childe. Math. 6.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Our Father which art in heauen, hallowed be thy name. Thy Kingdome come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heauen. Giue vs this day our daily bread. And forgiue vs our trespasses, as wee forgiue them that trespasse against vs. And lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill. For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for euer. Amen. Parent. Are you bound to pray in the onely words of this forme alwaies? Childe. See the ex∣amples of the Saints prayers in the holie Scriptures.Not alwaies, for Christ hath left it to our liberty for the words so that we doe imitate the matter, and vse the like affections.Exod. 14.15. 1 Sam. 1.15, 16 Psal. 119.145. Esai. 37 14, 15, &c. Rom. 8.26. Phil. 4.6. Iam. 5.16. So whether I vse this forme or not, I must pray cheefly with my heart, being touched with the féeling of my wants, and powring forth my soule before the Lord in euery request. Seruant. God knoweth before wee aske what wee need, yea and hath ap∣pointed in his prouidence what he will bestow, how and when, therefore why
should wee pray at all, at least wise so earnestly? Scholler. Psal. 14.4 & 50.15. & 145.18. Iob. 21.15. Ierem. 10.25. Ioel. 2.32. Acts 10.4. 1. Tim. 4.5. Luke. 23.42, 43.Because he hath sancti∣fied it to be his Ordinance, thereby to blesse and prosper whom, and what he will, for hee will saue them that call vpon him in truth, and none other. Parent. VVhat doe you learne out of this, that the Lord Iesus hath set vs downe what we should pray for? Childe. Math. 6.9. Psal. 119.41. Exo. 32.11.13. 1 Iohn 5.14.I learne, that I must ground and frame all my desires vpon the promises which God hath made in his Word. Parent. How many principall parts be there of the Lords prayer? Childe. Foure. First, the Preface. Secondly, the Petitions. Thirdly, the Thanksgiuing. Fourthly, the Conclusion. Parent. Which is the Preface? Childe. Our Father which art in Heauen. Parent. Who is that whom you call Father? Childe. Mat. 3.17. & 23.9. Iohn 20.17.God, who is become my
mercifull Father in Iesus Christ. Parent. What do you learne out of that? Childe. Joh. 16.23. Math. 17.5. Rom. 8.15, 16. Heb. 4.16.I learne to call vppon God onely, in the onely name and me∣diation of Iesus Christ, in whom he is well pleased. Seruant. What doe you learne out of that, that you call God, Our Father? Scholler. Math. 5.23, 43, 44. Mar. 11.25.26. Luke 23.34. 1 Tim. 2, 8. 1 Ioh. 3.18, 22. Esai. 1.15 & 58.4, 6, 7.I learne that all true Christians (especially) are my bre∣thren, and therefore that I must loue them heartily, and pray for them as for my selfe, yea also for my enemies. Parent. What doe you learne out of that which is added, which art in Hea∣uen? Childe. First,Exod. 3.5. Eccles. 5.1, 2. 1 Tim. 2 8. Psal 20.6. I learne when I pray, to approach vnto God with ho∣lie preparation, singular feare and humble reuerence. Secondly,Ephes. 3.20. I learne that he is not onely willing, but also able to helpe. Parent. How many Petitions bee therein the Lords prayer? Child. Sixe whereof the first three doe principally concerne Gods glorie,
the last thrée, our owne necessities. Parent. What doe you learne out of that order? Child. Prou. 16.4. Exod. 32.3.I learne that I must zea∣lously desire the glorifying of Gods most holy name, before I séeke reliefe for any of my owne necessities. Parent. Which is the first Petition? Child. Hallowed be thy name. Parent. What doe you pray for in the first Petition? Child. 1 Cor. 10.31. Rom. 11.36.That God may be glorifi∣ed in all things. Parent. Which is the second Peti∣tion? Child. Thy kingdome come. Parent. What doe you pray for in the second Petition? Child. First,Mark. 1.13. & 15.43. Math. 28, 18. Psal. 51.10. & 122.6. 2 Thes. 3, 1. that the kingdome of Grace may be daily inlarged, both by the inward working of the holy spi∣rit, and also by the outward meanes, vntill it be perfected at the comming of Christ to iudgement. Secondly,Reuel. 22:20 2 Tim. 4, 8. that God would finish these sinfull daies, and take vs to his kingdome of glory.
Parent. Which is the third Petition? Child. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heauen. Parent. What doe you pray for in the third Petition? Child. First,Deut. 29.29. Psal. 86.11. & 103.20. Acts 24.16. that wee may ren∣der dutifull obedience vnto Gods re∣uealed will, vntill wée be as the holie Angels. Secondly,Mark. 8.34. Phil. 1.29. Iam. 5.7, 8, &c. that wée may submit our selues to suffer his will with pati∣ence in time of afflictions. Parent. Which is the fourth Peti∣tion? Childe. Giue vs this day our dailie bread. Parent. What doe you pray for in the fourth Petition? Childe. Pro. 30.8. Psal. 104.15. 1 Tim. 4.4. & 6.8. Gen. 28.20 Pro. 10 22. Math. 8.2. Rom. 1.10. Luk. 12.16.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. That God would giue vs all things necessary and conuenient for this present life, with this excepti∣on, If it be his good pleasure. Parent. Which is the fifth Petition? Childe. And forgiue vs our trespasses, as wee forgiue them that trespasie against vs. Parent. What doe you pray for in
the fifth Petition? Child. Mat. 11.28. Esai. 55.1, &c. Psal. 19.12. & 32.1. Dan. 9.24 Zach. 12.10. That God would iustifie vs by the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, and the imputation of Christs righte∣ousnesse. Seruant. Doe we deserue forgiue∣nesse for our sinnes at Gods hands, be∣cause we forgiue them that trespasse a∣gainst vs? Scholler. No,Math 5.7. Luke 7.47. Mat. 18.22, 32 for first, God for∣giueth vs fréely, and then that being felt by faith in our hearts, causeth vs to forgiue them that haue offended vs. Seruant. Wherefore then is that Reason added? Scholler. Mark. 11.24 25.26.Both to teach vs that we ought to forgiue others when we pray, and also that by the same grace, we may get assurance that God will forgiue vs. Parent. Which is the sixth Peti∣tion? Child. And lead vs not into temp∣tation, but deliuer vs from euill. Parent. What do you pray for in the sixth Petition?
Child. Psal. 51.12. Iob 36.21. Genes. 39.12. 1 Sam. 25.13, 22. Math. 8.28, &c. Ioh. 14.30. 1 Cor. 10 13. Iam. 1.13, 14.That God would sanctifie vs by mortifying our corrupt nature, and quickning vs in newnesse of life. Seruant. Why doth Christ teach vs to pray for Sanctification in so ma∣ny words? Scholler. To assure vs, First,Psal. 66.18. & 145.19. Prov. 28.13. Iohn 9.31. Iam 5.16. 1 Tim. 2.8. that vnlesse we truly forsake all our sinnes, and hartily embrace a godly life vnto the vttermost of our power, God will not heare vs when we call vpon him. Secondly,2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 8, 9, 10. Phil. 2.12. that we cannot obtaine Sanctification without great dili∣gence. Seruant. What do you learne out of this, that, Christ hath taught vs two petitions for spirituall things, and but one for temporall? Scholler. Esai. 66.2. 1 King. 8.37, 38, 39. Luk 8 13, 14. Matth. 6.33. That being vnfained∣ly cast downe in the sense of our spi∣rituall miserie and vilenesse, we doe desire spirituall graces aboue all worldly benefits. Parent. Which is the Thanksgiuing of the Lords Prayer?
Child. For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for euer. Parent. What do you learne out of the Thanksgiuing? Child. 1 Chron. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 1.20. Phil. 4.6. 1 Tim. 2.1. 1 Pet. 4.14. Because God hath full right and power ouer all, and doth all things to his owne glory, and that for euer, I learne; First to ground my assurance of obtayning my prayers onely on God: And afterwards to render him therefore all praise and glory backe againe at all times. Parent. Which is the Conclusion of the Lords Prayer? Child. Amen. Parent. What is the meaning of Amen? Child. 1 Cor. 14.16. 2 Cor. 1.20. Reuel. 22.20.So be it, So it is, and So it shall be. Parent. What do you learne out of Amen? Child. Iam. 1.6, 7. & 5.16. Mark. 11.24.I learne thereby that I must pray not onely with seruent de∣sire to obtaine the thing that I aske, but also with Faith and Assurance that I shall haue my desire accom∣plished.
Parent. But what if God heare not our prayers at the first? Child. Mark. 9.24. Luk. 18.1, &c. & 21.36. Psal. 42.11. 1 Thess 5.17. Esai. 62.7.Yet we must striue against doubting and vnbeléefe, and continue in prayer, neuer waxing faint, nor for any cause ceasing to importune the Lord, till hée hath granted our re∣quests. Seruant. How is Prayer diuided? Scholler. Into Publike & Priuate, and either of the same into Ordinarie and Extraordinarie. Seruant. What do you call Publike Prayer? Scholler. Act 6.4 &c Psal. 84.1. &c. 1. Cor. 14.40.That which is made by the Church assembled for Gods worship and seruice sake. Seruant. What is priuate Prayer? Scholler. 2 Sam. 6.20. Ester 4.15. Math. 6.6.That which is made in priuate, either with others, as in the Familie, or solitarily and secretly by ones selfe alone. Seruant. Which are the fittest times for Prayer and Thanksgiuing to God, to be performed in and with the whole Familie, ordinarily? Scholler. Psal. 55.17. Dan. 6.10.The Morning and
Euening;1 Tim. 4.3.4.5. Mat. 14.19. Luke 24.30. And before and after Meales. Parent. I pray you (Pastor) giue vs some conuenient formes of Prayer, which during our infirmitie we will vse, till God inable vs to conceiue prayer of our selues. And first, let vs haue a forme of Prayer composed according to the principall matter and forme of the Lords Prayer, as you haue already ex∣planed it, and let it be fitted for the worke-day morning in the Houshold. Pastor. You may vse this plaine and easie one, or some other that you thinke fitter for your estate. A Forme of Morning Prayer on the worke-day, for the whole Familie. Luke 11.1.Lord teach vs to pray. A prayer for the familie on work-day mornings. O Gratious Lord, who hast not onely commanded vs to make
knowne our requests vnto thée only,See the proofes in the Conference concerning Prayer, supra. in euery thing by prayer and suppli∣cation with thanksgiuing, but also hast sanctified it to be thine ordinance, thereby to blesse them whom thou wilt blesse, assuring vs that thou wilt accept the prayers of all them that do ground the same aright vpon thy word and promise, we humbly be∣séech thée prepare our hearts by thine owne Spirit, that we may now ap∣proch vnto thy most sourraigne Ma∣iestie with holy feare and reuerence, and in the féeling of our wants may powre forth our soules before thée, who wilt fulfill the desires of all them that call vpon thée zealously. The Lords Prayer. Our Father And herein, chiefly we intreat thée to giue vs a true and comfortable fée∣ling that thou art become our most mercifull Father in Iesus Christ thy deare Sonne, in whom thou art well pleased, that calling vpon thy most holy name with Faith and child-like boldnesse through him, we may verily beléeue that we shall haue the petiti∣ons which we desire of Thée, and
thereupon expect thy blessing with comfort for all our necessities. And forasmuch as thou hast commanded vs to pray one for another, we pray thée to accept our cry also in the name of thy holy Sonne Iesus, for the be∣hoofe of all other thy children where∣soeuer liuing throughout the whole world, yea euen also of their and our enimies that belong vnto thée accor∣ding to the election of grace, though they be not yet called. which art in Heauen, And because thou art in heauen, being as able to helpe as thou art willing, we pray thee giue vs an assu∣red trust in thy All sufficient power, as well as in thy tender and frée mer∣cie, without the which grace we can∣not looke to be heard of thée in any of our praiers whatsoeuer. Hallowed be thy name. O God and Lord of all glory, we first and cheifly desire thée to vouch∣safe vnto vs the true zeale of thy glo∣ry, that we may be willing and ready instruments truely to set forth thy name in our thoughts, words, and all our cariage, according to thy holy will
reuealed in thy word, and that before we séeke reléefe for our selues in any of our owne necessities, and be thou pleased to be glorified of vs, yea and let thy name be magnified ouer all, for of thée, & through thée, and to thée, are all things, to thée be glory for euer. Amen. Thy king∣dome come. Next, we intreat thée to inlarge the kingdome of thy grace in Iesus Christ by the inward working of thy Spirit in our hearts and in all other thine elect: And to that end, let thy Word, thy Sacraments, and all other thy holy Ordinances haue free pas∣sage and libertie in the world, and become effectuall, vntill all thine elect shall be gathered, and fitted for thy comming to iudgement, which we pray thée hasten, that these sinfull daies may be finished, and then take vs to thy kingdome of glory. Thy will bee done in earth, as it is in hea∣uen. And therefore also we beséech thée to make vs more and more thine obe∣dient seruants, striuing to keepe thy commandements, till we come to perfection, and to be like thy holy
Angels, who hearken vnto the voice of thy word and do thy pleasure: And withall grant vnto vs, that we may neither despise thy chastenings, nor faint when we are rebuked of thée, but may giue thée reuerence in our sufferings with dutifull submission & ioyfull patience; and let thy chaste∣nings yéeld vs the peaceable fruit of righteousnesse, when we are exercised thereby. Giue vs this day our daily bread. And séeing thou (Lord) art the Au∣thor and Giuer of all temporall bles∣sings as well as spirituall, we pray thee according to thy heauenly will and diuine wisedome (for thou onely knowest our necessities and what is good for vs, yea and hast made vs to know that all things worke togither for good to them that loue thee) to be∣stow vpon vs all things needfull and conuenient for this present life, so as we may be best fitted to liue to thy praise, our owne soules eternall com∣fort, and to the spirituall profit and aduantage of others in thy Church, and especially to the better releefe
and refreshing of thy poore & afflicted seruants; vnto the which ends also we pray thee blesse and prosper vs in the right vse of those thy good gifts which we presently enioy. And forgiue vs our trespas∣ses, as we for∣giue them that trespasse against vs. But (mercifull Father) howsoeuer thou deale with vs for worldly bene∣fits, we most hartily desire thée to forgiue vs all our sinnes that are pas∣sed, iustifying vs in the righteousnes of thy Sonne Iesus Christ; And that we féeling the comfort of thy loue in our hearts by faith, may for thy sake vnfainedly forgiue them that haue offended vs; and by the same grace get stronger assurance to our owne soules, that thou (Lord) wilt in thine infinite mercies forgiue vs all that great and manifold debt of ours. And lead vs not into temp∣tation, but de∣liuer vs from euill. And for the time to come, we en∣tirely beséech thée, to let vs sée the deepe deceitfulnes of our owne fleshly hearts, and our corrupt inclination, whereupon the Deuill for the most part worketh; and withall doe thou stir vs vp to fight continually against the same, euen against our euill and
wretched lusts (the vile fruits of our vnbeléefe) and to watch against the Deuill, who walketh about as a roaring Lyon, séeking whom he may deuoure, and like a subtile Serpent, studying to deceiue. O Lord, grant he may neither bewitch vs in prospe∣ritie, as that we should denie or for∣get thée, nor make vs froward in ad∣uersitie. Mortifie our corrupt nature (the rotten and lothsome fountaine of our manifold sins) and quicken vs in newnesse of life, and in the studie of true godlinesse. Which grace of Sanctification and a godly life, we do the more earnestly beg at thy merci∣full hands, because thou hast taught vs plainly, that without the same, thou wilt not heare vs when we call vpon thée; as also, for that thou wilt not vouchsafe thine effectuall grace vnto any but vpon their strongest en∣deuours. And so (O gratious Lord) we do most instantly beséech thée to saue vs from our sinnes, to cast vs downe vnfainedly in the féeling of our spirituall miserie and vilenes, to
lift vs vp in the assurance of thy Sonne Christs merits, and to make vs far more laborious for grace for our soules, then for earthly fauour for our bodies. For thine is the kingdom, & the power, and the glory for euer. Touching all which our requests, we doe ground our Faith for obtai∣ning them, only vpon thée, who hast sole right, authoritie and power ouer all, and who wilt do all things vn∣doubtedly vnto they owne glory euer∣more, and wilt cause the spirit of glory to rest vpon vs, that on our part do glorifie thée: And therefore we doe promise to render vnto thée most harty thanks at all times for all thy mercies and fauours plentifully bestowed vpon vs in Iesus Christ, and most of all for our Redemption in him, beséeching thée to inable vs to praise thée the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, in doing those good works which thou hast ordained that we should walke in them, and speci∣ally the duties of our callings and de∣grées wherein thou hast set vs. Amen.
For these and all other necessarie graces  and blessings, we doe not onely most feruently desire them, but also do ve∣rily beleeue and desire to beleeue that thou hearest vs alwaies: Beseeching thee to giue vs grace to striue against doubting and vnbeleefe, and confirme our faith, that we may come often vn∣to thee with all cheerefull willingnes and sound delight, and may continue knocking for thy mercy without wea∣rinesse, vntill thy Sonne Iesus Christ shall come to dissolue vs, and to crowne his owne grace in vs with eternall glory. And here confessing thy free and gratious goodnesse in preseruing & protecting vs this night past, we pray thee teach vs to vse well thy mercy all this day, to loue vs still, to direct and blesse vs in our honest labours and businesses, and so giue vs more and more cause to sing praise and giue thanks vnto thee, and to liue and die to thy glory. And make vs alwaies mindfull of that great gift of thine (Christ and his Gospell) to the end we may giue vp our selues to walke with him in deeds and suffe∣rings,
and séeke our owne and o∣thers saluation with holy feare and trembling. Finally, let not thy word depart out of our mindes, nei∣ther let vs goe astray from thy com∣mandements. And though we be thy most vnworthy and vnprofitable seruants, yet be pleased to grant our suite and accept our sacrifice, sith we come vnto thée in the onely mediation and intercession of thy blessed Sonne and our Sauiour Ie∣sus Christ. And therefore2 Cor. 13.14. the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the loue of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with vs all. Amen. Parent. Secondly, I pray you giue vs a forme of Prayer for the worke-day euening, and let it be such as consisteth altogether of the phrases and sentences of holy Scripture, to the end we may take the better de∣light
in calling vpon God, for we finde our hearts dull and our flesh vnwilling oftentimes for this high seruice, but we haue had experience by our vsing those very words which the Holy Ghost hath indited in the Bible, that we haue beene quickned, and made willing, cheerefull and re∣uerent in our supplications & thanks-giuings vnto the Lord. Pastor. You may vse this following, if you please. A Forme of Euening Prayer on the worke-day, for the whole Fa∣milie. A prayer for the Familie, on worke-day euening. Esai. 6.3.HOly, holy, holy,Revel. 4.8. Lord God Almightie, which was, and
is,In this forme, I haue strictly followed the last translati∣on of the Bi∣ble, done by his Maiesties speciall com∣mandement, & appointed to be read in Churches. and is to come, the whole earth is full of thy glory,Psal. 19.14. Let the words of our mouth and the medi∣tation of our hearts be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord our strength and our Redeemer.Psal. 32.5. & 51.3. Wee ac∣knowledge our sinnes vnto thee, and our iniquities wee will not hide, for they are euer before vs.Rō. 5.12, 19. For by one man sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne, and by his disobedience wee are made sinners.Psal. 51.5. Thereupon wee were shapen in iniquitie, and in sinne did our mothers conceiue vs.Esai. 64.6. So wee bee all of vs as an vncleane thing, and all our righteousnesses as filthy rags. Thence it is that wee haue actuallyDan. 9.5, 9. sinned against thee, and haue committed iniquitie, and haue done wickedly and haue rebelled, euen by departing from thy precepts and from thy iudge∣ments, neither haue we obeyed thy voice (O Lord our God) to walke in thy Lawes which thou hast set
set before vs by thy seruants thy pro∣phets.Rom. 1.9. Neither haue we serued thée with our spirits in the Gospell of thy sonne for thoughTit. 2.11, 12, 13. thy grace that brin∣geth saluation hath appeared vnto vs, teaching vs that denying vngodli∣nesse and worldly lusts, we should liue soberlie, righteouslie, and god∣lie in this present world, so looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Sauiour Iesus Christ,Phil. 1.27. yet our con∣uersation hath not béene such as be∣commeth the Gospell of Christ,2 Cor. 6.1. but wée haue (ouer much) receiued thy grace in vain,Ephes. 4.27, grieuing thy holy spi∣rit,v. 30. giuing place to the Deuill,Psal 109.22. wounding our owne hearts within vs,1 Cor. 8.11. and the weake consciences of our brethren,2 Pet. 2.8. vexing the righteous soules by our vnlawfull déeds, &2 Sam. 12.14. gi∣uing great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme.Lam 3.22, 23 Where∣fore it is of thy mercies (oh Lord) that wee are not consumed, because thy compassions faile not, they are new e∣uerie morning. Besides,Psal. 19.12. we cannot
vnderstand our errors, clense thou vs from secret faults,Psal. 51.9. hide thy face from our sinnes, pardon and blot out all our iniquities,Psal. 25.11. for they are great, wash vs throughlieApoc. 1.5. from them through him that loued vs,Esai. 53.4, 5.10. that bare our griefes, carried our sorrowes, was wounded for our transgressions, whose soule thou madest an offering for sinne,Mat. 26.38. ex∣céeding sorrowfull euen vnto death,Iohn 1.29. the Lambe of God that taketh away the sinnes of the world. AndHeb. 12.14. because without holinesse no man shall sée the Lord, andIerem. 10.23 we know that the way of man is not in himselfe, it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps,Lam. 5.21. therefore turne thou vs (O Lord) and we shall be turned,Psal. 51.11. Create in vs cleane hearts (O God) and renew right spirits within vs.Psal. 19.13. Kéep backe thy seruants also from presumptuous sinnes, let them not haue dominion o∣uer vs, that so wée may bee vpright and innocent from the great trans∣gression.1 Thes. 5.23 Sanctifie vs throughout, and we pray God that our spirits and soules and bodies may be kept blame∣lesse
vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. To which end,Ephes. 3.14, 16.17.18.19. wée bow our knées vnto thée the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, that thou wouldest grant vs according to the riches of thy glorie, to be strengthned with might by thy spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith, that wée being rooted and grounded in Loue, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the bredth, length, hepth, and height, and to know the loue of Christ which passeth knowledge, that wée may be filled with all fulnesse of God. So let2 Cor. 5.14. the loue of Christ constraine vs1 Pet. 2.9. to shew forth the praises of thée (Lord) who hast called vs out of darkenesse into thy maruellous lightVerse 12., hauing our conuersatiō honest, that men may by our good workes which they shall behold, glorifie thée in the day of visi∣tation,2. Pet. 1.10. and giuing diligence to make our calling and election sure,Philip. 2.12. wee may worke out our owne saluation with feare and trembling, yea and shining as lights in the world,Luk 15.10. 2 Cor. 7.4. we
may reioyce both Angells and Men,Rom. 15.1, 2. edifie our weake brethren,1 Pet. 3.1. winne them that obey not the word; andvers. 16. ha∣uing a good conscience, that whereas they speake euill of vs as of euill do∣ers, that they may be ashamed that falsly accuse our good conuersation in in Christ,1 Pet. 2 15. for so is thy will (O God) that with well doing wee may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.1 Cor. 15.58. And forasmuch as we know that our labour is not in vaine in the Lord, make vs stedfast, vnmoueable, and al∣waie aboūding in the work of ye Lord,Psal. 119.15. directing our waies in thy statutes,Gal. 6.10. and as we haue opportunity, doing good to all men, specially vnto them who are of the houshold of faith,2 Cor. 9.7. not forgetting, chéerefully to communi∣cate with their afflictions,Mat. 25.40. because the very least of them are the brethren of thy sonne Christ Iesus,Heb. 13.16. and with such sacrifices thou art well plea∣sed. And because1 Pet. 5.8. our aduersaryRevel. 12.9, 12, 17. the Deuill is come down vnto vs, hauing great wrath, because hee knoweth hee hath but a short time, making warre
with them that keepe the commande∣ments of God and haue the testimony of Iesus Christ,1 Thes. 2.18. hindering them al∣so,Math. 4.3. Ephes. 6.11.12. and tempting them with his wiles and spirituall wickednesses,Reuel. 12, 9. being that olde serpent which deceiueth the whole world, we pray théeEphes. 6, 10. make vs strong in the power of thy might,1 Pet. 5.8, 9. to resist him, stedfast in the faith, know∣ing that the same afflictions are ac∣complished in our brethren that are in the world, and to be sober and vigi∣lant,Ephes. 6.13, 17, 181 taking vnto vs the whole ar∣mour of God, especially the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, praying alwaies with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watch∣ing thereunto with all perseuerance, that we may be able to withstand him in the euill day,Iohn 8, 44. and not do his lusts. And séeing1 Pet. 4.1, 2. Christ hath suffered for vs in the flesh, grant we may be ar∣med likewise with the same minde, no longer to liue the rest of our time in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to thy will, O God; norRom. 6. to suffer sinne to raigne in our mortall bodies,Luk 8.14. that
we should obey it in the lusts thereof, nor bée choked with cares, and riches, and pleasure of this life. And where∣as the fleshGalat. 5.17. lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other, so that we cannot doe the things that we would: we (wretched persons) do intreat théeRom 7.24. to deliuer vs from the bo∣dy of this death through Iesus Christ our Lord,verse 22. that we may not only de∣light in the law of God after the in∣ward man, but alsoGal: 5.16.24. walke in the spi∣rit and crucifie the flesh with the affe∣ctions & lusts. And seeing1 Iohn 5.19. the whole world lieth in wickednesse,Ioh. 17.14.15. and ha∣teth vs because we are not of ye world, wee pray not that thou wouldst take vs out of this world, but yt thou woul∣dest kéep vs from euill,Rom. 12.2. that we may not be conformed vnto the children of this world,Luke 16.8. who are in their genera∣tion wiser then the children of light.1 Cor. 1.27, 28.29. Thou hast made foolish the wisdome of this world, for not many wise, not many mighty, not many noble, are cal∣led, but thou hast chosen the foolish
things, the weake, the base, the despi∣sed, and things that are not, that no flesh should glory in thy presence. Oh then, giue vs grace (O Lord)Jam. 4.4. not to affect the friendship of this world, which is enmity with God, nor1 Ioh. 2.15, 16.17. to loue the world, nor the things that are in the world (which passeth away and the lust therof, and is not of the father) but to doe thy will (O God) and so to abide for euer. And now Lord,Psal. 139.2.3.4. who knowest our downe sitting, & our vp∣rising, who vnderstādest our thoughts a farre off, who compassest our paths, & art acquainted with all our waies; For there is not a word in our tongues, but lo (O Lord) thou knowst it altogether,Esai. 26.9. stirre vs vp that with our spirits within vs, we may séeke thee earely.1 Thes. 5.6. Suffer vs not to sleepe as others do,Eph. 5.11.14. 1 Cor. 15.34. in the vnfruitful works of darknes, but cause vs to arise from ye dead, & to awake to righteousnesse, ye thy son Christ may giue vs light,1 Thes. 5.10. who died for vs, that whether we wake or sleepe, we should liue together wt him:Luk. 2.37. so let vs serue thee night & day,Psal. 3.5. & 4 8. and
lye downe in peace, and not be afraid, and let our sleepe bee sweet. Af-Afterwards,Psal. 104.23 let vs awake and goe forth vnto our works & to our labors vntill the euening,Psal. 31.15. for our times are in thy hand,Psal. 3, 5. & 4.8. and thou Lord onely su∣stainest vs, and makest vs dwell in safetie.Psal. 127.2. And because it is vaine for vs to rise vp early, and to sit vp late, to eate the bread of sorrowes,Psal. 129 8. the blessing of the Lord be vpon vs. If for these earthly things thou (Lord) dost say,2. Sam. 15.26 I haue no pleasure in you, behold, here are we, do thou to vs as seemeth good vnto thée.1 Cor. 10.31 And (Lord) whe∣ther wée eat or drinke, or whatsoeuer we doe, moue our hearts to doe all to thy glory,Esai. 64.5. and so let vs reioyce, wor∣king righteousnesse and remembring thée in thy waies. And for our selues,Psal. 90.12. teach vs to number our daies, and becauseIob 4.19. our houses of clay (whose foundation is the dust) are crushed be∣fore the moath,Deut. 32.29. to consider our latter end.Eccles. 12.13 Make vs mindfull also (good Lord) that thou shalt bring euery worke into iudgement, with euery se∣cret
thing, whether it be good, or whe∣ther it be euill; and therforePsal. 119.37.60. quicken vs (we desire thee) in thy way, that wee may make haste, and not delay to kéepe thy commandements with our whole man.Psal. 51.18. Do good in thy pleasure vnto Zion, build thou the walls of Ie∣rusalem.Acts 9.5. Luk 21 19. Grant thy persecuted mem∣bers may possesse their soules in their patience.Math. 11.28 29. Giue rest vnto the soules of all that labour and are heauy laden.Psal. 147.4. Heale the broken in heart, and binde vp their wounds.Psal. 72.12.13, 14. Deliuer the poore and them that haue no helpers, redéem their soules from deceit and olence, and precious let their bloud be in thy sight:Psal. 146.7.8, 9. Execute iudgement for the op∣pressed, giue food to thy hungry ones, loose thy prisoners, preserue the stran∣gers, reléeue the fatherlesse and wid∣dowes.Psal. 41.3. Strengthen thy mercifull ones vpon their beds of languishing, and make their beds in their sicknesse.Psal. 3.8. Let thy blessing be vpon all thy peo∣ple.2 Sam. 15 31 O Lord we pray thée, turne the counsel of the vngodly into foolishnes; yea andPsal. 10.5. breake thou the arme of the
wicked & euill men, notwithstanding letPsal. 141.5. our prayers be in their calami∣ties.1 Tim. 2.2. Blesse our noble King and the hopefull Prince, and all that are in au∣thority ouer vs, that wee may leade a quiet and peaceable life in all godlines & honesty.2 Thes. 3.1. Let thy word haue frée course and be glorified.Eph. 6.19.20. Giue vtte∣rance vnto thy Ministers in generall, & particularly to ours, that they may open their mouthes boldly, and speake as they ought to speake, making knowne the mysterie of the gospell,2 Cor. 6.4. and in al things approue themselues as the Ministers of God.Act. 17.11. Grant we may receiue the Word with all rea∣dines, and search the Scriptures dai∣ly whether those things be so.Psal. 67, 2, 6, 7. And let thy way be known vpon earth, thy sauing health among all nations, and so let the earth yéeld her increase, and let God, euen our owne God blesse vs: let God blesse vs, and let all the ends of the earth feare him.2 Tim. 2.19. Let eue∣ry one of vs that nameth the name of Christ, depart from iniquity.1 Sam. 25.6. Peace be to vs, and peace be to our house,
and peace be vnto all that wee haue.Psal 145.15 Let our eyes wait on thee, O Lord, and giue thou vs our meat in due sea∣son.Psal. 108.12 Giue vs help from trouble, and1 Cor. 10 13. suffer vs not to be tempted aboue that we are able, but with the tempta∣tion make a way to escape, that wée may be able to bear it.Mark. 9.24. We belieue, Lord help our vnbeliefe.Esai. 26.8. The desire of our soule is thy name, and to the re∣membrance of thee.Dan. 9.18.19 O our God, en∣cline thine eare and heare, open thine eyes and behold our desolations, and the City which is called by thy name, for we doe not present our supplicati∣ons before thée for our righteousnes∣ses, but for thy great mercies.Eph. 3.20. Now vnto thée that art able to doe excéeding abundantly aboue all that we aske or thinke, according to the power that worketh in vs,Vers. 21. vnto thée be glory in the Church by Christ Iesus, through∣out al ages world without end. Amen. Parent. Thirdly, I pray you giue vs two easie and plaine formes of thanks∣giuing
for our daily vse at euery meale, the one before the receiuing of our food, and the other after, to be vttered by my selfe if I be present, or by some other of my house in the name of all that partake of the same meale: Pastor. I will. A forme of Thankesgiuing to be vsed of an ignorant familie be∣fore meales. MOst gratious God, we acknow∣ledge thée to be the author of all good gifts and blessings, wée humbly pray thée to forgiue vs all our sinnes. Grant vs faith and sobernesse in re∣ceiuing these thy good creatures: blesse them to our nourishment, and stirre vs vp thereupon to serue thy holy ma∣iesty with true thanksgiuing, through Iesus Christ thy Sonne and our Sa∣uiour by thy holy spirit, Amen. After Meales. TO thee, our most bountifull Fa∣ther and gracious Lord, who hast
made, redeemed and euer hitherto pre∣serued vs, and at this time fedde and refreshed vs with thy good gifts and creatures, be all glory and obedience rendred of vs and of all other thy peo∣ple, both now and euermore. God saue the Church vniuersall; blesse the kings Maiesty; continue thy Gospell; make thy holy word effectuall in our hearts; comfort all thy poore and afflicted ser∣uants, and giue vs thy peace and whole truth in Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Parent. Fourthly,I pray you giue vs some formes of prayer for morning and euening on the Lords day for the whole houshold, as you haue done for the worke-dayes. Pastor. Nay: I would rather exhort you to vse your best indeuours to con∣ceiue prayers of your selues, according as the spirit of God shall inable you, and your estate shall require; for on the Sabbath day you haue most time to la∣bour in prayer, if you will make con∣science
to redeeme your time: and ve∣rily if you would set your selues vnfai∣nedly to the studie heereof by your humble and constant crauingZach. 12.10. of the Spirit of Prayer at the Lords hands & by a conscionable exercising of your selues in the holy Scriptures, of a true purpose and holy desire to wrestle with GodGen. 32.24, 25, &c. with Hos. 12.3, 4. as Iacob did, in supplication to his glory, the Lord will bestow this a∣bility vpon you. Howbeit, if you de∣sire any further direction to traine you vp in this duty of prayer, you may pro∣fitably imploy your selues for some conuenient space on the Lords days in that singular help which the Lord hath prouided for you by the paines of Ma∣ster Iohn Brinsley, in his second part of the True Watch, containing The perfect Rule and Summe of Prayer; whereunto I referre you for this your fourth re∣quest: Yet I will giue you a forme of prayer for solitarie vse vpon the Lords day morning, I meane, for each one by himselfe apart. For although it bee a Christians part, both to pray solitarilie euery worke day, and also to ioyn with
the whole familie in priuate prayer on the Lords day (and the same more largely and oftner then on other daies) yet there seemeth to bee speciall reason and need for euery particular person to call vpon God by himselfe alone (for preparation) towards the beginning of the Lords day: Because, I. God must be intreated by al man∣ner praier and means possible to inable vs vnto the duties of this day.Reasons for solitary or se∣cret prayer in the entrance of the Lords day. II. This solitary praying will occa∣sion and further vs to seeke our neerer reconciliation with God, which as at al other times, so cheefly on that day we must giue greatest diligence to be sure of. III. It is a speciall meane to make vs the more carefull both to bestow the more time and labour vpon Gods ser∣uice, and to profit the better thereby, on that day. IV. Euery one knoweth best his owne particular corruptions and wants in former abuse of the Sabbath, where∣of hee ought to begge forgiuenesse at Gods hands in secret, and to seeke his
owne particular healing and comfort. V. Lastly, consider I pray you how you know that your heart is sincere and earnest in seeking the Lord on his day, and what sound comfort you can haue in your selfe against the accusation of hypocrisie or of vaine glory, when Sa∣tan shall by anie meanes charge you therewith, if you be cold in your secret and solitarie prayers on that day, and specially if you neglect them thereon altogether. Furthermore, remember that the Sabbath is the Bond of all Religion, for which cause the Lord doth often stileEsai. 56.2. Lam. 1.7. Ezek. 20.11, &c. his whole Religion by the name of the Sabbath, and that therefore it is your part (being a Christian Houshol∣der) as to haue a care of your selfe and of all your people for resorting vnto the publike worship of God with firme constancie, and there to conti∣nue with reuerence from the begin∣ning to the end of the whole, so to call your selfe to a secret reckoning with God for your profiting that day, and your people all togither before you,
inquiring of them one by one what they haue gained by ech Sermon, and to teach them diligently, labouring to haue conscience put vpon them by the Lord, and to the same ends imploying your selfe and them (more that day than any other) in praiers and thanks∣giuings, singing of Psalmes, and vse of the word, in publike and priuate, andPsal. 93. & 107. through∣out, but speci∣ally v. 42, 43. in a wise and holy obseruation and application of the workes of God. For (whosoeuer you be) vnlesse you make conscience of all these things, how can you expect Gods blessing vpon any publike exercise (though neuer so ho∣ly in it selfe) which you shall haue to doe withall on that day? Therefore, if you iudge this forme following fit for your estate, vse it (ech one seuerally by himselfe) during your present ig∣norance and weaknesse.
A Forme of Prayer for the Sabbath day morning (or, the euening before) to be vsed of a weake Christian by himselfe alone tending to his better preparation for the duties of the Sabbath. A forme of solitarie pray∣er for the be∣ginning of the Lords day. Psal. 21.1.VNto thée, O Lord, doe I lift vp my soule, andPsal. 5.3. my voice shalt thou heare in the morning, O Lord.Psal. 43.3. Oh send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them bring me vnto thy holy hill and to thy ta∣bernacles.Psal. 85.7. Shew me thy mercy, O Lord, and grant me thy saluation. And howsoeuerHeb. 4.2. Ierem. 7.8, 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 11.17. I haue often heard thy holy word, called vpon thy great name, and had to do with the seales of the righteousnes of Faith; not for the better, but for the worst, at least wise with small or no fruit, yet now, I humbly pray thée make me likeLuk 8.15. good ground, that I may with an ho∣nest
and good heart heare thy word, kéepe it and bring forth fruit with pa∣tience. And although (Psal. 8.1, 3, 6, 9. thy name be∣ing excellent in all the earth by reason of the works of thy fingers,Psal. 111.2, 3, 4, 5, 7. which are great and wonderfull, honorable and glorious, veritie and iudgment) I haue not sought out thy workes, norEsai. 5.12. considered the operation of thy hands, because I haue not had plea∣sure therein: yea and though,Psal. 40 5. many are thy wonderfull workes which thou hast done, and thy thoughts which are to me ward, they cannot be reckoned in order vnto thée,Esai. 64.7. and I haue not stirred vp my selfe to take hold of thée,Rom. 1.21. neither haue bin thank∣full,Ps. 119.76. nor praised thée for thy merci∣full kindnesse,2 Chron. 32.35. at least wise I haue not rendred againe according to the benefit done vnto me,Rom. 2.4. neither haue I knowne that the goodnes of God hath led me to repentance; Yet now (Lord)Esai. 26.10. by the fauour thou shewest vnto me, let me learne righteousnes, and2 Chron. 32.26. humble my selfe for my hardnes of heart, that thy wrath come not vp∣on
me. AndIerem. 31.18. whereas thou hast cha∣stised me, and I was chastised as a bullocke vnaccustomed to the yoke, notMica. 6.9. hearing the rod and who hath ap∣pointed it, yet (most gratious God) grant that now at the last,Esai. 9.13. I may turne vnto thée that smitest me, and seeke thée the Lord of Hostes.Heb. 3.7, 13, 15. To day giue me grace to heare thy voice, not hardened in my heart through the deceitfulnesse of sinne. Make me1 Pet. 2.17. to loue brotherly fellowship,1 Pet. 4.4. not run∣ning with the prophane to the excesse of ryot, butColoss. 3.16. teaching and admoni∣shing my selfe and others in Psalmes and Hymnes, and spirituall songs, singing and making melodie with grace in my heart vnto thée,Act. 12.5. praying earnestly and giuing thanks alwaies for all things vnto thée in the name of the Lord Iesus Christ,Heb. 3.13. exhorting and comforting my selfe and others with thy words,1 Thess 4.18. and humbling my selfe vnto them in thy feare, O God.Iam. 4.10. Let thy word dwell richly in me in all wisedome, which grant I mayProv. 4.21. kéepe in the midst of my heart, that
I may not sinne against thée, but ob∣serue to do as thou hast commanded me,Deut. 4.32. neither turning aside to the right hand nor to the left. Euermore grantIam. 4.8. Heb. 10.22. 1 King. 8.61. 1 Sam. 16.7. that I may draw néere vnto thée with a true, vpright and plaine heart,Phil 3.9. and studying to be found in Christ,2 Tim. 3.5. and to haue the power of godlinesse in me, I mayPhil. 3.14. presse to∣ward the marke for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus, that at the lastRom. 9.23. thou maist make knowne the riches of thy glory vpon me (a vessell of thy mercie) and1 Pet. 1.9. I may receiue the end of my faith, which is the saluation of my soule.Heb. 13.7. Make thy seruant the Minister of thy Gospell, which shall speake vnto me and others (this day) the word of God,Ezra 7.6. a ready Scribe,Mat. 13.52. instructed vnto the kingdome of heauen, like vnto a man that is an Housholder, which bringeth forth out of his trea∣sure things new and old. Stirre him vp2 Tim. 2.15. to studie to shew himselfe appro∣ued vnto God, a workeman that néedeth not to be ashamed, rightly di∣uiding
the word of truth.2 Thess. 3 2. Deliuer him from vnreasonable and wicked men. Strengthen him that he may2 Tim. 4 7, 8. fight a good fight, finish his course, and kéepe the faith; and so giue him the crowne of righteousnesse.Act. 16.14. And open my heart, O Lord, that I may attend vnto the things of thy word,Act. 17.11. and receiue the same with all readinesse of minde, searching the Scriptures daily whether those things be so. And (good Lord)2 Tim. 2.7. giue me vnderstanding in all things, not onely for to try the spirits, whether they are of God, but also that I mayDeut. 33.3. receiue of thy words, euenLuk. 12.42. my portion of meat in due season,Psal. 141.5. yea when I am reproued, let me take it as an excellent oyle which shall not breake my head. Far be it from me that I should beAct. 7.54. cut to the heart, and gnash at the Minister with my téeth, but let me be prickedAct. 2.37, 38. in my heart vnto repentance, and receiue of the Ministerie how I ought to walke and to please God,1 Thess. 4.1. and therein to abound more and more. Prepare me (O
Lord)Iam. 1.21. to lay apart all filthinesse and superfluitie of maliciousnesse, that I may receiue with méeknesse the in∣grafted word, which is able to saue my soule.Psal. 119.39. Incline my heart vnto thy testimonies, and not to couetous∣nes,1 Tim. 6.9. lest falling into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish & hurt∣full lusts, they drowne me in destru∣ction and perdition. Alwaies make me carefull toEphes. 4.15. 1 Tim. 1.5. grow in faith and a good conscience. And let me neuerIam. 1.22. deceiue my selfe in being a hearer onely and not a doer of the word. And because oftentimesMath. 13.21. tribulation and persecution ariseth because of the word, whereat (I sée) many are by and by offended, I pray thée teach me,Math. 7.24. to build my house vpon a rocke like a wise man,2 Tim. 2.12. and to suffer with Christ, that I may also reigne with him. Finally, I humbly pray thée to sanctifie my heart, that I mayEsai 58 13. turne away my foote from doing my plea∣sure on this thy holy-day, and that I may call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honourable, and
may honour thée, not doing mine own waies, nor finding mine owne plea∣sure, nor speaking mine own words; but2 Pet. 1.5. giuing all diligencePhil. 2.12. to worke out my owne saluation with feare and trembling, specially inLam. 3.40. sear∣ching and trying my waies and tur∣ning againe vnto thée Lord, accor∣ding to thy blessed Gospell, through thine onely Sonne Christ Iesus my Sauiour and Redéemer, vnto whom with thy holy Maiestie and thy sancti∣fying and comforting Spirit, be of me in my most willing and constant endeuours, and of all other thy ser∣uants in thy Church likewise, ascri∣bed and giuen, all honour, glory, praise, might maiestie and dominion, both on this thine owne holiday, and for euer world without end. Amen. Parent. But what if any of vs seue∣rally and alone (hauing no other to ioyne with vs, but must pray solitarily, vnlesse we altogither omit the dutie, after the manner of our prophane and
irreligious neighbours) would vse those two formes of prayer which you haue composed for the whole Familie on the worke-daies? Or, what if my whole Familie or any two or more of them would in their priuate fellowship vse that forme of prayer which you haue drawne for a Christian in solitary towards the beginning of the Lords day? May we not so vse either the one or the other, as may be most for our comfort and edification? Pastor. Yea, you may easily doe so, if you will. And you are bound to doe so rather then omit the dutie alto∣gither. Prouided, that in such a case when you doe vse the two formes which are for the worke-daies (as also for the formes of thanks-giuing be∣fore and after Meales) you do heed∣fully put the singular number for the plurall, as I for We, Me for Ʋs, My or Mine for Our, &c. And that, when mo than one of you shall joyne togi∣ther in the forme which is for the Lords day, you doe vse the plurall number for the singular, as We for I,
Ʋs for Me, Our for My or Mine, &c. The which course, if you be driuen of necessitie to take, or do sometimes vo∣luntarily performe, it will also proue one helpe to inable you to conceiue prayers of your selues without the helpe of these or any other formes to be read vpon a Booke, much sooner. For as I told you at the first, that is the end I shoote at in setting you downe these formes, and which you ought to labour for in vsing these or any other godly formes, vnto the vttermost of of your power. And assure your selues, that though you be very ignorant and weake at this present, yea and seeme to your selues that you can do litle or nothing this way, I meane, to conceiue prayer of your selues,Note these directiōs, you ignorant per∣sons, and re∣member to follow them in the feare of God; & haue a speciall care to examine your selues on the Lords day in secret, and to renew your peace with God in a more setled and comfor∣table turning of your feete vnto his testi∣monies, Psal. 119.19. with 92.11, 12, 13. yet if you will conscionably seeke the Lord & your owne saluation, diligently frequent the Ministerie that God hath sanctified vnto you, delight in the often fellow∣ship of the Godly, whom the Lord hath indued with sauing knowledge already, desire their helpe in prayer, and therein ioyne with them, and in
their absence (which to the greatest number of you must needs fall out very often) attentiuely, constantly and carefully vse these or any other godly formes of prayer and thanksgiuing, God will blesse you with such vnder∣standing of your spirituall estate, that you shall in far shorter time then you thinke, attaine to the end of your god∣ly desires, which is to lay away your Bookes, and out of your owne feelings to make your petitions and thanksgi∣uings vnto the Lord, vpon any occa∣sion either ordinarie or more speciall and rare. But if you shall neglect this counsell of God, and profanely put off the holy duties of praier and thanks∣giuing from time to time, or performe them but coldly, carelesly, vnreuerent∣ly, or vaine-gloriously, as the hypo∣crites doe, then verily be you afraid lest the Lord should in his wrath iudge you spiritually, and so you continue blind and ignorant or (after a sort) su∣perstitious in vsing a set forme now & than, and lest you haue alwaies such neede of a Booke to pray vpon, that
without it you shall be able to say litle more then,Behold a peece of the old wiues their very best prayers. Lord haue mercy vpon vs, forgiue vs our sinnes, blesse our house and our harbour, and all that euer we would haue good of, and send vs heauen at our last end; yea and lest you fall from praying vpon a Booke (as I haue knowne some) to meere nothing or worse than nothing.Note. Beware then of an idle forme and bare externall deuotion or ceremonie of Godlinesse, without seeking the power thereof: As also of such a manner of learning, as neuer to be able to come to the knowledge of the truth: Which feare∣full iudgement God doth therefore commonly inflict, because the heart is not zealous, sincere, nor godly dispo∣sed to see, obey and continue in the whole sauing truth of God, but resol∣ueth to stand out against some part of it, or to follow some sinfull lusts still: 2 Tim. 3.5, 6, 7, 8. Parent. Lastly, I pray you collect vs such a Hymne or Psalme (out of
Dauids Psalmes) as breifely toucheth the most necessarie graces, and which we may sing to Gods glorie and our owne edification and comfort, in fol∣lowing the labours of our vocations and callings, and at other times when we thinke good. Pastor. But you must consider Gods proceeding with you in all things, your owne necessities and estate, and accordingly seeke out and sing such Psalmes as God hath fitted for you in his Booke, to vse vnto your better mo∣uing and stirring vp to liue vnto his glorie, and your owne spirituall growth in faith and a good conscience. Parent. We will not forget to be∣stow our labour that way euerie day once at the least, in the choise of some Psalme or parcell of a Psalme (accor∣ding to our weake iudgement) if God permit. Howbeit, because we haue not any one Psalme of conuenient short∣nesse, that setteth forth the cheifest points and most necessarie graces of Christianitie, fitted for our capacitie, and because many of my people are
dull to learne manie Psalmes, prescribe vs one which my ignorant ones may learne by heart, and whereby we may haue a taste of the heauenly sweetnesse which the Godlie doe gather in their religious vse of diuine and spirituall songs. Pastor. Then take this for a taste, which if you will read and sing togi∣ther with all your Houshold, but once on euerie worke day in the Euening, you shall finde, that those who can learne any thing, shall before the yeare goe about, performe it by heart of themselues, although they bestow no other time vpon it. A godly Hymne or Psalme collected out of the booke of DAVIDS Psalms, and composed of choise verses, which do breifely point at some of the cheifest Lessons of Faith towards God, and of good Workes towards Men; all for the most part in forme of prayer & praise to God.
Fit for the more ignorant sort to sing at their ordinarie worke, and at other times convenient, to the glory of God and their owne edification. IT is a thing both good and meete, to praise the Highest Lord: And to thy name, O thou most High, to sing withone accord. To shew the kindnesse of the Lord, betime ere day be light: And eke declare his truth abroad, when it doth draw to night. O God giue eare and do apply, to heare me when I pray: And when to thee I call and cry, hide not thy face away. From all the sinnes that I haue done, Lord, quite me out of hand: And make me not a scorne to fooles that nothing vnderstand. If thou, O Lord, do straitly marke our foule iniquitie,
O Lord, who can before thee stand, excused for to be? But mercy and compassion, O Lord, are still with thee, That men may loue & feare the name of thy great Maiestie. His feare true wisedome doth begin, his lawes obserue do they That any vnderstanding haue, his praise doth last for aie. Direct my footsteps by thy word, that I thy will may know, And neuer let iniquitie thy seruant ouerthrow. Incline my heart thy lawes to keepe, and couenants to embrace, And from all filthie auarice, Lord, shield me with thy grace. From vaine desires and worldly lusts, turne backe mine eyes and sight, Giue me the spirit of life and power to walke thy waies aright. The second part. Behold, how good a thing it is, and pleasant for to see,
Brethren together fast to hold, the bond of amitie. And he is blest that carefull is the needy to consider, For in the season perillous the Lord will him deliuer. And, Lord, that man is happie sure whom thou dost keepe in awe, And through correction dost procure to teach him in thy Lawe. Yet thou dost helpe the weake & poore with aid, and make them strong, And eke destroy for euermore all those that doe them wrong. I did belieue, therefore I spake, yet I was troubled sore: But I am thine, saue me, my God, for I haue sought thy lore. Why art thou then so sad my soule, and fretst thus in my brest? Still trust in God, for him to praise, I hold it euer best. Doe well, O Lord, vnto all those that vpright are in heart.
But those that vnto crooked waies shall choose to turne apart, Them shall the Lord with workers lead of all iniquity, But peace vpon his Israell for euermore shall be. O Lord of Hostes, through thy good grace, conuert vs vnto thee: Behold vs with a pleasant face, and then full safe are wee. Set forth and shew thy selfe, O God, aboue the heauens bright, Extoll thy praise on earth abroad, thy Maiestie and might. Parent. I pray you what Psalmes of Dauid do you iudge most edifying and comfortable for our ordinary vse? Pastor. Twelue select Psalmes.Me thinketh, the first, the fourth, the eight, the twelfth, the fif∣teenth, the ninteenth, the twenty fifth, the thirty second, the fiftie first, the se∣uenty third, the one hundred & third, and the hundred & ninteenth are easi∣est and fittest for an ignorant familie:
For the which I referre you to your Psalme books; specially I recommend the fifteenth Psalme vnto you, wherein a true Christian is pithily and summa∣rily described by his proper marks and fruits. And if any of you can sing the tune of Psalme 136. and 148. you may sometimes vse the same fifteenth Psalme, which I haue paraphrased in this forme following, and fitted to be sung in that tune also, by two, the one making the question, and the other an∣swering. An Hymne made vpon the fifteenth Psalme,Psalme 15. in another tune. in manner of a Dialogue, and may be song by two, the one representing IEHOVA, and the other DAVID. To the tune of Psalme 136. Dauid. 1. IEhoua omnipotent, shew forth what folke they are Shall soiourne in thy tent, As Pilgrimes wont to fare, The members here
Of Church fighting, but aye dwelling in heauens there. Iehoua. 2. The righteous soule, he walkes vpright in constant wise, Entire and Iustice workes, his carefull exercise; Likewise the truth in heart doth speake, without deceit, the simple sooth. 3. This man, maliciouslie depraueth not with tongue, So neither frowardly his neighhour doth he wrong: Ne knowes slandour, nor yet doth broch a foule reproach 'gainst his neighbour. 4. Each vile one is abhor'd in his vnpartiall eye; Free fearers of the Lord he much doth magnifie: And if he sweareth, though hurt there-frō, to him do come, himselfe not spareth.
5. On gaine his heart's not bent, as vsurers for vse, Nor 'gainst the innocent, reward at all doth chuse. Dauid. Good godly deede why then doth he? Iehoua for charity, and not for meede. Dauid. These marks, Lord, are they true? Iehoua. These markes be veritie. Dauid. O'rethrowne iust shall, I rue! Iehoua. O'rethrowne iust shall not be, Nor any ill to him whose way goes not astray from this my will. Parent. What ordinances hath the Lord appointed and left vnto his Church in his wisedome and mercy, to further speciall prayer and thankesgi∣ning in more extraordinary occasions. Pastor. Fasting for Prayer, feasting for thanksgiuing, and Vowes for both. Which learne in the larger Cate∣chismes, and specially in the booke, in∣tituled, A Treatise of Christian Religion.
☞ THE FOVRTH PART. Concerning the Sacraments of the New te∣stament, The third out∣ward mean of Grace. first in generall. Parent. WHat are the Sacraments of the Testament? Childe. Gen. 17.1, 7, 11. Rom. 4.11. 1 Cor. 11.25.Publike and holy signes and Actions ordained by the Lord Ie∣sus, mystically setting forth and sea∣ling the Couenant of Grace. Seruant. Hath God ordained the Sacraments to begin grace in any per∣sons? Scholler. Rom. 4.11. & 10.14, 17.No, but God by his spi∣rit in Christ doth by the Sacraments confirme and strengthen grace, where it is already begunne. Seruant. How then doe you esteeme the Sacraments in respect of Christs minde towards you? Scholler. Acts 2.38. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. Mat. 28.19As the very pledges of his loue, the assurances and instru∣ments of his grace, and honourable
badges to professe his name by. Seruant. And how doe you esteeme them in respect of your mind towards Christ? Scholler. Acts 8, 36, 37, 39. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17As the testimonies of my Faith, receiuing his grace, the to∣kens of my thankefulnes, and the ve∣ry bands of my duety both to him and his Church. Parent. Who hath authoritie from the Lord to administer the Sacraments? Child. 1 Chron. 13.10 11. & 15.12, 13. 2 Chrō. 30.3 & 35.3, 6. Iohn 4.1, 2. Exod. 4.16. Mat. 28 18, 19They only who are sent to preach the Word. Parent. To whom do they of right belong to be receiued? Childe. Act. 2 38, & 8.37. 1. Cor. 12 13.To sound hearted Chri∣stians. Parent. What then haue the wicked to doe with them? Child. Act. 2.38. 1 Cor. 11.28.Nothing at all, till they be purged from their sinnes by Faith and Repentance. Seruant. But what if they presume to receiue them without faith and re∣pentance? Scholler. Deut. 23 21, 22. 1 Cor. 10.1 2, 3, &c. with Exo. 14.27 28, 29. Eccl. 3.4. Mat. 7.7, to 13Yet they shall reape no benefit by them, but rather increase
their sinne and condemnation. Seruant. And what if they shall neg∣lect or contemne them? Scholler. Gen. 17.14. Num. 9.13. Luk. 7.30.They are then speciall enemies of Gods glory and of their owne saluation, cutting themselues off from Gods couenant and Church, and so they incur Gods heauy wrath, vnlesse they repent.Oh cōsider that the Lord Iesus himselfe was baptized, ate the Lords supper, and commanded both. Seruant. How is that proued? Scholler. Exod. 4.24, 25, &c. 1 Cor. 11.25, 26, &c.Séeing God hath sharp∣ly corrected his owne children, sound hearted and otherwise godly with sickenesse and weakenesse, yea euen with death for some negligence or ir∣reuerence about the Sacraments, much more fearefullie will he punish the wicked and vngodly for their grosse abusing or refusing of them. Parent. After what manner are the Sacraments to be celebrated? Childe. Num. 9.3, 4, 5, 12. 1 Cor. 11.23.As is prescribed in the word of God. Parent. How many Sacraments be there? Child. Two;1 Cor. 12.13 Baptisme and the Supper of the Lord.
Parent. Of what parts do they con∣sist? Child. Heb. 6.2. 1 Cor. 10.16.17Both of outward and in∣ward things. Parent. What are the outward things? Child. The earthly creatures and certaine actions of Minister the and Receiuers about the same. Parent. What are the inward things? Childe. Christ himselfe, his spiri∣tuall graces and workes, and certaine spirituall actions of the Receiuers. Parent. What then is the benefite which the Faithfull receiue by the Sa∣craments? Child. Mat. 28.19. 1 Corin. 1.20. &c. & 12.13 Gen. 17.7, 8. Ephes. 5.26.They are confirmed in the vnion that they haue with Christ, yea and with God the Father, and with with God the holy Ghost, through Christ. Of Baptisme, in particular. Parent. What is Baptisme? Child. Mat. 28.19.The Seale of our En∣trance
and first admission into the pro∣fession of Christianity. Parent. What is the outward thing in baptisme? Childe. Math. 3.16. & 28.19.Washing, or sprinkling with water. Parent. What spirituall thing is meant thereby? Child. Eph. 5.25.26. 1 Iohn 1.7. Apoc. 1.5. Heb. 9.14. Math. 3.11.The bloud of Iesus Christ our Sauiour shed for vs, yea whole Christ himselfe purging our sinnes. Parent. What is the worke of the Minister, and the right forme of Bap∣tizing? Childe. First,Math. 28.19 1 Tim. 4.5. to open the coue∣nant of grace. Secondly,1 Tim. 4.4, 5. Acts 22.16. Luke 1.59. to sancti∣fie the water to this holy vse by praier and thankesgiuing. Thirdly,Mat. 28.19. with the water to baptizeThat is, into the Commu∣nion. into the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost. Parent. What is the inward worke performed by Christ? Child. 1 Cor. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. & 6.11. & 12.13 Mat. 3.11.12. Iohn 17.21, 22, 23, 24, 26.He putteth away my sins and giueth me a new life, thereby ma∣king mee one with himselfe and with his Church vnto my certaine assu∣rance
of eternall life. Parent. How doth Baptisme repre∣sent the putting away of your sinnes by Christ? Child. Act. 2.38. & 22.16. 1 Ioh. 1, 7. Rom. 6.6. Col. 2.11, 12. Psal. 32.5.Euen as the water sprink∣led by the hand of the Minister, wash∣eth away the filth of my bodie, so the bloud shedding of Iesus Christ layed hold vpon, by the hand of faith, clean∣seth me from all my sinnes, and that not onely by forgiuing mee both the guilt and punishment, but also by mortifying sinne in me. Parent. How doth Baptisme repre∣sent the giuing of a new life vnto you by Christ? Childe. Mat. 3.11. Mark. 1.4. Acts 15.9. 1 Pet. 3.21, 22. Tit. 3.5, 6.Euen as water maketh that faire which before was foule; so the holy Ghost purifying my heart by Faith, both iustifieth me before God in the imputation of Christs righte∣ousnesse, and sanctifieth me to lead a holy life, who before was vnholy and vncleane. Parent. What is the outward worke of those that are to be baptized? Childe. Math. 3.6. Act. 8, 36, 37, 38.Confession of their sins,
of their faith, and of their repentance, and readily to receiue baptisme in forme aforesaid. Parent. And what is their inward action? Child. Gal. 3.27. & 5.3. 1 Pet. 3.21, 22.To put on Christ by faith vnto newnesse of life. Parent. Why then should infants bee baptized which can doe none of these things? Childe. First,Gen. 17.7. Mark. 10.14. Act 16.15, 23 1 Cor. 7.14. because they be∣long to the Couenant of Gods grace, and vnto his kingdome, God himselfe saying, I am God vnto thée and to thy séed after thee. Secondly,Gen. 17.11.12 13, 14. Exo. 12.48. Col 2.11, 12.13. compared. they haue as good right to Baptisme, as the infants of the Iewes had to circumcision. Parent. What is the duety of chil∣dren after baptisme? Childe. First,Heb. 8.11. Psal. 110 27, 33 to learn the waies of the Lord, and to kéepe his statutes. Secondly,Ephes. 4.1, 2, , 4, 5, 6 Acts. 2.41, &c. to kéepe a holy fellow∣ship with Christ and his Church. Parent. When may you haue true comfort by your Baptisme? Childe, C. 2.12, 13. Tu. 3.5. 2 Cor. 5.17.When I feele my selfe to
be regenerate or sanctified. Parent. What? May you feele your selfe to be regenerate? Childe. Rom. 7.14.15, &c. Ps. 119.93, 94.Yes verily, if I be rege∣nerate indeed? Parent. How may you know that you are regenerate indeed? Child. Ephes. 5.26. 1 Pet 1.23. & 2.1, 2. 2 Tim. 3.5 Psal. 119.40.If I can find that the light and efficacie of Gods Word, shining and burning in my hearts, hath truely killed the strength of sin and wrought the power of godlinesse in me. Seruant. I pray you declare more particularly, when you can perceiue that? Scholler. First,Rom. 7.15, 16. &c. to the end. Phil. 3.10, 11, &c. Psal. 51. when I haue an vnfained hatred and striuing against all sinne, but specially against mine owne corruption, and contrariwise an earnest studie and delight to all ver∣tue, but speciallie to doe mine owne dutie. Secondly,Psal. 119.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Deut. 10.12, 13 16. Mat. 5.48. Col. 2.6, 7. when I doe constantly labour both for sincerity and vpright∣nesse of heart in all duties which I vn∣dertake, and also for perfection to kéep all the Commandements of God vnto
the vttermost. Thirdly,1 Cor. 6.19, 20, & 10.31. Deut. 30.20. 1 Thes. 5.18. Col. 2.6, 7. when I am moued with a holy zeale, to doe all things to the glory of God, for obedience to his su∣preame authoritie, and in way of thankefulnesse vnto him for all his be∣nefits, but chiefelie for giuing me Ie∣sus Christ and his gospell. Fourthly and lastly,Psal. 15.4. & 16.3. 1 Pet. 1.22, 23. 1 John. 3.14. & 5.1. Ps. 139.21, 22. when I bear a singular loue towards godly per∣sons, because they are godly, and con∣trariwise a holy hatred against the vn∣godlie, because of their vngodlinesse.* Parent. But what if one shall alwaies continue vnregenerate (for vnsanctifi∣ed) after his baptisme? Childe. Deut. 10.16. Eccles. 5.4, 5. Ezek. 44.9. Ierem 9.26. Iohn. 3.3, 5, 18, 19, &c. Rom. 2.28, 29.That is a plaine token that such a one wanteth faith, & there∣fore is vnbaptized in heart, whose damnation must néeds be the greater, because he breaketh his vow made vn∣to God.
☞ Of the Lords Supper, in particular. Parent. WHat is the Lords Sup∣per? Child. Mat. 26.26, &c. 1 Cor. 11.23 &c.The seale of our spirituall nourishment and growth in Christia∣nitie. Parent. What are the outward parts in the Lords Supper? Childe. Mat. 26.26, 27, &c.Bread and Wine. Parent. What be the inward parts or graces? Childe. Mat. 26.26, 27, &c. Iohn 6.35, 51.The Body and Bloud of Christ, yea whole Christ, God and Man, with all his merits. Parent. What is the worke of the Minister, and the right forme of admi∣nistring the Lords Supper? Childe. First,1 Cor. 11.24.25, 26. 1 Tim. 4.5. 2 Chr. 30.16, 17, 21, 22, &c. Exod. 12.6, 26, 27. to consecrate the bread and wine to this holy vse, by Praier and Thanksgiuing, declaring the Institution and vsing them accor∣dingly, together with a cleere opening of the Couenant of Grace. Secondly,1 Cor. 10.16. & 11.24. Acts 2.42. to breake the bread,
and poure out the Wine. Thirdly,1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. to deliuer them to the people in Christs owne words, or to that effect. Parent. Which are Christs owne words? Child. Of the Sacramentall bread Christ said,Math. 26.26, 27, 28. Mark. 14.22, 23, 24. Luk. 22.17, 19, 20.1 Cor. 11.24, 25. compared. Take, eat,That is, an effectuall Sa∣crament of my bodie that shall be bro∣ken, and of my blood which shall be shed. this is my bodie, which is broken for you, do this in remembrance of me. And of the sacramentall wine, thus,Math. 26.26, 27, 28. Mark. 14.22, 23, 24. Luk. 22.17, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. compared. Take this, diuide it among you, forThat is, an effectuall Sa∣crament of my bodie that shall be bro∣ken, and of my blood which shall be shed. this is my blood of the new Te∣stament, which is shed for you and for many for the remission of sinnes, this do in remembrance of me. Parent. And what is the outward worke of the Receiuers? Child. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26, 28. with 10.16. & 14.40.Reuerently & decently to take with their hands the bread and wine so consecrated and deliuered, and to eat and drinke them. Parent. Which are then the princi∣pall outward actions in the vse of the creatures when we celebrate the Lords Supper? Child. First, the Ministers break∣ing
of the bread, and powring out of the wine. Secondly, the Ministers giuing and the Peoples taking of both the bread and wine into their hands. Thirdly, the eating of the bread & the drinking of the wine by all the Receiuers. Parent. What grace of Christ is set forth by the Ministers breaking of the bread and powring out of the wine? Child. Esai. 53. Math. 26.37, 38. & 27.46. Luk. 22.44. Iob. 19.17, 18, 33, 34. & 20.25, 27. 1 Cor. 5.7.The most gréeuous and vnspeakable torments that Iesus Christ suffered in soule and bodie for his elect, yea euen vnto the death, and specially the breaking of his bodie & the shedding of his blood vpon the Crosse. Parent. What inward worke of Christ is sealed by the Ministers gi∣uing, and the peoples taking of both the bread and wine into their hands? Child. John. 6.27, 29, 35, 47, &c. Rom. 8.30. Eph. 3.17, &c. with 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. & 1. Iob. 1.12.That Christ offereth to all, but truly giueth himselfe and all his merits vnto euery one of them particularly, that doe receiue him
by the hand of faith. Parent. And what graces do the ea∣ting of the bread and the drinking of the wine assure vnto vs? Child. First,Math. 26.26, 27. Ioh. 6.35, 40, 51, 56. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. that Iesus Christ with all his benefits is become wholy the true beléeuers, to the féeding vp of their soules in the Couenant of Grace. Secondly,Iohn. 17.21, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. that they are made one with him. Thirdly,1 Cor. 10.16. & 12.13. Ephes. 4.15, 16. that they shall increase and grow in the féeling and enioying of him and of his grace. Parent. What then is the cheifest inward action of the Receiuers? Child. 1 Cor. 10.16.The Communion or par∣taking of the Bodie and Blood of Christ. Parent. How doe you communi∣cate or partake the bodie and blood of Christ in the Lords Supper? Child. First,Act. 2.42. Rom. 4.11. with 1 Cor. 10.16. I féede spiritually by faith in my soule on Christ and his merits vnto a more comfortable assu∣rance and féeling of the forgiuenesse of my sinnes and of my further iusti∣fication.
Secondly,1 Cor. 12.13. with Ephes. 5.26, 27. Deut. 16.6, 7, 12, 16, 17. Exod. 13.8, 9, 10. 2 Chr. 30.19. Ezra 6.21, 22. with Deut. 26.16, 17. in remembring his Loue with thankfulnes, I gather more and more strength to dye vnto my sinnes, and to liue vnto God in new obedience, whereunto (by recei∣uing this Sacrament) I do vow my selfe in my best endeuours. Parent. But what is represented by this, that you receiue the same crea∣tures in the Lords Supper, which all other the faithfull doe throughout the whole world, and that in the companie of the faithfull in the Congregation? Child. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.The Communion, mutuall loue and vnitie, that I and all the rest of the faithfull haue amongst our selues from and vnder Iesus Christ our Head. Parent. How do you then commu∣nicate with the faithfull in the Lords Supper? Child. First,Ephes. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 15, 16. I am confirmed in all such graces as other the Faithfull do receiue from Christ, that they do also belong to me. Secondly,Col. 3.14. Act. 2.41, 42, &c. 1 Cor. 12. & 13. I binde my selfe in a speciall bond of Loue, to practise all
the duties thereof vnto them in gene∣rall (as to the ioynt members of the same mysticall bodie) and particular∣ly to remember the poore. Seruant. Is there any change (as the Papists say) of the bread and wine, into the naturall bodie and blood of Christ? Scholler. 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28, 29.There is a change of their vse, but not of their substance. Seruant. What is their vse at that time? Scholler. Twofold. First,1 Cor. 11.26. a so∣lemne shewing forth of the Lords death. Secondly,1 Cor. 10.16, 17. with 11.27, 29. the nourishment of our soules and bodies vnto euerlasting life. Seruant. Whence haue they that strength and vse? Scholler. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, &c. From the ordinance and blessing of Christ, whereby they are consecrated to that purpose. Seruant. How do you proue that bread and wine remaine still in their owne nature after consecration? Scholler. 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28, 29.First, the word of God
calleth them so after. Secondly,1 Cor. 11.26. there must néedes be true outward signes. Thirdly,Experience. this consecrated bread and wine will corrupt in time. Fourthly,The Reason is good, vnles wee had a word of faith to build a matter of faith vpon. we sée, féele and taste nothing but bread and wine. Seruant. But seeing Christ saith, This is my Bodie, and This is my Blood, why should we not beleeue that they are changed into his bodie and blood? Scholler. There are many reasons why we should not beléeue so. Seruant. Let vs heare some of them. Scholler. First, the naturall sense of those words teacheth no such change. Secondly, Christ was neuer cor∣porally present in any of the Iewish Sacraments. Thirdly, Christ was not corpo∣rally present in this Supper, when he did first administer it. Fourthly,Act. 3.21. Christs bodie shall not come downe from heauen till the last day.
Fiftly, it possesseth but one place of a true naturall bodie, wheresoeuer it is. Sixtly, it is absurd and wicked to hold that Christ hath many bodies and in many places at once, and that men (though Reprobates) yea Dogs, Cats, and Mice may chew his flesh in their téeth. Seruant. Why are they then called his bodie and blood? Scholler. First, because they are the Sacraments of his bodie and blood. Secondly, for the great similitude betwéene them. And thirdly, to assure vs more strongly of his spirituall presence. Seruant. Is it lawfull to with hold either the bread or the wine from any of the Communicants? Scholler. No; for first, the Lord Iesus ordained both; and secondly, there is necessarie vse of both. Seruant. What necessarie vse? Scholler. Iohn 6.35, 53, 54, 55, 56. Act. 4.12.To shew that he is our full and sufficient foode.
Parent. You said that Christ giueth himselfe and all his merits vnto euery true beleeuer in receiuing the Lords Supper.Of fit and worthy Re∣ceiuers. Child. Yes,Luk. 3.8. & 20.35. Col. 1.12. Reuel. 3.4. for the Lord in his frée Grace and Mercy, estéemeth such to be worthy Receiuers. Parent. Shew mee more at large whom the Lord esteemeth worthy Re∣ceiuers? Child. They that are furnished with such Graces, as are both ne∣cessarie and fit in this case, and that do vse it as Christ hath appointed, and as becommeth so heauenly my∣steries. Parent. Which are those Graces that are most necessarie and fit? Child. These fiue: First,Ioh. 17.3. Know∣ledge. Secondly,2 Cor. 13.5. a true and liuely faith. Thirdly,1 Cor. 11.31. Repentance & newnesse of life. Fourthly,Col. 3.14. Charitie towards men.
Fiftly,Luk. 22.15. Act. 8.36. an earnest desire to receiue this Sacrament. Parent. 1. Of Know∣ledge.What knowledge is requi∣red (at the least) for the worthy recei∣uing of the Lords Supper? Child. Some true knowledge of God, of his Law, of his Gospell, of our selues or our owne estate, and of the Sacraments. Parent. What knowledge of God is required? Child. That there is1 Cor. 8.4. but one God,Gen. 1.1. the maker andAct. 17.28. gouernor of all things, and1 Ioh. 5.7. distinguished into the persons of the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost. Parent. What is God? Pastor. Reuel. 4.9.God is a liuing,Iohn 4.24. spirituall,1 Tim. 1.17. eternall,Job 11.7, 8, 9. infinite andRevel. 4.8. most holy essence,Exod. 3.14. existing onely of himselfe in all perfection,Psal. 135.6. Esai. 46.10, 11. Iam. 1.17. Mal. 3.6. as touching his will most absolute, free and vnchangeable,Psal. 147.5. Gen. 17.1. in his working all-sufficient for wise∣dome and strength,Mica 7.18, 19, 20. Ps. 99.8 & 145.17. Exod. 34.6, 7. and to his crea∣tures
most mercifull and iust. Parent. What is a Person? Pastor. Iohn 14.9, 16, 17, 18. & 17.21.A distinct manner of sub∣sisting in the Godhead. Parent. Declare vnto mee more largely, how the one onely God is di∣stinguished into three persons, and how the three persons subsist in the one God, which we commonly call the Ʋnitie in Trinitie and the Trinitie in Ʋnitie. Pastor. The three persons are so di∣stinguished one from another, that they are neither separated nor con∣founded, either in themselues or in their working.A mysterie to be reue∣rently belee∣ued, not curi∣ously searched Hypostases in∣seratabiles. Diuinitas indi∣uidualis, perso∣narum proprie∣tates incommu∣nicabiles. Ioh 1.33. & 5.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. & 8.16, 17, 18, 19. & 10.30. & 14.9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 23, 16. In themselues, for First, ech person hath the whole Godhead in it, in such sort as the Vnitie of the essence or nature of God is nei∣ther diuided into parts nor destroyed. Secondly, ech person is coeternall & coequall without difference of time or greatnesse. Thirdly, ech person is in and with ech other, and possesseth ech other, so that yet the Father is not the same with
the Sonne, or the Holy Ghost, or the Sonne the same with the Father or the Holy Ghost, or the Holy Ghost the same with the Father or the Sonne, as touching their persons. And fourthly, ech person enjoyeth equall glory with other, and ech hath euerlasting delight in other, yet not the same, but according to the distinct manner of ech persons subsistence in the Godhead. In their working, for though ech person doth the same things that the other do, in euery thing that is done, without absence or weaknesse, yet not any one of them worketh altogither after the same manner as another doth, but ech one of them according to the distinct proprietie of his Person in speciall. Parent. How are the three Persons distinguished in their speciall Pro∣prieties? Pastor. Prov. 8.22, 23, 24, &c. Psal. 2.7. Iohn 15.26.The Father is of himselfe, the Sonne is begotten of the Father from all eternitie, and the Holy Ghost proceedeth from the Father and the Sonne.
Parent. How in their working to∣gither? Pastor. Heb. 1.1, 2. Iohn. 5.17, 19.The Father worketh of himselfe by the Sonne and the Holy Ghost, and therefore the originall & beginning of the action is ascribed to him.Rom. 8.11. Heb. 1.2. The Sonne worketh from the Father by the Holy Ghost, and so the disposing of the action (as it were by a Steward) is attributed to him.Gen. 1.2. 1 Cor. 12.11. The Holy Ghost worketh from the Father and the Sonne, and therefore the effi∣cacie and finishing of the action is in a speciall sort allotted vnto him. Parent. What knowledge of the Law is required for worthy Recei∣uing? Child. Deut. 6.25. Rom. 7.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13.That it requireth true righteousnesse, and discouereth our corrupt nature, sinne and condem∣nation. Parent. What of the Gospell? Child. Act. 4.12. Gal. 3.13.That Christ is our suffi∣cient Redéemer and onely remedie a∣gainst Gods curse. Parent. What of our selues or of our owne estate?
Child. Ephes. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, &c.That we do surely stand in grace, though borne in sinne and wrath. Parent. What of the Sacraments? Child. Esai. 7.11. Rom. 4.11. Luk. 22.19, 20.That they are fit & wor∣thie helps to strengthen our weake faith. Seruant, How are they so? Scholler. Iere. 19.10, 11. Act. 21.11. Iohn. 3.12. Galat. 3.1. 1 Ioh. 1.1, 3.Because the Lord doth worke vpon other our senses and fa∣culties, as our séeing, féeling, being admitted, and clensed, receiuing, ea∣ting and drinking, tasting, digesting, being nourished, refreshed, chéered and strengthned, thereby to confirme vnto our hearts his sauing grace, which first by hearing the word we haue beléeued. Parent. II. Of Faith.What Faith is required for the worthy receiuing of the Lords Supper? Child. Faith, which taketh hold of Christ and his benefits, and leadeth vs to true thankfulnesse.Of this grace we haue conferred al∣ready in the second part. and also more in Part. 5.
Parent. What Repentance and Newnesse of Life is required?III. Of Repen∣tance and Newnesse of life. Child. See more of this grace in Part. 2. and in Part. 5. That godly sorrow wt causeth to forsake sinne, togither with that effectuall grace which in∣ableth to kéepe Gods Commande∣ments, increasing with the increase of God. Parent. What Charitie towards Men, is required,IV. Of Charitie towards men. before you receiue the Lords Supper? Child. 1 Iohn. 5.1. Ioh. 13.34, 35. & 15.12, 13. 2 Cor. 8.8, 9. compared.That which is wrought and groweth in my heart towards them for Iesus Christs sake, who loued both them and me vnto the death. Seruant. How do you further know that you haue loue or charitie towards men? Scholler. First,Psal. 16.3 1 Iohn 3.1 & 4.1. 1 P. 1.22. & 3.8. & 4.8, 9. &c. because I doe specially loue and reuerence godly persons. Secondly,Math. 5.23.24. I séeke for conscience sake to be reconciled, after offences committed.
Thirdly,Math. 5.44. Mark. 11.25, 26. I wish well euen in my heart vnto my very enimies, being ready to pardon all their wrongs and praying for them. Fourthly,1 Cor. 14.1. & 16.14. Galat. 6.10. Hebr. 12.14. 1 Pet. 3.11. 2 Tim. 3.3. Mal. 2.10, 14. I beare a louing affe∣ction towards all men, following peace with them, and endeuouring to doe them good, but particularly those vnto whom I am bound in nature or by any other couenant of God.See more of this grace in part, supra. and in part. 5. infra. Parent. V. Of earnest desire to re∣ceiue the Lords Sup∣per.Why must you earnestly desire to receiue the Lords Supper? Child. For two causes. First,1 Cor. 11 20, 22, 23, 24, 25. because the Lord hath both or∣dained and commanded it for his owne glory. Secondly,1 Cor. 11.17. Ephes. 5.26. Act. 2.42. & 20.7.11. God giueth more grace by it, than by the word preached alone. Parent. What more grace haue you by it, than by the word preached alone? Childe. First,1 Cor. 10.16. Christs death and merits are more particularly applied to me, and so I am more fully assured
to be kept still in grace, yea and sealed vp vnto euerlasting saluation. Secondly,& 12.13. I am more stronglie bound (as by a solemne renewing of an oath) to continue in Grace. Thirdly,Act. 2.42, &c. I am more effectually stirred vp to make profession of Faith and obedience, as often as I am cal∣led thereunto. Seruant. How often is euery Chri∣stian bound to receiue the Lords Sup∣per? Scholler. 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. Act. 2.42. Of receiuing worthily.As often as he may, so that he be a worthy receiuer. Parent. But what is required of vs about the time of celebrating the Lords Supper, that wee may vse it as Christ hath appointed, and as becom∣meth so heauenly mysteries? Childe. There are required these three things:  First, a due and holie preparation before.  Secondly, a fit disposition in the action.  Thirdly, o∣ther duties afterward.
I. Of prepa∣ration before. Parent. What preparation is requi∣red before? Childe. Wée must set our selues apart from all other businesse, that we may, First,1 Cor. 11.28.31. search our selues throughly for the sanctified graces of Know∣ledge, Faith, Repentance, Charitie, and desire to the Lords Supper a∣foresaid. Secondly,Psal. 26.6. Num. 9.6. stirre them vp and re∣new them vnto better growth and practise. Thirdly,2 Chron. 30.18, 19, 20. Mat. 5.23, 24. 1 Tim. 4.4, 5. humblie craue the assi∣stance of Gods spirit, and reconcilia∣tion with God; yea and with men al∣so, where néed is. Seruant. But what if you finde the sanctified graces of Gods spirit to be weake in your heart? must you not then abstaine? Scholler. No,2 Chr. 30.18 19.20. I must come, and that with hope and chéerefulnesse, vp∣on some conditions. Seruant. Why with hope and cheer∣fulnesse?
Scholler. Esai. 7.11. Luk. 4.18. Mat. 15.24. with Luk. 22.19, 20. Because the Lords Supper was ordained of purpose for the confirmation of the weake. Seruant. Vpon what conditions must you come? Scholler. First,Acts 8.37. if the graces a∣foresaid be sound in me, though verie weake. Secondly,John. 4.10. if I féele my wants with gréefe. Thirdly,Mark. 9.24. if I labour against my weakenesse, hungring and thirsting after Gods grace in Christ. Seruant. What speciall means hath the Lord appointed for our better di∣rection to try and examine our selues? Scholler. Math. 3.6. Acts 8.37. Iam. 5.16. Conference with good men, and chéefely with the Minister. Seruant. May notorious offenders that are impenitent, fooles, madde men, and children be admitted to the Lords Supper? Scholler: 1 Cor. 11.28. Exod. 12.15, 18, 19, 20, 43. Numb. 9.6. No, for they either can∣not or doe not examine themselues a∣right before they come, and therefore are not rightly prepared.
II. Dispositiō in the action. Parent: What disposition is requi∣red in the whole action of celebrating the Lords Supper? Childe. First,Num. 9.3, 5. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. a diligent obser∣uing of al the holy signes and actions, together with a wise vnderstanding of their right vses, and applying them accordingly by each particular person vnto himselfe for his owne spirituall profit. Secondly,1 Cor. 11.20 &c. and 14.40. The reason of due preparati∣on and dispo∣sition. such decent behauiour and gesture of the body, as are agrée∣able vnto euery holy action. Parent. Why must wee thus pre∣pare and behaue our selues? Child. 1 Cor. 11.20. &c. to the end of the chapter.Because otherwise wée shall receiue vnworthily. Parent. What danger is it to receiue vnworthily? Child. Very great,Ibid. and 1. Sam. 4.3, 4, 10. & 5.6, 7, 9, 11 12. for then wée are guilty of the body and bloud of the Lord, and so doe eat and drinke our own damnation or temporary iudge∣ment at the least, because we discerne not the Lords body.
Seruant. How is the vnworthy Re∣ceiuer guilty of the Body and Bloud of the Lord? Scholler. 1 Sam. 2.29, 30.Because the indignati∣on or reproach which hee offereth to this holy Sacrament, redoundeth to the things thereby signified and set forth, to wit, to the body and bloud of Christ, as the disgrace done to the Kings picture, Broad Seale, or Am∣bassador turneth to the disgrace of the King himselfe. Seruant. What indignity or reproch is that? Scholler. Psal. 50.21. Rom. 2.24.In that the vnworthy Receiuer himselfe estéemeth, and gi∣ueth cause for others also to thinke, that Christ is the Sauiour of euill men, or otherwise to blaspheme. Seruant. How is it said that the vn∣worthy Receiuer discerneth not the Lords body? Scholler. 1 Cor. 11.20, &c. to the end. Exo. 12.11, 14, 15, 16, 17, &c.Because he commeth to receiue the Sacrament with no other preparation nor deuotion, then as if it were but common bread and wine.
III. Of duties afterward. Parent. What dueties are required after we haue receiued the Lords Sup∣per? Child. First,Psal. 26.7. to blesse God hear∣tily for our redemption. Secondly,Nehem. 8.10. 1 Cor. 16.2. to giue to the poore as God hath prospered vs. Thirdly,Deut. 10.16. to labour to féele in our selues the strength and comfort of this Sacrament. Parent. What shall a true Recei∣uer feel in himselfe after the partaking of the Lords Supper? Childe. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. & 11.24. Acts 16.33.34The increase of his faith and sanctification in Christ, and so a greater measure of cōfort in Christs merits, and a greater care & power to dye vnto sinne, and to walke in new∣nesse of life. Parent. What if one after the recei∣uing of the Sacrament, neuer find any such thing in himselfe? Child. Act. 8.13, 14, &c. 10 24. John. 12.4, 5, 6. & 13.21, 26, 27, &c. and 18 2, 3, &c.He may well suspect him∣selfe, whether hee did euer repent or
not, & thereupon is to vse meanes to come to sound faith and repentance. ☞THE FIFTH AND LAST PART. Concerning the Practise of the Communi∣on of Saints. The fourth outward meane of Grace. Parent. WHat is the Practise of the Communion of Saints? Childe. Heb. 10 24.25. 1 Thes. 5.11 12. Act. 2.42.44Such holy fellowship as the faithfull doe exercise among them∣selues, according to the word of God. Seruant. What faithfull doe you meane? Scholler. Psalm. 16.3. Gal. 4.15. Act. 18.3, 26. Iames 2.All and euery one of the godly, whether teacher or learner, go∣uernor or gouerned, great or small. Seruant. When is this followship exercised? Scholler. Ioh. 20.19, 26 Acts. 20.6, 7, &c. Psal. 101.6 & 122. Acts. 18.3.Not onely in the pub∣like vse of Gods worship, as vpon the Sabbath daies, but also in pri∣uate,
& as much as may be through∣out their daily conuersation. Seruant. And how, and after what manner exercised? Scholler. 1 Tim. 4.6. 2 Tim. 3.16. 1 Thes. 4.18. Iam. 5.1. Rom. 12.15. Gal. 6.1. Luk 22.31. 1 Sam. 15.24, &c. 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 2.By teaching, admoni∣shing, remembring, exhorting, com∣forting, reproouing, confessing, pray∣ing and giuing thankes each with o∣ther, and for other, mutuall reioycing and mourning, conferring, aduising, considering to stirre vp, reléeuing, cor∣recting, accompanying, and otherwise as is taught in the holy Scriptures. Seruant. But what saith the Word concerning fellowship with the wick∣ed? Scholler. 1 Sam. 25.14, 17, 18, 19, 25. &c. Psal. 120.5. & 101.6, 7. 1 Cor. 5.11. Luke 5.30, 31, 32. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, &c.If your calling & estate will permit, we must carefully auoid all speciall fellowship with them (vn∣lesse it be to heale them) and chiefely those that are hardned in their sinnes, and doe contemne admonition. Seruant. What reasons bee there why a Christian must make speciall conscience of his company in his dai∣lie conuersation? Scholler. First,Mal. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. God noteth it
in his book of remembrance (as being specially delighted with it) how they that feare the Lord, speake often one to another. Secondly,Pro. 1.10. & 13.20. 1 King. 11.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 106.34, 35, 36. Companie, whether it good or ill, will intise men to be like vnto themselues, and the euent is commonly answerable, that, Euerie man is like his companions. So, hée that maketh little conscience of his company, vsually maketh little of sin. Thirdly,Psal. 1 33.1, 2, 3. 1 Thes. 5.11. not only the benefit that we receiue, yea and yéeld to other the faithfull by keeping brotherly fellow∣ship with them,Euen Iudas absteined frō much euill in his Maisters & fellowes com∣pany, Eccles. 4.9, 10, 11.12. 1 Pet. 4.9, 10, 11 is vndoubted and of∣tentimes very great in ministring of grace, as sauing knowledge, wise∣dome, loue, zeale, comfort, cheereful∣nesse and such like, at least restraint from the outward committing of sin, and that euen in the hypocrites, but also we inable one another thereby a∣gainst the enmiful courses of the wic∣ked on the one side, and for the perfor∣mance of many actuall dueties on the other, and all to the glory of God. Fourthly,Gen. 19.8. & 42, 16. Psalm. 119.115. though wee be not
grossely corrupted and peruerted by them, nor yet apparantly defiled with their pitch, yet our nigh and speciall fellowship with them, will eyther di∣minish our zeale to goodnesse and our hatred of euill, and soReuel. 3.15, 16, &c. luke warme∣nesse (which is an estate very odious in the sight of God) will creepe vpon vs, or at leastEzra. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Nehem. 6.9, 10, &c. hinder the doing of many good things, and in those wée doe, we are indangered, not to doe them in so good a manner for fréedom, chéerefulnesse, and perfection, as o∣therwise we might haue done them. Fifthly,1 King. 22.1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, &c. Gen. 34.20, 21.22, 23. ordinary fellowship with the vngodly (when they may be law∣fully and conuenientlie auoyded) is the way to harden them in their sinful state, especially if they be not often and throughly reproued and admoni∣shed, for they will soone conceiue, that if their case were so wretched and damnable (as indéed it is) then the o∣ther would not so much conuerse with them: And then chéefelie will they thinke so, when the godlie make speciall contracts with them as mar∣riages,
or haue great familiarity, or continuall and ioynt labours with them. Sixthlie,2 Cor. 6.14.15 16. Pro. 22.1. it is an vnequall yoke, and so not onely vneasie for a Christi∣an to beare, but also against the cre∣dit of Religion, and our owne good name, both which ought to be deare vnto vs, because the glory of God doth much depend thereon, as all ex∣perience sheweth. Lastly,2 Chron. 18.31. & 19 1, 2, 3. & 20.35, 36, 37. the Lord hath sharpelie chastised his seruants, though neuer so vpright and déere vnto him, for their sinne this behalfe. Of the effects of the 4 means of grace, both in good and bad. Parent. We perceiue then that Christ by his Spirit giueth the benefit of his Couenant of grace vnto his Church or people, 2 Chron. 15.3.4, 12, 13, 14, 15 Luk 11.9, 10. Acts 2. seeking him heartily and exercising it selfe religiously in these foure outward Meanes which we haue conferred of. Pastor. Yes verily; but yet after di∣uers manners, as hath beene shewed.
For First,Rom. 10.14, 15, &c. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. he calleth by his word and euermore inlighteneth and guideth by it. Secondly,Mark. 9.24. & 11.24. Iam. 1.6. & 5.16, 17 he stirreth vp and ina∣bleth to pray with the assurance of Faith, and with a feruent and holy de∣sire (which are the two chiefe proper∣ties and sinewes of Prayer) and heareth and blesseth the same. Thirdly,2 Chron. 30.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. hee setleth and comfor∣teth the heart in Grace by the worthy receiuing and remembring of the two Sacraments. Fourthly,Act. 9.10, 20 he further moueth and strengtheneth to forsake the euill, and to choose the good, training and assi∣sting in dutie, by the conscionable vse of the Communion of Saints. Parent. Are all these foure meanes effectuall to the saluation of all those who haue the outward vse of them? Pastor. No; for first,2 Cor. 2.16, 17 there are some that perish, vnto whom the prea∣ching of Christs Gospell is not the sa∣uour of life vnto life, but the sauour of death vnto death.
Secondly,Zach. 7.13. Psal. 109.7. the Lord will not heare their cry who wil not heare his cry, but their prayer shall be turned into sinne. Thirdly,Judas, Ma∣gus, &c. the wicked reape no be∣nefit by the Sacraments, but rather in∣crease their sinne and condemnation. And fourthly,2 Chron. 27.33. & 2 Sam. 16 23. Act. 1.17. and 8.13. John 17.12. though some bee numbred with the very chiefest, and continue in their fellowship, and that very nigh and speciall, yet they may be the children of perdition. A note or two of the consi∣deration of Gods workes. Parent. Is not the consideration of Gods workes shewed in his Creatures, and continuall Prouidence ouer all, a profitable meane to teach and mooue vs to belieue, feare, loue, and obey the Lord? Pastor. Psal. 19.1, 2, 3, 4, &c. & 8.3. Dan. 9.12, 13.Yes, for the Lord doth as it were second and seale the truth of his Word by proceeding according there∣unto, in his workes: For the vvhich cause,Psal. 77.10, 11, 12 & 111. the godly are commended in the Scriptures for their meditating and right-applying of the workes of Gods
hands,Psal. 28.5.1 Esai. 5.11, 12. and the wicked haue a woe pronounced against them for their prophane neglect and abuse of them. Parent. Why then haue you omit∣ted to put the Meditation of Gods workes vnto the meanes of grace? Pastor. Rom. 1.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, &c.Because the blindnesse and hardnesse of mans heart is such by our Nature corrupted, that though this booke of the creatures, and of all o∣ther the workes of God, be both great and plaine, yet of it selfe it helpeth vs not to attaine to the grace of the Gos∣pell, but onely as we are directed and ledde by some one or more of those 4. meanes of grace that wee haue euen now handled, and chiefely byPsal. 138.2. and 19.17. the light of the Word of God; Other∣wise it serueth to make man without excuse. II. Of Christ his Protecting and Defen∣ding of his Church. The second way of Christs ruling of his Church in this world. Parent. How doth Christ protect and defend his Church?
Child. Ps. 86. Psalm. 48. Psalm. 82.Both by ordinary and ex∣traordinary meanes. Parent. By what ordinary meanes? Child. Rom. 13.1:2 3, 4. Psal. 106.46. Jerem. 38.7 Gen. 37.39.40. &c. chapters. Exod. 3.4, 5, 6. &c. chapters.By his Magistrates, by his friends, and by his foes, and that both with and against their wills. Seru. Who are Christs Magistrates? Scholler. 1 Tim. 2.2.The King, and all in authority vnder him. Seruant. Who are his friends? Scholler. Iohn 15.14.They that doe what∣soeuer he commandeth them. Seruant. Who are his foes? Scholler. 1 Cor. 1.23. Apoc. 13.11. They that set them∣selues against his truth, either direct∣lie or in a mysterie. Seruant. What doth Christ say of those that are eyther carelesse or sla∣uishly afraid to maintaine his truth, when it is slandered and traduced? Scholler. Math. 12.30.He that is not with me is against me, and hee that gathereth not with me, scattereth abroad. Parent. How doth Christ protect his Church extraordinarily? Childe. Beleeue the histories of the Bible, and o∣pen thine eies & see the like hand of God vpon many persecutors in these latter times also.By sending it miracu∣lous & wonderfull preseruations and
succours, and by executing fearefull and strange iudgements vpon the ob∣stinate enemies thereof. III. Of Christ his disposing of all things to the greatest good of his Church in this world,The third and last way of Christs ruling of his Church in this world, and of his be∣ginning to glorifie it in the world to come. and of his beginning to glo∣rifie it in the world to come. Parent. HOw doth Christ dispose all things to the greatest good of his Church? Childe. Rom. 8.28. Math. 28.20. Mark. 16.20. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55 Psalm. 18.1. & 94.12, 13. Hab. 3.16. Both by powring his blessing vpon all his direct meanes so that they take good effect; and also by turning the very sinnes and afflicti∣ons of his seruants, and finallie their death, vnto contrary and profitable ends. Seruant. How doth he turn the sins of his people, vnto a contrary and pro∣fitable end? Scholler. 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. Rom. 7.8, 9 13, 22, 23, 24, 25. Deut. 8.2. 2 Cor. 7.11. & 12.7, 8. 2 Chron. 32.31: Wheras the end of sin is further intangling in sinne, and at the last euerlasting damnation by the
rule of Gods iustice, God is pleased in mercy to let his people see their corruption and infirmities, and the deceits of Satan, by suffering them∣to fall into some sinne, to the end they may be watchfull and circumspect for the time to come, lest they fall againe into the like or more grieuous sinnes, and walking humbly before him, may the more earnestly begge his grace; So not onely preuenting their con∣demnation, but also drawing them vnto him, euen by that which seemed to estrange them most from him. Seruant. How doth Christ turne the afflictions of his seruants vnto contra∣rie and profitable ends? Scholler. By comforting, sanctify∣ing and deliuering them. Seruant. How doth Christ comfort his people in time of their afflicti∣ons? Scholler. 2 Cor. 1.3. Rom. 5.2, 3. and 8.35, 36, &c. and 14.17. 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Tim. 4.17. Iam. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 1.8. He maketh them to re∣ioyce in the holy Ghost (with a begin∣ning of ioy vnspeakeable & glorious) through the féeling of his loue euen in the midst of tribulation, through
a stedfast perswassion that he will giue a happy issue in due time; and further helpeth them in the meane space to beare their burthens with pati∣ence. Seruant. What principall incou∣ragement haue you to suffer afflictions with patience and comfort? Scholler. Rom. 8.28, 29 Luk. 24.26. Heb. 12.2. Philip. 3.10. 1 Pet. 4.13, 14.Because I am confor∣mable therein vnto the Son of God, my Sauiour and my Head, who thus entring into his glory, made the pas∣sage both assured and easie for me, and causeth his glorious Spirit to rest vpon me. Seruant. Must then the Godly needs suffer afflictions and so enter in∣to Heauen? Scholler. Luk. 9.23. 2 Tim 3.12. Acts 14.22.Yes, and by no other way. Seruant. After what manner are they afflicted? Scholler. 1 Sam. 1.15. 1 Cor. 11.30.31.32. Iob 1.2 &c. chapters. Psal. 73 4, 5.Both in minde and bo∣die, and that not onely with such tri∣bulations, whereunto the wicked are subiect in this life, but also often∣times after an especiall manner: Be∣sides,
Gal. 4.29. they that are borne after the flesh, doe persecute them that are borne after the Spirit. Seruant. But do not the persecuti∣ons which the Godly suffer for the Gospell, turne to the destroying of the Gospell? Scholler. Phil. 1.12, 13, &c.No, but rather to the furtherance of it. Seruant. How so? Scholler. First,Mat. 16.18. with Phil. 1.12, 13, &c. 1 Pet. 4.14. 2 Cor. 1.8, 9. 1 Cor. 1.25. & 3.18, 19. because God will get himselfe praise in letting all men sée, that he not only maintaineth and preserueth, but also propagateth and spreadeth his truth, whatsoeuer opposition is made vnto it. And to that end he strengthneth the faith of his children, and confoundeth the wisedome of the world. Secondly,Act. 28.22, 23, 24. 2 Cor. 1.6, 7. God will gratiously blesse the godly sufferings of his ser∣uants, as well as other their obedi∣ence and endeuours, for the further clearing, and so for the continuance of his truth. Thirdly,Coloss. 1.24. 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10. 2 Tim. 4.17, 18. God will thereby in∣courage the Sufferers to perseuere.
Fourthly,Philip. 1.13, 14. 2 Cor. 1 6. 2 Tim. 2 9, 10. the weaker sort of the godly are vsually emboldned through the sufferings of the stronger, and so the Gospell getteth ground. And fifthly,Act. 4.13. & 21.33. & 25.13, 14, &c. & 26.1, &c. the rest are moued to consider more seriously of the cause; whence it is, that sometimes euen the Persecutors doe attaine to build that which before time they destroy∣ed, or at least wise do cease pecsecu∣ting, and are made more milde and fauourable: though I should say no∣thing, that other whiles they are dri∣uenDan. 3. & 6. chapters. Matth. 27.54. to confesse the truth, albeit they will not truly conuert; And some al∣so are afterward afraidAct. 9 5. It is a prouerb taken from oxen or hor∣ses, who when they are prick∣ed by the dri∣uer, do them∣selus no good by kicking & meeting the pricke, but ra∣ther procure double harme vnto them∣selues by re∣ceiuing the prick the dee∣per into their owne sides. to kicke a∣gainst pricks, that is, lest hauing béen conuicted by the shining light of the truth, togither with the Patience and Constance of the children of the truth (that do professe it and suffer for it) they do aggrauate and hasten Gods fearefull iudgement against them∣selues, sith that they cannot choose but know, that, will they, nill they, they must be subiect to the authoritie and lordship of Christ, who is the holy
and strong challenger of his owne sauing truth and of euery part thereof. Seruant. How doth God sanctifie his people by afflictions? Scholler. Psal. 119.67, 71. Exod. 10.28. Deut. 8.2, 3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 1.9, 10, 11. Revel. 3.19. Heb. 5.8. & 12.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 28.Whereas affliction is in the proper nature thereof, through Gods pure iustice, the due punish∣ment of sinne, and such a punish∣ment as by reason of our froward∣nesse draweth more sinnes out of vs, it is now made in Christ Iesus, Gods fatherly chastisement to reclaime vs from our sins, and to make vs loath them the more; and on the other side, to nurture and traine vs in Faith, Patience, Wisedome and child like awe and obedience to the Lord. Seruant. But what if your afflictions abound and be exceeding great and long? Scholler. Rom. 8 18. 2 Cor. 4.17.Yet I doe reckon that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be reuealed in me, as also that my light affliction which is but for a moment, worketh for me a
far more excéeding & eternall weight of glory, and therefore in such a casePsal. 42. & 73.26. & 138.3. 2 Cor. 1.5. I pray and striue for great and long patience, assuring my selfe, that God, who is the strength of my heart, will strengthen me with strength in my soule, & make my consolation abound through Christ. Seruant. It seemeth then that affli∣ction proceedeth from the diuine Pro∣uidence and Loue of our most merci∣full Father, as no small benefit vnto them that are thereby exercised. Scholler. 2 Sam. 16.10. Matth. 5.10. Revel. 3.19. It is very true; If first,Heb. 12.6, 7. we submit our selues to God, not refusing to be chastened. Secondly,Mat. 24.13. 1 Tim. 1.19. 2 Tim. 6.12. Rom. 2.7. Iob. 1.21. If we endure to the end in the profession of Faith and a good Conscience, blessing the name of the Lord. And thirdly,Heb. 12.10, 11. If we profit thereby, partaking of Gods holinesse, and yéel∣ding the peaceable fruit of Righte∣ousnesse; for the Righteous (saithIob. 17.9. Iob) shall hold on his way, and he that haeh cleane hands shall be stron∣ger and stronger.
Seruant. How doth Christ deliuer his people out of afflictions? Scholler. Jona. 4.6. Esai. 38.14.Sometimes he easeth them by mitigating their tribulati∣ons for a time, oftenPsal. 34.19. 2 Tim. 4.18. Psal. 74.12. he setteth them frée from their speciall afflictions by some powerfull and mercifull hand of his, butEsai. 57.1, 2. at the last he surely taketh them away from whatsouer is euill by Death it selfe. Parent. What is Death? Child. Luk. 16.22, &c. 2 Cor. 5.1. with Phil. 1.21. Ioh. 11.25, 26. Death is the parting a∣sunder of Soule and Bodie, which though it be vnto the soules of the wicked a present entrance into Hell, yet vnto the Godly it is become by Christ Iesus the assured passage vnto eternall life,Luk. 23.43. where they are instant∣ly with him in Paradise. Parent. What shall follow Death at the last? Child. Heb. 9.27. Dan. 12.2.The resurrection of the Bodie and the last Iudgement. Parent. To what end? Child. 2 Cor. 5.10.That euery one both elect and reprobate may receiue the things done in his bodie, according to that
he hath done, whether it be good or bad, the one sort vnto the manifesta∣tion and praise of Gods mercy, and thother of his iustice. Seruant. When shall the Resurre∣ction of the Bodie and the last Iudge∣ment be? Scholler. Both shall be at Christs second comming,Mat. 24.36. which for the day and houre cannot be knowne, either of Men or Angels. Seruant. What and whose bodies shall rise againe? Scholler. Iob 19.26, 27. Math. 25.32. Rev. 20.13.The very same & none other of euery one (without excep∣tion) both of Gods Elect and of the Reprobate, which they haue in this life. Seruant. How doth the word of God distinguish the bodies both of Gods Elect and of the Reprobate, at the latter day? Scholler. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. 1 Thess. 4.15, 16, 17. Rom. 14.9. 2 Tim. 4.1. Into two sorts, the one, of all those who haue béene dead from the beginning of the world vntil that instant of Christs comming to iudgement, the number of whom is
the greater, and the other are those that then shall be found aliue. Seruant. By what meanes shall the dead bodies of Gods elect be raised vp? Scholler. 1 Cor. 15.By the vnspeakable power and vertue of Christ declared in his owne resurrection, at the sound of a trumpet, they all and euery part and member of them throughout the whole bodie, shall be restored & made perfect (in a moment, in the twinck∣ling of an eye) notwithstanding all confusion and hindrances whatsoeuer to the contrary. Seruant. And what shall be done to the bodies of Gods elect that then shall be found aliue? Scholler. Luk. 24. Iohn 20. & 21. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52.Through the same power of Christ, who was changed when he rose from death to life in his owne bodie, they shall be likewise suddenly changed from all corrup∣tion, and so be made perfect also, which change shall be vnto them in stéed of a resurrection. Seruant. What kinde of bodies shall
they all then be? Scholler. Mat. 13.43. 1 Cor. 15.43, 44, 45, 53. Phil. 3.20, 21.Supernaturall, incor∣ruptible and glorious, euen like vnto Christs owne glorious bodie, though not so glorious. Seruant. What saith the holy Scrip∣ture of their soules? Scholler. 1 Thess. 4.14. compared with 1 Cor. 13.10, 12, 13. & Col. 2.2, 3, 4.Their soules (being in∣dued with perfect knowledge, holi∣nesse and loue, and descending from heauen) shall at the same instant of the Resurrection and change be revni∣ted and coupled vnto their bodies a∣gaine, neuer to be separated any more. Seruant. What of soule and bodie togither? Scholler. Revel. 21.4, 11. 1 Joh. 3.2.They both shall be frée from all infirmities and imperfecti∣ons, yea and passions that haue any paine ioyned with them, and general∣ly from all euill. Seruant. What saith the Scripture of the Reprobate? Scholler. Ioh. 5.29. compared with the ana∣logie of faith: & Revel. 1.7. & 6.15, 16, 17Their dead bodies in∣déed shall be raised vp from ye graue (as Malefactors are taken from the
prison to the tryall) by the power of Christ their most fearefull Iudge, and so their soules being ioyned againe to their bodies (full of extreme vglines and horrour) they shall be made able to indure the wrath of God for euer∣more, and the vnbeléeuers then liuing shall likewise be changed to the same effect. Seruant. What shall be done next afterwards? Scholler. Mat. 25.32. Act. 10.42.Christ will immediatly bring all both good & bad vnto iudge∣ment. Seruant. How will he bring his Elect vnto iudgement? Scholler. Mat. 25.3 32, 33. & 24.31. 1 Thess. 4.17.After that he hath ga∣thered all togither by the Ministerie of the Angels, he will seuer the Elect from the Reprobate, and place the Elect at his right hand by his iudge∣ment seat. Seruant. How will he vse the Elect in his iudgement? Scholler. Math. 25.34, 35. &c. Heb. 8.12. & 10.17. Ezek 18.22.First he will pronounce them to be righteous, not once men∣tioning any of their sinnes against
them, and therevpon allot them vnto his owne blessed kingdome and eter∣nall life. Secondly,1 Cor. 6.2, 3. Math. 19.28. he will honourably imploy them, as Iudges, to approue his most iust sentence, vpon the euill Angels and Reprobate men. Seruant. When shall the sentence of saluation be executed to the Elect? Scholler. Mat. 25.34, 46. 2 Thess. 1.10. 1 Thess. 4.17.Presently and togither with the giuing of the sentence, they shall be glorified, euen in the fight of the Reprobate; and afterwards they shall goe triumphantly with Christ & his Angels into heauen. Seruant. But how shall the Repro∣bate be brought to iudgement? Scholler. Math 25.34. & 24.30, 31. Revel. 1.7. & 6.15, 16, 17.They shall be forcibly haled by the Angels before Christs Tribunall, and there set at his left hand. Seruant. And how shall they bee vsed? And what sentence shall they receiue? Scholler. Matt 25.41, 42, &c.They being vpbraided and convicted of all their sinnes, shall receiue the sentence of condemnation,
whereby they shall be appointed vnto hell for euermore. Seruant. How and when shall that sentence be executed? Scholler. Mat. 25.46. Dan. 12.2. 2 Thess. 1.8, 9. Psal. 58.10. Matth. 11.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Luk. 12.47, 48.Euen instantly in the sight of the Elect, they shall be thrust into Hell, where they shall be puni∣shed with euerlasting destruction, shame and contempt, from the pre∣sence of the Lord and from the glory of his power, with the Deuill and his Angels, euery one according to the diuers measures of the deserts of their sinnes. Seruant. Why is the day of iudge∣ment concealed from all Angels and men? Scholler. Mat. 24.36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, &c. Mark. 13.33, 37. Luk. 21. 34, 35, 36.Both to preuent all cu∣rious inquiring, and also to make vs the more watchfull. Seruant. Why? what neede haue we to watch, seeing some signes that must go before that day, are not yet fulfilled, as besides others, thereMath. 24.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Mark. 13.21, 22, 23. must be False-Christs, and False-Prophets, shewing great signes and wonders? Scholler. For two reasons cheifly.
First,Job. 33.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Eccles. 9 10. Ps. 89.10, 11, 12. & 90.12. & 115.17. Hebr. 3.15. 1 Thess. 5.1. to 12. Rev. 14.13. compared. because our death is to vs, as the last iudgement shall be to them that then shall be found liuing, foras∣much as they are both alike vncer∣taine and vnknowne, and we may be (yea and are often) deceiued for the time of death as much as any shall be for the time of the last iudgement: And séeing the last iudgement shall finde vs in that state (whether for grace or sinne) wherein death leaueth vs; wherefore we must necessarily watch and prepare for death as for the last iudgement. Secondly,Mar. 13.32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Luk. 21.34, 35, 36. 1 Thess. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, &c. although wée should not be deceiued for the time either of the one or the other, yet the danger of securitie (whereby men are hardned to their owne destruction) can be by no other meanes preuented nor auoy∣ded, but by watching, the onely reme∣die against it. Seruant. Wherein consisteth this so needfull a Grace of Watchfulnes? Scholler. Both in shunning all the occasions of securitie, and in vsing all the meanes of a speciall prepa∣ration
or readinesse. Seruant. What occasions of secu∣ritie do you meane must be shunned, if we will watch? Scholler. Luk. 21.34, 35, 36.Not only voluptuous∣nes, couetousnesse, worldly careful∣nesse, ambitious desires, and the like, which are grosse sinnes;Luk. 17.26, 27, 28, &c. & 14.18, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 7.24, 35. Esai. 22.12, 13, 14. But also all abuse and excesse, yea and the vn∣seasonable vse of things that of them∣selues are necessarie & warrantable, as eating, drinking, buying, selling, planting, building, marrying and gi∣uing to mariage, recreating, &c. as when men do giue themselues ouer to these things which are so much the more pernicious to the soule, because they are not ordinarily condemned a∣mongst men. Seruant. What meanes of speciall Preparation or Readinesse must wee vse? Scholler. First,2 Cor. 13.5. Revel. 21.27. wée must dili∣gently examine our selues, whether we haue the Faith, Repentance and Sanctification which lead vnto sal∣uation.
Secondly, we must be carefullMat. 25.14, 15, &c. to 31. Dan. 5.18, to 24. with 4.24, 25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 10.31. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. of the talents, that is, of those gifts and graces both of minde & bodie, which God hath distributed to vs, to vse them to his glory and to the good of his Church (yea and that others also may be stirred vp to séeke and serue the Lord) which likewise turneth to Gods aduantage in the end. Thirdly,1 Thess. 5.17, 18, 19, 20, 23. Psalm. 16.1. Luk. 21.36. Mark. 13.33, 34. Revel. 22.20. we must set our selues in most serious manner, as to all the exercises of Piety, so specially to Prayer, that God would preserue vs from falling away, that he would ha∣sten his comming to Iudgement, and fit vs thereunto. Seruant. How shall one know whe∣ther he haue the true grace of Faith that leadeth to saluation? Scholler. Besides other notes which I haue declaredPart. 2. and Part. 5. aboue, one may try himselfe whether he hath true sauing Faith by these two. First,Rom. 5.2, 3, &c. Heb. 10.34, 35. 1 Cor. 3.21, 23. when he can rightly reioyce and glory in God, comfortably depen∣ding vpon him in all necessities, feares and dangers, yea euen in the
midst of his greatest tribulations and tryalls, vpon this ground of assu∣rance, that all things are his, he Christs, and Christ Gods. Secondly,2 Tim. 4.6, 7, 8. 1 Ioh. 5.4. when his heart reioy∣ceth at the very remembrance and consideration of the day of Iudge∣ment, because he is priuy to himselfe that he hath fought the good fight of Faith against all his temptations, and hath also kept the same in a good conscience. Seruant. And how shall one perceiue in himselfe true Repentance and San∣ctification? Scholler. First, more generally,Math. 11.12. 1 Iohn. 3.2, 3, 8, 10. Phil. 3.10, 11, 12, &c. Psal. 119.6. Matth. 16.23. Act. 5.3. Zach. 3.2. Rō. 16.10. 1 Ioh. 2.13, 14. Ephes. 4 26, 27. & 6.13. when one fully purposeth in his heart and applieth his whole strength (powring forth his prayers incessant∣ly vnto the Lord) both to be throughly purged from all his sinnes without exception, because where any one knowne sinne raigneth, there Satans throne is, and also to walke with God purely, in the obedience of all his commandements all his dayes, and most of all in such duties as God doth
specially require at his hands, for the magnifying of his power and grace ouer Satan and Sinne, and specially at what time he is most strongly tem∣pted to euill, or opposed in that which is good. Secondly, more particularly by the graces of humility and mercie. Seruant. How may we perceiue the soundnesse of our repentance and san∣ctification by the grace of humility? Scholler. Rom. 11.20, 22. Pro. 15.33. Luk. 17.10. 1 Cor. 4.5, 6, 7. Iob. 31.13, 14, 34. 2 Sam. 12.7, 8, &c. 13. with Psal. 51 & 141.5. & 144.3. 1 Tim. 1.15. Ephes. 3.8. Esai. 40, 17.When in all our waies, and euen in our greatest earthly pros∣peritie, we doe carrie our selues with lowlinesse and feare both before God and Men, as being euer in Gods sight, & onely vpholden by his grace, hauing nothing but what we haue re∣ceiued, and that of his frée goodnesse onely, which he might haue giuen (if he had pleased) to any others (though neuer so vnworthy) as well as to vs, and of sinners that shall be saued the chéfe, but lesse than the least of all Saints in one respect or other, if not in many. And séeing all people and nations of the whole world are coun∣ted
to God lesse then nothing and va∣nitie, how little (iudge you) is each particular person (if so he knew him∣selfe aright) in his owne eyes? To conclude, it is a good note that wee haue humilitie (the ready way to glo∣rie) when we can patiently and thank∣fullie in the secret of our hearts heare our reproofes, and holilie profit by them. Seruant. How by Mercy? Scholler. Mark. 3.5. Luk. 19.8, 41, 42, 43.44. Act. 9.36. & 10.1: &c. Gal. 6.10. Psal. 16.2, 3. & 35, 13, 14. Heb. 6.10. & 13.3.16 Iam. 2.13. Mat. 24.34. &c. Act. 9 4. Esai. 63.9. 2 Cor. 8.2, 3. & 9.7.When wee féele our hearts continuallie moued with com∣passion towards all, for their mise∣ries both spirituall and corporal, stri∣uing to do them good, yea though they be very wicked, and our vntractable enemies; and specially when wee haue a quicke sense of the gréeuances of the poore members of Iesus Christ his mysticall bodie, tendring them as if our selues (yea Christ himselfe in a sort) were afflicted with them, stirring vp our selues willingly and chéerfully (though in deepe pouertie) to our power,See more of Repentance in Part 2. and sometimes beyond our power to comfort and help them, and
that the rather, because wee sée this grace so generally neglected amongst men, yea of those that professe godli∣nesse. Seruant. How may wee know that we doe vse our talents to Gods glory, and the good of his Church? Scholler. Luke 17.10. Eccles. 1.1, 2, &c the whole booke. Reuel. 3.19. Gen. 22.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, &c. Act. 21.13. Rom. 9.3. 2 Tim. 2 9, 10. Ephes. 1.12. 1 Pet 4.1, 2, 3, 10, 11.When being inwardly ashamed and displeased at our selues for our former follies and vanities in the abuse of our gifts, our vnprofita∣blenesse, coldnesse, and sloth, we learn to be more affected with Gods cause than our owne, and with the saluati∣on of mens soules than the safeguard of our owne bodies, and thereupon doe from time to time studiously im∣ploy our gifts, whether great or small, vnto the same ends in taking all the most likely occasions and vsing them in the wisest and most gracious manner we possibly can, that they may become effectuall. Seruant. And how shall wee know that our prayers which we make in re∣spect of the last iudgement, are right before God?
Scholler. Rom. 7.24. Philip. 1.21. 2 Cor. 5.2. 2 Pet. 3.12, 13.If they procéed from an earnest desire and longing of the hart for the comming of the Lord, not so much to be fréed from worldly mise∣ries, as of a holy loue to be discharged of sinne, and to be clothed with righ∣teousnesse. Seruant. Shall all they that are thus watchfull finde their death and the last iudgement truly comfortable to themselues? Scholler. 2 Tim. 4.6, 7, 8. Luke. 21.28. 1 Thes. 5.1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Heb. 9.28. Reu. 21.2, 3, &c. and 22.20.Yes vndoubtedly, and therefore their consciences may and shal gather many comfortable tokens and pledges of Gods loue towards them for their eternall saluation. Of Christs most full and absolute glorifying of his Church in heauen, the place of the blessed. Parent. HOw will Christ most fully and absolutely glorifie his Church in heauen, the place of the blessed? Child. Psal. 16.11. 1 Thes. 4 17. Luk. 20.36.He will make them dwell
euermore in his own most happy pre∣sence, sight and fellowship, together with all his blessed Angells;Esai. 64.4. Reuel. 2.17. Dan. 12.3. Luk. 17.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and there he wil fill euery vessell of mercy with honour, and ioy vnspeakeable, according to the measure of his grace seuerally bestowed on them in this present life, and as they haue put the same to good vse in séeking of his glo∣ry, while they liued here. Parent. Finally, I would entreat you (louing Pastor) to collect the sum of our whole Conference, cheefely for the most necessary matter and points, and to compose it in easie and ordina∣rie meeter, which we will often read o∣uer or sing as we follow our earthly la∣bours, or at our leasure, sometimes one part, and sometimes another, as wee shall thinke needfull, and fit for our e∣dification. For wee assure our selues that you are studious to dresse and or∣der this food of our soules after sundry sorts, as good Cookes doe their meats,
that so our taste may be pleased, our appetite stirred vp,Iob 23.12. and wee may re∣ceiue it rather then our necessary food fitted for vs, if not in one manner, yet in another. Pastor. Lo then, your desire is satis∣fied, and that in as plaine a manner as I was able to attaine vnto, without affe∣cting a lofty stile, or vsing hard words, because I would benefit you, poor sim∣ple countrie-people by speaking to your vnderstanding.O you igno∣rant souls, will you still loath the heauenlie Manna, thogh the Lord hath tempered it for you after so many fashi∣ons? Consider at length (if nothing else wil moue you) with what face you shall behold the Lord (at that day) if you cō∣tinue carelesse. Prou. 1.29.30. &c. with 2 Thes. 1.7, 8, 9. And if you will bestow some time in singing it, or some part of it daily, you shall find (by Gods grace) it will prooue a good Meane, es∣pecially with some wits and dispositi∣ons, both to informe and to delight in the waies of Godlinesse.See my war∣rant in Ephes. 5 19. and Col. 3.16.
The Peroration, or summe of the whole in Meeter. The Perora∣tion or Sum of the whole, in fiue parts. First, of God and his Law. ONe onely God, yet persons three, I euermore confesse, The Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, of like Almightinesse. Without beginning or any end, this liuing God I praise, Most wise, most iust, and mercifull, and infinite alwaies. God maker is, and gouernour of Heauen, Earth, Seas and all, Of Angells, Men, all Creatures, all matters great and small. God worketh all vnto the best, his owne elect to saue, And will condemne the Reprobate, themselues that mis behaue. God made man good, iust, right, and pure, and neuer to haue died, But shamelesly and wilfully forbidden fruit man tried. Through Satans slight, so him and his corrupt and bad he made,
In soule to hatch his secret sinne, and body it to trade. Then God gaue man his holy Law, the tenne Commandements, And charged him to keepe them all, and thus with him indents. If perfectly thou doe these things, without all sinfull staine, Thou shalt my blessing plentifull and heauens ioyes attaine. But if in any thing at all thou faile or breake my lore, Then surely thou my curse shalt feele in hell for euermore. Lo heere the substance and the sum of these ten Lawes of his, Which in most dreadfull sort hee gaue vs, to all his folkeywis. The tenne Commande∣ments. The first Commandement teacheth Gods inward worshid hye, As him to know, to feare and loue and trust in him onely. The second precept doth injoyne the ontward worship pure Of God onely, as he appoints in Canon of Scripture. The third forbiddeth all abuse
of Gods most sacred name, His titles, words and workes, that I dishonour not the same. 4. The fourth injoyneth me & mine the Sabbath day to keepe, And set my heart and bodie both, the Lord onely to seeke. 5. The fifth Commandement biddeth me, that speciall duties all, I rightly yeeld to euery one, to high, low and equall, Respecting speciall calling theirs and mine. So happinesse I shall enioy, whether I liue a longer space or lesse. 6. The sixth all duties teacheth me to others and my selfe, Mans person eke, with due regard of soules and bodies health. 7. The seuenth Precept doth injoyne the rule of Chastity, In heart and tongue, and euery part, to leade my life thereby. 8. The eight Cōmandement biddeth me for goods and maintenance, To yeeld the right to euery one, to pore his sustenance.
9. The ninth concerning mans good name, all duties doth command, In publike and in private both God lookes for at my hand. 10. The last of all bids keepe my heart from ill concupiscence, And pleasing-sinfull thoughts, before consent to such offence. * Then, out alas, and welladay, what shall of me become, That euery day doe breake Gods law, euen from my mothers wombe? I, wretched soule, haue spent my time each day and night in sinne, By thought, by word and deed, yet I haue seldome knowne wherein. From sinne therfore which I not feele, I little care to flee; Nor if I did, could I escape by any meanes in mee Against Gods Law, a Rebell I to God and selfe a foe: And in that state fast held I am by Satans snares also. Gods curse is mine by due desert, euen hellish condemnation: Who then can worke my liberty, my peace and my saluation?
Secondly, Of Christ and his Gospell. O Heauēly father thou sent'st forth the second person hye, Thine onely Son, who was conceiu'd in wombe of maid Marie By holy ghost, and in due time was borne our nature in, In all respects a very Man, excepting onely sinne. Christ Iesus hee both God and man Gods holy Law obai'd, And yet the endlesse curse thereof for vs on him was laid. His soule was heauy to the death, his bodie hang'd on tree, Till wrath of God was satisfy'd, It's finisht then said he. His bloud he shed to saue our soules, he put to shamefull death, For to preuent our hellish paine, our sinnes did stop his breath. So in our stead himselfe he gaue an holy sacrifice; Imputed to the faithfull flocke that serue him in right wise.
For Faith beleeues, Christ loued mee, himselfe for me he gaue, Embracing firm Christs righteousnes, which Gods Elect doth saue. This Faith, if true, will comfort yeeld to each repentant heart, And certainly repentance shall performe a happy part. Thy minde full sore shall grieued be, for all offences past, Because therby thou piercedst Christ, full bitter shall they taste: And them to leaue Repentance will thee teach, and sanctifie, In holinesse and righteousnesse to lead thy selfe godly. Such thankefulnesse will faith bring forth from secret heart within, That Christ his will to know and doe, forthwith thou shalt begin. And then thy conscience shall be built vpon his holy Word, To serue him so, and for to wait onely vpon the Lord. Ye further eke his crossing crosse thy minde shall not abhorre, To take it vp with Patience
and beare it lesse or more. And finally to giue thy selfe entirely vnto him, Thy heart will melt for his great loue and pardoning thy sinne. But as for vnbeleeuing soules, conuerting not to God, Vnthankfull and impatient they to kisse his blessed Rod. They worke their owne inuentions, Christs word they doe neglect, They doe but prate and make a shew sure Christ will them reiect. Therefore, deare Christian take good heed and follow not their guise, Their course is nought, their hope also is vanitie and lies. And for to traine thy silly soule, to walke the way aright, Behold Gods rich prouision to giue thee true insight. His Law doth shew thy foule great sin, thy misery and curse, And terrifie thy heart that is conuict, but yet the worse. But Christs Gospell doth shew thee grace, speakes peace and giues thee Faith,
And leads thee straight to obey the law as holy Scripture saith. Thirdly, of the Word of God, and of Prayer. FIue Exercises Christ hath fram'd, for thee to labour in, To purge thy heart from vnbeleefe, corruption and sinne. *The first and chiefest is his Word, both truly preach'd and heard, Next, often read and thought vpon, and soberly conferd. *And Prayer is the second thing, in Christ his name with Faith, With puritie and feruencie, such shall be safe he saith. For God hath sanctified this course to be his Ordinance, Thereby to blesse whom euer hee will, with louing countenance. The Lords Prayer. To God therfore the gracious Lord, to call be not thou dull, He is become through Iesus Christ, Our Father mercifull. And pray with reuerence, and withall
belieue that helpe he giues, And say, which art in Heauen, still thy power and mercy liues. 1. And looke that thou doe zealously desire to glorifie Gods holy name, before all things and each necessitie. For, Hallowed be thy name, Christ made the first Petition; Now Hallowed meaneth magnified, Gods name himselfe alone. 2. And secondly Christ bid vs pray, Thy kingdome come, apace, Enlarge thy Kingdome here, O Lord, by thy good meanes of grace. Thy spirit let worke effectually, and holy word let runne, And quickly end these sinfull daies, euen so Lord Iesus come. 3. The third Request, thy will be done in earth, to wit, that we May doe his will, as 'tis in heauen, where Angells perfect be: And that withall we may submit our selues his will to bide, In time of our aduersitie, when crost on euery side.
4. The fourth Petition Christ taught vs Giue vs this day, O Lord, Our daily bread, each needfull thing conuenient for this world. Yet so, in case it be thy will, none otherwise we pray, These earthly things doe sometimes helpe, and sometimes turne away. But sauing grace, most absolute, without an If or And, We aske and seeke without a Nay, at thine Almighty hand. 5. The fifth is, And forgiue vs (Lord) our debts and trespasses, Remit our sinnes, vs iustifie, and giue Christs righteousnesse: As we forgiue them that trespasse against vs, great and small, For thy free grace doth mollifie our hearts to debters all. For why? our brothers dreatest debt is but an hundreth pence, But ours to God, who knowes how much? ten thousand great talents. 6. Our last suit is, And lead vs not into temptation, But (Lord) deliver vs from ill,
Satans suggestion; Oh mortifie our nature vile, and quicken vs afresh: Thy speciall ayd wee need each day for weakenesse of our flesh. And Lord I ground my heart, onely to haue these things from thee, For thine is (eke) the kingdome, and the powre and the Glory For euer. So full right and power sure thou hast ouer all, And al things dost to thine own praise, all times perpetuall. Amen, so be it, and so it is, and so shall be for aye Therfore till God shall grant my suite, I will not cease to pray: Fourthly, Of the Sacraments, the Com∣munion of Saints, and the consideration of Gods workes. THe third Meane is Christs Sacraments, Baptisme and Supper (his) The seales of Christes righteousnes and pledges of his blisse.
Baptisme. For why? In Baptisme sure there is assured vnto thee, Thy sinnes are washed by his blood, and thou renew'd shalt bee. And thou art entred once for all into the fellowship Of Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, at no time thence to slip. This holy Trinitie is thy God, and thou his Child become: His grace is thine, thou not thine own, through Christ these things are done. And Faith is it that consecrates thee to the Lord alone, Yea Faith (I say) in Christes death and Resurrection. Therefore vnto the Lord see thou thy selfe do dedicate, To dye to sinne and liue to him, in state regenerate. As water skowreth filth away, so makes it faire and cleane; Thinke not thy sin is washt, when yet thou wicked dost remaine. The Supper of the Lord. * So in the Supper of the Lord, this gratious Couenant Is otherwise set forth to thee
that art the Lords seruant. The broken bread doth signifie Christs bodie put to death; The powred wine his pretious blood doth note vnto thy Faith. When Bread and Wine are ministred by Minister to thee, Thinke with thy selfe, Christ offereth himselfe and grace to mee. And when thou eatst & drinkst ye same perswade thy selfe withall, Christs Merits now belong to me, to set me free from thrall. Thy Baptisme once was ministred, the Supper often ought; The new birth needeth oft releefe, though once twas truly wrought. Wherefore as bread and wine do fresh our bodies oftentimes, So comforts Christ the conscience with guilt of sinne that pines. And as mans bodie gathers heart, by bread and wine to liue; So by this sacred food, the Lord, more spirituall strength will giue, To doe his will with thankfulnesse, more perfect for to be,
And better able sinne to leaue, this is the veritie. And finally as thou dost joyne, and that in open place, Amids Gods people that receiue before Christ Iesus face: See then that peace and loue in thee vnfained be to Men, And specially to faithfull folke, else thou art none of them. Stirre vp thy knowledge and thy faith, repentance and thy loue, Be zealous of this holy food, vnworthy lest thou proue. Examine well thy heart before, to God thy prayer powre, And look & try how thou dost thriue in grace from that same howre. *The fourth good Meane or Exercise that Christ bids thee to vse, Is speciall fellowship with Saints, the bad thou must refuse. The Saints will teach & comfort thee, and many waies thee aide, The bad will badly teach and will make thee of grace afraid. * The fifth and last is noting well
Gods creatures, workes and hand, His iudgements and his benefits God cause thee to vnderstand. His patient long-sufferance, and doings good alway, Repentance and Obedience do teach thee euery day. Fifthly, Of the right vse of the Meanes of Grace, and the Reward thereof. DRaw neere to God with vpright heart, and vse these meanes of grace, Then Christ will be thy King & Priest, and Prophet in ech case. Thy King to worke & rule thy heart according to his will, Most ready for to do thee good, and saue thee from all ill. Thy Priest, for why? he offred vp himselfe to death for thee, And will apply his precious merits thy heart to purifie. And of this thing thou maist be sure, because he rose againe From death to life, ascended vp,
and raigneth now in heauen. And thence it is, he worketh by his scepter and his rod, Making his Meanes effectuall to bring thee vnto God. And thence he is thy Prophet eke by Ministers that teach His holy word, which thou must heare and diligently search. Directing all thy wayes thereto, with good and honest hart; Christ wholly thine, thou wholly his by true indeuour art. Then God will surely saue thy soule for Christes sake his Sonne, And prosper thee in all thy wayes, what ere is said or done. Hee'l turne thy suffrings to the best, and Satan eke confound: His Promises he will fulfill, if that thy heart be sound. Beleeue then firmely in thy minde, that God will count thee pure, Full freely and full gratiously, Christs Gospell is most sure. Repent thee, turne and grow in grace, be thankfull and rejoyce
In suffering with thy Sauiour, obey his holy voice. And keepe thy selfe within thy lot, thy calling and degree, Take paines, be iust, meeke, mercifull, and God will harke to thee. And alwaies watch, for Christ shall come to iudge both quicke and dead, Thy Bodie shall be raisd from dust, and to thy soule joyned. Thy sinnes he will not mention, the iust he will declare, But iudge he will the Reprobate, their sinnes he will not spare; Their damned state thou shalt behold, Christs sentence to commend, Yet thou the joyes vnspeakable shalt haue without all end.
A Forme of Prayer after Conference. Parent. WEColoss. 1.9. pray thée, O God, to fill vs with the knowledge of thy will in all wise∣dome and spirituall vnderstanding,  to giue vs grace to walks worthy of thée (Lord) vnto all pleasing, being fruitfull in euery good worke, and in∣creasing in the knowledge of God, to strengthen vs with all might,  accor∣ding to thy glorious power, vnto all patience and long-suffering with ioy∣fulnesse, and to make vs truly thank∣full, vnto thée,  O Father, who hast made vs méete to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light,  and for that thou hast and wouldst de∣liuer vs from the power of darknes,  and translate vs into the kingdome of thy deare Sonne, in whom we haue redemption through his blood,
euen the forgiuenesse of our sinnes,  andRom. 9.5. who is God ouer all, blessed for euer. Child. Amen. Seruant. Amen. Scholler. Amen. HEB. 6.1. Let vs goe on to perfection. FINIS.
