22401 99850005 15187
LECTVRES Or Readings vpon the 6. verse of the 22. chapter of the Prouerbs, concerning the vertuous educa∣tion of Youth: A treatise very necessarie for all parents in this corrupt and declining age of the world. AT LONDON, Printed by Felix Kingston for Thomas Man. 1602.
TO THE RIGHT HONO∣RABLE SIR THOMAS EGERTON Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England, and one of her Maiesties priuie Councell, my very good Lord: health and prosperitie, with the increase of grace in this life, and e∣ternall happines in the life to come. NOn datur beneficium nisi propter officium, saith a learned Father. Wherefore hauing performed this small part of my dutie in the house of God, now at last I am bold to offer it to your good Lord∣ship, first as a signe of my dutie for your good Benefice in Suffolke lately bestowed vpon me, and secondly for patronage. For whereas since my going into Suffolke, by meanes of some of my friends I was discouered to my enemies in the flesh, but not in the Lord, to be the author of this booke, which at the first came forth like a fatherlesse orphan: vnworthily I was cast vpon the obloquie of all men (they seeing in me nothing worthie of this meanenes) and behinde my backe was bought and sold for a vaine glo∣rious man. Thus while I shunned the title of vaineglorie, and would not be like those Philo∣sophers, which (as Tully saith) put their names to the bookes which they make in contempt of glory; ere I wist, as Iob saith, the thing which
I feared fell vpon me. Notwithstanding ta∣king patience for my buckler, and a cleare con∣science for my defence, I satisfied my selfe, though I could not satisfie mine aduersaries. Now so it is come to passe, that all the first fa∣therlesse edition is spent, and the vertuous call vpon the Printer, and the Printer calles vpon me for a second presse, exhorting me to make some addition or correction if I were so dispo∣sed, that so it might come forth the second time with a happier successe. The which thing ha∣uing performed according to my weake mea∣sure, I am bold to present it to your Lordships patronage, to couer my simplenes vnder the shadow of your wing, and to craue protection both for the worke and my selfe: which if your Lordships fauour shall vouchsafe, you shall en∣courage a poore Minister beginning at low steps to ascend higher in religious duties: the young infants which as yet sucke vpon their mothers breasts shall thanke God for you, and my selfe shall be alwaies bound to pray for you. Your Honours in all dutie most bounden, ROBERT SHELFORD.
READINGS VPON THE SIXT VERSE OF THE 22. chapter of the Prouerbs, for the vertuous education of Youth. Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not depart from it. THis verse, of which wee are here to speake at this present, natu∣rally deuideth it selfe into two heads. The first is a precept or commaundement. The second is the reason of the precept. The precept is contained in ye former part of the verse, Teach a child in the trade of his way. The reason fol∣loweth in the latter part, and when he is old he shall not depart from it. Now first for the pre∣cept, because it is set downe indefinitly, the question may be moued who should teach, & to whom this charge and commandement is here directed? The Magistrate is not heere spoken vnto, because his office is not to teach
and instruct by word of mouth, but to rule and gouerne by lawe, neither euer haue wee heard of any ciuill law giuen to childrē: first, for by reason of sooner instruction, they are not yet fit and capable of it: and secondly, for that they are vnder the gouernment of those that are commaunded by it. Againe, these words doe not properly binde the Ministers of the Church: first, because this dutie is no where expresly commaunded vnto them in Gods word: secondly, because their duetie is to teach the parent how to bring his children vp: and thirdly, because the subiect of this teaching is more then belongeth to the pro∣fession of the Minister. It is to teach a childe in the trade of his way, which is not onely to instruct him vnto godlines, but also vnto all other humane duties. Wherefore this dutie then belongeth vnto parents, and they are here bound by these words of this text, and this we will proue both by reason and confe∣rence of holy Scripture. For who should teach and informe the childe,Reasons. but they which haue the gouernment and commaunding of him? But it is well knowne that parents only haue the gouernment and commaunding of their childrē, or such as they shal procure for their better education, and therefore this precept lieth vpon them, and they must look vnto it. Againe, this is apparant euen by the generall
law of nature, which hath taught the very brute beasts to bring vp their owne young. And further, this duetie is yet enforced from the oportunitie of the thing commanded. For euen as a plant will sooner take nourishment and thriue better in the soyle where it first grew & sprong vp, then in any other groūd, because it liketh his owne soyle best: so chil∣dren will sooner take instruction and good nurture from their parents, whom they best like, and from whom they had their first be∣ing, then from any other: and therefore you parents are in fault if your children are not well taught. For whatsoeuer good commeth from the parent to the childe, is naturall and kindly, no otherwise then the warme milke from the mothers dugge. You shall sooner be heard of your children, then either the sage counsell of the ancient, or the forcible & mo∣uing speech of the learned. Lastly, the rule of iustice doth require that euen as the first pa∣rent Adam, and so all other after him haue been a meane of falling to all their posteri∣tie in begetting children in their own image,Gen. 5.3. which according to the law of creatiō should haue been borne in Gods image: so now in lue of this, al parents should lend their hands to lift them vp againe, and neuer cease vntill they see in some measure the beautie of the first image, and the vertue of the second A∣dam.
This is a thing so euident and so ingraf∣fed in nature, as that the holy Ghost thought it not a matter of necessitie to expresse here the name of parent. But now let vs goe for∣ward to confirme the same by testimonies of holy Scripture. In the fourth chapter of Deu∣teronomie, the Lord commandeth parents to teach their children the wonders of his law; and that they might not trifle this ouer and make no great reckoning of it, and thinke it but a childes matter, the Lord there laieth a great weight vpon this charge, in exhorting them to doe this with all diligence and care∣fulnes: Take heede vnto thy selfe,Deut. 4.9. and keepe thy , that thou doest not forget those things which thine eyes haue seene, and that they doe not depart from thy heart all the daies of thy life: that thou maist make them knowne vnto thy sons and thy sonnes sonnes. Take heede, saith he, as if he should haue said, it is not a little matter that I commaund thee, but great and weigh∣tie, and therefore I would haue thee to take speciall care of it: and that thou mightest doe this diligently in deede, I would not haue these things which I haue shewed thee to de∣part from thy heart all the daies of thy life, that is to say, any one day of thy life, that so thou mightest teach them to thy sonnes and thy sonnes sonnes continually. The Lord would not haue his holy word and his won∣ders
which he shewed vnto his people at the giuing of his law, to be one day absent from the heart of the parent, that so no one day might passe without instructing of their chil∣dren. If this one precept which the Lord here so carefully commandeth, were drawne ouer the hearts of parents now a daies, how many might it shame and condemne of too great negligence, which scarse once in halfe a yeere giue any one word of instruction vnto their children? Againe, in the II. chapter of Deut. the Lord stil calleth vpon parents in this du∣tie. Therefore lay vp these words in your hearts,Deut. 11.18.19. and in your mindes, and teach them to your chil∣dren, talking of them when thou art at home in thine house, and when thou goest abroad, and whē thou liest downe, and when thou risest vp. Here the Lord commendeth to parents his deere and pretious word to bee treasured vp for their childrē: as if the Lord should haue said, you parents vse to lay vp for your children the most pretious iewels and the best things you can get, here are iewels passing al earthly treasure, my wordes the instruction of your liues, and the light of your soules, lay vp these in your hearts, and keepe them for your chil∣dren: and because your children are deere vnto you, be alwaies imparting of them vnto them, teach them vnto thy children, talking of them when thou art at home in thy house, and
when thou goest abroade, and when thou liest downe, and when thou risest vp. As if the Lord should haue said, take all occasions, and vse all seasons and opportunities to instruct thy children. The Lord would haue vs to begin the day with teaching our children, and hee would haue vs to end the day with the same. O wonderfull care of our God, oh louing fa∣ther of heauen, that so dearly louest our chil∣dren! But how do we answere this carefulnes of our heauenly father? when wee rise in the morning is our first care for our childrē? No, the Hogge, and the Horse, and the Cow shall be first serued: and as for our children, whose soules stand more in neede of good nurture and education, then the bodies of beasts doe of corruptible food, they are forgotten al the day long. A pitifull thing it is that the vnrea∣sonable creature, whose spirit perisheth with the bodie, should haue his iust tending and looking to, and that the soule which is made after Gods image, should be suffered to run into al manner of danger and vndoing with∣out regard. Oh that wee should be so earthly minded, as to regard these transitorie things aboue that which is to last for euer! Consider with thy selfe (beloued) and God giue thee feeling: if thy cattell or beast want his ten∣ding and looking to, happily it shall pine a∣way for want of food, happily it shall stray so
farre that thou shalt neuer see it againe, or happily it shal fall into some pit, where it shal either drowne it selfe, or breake his necke: what hast thou lost now? thou hast lost but a carcase: but if thou through thy negligence or ill gouernment, sufferest thy child to stray away from the Lord thy God, and he fall in∣to the pit of hell, thou hast lost a soule more worth then all the world, and the Lord shall require his bloud at thy hands, because hee hath committed him to thy safe keeping, and thou, in that thou hast not kept him, hast cast him away. Oh danger to be flyed and looked vnto before all dangers! And yet such is the blind miserablenes of many parēts, that they had rather see their sonnes swearers, drun∣kards, whoremasters, or any other prophane person, then to beholde one of their beasts hides to hang on the beame: whereby it com∣meth to passe, that the very brute beasts are eftsoones better taught then the sonnes of men, as the Prophet Esay lamentably com∣plaineth of the children of Israel:Esai. 1.3. The oxe knoweth his owner, and the asse his masters crib: but Israel hath not knowne, my people hath not vnderstood. Againe, S. Paul in the 6. of the E∣phesians, giueth this same charge vnto pa∣rents: And ye fathers prouoke not your children to wrath,Ephes. 6.4. but bring them vp in instruction and information of the Lord. And the Prophet in
the 78. Psalme saith,Psal. 78.5. He established a testimo∣nie in Iacob, and ordained a law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers that they should teach their children, that the posteritie might know it, and the children which should be borne should stand vp and declare it to their children. Many other places of Scripture might bee brought, but these shall be sufficient to shew vnto euery parent to whom the Lord heere speaketh, Teach a child, and also to shew him how great charge and weight the Lord laieth vpon this commandement. But now because this duty of parents is cōmunicated to many▪ as to Rectors of Schooles, to masters of fami∣lies, to dames, to patrons and guardians, and such like: let all they here vnderstand who∣soeuer they be, that haue the gouernment of children or any youth committed to their charge, that they are here bound by the voice of the Almightie, and that they must doe the duetie of parents vnto them, as if they were their naturall children. Teach a childe in the trade of his way: that is, thou parēt teach, thou master teach, thou dame teach, thou mistris teach, thou tutor teach, and in a word, al you that haue the duty of parents committed vn∣to you. Now the vices which are committed a∣bout this commaundement and ought to be flied, are these.
1. First, the ignorance of the parent: as if the parent bee so rude that he is not able to teach his child, he breaketh this commande∣ment of almightie God, and is heere sent to schoole himselfe, teach a child, that is, get thee so much nurture & knowledge, as that thou maist be able to instruct others vnder thee. 2. The second vice is the prophanenes of many parents, who, so they may prouide liuelihood and necessaries for their children, they care for no more. Of this fault of pa∣rents writeth Chrysostome: Mothers be louing to the bodies of their children, but the soule they despise: they desire them to welfare in this world, but they take none heede what they shall suffer in the other: the lust of their bodies they would buy deere, but the health of their soule they make no reckoning of. If they see them poore or sicke, they sorrow and sigh: but though they see them sinne they sorrow not. And in this they shew that they brought foorth the bodies of their children, but not their soules. 3. The third vice is committed of such poore parents, which make no great choise with what masters & dames they place their children, so they haue meate and drinke e∣nough and wages thereto competent, and are neither backe beaten nor belly beaten, as they say. Alas, such poore children while they serue for their bellies, they may lose their
soules, because they want godly masters and dames to giue them holesome instruction, to hold them in by good example, and to go∣uerne them continually in the feare of the Lord. Wherefore here let all parents learne that it is their duetie to make choise of such masters and dames for their children as are godly and religious, wise hearted, such as are both able & well disposed to traine vp youth in all good nurture & Gods seruice: and not onely this (for the greatest care of al lieth vp∣on the parent) but also they must so often as conueniently they may repaire vnto them, and see how they profit, and hold them vp by their good counsell, & be carefull to entreate those which haue the gouernmēt of them, to be good vnto them in this chiefe point aboue the rest.Prou. 18.21 For as Salomon saith: Life and death is in the power of the tongue: So wee may well say, life and death is in the education of our children. If they be well brought vp, it shalbe life vnto them: but if it be otherwise, they are trained vp to euerlasting death. 4. The fourth vice is the fault of many ma∣sters & dames, who make no further recko∣ning of their seruants then they doe of their brute beasts. For so long as their worke and busines bee well done by them they care for no more, and they will teach them no further then may serue for their owne turne and be∣nefit,
that is, to be a profitable seruant vnto them. Such masters make their seruants drud∣ges to the world and the diuell, and the life of such youth dieth while it shooteth vp. All these sinne and trespasse against this com∣mandement of the heauenly father, because they are contrarie to good nurture and god∣ly instruction. Now hauing shewed what parents and all other gouernours of youth are to shunne in the education of children and seruants, wee must come to the second poynt, which is to shew wherein this carefull and diligent in∣struction is to bee executed; and this is con∣tained in these words, in the trade of his way. I will not trouble you with the idiome of the originall, the words are faithfully translated and significant enough. Vnder these words are contained three diuers instructions, in all which the Lord here commaundeth parents to bring vp their children. The first is that which we commonly call an occupation,The first part of the trade of the way. or profession of life: and this is either mechanicall, which wee call handi∣craft; or liberall, which is the learning of Schooles: and the end of this is either to get his liuing honestly and in Gods ordinance, or else if he wanteth no maintenance, to ap∣plie his profession and trade of life to the be∣nefit of the Common-wealth. No childe of
what birth and stocke soeuer he be of, ought to want this instruction and bringing vp. If thou saiest, my childe hath no neede of any trade, yet the Common-wealth and Gods Church hath need of him, and the very Hea∣then Philosophers will teach thee that no mā is borne for himselfe, but his friends will re∣quire one part, his kindred another, and his coūtrie the third. And if handicrafts like thee not, thou hast the Liberall Sciences, of which no man euer was yet ashamed, but many haue made them their crowne of glorie. Mi∣thridates the great King of Pontus was trained vp in Phisicke, and hath left vnto all posteri∣ties that worthie confection which is called of his own name Mithridate, a treasure more worth then Princes Crownes. Iustinian the Romane Emperour was that great Lawyer, which by his owne industrie gaue perfection to the law of Nations. Quintus Cincinnatus was called from the plow, to beare that high office of the Dictatorship in Rome. Saul was annointed King while he was seeking his fa∣thers Asses: and Dauid was taken from the sheepfold to feed with his wisedome, and go∣uerne with his prudence that honourable people of the children of Israel. And againe, we reade that those two famous Prophets E∣lisha and Amos, the one was called from the plow, and the other from keeping of beasts.
Which examples do plainly teach vs, that the great and reuerend God despiseth no honest trade of life bee it neuer so meane, but crow∣neth it with his blessing, to drawe all good minds to his holy ordinance. But now adaies such is the pride of our hearts, (a thing to bee lamēted through all our land) that our gentle mens children may not be brought vp in any trade: oh it is too base & beggerly for thē; they must liue of their lands, they must maintaine their gentrie, a small learning will serue their turne: but while this ordinance of God is neg∣lected, what miserie from hence ensueth? who are the wasters of patrimonies? who are the robbers and reuers in the Common-wealth? who are the deflowrers of maidens? who are the defilers of matrons? who are ye corrupters of youth? and to speake in one word, who are the seedes men of all mischiefe in our countrie, but these children of gentlemen, who haue not beene taught and trained vp in the trade of their way while they were young? For euen as a weede if it grow in a ranke soyle will waxe out of measure noy∣some: so these children comming of hono∣rable parents, brought vp in ease, and pampe∣red with the delights of gentrie, they waxe immeasurably vitious, and who may keepe them vnder? neither lawes, nor Magistrates, nor any other good meane. Wherefore here
the Lord that he might hold all youth vnder his obedience, which otherwise would runne out into all maner of extremities, he streight∣ly commaundeth all parents whosoeuer  bring vp their children in some honest  and profession of life, that so thereby they might bee kept from committing much euil, and that when they be come to yeares of go∣uernment, God might bee glorified by them, and the Common-wealth in which they liue, receiue the common mutuall duetie. Now then you plainly see here what God requi∣reth; none must liue idly, but all must bee taught to benefit Gods Church and the com∣mon-wealth, and such a one is not worthy to liue in any wel ordered and good Common-wealth, which cannot one way or other dis∣charge the common duetie thereof. The second part of the trade of the way.The second thing which the Lord requi∣reth at the hands of parents towards their children vnder the name of the trade of their way, is, that they should teach thē good man∣ners and ciuill behauiour, to rise vp to their betters, to vncouer the head, to make obei∣sance, to be curteous towards their equals, to be gentle and lowly to their inferiours, and louing and kind to all. This is another part of the trade of childrens way, and this is no lesse needfull for youth then their meate and their drinke. And if this trade and way of nurture
bee not taught our children while they bee young, when they be old they shall be found so head-strong, that they will not bee gouer∣ned, but this consequent must needes follow, that all order shall bee taken away, and then confusion must needes insue. For if nurture be neglected, then our elders and gouernours shall not be reuerenced; if they be not reue∣renced, they will not be regarded; if they be not regarded, they will not bee obeyed; and if they be not obeyed, then steps in rebellion, and euery one will doe what he lusteth. Now is fulfilled that heauie curse which the Pro∣phet Esay threatned against the children of Israel:Esay. 3.5. The people shall be oppressed one of ano∣ther, and euery one by his neighbour: the children shall presume against the ancient, and the vile against the honorable: now the bandes of the Common-wealth are broken, and now is such a nation subiect to be rooted out, to bee ouerrun of euery enemie, or to bee destroyed of it selfe. For whence comes warres? whence comes seditions, enuies, braules, quarrels, fightings? whence comes strife and lawings? whence comes all manner of loosenes of life? and whence comes it that one neighbour can not liue quietly by another, but he pineth a∣way, and is the worse euery time he seeth his brother? All this mischiefe springeth from the neglect of this duetie, for that the hearts of
such people were not broken and brideled while they were yong by good nurture. Now one neighbour like a cur dogge leapeth in the face of another: whereas if he had beene trained vp in ciuilitie and good manners, though he neither feared God nor loued mā, yet euen very shame would hold him from committing this follie. Oh beloued, good nurture and manners, they are the cords and bands of the Common-wealth, they are the nurserie of sweete loue and concord, & they are the preparation to religion it selfe. For nurture a child wel, breake his affections, and teach him awfulnes at home, and when hee commeth to Church and heareth the prea∣cher denouncing the heauie threatnings of God against sinne, he will by and by beginne to tremble, he wil lay it to his heart, and feare least he fall afterwards into the same danger: whereas the childe that is not thus prepared and manured before, when he commeth he careth not whether hee heareth or no, but is readie to toy and play with euery bable that runneth in his eye: and though at sometimes whether he will or no the word beateth vpon his eares, and he must needes heare, yet it go∣eth in at one doore and out at another, he ca∣reth not for it, but goeth away as lewd and reachles as he came: and why? because hee hath not bin trained vp in awfulnes, & hath
not been so much as instructed and gouerned in ciuill dueties. Againe, hereof springeth an other mischiefe, that euen those which haue imbraced christianitie, for want of this good education doe not liue so louingly together as becommeth: For when one neglecteth du∣tie and reuerence towards another, by and by there arise dislikings, dislikings breede con∣tempt, and contempt stirs vp bitter hatred and dissensions. So that what is the cause, why euen the best professors many times fall out amongst themselues? they embrace a re∣ligion which is not diuided but one, they all thinke one thing, and speake one thing, but this clownish rudenes and want of ciuilitie will not suffer them long to agree together. So that take away good nurture and ciuilitie, and there will be no quiet and orderly liuing either in the Church of God or Common∣wealth. And therefore the Apostle diligently calleth vpon this dutie:Rom. 12.10. In giuing honour goe one before another. As if he should haue sayd, studie and striue who may bee most dutifull. For hee which is most dutifull excelleth o∣thers, and is most honourable. Againe, S. Peter sayth worthily,1. Pet. 2.17. honour all men: where the A∣postle by the wisedome of the holy spirit ta∣keth away a double obiection. This first is made in the person of the honorable: What doe I owe duetie to those that are so farre my
inferiours? they are to honour mee, and I am not to honour them. The holy Ghost here steppeth in and sayth, honour all men. There are degrees in honour; and he is most vnwor∣thie which receiueth much, and cannot bee content to returne some part backe againe; neither is there any kinde of men so base which retaine the least part of Gods image, (for in the image of God made hee man) but they are worthie of some honor for the image sake.Gen. 1.27. The second obiection is made in the person of the common people labouring to∣gether in poore estate and base trades. What must we honour one another? it is enough for vs to reuerence our betters, small duetie will serue among vs. The holy Ghost here againe replieth, honour all men. As if he should haue sayd in more words, let there be no degree or societie of men so barbarous as to contemne and auoyd all reuerence; honor all men, ho∣nour thy poore equals, and thy poore inferi∣ours. But now adaies when neighbours meet there is no curteous salutatiō, there is no pre∣uenting of duetie, but some one bolde word or other cast out, and as they meet with rude∣nes, so they depart with clownishnes. O if men would vse ciuilitie and curtesie one to∣wards another, & regard it, it would so linke their mindes together in friendship and good wil, that no smal offence or dammage should
breake them asunder. But here let vs find out the cause why this disorderly rudenes so fast springeth vp amongst vs. Truely the onely cause is the negligence of parents in instruc∣ting their children. And againe, what is the cause of this negligence of parents? but that either they themselues were brought vppe so rudely too, & so they teach their children no more, because they knowe no better them∣selues: or els this commeth of a muckish minde, because the hearts of parents are so set vpon this world, that so their busines be done by their children and seruants, they care not what language they giue them, nor how vn∣mannerly they stand before them: they doe not teach them to honor thēselues at home, and therefore there is no dutie and reuerence toward others abroad. Wherefore you pa∣rents knowe your estate, let not the drosse of this world so blind your eyes that you should forget your honour, know that the Lord hath made you parents, and giuen you to look for duetie and reuerence from your children and seruants: and though you doe not regard this dutie, & your minds be so base that you look not after any reuerence, yet for your childrēs sake require it, that so they may bee brought vp in the knowledg of their duetie, & receiue the blessing which God hath promised vnto them for it:Exod. 20.12. Honour thy father and thy mother
that thy daies may bee prolonged in the lande which the Lord thy God hath giuen thee. This is the first commaundement with promise, saith the Apostle,Ephes. 6.2. Ephes. 6. that he might espe∣cially allure vs to the obseruing of it. But here we must vnderstand, that as this comman∣dement is a commaundement with promise, so the promise is with a condition, which is of honouring our parents: so that if children do not honour their parents, they haue no pro∣mise of life, but stand subiect euery houre and moment to haue Gods wrath powred downe vpon them. O then you that are parents, haue pitie vpon your dear childrē, teach them their dutie, teach them good nurture, teach them reuerence both towards your selues and o∣thers: for if you do not, you do as much as in you lieth, cut off your childrens liues. For God (beloued) hath care of his Church, and if hee should suffer rude children to increase, they would become rude parents, & rude parents would againe bring vp rude children, and thus confusion would spread it selfe ouer all the world, and therefore the Lord to meete with this mischiefe, hath promised his bles∣sing onely to the dutifull and obedient, and all other stand out of his protection, subiect to the violence of euery danger. The third part of the trade of the way.The 3. and last part of the trade of the way, in which the Lord here commandeth parents
to bring vp their children, is godlines; name∣ly, that they should teach them to know God & their dutie towards him. And this instruc∣tion is that which parents ought aboue all things to regard. The former instruction ser∣ueth to teach them how they might liue ci∣uilly and decently with men: but this instruc∣tion prepareth them to liue and walke with God. Wherefore this trade is the head of all trades, and happie is that soule which can learne it.Prouer. 1.7. Salomon saith, The feare of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge. Although a man hath neuer so much worldly wisedome, and policie, and ciuilitie; yet if hee want this the feare of God and true godlines, he is the grea∣test foole in all the world: for the more wise that he is without religion, the more foole he is, because he doth not apply his wit vnto that which is the head & originall of al wisedome, and without which al other wisedome is foo∣lishnes and confusion. Againe, Salomon saith worthily,Prouer. 14.27. Pro. 14. The feare of the Lord is as a well spring of life to auoyd the snares of death. And againe, in the 3. chapter speaking of this diuine & heauenly instruction,Prouer. 3.13 he saith, Bles∣sed is the man that findeth wisedome: that is, this godly wisedome, whereby a man lear∣neth to knowe God and his duetie towards him. For, saith he, The marchandise thereof is better then the marchandise of siluer, and the
gaine thereof is better then golde: it is more pretious then pearles, and all things that thou canste desire are not to bee compared vnto her. Length of daies is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and glorie. Her waies are waies of pleasure, and all her paths prosperitie. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold on her, and blessed is he that retaineth her. O what hono∣rable profits and commodities come by this instruction? this is that which I said vnto you before, that this trade is the head of al trades. O you parents that are wise-hearted come you hither: I know that euery parent would gladly haue his childe brought vp in the best trade, and that which shall one day bee most profitable for him: O here is a trade that hath the profits of all other trades vnder it.1. Tim. 4.8. Godli∣nes (saith saint Paul) is profitable vnto all things, and hath the promise of the life present and of the life to come. O you parents, you are more then mad if you finde not out this trade for your children. First it is a rich trade. Salomon saith, that the marchandise of it is better then the marchandise of siluer, and the gaine ther∣of is better then gold, it is more pretious then pearles, and all things that thou canst desire are not to be compared vnto it. Secondly, it is an easie and pleasant trade. Her waies are waies of pleasure (saith Salomon) and all her paths prosperitie. Thirdly, it is an honorable
trade; because Salomon saith, that glorie is in her left hand. If glorie be in her left hand, then what is in her right hand but the life eternal? Fourthly, this trade is not like vnto other trades, which if they bee hardly followed, in time weare away mans strength: but this in∣creaseth life and vigour to al those that occu∣pie it; it is a tree of life to al those that lay hold on it. Fiftly and lastly, this trade is the most certaine trade in al the world; it neuer faileth, and it neuer changeth, because S. Paul saith, it hath the promise of this life and of the life to come. All other trades be they neuer so profi∣table, yet they are subiect to the course of this world: now good, now bad: now profitable now againe as beggerly: besides, how many ventures and casualties they are subiect vnto, such as haue experience in them can better tell then I can: but this trade I know wel can neuer faile, because God hath sealed vp his promise to it. S Paul saith, it hath the promise of blessing both of the life present, and of that which is to come. O you wise children heare my words: though your parents will not bind you to this trade, yet come you & offer your selues of your owne accorde, embrace it, and catch hold on it with both your hands: for if euer you will come to happines this is the way. Now then I hope you that are parents see
the scope of this text, and what the Lord here requireth at your hands. Teach a child in the trade of his way: that is, first teach him the trade of occupation, that thereby he may get a competent maintenance of things necessa∣rie for this life, that so he may liue well among his neighbours another day without iniuring any man, or vsing any vnlawfull meanes: or if he hath no need of this, that thē by the trade of his education, hee may bend his endeuour to profit the Common-wealth, which will al∣waies haue neede of men well trained vp in some good Art or other. Secondly, Teach a child in the trade of his way: that is, teach him nurture and good manners, teach him his du∣tie towards all men, that so hee may another day liue an honest, comely, and well ordered life amongst his neighbours without conten∣tions, braules, and quarrels, which are the dis∣eases both of Church and Common-wealth. And thirdly and chiefly, Teach a childe in the trade of his way: which is as much to say, as teach him godlines and the feare of the Lord, that hee may liue and dye Gods seruant, that he may know his saluation in Christ Iesus, & continue in his loue and fauour vnto the end. All these three poynts pertaine vnto the trade of euery mans way, and euery childe must be trayned vp in all these three: otherwise Gods ordinance is peruerted, and his commaunde∣ment
broken, and then we can looke for no blessing vpon our children, but shame and confusion and vtter destruction. Hauing shewed how euery parent is to bring vp his childrē in the trade of their way, which signifieth first an occupation, second∣ly good manners, and thirdly godlines: now it falleth so out by mans lamentable corrup∣tion, that many parents themselues know not what these things are, nor how to teach their children the same: and therefore here I think it will bee the best part of my duetie to lay downe such rules, and draw such a methode out of Gods word, as may best helpe the pa∣rent to teach, and the child to learne. For the first part, that is, for the trade of occupation, I will so entreate as the scope of a Diuine and the nature of the thing will permit, exhorting industrie, painfulnes and diligence, chasing a∣way idlenes, and furnishing the parent with conuenient and meete helpes for this part of education. And to this end for the more sen∣sible teaching, I will adioyne this text to the former, Lamentations of Iere. 3.26. It is good for a man that he beare the yoke in his youth. HEre by the yoke is vnderstood not only the crosse and afflictions, as the speciall application of the text doth pretend, but ge∣nerally
all manner of paines and labours, whereby the minde of man may bee brought to patience, and quietly to beare the Lords burthen of what kinde soeuer it be, and to be held in from running out into any manner of extremitie. Wherfore this yoke in one parti∣cular which wee here purpose to follow, is the yoke of gouernment and painfull education. Whosoeuer is not vsed to this yoke while he is young, shall neuer bee fit for any good ser∣uice either in the Church or common-wealth when he is old. For as the brute oxe and asse would neuer endure their hard labor, except they were held in by their yoke, but would stray euery way: so vnbrideled mā if he be not in his youth held in by the yoke of painfull labour, he will neuer abide it when he is old, but will run out into euery path of destruc∣tion. For what is the cause why our land is so oppressed with rogues and theeues and beg∣gers, which are worse then beasts, because they cut themselues from the meane of salua∣tion, which is the word and Sacrament? And what is the cause why the greatest part of the world vseth vnlawful and damnable meanes to liue by, as to lie, to sweare, to forsweare, to forge, to dissemble, to cousen, to counterfeit, to bribe, and a hundred such like, but because they cannot endure to beare the yoke: and why can they not endure it? but because
they were not streightly held with it while they were young. Wherefore O you good parents, you that desire to haue your childrē good old men like to your selues, and to liue in the Lordes holy ordinance, which is the path-way to heauen, hold their neckes vnder with the yoke of painfull labour while they be tender? lay it vpon them euen from their cradle, & then they will not forsake it to their graue.Iustine lib. 12. How came Alexander ye great by such a puissant armie, whereby he conquered the world, but by hauing children borne and brought vp in his campe, whereby they be∣came so well acquainted and exercised with weapons from their swadling cloutes, that they looked for no other wealth or countrie but to fight: euen so if thou wouldest haue thy children either to doe great matters, or to liue honestly by their owne vertuous ende∣uours, and not to gape vniustly after other mens goods, but to be content with the bles∣sing of God vpon their owne labours, thou must acquaint them with the yoke euen from their cradle. Some men set their chil∣dren to learning, some place them in offices, some binde them prentices: but many of these proue not, because they were not first well held in by their parents with the yoke of painefull education: so that breake the yoke, and deliuer all youth to vndoing. There is
no function and no exercise either of bodie or minde that hath not neede of this yoke. Let vs examine the matter familiarly, and not hold scorne of the plaine steppes of the truth. What is the cause why some prentice can en∣dure with hard fare, now and then beare a deserued blow, and take a thousand repro∣ches and chidings vpon his shoulders with∣out murmuring, and carrie all the hardnes of seruice, vntill he hath gotten his freedome & science the crowne of his labours: and some other againe rather thē he would endure this, he will runne as farre as his legges can car∣rie him, or saile ouer sea to take sanctuarie a∣gainst his happines? the one hath been vsed to the yoke, the other hath not. Againe, why doth the poore mans childe arise in learning? why is he called to beare office in the Church of God and Common-wealth, and the chil∣dren of Noblemen and great gentlemen re∣fused? the one by reason of his former paines in vertuous studies can beare this honorable burthen; the other wanting this meane, hath neither will nor power to sustaine it. Moreo∣uer, what is the reason why euen in the seruice of God one Christian goeth before another? why can one better beare the crosse then an other? why doe some mens zeale so farre ex∣ceede others? and why doe some mens la∣bours shine in Gods Church before others?
There can no other cause be rendred but the reason of the yoke. This breedeth such a hard braune in the soule, that no paines can pearce it. Wherefore bee yee comforted in your honest trauailes you good husbands of the countrie, you are the staple of the land, you raise vppe the pillars thereof, by your honest labours the king is maintained, you furnish the Church of GOD with painfull Ministers, you garnish the Common-wealth with wise and graue Counsellors, you pro∣uide all necessaries for the good of the coun∣trie by your thriftines and painful education of your children. For without labour how should Schooles be maintained? how should lawes bee executed? and how should all ho∣nest functions stand? and where should that honourable troupe of vertues shewe them∣selues? where should liberalitie bee praised? where should sobrietie and grauitie bee re∣uerenced? and where should that kinglie magnificence be extolled? doe wee not see that painfull labour is the fayre handmayde to all these, and ministreth matter for them to worke vpon? so that take away painfull labours, and you loosen the cordes of the Common-wealth, you exile all vertues; and then wee must liue like wilde beastes and feede vpon hearbes, deuouring and being deuoured one of another.
Now the contrarie to this yoke of good e∣ducation is idlenes. And as in all things na∣turall there is one thing or other which is the spoyle of it, as the canker to the rose, the worme to the apple, and the caterpillar to the leafe: so the common spoyle to all youth is the contrarie to this yoke which is idlenes. Therefore S. Bernard worthily calleth idle∣nes the mother of all euils, and stepdame of all vertues.Ezech. 16.49 The Prophet Ezechiel in his six∣teenth chapter, teacheth that idlenes was one of the principall sinnes of Sodome, which pulled downe fire and brimstone from hea∣uen vpon their heads: this idlenes is the di∣uels confederate, for euen as the trayterous seruant while his maister is a sleepe, and all things at rest, setteth open the dore for the theefe to enter in vpon him and spoyle him at his pleasure: so idlenes while wee are not a∣ware, lying soft vpon the pillowes of security, openeth the dore for ye diuell to enter into vs with full swing to the destruction both of bo∣dy & soule.Matth. 13.25. Saint Matthew saith chapter 13 that while men slept, the enemie came and sowed tares among the wheate: so the fittest time that the diuell can finde to worke vpon vs, is when we are idle, for that is the sleep of the soule. In the 11. chapter of the 2. Sam. Wee reade that while Dauid tarried idly at home in the beginning of the yeare when
Kings vsed to goe forth to battell, hee was soone ouertaken with those two foule sinnes of adulterie and manslaughter. Oh that men saw to how many vices and euils they shut the dore when they cease to be idle, and giue themselues to honest labours. So long as Sampson warred with the Philistines,Iudges. 19. hee could neuer be taken or ouercome, but after that he gaue himselfe to idlenes and pleasure, hee not onely committed fornication with the strumpet Dalilah, but also was takē of his enemies, and had his eyes miserably put out. If these two which were such excellent men, indued of God with singular giftes, the one of prophecie, and the other of strength, and such as no labour or trouble could ouer∣come, were notwithstanding ouerthrowne and fallen into grieuous sinnes, by yeelding for a short time to ease; then what crimes, what mischiefes, and inconueniences are not to bee feared of them, who all their life long giue themselues to idlenes and loytering? But such hath alwaies been the peruerse incredu∣litie of mans heart (as Haymo repeateth out of Origen) that they will not beleeue that o∣ther men haue perished vntil they themselues perish also. If we be vtterly voyde of vnder∣standing, let vs goe to the brute creatures which want those helpes of reason and go∣uernemēt that man hath,Prou. 6.6. and learne of them.
Goe to the Pismire O sluggard (saith Salomon) beholde her waies and bee wise: for shee ha∣uing no guide nor ruler, prepareth her meate in the summer, and gathereth her foode in the haruest. Let vs set before our eyes the loo∣king glasse of all creatures: the birdes flye, the fishes swim, the wormes creepe, the hea∣uens turne, the elements moue, yea the earth it selfe, which is the most brute and senseles creature of all other neuer ceaseth her wor∣king, bringing forth her burden in summer, and labouring inwardly all the winter, con∣cocting and digesting her nourishment for the next spring. What should I speake of the strange operation of stones and mettals, and herbes, whereof one is called the Load stone and the Magnet stone of his mighty force and working? God, who is the first mouer of all things, seeing all excellencie to lye in mo∣uing, & being of himselfe infinite good, can∣not but create all things good; and as the na∣ture of the efficient cause is to make his effect like vnto himselfe: so God being excellent in motion and working hath made all his crea∣tures indued with this bonitie of nature. Now seeing God hath made all his creatures in this perfection, and seeing himselfe is the continuall mouer of al things, as the Apostle saith, Actes 17.28. In him we liue and moue, and haue our being; then there can nothing
bee more contrarie to Gods working and mans perfection, then the priuation thereof, which is idlenes. God (beloued) sustaineth and vpholdeth the whole frame of the world by his dayly and continuall working, and if he should draw his hand backe but one mi∣nute, all creatures would presently fall to nothing from whence they first came. Why doe wee not then see that idlenes is the ruine and destruction of all things? and how can we perswade our selues that we are the sons of God, when by our idle life, wee shew our selues most contrarie vnto him, who is al∣waies in working? The perfection and excel∣lencie of euery creature is his working; and therefore the wise Grecians call the soule of man, which the prophet Dauid calleth his glorie, , that is, a continuall working: yea so excellent a thing is it, and so fit to set foorth Gods glorie, that hee hath ordained most forcible meanes to stirre vp and thrust forward man vnto it, as all manner of wants and necessities. For what is the great glorie of God but his omnipotencie and power? and how is his power seene but by working? and how should wee see Gods working, and how should we come to the vnderstanding of his omnipotencie, except wee sawe it in his creatures?Rom. 1.20. for the Apostle sayth, that the inuisible things of God, as his eternall power
and God-head, are seene by the creation of he worlde, being considered in his workes: and therefore when I see so many millions of thousands in the worlde moouing vpon the face of the earth, and all occupied in such va∣rietie of trades, one this way, another that way; when I consider the straunge monu∣ments of warre, the mightie works of peace, the curious inuentions of Arts, and the mani∣folde chaunges of gouernment, disposition and actions, from age to age; I must needes acknowledge that there is an high and su∣preme power which is called omnipotencie, which worketh all in all these things, and that that mā which is the greatest imitator of God in honest and vertuous working, commeth neerest vnto the diuine nature, most setteth forth Gods glorie, and shall haue the greatest reward both in this life & in the life to come: but the idle and slugglish soule who hath re∣ceiued power of God, and vseth it not in some honest labour, he obscureth Gods glorie, hee oppresseth as in him lieth his omnipotencie and power, and in that wherein I compare him he is worse then the diuell, for hee neuer ceaseth compassing the world,Iob. 2.2. 1. Pet. 5.8. Iob. 2.1. Pet. 5. Wherefore thou good parent, if thy desire be to haue thy sonne to bee Gods sonne, and to follow his working, and to haue him brought vp in al good nurture and instruction; and if
it bee the death of thy heart to see thy deare child drowned before thine eies in that dead∣ly lake of all filthie vices, in the hardnes of his heart, in stubbornes, in rebellion, in Athe∣isme, in whoredome, and other impietie; then now while thou hast time lay the yoke vpon his necke, lay it vpon him while hee is young and tender, for now he will suffer thee to put it on, and afterwards he will not. O you ten∣der mothers,Matth. 2.18 Iere. 31.15. you that knowe the deare price of your children, remember Rahels weeping for her children, and would not be comforted because they were not: and what comfort should you find not when you haue lost chil∣dren without being, but when you haue by your great paines borne them, and by your long and chargeable education brought thē vp for hell fire? Remember godly Rebekas care for her sonne Iacob,Gen. 27.46. Gen. 27. I am wearie of my life for the daughters of Heth, if Iacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, what a∣uaileth it me to liue? so if your sonnes while they dwell idly at home with you, should be∣take themselues to this folly or that, how could your liues be pleasant vnto you? Wher∣fore send your sonnes forth to Laban as Re∣beka did, and let him lay the yoke vpon their shoulders. But here peraduenture some man wil say, haue not I enough to leaue my child? is he not mine heire and the principall of my
strength? why should I then without cause set him to drudging and droyling? But O thou vnwise man labouring of the streightnes of vnderstanding, hast thou prouided for thy sonne liuelihood? and why doest thou not prouide also that he may keepe it? was it not first gotten by labour and carefull diligence, and can it bee kept without the same meane by which it was gotten? And why doest thou not see how that the Lord by this yoke would prepare thy sonne for another yoke?Matth. 11.29. Take my yoke on you, and learne of me that I am meeke and lowly of heart, Matth. II. And was not Christ Iesus,Mark. 6.3. Luke. 2.51. the heire of heauen and earth, a carpenter, and laboured faithfully vnder Io∣seph, being subiect vnto him vntill the time came that he should preach the Gospell? And was not Iacob, the great father of the twelue Patriarkes, Isaaces sonne & heire? & was not Isaac Abrahams heire? and was not Abra∣ham that great man in those daies and won∣derfully rich,Gen. 24.35. as we may reade Gen. 24? how could Isaac then suffer his sonne Iacob who was borne to so great patrimonie, to serue twentie yeares together in such hard seruice, as Iacob himselfe confesseth,Gen. 31.38. Gen. 31? I was in the day consumed with heate, and with frost in the night, and my sleepe departed from mine eyes. It may seeme that parents were not then so sicke of their children as they are now a
daies. But this cockering and cokish bring∣ing vp of children in our time marreth all: for such is the foolish loue that many poore pa∣rents haue towards their children, that rather then they will put their tenderlings to any la∣borious busines, they will do al thēselues; yea & rather ouercharge themselues, thē see them to take a little paines with them. Oh it will hinder their growth, say they: nay it wil make their growth firme and stable, and one such childe which is honestly brought vp in mo∣derate paines and labours euen from his cra∣dle, shall hold out longer, and be able to doe more good seruice when he is growne to be a man, then two other long lubbers that haue not bin held vnder the yoke while they were young. Now the necessarie adiuncts of the yoke,The adiuncts of the yoke. which are fit helpes vnto parents for the ver∣tuous bringing vp of their children in the trade of their way, are these. 1. First, not to suffer children and youth to haue their owne will. For Salomon saith, Prouer. 11.Prou. 11.20 They that are of a froward heart are abomination vnto the Lord. And againe, in the 29. chapter,Prou. 29.15 A child set at libertie ma∣keth his mother ashamed. But what will some be readie to answer in this case? Oh hee may bee broken of that time enough afterwards. But what sayth the wise man,Eccles. 25.27 Eccle. 25? Giue
no passage to the waters, no not a little. The heart of a childe is as the violent waters; and as those which haue experience in keeping and repairing of the sea bankes can easily tell vs, that if the raging waues should be suffered to break ouer but one tide, they shold hardly in many daies recouer it again: so if thou suf∣ferest thy childes affections to haue the full swinge & course yea but a small season, thou shalt hardly or neuer againe win this breach. 2. The second adiunct of the yoke is mo∣deration in diet; not to pamper children with too much meate, or that which is delicate, but to giue them that which is holesome and sufficient and no more. For excesse breedeth diseases both in bodie and minde. And for confirmation of this helpe, wee bring the ex∣ample of the good huswife in the last chap∣ter of the Prouerbs,Prou. 31.15 where it is sayd, And shee riseth while it is yet night, and giueth the por∣tion to her houshold, and the ordinarie to her maides. Thou must therefore giue them their portion, and not more: if thou giuest them more then their portion, thou makest them vnapt for the yoke, or any honest burthen, thou makest them gluttons and drunkards, consumers of patrimonie, and this vice dra∣weth a thousand more with it. And euen as the fattest soyle bringeth foorth the rankest weedes: so pampered children brought vppe
without due gouernment & discipline, thrust foorth the greatest and most ouergrowne vi∣ces. 3. The third adiunct or helpe, is not to clothe them with costly apparell, or to attyre them with newe fashions. For this againe is contrarie to the nature of the yoke, and stir∣reth vp pride. For euen as the soft flaxe soone catcheth holde on the fire: so youthfull na∣ture will soone bee enflamed with this vice, as lamentable experience too much teach∣eth this day. For from whence commeth this monstrous apparell, but from the wan∣ton and dissolute education of youth? This is the speciall sinne of England, and if anie thing bee the ouerthrowe of it (which God for his mercie turne away) it will bee this, the land is too heauie of this sinne. For the pride of all nations, and the follies of all countries are vpon vs, how should wee long beare them? How art thou fallen from heauen O Lu∣cifer sonne of the morning?Esay. 14.12. Zeph. 1.8. And it shall be in the day of the Lords sacrifice that I will visit the Princes, and the Kings children, and all such as are clothed with strange apparell. 4 The fourth adiunct and help, is repre∣hension or chiding. And this is taught, Pro. 29 The rod and correction giue wisedome.Prou. 29.15. Where by the rod is vnderstood chastisment, and by correction is vnderstoode chiding or repre∣hension,
as it is well knowne to those that vn∣derstand the Hebrew text. The want of this helpe was the vtter spoyle and vndoing of A∣doniah,1. Kings 1. as wee may reade, 1. Kings 1. where we see how rebelliously and disloyally hee v∣surped his fathers kingdome hee being yet a∣liue, and againe how he assayed it after his fa∣thers death in demanding Abishag his Con∣cubine, which cost him his life for it, as wee may reade in the 2. chapter following. The whole cause of this mischiefe is expressed in the 6.1. Kings. 1.6 verse of the first chapter: And his father would not displease him from his childhood, to say why hast thou done so? And here I cannot but iustly finde fault with most parents, who though they bee somewhat carefull for their children while they be tender; yet when they beecome to some yeares of discretion, as to fifteene or sixteene, (which time is most fit for reprehension, because then by all reason it should soonest enter, and which time againe is most dangerous, because then our affecti∣ons are most strong in vs) oh then they bee growne to mens and womens estate, they may not bee reprehended, they may not bee disgraced. But knowe thou O wise parent, that so long as thou hast a childe, so long thou art a parent; and so long as thou art a parent, so long thou must carrie a fatherlie authoritie and power ouer him.
5. The fift adiunct or helpe is chastise∣ment, and it may well bee called a helpe, be∣cause where reprehension will not serue that must helpe, and this must bee vsed in order and method as the Phisitian worketh: for as the skilfull Phisitian will not giue his strong and bitter pill before his preparatiue, least the working of it should bee hindred by the stubborne and indurate obstructions: so the wise parent in curing his sonnes vices, must not strike before he hath reprehended or pre∣monished; least either hee bee too much cast downe and discouraged, or waxe obstinate. This kinde of Phisick as it is more strong then the former, so it hath a more forcible and excellent working. The Councell of Turon saith worthily:Conc. Turon. 2. in prole∣gom. Magna est in ipsa seueritate pietas per quam tollitur peccandi facultas: Great is the godlines in that seueritie by which the power of sinning is taken away. And againe, Salomon in the 22. of the Pro∣uerbes saith more worthily,Prou. 22.15 Foolishnes is bound in the heart of a childe, but the rodde of correction shall driue it away. And againe in the 13.Pro. 13.24. chapter, Hee which spareth the rodde hateth his sonne: that is, he is an enemie vnto him. Wherefore know thou this O thou fa∣ther, that when thou seest thy sonne dange∣rously sicke with the disease of sinne, and doest not vse this helpe and remedy which
God in his holy word hath prescribed vnto thee, thou art accessarie to thy childes death as an enemie, and his blood shall be required at thy hands; because that where thou migh∣test haue saued him, thou hast wilfully cast him away: for Gods loue good parents looke to your children. Oh that parents had lesse naturall affection or more wisdome: for euery parent is blinde in his owne children: oh is it not a pitifull thing, that parents should them∣selues make graues for their owne children, and burie them quick without all compassi∣on, and think they do well in it? And is it not a folly aboue all follies, that while the parent layeth his hand vpon his childes mouth to keepe away the colde winde, hee presseth it downe so hard, that he strangleth him there∣with? Thus many a father and mother in the world haue killed their deare ones by their inordinate loue and cockering of them, and thus many poore infants must still be murde∣red, because parents will not bee warned. Wherfore now I wil lament with the Prophet Ieremie; my soule shall mourne in silence, and mine eyes shall cast forth riuers of waters while I walke solitarie, because I see the de∣struction that is to come vpon the children of my people for want of good education and gouernmēt. The yoke is too heauie, breaking is violent, chiding discourageth, the rod ma∣keth
bluenes: therefore while wee contemne the Lords helpes, death breaketh in vpon vs. Now let vs fall downe before the Lorde, and beseech his pittifulnes, that hee would euen without meanes saue some of those poore in∣fants, which knowe not the right hand from the left, and whom the inordinate loue, and blind folly of cursed parentes haue destinate to destruction, &c. Onely let your conuersation bee as it becom∣meth the Gospell of Christ. Phil. 1.27. Now hauing finished the first parte of the trade of childrens way, wee are come to the second to teach good manners. Where∣in I minde not to trouble you with courte fa∣shions, and new fangles, and toyes of curious heades; but onely to teach such nourture and seemely behauiour, as Gods word com∣mendeth and well becommeth the Gospell of Christ Iesus. The duties of nurture in which parentes are to bring vp their chil∣dren, are either priuate to themselues, or common to all. The dutie which the parent must teach his childe priuate to himselfe,Good man∣ners to Parents. is vnfayned obedience without any sem∣blance of disliking in all things that hee shall commaunde him, not being contrarie to the worde of GOD, yea though hee seeth no
reason of the thing commaunded, (as Isa∣ack went obedientlie with his father to the altar, though hee sawe no burnt offering) nay though his owne reason goeth against it. For the parent should giue his childe to vnderstand that God himselfe hath so disposed of him in his holy ordinance, that hee shoulde not growe vp in his owne will and gouernement, but bee subiect vnto them in all things. And this is commaun∣ded, Colossians 3.20. Children obeye your Parentes in all thinges,Coloss. 3.20. for that is well plea∣sing vnto the Lorde. And here Parentes must remember to chastise and banish a∣waye from their children all murmuring▪ and reasoning of the matter or answering a∣gaine: for this is the breach of good man∣ners, and forbidden of the Lord,Phil. 2.14. Phil. 2. Doe all things without murmurings and reasonings. There must bee no grumbling, and there must bee no debatings or delayes, as why may not hee goe, why may not shee doe it, (this is a foule and a shamefull hearing) but euery one so soone as hee is commaunded must goe or bee made to goe without any more adoe. This is good nurture, and Gods commaundement; and example of this wee haue in the seruants of that worthie Centu∣rion whose praise is in the Gospell;Matth. 8.9. and I saye vnto one goe, and hee goeth; and to another
come and he commeth; and to my seruant, do this, and he doth it. Now the rest of the duties which parents must teach their children not onely towards themselues, but also towards others, consist in reuerence and courtesie: and this is to bee shewed in these two heads, either in speech or gesture. Againe the duties of our speech are to be diuided into other two heads, which are fayre speech and conference. 1. The first dutie of fayre speech,Good man∣ners in speech. is to call our betters by an honorable name. And thus we reade that Abigaile called Dauid Lorde at euery worde, yea fourteene times toge∣ther in that small speech,1. Sam. 25.24. 1. Samuel. 25. And thus againe wee reade in the tenth of Marke, that that ciuill and well nourtured ruler vsed this courteous speech vnto our sauiour, where hee sayth,Marke. 10.17. Good Master what shall I doe that I may possesse eternall life? And when hee made answere againe hee saide, Master, all these things haue I obserued from my youth. Of this sweete dutie of fayre speech Salo∣mon giueth this commendation,Pro. 16.24. Prouer. 16. Fayre wordes are as an hony combe, sweetenes to the soule, and health to the bones. Here on the contrarie, parents must haue a speciall care to keepe their children from al foule and vnseemely speech, for this is contrarie to faire speech,Ephes. 4.2. and forbidden, Ephes. 4. Let no cor∣rupt
speech proceed out of your mouthes.. Now this corrupt speech are those foule tearmes which are so common in the mouthes of vnnurtured children, as knaue, drab, whore, theefe; this is rotten and corrupt speech most vnseemely for the mouth of any Christian: and this is that that destroyeth good man∣ners,1. Cor. 15.33. as the Apostle saith, 1. Cor. 13. Euill wordes corrupt good manners. And here fur∣ther I must put you in minde to keepe your youth from speaking contemptuously of those which are in authority, yea though they he euill men, for wee are to reuerence them, not so much for themselues, as for Gods or∣dinance; and weaken once the maiestie and good estimation of gouernours, and then all will goe awrie: Iude maketh this vice a marke of a reprobate.Iud. verse. 8. These sleepers also defile the flesh, and despise gouernment, and speake euill of them which are in authoritie: and wee reade in the 2. Kings 2. that two and fortie chil∣dren were deuoured of two beares, for moc∣king Elisha Gods Prophet. Againe on the o∣ther side, children must not onely be compel∣led to leaue this filthie & corrupt speech, but also they must bee commaunded to vse fayre and gentle words; the child must louingly in∣treate the seruant, & the seruant must againe gently answer the childe: & this is comman∣ded Ephes.Ephes. 4.23. 4. Bee yee courteous one to another,
and tender harted. We must therefore vse cur∣teous and louing speech one to another, for out of the aboundance of the heart the mouth speaketh; if the heart bee tender, the speech cannot be rough and hard. If this discipline were practised amongst vs, oh what sweete and comfortable houses should wee haue, e∣uen like vnto the amiable communion of Gods saintes; it would doe any man good to liue in such a family which is like vnto Gods dwel there, where skoulding & brawling, and cursed speech runneth to & fro, like ye yelling of the wicked spirits in that infernal dungeō. 2. The second duty of good nurture about the gouernement of the tongue in fayre and comely speech, is not only to speake well and honorably of others, but also to speake mo∣destly and humbly of our selues, & this poynt of good manners we learne of that wise ma∣tron Abigaile;1 Sam. 25.41 in 1. Sam. 25. where we reade, that when she was sent for of Dauid to be his wife, she first bowed her selfe to the seruants, and then made this lowly answer to him that brought the message: beholde let thine hand∣maide bee a seruant to wash the feete of the ser∣uants of my Lord. 3. The third dutie of Christian manners in fayre speech, is louingly to salute our friendes and acquaintance, and generally all others
whom we take to be brethren. This salutation is to pray well to others, wishing health and prosperity vnto thē: & exāple of this we haue in the Angel Gabriel, who being sent of God in message to the virgin Marie,Luk. 1.28. he first saluted her in these words: Hayle thou that art freely beloued, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou amongst women. And againe as we read after∣ward in the same chapter,Luke. 1.40. thus Marie ye mo∣ther of our Lord, went and saluted her cousē Elizabeth, who was then with child of Iohn Baptist, where to the great cōmēdatiō of this kind & dutiful salutatiō, we read that ye babe sprang in her belly for ioy, according to that which before we repeted out of the Prouerbs, Faire wordes are as an hony combe, sweetnes to the soule & health to the bones. Now our salu∣tations are either common vpon euery mee∣ting, or extraordinarie vpon some new occa∣sion. Common, as God giue you good mor∣row, God speede you well: extraordinarie, as I pray God giue you much ioy of your ad∣uancement. And example of this wee haue 1. Kings. 1. where it is sayd, that the people came to blesse or salute King Dauid vpon the annoynting of Salomon his sonne king, and in their salutation they sayd:1. King. 1.47 God make the name of Salomon more famous then thy name, and exalt his throne aboue thy throne. 4 The fourth dutie of faire speech, is to ac∣knowledge
a benefit where we haue receiued it, with giuing of thankes. And this dutie is counselled of the wise man,Eccles. 29.16 Eccles. 29. Forget not the friendship of thy suretie: for hee hath layd his life for thee. And example of this due∣tie we haue in Laban towards Iacob, Gen. 30. To whom Laban answered, If I haue now found fauour in thy sight,Gen. 30.27. tarry, I haue perceiued that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake. So if men would acknowledge with thankfulnes vnto their good friends, that they had receiued a blessing from God by their means, this would encourage them to continue their bountie & good will towards them, as Iacob was now contented to dwell still with Laban: but this rude vnthankfulnes rendeth vs from al good, being abhorred of God and hated of man. 5. The fift duetie of faire speech, is to con∣fesse an offence where it is committed, with humble crauing of pardon. And example of this we haue in that vertuous and faire spokē matron Abigaile, as we may read, 1. Sam. 25. where she taking vpon her the person of her loutish husband Nabal, appeaseth the fierce wrath of Dauid, and redeemeth the liues of all her familie with this one duetie of good manners:1. Sam. 25.23 And when Abigaile saw Dauid, she hasted and lighted off her asse, and fell before Dauid on her face, and bowed her selfe to the ground, and fell at his feete, and said, Oh my
Lorde, I haue committed the iniquitie, and I pray thee let thine handmayd speake vnto thee. Let not my Lord I praye thee regard this wic∣ked man, Nabal: for as his name is, so is hee: Nabal is his name and folly is with him, &c. Then Dauid sayd to Abigaile, Blessed bee the Lord God of Israel which sent thee this day to meete mee, and blessed bee thy counsell, and bles∣sed bee thou which hast kept mee this day from comming to shead bloud, and that mine hand hath not saued me, &c. Oh that men saw what great daungers they draw vpon them by the neglect of this duetie, and might preuent: and also what gratious blessings they might procure both to themselues and others, by meanes of it, as this vertuous Abigaile kept Dauid from sheading innocent bloud, saued her owne life, with the liues of all her familie, and in the ende was receiued to be a Princes wife for the wise carrying of her selfe in this matter, as wee may reade in the ende of the chapter. Now the second thing which wee are to obserue in our speech. 1. For the teaching of good manners, is our conference. And here the first rule which we must learne, is to keepe silence while our bet∣ters are in place, vntill wee be spoken vnto; and thē we must make answer in few words, without vnnecessarie circumstances, and di∣rectly
vnto the matter. This is taught, Pro∣uerbs 17.Pro. 17.27. A man of knowledge refraineth his wordes, and a man of vnderstanding is colde of spirit. 2. The second rule, is to giue our elders and betters leaue to speake before vs. Exam∣ple of this wee haue in Elihu that wise young man,Iob. 32.4. Iob. 32. Now Elihu had waited till Iob had spoken, for they were more auncient in yeres then hee, and hee sayd; I am young in yeares, and yee are ancient, therefore I doubted and was a∣frayd to shew mine opinion. For I sayd, the dayes shall speake, and the multitude of yeares shall teach wisedome. 3. The third rule, is not bee loude, bab∣ling, or hot in speech, but colde and milde. For Salomon sayth, A man of vnderstanding is cold of spirit.Prou. 17.27. 4. The fourth rule, is not to interrupt or trouble others while they are inspeaking. For Salomon sayth, Seest thou a man hastie in his wordes? there is more hope of a foole then of him,Prou. 29.20 Prou. 29. Wherefore then if we will keep the bounds of good manners, wee must not bee streporous or troublesome in talke, but e∣uery man must obserue and take his due time and course; and if there be any thing spoken vnto which wee would willingly make an∣swer, wee must either curteously craue leaue of him that speaketh, or els wee must carrie
it in remembrance vntill our turne com∣meth to speake, which is the better of the twaine. 5. The fift rule, is to giue an entercourse of speech vnto others; we must suffer others to speake by vs. For as there is a time for a man to speake: so there is a time to keepe silence, and to heare others speaking. He that will haue all the talke passeth the bounds of good manners, and breaketh the rule of Saint Ambrose, who requireth three things in the gouernment of our speech: that is, a yoke, the ballance, and the metewand; the yoke to holde it in grauitie, the ballance to giue it weight of reason, and the metewand to keepe it within measure, that it bee neither too long nor too short. And thus much for the dueties of good manners in our speech. The second generall head of good man∣ners which parents ought to teach their chil∣dren, is the framing of their gesture to a reue∣rent and duetifull behauiour towards others,Good man∣ners in ge∣sture. which consisteth in these sixe poynts. 1. The first, is to meet those that are com∣ming towards vs. And of this wee haue ex∣ample in holy Abraham, Gen. 18. where it is written, And hee lifted vp his eyes and looked, and loe three men stoode by him,Gen. 18.2. and when hee sawe them, hee ranne to meete them from the tent doore. Againe, this example we find euen
in K. Salomon sitting vpon his regall throne, 1. King, 2.19.1. Kings. 2.19 Bathsheba therefore went to King Salomon to speake vnto him for Adonijah, and the King rose to meete her. 2. The second, is to rise vp to our elders and betters when they passe by vs. And this is taught,Leuit. 19.23 Leuit. 19. Thou shalt rise vp before the bore head, and honour the person of the olde man, and dread thy God, I am the Lord. But now here I must warne you of a great abuse which is committed amongst you, and which tendeth to the high dishonor of God, which is this, that you know not ye time of your du∣ties, but you will then rise vp to men, when you should kneele downe to God; as if one that is more honorable among you shal come into the Church while you are vpon your knees in prayer vnto God, presently you start vp and leaue God to reuerence men. Is this religion? is this deuotion becomming Gods house? is not this all one as if a man should say, stay God, here comes in my worshipfull neighbour and my good friend, to whom I am much beholding, I must doe my dutie vn∣to him, I must rise vp till he be past, and then I will come to thee againe? What is this but to preferre men before God? I haue forewar∣ned you of this vice before, but some spurned at mee for it, and the rest haue not reformed themselues. Wherefore I call the stones of
the walles of this house to witnes against you, that if you continue still in this obstinacie, you are louers of men more then God: and you that take this duetie and reuerence vpon you, are robbers of Gods honour, and you shall answere him for it. Is there no time to shew our duetie towards men, but euen then when we are about Gods seruice? why know thou that when man standeth before God, how honourable soeuer he be, he is but dung and filth, and not to be regarded: and learne you this wisedome, that while wee teach you duties towards men, it is not to robbe God of his worship, but there is an appointed time vnto euery dutie and purpose, as Ecclesiastes in his third chapter well admonisheth: To all things there is an appoynted time,Eccles. 3.1. and a time to euery purpose vnder the heauen. It is recor∣ded of Leuy to his eternal praise, Deu. 33. that in Gods cause he said of his father & mother,Deut. 33.9. I see him not; neither knew hee his brethren nor his owne children. Euen so beloued, our eyes, and our mindes, and deuotions should bee so fixed and intent vpon God whē we are in his seruice, that wee should not see or regard any mā in that while. And again, we read in the 2. chapter of the Gospell after S. Iohn of our Sa∣uiour himselfe, who though hee was the most dutifull child that euer was borne of woman, yet when he was about his fathers busines, he
saith vnto his mother,Iohn. 2.4. Woman what haue I to doe with thee? which examples well teach vs, that whē we are about Gods seruice, all other duties must sleep and be layd apart. 3. The third dutie of good manners to be obserued in our gesture, is to stand while our betters are sitting in place. Example of this we haue in holy Abraham our father, Gen. 18. where it is written of his entertaning of the two strangers: And he tooke butter and milke, and the calfe which hee had prepared,Gen. 18.8. & set be∣fore them, and stood by himselfe vnder the tree, and they did eate. Well may Abraham be cal∣led the father of the faithfull, for giuing his children so good example. For if we consider the circumstances, we shall finde this to be a most rare example, and going beyond all the curtesies of these our daies. For these mē were but strangers vnto him, hee knewe not from whence they came, nor whither they would: againe this was at his owne house, and at his own table, and the common prouerbe is, that euery man is a Lord in his owne house: yet so much did curtesie and ciuilitie preuaile with this reuerend olde father,Gen. 24.35. exceeding rich and mightie, that hee waited and stoode there, where hee might haue commaunded a seate. 4. The 4. dutie is to bend the knee, in tokē of humilitie and subiection. Example of this,
Mar. 10. And when hee was gone out on the way, there came one running and kneeled to him,Mark. 10.17 and asked him; good master, what shall I doe that I may possesse eternall life? Againe, this kind of courtesie is shewed euen from the kings throne, that no degree might holde scorne of faire and comely manners,1. Kings. 2.19. 1. King. 2. and the King rose to meete her, and bowed himselfe vnto her. And Abraham the great Patriarch, bow∣ed himselfe down to the ground to his guests. Gen. 18.2. 5. The fift thing, is to giue the chiefe place to our betters, and to offer the same to others in curtesie. And example of this wee haue in King Salomon, (and who would not learne manners of a King) as we may reade,1. King. 2.19 1. King. 2 where wee reade that when he had rose from his throne, and dutifully saluted his mother which came to him, hee caused a seate to bee set for her at his right hand. Againe, our Saui∣our himselfe giueth this good precept of nur∣ture in the 14. of Luke.Luke. 14.8. When thou shalt be bid∣den of any man to a wedding, set not thy selfe downe in the chiefest place, least a more hono∣rable man then thou bee bidden of him, and hee that badde both thee and him come, and say to thee, giue this man roome, and thou then with shame begin to take the lowest roome: but when thou art bidden, goe and sit downe in the lowest roome, that when he which bad thee commeth,
he may say vnto thee, friend sit vppe higher: then shalt thou haue worship in the presence of them that sit at meate with thee. For whosoeuer exal∣teth himselfe shall bee brought low, and hee that humbleth himselfe shall bee exalted. Agreeing to this are the wise Prouerbes of Salomon chap. 16.18.Prou. 16.18. and 15.33. Pride goeth before destruction, and an high minde before the fall. And chap. 15.33. before honour goeth humilitie. 6. The sixt duetie, is to vncouer the head. And though wee finde no example for this in holy Scripture, as being not vsed in those for∣mer times: yet seeing the thing is ciuill and comely, & one of the speciall curtesies of our daies, we will confirme it also with the autho∣ritie of Gods word,Philip. 4.8. Phil. 4. Whatsoeuer things are honest, whatsoeuer things are of good re∣port, those things doe.1. Cor. 14.40 And againe, 1. Cor. 14. . Let all things be done decently and according to order. But this kind of ciuilitie is both decent and according to order, as also honest and of good report, & therefore warranted and cōmended by Gods word, and so worthie to bee followed. And here in these words of the Apostle we haue a generall rule for the teaching and gouerning of all good ciuilitie. If it be , that is, of a good forme, decēt and comely, then is it cur∣tesie and good manners: but if it bee toyish, new-fangled, or french-like, it hath no war∣rant
out of Gods worde, and so not to bee re∣garded of any modest Christian, and rather to be laughed at then to be imitated. Hitherto I haue shewed you al the parts & membs of good manners: yet this is but as a dead man, or as a bare anatomie consisting of bones and sinewes, and therefore now we must put a spirit and life into them, to moue all these good parts in a comely order.Loue, the soule of good manners. Now this spirit which must giue life and mouing to all these is loue. For the Apostle saith, 1. Tim. 1 The end of the commandement is loue out of a pure heart. As if he should haue sayd, loue is the principal and chiefe thing in al our duties and in whatsoeuer is commanded. Without this all our curtesies & manners are but sha∣dowes of curtesies and pictures of manners, and there is no more life in them then is in a dead carkasse: but if thy curtesie commeth from a louing and willing minde, it moueth all men, and stirreth vp others to render the like dutie againe. Now lastly it remaineth to teach you the helpes of good manners, which serue for their ayde and vpholding,Helpes. and these are three in number. 1. The first is meeknes, of minde, whereby euery man must esteeme others better then himselfe.Philip. 2.3. And this is commaunded, Philip. 2. That nothing bee done through contention or vaine glorie: but that in meeknes of minde euery
man esteeme others better then himselfe. With∣out this helpe wee may teach manners ne∣uer so long, and yet all our labour will be but lost in the end. For so long as the mind swel∣leth with the vaine shadow of his owne esti∣mation, euery man will looke for dutie & re∣uerence from others, but yeeld none himself. And therefore if parents will haue their chil∣dren to bee brought vp in good nurture, they must keep downe their high and loftie affec∣tions, and not hold scorne to teach them their duetie euen to those that are meaner then themselues,1. Sam. 25.41. as Abigaile made cursie to Da∣uids seruants, 1 Sam. 25.41. 2. The second help, is to cast our eyes vpō our brothers vertues, that so we might be stir∣red vp to reuerence the good gifts of God in them. And this is commanded in the same 2. chapter to the Philipians and the verse fol∣lowing: Looke not euery man on his own things,Philip. 2.4. but euery man also on the things of other men. What is the cause why there is so little curte∣sie and so great strangenes amongst vs many times, as though wee were scarse men? why e∣uery man lookes vpon his owne things▪ (and yet indeede they bee not his owne, for what hast thou which thou hast not receiued) the rich man he looks vpon his wealth,1. Cor. 4.7. the strong mā vpon his strength, the welfauoured man vpō his beautie, the Nobleman vpon his birth, the
officer vpon his office, the learned man vpon his knowledge, & the wittie man vpon his cō∣ceits, & euery man because he dwelleth nee∣rest himselfe can easily see his owne gifts, but no mans els: and from hence it commeth that there be so many which gape for duties, & so few that performe them. Whereas if euery mā would looke one vpon anothers gifts, as the holy Apostle here commaundeth, euery man should render mutuall duetie and kindnes to each other, and then should bee fulfilled that sweet saying of the Apostle, Rom. 13. Owe no∣thing to any man but to loue one anether.Rom. 13.8. 3. The third helpe, is to looke vpon God & his ordinance. For now while we looke only vpon men, wee see no such reason why wee shold so humble our selues in dutie vnto thē; but when our eyes are turned vnto God, and behold him inuesting our superious and go∣uernours, setting them in his owne throne, & giuing them his owne name, as in calling our Princes and Iudges Gods,Psal. 82.1. Psal. 82. and in cal∣ling our Ministers his Ambassadors, and such as occupie not their owne place, but are in Christ stead vnto vs,1. Cor. 5.20. 2. Cor. 5. & in terming our parents fathers after his own name: ther∣fore now we will reuerence thē not sleightly, or for fashiō sake, but for Gods sake, & for his holy ordinance sake, though they be not wor∣thy of it. And this is taught in many places
of S. Pauls Epistles: Submit your selues one to another in the feare of God.Ephes. 5.21 6.5.7. Eph. 5.2.1. in singlenes of your hearts, as vnto Christ. Eph. 6.5. with good will seruing the Lord, and not men, vers. 7. And whatsoeuer yee doe doe it heartily as to the Lord,Coloss. 3.23. and not to men. Oh if all our duties were done as vnto the Lord, what lights should we bee vnto the world, shining in all honest and godly conuersation? but now we looke only vpon men, and therefore Gods ordinance is neglected, and our dueties peruerted, Thus haue I drawne before your eyes as in a faire table, the liuely picture of good maners, the which if we would imitate, we shold lead such a comely life before others, as that euery man would be glad of our cōpany: we should then bee looking glasses for the ruder sort to dresse themselues by, and we should beautifie Gods Church euen to the eye of the world. For as ye material sanctuary had his outward ornaments, as gold & siluer, pretious stones, silke, purple, fine linnen, and such like: so the spiritual sanctuary which now consisteth not of wood and stone, but of the soules of christi∣ās, besides religion which is the inward beau∣tie, it must haue also the outward ornaments, which are good manners and comely beha∣uiour, that nothing may be wanting vnto the due honour and dignitie thereof. Now by Gods blessing we are come to the
third and last part of the childs way, which is the chiefest and highest of all the rest; where∣in that I might instruct parents with more fa∣cilitie & profitable application, I haue made choise of this text, Psal. 130.3.4. If thou O Lorde streightly markest iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? But mercie is with thee that thou maist be feared. The first part of the Catechisme.THe partes of this text are three, and so ye summe of al diuinity is threefold too. The first is to teach vs our miserie in our selues, contained in these wordes; If thou O Lorde streightly markest iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? The second is to shew vs a meane how wee may escape out of this miserie; and this meane is the only mercie of God in his sonne Christ Iesus, expressed in these wordes, But mercie is with thee. The third part is to teach vs what wee ought to doe when we are deli∣uered frō our miserie, & that is to feare God; vnder which word is cōprehended the whole seruice of God, and all that thankefulnesse which is required at our hands for our salua∣tion & redemption: & this is conteined in the last words of this text, that thou maiest be fea∣red. For whom wee feare, him wee would not offend; and whom we would not offend, his will we would obey, and whose wil we obey, him we honor, serue and worship. Now the literall & plaine sense of the first part of this
text is this: O Lorde if thou shouldest deale with vs according to iustice, and the streight∣nes of thy lawe, no man that liueth were able to stand before thee, but hee must needes fall vnder thy reuenging hand, & the tortures of thy iudgements. This lesson euery parēt must teach his children to vnderstande and con∣fesse. For vntill they knowe howe much they are endangered to God, and in what a feare∣full estate they stand, by reason of their sins: and vntill they knowe what a great God the Lord is, so mightie in power that he is able to cast all the world downe headlong into hell, and that hee will doe so indeede, except they craue mercie at his handes, turne vnto him, seeke his fauour, and indeuour to please him before I say they knowe this, and this know∣ledge be deeply setled in their harts, they will neuer seek after god, but dwel stil in their old estate, because they thinke it is good enough vntill death set vpon thē vnawares, & they be cast away eternally. Wherefore here the first thing that parents are to beate into the heads of their children, is the greatnes of God, his infinite power, and fearefulnes; insomuch that seeing hee hath made all mankinde of the claye of the earth, as the potter doth his pottes, and when hee hath done so, hee may breake them all to peeces againe, and who shall saye what doest thou? euen so if God
after he hath made vs, shall condemne vs all to hell, which hee may doe if it please him, which of vs all dare open his mouth against him? If thou O Lorde streightly markest ini∣quities, O Lord who shall stand? O Lord if wee had offended but an earthly maiestie, or if we had transgressed but a temporall lawe, or if wee were brought but before the barre of one of the monarches of the earth, we would not so much tremble and quake, though our cause were capitall; for they can doe no more but kill the bodie: but thou if thou wilt, canst kill both soule and bodye in hell; oh who would not feare thee? If thou takest displea∣sure against vs, who shal turne thee to mercy? Yet he is of one mind (saith Iob) who can turne him?Iob. 23.13. yea he doeth what his minde desireth. And againe in the ninth chapter hee saith, If wee would dispute with him,Iob. 9.3.15.19.30. wee could not answere him one thing of a thousand. For though I were iust, yet could I not answere, but I would make supplication to my iudge. If we speake of strength, behold he is strong: if wee speake of iudgement, who shall bring me in to pleade? If I washe my selfe with snow water, and purge mine handes most cleane, yet shalt thou plunge mee in the pit, and mine owne cloathes shall make mee filthie. Wherefore here teach al your children to cry out when they make their humble prayers and supplications vnto God, If thou O Lorde
streightly markest iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? The second thing which the parent must teach his childe, is to know his miserable e∣state in Adam. The Lorde in the 51. chapter of the prophecie of Esay, saith vnto the chil∣dren of Israel, Looke vnto the rocke whence yee are hewen,Easay. 51.1 and to the hole of the pit, whence yee are digged: so you must call vpon your chil∣dren to looke vpon Adam their great grand∣father, out of whose loynes all nations and people of the earth are digged. And here first in that the Lord vseth a metaphor of a rocke, a pit, and digging, you must teach your chil∣dren that they are no better then the dust of the earth, as wee may reade in the creation of man, Gen. 2.5. and that their hearts naturally are as hard as any flint to receiue grace; and being but dust and voide of all goodnes, so soone as euer the breath of the Lord bloweth vpon them, they fall to their earth againe. Here you must teach your children that whē all we, euen al the nations of the world were in the hole of Adams side, and as yet vncut out, God gaue vnto Adam, and so vnto vs being in his loines a law with two, conditi∣ons, the lawe was this, that wee should not eate of the tree of knowledge of good and e∣uill, standing in the middest of the garden of Eden,Gen. 2.17. as we may read, Gen. 2. The conditions
of this law were these: the one life euerlasting if we would keepe this law figured out vnto vs by the tree of life, of which it was lawfull for vs to eate euery hower: the second was, that in the same daye wherein wee shoulde breake this law, we should dye the death. It was not long after this lawe was made, but Adam broke it,Gen. 3.6. as we may read in 3. chapter of Genesis, and so death presently seazed vp∣on Adam and al vs his posteritie, being yet in his loynes, according vnto Gods word, who said in the same day that thou shalt eate of it, thou shalt dye the death, and as it is saide, 1. Cor. 15.1. Cor. 15.22 Rom. 5.12. In Adam all di, and as it is said, Rom. 5. By one man sinne entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death went ouer all; in whom all men haue sinned. So that now if wee would looke vnto our fountaine, and to our origi∣nal pit from which we were first digged; we should soone see our miserable estate which is nothing els but deadly. And now that we might come to the bottom of this pit, that so wee might the more fully and cleerely see all our miserie, to humble vs vnder the mightie hand of God; I must shewe you howe death hath entred vpon vs, and howe it hath killed vs, and giuen vs the deadly wounde euen while wee liue, and yet wee perceiue it not. This death hath first seazed vpon our rea∣son and vnderstanding, and put out the light
of it; so that nowe wee bee as blinde as a stocke to beholde anie heauenly thing. For Saint Iohn sayth in his first chapter of the Gospell,Iohn. 1.5. The light shineth in the darkenesse, and the darkenesse comprehended it not: that is, Gods word shineth into our minds, and yet wee cannot see it, so blinde are wee of our selues. Now if we cannot see the light it selfe though it shineth into vs, which light is the cause why all other things are seene as the A∣postle sheweth,Ephes. 5.13. Ephesi. 5. For it is light that maketh all thinges manifest; then much lesse can wee truely beholde any other thing else. And whereas the Apostle here calleth our reason and vnderstanding darknes, which is all the light of our soules if it were light, then howe great is our darkenesse? Our Sa∣uiour sayth in the fift of Matthew:Math. 6.22. The light of the bodie is the eye, wherefore if the light that is in thee be darkenesse, how great is that darke∣nesse? so wee may here say, if our reason and vnderstanding, which is the eye of the soule bee darkenes, how great is this darkenes? oh death hath killed vs, it hath put out all our light in heauenly things. Secondly, our mise∣rie which hath fallen vpon vs through this death is so much the greater, for that though all our light be put out, yet we thinke we see; and therefore we doe not with the two blind men in the gospell crie out vnto our Sauiour.
O Lord the sonne of Dauid haue mercie vpon vs.Matth. 20.30. For the whole hath no need of the phisiti∣on; and so we walke in blindnes all our dayes to our destruction, and goe on without anie mistrust, euen as the sheep that are driuen vn∣to the slaughter, vntill we fall from the dark∣nes of this life, vnto that vtter darknes in the life to come, where is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth. Oh great misery. A de∣monstration of this doctrine wee haue in the ninth chapter of the gospell after Saint Iohn, where our Sauiour saith; I am come vnto iudg∣ment into this worlde,Iohn. 9.39. that they which see not might see, and that they which see might bee made blind. Then some of the Pharisies saide, are we blind also? They could not beleeue that they were blinde, and therefore our Sauiour there telleth them that their sinne remained. And thus much to shew you how death hath taken the possession of the minde and reason of man, in so much that it hath spoyled it of al light in heauenly vnderstanding. Secondly, this death hath passed from the vnderstan∣ding and reason, and hath entred vpon the will and affections, and giuen them also the deadly blow; so that now we cannot will or affect any thing that good is, and profita∣ble to life eternall, no more then a stone that is without life, vntill such time as Gods pre∣uenting grace repaireth vs, and giueth vs a
new power from heauen. And therefore our Sauiour saith in the sixt of Iohn, No man can come to me, except the father which hath sent mee drawe him.Iohn. 6.44. And Saint Augustine vpon these words saith; Non trahimus nisi nolen∣tem. Wee doe not drawe any thing but that which is vnwilling. So that now we hauing lost the life of our will, we must be haled and drawen by Gods grace, euen as men hale and drawe a logge that hath no moouing in it, or else we can neuer come to heauen. This do∣ctrine is confirmed by the saying of the Apo∣stle, Rom. 7. where hee speaketh of the same thing;Rom. 7.24. Who shall deliuer me from the body of this death? as if hee should haue saide, all is dead, euerie part and member of it. Moreo∣uer this death hath not onely made the will vncapable of all good things: but also it hath so disturbed it, that it is become like a furious or mad man repugning and striuing against all reason:Gal. 5.17. and therefore the Apostle sayth, Gal. 5. The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirite against the flesh: and these are con∣trarie one to another, so that yee cannot doe the same things that ye would. And againe Rom. 8.Rom. 8.7. The wisedome of the flesh is enimitie against God: for it is not subiect to the law of God, nei∣ther in deed cā be. 3. This death hath not rested in the reason & will, but it hath gone further, & takē hold on the body also, & euery mem∣ber
of the body, and strooken them all out of frame: so that now our eares are the eares of folly, our eies are the eies of vanity, our hands are the hands of strife, our mouth is a mouth of cursing, our lippes are full of poyson, our throate is an open Sepulchre, and our feete are swift to shed bloud; and generallie al our members are the instruments and weapons of vnrighteousnesse as the Apostle speaketh, Roman. 6.Rom. 6.13.19 euery one being captiues to sinne, and standing fighting against God and our owne saluation: so that now if the Lord shold streightly marke what were amisse in vs, Oh Lorde who shall stande? 4. This death hath not onlie taken the possession of all the parts about vs, & of al the powers and faculties of euery part: but also it hath brought forth in∣finite fruites in vs to eternall condemnation. Whereupon the prophet Dauid in his 19. Psa. cryeth out, Who can vnderstand his faults? O clense me from my secret sins. Now beloued if our sins & wicked transgressions be so many, that we cānot number them, nor vnderstand them all, they be so hidden in heapes in euery mēber about vs, & the wages of euery one sin yea euen of the least that can bee cōmitted is death,Rom. 6.23. as the Apostle teacheth, Rom. 6. then again, how great is this death which lieth vp∣on vs? Here lieth the man that was trauailing betweene Ierusalem and Iericho bleeding by
the high waies side, hauing receiued his dead∣ly wound, and being already more then half dead? wherefore except that good Samaritan Christ Iesus, doth shortly powre in wine and oyle into our wounds, me must needes perish eternally. Fiftly, that wee might yet the bet∣ter and more cleerely see into our owne mi∣serie, we must goe vnto Gods lawe which is our looking glasse, for that will shewe vs the very least moate of sinne that cleaueth vnto vs, and when wee are come hither, alasse this will cast vs all downe vpon our faces. Oh sayth the Apostle, Rom 7. I once was a∣liue without the lawe,Rom. 7.9. but when the commaun∣dement came sinne reuiued. Wee thinke that we are iolly fellowes, and that we are in case good enough, vntill wee looke our faces in Gods glasse, and alas then we see nothing but death, and then we crie out with the Apostle, O wretched man that I am,Rom. 7.24. Math. 5.22. who shall deliuer me from the bodie of this death? This teacheth thee, that if thou art but angrie with thy bro∣ther vnaduisedly,Math. 5.28. thou art a murtherer; this teacheth thee, that if thou dost but looke vp∣on a woman to lust after her in thine heart,Math. 15.19 thou art an adulterer; this teacheth thee, that if thou dooest but desire thy neighbours goodes, though thou neuer layest handes vpon them, yet thou art a theefe and a fel∣lon; and this telleth thee, that though thou
speakest a trueth by thy neighbour with a minde to discredite him,2. Cor. 12.20. thou art a slaunde∣rer; and this teacheth thee, that euerie little wicked thought which ryseth vp in thy mind is sinne,Rom. 7.7. Exod. 20.17. and so deserueth euerlasting death; yea though thou neuer giuest consent vnto it. So that if wee would examine our selues by this glasse, wee must needes all of vs cast downe our selues at Gods feete, and saye with the Prophet, If thou O Lorde streight∣lie markest iniquities, O Lorde who shall stand? Now that which I haue here taught you, I be∣seech you by the mercy of God by which onely you must bee saued, teach it your chil∣dren againe: for this is the ende of all my la∣bour to saue your childrens soules which are so deere vnto you. Sixtly, and lastlie, after you haue beaten into their heades their mi∣serable estate, by reason of their falling from God and breach of his lawe; then you must shew them the feareful punishments be lon∣ging vnto the same, and bring them euen vn∣to the brinke of hel and bid them stand fast in Christ Iesus, & look in. First, you must bid thē behold the vnquēchable fire alwaies feeding vpon the soule and body of man, & neuer cō∣suming the substance. 2. You must shew them further the vtter darkenes which is as it were that irksome smoake which ariseth out of this horrible and infernall fire. 3. You must point
out vnto them where the worme of consci∣ence lieth alwaies gnawing vpon the tender hart and soule of man with torments vnspea∣kable. 4. You must shew them in this hide∣ous place the feare and dreadfulnes of God wrapped about with his wrath, which sha∣keth all the partes of soule and bodie, from whence ariseth the gnashing of teeth. And lastly, here at once you must lay before their eies all the vnspeakable torments of hell, which cause that intolerable noyse of how∣ling and crying which is to bee heard in that place. Here is yt Tophet which Esay speaketh of in his 30. chapter, the burning thereof is fire and much woode, and the breath of the Lord like a riuer of brimstone doth kindle it. Here lyeth Esau weeping for his birth-right: there lyeth Ierusalem crying out, because she knewe not the time of her visitation. Here lyeth Caine for killing his brother: there ly∣eth Iudas for betraying his master. Here ly∣eth Iezabell torne of the dogges of hell for stoning of Naboth: there lyeth Diues boy∣ling in brimstone for not shewing compas∣sion on poore Lazarus. Here lye burning night and day the fiue Cities of Sodome, be∣cause they burnt with vnnaturall lust while they liued here: and there ly all the old world drowned with the sea of Gods wrath, because they had corrupted euery man his way vpon
earth. O you good parentes, take heede to your children, and giue them good counsell, that they come not into this place of tormēt. Should you not crie out, woe worth the day that euer you begate a childe for this place? here euen vpon this pittes brinke stands eue∣ry mothers child as he is naturally borne into the world. Wee are by nature the children of wrath saith the Apostle,Ephes. 2.5. Ephesi. 2. and wee haue al of vs euen from the conceptiō fought against God with our sinnes, and prouoked the holy one to anger: and therfore now here it were iust with God if hee should with his foote spurne vs all into hell. Wherefore deere parents ere the Lordes anger be kindled a∣gainst you and your children, remoue them from hence, drawe them out of this cursed estate: for if God should here examine them, O Lord which of them all should stand? they were all no better then cast away for euer. But with thee is mercie Hitherto we haue spoken of our own mise∣ry, & now we are come to the remedy which is Gods mercy.The second part of the Catechisme. Psal. 101.1. Wherfore as the prophet Da∣uid in the 101. Psal. saith, I will sing mercy and iudgment vnto thee O Lord: so wee hauing al∣ready sung of iudgemēt, Sanctus Ber∣nardus in serm. de S. Maria Mag∣dalena. now we wil come to sing of mercy. These two (as one of the fathers saith) are as it were the two legs of god where∣with he walketh towards vs. If God should
come towards vs with the legge of his iustice onely, alas who might abide him, and who should stand before him? but now hee com∣meth with mercie also, and therefore we will praise him. All the pathes of the Lorde (sayth the Prophet) are mercie and truth vnto such as keepe his couenant.Psal. 25.10. This truth is Gods iustice whereby wee are humbled: his mercie is the meane whereby we are raised vp againe. This is the waye of Gods walking towardes vs, which is most wise in the eies of the almighty. For if God should come to vs only in iustice, then we would not loue him: & againe, if he should come onely in mercie, so licentious are we, that we would not feare him. Where∣fore sweet is this entercourse of gods mercy & iudgement, most healthfull to the soule of e∣uery Christian.Psal. 85.10. Mercie and trueth haue mette together, righteousnes and peace haue kissed ech other. Let all Christians reioyce at this happy meeting. Let the sea make a noise, and al that is therein, let the flouds clappe their handes, and reioyce their fill, let the mountaines skip before the Lord like yong rammes, and let e∣uery mouth confesse vnto the Lord, and sing mercy and iudgement. Oh if Gods mercy had not met his iustice by the way, and kissed and imbrased it, wee had all of vs bin swept away with the whirlewinde of his wrath long ere this day: but with thee is mercy saith the Pro∣phet:
Gods mercy hath staied his iustice from dealing extremely with vs. Who can suffici∣ently praise this mercie of God? The Lord is gratious & righteous (saith the prophet) ther∣fore will be teach sinners in the way.Psal. 25.8. Oh what a glory is it to the Lorde to saue poore soules that were wandring downe to hell? and oh what cause haue we now aboue all creatures to sound out the praise of this mercifull God, who were brought euen to deaths doore, & are nowe lifted vp againe by his grace: this name gratious and mercifull is Gods sweete name, and soundeth as much as Iesus, whom ye church in the 1. of the Canticles describeth after this manner;Cant. 1.2. Thy name is as ointment pou∣red out, therefore the virgins loue thee: because God hath mercie in store for poore sinfull creatures, therefore wee will runne after him by the smell of his garments, and remember his loue more then wine: all our talking shal bee of him and his mercie, and of his praise there shall be no ende. Wherefore now you good parents, you which are the Lords depu∣ties, sing mercie and iudgement to your fami∣lies continually; and sing not onely mercie, but sing iudgement also; and againe sing not iudgement alone, but sing iudgement and mercie both together. If you teach your chil∣dren Gods iustice and iudgements only, then they shal fall vpon the rockes of despaire, and
so goe mourning downe to hell. Againe, if you learne them onely Gods mercie, then will they sinke in the sands of securitie, and so bee cast away eternally. Wherefore if your desire be to haue your children passe the dan∣gerous sea of this world, that so they may ar∣riue in the quiet hauen of blessed rest, you must teach them to saile both by Gods iustice and mercie. And now hauing taught you out of the former verse, the way by the streight line of Gods iustice, now we are come to the calme and pleasant sea of his mercie. But with thee is mercie. Now then looke to your wounds; for here is the baulme of Gilead, whereby our soules are cured, euen Gods mercie. Is the candle of thy soule the light of thy mind put out through the darknes of sin, so that thou canst not tel how to walke in the course of this life acceptably to God, and in∣offensiuely to thy neighbour? here is Gods mercie in Christ Iesus readie to enlighten thee, but with thee is mercie. As if the Pro∣phet should haue said, with thee is Christ Ie∣sus, in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge.Coloss. 2.3. With thee is mer∣cie, with thee is Christ Iesus,1. Cor. 1.30. who is made vnto vs wisedome and righteousnes. With thee is mercie,2. Pet. 1.19. with thee is that light that shineth in a darke place vntill the day dawne, and the day starre ariseth in our hearts. With thee is mer∣cie,
that is,2. Cor. 4.6. thou art hee which commanded the light to shine out darknes, and thou art hee which shineth in our hearts, to giue the light of the knowledge of the glorie of God in the face of Christ Iesus. And to conclude, with thee is mercie, that is, thou art that louing God which doest counsell vs for our owne good, to buy of thee eye salue,Apo. 3.18. and to annoynt our eyes therwith, that the sight of our vnderstā∣ding may recouer againe to beholde all thy wonderfull mysteries in thy sonne Christ Ie∣sus, the which the Angels desire to beholde. And with thee is the well of life,Psalm. 36.9. and in th light shall we see light. 2. Secōdly, are thy will & affections out of frame, so that thou hast no power of thy selfe to will & desire any heauenly good? behold Gods mercie is at hand againe to repaire thē, and to put a new power and facultie in them, as the Apostle teacheth,Phil. 2.13. Phil. 2. For it is God that worketh in you both to will and to do, euen of his owne good pleasure. 3. Thirdly, are all thy members distemp∣red with sinne, by reason of that law of sinne and bodie of death, which hath setled it self in euery part & member about thee, so that thou criest out with the Apostle, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the bodie of this death? Christ Iesus the son of this mer∣ciful God, being sent down from heauen by
his mercifull father, hath taken vpon him our whole nature, & euery power of our nature, and hath sanctified it all for vs, as the Apostle teacheth vs,Heb. 2.11.14 Heb. 2. For he that sanctifieth and they that are sanctified, are all of one: where∣fore he is not ashamed to call them brethren. And againe in the same chapter: For as much as the children are partakers of flesh and bloud, he also himselfe likewise tooke part with them, that he might destroy through death him that had the power of death that is the diuell. So that now if thou wile lay holde on Gods mercie and Christs merits, which he once purchased for thee in thine owne nature, the power of sinne shall euery day more and more dye in thee, and thou shalt grow into the image of Christ thy Sauiour, & all thy members which before were the instruments and weapons of vnrighteousnes, now they shall be chaunged into the instruments of righteousnes, & fight for God. Now thine eyes shall beholde the thing which is right, now thine eares shall be open to heare the word, now thy hands shall make peace, now thy lippes shall speak truth, thy mouth shall blesse, thy feete shall be swift to all goodnes, and euery member shall bee sanctified vnto the Lord. Oh great is this mercie of God, that hath giuen his son Christ Iesus to doe so great things for vs. 4. Fourthly, doth the multitude of thy sins
which thou hast brought forth out of this bo∣die of death, lye boyling in thy conscience, so that thou cāst take no rest neither night nor daye ? come againe hither to the mercie of God: In that day (saith the Prpohet Zachary) there shall bee a fountaine opened to the house of Dauid,Zach. 13.1. and to the inhabitants of Ierusalem, for sinne and for vncleannes. That day is this blessed time of the Gospell in which wee now liue, hauing his pretious word sounding vnto vs on both eares, & this fountaine is that pure righteousnes and merits of his sonne Christ Iesus, which he wrought for vs while he liued here vpon earth with vs. Here euery one may wash away all his sinnes, bee they neuer so many and filthie. This is that riuer of Iordan where Naaman may wash away all his lepro∣sie, and his flesh shall come vnto him againe, like the flesh of a yong child. And this is that poole of Bethesda, where euery one may bee cured (if hee wash lawfully) of whatsoeuer disease hee hath. Oh let vs blesse God for this fountaine of liuing waters! 5. Fiftly, if the law of God terrifie thee, and threaten thee with the sentence of death and condemnation, then appeale thou to the Go∣spel and to the law of faith, this law is the law of life, and is aboue the law of wrath and the law of death: this law is like vnto the court of Chancerie, which mitigateth the rigour of all
other courts: this is the law of mercie, this is the new law which Christ brought with him from heauen, and therfore he would not con∣demne the woman that was taken in adulte∣rie: here, euen here thou maiest finde succour and reliefe whensoeuer thou art oppressed with the law of wrath, if thou wilt appeale vnto it. 6. Lastly, whensoeuer the paines of hell catch hold vpon thee, and the worme of con∣science begin to gnaw within thee, (for some haue euen here in this life a taste of the tor∣ments of hell) euen now I say after thou hast felt the sting, if thou canst cast thine eyes vpō the brasen Serpent Christ Iesus, and looke vpon Gods mercie, all thy horrour and feare shall presently flye from thee. For hee is our redemption, as the Apostle sayth, Ephes. 1. By whom we haue redemption through his bloud,Ephes. 1.7. euen the forgiuenes of our sins: and being redeemed ioy and peace of conscience must needes fol∣lowe.Rom. 5.1. Wherefore (sayth the Apostle) being iustified by faith, wee haue peace towardes God. They therefore that being not content with a moderate and lawfull sorrow for sinne, will by no meanes be brought to receiue the com∣forts that Christ hath purchased with his most pretious bloud, are as much to be blamed as mad mē and contemners of this blessed work of our redemption. For what man (except
hee were mad) when hee is redeemed from his prison, would goe and chaine vp himselfe againe, and bight his owne flesh, and so be a prison vnto himselfe. I know (beloued) if God would, and if hee were willing with it, wee should bee tormented with the sight of our sinnes and with a guiltie conscience con∣tinually: if hee should streightly marke what were amisse in vs euery moment, O Lord who should stand? wee should fall vpon our sinnes, and our sins should fall vpon vs, and wee should both fall vnder Gods reuen∣ging hand, and then all comfort should flye from vs: but the Lord (beloued) hee is a God of mercie, he would not the death of a sinner, as the Prophet Ezechiel teacheth in his 18. chapter,Ezech. 18.32 I desire not the death of him that dyeth, sayth the Lord God. With God is mercie, with God is ioy, with God is comfort, with God is light: oh who would not embrace this mer∣cifull and sweete God? And on the contrary, if we fall away from him, and if we now neg∣lect his bountiful mercie, in offering his grace so freely to redeeme vs from al our sinnes and miseries; then it cannot be auoyded, but we must needes be whurled into the pit of deso∣lations, and one destruction shal follow ano∣ther. Now (beloued) seeing that wee know our owne miserie, and that there is nothing in vs which is found, as I haue alreadie shewed
vnto you;Esay. 1.6. from the sole of the foote vnto the head there is nothing whole therein, but wounds, and swellings, and soresful of cor∣ruption; they haue not beene wrapped, nor bound vp, nor mollified with oyle: within are horrible desolatiōs, without are terrors & the sound of mightie iudgements, and our de∣struction is like the ouerthrow of straungers: oh why do we then sit still while we perish vt∣terly? Is there no baulme at Gilead, saith the Pro∣phet Ieremy?Ierem. 8.22. is there no mercie in God? wherefore now beloued, I witnes vnto you al here this day, that the Lord is innocent from the death of you all, and that if you will not lay hold vpon his mercie, so freely proclaimed in your eares by the mouthes of his messen∣gers, your bloud shall bee vpon your owne heads: for with God is mercie, with God are all meanes of your saluation, if you will sue vnto him for it. Now you good fathers of fa∣milies, make these things knowne vnto your children, that they may teach the same again vnto their children after them, that God may haue the praise of his mercie through al ages, and that all Israel may bee saued,Rom. 11.26.as it is writ∣ten: Make your houses little sanctuaries for Gods worship, and bee telling of his louing kindnes from day to day, & let the mercie of God in Christ Iesus, be as wel known to your familie, as their meate and drinke: be not a∣shamed
to speake Christ Iesus, because you cannot speake eloquētly: the Gospel of Christ as the Apostle telleth you, standeth not in words and wisedome of men,1. Cor. 2.4. but in power & euidence of the spirite: the Lord open your mouthes, and fill your hearts with all heauen∣ly wisedom, that you may be helpers of Gods ministers to build vp his temple with spiritu∣al stones, and that you may lay your children and seruants the polished corners thereof. Now after you haue taught your children the remedie against their own miserie,The meane to come by Gods mercie. which is Gods mercie: (for there is no other helpe besides this, whether we looke to the East, or to the West, to the North or to the South) thē you must shew them also the meane where∣by they may come by this, and how this mer∣cie of GOD may bee profitable vnto their soules. This meane is the hand of faith: and without this hand of faith Gods mercie shall profite vs nothing at all. God is mercifull in deede, yea his mercies are infinite, they are a multitude of mercies, as the Prophet Dauid speaketh: but if thou hast not a hand of faith to lay hold vpon them, Gods mercies abide still in himselfe, and they shall nothing auaile thee. For all the benefit of Christs Gospell is in the vse and application of it. Christ is cal∣led Emmanuel, that is to say, God with vs. A∣las (beloued) though God be neuer so good,
yet without vs he doth vs no good. Where∣fore wee must get vs faith to draw him into our hearts; and this is as the hand that layeth the playster vpon the wound: and euen as it little profiteth the wounded man to haue the best medicine lying by him, except he had a hand to lay the playster vpon the sore; euen so the mercies of God can doe vs small good, except wee had a faith to applie them vnto our sinfull soules. This then you see is a speciall poynt, and therefore most carefully to bee called vpon: yea this is euen as necessarie for the life of the soule, as the wind pipe is for the life of the bo∣die. For by this meane the breath of our new life is conueyed into vs, as the Prophet Ha∣bacuck sayth chapter 2.Habac. 2.4. The iust shall liue by faith.2. Cor. 1.24. 2. Cor. 5.7. And S. Paul in the 2. Corin. 1. sayth, we stand by faith. And againe, in the fift chapter of the same Epistle, we walke by faith: so that now all is by faith, all our life, and all our ac∣tions, and all our welfare, and without faith there is no goodnes to be hoped for of vs, be∣cause there is no other meane wherby Gods grace and mercie can bee conueyed into vs. And now next after this, seeing our faith is such a speciall instrument for vs, you must teach them the meanes how to preserue and maintaine it, because all their life hangeth vpon this. For our faith is to the soule, euen as
our hand is to the mouth, and the mouth to the stomacke, and the windpipe to the hart: so that if thou hast not a hand to feed thy mouth, and a mouth to feed thy stomacke, thy bodie must needs soone perish: and againe, if thy windpipe should be cut asunder, presently thy heart dyeth, and all thy members fall downe, because they want the breath of life: euen so if thy faith which is the only meane whereby thou receiuest the breath of Christs spirit into thy soule, and whereby thou liuest that new life in Christ Iesus, of which the Prophet Ha∣bacucke speaketh, The iust shal liue by his faith: if this pipe and conduit (I say) be perished or broken in thee by thine owne negligence, or cut off by thine aduersarie the diuell, who seeketh nothing else night nor day but thy euerlasting spoyle, then certainly both thy soule & bodie must needs perish too. Where∣fore maintaine and vpholde your holy faith by all meanes.The meanes of maintai∣ning our faith. And these meanes are sixe in number: the first, is the hearing of the word preached with all diligence: the second, is the reading of the word with vnderstanding and carefull meditation: the third, is the in∣struction in the catechisme: the fourth are deuour and heartie prayers for the continu∣ance of Gods fauour and loue vnto the ende: the fift are often meditations of Gods good∣nes towards vs: the sixt and last are continu∣all
watchings in our soules ouer all our waies and euery particular action: if these things bee in you and abound, your faith shall ne∣uer faile, but it shall be vnto you a fountaine of liuing waters, and Gods mercie shal stand vnto you and to your children for euer: which God graunt vnto you all for his sonne Christ Iesus sake. Now,The third part of the Catechisme.after that you haue taught your chil¦dren first their owne miserie in themselues, and secondly the remedie against their mise∣rie, which is Gods mercie in Christ Iesus, whereby they are saued and redeemed: the third thing now to bee taught them, is what they should doe after they are saued and redeemed, and that is to feare God, which is as much to say as to serue him. But with thee is mercie that thou maiest bee feared. And here first that I might proue vnto you that this phrase in our text to feare God, signifieth to serue God, I will bring two places of ho∣lie Scripture for confirmation. The first is in the first chapter of Malachy, vers. 6. A sonne honoureth his father, and a seruant his ma∣ster: If I bee a father, where is my honour, and if I bee a master where is my feare? that is as much to say, as where is my seruice? for wee knowe that the dutie of seruants is to serue their maister, and that their feare towardes them is required not simply for it selfe, but
for their seruice sake, that so they might the more diligently seeke to please them, whom they feare to offend. The second is in the first chapter of the Gospell of Saint Luke, and is an argument drawne from the end of our re∣demption, in these words,Luk. 1.74. That wee being deli∣uered out of the hands of our enemies, might serue him without feare all the daies of our life, in holines and righteousnes before him. In which words wee are to learne foure instruc∣tions. The first is, that when wee are redee∣med from the burthen of our miseries, and set in the state of saluation, then consequently wee should giue our selues wholy to Gods seruice, because then wee haue nothing els to doe. The second doctrine teacheth vs how long this seruice should continue: that is, not for a day or two, but for all the dayes of our life. For seeing Christ hath redeemed vs not for a day or two, but for euer, therefore it is iust that we should serue him for euer: and seeing Christ hath thought no paines too much to suffer for our sakes; so we should thinke no labour too long or wearisome for his sake again. Our Sauiour in the tenth chap∣ter of Matthew teacheth vs, that he only shal be saued which continueth vnto the ende.Mat. 10.22. The third instruction teacheth vs the summe or chiefe partes of this seruice of GOD, which are holines and righteousnesse; holines to∣wards
GOD, and righteousnesse towards our neighbour, vpon which two hang all the lawe and the Prophets. The fourth teacheth vs, first the true and onely manner of performing this holines and righteousnes, which is spirituall, sincere, and which is done and taken in hand with an eye vnto GOD: before him. So that if thou takest good due∣ties in hande, and doest not looke vp vnto God with the eyes of thy mind, and with the zealous affections of thine heart, & say, Lord this is for thee, and for thy sake I doe it, thy holines and righteousnes is not before God, and so no part of his seruice, hee accepteth it not. Secondly, this teacheth vs to distinguish betweene the true holines and righteousnes, and that which is false and counterfeit, which is no part of his seruice. If thy holines & righ∣teousnes bee of thine owne making, and the fancies of thine owne braine, as the toyes of poperie are; then it is not before God, and so shall neuer please him. Wherfore if thou wilt seeke to shew thy selfe thankfull to God for thy great deliuerance, thou must serue him with such holines and righteousnes as is be∣fore him, and that is such as his worde onely commandeth. Now let no man thinke that this place is contrary to that which we labour to make plaine by conference and consent, which is our text: the one affirming to feare
God, the other to serue God without feare. In a word, this clause (without feare) in the 1. of Luke is not contrary to our text, Psalm. 130. because the one is vnderstood of the feare of God, which is his seruice; and the other of the feare of our enemies: and so the allegation is contained in the word seruice, and not in the worde feare: that wee being deliuered out of the hands of our enemies, might serue him: that is, feare him, and feare him that we might serue him. Now hauing layd out vnto you the vn∣doubted sense and meaning of our text, I will shew you why the holy Ghost here rather v∣seth the word feare, then the word seruice, saying, that thou maiest be feared, rather then that thou maiest be serued. This is for that the Lorde thereby might the better prepare vs vnto his seruice, and being prepared might continue and hold vs in the same, as it were with a bridle, from running out. And therfore we see in holy Scripture, that when the Lord would make any man fit for his seruice, he as it were manureth him first by his feare, as we may see first in the Prophet Esay, as wee may reade in his 6. chapter, where when the Lord called him to beare his hard message vnto the children of Israel, he appeared vnto him in a fearfull vision sitting on his throne of maiestie, to the ende that this sight might strike so deepe an impression into his heart,
that neuer after hee might forget the bounds of his calling:Esay. 6.5. Woe is me (sayth hee) for I am vndone, because I am a man of polluted lippes: for mine eyes haue seene the King and Lord of hostes. Againe,Ezech. 1.29. and. 2.12. in the calling of Ezechiel, as we may reade in his first chapter, wee may see what a fearefull vision hee had, so that he fell downe vpon his face before the Lord, and could not stand vp any more vntill Gods spirite had entred into him and helde him vp. And a∣gaine in the 19. of the first book of the Kings, when the Lord called his seruant Eliah to go about a dangerous and hard peece of seruice, (which was to annoynt two Kings, and both against his Lord and soueraigne Achab,1. King. 19.15. to be auenged of him and his bloudie wife Iezebel for destroying his Prophets) yt he might not at any time flye out from his charge, as Ionah did, the Lord prepared him before with feare∣full signes: first he sent a mightie strong wind which rent ye mountaines, & brake ye rockes before him. 2. after the wind he sent an earth∣quake, after the earthquake there came a fire, & after the fire whē Eliah was now sufficiētly humbled & prepared, came a still and a soft voice, & then he receiued his message. In like māner also whē the Lord gaue the law of this his seruice vnto his people vpō moūt Horeb, what fearefull signes did he send before? there were thunderings & lightnings, ye earth qua∣ked
vnder thē, the ayre was rent aboue thē by reason of the horrible noise of the trumpet of God and fearefull thundercracks, and before their eyes all was of a smoake and burning fire, in so much that Moses himselfe, though hee was a man very well acquainted with God, and accustomed with wonders, yet he also feared and quaked (as the author to the Hebrewes sayth) and all the people fled back.Heb. 12.21. Thus then you now see euen by the Lords owne methode and proceeding, how neces∣sarie the feare of God is for his true and faith∣full seruice; yea so necessarie is it, that with∣out it there is no seruing of God aright. The wise man, Salomon in the first chap∣ter of the Prouerbes,Pro. 1.7. VVhat man is he that feareth the Lord? him will he teach the way that he shall choose. Psal. 25.12. sayth, The feare of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: and the Hebrue phrase saith it is the head of knowledge: which signifieth not onely the beginning, but also the chiefe and principall parte there∣of, from whose fountaine the very life of all good vnderstanding is deriued, euen as the head giueth continuall sense and mouing to all the members of the bodie. 2. Secondly, this feare of God is not on∣ly the beginning of Gods seruice, but it is al∣so the continuer and conseruer of it, holding vs alwaies within our limites, who like wilde horse are readie at euery step to runne out of the way. For this cause Moses after the giuing
of the law, as wee may see in the 20. chap. of Exodus, teacheth the Israelites the true vse of those fearefull sightes which they had seene, which was that Gods feare might continue with them to be euer after a bridle vnto them to withhold them from sin:Exod. 20.20 and that his feare may be before you that you sin not. So that now take away gods feare from before our eies, & presently we wil fal into sin, & break off gods seruice, though we haue made neuer so good an entrance. The force of this bond of feare when Iacob behelde, hee toulde his vncle Laban plainelie,Gen. 31.42. Genesis 31. that except the feare of Isaac had beene with him, meaning the feare of God who was Isaacs feare, hee would haue sent him away empty: and euen so beloued, it is with vs all, except Gods feare remaine and continue with vs, though the Lorde hath deserued neuer so much at our handes, yet wee like vnthankefull Labans would send him emptie away, and robbe him of the praise of all his blessings and gra∣ces bestowed vpon vs. Moreouer this feare of God was of such account amongst the holy Patriarches, that it was taken then to be the onely bonde in the worlde: and there∣fore when Ioseph would perswade his bre∣thren before they knew him, to leaue one of them behinde in prison till they had cleared themselues of suspition, which was obiected
against them,Gen. 42.18. as wee may reade, Genesis. 42. he also to giue them to vnderstande of faith∣fulnes on his part▪ vsed this onely reason vnto them: For (sayth hee) I feare God; as if hee should haue saide, I dare not doe to the con∣trarie. Gen. 50.19. Againe, in the 50. chap. of Gen. when Iacob their father was dead, Iosephs bre∣thren, fearing then that hee might seeke to bee reuenged of them for their vnkinde and inhumane handling of him, they came to make supplication vnto him, prostrating themselues before him, desiring him to for∣giue them their offence: to whome hee an∣swered,Eccles. 34.14 Who so fea∣reth the Lord feareth no man, neither is afraid: for he is his hope. Psalm. 19.9. Feare not, for am not I vnder God? as if he should haue said, I feare God, and therfore you neede not feare me. 3. The feare of God is not onely the beginning of Gods seruice, and the continuance of Gods seruice, but also it is the end of Gods seruice, and endureth for euer, as the Prophet Dauid saith, Psal. 19. The feare of the Lorde is cleane, and endureth for euer: and our text sayth, that thou maiest bee feared. Againe Salomon in the 14. chapter of the Prouerbes, extolling the excellencie of the feare of God,Prou. 14.27. sayth. The feare of the Lord is as a well spring of life to auoid the snares of death. Here then is the fountaine from whence all the streames of Gods seruice, and euerie parte of his worship are first fetched. And againe
in the 16. chapter hee saith,Prou. 16.6. By the feare of the Lord we depart from euill. So that now as you see all goodnes commeth by Gods feare; it is the beginning of Gods seruice, it is the con∣tinuance and conseruation of Gods seruice, it is the end of Gods seruice, & it is the walles of Gods seruice, whereby both the enemie is kept from vs, and we from running to the e∣nemie; and what shall I saye more? it is the irons and boltes wherewith the olde man is manacled, and it is the bridle wherwith our stubborne and effrenate affections are helde in, and whereby we are gouerned and direc∣ted in the new and liuing way, as the Apostle speaketh. So excellent a thing is the feare of God, that nothing may be compared vnto it. Whereupon Ecclesiasticus saith well, Chap. 40.26. Riches and strength lift vp the mind: but the feare of the Lord is aboue them both: there is no want in the feare of the Lord, and it needeth no helpe. 27. the feare of the Lord is a pleasant garden of blessing, & there is nothing so beautifull as it is. Wherefore you good fathers, which haue a desire to teach your children and ser∣uants the true seruice of God, in token of thankfulnes to their maker and redeemer Christ Iesus for so great benefits and graces receiued, you must enter them with the feare of God, and you must hold and continue thē in the same with the feare of God: if you laye
not this foundation all your labour is lost, Gods seruice shall eftsoones slide away from them, and then they might better neuer to haue knowen the way of righteousnes: without this there is no stay or helpe from a∣postasie, which state is most miserable of all other. This maketh vs to tread surely in all the waies of the Lord, whereas the forwarde children which haue no feare catch many a fall. For Gods loue looke well to this point, and euer carrye in your mind that most hole∣some saying of the Apostle in the second chapter of the Epistle to the Philipians,Philip. 2.12 Make an end of your saluation with feare & trembling: and Pro. 28.14. Blessed is the man that feareth alway. Titus 2.11.12. For the grace of God that brin∣geth saluation vnto all men hath appeared, and teacheth vs that wee should deny vngod∣lines, and worldly lustes, and that wee should liue soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world. HItherto I haue spoken of the beginning and true foundation of Gods seruice: & now it followeth in order that I should teach you the whole buildinge, with all the partes thereof, that so good parents might goe for∣ward in their dutie vntill they haue brought their childrē to a comly frame in Gods house.
But here first before we come to these partes, we must speake something of the connexion of this text with the former, and of the words of the text as they lye in order. This word the grace of God is al one in effect with that which is translated mercie, in the 130. Psalme, and they both tend to one end, that is, to stirre vp men to the seruice of God: the one noting out vnto vs the relenting and pitifull affecti∣on in God vpon the sight of our miserable e∣state, into which we had cast our selues help∣lesse: & the other the gladsomnes of our hea∣uenly father in bestowing this his mercie vp∣on vs, which is signified vnder the worde grace. From the nature of which two words I gather this double fruitful exhortation. First, that seeing our God which was our iudge, and not onely our iudge, but also the partie grie∣ued & offended, did notwithstanding yearne in compassion towards vs, & pitie our mise∣rie, and forgaue vs all our debt and trespasse: so now wee in token of thankfulnesse to him againe, should yearne and grieue within our selues to see his name dishonoured. And secondly, whereas God hath bestowed his grace so frankely and gladsomelie to saue vs: so now we being saued by his grace, it should bee our ioye to serue him for it in all obedi∣ence and in euerie good duetie. And where∣as the Apostle saith, that this grace hath ap∣peared,
(or as the Greeke verbe saith shined) hee noteth out vnto vs the magnificence thereof, as if the Lorde had reared it vp in the middest of the firmament like the sunne to giue light vnto all the partes of the world▪ Great is this grace of GOD in Christ Ie∣sus, which hath shined and appeared vnto all nations, knreds, and tongues, and vnto all kindes of men, honourable and inho∣nourable. And teacheth vs that wee should denie vngodlines and worldly lustes. In these words the holy Ghost layeth downe the true and onely methode of proceeding in this ser∣uice of God; which is that wee should first wash out of the heart all vngodlinesse and worldly lustes, that so there may be a conue∣nient roome for his worship to come into. For euen as a foule and stinking viall infec∣teth the pure & good ointment which is put into it: euen so the worship of God if it be placed in a foule heart, it will soone corrupt and shortly turne into flat idolatrie & impi∣ous dissembling. Agreeable to this the holy Ghost teacheth,1. Cor. 5.7. 1. Cor. 5. Purge out there∣fore the olde leauen, that yee may bee a newe lamp. And againe in the sixt verse. a little lea∣uen leaueneth a whole lumpe: so a little vn∣godlines and wordly affections sowreth the whole masse of Gods seruice, and maketh it vnpleasant vnto him. Wherefore all must
bee cleansed out. And againe in the fifteenth of the Actes, the Apostle speaking of the working of the holy Ghost in gathering in∣to his Church the polluted Gentiles saith, hauing purified their harts by faith.Acts 15.9. So that now we see, he yt will keep his vessel holy vnto the Lorde, and prepare his heart aright to serue God, he must wash it, and rince it, and puri∣fie it before; hee cannot make it too cleane, for the seruice of God is the purest thing in al the world. And here that wee may the better stirre vp our selues vnto this diuine seruice of God, let vs diligently obserue the phrase of the holy Ghost▪ The grace of God teacheth vs that wee should denie vngodlines and worldly lustes. This is a metaphoricall speech taken from militarie affaires, and is answerable vn∣to the worde abandon. For when the good Captaine findeth iust cause of disliking in his souldiers, he is said to abandon them, that is, to thrust them out of his band, and to put them from their pay, and so turne them away. Again on the other side, when the good soul∣dier shall see the misgouernment of his cap∣taine, and his bad cause in hand, hee leaueth his captaine and turneth to the iust cause, de∣nying and defying by solemne sacramentall othe of warre his former colours. Without this denying, the souldier shall not bee recei∣ued, but shall be taken and held as a spie and
a traytor, and so reiected. Euen so beloued, when we haue once renounced the black co∣lours of the diuell, the world, and the flesh, and are turned to the Lord Iesus, because we see his cause is iust, and his pay best: now this great captaine and Lorde generall of heauen and earth, before hee will admit vs into his band, he requireth of vs that we should deny and defie our former colours, that is, all vn∣godlines and worldly lustes, vnto which wee haue hitherto borne weapons. For no man can serue two masters, as our Sauiour saith in the gospell. And therefore thou whosoe∣uer thou art, that wilt bee a good souldier of Christ Iesus, and doe him true and faithfull seruice, because he hath raunsomed thee from the tyrannie of the diuel; thou must renounce and denie from thy heart all vngodlines, and that is all that prophanenes of mind, wherein before thou diddest liue whē thou regardedst not God nor religion, and all worldly lustes; that is, all the lustes of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,1. Ioh. 2.16. and the pride of life, as Saint Iohn teach∣eth vs, 1. Epist.2.16. all which are the verie armes & ensignes which the deuill the prince of darknes beareth against thy deere Sauiour and redeemer. Now after that thou hast wa∣shed thy hands from all vncleanenes, and re∣nounced the deuill with all his adherents the world & the flesh, & art now become embā∣ded
in the Lords troups; now thou must next learne how to stand in Gods aray, & what is the whole duety & seruice which he requireth at thy handes. This consisteth in these three parts, as we are here taught in this text: first, in liuing soberlie to our selues: secondly, in liuing righteouslie to our neighbours: and thirdly, in liuing holily or godly towards god. In these three points wholy standeth the ser∣uice of God, so much as of man is required. The first & second parts are contained in the second table of Gods law, the third is contai∣ned in the first. Now in the first part of Gods seruice (following the order of our text, be∣ginning at our selues, and rising as it were by steps from the lowest to the highest) is to liue soberly towards our selues; & this is to gouern our own bodies and persons in such measure and comely behauiour, as that the Lord who is the continuall beholder of all our actions, as well priuate as publike, and as well secrete as open, bee not offended at vs. Wherefore here euery man must learne to temperate and moderate himselfe in his speech, in his gesture in meate and drinke, in apparell, in pleasures, in paines and labors, and generally in whatsoeuer concerneth a mans owne per∣son, and in all his lawfull liberties: so that our speech may not be too rough, nor too ridicu∣lous: our gesture may not be too light, nor too
lowring: our meate and drinke neither too much, nor too delicate: our apparell not too gay, nor too sluttish: our pleasures neither too long, nor in bad causes: our sorrowes not for euery vain losse, nor in any defect or excesse: and our labours such as may rather preserue life then quench it; in all which we must al∣waies hold this rule, to consider not what we are able to doe, but what is most meete to bee done, agreeable with our estate (where∣in wee may not flatter our selues) and seeme∣lie both before God and man. This sweete sobrietie is the honest grace and flower of our life, which whosoeuer wanteth, hee com∣meth too short of that duetie which God re∣quireth at his handes, being vnthankefull to God who hath redeemed him to liue in such an honorable estate,1. Cor. 11.10. offensiue to men and an∣gels, and hurtfull to his owne soule and body. For what is the cause why our soules corrupt and stinke in the filthie lustes and pleasures of the flesh, & in al manner of excesse & riotous kind of liuing, but because they want this sale of sobriety wherby they shold be kept sweet? why canst thou not endure to beare the la∣bours of Gods seruice? why dooest thou waxe faint in prayer? why doest thou thinke it long to heare? why doest thou thinke much to streine thy heart vnto God in the zeale of thankesgiuing? and why canst thou not a∣way
to carie patiētly the easie yoke of Christ Iesus? why thou hast not beene acquainted with sobrietie, which is as it were the yoke to holde all men within their religious and ver∣tuous endeuours. Againe, let vs come to the duties of the second table, and aske what is the cause why wee cannot liue within the compasse of them? Why doe some lift vp the heele against their gouernours like the vnta∣med horse? why doe others liue in continual contentions and fightings, like the sauage wolues and Tygers? Why do some wast their strength in pleasures, as the flame which con∣sumeth the tallowe? and why doe other neg∣lecting the tender budde of their decaying stocke draw all through their owne throats, while their wife and children starue for hun∣ger? and why doe other enuying the age to come gape vpon all things present like Behe∣moth, as though they would make an end of the world with themselues? and why do o∣ther some kindle such discord amongst their neighbours by that fire of the tongue, as Saint Iames calleth it, that it can neuer after bee quenched vnto the death? and why is hell let loose within our selues, to disturbe all the powers and sences about vs with wicked thoughtes & lusts? why this vertue of sobriety is absent from vs. So that take away sobriety, and you vndoe all Religion. Wherefore
you good parentes, you which haue a care of the posteritie and of the Church of God to come, and you which thinke nothing too deere for the redemption of your own soules and the soules of your children: shewe your thankefulnes vnto GOD in instructing your houshold, teach them holines towards God, and righteousnes towardes men, and teach them not onely holines and righteousnes to∣wardes God and men, but also traine them vp in sobrietie towards themselues: for this is the locke and key to religion, it is the yoke of our life, it is the salt of our soules, & it is the grace of all our actions. O you good youth, I call to you which loue the Lorde, I call to you which honour all those which giue you good instruction, and I call to you who had rather dye an honest and godly death while you are young, then to liue in the filthie plea∣sures of sinne for a season, and in the ende to bee cast awaye eternallie: embrace this noble vertue of sobrietie; if there bee anie vnderstanding, if anie loue of vertue, if anie zeale of chastitie, if anie courage for good thinges, fulfill my desires in the Lorde, who loue your soules so deerely, and God almigh∣tie raine downe a blessing vpon you. 2. The second part of Gods seruice, is to liue righteously towardes men, and that is to giue euery man his due and right. Giue to e∣uerie
man his due,Rom. 13.7.8 saith the Apostle, Rom. 13. Tribute to whome yee owe tribute, custome to whom custome, feare to whome feare, honour to whome vee owe honour. Owe nothing to a∣nie man, but to loue one another: for hee that loueth another hath fulfilled the lawe. Nowe this whole duetie of louing our brethren, and in giuing euery one his due, we may general∣ly comprehende in this diuision. First, in ho∣nouring and obeying our superiours and go∣uernours: secondly, in relieuing our inferiors and all such as stand in neede of our helpe: and thirdly, in being kinde to our equalles, and louing to all. For the dueties towardes our superiours; the subiect must honour his magistrate with obedience, reuerence, and common maintenance: so the people must honour their pastour, the child his parent, the wife her husband, and the seruant his master. All these must bee honoured and obeyed of vs not sleightly, but seriously and vnfeyned∣ly, euen as purposing to honor God in them. for this also is a part of Gods seruice, and the dueties which wee giue vnto them wee must giue as vnto God himselfe, setting God al∣waies before our eyes, whome in all thinges wee ought to worship and reuerence. And on the other side, superiours must know so to carie themselues towardes their inferiours, in gouerning, teaching, and defending of
them in all wisedome and grauitie, that they may seeme worthie of those honours which according to Gods ordinance are bestowed vpon them. Secondly, for the helping and relieuing of our brother, wee must not doe it by halfes, but fully, as God himselfe hath commaunded. We must not aide him in his bodie, and hurt him in his goods; and wee must not helpe him in his goodes, and offend him in his name: and lastly, wee must not care for him in his bodie, goodes, and name, and suffer his soule to perish by vs for want of our spirituall counsell and exhortation; but wee must labour to vpholde and defend him in all these together, but especially in his soule, because this is more pretious then all the other. For euen as one member of our own bodie is as deere vnto vs as another: so should all our brothers things be vnto vs, because we are all members of our deere Sa∣uiour, who hath loued vs all alike in giuing his whole selfe for vs all. Thirdly, and last∣ly, so shoulde wee loue all men, as well those which haue no neede of vs, as those which stand in need, that no offence being giuen on either side, wee liuing as lightes in the worlde, and shewing forth the vertues of him that hath called vs out of darkenesse into his marueilous light, as Saint Peter sayeth,1. Pet. 2.9., all men maye haue iust cause to
praise GOD for vs, and so God to be hono∣red all in all. 3. The third & highest part of our seruice, is to liue holily towardes God: and this is to set vp and exalte the Lorde onelye in our heartes, and to establish his kingdome and gouernement in our soules, banishing and auoyding from within vs all forraine powers of the world, the flesh, and the diuell, that so there may be but one sole and absolute regi∣ment of Gods spirit within vs, that hee onely may commaund, forbid, controule, chastize, and direct in all his waies. And secondly, that as hee onely is wise to prescribe, so wee should giue our selues wholy to serue him not as wee our selues thinke best, but as hee commaundeth in his worde; that is spiritu∣ally, inwardly, and vnfainedly, and in such particulars as hee himselfe setteth downe vnto vs. And thirdly, because hee is such a great GOD holding all the worlde vnder his obedience, saying to the king as it is in Iob 34.Iob. 34.18. Translatio Tremelij. Thou naughtie man, and to the nobles you wicked men: therefore now we should vse his name with all holy reuerence, and neuer presume to speake of him, but with titles of maiestie and honour. And fourthly and lastly, wee must performe all our homage and seruice vnto him, in frequenting his courts diligently, in hearing his word prea∣ched
gladly, in praying to him deuoutly, in receiuing his holy Sacraments reuerently, & in casting our selues downe at his feete, ac∣knowledging all our possessions, wealth, ho∣nours, priuiledges, and whatsoeuer els wee enioy that good is, all to bee held from his gracious hands, most heartily thanking him for the continuance of them vnto vs, and be∣ing readie whensoeuer hee shall call to sur∣render them vp vnto him againe. In this pre∣sent world. Now in that the holy Apostle re∣straineth his exhortation to the time of this present world, he teacheth vs that there is no longer deferring to serue God, but wee must euen now at this present instant change our hearts, and set vpon his worke: for this pre∣sent instant is a parte of this present world, and so you see here that the Lord hath left vs no time in this life to serue our owne lustes and pleasures. Secondly, the Apostle here setteth foorth vnto vs the common stade of Gods seruice, which is this present life. This present life and this present world God hath appoynted out for seruice, and that which is to come hee hath ordained for reward and rest. Wherefore now if men will serue God, they must serue him in this life, or els they shall neuer serue him. I know well that many could be content to serue God after they bee dead, so they might enioy and follow their
pleasures in this present world, then they would liue soberly, and righteously, and holily, but then it is too late. For this present world, as I sayd, is the time of seruice, and the next is the time of reward; the reward of glo∣rie, and rest to such as haue serued God in this world, and the reward of vengeance and torment to such as haue disobeied him. Verse. 13.14. Looking for that blessed hope, and appearing of that glorie of that migh∣tie God, and of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, who gaue himselfe for vs, that he might redeeme vs from all iniquitie, and purge vs to bee a peculiar people vnto himselfe, zealous of good workes. NOw hauing taught you what the whole seruice of God is, and what is required at our hands for our saluation & redemption, because our hearts are so heauie and slug∣gish, that few of vs regard these things: And againe, such of vs as regard them, can better talke of them then performe them: and con∣sidering the lets of Christianitie to bee ma∣ny, I haue thought good here to vse such forcible motiues, as I can best gather out of Gods worde, whereby our colde zeale may bee enflamed, and wee violnttlie thrust forward to laye hand vpon Gods busines.
1. The first motiue which the holie Ghost here offereth vnto vs, is the lifting vp of our eyes vnto the marke or reward which is set vp for vs at the ende of our race, to drawe vs forward with all our might. For as it is in the game of running (which similitude the Scripture often vseth) there is a marke or crowne of rewarde erected vppe on high on some pillar at the race end, to the end it might be seene a far off, and that it might bee alwayes in the eye of the runner, like the load-stone to drawe him forward with all his might and power: euen so vnto vs Christians, which runne in the spiritu∣all race of Gods seruice, wherein the great God and his Angels are lookers on, there is a great price set vppe for vs euen in the height of the heauens, which is here called the blessed hope, and the glorie of the mightie God, which at that day shall breake forth as a floud of light from his owne glorious maiestie to glorifie all his saints. And for the more efficacie of this motiue, I will bring for example our Sauiour himselfe, who be∣ing the author and finisher of our faith, vsed this helpe through all his way, as wee may reade Heb. 12.Hebr. 12.2. Who for the ioy which was set before him, endured the crosse, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. Againe, this helpe that worthie light
of the Church the Apostle S. Paul vsed, Phi∣lip. 3.Philip. 3.13.14. I forget that which is behinde, and ende∣uour my selfe vnto that which is before, and follow hard toward the marke, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus. But what is this marke, and what is this price which is alwaies so in the eye of the Apostle, that he forgetteth all other things, and regar∣deth nothing but it?Apoc. 7.2. This marke is that palme branch, which is giuen vnto all those faithful seruants of Christ Iesus, who haue ouercom∣med all the difficulties and hardnes of this life: and this marke is that immortall inhe∣ritance and vndefiled, and which withereth not, reserued in the heauens, of which S. Pe∣ter speaketh,1. Pet. .4. 1. Epistle 2. chapter: and this marke is the fulnes of ioye, as the Prophet Dauid sayth,Psal. 16.11. Psalm. 16. In thy presence is the fulnes of ioye, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for euermore: and this marke, and this blessed hope, is the crowne of righteous∣nes layd vp for all Gods faithfull seruants a∣gainst the day of this appearing of the glorie of this mighty God our Sauiour Iesus Christ: From hence forth is layd vp for me (sayth the Apostle) the crowne of righteousnes,2. Tim. 4.8. which the Lord the righteous iudge shall giue me at that day, and not to mee onely, but to all those that loue that his appearing. 2. Tim. 4. O if a man had a crowne alwaies in his eye, what
would hee not doe to come by it? Why doe wee then stagger vnder our burthens? and why doe we waxe faint in the Lords seruice? why wee doe not looke vppe vnto our blessed hope, and wee doe not set that glorious appea∣ring of our Sauiour Christ Iesus alwaies be∣fore our eyes, whose presence shall wipe away all teares from our cheekes. This would holde vp our hands if there were any life in vs. Cast your eyes then vpon your inheritance which shall not wither? What seruice can be suffi∣cient for a kingdome? what dutie for the crowne of heauen? what loyaltie for the a∣doption of the sons of God? and what paines taking for the fulnes of ioye? O you Christi∣ans that you saw and knew your happines, that you might loue and serue the Lord. 2. The second motiue is taken from that exceeding loue of Christ, in giuing himselfe so freely for vs, and therefore now we should giue our selues and all our things vnto him a∣gaine, as wee are taught of our mother the Church,Cantic. 6.2. Canticles 6. I am my welbeloueds, and my welbeloued is mine. O if Christ Iesus that heauenly bridegroome hath bestowed himselfe vpon vs, and giuen himselfe for vs, which sometimes were more vile then the clay in the streete, how can wee now denye him any seruice, or any thing which is with∣in vs? shall the heire of eternitie and the son
of God bestow himselfe vpon vs with a full dowrie of the kingdome of heauen, and all the ioyes of the life to come, and with the fruition of the diuine nature, as S. Peter saith, and shall not we now bestow our selues and our liues vpon him againe? for that loue of Christ constraineth vs (sayth the Apostle) be∣cause wee thus iudge,2. Cor. 5.15. that if one bee dead for all, then wee are all dead, and hee died for all, that they which liue, should not hence foorth liue vnto themselues, but vnto him which dyed for them and rose againe. O had not wee neede now bee a deare and louing spouse vnto our husband Christ, who hath bought our loue with his owne death? would not this medi∣tation constraine any reasonable heart vnto all duetifull seruice? wherefore now I speake like a troubled soule out of the affection of my heart, I had rather be hanged in the ayre, I had rather bee burnt in the fire, I had rather bee torne with the racke, yea I had rather run through hell it selfe, then I would willingly offende and displease this mercifull Lorde, who hath loued mee and giuen himselfe for mee.Gal. 2.20. For I was dead, but now I am aliue: I was lost, but now I am found: I was forsaken, but now am I beloued.Acts 21.13. What doe you weeping and breaking my heart, saith the Apostle? for my life is not deare vnto my selfe,Acts 20.24 so that I may fulfill my course with ioye. Oh we haue
not halfe franke hearts to deale with God; wee thinke much to serue God with our per∣sons, our soules, and our bodies: and as for our goods we lay them to aside, they may not goe with vs into the Lords Sanctuarie for feare of losing: and yet our Lorde hath not only giuen soule and bodie to raunsome vs, but also hath stripped himselfe naked of al his heauenly royaltie and riches, and tooke vpon him the forme of a seruant, as the A∣postle teacheth,Philip. 2.7. Phil. 2. O where is now that constraining loue of the Apostle to stirre vp our dull and cold hearts? 3. The third motiue to stirre vs vp with al cheerefulnes vnto Gods seruice, are those great and vnspeakeable paines and labours which our deare Sauiour hath taken vpon him to beare and goe thorow with for our redemption. Who gaue himselfe for vs, sayth the Apostle, that is, who gaue himselfe to en∣dure all manner of torments, calamities, and sufferings for our redemption; and all man∣ner of painefull seruice for our iustification. Now hath Christ our Sauiour giuen himselfe to doe so much for vs, and shall wee giue our selues to securitie and liue as wee lust? hath Christ watched for vs, and shall wee giue our selues to sleepe? hath Christ fasted for vs, and shal we giue our selues to banquetting? hath Christ bin tempted for vs, and shall we yeeld to euery suggestion? hath Christ suffered per∣secution,
& shal we look to line at ease? and hath Christ so liued here vpon earth for our sakes, that he wold not please himselfe, Rom. 15. and shall wee sport in the delights of this life, and the sensualitie of our owne flesh? and hath Christ not onely suffered all the troubles of this life, but also tooke vpon him the torments of the life to come, to free vs from that dreadfull lake of eternall iudge∣ment, & now shall we cast our selues down vnder the greene boughes of the pleasures of this world, and shunne the heate and burden of the day, and giue our selues to idle loyte∣ring, when God calleth vs foorth to labour in his vineyard? O what a shame were this to Christians, at whose hands the Lord hath de∣serued so great duties through his infinit la∣bours and sufferings. If Christ our Sauiour had redeemed vs without any paines taking, as easily as a rich man pulleth out twentie pounds out of his pocket to ransome a poore captiue whom hee taketh pitie on, yet re∣specting the vnspeakable miserie from which we are deliuered, and the greate freedome in∣to which wee are brought, that is, into the glorious libertie of the sonnes of God, and to the inheritance of the Saints, and to be ci∣tizens of heauen, this would deserue infinit duties of thankfulnes: but now this was not our deare Sauiours case, alas it was no ease
for him to saue vs, as the monument of this day can well witnesse vnto vs, at what time he finished the terme of 32. yeares seruitude and halfe, hauing troden the wine presse of the Almighty, borne the fierce wrath of God his father, sweat water and bloud, with strong cryings and teares, and now hauing passed the yron gates of death, hee appeared vnto vs, bringing saluation through no little sor∣rowe, and therefore now as the matter thus standeth, who is sufficient for these things, and who shall giue vs thankfulnes, and due∣ties, and seruice for so great deserts? Blessings past and present.4. The fourth motiue, are all those sweete graces and blessings both temporall and spi∣ritual, which are bestowed vpō vs by Christ, in giuing himselfe for vs. For as the Apostle sayth,Rom. 8.32. Rom. 8. Seeing hee spared not his owne sonne, but gaue him for vs, how shall hee not with him giue vs all things also? So then when God gaue vs his sonne, and Christ gaue vs himself, all good things were giuen vnto vs to. Haue I beene as a wildernesse vnto Israel,Ierem. 2.21. sayth the Lord? Ierem. 2. Hath the Lord been barren vnto vs, or as a land of darknesse? is not hee that God who hath made the light of Eng∣land to shine tenne times brighter then euer it did before? is not hee that God who hath planted peace in all our borders? hath not hee in our daies crowned the earth with foy∣son
of all things? hath not he made the plow∣man to touch the mower, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seede? hath not hee made the hilles to droppe fatnes, and the fur∣rowes to reioyce and sing? hath not he made our desert like Eden, and our wildernesse like the garden of the Lorde? and is not hee that God who hath taken away from vs that fa∣mine of the word, which heretofore oppres∣sed the land more then the dearth of AEgypt, and made our soules like a well watred gar∣den, and giuen vnto vs abundance of spiri∣tual blessings, and set our Priests and our Le∣uites as in times past? Now (beloued) seeing it is thus, and our eyes are full of Gods bles∣sings which way soeuer wee turne vs, can we forget our duetie towardes our gracious God, who hath opened his hand so wide vn∣to vs?Ierem. 2.32. Can a maide forget her ornament (sayth the Lord) or a bride her attire? yet my people hath forgotten me daies without number. O good brethren, let vs not prouoke the Lorde to speake vnto vs by his iudgements, complai∣ning as hee did sometimes of the children of Israel,Esay. 1.2. Esay. 1. Heare O heauens, and hearken O earth, for the Lord hath sayd, I haue nou∣rished and brought vp children, but they haue rebelled against me. And againe in the fift chapter,Esay. 5.4. What could I haue done any more vnto my vineyard, that I haue not done vnto
it? and when I looked that it shoulde haue brought foorth grapes, it brought foorth wilde grapes. Promises, and reward to come.5 The fift motiue, is that great and plen∣tifull reward which God that cannot lye, and with whom is no variablenes nor shadow of turning, hath in his word promised, and will hereafter performe to all his faithful and dili∣gent seruants. Though the Lord hath alreadie deserued our seruice, and ten thousand times more thē we cā do in sauing our soules which were lost, yet such is the magnificent frank∣nes of our God, that hee will not receiue the least dutie at our hands for nought, no not so much as a cup of cold water bestowed vpon his seruants for his sake, but hee will render a double reward for it. O is it not good ser∣uing of such a master, where all things are still comming in, and where nothing is layde out, and no time spent but bringeth in double gaine, both in this life and in the life to come? Verely I say vnto you (sayth our Sauiour Christ, Mark. chapter 10. verse 29.) there is no man that hath forsaken house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receiue an hundred fold, now at this present, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, & lands with persecu∣tions, and in the world to come eternall life. O if
men would serue the Lord, what plentie of al good things should we enioy?Malac. 3.10. Proue mee now herewith, saith the Lord of hostes, if I will not open the windowes of heauen vnto you, and power you out a blessing without measure? Malac. 3. Againe,Esay 48.18. Esay. 48. Oh that thou haddest har∣kened vnto my commandements, then had thy prosperitie beene as the floud, and thy righteous∣nes as the waues of the sea. Furthermore, the Prophet Dauid vseth most excellent simili∣tudes, to set foorth this estate worthie of due meditation,Psalm. 92. Psal. 92. The hornes of the righ∣teous shall bee exalted like Vnicornes, they shall be annoynted with fresh oyle, they shall flourish like a palme tree, they shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon, they shall be fat and flourishing, and they shall bring foorth fruite in their age: that is, they shall haue a power euen aboue na∣ture: loe thus shall the men bee blessed that serue the Lord, and men shall say, verily there is fruite for the righteous. 6. The sixt and last motiue to stirre vs vp to this industrie in Gods seruice, is the Lords ende, and as it were the marke and butte whereat hee shooteth in sauing vs, which is, that wee should giue ouer our liues whollie vnto him in the zeale of good workes, there∣by to set foorth the praise of his glorious working towards vs. And this is expressed in the 130. Psalme: But with thee is mercie
that thou maiest bee feared. And secondly in this our text, Who gaue himselfe for vs, that hee might redeeme vs from all iniquitie, and purge vs to bee a peculiar people vnto himselfe, zealous of good workes. And thirdly, S. Peter in his first Epistle and second chapter sayth, That wee are a chosen generation,1. Pet. 2.9. a royall Priesthood, a holie nation, and a people set at libertie, that wee should shew forth the vertues of him that hath called vs out of darknes into his meruailous light. This is the end then of Gods redemption. Now (beloued) shall the Lorde lose his ende by our negligence, and bestow all his labour in vaine, and shoote as it were at a wrong marke? hath he culled and picked vs out of all the world to bee a speciall and peculiar people vnto himselfe to be zea∣lous of good workes, to excell all other in vertue, and to holde out his glorious vertues vnto all the world, and shall we now neglect the high caller, and contemne his honorable and heauenly deseruings at our hands? wee cannot doe it. If our gracious Prince to shew her puissance against a forraine power, should call forth one or two of her subiects, who are most beholding vnto her, to iust and turnie in her presence for her honour, would they not straine all their strength in this seruice, yea and their liues too? Now, shall wee doe more for our Prince then we would for God?
Hath not our God called vs out by name to fight for his honour, to bee a chosen and pe∣culiar people vnto himselfe, to stand on his parts, to shew foorth his vertues, and to bee zealous of good workes, (yea and that wee might the better performe this seruice, hee hath furnished vs with his owne armour and weapons, yea and his owne hand is with vs too, though all men see it not) and shall not we now doe valiantly for our God? and shall not wee nowe endeuour our best to answere the expectation of our heauenly King? O my deare brethren, see the ende of your calling. You are not called to shewe your owne strength, or your owne vertues, or your own holines? but you are called to shewe foorth the strength, and the vertues, and the holines of the almightie, and to bee zealous of good workes. But what is this zeale that we may know it and followe it? This zeale, as the Spouse in the last chapter of the Canticles teacheth vs, is no small matter, but a most ardent and burning loue vnspeakable, ouer∣comming all the affections in man: Loue is strong as death,Cantic. 8.6. and zeale is cruell as the graue, the coales thereof are fierie coales, and a vehe∣ment flame: yea the flame of God, as the He∣brew worde signifieth, Much water cannot quench loue, neither can the flouds drowne it. Now then (beloued) you see the end of your
redemption and calling: it is not only to do good works, but to be zealous of good works you are called and redeemed to the heate and fire of good works, you are called and redee∣med to such a burning loue of them, that no∣thing may quench it: nay euen as death and the graue ouercome all things; so this zeale in vs of good workes should ouercome and cast downe before vs all the lets and impedi∣ments which stand vp against vs in the ser∣uice of our God: for loue is strong as death, zeale is cruell as the graue. Wherefore O you redeemed of the Lorde, not with golde and siluer, as Saint Peter speaketh, but with the pretious bloud of his owne sonne, lay this vnto your hearts, and stirre vp your selues vnto Gods seruice; you that haue eares to heare, heare; and you that haue zeale within you, bee inflamed, for euery one cannot. I call vpon you all, as the Apostle Saint Iohn writeth, I call vpon you little children, be∣cause you are well acquainted with your fathers deare loue and tendernesse towards you; I call vpon you young men, because your affections are strong in you, and you are best able to beare the Lordes burthen; and I call vpon you olde men, because you by reason of your long experience haue most knowledge of your dueties, giue the Lorde his due and right, and abound in all
manner of good workes, which he hath or∣dained for vs to walk in, to the glorie of his holy name. Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is olde he shall not depart from it. Pro. 22.6. When I began to read this verse vnto you, I told you it consisted of two parts: of a pre∣cept, and the reason of the precept. Hitherto I haue spoken of the precept, and of the neces∣sarie circumstances belonging vnto it, and now I am come to speake of the reason of it, that so I might stirre vp the life of the precept in his working in you: And when he is olde he shall not depart from it: that is, if thou faith∣fully instructest him in his way while hee is young, he shall haue the benefit of it all his life after. But now that parents might bee compassed about with a cloude of exhortati∣ons, I haue thought good here not onely to presse forth the principall scope of this text, but also to sucke out of the bowels thereof the more hidden and abstruse collections, and to gather the like arguments out of other scrip∣tures, because the whole scripture is one and lendeth hand to it selfe. 1. The first reason which should moue pa∣rents to take in hand this dutie of instructing their children in this trade of their waye,The necessi∣tie of tea∣ching. is drawne from the necessitie of the precept, be∣cause euery child naturally is conceiued and
borne out of the way, as the Prophet Dauid teacheth vs,Psalm. 51.5 Psal. 51.5. Behold I was borne in iniquitie, and in sinne hath my mother concei∣ued me. And the Apostle Saint Paule sayth, Ephes. 2.Ephes. 2.3. That we are by nature the children of wrath.Gen. 6.5. And Moses in the 6. chapter of Gen. teacheth vs, that all the thoughts and imagi∣nations of mans hart are continually euill: and the Apostle sayth, 1. Cor. 2. that the naturall man cannot perceiue the thinges which are of the spirite of God.1. Cor. 2.14 And againe, Rom. 8. hee telleth vs that the wisedome of the flesh is enimi∣tie against God,Rom. 7.8. for it is not subiect to the lawe of God, neither indeed can be. Wherefore now you see plainely how euery mothers child is borne into the world, blind in his vnder∣standing, froward in his will and affections, corrupt in all the motions of his hart, dead in the life of God, & wholy possessed with sin; so that except now his nature be changed by good education, hee cannot possibly applye himselfe vnto any good waye, but hee must needs all his life long runne astray, and in the end fall headlong into hell fire. Wherefore O you parents, as you haue giuen your chil∣dren the worse, so giue them the better also, as you haue brought them forth the children of wrath and death, so now teach them howe they may become the children of grace and life; teach your children in the trade of their
way, they must needes bee taught, for except their education and teaching bee better then their birth, they are cast away for euer, and they may curse their parents that euer they brought them into the world. 2. The second reason to moue parents to this vertuous teaching of their children,The oportu∣nitie of tea∣ching. is ta∣ken from the oportunitie thereof. For if e∣uer they will doe their children good, nowe they must doe it while they bee children. The Smyth must strike wile the iron is hot, and the Plowman must plowe while his ground will worke, and the Sayler must saile when hee hath winde and tide; and as you see euerie trade hath his proper oportunitie: so this trade also of education hath childhood for his fittest time to worke vpon. If you doe not teach your children and traine them vp in good nourture while they bee yong, all your laboure shall bee but lost after∣wardes; you shall strike vpon the colde i∣ron, you shall plowe in the harde rocke, and you shall striue against both the winde and the streame. Againe doe wee not see that while the plant is yong and tender a man may winde and bende it which way hee will, but if you assaye this when it is growen olde, it will sooner burste then bende: euen so is it in the education of youth, and therefore if parentes will doe their
children any good, and bend their crooked disposition to a comely stature, they must do it while they bee tender and yong; for now they wil bend, now they be pliable, now they will worke, therefore Salomon sayth, Teach a child, & not teach a man. For how came Paul to bee so mightie a teacher in the scriptures after he was conuerted, and wrote more then the rest of the Apostles, but because hee was brought vp in them from his youth at the feet of Gamaliel?Act. 22.3. And how came Timothie to be such a famous scholler of so worthy a master as Paul was,2. Tim. 3.14 15. but because hee had knowen the holy scriptures of a child? And how came Da∣niel to be so excellent a prophet,Dan. 1.12. but because he was so religious being a child, that he chose rather to feed vpon hard pulse, thē to pollute himselfe with the kinges delicates? Euerie thing groweth well in the spring time; and so the best planting of any goodnesse is in the youth, for then it will grow if it bee well watered and looked vnto. But here I finde two principall wants in parents which great∣ly hinder this vertuous worke. The first is the want of following & continuance. For many thinke that if now and then they giue their children some good instruction, that then they are discharged before God, & that they haue performed a very great duetie; but alas this is but little worth. Euery trades man can
easilie tell vs, that no science will go forward wel except it be hardly followed. And again, the mindes of children are like the soft waxe (the which as it will soonest take the print, so it wil be soonest beaten out againe) and ther∣fore haue need often to be imprinted. The se∣cond principall want is the want of gouern∣ment, as when parents teach their children good things, but doe not looke diligently af∣ter the practise of them, nor see howe they take roote in them, this is but a dead kinde of teaching, & therefore loseth his fruit: but they doe worst of all, who after they haue taught wel suffer the cleane contrarie, for these build with one hande and pull downe with the o∣ther. Wherfore here the carefull parent must not only teach, but continue in teaching, and not onely continue in teaching, but also look for the fruit of his teaching: and againe not only looke for the fruite of his teaching, but also wall it about with his diligent gouern- that in the end it be not lost. 3. The third reason is drawn frō the true end and proper good of euery child.The proper good of euery child. Teach a child in the trade of his way, that is, teach him in the trade of his owne way, and that is, as I haue shewed you, in some honest profes∣sion, in good nourture and godlines. This is called a childes waye, not because hee of his owne will inclineth vnto it, but because the
Lord who is only wise and most louing, hath of his great grace appointed out this way for him to walke in for his owne good. Nowe you tender parentes, would it not grieue you that your children shoulde take a wrong course, and drudge and droyle for other men all the dayes of their life without any profite or pleasure to themselues? but now it were well with them if they were mens drudges, for if they misse of their owne waye and of their owne trade for want of good guiding and instruction, they fall presently into the Diuels way, because there be but two waies, and now they are become the diuels packe∣horse bearing his burden vnto hell gates: shal they not be well paied for their paines when they come there? wherefore good parents if you would not haue your children to bee the diuels drudges, and to labour all their liues for his profite, then teach them in the trade of their owne way and hold them in it. The lessing of God vpon the parent for teaching.4. The fourth reason is fetched from the speciall blessing of God vpon the parent for this vertuous care of instructing his children, as we may reade in the eighteenth chapter of Genesis,Gen. 18.17. and the seuenteenth verse. Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I doe? for I knowe him that hee will commaunde his sonnes and his houshoulde after him, that they keepe the way of the Lord, to doe righteousnesse and iudge∣ment,
that the Lord may bring vpon Abraham that he hath spoken vnto him. Heere wee see plainelie to no small en∣couragement to good parentes, howe the Lord referreth to godly instructing of fami∣lies, as vnto the meane of his working, not onely the imparting of his blessed secrets, but also all other blessings in generall; that the Lord may bring vpon Abraham that he hath spoken vnto him. Now what was that he had spoken vnto him? why the promise of all his blessings both temporall and spirituall as we may reade,Gen. 12.2. Gen. 12. I will make of thee, a great nation, and will blesse thee, and make thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing. I will also blesse them that blesse thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee shall all families of the earth bee blessed. O great is the blessing that commeth by the meane of this vertuous teaching, the fruite of it shall remayne with our posteritie euen long after we are gone, and the benefite shal be poured out from age to age vnto the worlds end. Godlines maketh great housen, for the Lorde hath promised his blessing to a thousand generations of them that loue him and keepe his commandements. But on the contrarie, what is the cause why the Lord hi∣deth his secrets, keepeth backe many a hea∣uenly instruction, & withholdeth great bles∣sings from most parents, but because they
will not doe as Abraham did, they haue no care that these blessed monuments may not die, but bee deriued from age to age to Gods eternall glorie. Wherefore thou good pa∣rent goe thou forwarde in this vertuous edu∣cation of thy children, and then GOD shall hide no necessarie secret or instruction from thee, and he shall withhold no good blessing from thy posteritie; thou shalt be a father of the faithfull as Abraham was, if thou hast the same care for thy children and familie that he had. 5. The fifth reason to stirre vp dull and carelesse parents to this their duetie,Threatnings and punish∣ments. are those punishmēts and hard threatnings of God in holy scripture denounced against both parēt and childe failing in their dueties. Salomon sayth, Pro. 17. Hee that begetteth a foole be∣getteth himselfe sorrowe, and the father of a foole can haue no ioy.Pro. 17.21. Here by the word foole is not meant an innocent or idiot, but the child that is foolish and vntaught, as Salomō expoundeth himselfe,Chap. 19.13. chap, 19. verse 13. A foolish sonne is the calamitie of his father. And againe chap. 29.15. A child set at libertie ma∣keth his mother ashamed.&. 29.15. Wherefore oh you good children, you that haue more vnderstā∣ding then the rest, take pitty vpon your deere parents yt haue taken so much paines for you, & suffer them not by your dissolute life to be
made a spectacle of shame & a gazing stocke vnto all others. Againe Salomon speaking of vnnurtured children sayth, Pro. 20. Hee that curseth his father or his mother,Pro. 20.20. his light shall be put out in obscure darknes: that is, in the vtter darkenes where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.Chap. 30.16. Againe in the 30. chap. he saith, The eye that mocketh his father and despiseth the obedi∣ence of his mother, the rauens of the valley shall iob it out, and the eagles shall eat it vp: that is, he shal be slaine in the field, and the birdes of the aire shall deuout him. Againe Iob spea∣king of wicked and vngodly parents in his 27. chap. saith,Iob. 27.14. If his children bee multiplied they are multiplied to the sword, and his posterity shal not be satisfied with bread. Againe the Lord in ye prophesie of Amos saith, Though they bring vp children, yet will I depriue them from being men,Amos. 9.12. yea woe to them when I depart from them. And againe verse. 13. Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the murderer. Now from whence commeth all this mischiefe and the cause of this great miserie both vpon children and parents? what is the cause of this ruthful sor∣row? whence springeth this mothers shame? and how commeth it to passe that the pa∣rents own doung is cast in their faces by their own children in mocking & despising of thē? and whence arise all these heauie plagues and iudgements of God vpon their children
to ye consuming of their eies, but from this their owne negligence in bringing vp their chil∣dren? for it is euen iust with God, that seeing they haue offended him in his greatest bles∣sings, they shuld be plagued in the same thing wherein they offended with his greatest iudg∣ments. O you vnnaturall parents,Luk. 16.27. Diues in hell shall rise vppe against you in the day of iudgement and condemne you; for he being in hel had a care of his fathers house that they might bee forewarned, and therefore desired Abraham to send Lazarus to his brethren to testifie vnto them that they came not into that place of torment: but you will not ad∣monish your children, you wil not teach them Moses and the prophets, & you wil not shew them the danger of Gods heauie displeasure hanging ouer their heads, and therefore your owne children shall be one of the furies in hel to torment you. The Lord open your eyes to foresee and flie these fearefull iudgements. The diutur∣nitie of the good of good education. Psal. 78, 5.66. The sixt and last reason to moue parents to this excellent dutie, which is the principall scop of this text, is ye diuturnity of this good; their children shall be the better for it al their liues after; nay the worlde to come shall reape this benefite: for such children as you now bring vp, such parents shall they bee af∣ter you when you are gone: and looke what parents you leaue behinde you, the like chil∣dren
againe shall they reare vp. Wherefore O you parents, you are either the making or the marring of the world: for if your chil∣dren learne no good erudition at your hands, how should they be good fathers after you? and how should they leaue that to their po∣steritie by the right of inheritance which they neuer receiued from their auncestors? Let no man think that I dwell too long in this thing: For this is so profitable both for you, and your children, and for the whole Church of God, as that if I should turne aside from it, I know not what ground I should choose to bee so profitably occupied in againe; this is a most excellent course, to this busines I will lay both my shoulders, and if this did so much moue you as it doth me, we should shortly see a wonderfull change in Gods Church. Oh whose heart would it not reioyce to see the walles of Gods kingdome raised vp? Where∣fore yee that are the Lordes remembrancers keepe not silence, and giue him no rest vntill he repayre and set vp Ierusalem the praise of the world: call vpon the Lord to moue the hearts of parents, and call vpon parents to re∣member their duties, and you parents hear∣ken when you are called vnto, and stop not your eares like the deafe Adder. Your chil∣dren are the seede of Gods husbandrie:1. Cor. 3.9. We together are Gods labourers, saith the Apostle,
Ye are Gods husbandrie and Gods building. Now euen as it is in the husbandrie of this world, the good husband before he reapeth his crop will plowe and prepare his ground for ano∣ther haruest to follow that, and when he hath prepared his ground, his next care is for his seede, that it may be of the best, he dresseth it, and sifteth all the vnprofitable soile out of it, that so in time to come he might receiue the more happie encrease: euen so you good pa∣rents, you must not liue so careles as though the world should ende with your selues; no you must plow and fallow, and prepare your seede for another haruest before you reape your owne crop, the Lords husbandrie must not die to the end of the world, and hee hath made you his plowman together with his ministers, and your children are the seede. A∣gaine, you parents are the Lords orchard and vineyard, as we may reade Cant. 4. Esay 5. and therefore your children are the nurserie vnto it. The olde trees cannot alwaies stand, and the time shall come when all wee shall be cut downe with the axe of death. Now as hee that will continue his orchard of good fruites vnto his posteritie, will alwaies keepe a nurserie of young impes to succeede as the old shall decay, and as he will be more care∣full for them then for his older trees, because they by reason of their tendernes may sooner
catch hurt: for if they should be bitten and nipped while they bee young, or the canker should take them, they should prooue but scrubbed trees, and would neuer be fit for their roomes: euen so you parents which are both the Lords husbandry and his husbands, if you doe not keepe a nurserie for the Lords orchard, and if you doe not looke well to your children, which are the young oliue plants in this spirituall garden, the canker∣worme of euill vices shall catch them, and the wilde beasts of the forrest the heard of diuels which stray continuallie seeking whome to deuoure, shall so bite them, that they shall not after vs be fit to come into our roomes, and so the Lords vineyard should in time to come growe waste. For Gods sake good people looke well to this; if your owne chil∣dren doe not moue you, yet let Gods Church and his glorie for many yeares to come pre∣uaile with you. Now adaies parents thinke it to be the onely succouring and nourishing of their children, to giue them meate and drinke to the fill, and ease enough, and to cocker them vnder their wing, and thus in deede their bodies grow tall, but their soules they suffer for want of spirituall instruction and good manners, to dye and decay in them in the mean while, whereby they shew (as S. Chrysostome saith) how that they brought
forth the bodies of their children, but not their soules. This is not to keepe a nursery for Gods Church which is built of spirituall stones. The Lord be thanked we our selues haue at the least some care to serue God, oh let vs not leaue Gods Church in worse case then we finde it, for then should we leaue our shame behinde vs when we are gone: but it is to be feared (beloued) except we take bet∣ter meanes in hand then we doe begin, wee shall leaue behinde vs such a stinke, to the great annoyance of Gods Church after vs, that the ages to come shall be greatly infec∣ted with it. For in very trueth and diligent watchfulnes I speake it, I finde far lesse dutie in our youth, who owe reuerence to their el∣ders, then in the elders themselues, who ought to be reuerenced. What is become of the an∣cient discipline of parents? a few late yeares of ease and plentie haue made it to be forgot∣ten, as a lawe worne out of mind. Wherefore good parents, now lay to your hands before all run to ruine, take vnto you the auncient bonds wherewith your selues were held when you were young, receiue all the helpes of which I haue shewed you, and teach your children the whole trade of their way, that they may keepe it when they be old men, and deliuer the same enlarged and perfected to their children againe, that so Gods Church
and his glorie may not dye, but still be proui∣ded for to the end of the world. Al our hope is vpō this youth now being; for if they be well brought vp then they will also haue care of the posteritie following, and the posteritie following shall againe commend this good education by eternall tradition to the day of doome? Oh you parents, cast your eyes vpon this present ofspring framed of God so come∣ly, as though they were destinate to some strange and singular reformation. Consider with your selues how the world to come shall reioyce ouer vs, and speake of this happie conuersion to all posterities: and lastly, lift vp your eyes to heauen, and beholde the bridegroome Christ Iesus, preparing for his second comming, and prepare you also the world for him, that so we being found faith∣full stewards at his returne, we may with our deare children and beloued posteritie, enter with him into the Masters ioy, which he grant that hath made vs all, to whom be all ho∣nour and praise and euery good dutie world without end. Amen. FINIS.
