22900 99857017 22677
A most excellent new Dittie, wherein is shewed the sage sayinges, and wise sentences of Salomon: wherein each estate is taught his duetie, with singular counsell to his comfort and consolation. To the tune of Wigmoores Galliard. THose that will run a Vertuous race, and learne the Precepts of the sage Those that true wisedome will imbrace and learne to liue in youth and age: Let him approch hereto with speed, And to these Lessons giue good heed: for bearing well these thinges away, the Lord will blesse them night & day. My Sonne, sayth Salomon the wise, if thou true Wisedome wilt attaine: Then feare the Lord that rules the skies for so the scripture telleth thee plaine. Imbrace his word, and him obay: This is the chiefe and onely way: for they that do these thinges despise, are fooles to God, though worldly wise Vnto thy Father honour giue, and thou shalt surely blessed be: And be obedient while you liue, vno your Mother courteously: Then God will send thee euermore Sufficient wealth, and treasure store: all thinges shall prosper in thy hand, and song thou shalt inioy the Land. The blessing of thy Father deare, doth cause the childrens good successe: But where the Mother doth appeare, to curse the childrens wickednesse, Their whose foundation doth decay, Like withered leaues they fall away: Then all good children learne of me, to loue your Parentes faythfullie. Set not thy minde on worldly wealth, nor put thy confidence therein: For Riches doth consume by stealth, and Couetousnes is counted sinne: For while thou liuest on the earth, Thou art vncertaine of thy death: and when that death doth stop thy wind then must thou leaue thy goods behind Be friendly vnto euery man, but vnto few familiar be: And try thy friende if that thou can, his inward thoughts to proue and see: And if thou finde him iust and true, Change not thy old Friend for a new: For many promise much indeede, but cleane forsake thee in thy neede. If thou hast Sonnes, instruct them well but on thy Daughter neuer smile: Their wanton wayes do farre excell, let no affection thee beguile: With due correction loue them still, And giue not them their wanton will: for if that they do stubborne grow, their duetie then they will not know. Giue honour to the Aged sort. and to thy Betters alwayes bow: So shalt thou winne a good report, for God him selfe doth him allow: Of hatefull Pride likewise be ware, And haue an eye to after care: be not too rash in any thing, for that will soone repentance bring. Lende not thy goodes to Mighty men, whose countenance passeth thy degree For it is hard to get againe, as we by dayly proofe may see. For other men giue not thy word, No further then thou canst afford: least afterward thou chaunce to rue, and pay the debt when it is oue. With him that is a Maiestrate, in any case go not to law: Least thou repeut the same too late, for he will hold thee still in awe: Be alwayes wary in thy wordes. For spightfull congues are euill sworts and looke to whom thou dost impare, the thoughtes and secrets of thy hart. Be neuer ieolous of thy Wife, least she thereby do mischiefe learne, For so thou shalt soone purchase strife: then wisely do each thing discerne. And do no euill occasion giue, But louiugly together liue: For where the man and wife do hate, the curse of God waytes at thy gate. On Harlots cast not thou thy minde, least thou thereby thy selfe consume: And waste thy riches in the winte, whilst thou in faunie fret and fume: Their soule inticements bringeth death▪ And poyson commeth from their breath: their eyes are wandering too and fro, and euery one their fashons know. Prayse no woman for her beauti▪ sake, nor discommende no man by light: And with thy tongue no lying make, fulfill thy promise iust and right. Be mercifull vnto the poore, And God will thee reward therefore: Keepe not the Laborers wages bake but comfort such as comfort lacke. Grieue not the heauie harted man, nor ioy not at thy enemies harme: Rebuke thy Brother friendly than, against no man vse open charme: Nor credite thou each tale in hast, Till tryall proue the matter wast. Frō hateful slaunder keepe thy tongue & worke for age, whilst thou art young Three things there are which God doth hate as holy Scripture do declare: A man too proud in beggars state, a Rich man for to lye and sweare: To see an Old-man giuen to iust: And those of God are sure acurst. The lying tongue the soule doth quest but pride & iust throwes downe to hell. While you are liuing, call for grace, thy selfe is like the fading Flower: Death commeth stealing on a pace, thou shalt not know the day nor houre. Thy speach at all times shall not last, Vse well the time that now thou hast: and from repentance do not stay, thou canst no time with death delay. If thou consider well the same, and beare these Lessons in thy minde: And therevnto thy selfe do frame, great comfort surely thou shalt finde. Plant well these sayings in thy hart, And from these precepts neuer start: So shalt thou liue in perfect peace, and God will blesse thee with increase. FINIS. At London printed by W. W. for T. P.
