23332 99853072 18437
THE Abridgement of the English Chronicle, First collected by M. Iohn Stow, and after him augmented with very many memorable Anti∣quities, and continued with matters forreine and dome∣sticall, vnto the beginning of the yeare, 1618. By E.H. Gentleman. There is a briefe Table at the end of the Booke. Imprinted at London for the Com∣pany of Stationers, 1618. Dextera Domini me exalt abit.
To the Right Honorable Sir George Bolles Knight, Lord Maior of the Citie of London, and to the Right worshipfull the Aldermen his brethren: And to Sir Anthony Benn Knight, Re∣corder of the same Citie. Edmond Howes, Gentleman, wisheth all health and felicitie. RIght Honourable and graue Senators, the bles∣sed and peaceful entrance into this land, and ioyfull possession of our Leige Lord, of his immediate right of the Imperiall crowne of England, and the vtter banishment of all doubt in the Regall succession, with the vniuersall hearts applause of all his Highnesse English subiects, who with one consent acknowledged their loue and dutie vnto his lawfull right in Soueraigntie, all which in the speedy effecting and establishing of peace in this kingdome was much more then either our neigh∣bour Nations held possible to bee so easily perfor∣med,
A appeared by their great admiration vp∣on the certaine knowledge thereof, or was right∣ly vnderstood of the multitude that wholly en∣ioyes the benefite, as too plainely appeareth by their wilful ingratitude & forgetfulnes, seeing their long continued feare so quickely supprest, and be∣yond all expectation conuerted into as great free∣dome and tranquilitie, as either their hearts could wish, or is enioyed by any other nation. All these, and many other high blessings of Almightie God still succeeded one another, & no man would once hold vp his finger to make present acknowledge∣ment or publicke vnderstanding vnto posterities, of the boundlesse and wondrous workes of God in these our daies, as also of the manifold remark∣able accidents which haue happened of late yeares. These motiues, I say, with the earnest perswasi∣ons of diuers graue and honourable personages, who neuer ceased to accite mee vnto this present Act of Chronologie, haue directly caused mee to performe this generall businesse, in which my te∣dious labours I haue been intollerably abused and scandalized by Thraso, Momus, Zoylus, and other backebiters, & detractors: concerning whom, sith it is the least of offences to offend offenders, I will nei∣ther vexe my selfe, nor trouble your patience in seeking to please the enuious and insatiate. But forasmuch as I highly prize the good content of the honest, wise, and vertuous, thus was the course and manner of my proceeding herein. After I had well obserued, that no man would
lend a helping hand vnto the late aged painefull chronicler: neither in many moneths after his death, that any would expose or shewe themselues to prosecute so good a worke: and albeit that in this interim, & before, there were many named to haue already entred into this Labyrinth, yet not one appeared: whereupon I remembred the say∣ing of the Philosopher: That the naming of many friends, is a maine impediment vnto friendship. And as in that, so in this; then for my own cleare satisfacti∣on, & full assurance, that I would neither preiudice nor preuent any others better proceeding, I ente∣red into particular conference with euery man whose names had beene diuulged. Some of them of honourable rancke and reuerent qualitie: all of them learned, & of good sufficiency, some where∣of answered me, they thought that the giuing out of their names in this sort, was rather done by their secret enemies, of purpose to draw them into ca∣pitall displeasure, and to bring their names & liues into a generall question, then for any other intent of good: other saide, who doth this worke, must flatter, which I cannot, neither will I wilfully leaue a scandall vnto my posteritie. Another said, I can∣not see how in any ciuil action a man should spend his trauell, time & mony worse, then in that which acquires no regard, nor reward, except backebi∣ting & detraction. And one amongst the rest after he had sworne an oath, saide: I thanke God that I am not yet madde, to wast my time, spend two hundred pound a yeare, trouble my selfe, & all my friends, onely to gaine assurance of endlesse re∣proch,
losse of libertie, and bring all my dayes in question: & like as these spake, so did many others. And in conclusion, I sawe it vtterly refused of all. And by this time it was generally obserued, that this worke was wholly neglected. Then many of my friends began againe to animate me, and very seriously required me to make supplement: whose kinde perswasions preuailed so farre, that I promi∣sed them to doe my indeuour, onely for one yeares space, wherein my good will exceeded my best ex∣perience, as I found afterwards, for that it is not a yeare or two wherein a man may obtaine the par∣ticularities of truth, neither accomplish any thing to the effect in this solide and variable im∣ploiment. Then forthwith I repaired to the most honourable superiours, vnto whom I humbly sig∣nified my zealous loue, dutie, and diligence in this generall seruice of my Prince and Country. Of whom I receiued very gracious incouragement, & honorable instructions. And after that, vpon con∣ference with diuers graue Elders, louers of vertue, and fauourers of the Cities honour, by whose di∣rection, with all meekenesse I manifested my wil∣lingnesse vnto the Lord Maior, and Court of Al∣dermen, being then resolued, neither to breake my former promise, nor to neglect so great and gene∣rall a good for any deprauing speeches, or maleuo∣lent aspects, with all integritie; since which time I haue spent in this busines sixteene yeares without any great cause of encouragement. May it there∣fore please your wisedomes rightly to vnderstand that in all my proceedings I haue neither presu∣med
too farre of my selfe, nor done ought that might discourage, or preuent any other. And thus much for the cause and maner of my proceeding. Now right honourable, and most worthy El∣ders, whose state and gouernment is renowned through the world: what is hee that hath any vn∣derstanding, and knowes not London to bee the most flourishing and peacefull Cittie of Europe? of greatest antiquitie, happiest in countinuance, most increased, chiefe in prosperitie, and most sto∣red with plentie? and here I might alleadge many ancient presidents of pleasures, profits, time, and state, whereof neuer any subordinate Magistrates could equall yours. But seeing few wordes to the wise suffice, I will onely speake a word or two by the way. The promised blessing vnto the an∣cient Israelites to possesse a land that flowed with milke and hony, is with seuen fold measure heaped on your heads, your citty filled more aboundantly with all sorts of silkes, fine linnen, oyles, wines, and spices, perfection of Arts, & all costly ornaments, and curious workemanship, then any other Pro∣uince: so as London well deserues to beare the name of the choicest storehouse in the world, and to keepe ranke with any royall Cittie in Europe: her Cittizens rich and bounteous, witnesse their franke-giuing of more then twice seuen fifteens in one yeare, and their long continued charges and expence, as well vpon all occasions by sea and land for defence of their Prince and Country, as in ayding and relieuing their distressed neighbour Nations, and in performing many other worthy
matters for their owne honour, the delight of strangers, and the reliefe of the poore, as other∣wise: so as without offence it may truely be said, that the liberalitie of the Londoners, is but halfe knowne to their common friends. Peace and plen∣ty in the highest degree possesseth now your gates and pallaces: all nations repaire with willingnesse to bee partakers of your happinesse: many other glorious Cities haue many waies wanted these in∣cessant blessings: witnesse the famous Citie Rome, which hath beene often spoiled and sacked: the Ci∣ty Mosco, which not long since was twice spoiled with fire, the first by her enemies, the last was a priuate politicke practise of her owne Emperour. The like misfortune hath befallen vnto the great Cittie Constantinople. Stately Antwerpe hath felt the smart of diuers changes within mans memo∣ry. Populous Paris of late yeares was glad to beat downe her owne Suburbs, and cut her skirts shor∣ter, least other should sit vpon them: Cracouia, Lishbon, and many other royall Citties were glad and faine to seeke and sue for that which is freely giuen vnto her. These last haue I cited to bee as a looking-glasse to London; sith it is as impossible for any to know their proper face & feature with∣out an obiect, as it is for any people to bee truely sensible of their owne felicirie, that haue not seene nor tasted others misery. And thus (right Honourable and graue Fathers) although it was my meaning to haue vsed breuity, yet being inforced to the contrary, I craue your pardon, least I haue offended by prolixitie. And
because I will for euer be exempt, and free from all danger of all precurrant vipers, lurking Adders, and venemous tongues, I here conclude, with ten∣der of my loue, and the continuance of a double prentiship, not onely of these my free offered la∣bours in this Abridgement, but also my larger Booke, the which I likewise recōmend vnto your kind acceptation, hauing as well formerly as at this present proclaimed a cessation from any fur∣ther supplement or continuance of the generall English Chronicle, to the end they might and shall for euer be truely vnderstood, that I haue no cohe∣rence with the enuious who neuer did good them∣selues nor speake well of others, being euer desi∣rous to doe my best to auoide all impediments that may any way impeach others better pro∣ceedings, wishing you all encrease of your hearts desire, and euerlasting hap∣pinesse.
TO THE HONEST AND friendly Reader. FOr thy sake with the rest of my louing Countrimen, and for the modest delight of other Nations, of what qualitie soe∣uer, through the earnest perswasion of many my good friends, fauourers of knowledge, I was the rather induced to performe this businesse, and to arme my selfe with my best patience a∣gainst the daily iniuries and discurtesies which in these affaires I haue indured both in Court and Countrey, without the least part of pride or presumption on my be∣halfe. A time may come, to their disgrace, wherein I may retort their vndeserued malice. But as concerning the ignorant, proud and enuious, it will be hard for me to escape their braine-sicke imputation. For my owne part I acknowledge others excellency, and my owne in∣sufficiency. What I haue done, was in a kinde of volun∣tary necessitie; as is euident: for that euery man (so far as I could perceiue) though they thought it a very good worke, yet they held it no wisedome to run headlong into iudgement, and for the pleasure of others to waste their time, spend their money, displease superiors, and endure the cruell censure of the multitude, onely vpon hope of Master Stowes reward. All which, notwithstanding, for the generall good of all men, & without intent of of∣fence
to any, seeing so many memorable accidents like to be buried in obliuion, I haue vndertaken sixteene yeares supplement, and enlarged it with very many memorable antiquities. And according to my promise I haue published my larger worke three yeares past. The manifold abuses which haue beene offered me by the shape of man, and the small respect by those of good spirit, and solide sub∣stance, haue so checkt my forwardnesse, that I stand a∣mazed, hauing already beene condemned, and idged before I was tried, or heard to speake. What I haue written, is free from leazing: Be thou therefore of what Religion or condition soeuer, expect nothing here∣ contained, to be written for any purpose of flattery, time seruice, or offence: truth I sought, and truth is here set downe. Peace and good thoughts possesse thee. Fare∣well. Thy very louing friend, Edmond Howes.
A DESCRIPTI∣ON OF ENGLAND SCOTLAND, WALES, and Cornwall. BRitaine, is an Island in the Oce∣an Sea, situate right ouer against France, one part of which Isle Englishmen doe inhabite, another part Scots, the third part Welsh∣men, and the fourth part Cornish∣men. All they either in language, conditions, or lawes, doe differ among themselues. England is the greatest part, which is diuided into 40. Coun∣ties, which we call shires: whereof ten (that is to say) Kent, Sussex, Surrey, South-hampton, Barkeshire, Wilshire, Dorsetshire, Somerset∣shire, Deuonshire, and Cornwall, doe containe the first part of that Island, which part bounding to∣wards the South, standeth betweene the thames and the Sea. From thence to the Riuer of Trent, which pas∣seth through the midst of England bee 16. shires, whereof the first sixe (standing Eastward) are Es∣sex, Middlesex, Hartfordshire, Suffolke, North∣folke,
and Cambridgeshire. The other ten, which stand more in the middle of the country, are these: Bedford, Huntington, Buckingham, Oxford, Northampton, Rutland, Leicester, Notingham, Warwicke, and Lincolne. After these there be 6, which border Westward vpon Wales, as Glo∣cester, Hereford, Worcester, Shropshire, Staf∣ford, and Chester. About the middle of the Regi∣on, Darbishire, Yorkeshire, Lancashire, & Cum∣berland. On the left hand toward the West, is Westmerland: against the same is the Bisho∣pricke of Durham, and Northumberland, which boundeth vpon the North, in the Marches of Scotland. These shires be diuided into xxii. Bi∣shoprickes, Canterbury, Rochester, London, Chi∣chester, Winchester, Salisbury, Excester, Bath and Welles, Worcester, Glocester, Hereford, Couentry and Lichfield, Lincolne, Ely, Norwich, Oxford, Peterborow, Bristow. And this is the prouince of the Archbishop of Canterbury, which is the Primate of England, with Wales. Yorke, Durham, Chester, and Carlile, is the other pro∣uince of the Arch-bishop of Yorke, which is ano∣ther Primate of England. The Ocean sea doth bound England: the first part of Britaine East and South Wales, and Cornwall West. The ri∣uer of Twéede diuideth England and Scotland North. The length of the Island beginneth at Portsmouth in the South part, and endeth at Twéed in the North,Scotland another part of Britaine. containing 320. Miles. Scotland, after the ouerthrow of the Picts, be∣gan at the riuer Twéed, & so méeting at the riuer
Tine. Therefore ye length of Scotland, frō Twéed to the furthest coast, is estéemed to be 480. myles: But as Scotland is longer than England, so is it narrower. The said riuer of Twéed separateth the marches from Northumberland, the farthest country of England: the chiefe towne whereof is Barwicke, now in possession of the English. The westerne limite of Scotland, whilome was Cumberland, which the riuer of Selue diuideth from Annandall. Betwéene these two Regions, the Cheuiot hilles appeare. Next to the marches, Pictland bordereth, bounding vpon the East. The most famous townes, be Dunber, Hadding∣ton, Leigh, Northbarwicke, and Edenbrough the Kings seat. The same Cittie, the riuer called the Frith, doth water and passe by: the same riuer a∣gaine diuideth from Loughdean, a country adioy∣ning called the Fife, in which country are many townes, as Donfermile, Cupre: but the notable towne of S. Andrew, specially famous for the V∣niuersitie, and Sea of the Arch-bishop. On the o∣ther side toward the Irish side Northward, is Ni∣disdalia, so called of the riuer that passeth thereby, where be the townes of Douglasse, and Doufrie. Vpon the South adioyneth Galloway, where is the towne called Coswel, and the ancient Temple of S. Ninian. By that standeth the countrey of Haricta once renowned with the towne Haricton, whereof perchance it tooke the name. About Hari∣cta, towards the west, is Elgonia bordering vpon the Ocean, whereon is the Lake Lomunde, which is very broad & large, containing many Islands,
situate at the foote of the mountaine Grantshayn, eight miles from the Castle of Doubriton. A good space on this side Grampius riseth ye riuer Taus, the greatest of all Scotland, taking his name of Atholl and Calidonia, a lake from whence it springeth, which falling by many places, but chief∣ly by S. Iohns towne, and lastly by Dunde, and there breaketh into the Germaine sea. Against Taus is Anguise, and is diuided from Fife. To the same vpon the North, adioyneth Atheles. On the other side Argile sheweth it selfe, being full of Lakes, whose vttermost bounds stretch so farre as Ireland, about which the promontary of fote∣land, called Lands-head standeth. Betwéene Argatele and Olgouia westward, lyeth the countrey of Sterling. Héere the Forrest of Calidonia beganne on the left side, there like∣wise is the Castle of Calidone situate by Taus, called Doucheldin. From a little hill of the For∣rest, riseth Cluid. Of that riuer the Dale was called Glotenale: which country that riuer runneth by, and in the same is the Citty of Glasco, a goodly Vniuersity. Againe, towards the East is ioyned the country of Anguis and Merne, vpon the sea coast, where∣in Fordunne by situation is very strong. Of the same side of Scotland is the countrey of Marre, garnished with a citty called Aberdon, standing betweene the two riuers of Dona and Dea. Then followeth Morry, which the two notable riuers doe compasse about, called Nea and Spea. At the mouth of the last riuer, standeth the towne of
Elgis: But in the middle part standeth the broad country of Rossia. The breadth of the Island is scarse xxx. miles ouer, which defended with thrée promontories like Towers, repelleth the great waues and surges of the sea: and inuironed with two gulfes, which those promentories do inclose, the entries be quiet and calme, & the water peace∣able. The strait of the land is at this day called Cathanes, coasting vpon the sea Deucalidon. About Scotland in the Irish seas are xl. Ilands: many of these in length at least are 30. miles, but in breadth not aboue 12. Amongst them is Iona, beautified with the tombs of the Scottish Kings. Beyond Scotland towards the North be the Iles of Orcades, the which are 30. in number the prin∣cipall of which Ilands is Panonia. Beyond the Orcades standeth Thule, in the fro∣zen sea now called Island. The other part Northerne, and full of Moun∣taines, a very rude & homely kinde of people doth inhabite, which are called the Redshankes, or wild Scots, and thus much of Scotland. Wales lieth on the left hand:Wales the third part of Britain. which like a pro∣montary or foreland on euery side is compassed with the maine sea: except it be on the Southeast part with the Riuer of Seuerne, which diuideth Wales from England. Therefore Wales is ex∣tended from the towne of Chepstow, where it be∣ginneth by a straight line, a little aboue Shrews∣bury, euen to Westchester Northward. Into that part so many of the Britaines as remained aliue after the slaughter & losse of their country, at the
length did repaire, where partly through refuge of the mountaines, and partly of the woods and marshes, they remained in safety: which part they enioy to this day.4 Bishops in Wales. There bee many townes and strong Castles, and foure Bishoprickes. The first is S. Dauids, another Landaffe, the third Bangor, and the fourth S. Asaph, which be vnder the Arch-bishop of Canterbury. The Welshmen haue a language from the Englishmen, which as they say, doth partly sound of the Troian anti∣quitie, and partly of the Gréeke. And thus much of Wales. Cornwall.Cornwall beginneth on that side which stan∣deth towards Spaine westward: toward the East, it is of length fourescore and ten miles, rea∣ching a little beyond S. Germaines, situate on the right hand vpon the sea coast, where the greatest breadth of that countrey is but twenty miles. It bordereth vpon England, West, South & North: The maine sea is round about it: it is a very bar∣ren soyle, but there is great plenty of Lead and Tin: their tongue is farre dissonant from Eng∣lish, but it is much like to the Welsh tongue: be∣cause they haue many wordes common to both tongues. Cornwall is in the Diocesse of Exester, which was once worthy to bée counted the fourth part of the Island, for the contrarietie of the lan∣guage. Thus much of the particular description of Britaine. The forme of the Island is Triquetra, hauing thrée corners, or thrée sides: two whereof, that is to say, the corner toward the East, and the
other toward the West (both extending North∣wards) are the longest. The third, which is the South side, is farre shorter then the other: for the Island is greater of length then of breadth. The right corner of which Island Eastward, is in Kent at Douer and Sandwich. From whence, to the third angle, which is in the North of Scotland, is seuen hundred miles. Againe, the length from this corner of Douer in Kent to the vttermost part of Cornwall, being S. Michaels mount, is supposed to be three hundred miles. From this left angle, being the West part of Cornwall, which hath a prospect towards Spaine, to the North angle in the further part of Scotland, the length is eight hundred miles. THE RACE OF THE Kings of Britaine: and in the Margent are placed the yeares before Christs birth, when e∣uery King began their raigne, till Cunobilinus, in whose time Christ was borne, and then the yeares from his birth are placed. BRute the sonne of Siluius (following,1108. as here∣tofore, the common receiued opinion) after a long and weary iourney with his Troians, a∣riued in this Island, at a place now called Totnes in Deuonshire, the yeare of the world, 2155. the yeare before Christs natiuitie, 1108. wherein he
first beganne to raigne, and named it after his owne name Britan: he builded the Citty of new Troy, now called London: he diuided the whole Island among his thrée sonnes. Vnto Locrine his eldest sonne, hée gaue the middle part, called Loegria: to Camber, Cambria, to Albanact, Alba∣nia: he deceased when he had raigned 24. yeares. 1084LOcrine raigned 20. yeares. he chased the Hun∣nes which inuad this realme, & pursued them so sharpely, that many of them with their King, were drowned in a riuer named Humber. Locrine had to wife Guendoline,How Hum∣ber tooke that name. daughter to Corineus, Duke of Cornwall, by whom hee had a sonne named Madan: hée also kept Estrild, by whom hee had a daughter named Sabrine: but Guendo∣line gathering a great power, fought with King Locrine, and stewe him. Shée drowned Estrild with her daughter Sabrine,Seuerne. in a Riuer called Se∣uerne. 1604 Guendoline a Queene. The King deuoured by woules.GVendoline discréetly ruled 15. yeares, and left the same to her sonne Madan. MAdan was deuoured by wild woules, when he had raigned 11. yeares. 1009 A traitor to his brother deuoured of wild beasts.MEmpricius slewe his brother Manlius, ta∣king the wiues & daughters of his subiects: but was destroyed of wolues, when he had raig∣ned 20. yeares. EBranke founded Alclud in Scotland: he made the Castle of Edenbrough,919 and Bambrought: hee builded Rayrbranke,929 now called Yorke, hée raigned 40.917 yeares. Chester.Brutus, surnamed Greeneshield, raigned
twelue yeares. LEil builded Carlill, now called Cestria:892 hée raigned 25. yeares. RVdhudribras builded Canterbury, Winche∣ster, and Shaftsbury. He raigned: twentynine yeares. BLadud, who had long studied at Athens,863 Bath. The King attempted to flye. broght Philosophers to kéepe schooles in Britaine: hée builded Bath, and presumed to flie: but brake his necke when he had raigned 20. yeares. LEile, builded Caer Lair, now called Leicester. Hée had thrée daughters, Gonorell, Ragan, and Cordelle: which Cordelle succéeded him in the Kingdome, when he had raigned fourtie yeares. COrdelle was sore vexed by her two Nephews,844 Cordila Queene. Morgan of Albanie, and Conedagus of Cam∣ber, who cast her into prison: where shée flew her selfe, when she had raigned 5. yeares. MOrgan warred on his Nephewe Conedagus,800 but Conedagus slue Morgan, and then was King of all Britaine: He raigned thrée and thirty yeares. RIuallo, in whose time it rained bloud three dayes:766 Bloud rai∣ned. And then a great mortalitie caused al∣most desolation. He raigned 46. yeares. GVrgustus, a common drunkard, whereof fol∣lowed other vices, raigned 37. yeares.721 SIcilius the brother of Gurgustus raigned fortie nine yeares.664 IAgo, Cousin to Gurgustus,636 raigned fiue and twen∣ty yeares.
612Kimmacus raigned 53. yeares. 59Gorbodug raigned 43. yeares. 396 The bro∣ther slue the bro∣ther.FErrex with his brother Porrex, ruled Britain fiue yeares, they fell at ciuill discord for the so∣ueraigne dominion, in which Ferrex was slaine, and Porrex afterward was killed. 441 Mulmutius lawes.MVlmutius Dunwallo constituted good lawes, which long after were called Mulmutius lawes, he gaue priuiledges vnto Temples, and ploughes, and began to make the foure notable wayes in Britaine, he raigned 40. yeares. BElinus & Brennus diuided this Isle of Britaine. Vnto Belme was appointed, England, Wales and Cornwall. Vnto the other, the part beyond Humber. This Brennus raised warre against B∣line: but in conclusion, Brennus went amongst the Gaules, where for his excellent qualities, hée was their soueraigne Captaine, with whom he passed into Italy, sacked Rome. Belinus raigned xxvi. yeares. Gurgustus subdued Denmarke, and in his re∣turne met with a fléete comming from the parts of Spaine, which were séeking for habitati∣ons,375 Ireland in∣habited. to whom he granted the Isle of Ireland to in∣habite. He raigned xix. yeares. 356 Merciā law the third.GVinthelinus had to wife a notable womā na∣med Mercia: Shee diuised certaine lawes, named Mercians lawes. He raigned xxvi. yeares. 33 The Picts inhabited the marchesCEcilius raigned seuen yeares: a people called Picts, arriued here in Britaine, and possessed those parts, which now be the Marches of both Realmes, England and Scotland.
KImarus raigned 3. yeares,323 and was slaine as he was hunting. Elanius was King of Britaine 9. yeares.321 MOrindus,311 The King deuoured. in whose time out of the Irish seas came a wonderfull monster, which destroyed much people, whereof the King hearing, would needes fight with it, by which hee was deuoured, when he had raigned 8. yeares. GOrbomannus raigned 11. yeares.393 Grantham builded. He builded Grantham. ARchigallo extorted from men their goods,192 The King depriued. to enrich his treasure: for which cause he was depriued when he had raigned 5. yeares. Elidurus raigned 5. yeares.296 ARchigallo restored, ruled the people quietly ten yeares. ELidurus, after the death of his brother,272 raigned not passing two yeares, but that his younger brother Vigenius tooke and cast him into prison. VIgenius raigned seuen yeares, and Pereduries,370 The towne of Picke∣ring built. raigned after 2. yeares, He builded the town of Pickering. Elidurus the third time raigned foure yeares.261 Gorbonian raigned ten yeares.258 Morgan guided the Realme 14. yeares.248 EMerianus, when he had tyrannously raigned 7. yeares, was deposed.234 227 Iuall gouerned peaceably 20. yeares.207 Rimo gouerned this Realme 16. yeares.191 Gernuntius raigned 20. yeares.171 CAtillus raigned ten yeares:A good example. he hung vp all op∣pressors of the poore.
161Coilus quietly raigned 20. yeares. 141Porrex, a vertuous Prince, raigned 5. yeares. 116CHierennus, through his darkenesse, raigned but one yeare. 135Fulgen his sonne raigned but two yeares. 133Eldred raigned but one yeare. 132Androgius likewise raigned one yeare. 131Varianus raigned thrée yeares. 136Eliud, a great Astronomer, raigned 5. yeares. 124Dedantius raigned fiue yeares. 120Detonus raigned in the land two yeares. 118Gurginus raigned thrée yeares. 115Merianus was King two yeares. 111Blandumus gouerned two yeares. 180Capenus raigned thrée yeares. 106Quinus ruled this land two yeares. 104Silius raigned two yeares. 94Bledgabredus raigned ten yeares. 91Archemalus was King two yeares. 88Eldelus raigned foure yeares. 86Rodianus was King two yeares. 83Redargius raigned thrée yeares. 81Samulius raigned two yeares. 78Penisellus was King thrée yeares. 76Pyrhus ruled this land two yeares. 74Caporus was King two yeares. 70Diuellus gouerned foure yeares. 66Helius raigned not full one yeare. Lud repai∣red LondonLVd repaired the city of new Troy, & builded on the west part thereof, Ludgate, leauing after him two sons, Androgius, and Theomancius: who being not of age to gouerne, their Vncle Cassibe∣lan
obtained the crown. London tooke the name of Lud, and was called Ludstowne. Thus farre Ief∣fery Munmouth. CAssibelanus ruled 19. yeares. In the 8. yeare of his raigne Iulius Caesar sailed into Britain,51 Caesar his first voiage into Eng∣land. whereat the first, being wearied with an hard & sharpe battaile, & after with sudden tempest, and his nauy almost destroied, he returned againe in∣to France: the next spring (which was the yeare before Christ 51.The second voyage of Caesar.) hée passed the seas againe with a great army. But whiles he went towards his armies nland, his shippes lying at anker, with force of tempest were destroyed, so that 40. were lost. Vpon land also his horsemen at the first en∣counter were vanquished. At the second conflict, hee put the Britaines to flight. From thence hée went vnto the riuer of thames, on the further side whereof, Cassibelanus with a great multitude of people, was kéeping the bankes: but not being a∣ble to resist the force of the Romanes,England tributary to the Ro∣manes. London submitted it selfe to Caesar, deliuering vnto him hostages: which example also the other citties fol∣lowed: whereby Cassibelanus was constrained to agrée that Britaine should become tributary to the Romanes. Then Caesar like a conqueror with a great number of prisoners, sailed into France, and so to Rome. Theomantius raigned quietly 23. yeares.37 CVnobilinus. the sonne of Theomantius, raigned 35. yeares. In the 14. yeare of his raigne,14 Christ our Sauiour was horne.
From this place following, the yeares from Christ his birth, are placed in the Margent. An Christ. 1IESVS Christ very God and man, was borne in the 42. yeare of the raigne of Augustus: hee beganne to preach the 15. yeare of Ti∣berius, and suffered his pas∣sion in the 18. yeare of the same Tiberius. 21GƲiderius, for that hee thought the Romanes had their tribute wrongfully, he denied to pay the same: he raigned 23. yeares. Aruiragus rained 28. yeares. 44Claudius the Emperour sailed into Britaine: he subdued vnto the Empire, the Isles of Orca∣des, and those that lye in the Ocean Sea beyond Britaine. First Chri∣stians in England.The yeare after Christs birth 63. came into Britaine Ioseph of Arimathie, & 11. other Chri∣stians, who builded them a Chappell in the Isle of Anaion, and after he was there buried; which place being since increased and newly builded, was named Glassenbury. 73MArius was ordained King: the Picts, accom∣panied with the Scots, inuaded Britaine,
vnto whom Marius gaue inhabitance in the fur∣ther part of Scotland: He raigned 53. yeares. COilus, brought vp among the Romanes,124 Colchester built. paied the tribute truly, he builded the towne of Col∣chester, and raigned 55. yeares. At this time 133.Galen. the famous Physitian Galen flourished in Rome vnder Helius Adrianus the Emperour. LVcius sent his Embassadors to Eleutherius Bi∣shop of Rome,England receiued the Faith. desiring him to send some de∣uout and learned men, by whose instruction both he and his people might be taught the Faith and Religion of Christ: whereof Eleutherius being ve∣ry glad, sent with them Faganus, and Deruuianus, by whose diligence Lucius and his people were baptized and instructed in the faith of Christ. Lu∣cius raigned 12. yeares. SEuerus Emperour in Britaine, caused a trench to be cast from sea to sea, the length of 22. miles.194 He deceased at Yorke. ANtonius Bassianus died in the vi.212 yeare of his raigne. CArausius tooke vpon him in Britaine, and 7.290 Carausius vsurpeth in Britaine. yeares after Carausius was slaine by Ale∣ctus. Saint Alban, suffered martyrdom vnder Dioclesian and Maximilian, in the yeare of our Lord 23. ALectus then kept Britaine by the space of thrée yeares, and was subdued by Asclopiodatus.292 The first imperiall Crowne of gold. At this time the Emperour of Rome ordained for himselfe & his successors, and imperiall Crowne or diadem of gold, adorned with precious stones.
Reade my larger booke. 299ASelepiodatus slew Gallus, the Romane Cap∣taine in the citty of London, Coil tooke on him the Kingdome of Britaine. 305Constantius began to raigne, possessed Africa, I∣taly, France, Britaine. 306COnstantine the great, sonne of Codstantius, and Helen was created Emperour in Britaine: he established the Gospell in his Empire, and after him all Emperours were Christians: He left be∣hind him thrée sonnes, to wit, Constantinus, Con∣stans. and Constantius. 337COnstantinus attempted warre against his bro∣ther and was slaine. 340COnstans then ruled Britaine, which he had ad∣ministred with great iustice: but was slaine. 353COnstantius then had the regiment of Bri∣taine himselfe alone, enioyed the Roman Empire. S. George.About this time liued the famous Preacher S. George in Antioch. 372 Iulian the Apostata.IVlianus (called the Apostata) beganne his raigne ouer the Empire, an earnest aduersary to Chri∣stian Religion. After him succéeded in the Empire, Iouinion.Iouinian. 365VAlentinian was Emperour: he by his Depu∣ty here in Britaine, made sharpe warre vpon the Picts and Scots. Hillary Tearme.This yeare 369. dyed S. Hillary, Bishope Poytiers, of whom Hillary Tearme taketh the name: or as some thinke, of Pope Hillary, who was Pope in the yeare 464.
GRatian was then created Emperour:375 Maximus. Maximus heere in Brittaine vsurped the title of the Empire, whereupon assembling all the men of warre, and youth of the Realme, he passed into France, expelled the Frenchmen out of Armo∣rica, and placed therein Britaines, vnder Conon,Lītle Britan in France. of whom euer since it hath béene called Britaine the lesse. VRsula, with the eleuen thousand Virgins, sent into little Britaine to be maried, were slaine. At this time 386.The origi∣nall of the Patriarchy of Constan¦tinople. in a generall Councell at Constantinople, among other things it was or∣dained, that the Bishops of Constantinople should for euer be called Patriarches. Reade my larger booke. HOnorius the sonne of Theodosius,395 sucéeded after his father in the Empire: but Gratian, a Bri∣taine, taking vpon him to gouerne Britaine: was immediately slaine, and Constantine was elected Gouernour. THe last of September 425.408 The death of S. Hie∣rosme. died the most re∣uerend Father S. Hierosme, in his hermitage in Bethelem at 91. yeares of age. THeodosius succéeded in the Empire, and made Valentinian his cousin, fellow therein, At this time Britaine, with the foresaid warres, was so impouerished of able men, that it could not with∣stand the inuasions of the Pictes and Scots: whereupon they required aide of Aetius, the Captaine of the Romaine Army, hée sent them certaine men of warre out of Fraunce, who manfully chased away the Picts and Scots, and
raising a wall betwéene the Prouince and the e∣nemy, returned. After their departure, the Picts and Scots inuaded the Britaines againe, forra∣ged their countrey, and destroied the inhabitants: wherupon there was sent new aid out of France, and a wall was made of stones. But shortly after the Scots and Picts made greater Roades into Britaine, then euer heretofore. For the Romans being troubled with wars in France and Italy, neglected the defence of Britaine. This happened about the 16. yeare of Theodosius the yonger, the yeare of Christ, 443. S. Patrique sent to con∣uert Ire∣land.About this time, being the 14. yeare of Hono∣rius the Emperour, there was a generall Coun∣cell held at Ephesus, by Celestinus the first, who by consent of the Emperour, sent S. Patrique the sonne of Gothes, sister to S. Martin of Towers, to conuert the Irish Nation. And in the yeare 413. which was the 2.The Go∣thes spole Rome. yeare of this Honorius, the Go∣thes destroyed Rome: but Alarcus their King, be∣ing a Christian, shewed mercy to such as fled into the Churches of St. Peter and St. Paul. Ricus Geyse, alias Genseric, King of Alaynes and Vandals, after hée had subdued Carthage, came from Spaine into Libia, at the request of Boniface, gouernor of Affrica, to aide him against Sygisuldus, King of Barbary, who not onely made hauocke of the Countrey of Affrica, with fire and sword in all extremitie with his diuellish people, but also greatly infected the world with the Arri∣an heresie. And in the yeare 431. hee with like malice to disturbe the Christian Church,
besieged the Citty,The death of S. Augu∣stine. wherein was the most holy and reuerend Father, Saint Augustine, who died within thrée moneths after the siege, at 76. yeares of age, hauing béene 40. yeares Bishop: of whom it is written: that God shewed him a speciall grace, that hee liued not to see the desolation of that Citty, whereof he was then Bishop, viz. Hyppo. The end of the Romanes gouernment in Britaine, which had conti∣nued 483. yeares. AFter this, the Britaines continuing a while in doubtfull war with the Picts and Scots, elected Vortiger. VOrtiger being king,447 such a plenty of corne and fruit happened, as the like had not ben séene in many yeares; which plentie caused idlenesse, gluttony and letchery.Pestilence. There followed such a great pestilence, that the liuing scantly sufficed to bury the dead. Also the Scots and Picts in most cruell wise spoiled the land: where through Vor∣tiger was forced to send for aide of forraine lands. And in thrée large shippes,Saxons sent for. there came out of Ger∣many, thrée sorts of people, Englishmen, Saxons, and Getes: Hengist and Horsus,Saxons en∣tered this land. two brethren be∣ing their Captaines, vnto whom was giuen the Isle of Thanet to inhabite. By their manhood in many battailes, Vortiger vanquished and droue
backe the Pictes and other enemies: whereby Hengist came in such fauour,Vortiger diuorced. that Vortig married his daughter Rowan, a maide of won∣derfull beauty▪ for whose sake the King was di∣uorced from his lawfull wife: after which time the Saxons daily increased, and the Christian faith decaied. The Britaines considering the daily repaire of the Saxons, shewed to their King the iepardy that might thereof insue, but all was in vaine: wherfore they depriued him when he had raigned 7.Vortiger depriued. yeares: and ordained to their King, his eldest sonne Vortimer. 454 The King poysoned.VOrtimer pursued the Saxons, and vanqui∣shed them. Vntill at length hée was poysoned by his Step mother, after hée had raigned sixe yeares. 460 Barone slaine at AubresburyVOrtiger obtained againe the Kingdome, and shortly after, Hengistus entred the land, with a number of Saxons: but when hée heard of the great assembly that the Britaines made against him, he treated for peace: shortly after the Sax∣ons traiterously slew on the plaine of Sarisbury, CCCClx.First king∣dome of the Saxons. Barons and Earles, and tooke the King prisoner, constrained him to grant vnto them Kent, Sussex, Suffolke, and Norfolke. Then Hengist began his dominion ouer Kent: and sending fore moe Saxons, made warre vpon the Britaines. Aurelius Ambrose and Viher, made warre vpon Vortiger,Vortiger burned. and burned him in his Castle, when he had secondly raigned 6. yeares.
AVrolius Ambrose, second sonne to Constantine,466 hasted him with an army towards Yorke a∣gainst Occa sonne of Hengist, where hee discomfi∣ted, and tooke prisoner the saide Occa. He caused the great stones to be set vpon the plaine of Saris∣bury,Stonehing. in remembrance of the Britaines that were slaine there. A Saxon subdued the countries of Southe∣ry, Somerset, Deuonshire, and Cornwall,The second kingdom of the Saxons. which after was called the Kingdome of South Saxons. The kingdome of the east Saxons began vnder Duke Vffa,The third kingdom of the Saxons. which contained Norfolke and Sf∣folke. Aurelius, died of poyson, when he had raig∣ned 32. yeares. VTher Pendragon was crowned King.498 He was enamored vpon Igreene the Dukes wife of Cornwall, and on her hée begate Arthur. Hee raigned eightéene yeares, and was buried at Stonehing. ARthur, the sonne of Vther Pendragon,516 was crowned King of Britaine. He fought twelue battailes against the Saxons,Round Table. he constituted the order of the round Table, to which order he onely receiued such of the nobilitie, as were most re∣nowned for vertue and chiualry. While Arthur was ocupied in his warres be∣yond the seas, Mordred, to whom he had commit∣ted the gouernment of Britaine, confederating himselfe with Cerdicus, King of the West Saxons, traiterously vsurped the Kingdome: of which treason, when relation came to Arthur,
he spéedily returned,Mordred slaine. pursuing him into Corne∣wall, gaue him battaile, where Mordred was slaine, and Arthur being deadly wounded, was conueied to Glassenbury, where he died, and is buried, after he had raigned 16. yeares. 542COnstantine, kinsman to Arthur, was ordained King. AVrelius a Britaine, raising mortall warre a∣gainst Constantine, slue him when he had raig∣ned 3. yeares. He was buried at Stonehing. This yeare 544. there was an vniuersall earth∣quake. 545AVrelius Gonaxus, King of Britaine, imprisoned his vncle, which was right heire to the crown. He raigned 33. yeares. The 5. & 6. kingdomes of the Sax∣ons.The kingdome of Northumberland began vn∣der a Saxon, named Ida. This prouince was first diuided into two kingdomes: the one was called Deyra, the which contained the land from Hum∣ber to Tine: the other Brenicia, which included the countrey from Tine to the Scottish sea. VOrtiporus the sonne of Conanus, was ordained King of Britaine, a victorious King, and cru∣ell tyrant,578 who put from him his wife, and kept her daughter for his concubine: in diuers battailes he discomfited the Saxons: He raigned 4. yeares. MAlgo Conanus gouerned the Britaines, slue his first wife, and tooke his brothers daugh∣ter.The first warre be∣tweene the Saxons in this realme. EThelbert, King of the Saxons in Kent, gaue battell to Ceanlinus, King of the west Saxons: in which fight were slaine two Dukes of Ethel∣berts,
and himselfe with his people chased. CAreticus ruled the Britaines,58 his subiects mo∣ued the Saxons (with Gurmundus King of Ireland) to make warre vpon Careticus, in such wise, that he was faine to take the towne of Cice∣ster, where they assaulted him so sore, that he with his men fled from thence into Wales.Gurmund∣chester builded. When he had raigned 3. yeares, Gurmund builded Gur∣mondchester. EThelridus gouerned Northumberland,588 who made such continual war vpon the Britaines, that it is thought he slue more of them then all the other Saxons. By this cruelty the faith of Christ was almost vtterly extinguished in Britaine, ma∣ny were chased out of the Iland,The Saxons had the whole pos∣session of this realme. the rest remained in Wales, and the Saxons obtained the whole do∣minion of the Island: sauing a part of Scotland, and was subiect to the Picts and Scots. This yeare 616. being the fourth yeare of Hy∣raclius the Emperour of the Romanes, in the moneth of August, in France and other places,A strange and terrible pestilence. there happened a great earthquake, and present∣ly followed a great pestilence, with such hideous scabs and botches, as they could not discerne nor know one man from another. This pestlience was very fierce and infectious. 596. S. Gregory sent Augustine, Melitus Iustus,Austē came into Eng∣land, S. Au∣stens at Canterbu∣ry, S. Pauls Church in London. and Iohn, to preach the Christian faith to the An∣gles, which were first receiued of Ethelbert, King of England, whom they conuerted to the faith, with diuers of his people. This Ethelbert began to build Saint Augustines in Canterbury, Pauls
Church in London,S. Andrews in Roche∣ster, S. Pe∣ters at Westmin∣ster builded The life & death of the false Prophet Mahomet. and S. Adrewes in Rochester. Sibertus, King of the east Saxons, builded West∣minster. MAhomet, of the stocke of Ismael, an Orphan, of poore parentage, of an excellent wit, and great strength, borne in Arabia, in his youth ta∣ken and sold to a rich Marchant, who imployed him in his affaires: his maister died, then he mar∣ried Cadiga his Mistresse, of 50. yeares of age, by whom hee had much wealth, which hee in few yeares increased mightily, as well in Trea∣sure, Camels, Munition, as other commodities: hee gaue great entertainment in his house, and was liberall vnto the poore, hée was very skilfull in Magicke, and learned many deceits of the E∣gyptians, for the which hee was held in admira∣tion of the ignorant Sarazens, and distracted A∣rabians. And albeit he was of small reading, by reason of his education & otherwise, yet he hear∣kened vnto such as were learned, especially, if they were any way malcontented, either with any established religion, state or gouernment. Amongst which number, hee inclined earnestly vnto the censured Hereticke Sergius, a Monke of Constantinople, which should haue béene pu∣nished for maintaining the Nestorian heresie: hée attributed great Diuinitie to himselfe: And ha∣uing the falling sicknesse, he denied it, saying, hée was onely in a trance, being rauished with the vi∣sion of the Angell Gabriel, who deliuered him secret instructions, and new commaundements from God: hee taught a Doue to pecke foode out of
his eares, which hee made the people beléeue was the holy ghost, that came to inspire him: by means whereof, and other his illusions, which his con∣federates vsed in his behalfe, strongly possest the multitude with a most holy and reuerent opinion of him, as also that hee was the great Prophet of the Ismaelites, or as they call themselues,As descen∣ded of Sara wife to A∣braham. the Sarazens: and then by the helpe of Sergius and the rest, in contempt of the old and new Te∣stament, hée made his Antichristian Alcaron, wherein hée forbade the vse of holy Scriptures, commanding them to continue circumcision, and vtterly to abolish baptisme, for to them belonged the diuide promise: in contempt of Iewe and Christian: hée commanded euery Friday for euer, to bée held his holy Sabbaoth: hée commanded them not to eate swines flesh, nor drinke wine by day: hée allowed euery man to haue many wiues, and constituted a voluptuous Paradise, like to the Manichées: hée absolutely denied the Trinitie, and the doctrine of our Sauiour Christ, and his Apostles, except onely such places of text, as hée wrested to serue his sathanicall pur∣pose, saying Christ was a holy Prophet, and his fore-runner, and had foretold much of him, and of his comming: hée said the holy Ghost was a Creature, like to the Nicholaytans, with ma∣ny other abhominations and blasphemies, not fit to be spoken by a Christian: all which hee began publickely to preach in the yeare of Christ 620. in the twelfth yeare of the raigne of Hyraclius the Emperour: and by degrées it was so followed and
beléeued, that hée grew mighty in fauour with all sorts of people, chiefely the Sarazens: then he en∣tred into armes, and with a great hoast wasted Asyria,The Sce∣nits did Mahomet great ser∣uice. tooke Damasco, ouerthrew the Persians, hée inueigled the warlike Scenits, who reuolted from Hyraclius for want of pay, & hauing subdued many Nations, caused himselfe to be crowned King of Persia: then hée proclaimed himselfe a great Prophet, and by force established his blas∣phemous Alcaron, consisting of the dregges of all Religions then in vse: which diuellish and Antichristian Doctrine, through the remisnesse and negligence of the Emperours, and ciuill dis∣sention of the rest of the Christian Princes, hath ouer spread all Asia, Affrica, and the best part of Europe, and is in many places of India. He dy∣ed in the yeare 632. being poysoned by his alyes, vpon hope to succéede him in his gouernment: some write hee dyed at thirty yeares of age, and others write at forty yeares, and they put him in an Iron chest, and placed it vpon loftie Tressels in the Citty of Mecha in Persia, whereunto the Turkes goe in pilgrimage from all places. Reade Egnatius 2. Booke, Blondas 9. Booke, Charles Fountagne 2. Booke of Medals, and Polydor, Vir∣gil, 7. Booke. 606This yeare 606. Clocks and Dials were com∣maunded to be set vp in Churches. 613CAdmine Duke of North Wales, was made Soueraigne of the Britaines, who gaue strong battell to Ethelfride, King of Northum∣berland, and forced him to intreate for peace: hée
raigned 42. yeares. The Kingdome of Mercia beganne vnder the Saxon Penda:The 7 king∣doms of the Saxons. Lincolne Minister. S. Peters at Yorke. which Lordship contained Hun∣tingtonshire, Herefordshire, and Glocestershire. At that time raigned in diuers parts of the land, 7. Kings. Paulinus builded the great Church at Lincolne. He beganne the Cathedrall Church at Yorke, named S. Peters. CAdwallaine the sonne of Cadwane,635 began his raigne ouer the Briaines, He warred strong∣ly vpon the Saxons, & made Penda King of Mer∣cia tributary to him: he raigned 48. yeares, and was buried at London. Sigibert King of the East Angles, sent for Fe∣lix out of Burgondy to preach the faith:Dunwich. The pro∣uince of Canterbu∣ry diuided into pari∣shes. Ely. Owaldfire The bishops sea of Win∣chester. Glazing brought first into England. The Ab∣beyes of Abingdon. Chertsey. & Barking builded. he made this Felix Bishop of Dunwich, and by his coun∣sell, he erected diuers schooles. Honorius, Arch-bishop of Canterbury, diuided his prouince into Parishes. Atheldrith the Quéene, began the Monastery at Ely. Medulfe builded the Abbey of Malmes∣bury. Penda, King of Mercia, warred vpon Os∣wald, King of Northumberland, and slue him in battell. Kenewalcus King of the west Saxons, builded the Bishops sea of Winchester. Benet the Monke, and maister of the reuerend Beda, brought first the craft of Painting, Glasing, and Masons worke into this land. Cissa began to build the Abbey of Abingdon, &
Erkenwald Bishop of London, builded the Ab∣beyes of Chertsey, and of Barking. Ostrike, Duke of Glocester, founded the Mona∣stery of Glocester. Peda, The sonne of Penda, and Selruphus of Mereia, were the first founders of Peter∣borow. 685CAdwalladar was ordained King of Britaine, (saith-Ieffery) and ruled onely three yeares. He was the last King of Britaine. And this land after his time called Anglia,This Iland called vni∣uersally England. and the inhabitants there of Angles; or Anglish Saxons, who vsed to call all men Welshmen that bee strangers vnto them. This happened after the entring of the Sax∣ons, vnder their leaders Hengist and Horsus, in the time of Vortiger, 236. yeares. Iustinian the Empe∣rour.IVstinian the second, which some said was Iusti∣nian the fourth, sonne to Constantine the fourth, was the last of the race of Hyraclius, and began his raigne in the yeare 686. hée cut the noses of his yonger brothers, to the end they should not a∣spire to the Empire. This wicked Emperor cau∣sed a headstrong Councell to bee made against the sixt generall Councell held by his father: he made warres vpon the Arabians, and Bulgarians, con∣trary to the appointment of his father, and pro∣spered accordingly, for he was put to the worst: A∣murath King of Sarazens, made peace with him, and restored backe Affrica. This Iustinian, for his crueltie, and wilfull behauiour, was general∣ly hated of all his subiects, and in the tenth yeare of his raigne was chased out of his gouernment,
by Leonicus, who possest the Emperiall Crowne thrée yeares: with the speciall helpe of Callymycus, and then the men of warre chose Hysmarus, Alias Tyberius the third, who cut his nose likewise; and repressed the Arabians: he banished the most no∣ble Phillippicus, because an Eagle was séene to light vpon him as bée slept, then hée sailed from Affrica, to Constantinople, and tooke Leonicus, and cut his nose, as he had done to Iustinian, and séered it: in the seuenth yeare of his raigne, Iustini∣an by helpe of the Bulgarians, recoured his Em∣pire, and presently practised all maner of reuenge vpon those hée hated: he banished Tiberius, pulled out the eyes of Callymycus, and in his daily exer∣cise of crueltie, as oft as he blew his nose, hée cau∣sed some of the fauourers of Leonicus to bée put to death: sixe yeares after his reestablishment, he sought to ruinate Chersena, he was banquished in warre by Phyllippicus, whom hee banished with his sonne Tiberius, and lost his life and Em∣pire: after him succéeded Phyllippicus, surnamed Bardanes. Read Egna∣tius 2. Booke.
I will not speake chiefely of the West-Saxons, because (in the processe of time) they subdued other Kings, and brought this land againe to one Monarchy. 687KEnwalcus, surnamed Iew, raigning among the west Saxons maintained such warre against the Kentish Saxons, that he constrained them to séeke meanes of peace. Wels and Glassen∣bury. Kingdome forsaken.This man builded the Colledge of Wels, and the Abbey of Glassenbury, hee also paide the Pe∣ter. pence first to Rome. When hee had gouerned the west Saxons by the space of 7. yeares: he gaue vp his royall power, and went to Rome. Anno 101. Ethelredus King of Mercia, obtained a Bi∣shops sea to bée in the Citty of Worcester, Anno 711. Edilwach King of the south Saxons, gaue to the Bishop Wilfride,Selsee. the Isle of Selsee, wherein the saide Wilfride builded a Monastery, and became the first Bishop of the Prouince. Germany conuerted.And in the yeare 715. the Germanes were ge∣nerally conuerted to the Christian faith. 726EThelard was King of the West Saxons, in whose time the reuerend Beda was famous.Beda Beda for his learning and good life was renowned
in all the world: he compiled 78. bookes. Ethelrald raigned 14. yeares. He died at 70. yeares of age. Beda died the last of May, 732. of age 72. CVthred was King of the west Saxons:740 he raig∣ned 16. yeares. Slgibert being cruell towards his subiects,757 Cruelty. was depriued of his kingly authoritie, and wandring in a wood, was slaine of a swineheard: he raigned not one yeare. About this time the Sarazens ouer-ran and spoiled all France. KEnulphus appeased certaine murmurs that were among the people,757 The King slaine. for the deposing of his predecessor Sigibert. Hee founded the Cathedrall Church of Wels, in Anno 766. As he haunted a woman,Wels. which he kept at Mer∣ton, he was slaine by a kinsman of Sigibert.Kenulphus slaine. When he had raigned 29. yeares, he was buried at Win∣chester. About this time Charlemaine had forced the Saxons to become Christians.Saxons be∣come Chri∣stians. BRithricus, of the blood of Cerdicus, was made King of the west Saxons, and ruled 17. yeares.It rained blood. In his time it rained blood, which falling on mens cloathes, appeared like crosses. This yeare 793.The origi∣nal of Flan∣ders. soleme musicke in Churches in France. the west country of Flanders began to bee an Earledome. And 16. yeares be∣fore that Charlemaine of France sent choise schol∣lers to Rome, to learne to sing according to skill and Art. The first Church that receiued and pre∣ferred skilfull melody was Mets in Lorrayne. Till this time the Frenchmen had but small skill
in Musicke: but there were no Organs knowne in France, vntill the yeare 826. Offa, King of Mercia, builded the Abbey of S. Albones:S. Albones. Offa-dike. hée chased the Britaines into Wales, and the vtter bounds of Mercia, which is now called Offa-dike. The Danes first entred this land. The King poysoned.The Danes ariued in the Isle called Portland, but by the puissance of Bithricus, and other Kings of the Saxons: they were compelled to auoide the land. Bithricus was poysoned by his wife Ethel∣bura: for which deede the Nobles ordained that from thenceforth the Kings wiues should not bée called Quéenes, nor suffered to sit with them in places of estate. Winch∣combe.Kenulph King of Mercia, builded the Abbey of Winchcombe. 802EGbricus the Saxon, obtained the gouernment of the west Saxons, he tamed the Welshmen, and vanquished Bertulphus, King of middle Eng∣land: hée raigned 37. yeares, and was buried at Winchester. The Bisho∣pricke of Hambro & Breame founded.This yeare 812. being the 11. yeare of the Em∣periall raigne of Charlemaigne, hée founded an Arch-bishopricke in Hambro, and ordained that the Arch-bishop and his successor should bée Me∣tropolitan of Sclauonia, Denmarke, and other great Prouinces of the North, Vpon enuy there∣at, the Danes and others being mighty in armes after the death of Charlemaigne, assaulted Ham∣bro, and destroyed it cruelly. Then within a while after was ye Bishopricke of Breme founded. The Archbishop of Hābro sought to cōuert the Danes.
A Delnulphus, the sonne of Egbricus,839 began his raigne ouer the most part of England: there came a great Army of the Pagan Danes, with 550. shippes into the mouth of the Thames, and so to London, and spoled it.London spoiled. Adelnulphus came a∣gainst the foresaide Danes, and had of them an honourable victory. Adelnulphus sent his sonne Alfreed to Rome: at which time Leo the fourth consecrated him King. Adelnulphus did make the tenth part of his kingdome frée from all tribute and seruice to the King: he raigned 18. yeares, and was buried at Stonehing. ADhelbalde raigned two yeares and a halfe:857 he presumed to his fathers mariage bed, and was buried at Shireburne. AThelbrict, brother to Adhelbald, tooke vnder his dominian, Kent, Southery,860 and South∣sex.Winchester spoiled. In his time the Pagans spoiled the Citty of Winchester: hee raigned 5. yeares, and lyeth at Shireburne. ETheldred brother to Atheldrict,866 was slaine by the Danes, when hee had raigned 5. yeares and was buried at Winborne. About this time a furious heathen people came from Sweathland, Denmarke, and Norway, and most despitefully possest that part of France, which euer since hath béene called Normandy,The origi∣nal of Nor∣mandy. of whom it tooke the name: William the Conqueror is descended of them. Hinguar and Hubba ouercame the Prouince
of the Northumbers.Edmond martyred. Hinguar sailed into the east part of England, tooke Edmond, the King of that Prouince, being constant in the faith of Christ, who first beaten with bats, then scourged with whips, yet still called on the name of Iesus Christ, his aduersaries shot his body full of shafts, and stroke off his head. Chastity before beauty pre∣ferred.Ebbe, Abbesse of Coldingham, cut off her nose and vpper lip, and perswaded all her sisters to doe the like, that they being odible to the Danes, might the better kéepe their virgnitie: in despite whereof the Danes burned the Abbey and Nunnes. 872ALfreede the fourth sonne of Aethelwolph, re∣ceiued the gouernment of the whole Realme, and fought many sharpe battailes against the Pagans. Hee restored, and honourably repaired the Citty of London (after it had béene amongst other Citties destroyed with fire, and the peo∣ple killed vp.) he made it habitable againe. The twenty ninth yeare and fifth month of his raigne, departed this life, and is buried at Winchester in the Monastery of his foundation. Hee foun∣ded a Monastery of Monkes at Ethelingsey, and another for Nunnes at Shaftsbury: hee or∣dained the hundreds, and tenths: hee ordained common Schooles of diuers Sciences in Oxford, and turned the Saxons lawes into English,Vniuersitie in Oxford. with diuers other bookes. Hee diuided the twenty foure houres of the day and night into thrée parts: he spent eight houres in writing, reading, and praying, eight in prouision for his body, and eight
in hearing and dispatching the matters of his sub∣iects. This yeare 930. the King of Norway was baptized, and became a deuout Christian,900 The Danes and Nor∣weies con∣uerted. and his sonne Otto was Emperour, his eldest daughter married Lewis, the fourth of that name, King of France. And about the yeare 962. the people of Denmarke were conuerted to the Christian faith by Popynus the Popes Chaplaine: and shortly af∣ter that, the said Otto made fierce wars vpon Den∣marke, and tooke their King Aleadus prisoner, and caused him and all his children to bee bapti∣zed. EDward, surnamed Senior, the sonne of Al∣freed, was annointed King: hee builded. Hert∣ford, another towne at Wittham in Essex: hee builded a new Towne against the old Towne of Nottingham on the south side of the Riuer of Trent, and made a bridge ouer the said Riuer be∣tweene two townes.Thilwall built. Manche∣ster repai∣red. Hee subdued the King of Scotland and Wales: he also builded Thilwall, and repaired Manchester: hee was buried at Winchester when hee had raigned foure & twen∣ty yeares. ADelstane, after Edward his father was crow∣ned at Kingstone: hee brought this land into one Monarchy, for hee expelled the Danes, and quieted the Welshmen. Hee caused them to pay to him yearly for a tribute, twenty pound of gold, 300. pound of siluer. 2500. head of neate, with hounds and hawkes to a certaine number. Hee conquered Scotland: Hee raigned 15. yeares,
and lyeth at Malmesbury.Guy of Warweike Guy Earle of War∣wicke side the Danish Giant in Hide meade, nigh vnto Winchester. 940EDmund, brother to Adelstane, tooke on him the gouernance of this realme, who was slaine when he had raigned 5 yeares, and was buried at Glastenbury. About this time the Empire of Gréece was translated from Constantinople into Germany,The Tran∣slation of the Empire of Greece. The King of Den∣marke con∣uerted. in the time of Otto the Emperour. And at this time began the Princes Electors. And the Citty Magdeburge in Germany was also founded, read my larger booke. ELdred succéeded Edmund his brother: he tooke on him but a protectour, but afterward hée was crowned at Kingstone: he quieted and kept in due obeisance the Northumbers and Scots, and exiled the Danes. He raigned 9. yeares, and was buried at Winchester. 946EDwine succéeded his vncle Eldred, he was crow∣ned at Kingstone. In the selfe same day of his coronation, he rauished his owne kinswo∣man,959 The King depriued. the wife of a noble man: and afterward slew her husband. Which act, and for banishing Dun∣stan, who rebuked him, he became odible to his subiects, and was depriued when hee had raigned 4. yeares. EDgar, brother to Edwine, was crowned at Bathe: Hée was excellent in iustice, and sharpe in correction of vices,King crow∣ned at Bath that neuer before his dayes was vsed lesse Fellonie by Robbers, or Extortion by false Officers. Hee chastised the
great negligence, and vicious liuing of the Clear∣gy: he prepared a great Nauy of ships, which he disposed in thrée parts of this Realme, and had Souldiers alwaies ready prest, and ready against the incursions of forraine enemies. King Edgar hauing restored, and new founded eight and fourtie Monasteries, which before had béene destroyed,Worcester and confirmed the Monasterie of Worcester, which Osnalde then Bishoppe of Worcester, by the Kings consent had inlar∣ged, and made the Cathedrall Church of that shire. Alwinus Alderman, Earle of Eastangle,Ramsey founded. foun∣ded the Abbey of Ramsey. King Edgar raigned 16. yeares, and was buri∣ed at Glastenbury. EDward the sonne of Edgar,975 The King murdred. was crowned at Kingstone, by the counsell of his Stepmo∣ther Elfreed: hee was traiterously murdered when he had raigned 3. yeares. Buried at Shafts∣bury. At this time died S. Dunstan. Etheldred the sonne of Edgar was crowned at Kingstone: but because he came to the kingdome by killing his brother, he could neuer get the good will of his people. A great part of the city of Lon∣don was burnt. At this time (saith Sigibert the Historian) flou∣rished Guydo Aretine: he was the first that taught the Gamuth for prick-song. King Etheldred erected the Bishopricke of Ex∣eter: he caused all the Danes in England to bee
slaine. In reuenge whereof, Swaxe King of Denmarke inuaded England with fire & sword. Etheldred died when hee had raigned eight and thirty yeares, and was buried in Paules Church in London. 1016 Edmond Ironside.EDmund the sonne of Etheldred, succéeded in the kingdome, who was surnamed Ieronside: and whiles betwéene him and Canutus, striuing for the Empire, many bloody battailes were fought, the Kings themselues attempted to fight hand to hand for the title of the kingdome, in which com∣bate, after long and doubtfull fight, they both be∣ing wearid,England diuided, Edricus a traitour. Treason re∣warded. fell to a couenant to diuide the same. Edmund not long after was slaine by the treason of one Ederick of Staton. Edrick making vaunt thereof to Canutus, Canutus answered, saying: and thou shall die, as well thou art worthy: & straight wayes the traitor was tormented to death, and cast into a ditch. About this time ended the race of Charle∣maigne, and then began the line of Hugh Caper in France. 1018 The Danes possessed all England. Marriage made vpon condition. Canutus King of 4. Kingdomes.Canutus the Dane challenging all England to himselfe, slew his brother Edmond; he procured to haue giuen him in mariage Emma the Widdow of King Etheldred, who at that time was with Edward, and allured her sons to exile with Duke Richard in Normandie. She did beare Canutus a sonne of his owne name: by his affinitie and alli∣ance, the Danes became of the more strength and power. His subdued the Scots, whereby he was King of England, Scotland, Denmarke, & Nor∣way.
Hee founded the Monastery of Saint Ed∣mondes-Burie:S Edmonde bury buil∣ded. when hee had raigned twenty yeares, hée deceased, and was buried at Winche∣ster. HArold Harefoot,1038 vsing the force of the Danes that dwelt in England, inuaded the Realme, while his brother Hardicanutus gouerned in Den∣marke. And not being vnmindfull by whose aide hee came to the kingdome,Harald a tyrant. Emma & her childrē banished. rewarded the Danes with great dignitie, in this Realme: he constrained his mother in law Emma to flye and prouide for her selfe: hee tormented to death Alured the sonne of Emma, which she had by King Etheldred, who then was come out of Normandy to visit his mother, He raigned 3. yeares, died at Oxford, and was bu∣ried at Westminster. HArdicanutus sonne of Canutus and Emma,1041 as soone as hee had gotten his fathers kingdome, fetched his mother out of exile. And in reuenge of displeasure that was done to her, and of the mur∣der of his brother Alured, hée commanded the car∣kas of Harold to bee digged out of the earth, and to be thrown into the riuer of Thames, where,S. Clements Church without Temple∣barre. by a fisher it was taken vp, & brought to the Danes, who buried it in a Churchyard which they had at London. In the midst of his cups he departed this life, the 3. yeare of his riagne, and was buried at Winchester. EDward the sonne of Etheldred, was crowned at Westchester: hee released the tribute of 4000. pounds, called Dane-gelt,Dane-gele. which the Eng∣lish
people from the beginning of the raigne of the Danes, was compelled to pay their King euery yeare:Edgitha was barren. he tooke to wife Edgitha, the daughter of Earle Goodwine: hee sent for home into England his Nephew Edward, the sonne of King Edmond his brother, who brought with him Agatha his wife, Edgar, Margaret, and Christian his children, borne in Pannonia, where hee liued but a while. Thus Edward being disappointed, both of his Ne∣phew and his heire, pronounced Edgar the Out∣lawes sonne, to be heire to the Kingdome: but be∣cause this Edgar was within age, by his testa∣ment hee made Herold the sonne of Goodwine Re∣gent, vntill the young Edgar should be of age to re∣ceiue the kingdome: notwithstanding, he imme∣diatly after the death of Edward, pronounced him∣selfe King, which thing shortly after brought de∣struction both to himselfe and all England. This Edward raigned 23. yeares 6. moneths and odde dayes:Lubecke founded. he was buried at Westminster, which hée had newly builded. 1066 This yeare of our Lord be∣ginneth here at Christmas William Conqueror cousin to K. Edward by the mo∣thers side.This yeare 1055. Henry the 4. Emperor of that name, and 90. in number began his raigne, and in the 43. yeare of his raigne, the city of Lubeck was founded by a Pagan. Read my larger booke. HErold gaue to young Edgar the Earledome of Oxford: but Harold the King of Norway as∣saulted England both by sea and land. Whose attempt whiles Herold of England prepared to withstand, William Duke of Normandy, came into England with a well appointed Army, al∣leaging, that by right it was due to him by the gift
of King Edward his kinsman, and also by oath e∣stablished betwixt Harald and him. He landed at Pemsey, the 28. of September.Harald slaine. Harald notwith∣standing he was bare of men by reason of the bat∣taile that hée had fought against the men of Nor∣way; yet hearing of Williams comming, went straight wayes against him. Both armies being brought into array, the battel was fought, where∣in great slaughter of Englishmen was made. And the Normanes got the victory on the 14. of Octo∣ber. King Harold was shot through the braines with an arrow, when he had raigned 9. Moneths, and was buried at Waltham in Essex, where hee had founded a faire Colledge. THus endeth the raigne of the Saxons, who had now continued sometimes in warres with the Britaines, then with the Danes, and now with the Normanes the space of sixe hundred yeares. VERSES. A thousand sixe and sixty yeare, it was, as we doe read: When that a Comet did appeare, and Englishmen lay dead. Of Normandy, Duke William then, to England-ward did saile: Who conquered Harald with his men, and brought this land to bale.
WILLIAM CON∣QVEROVR. Anno reg. 1WIlliam, Duke of Normandy, sur∣named Conquerour, bastard sonn of Robert the 6. Duke of the Duchy, and cousin germaine to King Edward, after the battell at Hstings, came to London, when with great ioy he was receiued, both of the Clear∣gy and people, and crowned on Christmas day, which day by the Historiographers of that time, was accounted the first of the yeare following, and so named 1067.1067 But after the account of Eng∣land now obserued, the yeare beginneth not vntil the 25. of March. This yeare, through the great suite and labour of William the Bishop of London, King VVlli∣am granted the Charter and liberties to the same VVilliam Bishop,Wherefore the Mayor & Citizens of London repaire to Paules. and Godfry of Portgrine, and all the Burges of the same Citty of London  as large forme as they enioyed the same in the time of Saint Edward, before the Conquest:  reward whereof, the Citizens haue fixed  his graue, being in the midst of the great Isle of Saint Paules Church in London, this Epitaph following.
TO William, a man famous in wisdome and ho∣lines of life, who first with Saint Edward the King and Confessour, being familiar, of late pre∣ferred to be Bishop of London, and not long af∣ter, for his prudency and sincere fidelitie, admitted to be of Councell with the most victorious Prince VVilliam, King of England, of that name the first, who obtained of the same, great and large priui∣ledges to this famous Citty: the Senate and Citi∣zens of London, to him hauing wel deserued, haue made this. KIng William besieged Exeter,Exeter be∣sieged. which the Citizens and other English men held against him. King William gaue to Robert Cummin,An, reg, 2. 1068 Earle of Northum∣berland slaine. the Earledome of Northumberland, against whom the men of the country did arise, & slew him with nine hundred of his men, and King William came afterward vpon them, and slew them euery one. AGlricus Bishop of Durham,An, reg, 3. 1069 being accused of treason, was imprisoned at Westminster. The Englishmen that were fled out of England, hauing Edgar to be their captaine, returned out of Scotland, and suddenly set vpon the Garrisons that King William had set at Yorke, put them to ight, slewe them, possessed the Citty, and pro∣nounced Edgar to bee King; but not long after, King William came with a great army and re∣couered the Cittie, constraining Edgar to returne againe into Scotland. Such a dearth was in England,Ann, reg. 4. that men did
eate horses, cats, dogs, and mans flesh. 1070 Monaste∣ries rifled. Ann, reg. 5.King William bereued all the Monasteries and Abbeyes of England of their gold and siluer, sp∣ring neither Chalice nor Shrine. 1071 Ann. reg. 6. Castle of Ledes and of Oxford.The castle of Ledes in Kent was builded by Creueceur, and the Castle of Oxford by Robert Oley, two noble men that came into England with William the Conquerour. 1072 Yorke sub∣iect to Can∣terbury. Ann. reg. 7.In a Counsell holden at Windsore,  Prouince of the Church of Canterbury  the Church of Yorke, was examined, and ap∣proued. 1073 Ann. reg. 8.King William with a great power inuad Scotland, and forced Malcolme to do him homa and fealty. 1074 Married Priest re∣moued.Gregory the seaueth Pope, excommuni∣cated all committers of Simony, and remo∣ued married Priestes from executing of diui Seruice, whereof arose great troubles in Eland. 1075King William caused a Castle to be builded a Durham, and Earle Waltheothus of Northuberland to be beheaded at Winchester: hée saith into Britaine, and besieged the Castle of Dole, but preuailed not. Bishop murdered. An. reg. 10Walter Bishop of Durham, bought of King VVilliam the Earledome of Northumberland, wherein he vsed such cruelty, that the inhabitants slew him. 1076 An. reg. 11The earth was hard frozen from the kalende of Nouember, to the middest of Aprill. 1077Vpon Palme Sunday about noone, appeare
a blashīg Starre neare vnto the Sunne.An, reg, 12. Malcolme King of Scots, waffed Northum∣berland, flew many and tooke a great prey.1068 An, reg, 13 This yeare King William builded the Tower of Lon∣don. Thurstone Abbot of Glassenbury,1079 Murther. in his Church caused thrée Monks to be slaine, & eightéene men to be wounded, that their blood ran from the Altar awne the steps. This yeare was a great winde on Chrstmas day, a great earthquake and roaring out of the earth the 6. of Aprill.An, reg, 15 1081 Henry Earle Ferrers founded a Church within his Castle of Tutsbury. An, reg, 16 Tutsbury. Alwine Childe, a Citizen of London,1082 Bermond∣sey. founded the Monastery of Saint Sauiours at Bermond∣sey in Surrey. King William caused enquiry to bee made,An, reg, 17 1083 Acres of land num∣bred, An, reg, 18 how many Acres of land were sufficient for one plough by the yeare: how many beastes to tilling of one hide, how many Citties, Castles, Farmes, Granges, Townes, Riuers, Marshes, and Woods, what rent they were by yeare, and how many Knights or Souldiers were in euery shire: all which was put in writing, and remained at Westminster. King William tooke homage and oath of alle∣geance of all England,1084 A greatter & tooke of euery hide of land sixe shillings, and sailed into Normandy. When the Normanes had accomplished their pleasure vpon the Englishmen,An, reg, 19 1085 so that there was no Noble man of that Nation left to beare any
rule ouer them: it was brought to passe, th for the space of more then thirty miles, good profitable corne ground was turned into a chase  wilde beastes.New forest Bishop at Lincolne. Remingus Bishop of Dorcheste remoued his sea to Lincolne, where hee builded new Church. An, reg. 10. 1086 water flood Battail Ab∣bey, & Sel∣by Abbey. S. Martine be grand.There was a great water flood, so that hils we made soft and consumed, and with their fall ouerwhelmed many villages. King William builded Battell Abbey in S∣sex, another at Selby in Yorkeshire, the th at Caen in Normandy, in which hee was buried. He gaue great priuiledges to Saint Marthle graund in London. Pauls Church in London burnt. An, reg. 21. 1086 bos foūdIn a prouince of Wales called Rose,  found the Sepulchre of Gawen, vpon the Seshore, who was sisters sonne of Arthur the great King of Britaine, being in length fourtéene so King William being at Roan in Normand went with a great Army into France, spoyli all things as he passed. Last of all hée burned  Citty of Meaur, with our Lady Church, a two Anchorits that was inclosed there. The Ki cheared his men to féede the fire, and came hi selfe so neare, that with the heate of his harne he got a disease. Also the Kings horse leaping ouer a ditch, did burst the inner parts of the King with the paine whereof hee was sore afflict and returned to Roan, where shortly after  ended his life,King Wil∣liam died, the ninth day of September,  the yeare of our Lord 1087. When hee had raigned
twenty yeares, eight moneths, and sixtéene dayes. Hee was buried at Caen in Normandy, and had issue by Matild his wife, daughter to Baldwin Earle of Flanders, Robert Curthose, vnto whom hee gaue Normandy, Richard that died young, William Rufus to whom he gaue England,King Willam had 4: sonnes, and 5. daugh∣ters. and Henry, to whom hee gaue his wiues inheri∣tance and treasure: Daughters, Cicely Abbesse of Caen, Constance wife to Stephen Earle of Bloys, Margaret promised to Harold King of England, and Elienor betrothed to Alfonso King of Galicia. WILLIAM Rufus. WIlliam Rufus,An, reg. 1. the third sonne of William Conquerour, beganne his raigne the ninth day of September, in the yeare of our Lord 1087. He was variable, inconstant, couetous, and cruell: he burdened his people with vnreasonable taxes, and what he thus got, he prodigally spent in great banquetting, and sumptuous apparrell. Otho Bishop of Bayon, and Earle of Kent, with his brother Robert, Earle of Mortaine and Hereford, and almost all the Nobles of England,The nobles rebell. raised warre against King William, & would haue had Robert his eldest brother to be King: but Wil∣liam by faire wordes pacifying some of the prin∣cipall
conspirators, besieged the residue in the Castell of Rochester, And lastly ouercame them. An, reg, 2. 1089 Hospitall of S. Iohn & Harbal∣downe. An, reg, 3.Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury deceased, hee renewed the great Church of Canter∣bury, hee repaired the walles of that Citty, buided two Hospitals, the one of Saint Iohn, th other at Harbaldowne. He restored the Churc of Rochester. 1090 K. William made war against his brother.King William Making warre against his brother Robert Duke of Normandy, at length agrément was made betwéene them, that if one  them died without issue, the other should succe in the inheritance. Scots did homage.Malcolme King of Scots, did homage to King William. A great tempest fell on Saint Lukes day, spe∣cially in Winchcombe, where a great part of the Stéeple was ouerthrowne. And in London, the winde ouerturned 606.606. houses ouerturned An, reg, 4. houses, and the roofe Bow Church in Cheape, wherwith some persons were slaine. 1091 Newcastle. Sarisbury.King William builded the new Castle vpon Tine. Osmond Bishop of Sarisbury, founded the Cathedrall Church of Sarisbury. In England fell a wonderfull aboundance  raine,An, reg, 5. 1092 great frost. and after insued so great frost, that Horses and Carts passed commonly ouer great Riuers, which when it thawed, the Ice brake downe many great bridges. King of Scots slaine Bishoprike at Bath.Malcolme the King of Scots cōming into Eng∣land, was sodainely slaine with his sonne and heire, by Robert Mowbrey, Earle of Nor∣thumberland.
Iohn Bishop of Welles, by noin∣ting the Kings hands, transposed the Bishops sea to Bath. King William builded againe the cittie of Car∣lile, which was destroyed by the Danes 200.An, reg. 6. 1093 Carlile re∣paired and the castle builded. Famine. yeares before: he also builded a castle there, and out of the South parts of England, sent men to inhabite there. This yeare was a great famine, and so great a mortality that the quick were scant able to bury the dead. The Welshmen spoiled the citty of Glocester,Welshmen won An∣glesey. Ann, reg. 7: with a part of Shrewesbury, and won the Isle of Anglesey. The Bishopricke of Thetford was translated to Norwich. King William with a great power entred Wales,1094 Bishoprick at Norwich K. Willam inuaded Wales. not being able to follow the Welchmen amongst the hils, hee builded two Castles in the borders, and returned. Great preparation was made by the Christi∣ans to goe against the infidels at Ierusalem,An, reg, 8.1095 Going to Ierusalem. 1096 Peter the Hermite being their first leader, and after Godfrey of Bullen. Robert Duke of Normandy,An, reg. 9. Normandy pawned. An, reg. 10. 1097 tooke his iour∣ney towards Ierusalem, and laide Normandy to gage to his brother King William for 6666. pound of siluer. All the land that sometime belonged to Earle Goodwin, by breaking in of the sea, Goodwin sands. An, reg. 11. 1099 was couered with sandes, and there is yet called Goodwin sands. King William in Normandy gaue himselfe
to warres, so that with exactions and tributes, he did not onely shaue, but flea the people of Eng∣land. Ierusalem wonne.The Christians tooke the Cittie of Ie∣rusalem, placing there a King and a Patri∣arch. The Con∣quest of Ie∣rusalem by Godfrey of Bollen.THe fiftéenth of Iuly, 1098. after thirty sixe dayes siege, the Cittie of Ierusalem was yéelded vnto Godfrey of Bollen, Duke of Lo∣rane, chiefe leader of the Christian Army against the Sarazens, to recouer the Holy land: hee was accompanied with thrée Kings, and diuers other Christian Princes: namely, Robert Duke of Normandy, eldest sonne vnto William the Conquerour: hee had an hundred thousand Souldiers, all of them marked with the signe of the Crosse. This renowned and victorious Prince, before hee entred into Armes, morgaged his Duke∣dome vnto the Bishop of Liege, for great summes of money, wherewith hee furnished himselfe in this expedition: he was chosen King of Ierusa∣lem, but would not bee crowned with a Crowne of gold, because our Sauiour Christ was crow∣ned with a crowne of thornes. This Christian Conquest was performed about fiue hundreth yeares after the Persians had got possession of Ierusalem and the Holy land: Peter the Her∣mite, who had seene and felt the Turkish out∣rages, tooke great paines in going to all Christi∣an Princes, to contract them vnto this seruice. Pope Vrban the second, in the Councell of Cle∣remount,
was also very forward in this businesse. King Godfrey dyed of a feuer, hauing raigned one yeare, and was buried neare vnto the holy Sepulchre: after him succéeded his brother Bald∣wine, and raigned eighteene yeares: hee made great wars vpon the enemies of our faith. After the death of King Godfrey. Ierusalem continued fourescore and eight yeares vnder Christian o∣bedience, and then became subiect vnto Turkish tyranny. After King William was come out of Nor∣mandy, he kept his Court at Westminster, in the new Hall, and hearing men say it was too bigge,Words of William Rufus. he answered, This Hall is not bigge enough by one halfe. King William being a hunting, word was brought him that his people were besieged in Maine: he forthwith tooke shipping, though hee were vehemently petwaded to the contrary, for that there was at that time a great tempest, to whom hee answered, hee neuer heard that a∣ny King was drowned. At this time hee got more honour then euer hee did in all his life: for hee chased his enemies, and returned with vi∣ctory. In the Summer,An, reg, 1. 1100 K. William slaine. blood sprang out of the earth at inchamsteed in Barkeshire. King William on the morrowe after Lammas day-hunting in the new forrest, Sir Walter Tirel shooting at a Deare vnawares hit the King in the breast, that hee fell downe dead, and neuer spake word: his men, and especially that Knight, gat
them away: but some came backe againe, & laide his body vpon a Colyars cart, which one silly lne beast did draw to the Citty of Winchester, where he was buried. He raigned twelue yeares, 11. monethes lacking eight dayes. Hee gaue vnto the Monkes called de Caritate in Southwarke, the great new Church of Saint Sauiour of Bar∣mondes eye, and also Barmondes eye it selfe. He also founded a good Hospitall in the city of Yorke, called Saint Leonards, for the sustentation of the poore. Henry Bewclarke. An, reg, 1.HEnry brother to William Rufus, and the first of that name, for his learning called Bewclarke, borne at Salby beganne his raigne the 5. of August, the yeare of our Lord 1100. He restored the state of the Cleargy,Measures reformed. Vlna, now called a yard. asswaged the grieuous paiments, redu∣ced againe S. Edwards lawes, reformed the olde vntrue measures, & made a measure by the length of his arme, which was called Vlna. S. Iohns by Smith∣field. Clarken∣well.Iordan Brise: Baron, founded the house of St, Iohn of Ierusalem, neare vnto London in Smith∣field. The same Iordan gaue 14. acres of ground lying in the field next adioyning to Clarkenwell, to build thereon a house for Nunnes. 1101. An reg, 2.Robert, Duke of Normandy, the Kings eldest
brother, which was now returned from Ierusa∣lem, made warre for the crowne of England: but by meditation, peace was made, on condition that Henry should pay 3000. markes yearely to Duke Robert, and if the one died without issue,Winchester and Gloce∣ster burnt. the longer liuer should inherit: Winchester and Glocester was burnt. The Cathedrall Church of Norwich was founded by Robert Bishop of Norwich.1102 Norwich. An, reg, 3. Hospitall of S. Bartho∣lomew. The priory and Hospitall of Saint Bartholomew in Smithfield was founded by a Minstrell named Reior. Robert Duke of Normandy comming into Eng∣land,1103 An, reg, 4. Younger brother be∣guileth the elder. through the subtilty of King Henry his yon∣ger brother released to him the tribute of 3000. markes of siluer. Great malice was kindled betwéene the two brethren, Robert and Henry,1104 An, reg, 5.whereupon deadly warre in sued. There appeared about the Sunne, foure circles, and a blazing starre. Endo, sewer to King Henry,1105 An, reg, 6. S. Iohns in Colchester founded the Mo∣nastery of S. Iohn in Colchester. Robert, Duke of Normandy, came to his brother, and friendly desired him to beare bro∣therly loue towards him:1106 Elder bro∣ther seeketh fauor of the younger. But King Henry feeling his conscience accusing him for obtaining the kingdome by defrauding of his eldest brother, and fearing men more then God, first he reconci∣led the Nobles of the Realme with faire pro∣mises, and then pursued his brother into Nor∣mandy, where betweene them were many sore battailes fought, but at the last, the valiant man
Robert was taken. The first Canons entred into the Church of our Lady in Southwarke, called Saint Mary Ouery,Saint Mary Oueries. founded by Willi∣am Pountlarge Knight, and William Dancis, Nor∣mans. 1107 Ann. reg. 8.King Henry returning into England, brought with him his brother Robert, and William of Mo∣rion, and put them in perpetuall prison, from whence shortly after Duke Robert deceiuing his kéepers, sought to escape, but he was taken, and by his brothers commandement, hée had his eyes put out, and then kept straighter till his dying day. The Priory of the Tri∣nitie in London builded.The Church of the holy Trinitie without Al∣gate in London, was founded by Mathild the Quéene. A great part of Flaunders was drowned by breaking in of the sea,1108 Flemings sent into Wales. Ann. reg. 9. which caused many Fle∣mings to come into Englād, at length by the kings appointment, they tooke vpon them the possession of Rosse, a prouince in Wales. 1109 An reg. 10 Taxe. Ely a Bisho∣prike.Henry Emperour of Rome, required to haue Maude the Kings daughter in marriage, which was graunted, and the King tooke thrée shil∣lings of euery hide of land through England. This King translated the Abbey of Ely into a Bi∣shopricke. 1110 An. reg. 11 Castles as Bristow & Cardife. S. Iames at Bristow.King Henry made Robert his bastard sonne, the first Earle of Glocester, who after builded the Ca∣stles of Bristow and Cardife, with the Priory of S. Iames in Bristow. King Henry went into Normandy to make
warre against the Earle of Angion,1111 An. reg. 12. and spoyled the whole countrey. This yeare was a great mortalitie of men,1112 An, reg, 13and murren of beasts. The citty of Worcester was burnt.1113 An, reg, 14. The tenth of October the riuer of Medway, by no smal num¦ber of miles,1114 An, reg, 15 Medway & Thames dried vp. did so faile of water that in the mid∣dest of the channell the smallest vessels and boats could not passe. The selfe same day the Thames did suffer the like lacke of water, for betwéene the Tower of London and the bridge, not onely with horse, but also a great number of men and chil∣dren, did wade ouer on foote.1115 Chichester burnt. A blazing starre. Chichester was burnt, many stormes, and a blazing starre. In March was excéeding lightning, and in De∣cember thunder and haile,1116 and the Moone at both times séemed to be turned into blood.1117 Maude the Quéene of England dyed,An, reg, 18 1118 Matildes hospitall. An, reg, 19 Knights of the temple. and was buried at Westminster, shee builded an Hospitall neare vnto London, without Holborn, which now is the parrish Church of Saint Giles in the field. The order of the Templars Knights began. Many sore battailes were fought in France and Normandy, betwéene Henry King of England,1119 An, reg, 20. and Lodowicke the French King.1112 An, reg, 21 The Kings children drowned. King Henry hauing tamed the Frenchmen, and pacified Normandy, returned into England, in which voyage William Duke of Normandy, and Richard his sonne, and Mary his daughter,An, reg, 22. 1121 Ri∣chard Earle of Chester, and his wife,1122 with many
noble men, and to the number of 160. persons were drowned. Lybussa Queene of Bohemia.Lybussa daughter of Cracus the second King of Bohemia: for a certaine space raigned as Queene ouer them: and albeit shee ministred iustice indif∣ferently, yet there grewe a great disdaine & male∣contentment amongst all sortes of people, that men should bee gouerned and directed by women: and thereupon was spread a generall voyce, that foorthwith they would haue a King. And to ap∣pease the peoples discontent, or as some thinke, for her owne pleasure, shee married a Peasant, called Primislaus, who gouerned the Bohemians, and was the first that builded walles and rampi∣ers about the Citty of Prague, in the yeare 995. After the death of the said Lybussa, there present∣ly start vp one of her handmaids, called Valasque, a lusty Lady, of wondrous Amazonian bold∣nesse,Valasque with her army of La∣dies. who very cunningly caused an assembly of all the chiefe Ladies, and others of note, vn∣to whom shee made an eloquent Oration, and amongst other things, shee spake as followeth: My most noble and worthy Ladies, wee haue lost our Quéene and Mistresse, whose high spirit could neuer admit, that either wée or our Sexe, should in any sort be subiect vnto men: if therefore for the euer fréeing of our selues and our heires, you now please to lend me your strong hand, I héere pro∣mise and assure you, that we will haue the supre∣macy and gouerntment. This speach preuailed so farre, that instantly the women tooke oath, and ioyned their hearts
and hands to effect their willes against men, and in that fury flew all the men they met: then they entred into Armes, and for seauen yeares space, maintained warres very stoutly, and like valiant Amazones: all which notwithstanding in the end they were suppressed by Prymslaus, partly by force, partly by policy, gifts and faire wordes. Reade Naucler. King Henry married Adelisia,An. reg, 23. Glocester burnt. the Duke of Lo∣uans daughter. The Citty of Glocester was burnt. Henry Earle of Warwicke,An, reg, 24 Warwicke with the Colledge. and Margaret his wife, founded the Colledge of Saint Mary in the towne of warwicke. Waleran Earle of Mellent was taken in Nor∣mandy by King Henry,1124 and hee with many others were imprisoned at Roan.An, reg, 25 Coiners punished. The King caused all the Coiners of England to haue their priuy members cut off,1126 An, reg, 26 The Empres returned into Eng∣land. and also their right hand, because they had corrupted the Coine. Henry the Emperour being dead, Maude the Empresse returned into England. Richard Bishop of London,1127 An, reg, 28. S. Oseth. An. reg, 29. founded the Mona∣stery of S. Oseth in Essex. At this time men had such a pride in their haire, that they contended with women in length of haire.1128 Men ware haire like women. King Henry held a Councell at London, wherein it was granted him correction of the Cleargie: so the King tooke infinite sums of money of Priests,1129 An, reg, 30. and suffered them to doe what they would.
1130 An, reg, 31.King Henry gaue his daughter the Empresit, vnto Geffrey Plantagenet Earle of Angiou. 1131 An, reg, 32 Rochester burnt.The Citty of Rochester was sore defaced with fire. The King made a Bishopricke at Carlile. 1132 An, reg, 33 Carlile a Bishoprike. London burnt.Maude the Empresse did beare vnto Ieffery Plantagenet Earle of Angiou, a sonne, and named him Henry. A great fire beginning at Gilbert Beckets house in west Cheape, consumed a great part of London from thence to Algate. Henry Bloys Bishop of Winchester, builded the Hospitall of S.1133 An, reg, 34. Worcester burnt. Crosse neare vnto Winchester. Worcester was sore defaced with fire. Maude the Empresse brought forth a sonne na∣med Ieffery.1134 An, reg. 35. Short thigh died. Robert Cortoise or Short-thigh King Henries brother died in the Castle of Cardife, and was buried at Glocester. King Henry remaining in Normandy, deceased the first day of December,1135 An, reg, 36. Death of K Henry. Anno 1135. when he had raigned 35. yeares, 4. moneths: his bowels, braines and dies were buried at Roan, the rest of his body being powdred with salt, and wrapped in Buls hides, was buried at Reading, an Abbey of his owne foundation. Hee founded a Priory at Dunstable, and builded the Castle of Windsort, with a Colledge there.
KING STEPHEN. STephen Earle of Beloine, sonne of the Earle of Blois, and Adala,An, reg, 1. Wil∣liam Conquerours daughter, Ne∣phew to King Henry the first, clai∣med the kingdome the second day of December, Anno 1135. and was consecrated at Westminster on the 26. of December. This was a noble man and hardy, of passing comely of fauour & personage: he excelled in martiall policy, gentlenes, & liberality towards all men: although he had continuall warre, yet he did neuer burden his commons with exactions. Fire which began at London Stone,Fire at London. consumed eastward to Algate, and westward to S. Paules Church. King Stephen besieged the castle of Exceter a long time,1136 Exceter besieged. which Balwine de Riuers held against him: but at length when they within the Castle, wanted necessary things to liue by,An, reg, 2. they com∣pounded. King Stephen passed the sea,1137 to subdue Nor∣mandy, where hee tooke many citties and strong Castles. Rochester was burnt with all the citty.Rochester S. Peters in Yorke. The Archbishops sea in Yorke, S. Martins with∣out the walles, & the Hospitall with 39. Churches were burnt.
Saint Peters Church at Bath,The city of Bath burnt An, reg, 3. and all the citty was burnt. 1138 An, reg, 4. Battel of the stādardThe Nobles sent for Maude the Empresse, pro∣mising her the possession of the Realme, according to their oath made to her. Dauid King of Scots, purposing to recouer the Crowne of England for the Empresse, inuaded Northumberland, when by Thurstane Archbishop of Yorke, the Scots had an ouerthrowe, and were slaine aboue ten thosand. 1139 The Em∣presse re∣turned into England. An, reg, 5.Robert Earle of Glocester returned into Eng∣land with his sister the Empresse, and a great A∣my, which arriued at Portsmouth. Robert Earle of Glocester, with a great power, inuaded the towne of Nottingham, and spoiled it the Townsmen were taken,1140 Notting∣ham spoi∣led. slaine, or burnt in th Churches whereunto they fled. This yeare 1140. died Iohannes de temporibus, he was Page to Charlemaigne. An, reg, 6. 1141 Lincolne be sieged. K. Stephen taken. An, reg, 7. The Em∣pres obtai∣ned the Crowne. Earle of Glocester taken. K. Stephen restored.King Stephen besieged Lincolne against Rai∣nulph Earle of Chester, but Rainulph Eare of Gcester, came with a great power and rescued the same, chased the Kings Army, and tooke him prisoner, hée was had to Glocester, and after to Bristow. The Empresse reioycing at this he good hap, departed from Glocester, and came to Cicester, from thence to Winchester, where the Crowne of the Realme was deliuered into her hands. Earle Robert being pursued, was taken a Sobbrige with Earle Warren, and many other: at length through meditation, peace was conclu∣ded,
that the King should be deliuered to his king∣dome, and the Earle to his liberty. Gaufride de Mandeuil, Earle of Essex,Abbies of Walden & Stratford. founded the Abbey of Walden, and Sir William de Mountfitchet, founded the Abbey of Stratford Langthorne. King Stephen hearing the Empresse to lye at Oxford,1142 with a great power came and besie∣ged her a two moneths space. Earle Robert, with Henry Sonne to the Empresse, landed at Warham, where hee besieged the Castle,Warham Castle be∣sieged. which was defended by Hubert de Lucie, who at length yeelded the same. In the meane time the Empresse séeing that shee was voyde of helpe,The Em∣pres flieth. cloathing her selfe and her companie all in white, vpon a night went ouer the Thames a foote, which was then hard frozen: she went to Wallingford, and the Castle of Oxford was yéelded to the King.An, reg, 8. 1143 William of Ypre founded Boxley Abbey in Kent.An, reg, 9. Boxley. King Stephen tooke Ieffery Maundeuile, Earle of Essex at Saint Albones,1144 An, reg, 10 which Ieffery could not be at libertie, till he had deliuered the Tower of London, with the Earles of Waldon and Ple∣cy. When the Earle was thus spoiled of his holds, hee tooke the Church of Ramsey, and forti∣fied it.1145 Walling∣ford besie∣ged. An, reg, 11 King Stephen besieged Wallingford, but could not preuaile. The Earle of Chester was reconciled to the King, and was at the siege with
him,1146 An, reg, 12. but shortly after when he came to the Court, the King being at Northampton, hee was taken and kept prisoner till he had rendred the Castle of Lincolne, and other fortresses. 1147 An, reg, 13. The Em∣presse went into Nor∣mandy.Earle Robert deceased, and was buried at Bri∣stow. The Empresse being wearied with the dis∣cord of the English nation, went ouer into Nor∣mandy. 1148 An, reg. 14. S. Katerins.Quéene Matild builded the hospitall of S. Kathe∣rine by the Tower of London for poore brethre and sisters. Henry the Empresse sonne, went to Dauid King of Scots, of whom he was ioyfully receiued, and made Knight. 1150 An, reg, 16.England was full of trouble and warre, set foorth to fire and rapine, through the discord be∣twixt Stephen,1151 and certaine Earles that tooke part with Henry. Ieffery Plantagenet Earle of Angiou, and Duke of Normandy deceased, and left his sonne Hen his heire. About this time died Gratianus: hee compos the great Decretals. Henry Duke of Normandy married Elion whom Lewis King of France had diuorced from him,An, reg, 17 1152 and had by her a sonne named William. Quéene Maude deceased, and was buried Feuersham. The King commanded the Nobles to méete a Winchester, where the Duke being receiue with great ioy the King in sight of all men adop∣ted
him his sonne,An, reg, 18. Norwich increased. 1153 and confirmed to him the prin∣cipalitie of England. The Duke receiued him in place of a father, granting to him all the dayes of his life to enioy the name and seate of the King. Duke Henry came with the King to Oxford,An, reg, 19. K. Stephen adopted K. Henry. where the Earles and Barons, by the Kings com∣mandement sware fealty to Duke Henry, sauing the Kings honour so long as he liued. King Stephen died the 25. of October,1154 K Stephen died. when he had raigned eighteene yeares, ten moneths, and odde daies. He founded the Abbeies of Cogshall in Essex, of Furnes in Lancastershire, and Feuer∣sham in Kent, where his body was buried. Henry the second. HEnry the sonne of Ieffery Plantage∣net, and Maude the Empresse,An, reg, 1. be∣gan his raigne ouer this Realme of England, the 17. day of De∣cember, and was crowned the the same day, in the yeare of our Lord 1154. he was somewhat red of face, short of body, and therewith fat, well learned, noble in chi∣ualry, wise in counsell, stedfast of promise, and a wedlocke breaker. William of Ipres,1155 and all the Flemings that had flocked into England, fearing the indignation
of the new king, departed the land, and the castles that had béene builded to pill the rich, and spoile the poore, were by the Kings Commandement throwne downe. Quéene Elianor did beare a sonne, called Henry after his father. Line of the Saxons re∣paired.King Henry went into Normandy, where with long siege he tooke diuers Castles. King Henry with an Army went against the Welshmen,An, reg, 2. 1156 where he felled their woods, fortified the Castle of Rutland, and reedified the Castle  Basingwirke.An, reg, 3. 1157 An, reg, 4: K. Henry reedified Castles. 1158Quéene Elianor brought foorth a sonne named Ieffery. A new coine was made in England. King Henry tooke escuage of the Englishmen, the sum whereof grewe to 124. thousand pounds of siluer. An, reg, 5. 1159Henry the Kings sonne, not seuen yeares olde, married Margart the French Kings daughter, not two yeares old.An, reg, 6. 1160 An, reg, 7.Thomas the Kings Chancellour, was elect Archbishop of Canterbury. 1161 An, reg, 8. Publicanes whipped. An, reg, 9. 1162There came into England thirty Germanes as well men as women, who called themselu Publicanes, they denied Matrimony, Baptism and the Lords Supper. Being apprehended, th King caused they should bee marked with an ho Iron in the forehead, and whipped them, an that no man should succour them. Thus being whipped, and thrust out in the winter, they di for cold.An, reg, 10. 1163 London bridge was new made of timber,
Peter, a Priest of Colchurch.London bridge made of timber. Malcolme the Scot∣tish King, and Kefus Prince of Southwales, did homage to King Henry, and his sonne Henry. A Councell was holden at Claringdon in pre∣sence of the King and the Archbishops, Bishops,1164 An. reg. 11 Lords, Barons, &c. wherein was by their oathes confirmed many ordinances. Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, being sworne to the same, shortly after sore repented, and fled the Realme. A great earthquake in Ely, Norfolke,1165 An. reg. 12. Earthquake and Suf∣folke, so that it ouerthrew them that stood vpon their féete, and caused the bels to ring. Quéene Elianor brought foorth a sonne named Iohn. The warre was receiued betwixt the King of England,1166 An. reg, 13. and the French King for the Citty of Tholouse. Conan Earle of little Britaine died,1167 An, reg. 14. and left his heire, a daughter named Constance,1168 An, reg, 15 which hee had by the King of Scots sister: which Constance King Henry married to his sonne Geffery. Robert de Boscue, Earle of Leicester, founded the Monasteries of Gerendon of Monkes,Gerendon. Leicester, and Eaton. An, reg, 16. Henry the Kings son crowned. 1169 of Leicei∣ster of Canons regular, and Eaton of Nunnes, was founded by Amicia his wife. King Henry caused his sonne Henry to be crow∣ned, as hee thought to the quietnesse of himselfe and his realme: but it proued otherwise. Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, the eightéenth day of December was slaine by Wil∣liam Tracie, Reignold Fitzs Vrse, Hugh Moruil, and Richard Briton Knights: Nicholas Breee∣speare
an Englishman,K. Henry Lord of Ireland. An reg, 18. 1172 who was chosen Pope by the name of Adrian the 4. He graunted the Regi∣ment of Ireland to the King of England, where∣upon King Henry tooke ship at Pembroke, and sailed thither. An reg, 19. 1173King Henry the son, with his wife the French Kings daughter, were both together crowned at Winchester. King Henry the elder was assoiled of the death of Thomas the Archbishop, vpon his oath made that he was not priuy to it. King Henry married the eldest daughter of He∣bert Earle Morton vnto his sonne Iohn. An, reg, 20. 1174 Leicester burnt. King of Scots ta∣ken. Canterbu∣ry burnt.King Henry the elder returning into England, in short time subdued his rebels. The citie of Lei∣cester by his commandement was burnt, the wals and castle rased, and the inhabitants dispersed in∣to other cities. The King of Scots was taken by King Henry, led into Normandy, where he com∣pounded for his ransome. Christs Church in Can∣terbury was burned. An, reg, 21. 1175King Henry the sonne, with his brethren, and others, were reconciled to King Henry the Father. An, reg, 22 1176The Kings of England both father and sonne went together to visite the tombe of Thomas late Archbishop of Canterbury. An, reg, 23. 1177 The stone bridge o∣uer the Thames at London was began to be foū∣ded. A Cardinall and the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, gaue 1000. Marks towards the same foun∣dation. There chanced some discord betwixt the Kings of England and France, about the marri∣age
of Richard Earle of Poitow,An, reg, 24 1178with the French Kings daughter. Richard Lucie, the Kings Iusticiar,Lesnes. An, reg, 25 1179 layed the foundation of the conuentuall Church in a place which is called Lesnes, in the Territorie of Ro∣chester. The Citie of Yorke was burned. The Church of St. Andrew in Rochester,An, reg. 26. was consumed with fire. The Vsurers of England grieuously puni∣shed.1180 An, reg, 27. Vsurers pu∣nished. Geffery the Kings bastard sonne, resigned the Bishopricke of Lincolne, & was made the Kings Chancellour.1181 An, reg, 28. Robert Harding, a Burges of Bristow, to whom king Henry gaue the Barony of Barkeley,1182 builded the Monasterie of Saint Augustines in Bristow. They of Aquitane hated their Duke Ri∣chard for his crueltie, and were minded to driue him out of his Earledome of Poitow, and Duke∣dome of Aquitane,An, reg, 29. 1183 An, reg, 30 K. Henry the yonger deceased. and transpose those estates to his brother King Henry the younger: but all men looking for victory to the young King, hee fell miserably sicke, and died, and was buried at Roan. King Henry sent many men of warre in∣to Wales:1184 for the Welshmen emboldened by the Kings absence, had slaine Many English∣men. The Abbey of Glastenbury burnt.Glastenbu∣ry burnt. An, reg, 31. Heraclius Patriarch of Ierusalem came to king
Henry,Heraclius the patriark desiring him of aide against the Turke: but the King because of the cruelty of his sonnes, was counselled not to leaue his dominion in hazard, and to goe farre off. This Patriarch dedicated the new Temple, then builded in the west part of London. This yeare 1186. The citty of Paris was pa∣ued, whose stréetes vntill this time, lay as rudely as London stréetes, which were not all paued in foure hundred yeares after:Paris paued London paued. Lubecke destroyed. The cities take war∣ning. Tile or slate generally vsed in the Citties. and the north Church∣yard of Paules, otherwise called the Close, and di∣uers other stréetes in London were not paued vn∣till the raigne of Quéene Elizabeth. In the yeare 1246. the Citty of Luberke was quite consumed with fire, whose misfortune made Paris, London, and other Citties to couer their houses with tile or slate, especially if they stood close together, and not to vse any thatch, which vn∣till then was vsuall. The Em∣pres decea∣sed.Maude the Empresse, mother to King Henry the second deceased, shee founded the Abbey of Bordesley. An, reg, 32 1180 Geffery earle of Bri∣taine dieth.Geffery Earle of Britaine the Kings son died, and was buried at Paris, he left issue two daugh∣ters, which he had by Constance (daughter of Co∣nan Earle of Britaine) who also at this time of his death was great with child, and after brought a sonne named Arthur. A great earthquake threwe downe many buil∣dings: among the which the Cathedrall Church at Lincolne was rent in pieces,Chichester burne. Chichester Cittie was burnt.
Neare vnto Orford in Suffolke,An, reg, 33. 1151 A fish like a man. certaine Fi∣shers tooke in their nets a fish hauing the shape of a man: which fish was kept by Barthelmew de Glan∣uile, Custos of the Castell of Orford, in the same Castell by the space of sixe moneths, and more for a wonder: he spake not a word: all maner of meats he gladly did eate, but most greedily raw fish. At length he stole away to the sea. The towne of Beuerly with the Church of St.An, reg, 34. 1189 Beuerly burnt. Iohn there was burnt. Phillip the French King required that his sister which had ben kept in England 22.An, reg, 35. 1190 yeares might be restored vnto Earle Richard as his wife, and Earle Richard desired the same: but King Henry denied this request, and so they got them to ar∣mour. The French King and Earle Richard pur∣sued the King of England so hard,Death of Henry the second. that he was for∣ced to yéeld all the requests, as well of the French King, as of his sonne Richard. This was done at Gisors, and so departing came to Zafe, where he fell sicke, and departed this life, the sixth day of Iuly, in the yeare of our Lord 1189. when hee had raigned 24. yeares, 7. moneths, lacking 11. dayes, and was buried at Fonteuerald, in the Monastery of Nunnes by him founded.
Richard Coeurdelyon. RIchard the first, for his valiant∣nesse, surnamed Coeurdelion, se∣cond sonne to Henry the second, be∣gan his raigne and was crowned the third of September 1186. He was bigge of stature, with a mer∣ry countenance: he commanded that no Iewes nor women should be at his Coronation, for feare of inchantments. For breaking of which commande∣ment many were slaine. Elianor the old, who at the commandement of her husband, had béene long kept close prisoner, was now set at libertie. King Richard gaue ouer the castles of Berwick and Rokesburgh to the Scottish King, for the sum of ten thousand pound: he also sold to the Bishop of Durham his owne Prouince for a great péece of money, and created him Earle of the same. He also faigned to haue lost his signet, & then cau∣sed to be proclaimed, that whosoeuer would safe∣ly enioy those things which before time they had inrolled, should come to the new seale. He gaue his brother Iohn the Prouinces of Nottingham, De∣uonshire and Cornewall. Outlaws in England.In this time were many Robbers and Out∣lawes, among whom Robert Hood and little Iohn remained in the woods, despoiling and robbing the goods of the rich. The saide Robert entertained an hundred tall men and good Archers with such spoiles as he got: vpon whō foure hundred men were they neuer so
strong, durst not giue the onset. Poore mens goods hée spared, aboundantly relieuing them with that which hee got from Abbies, and houses of rich Earles. This yeare the Cittizens of London obtained to be gouerned by two Bayliffes or Shriues, and a Maior. Henry Cornhill, Shriue. Richard Reynery. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin, Fitz Leostane Maior. King Richard betooke the guiding of this land to William Longshanke, Bishop of Ely,1190 Chancel∣lour of England, and transported ouer into Nor∣mandy. The two Kings of England and of France met at Towers,Voyage to Ierusalem. and from thence set forward on their iourney towards Ierusalem. The Iewes of Norwich, Saint Edmonsbu∣ry, Lincolne, Stamford, and Linne, were robbed. And at Yorke to the number of fiue hundred, be∣side women and children, entred a tower of the ca∣stle, which the people assailing, the Iewes cut the throats of their wiues and children, and cast them ouer the walles on the Christians heads, the re∣sidue they locked vp, and burnt both the house and themselues. William Bishop of Ely,Ditch a∣bout the Tower of London. builded the outer wall about the Tower of London, and caused a déepe ditch to be made. Iohn Herlion, Shriue. Roger Duke. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Fitz Leostane Maior.
King Richard subdued the Isle of Cipres, and then ioyned his power with Phillip ye French king in Asia, conquered Acon, where there grewe be∣twéene the two Kings, a grieuous displeasure: for which cause Phillip shortly departed thence, and comming into France, inuaded Normandy. Iohn, brother to king Richard, tooke on him the kingdome of England. King Richard restored to the Christians, the citty of Ioppa. The bones of king Arthur were found at Gla∣stenbury. William Hauerall. Shirues. Iohn Bucknot. Shirues. 1191Henry Fitz, Alwine fitz Leostane. Maior. Ann. reg. 3. Iohn the Kings bro∣ther rebel∣led. 1192William, Bishop of Ely, withstood the kings bro∣ther, who said, he wist not if his brother were aliue or not. To whom the Bishop answered: If King Richard be yet liuing, it were vniust to take from him the crowne. If he be dead, Arthur the elder brothers sonne must enioy the same. Nicholas Duke. Shriue. Peter Newlay. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwine fitz Leostane. Maior. An, reg. 4. K. Richard was taken prisoner. 1193 An, reg, 5King Richard hauing knowledge that Phillip of France inuaded Normandy, and that Iohn his brother had made himselfe King ouer Eng∣land, made peace with the Saladine for thrée yeares, & with a small company returning home∣ward, he was taken by Leopold, Duke of Austria, who kept him in straight prison, a yeare and fiue moneths.
Roger Duke. Shriue. Richard Fitz Alwine. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwine fitz Leostane Maior. The Kings friends intreating for his deliue∣rance, his ransome was set at 100000. l.Kings ran∣some. where∣vpon cōmandement was directed from the Kings Iustices, that all Bishops, Prelates, Earles, Ba∣rons, Abbots, and Priors, should bring in the 4. part of their reuenewes, towards the Kings ran∣some, and besides this, the Cleargy brought in their golden and siluer Chalices, and fléeced their Shriues, all which was coined in mony. Iohn the kings brother, when he heard of the im∣prisonment of his brother, made great war with∣in the realme, and tooke by strength the castles of Windsor, Nottingham, and others. The king was deliuered, & landed at Sandwich:1194 K. R. the se∣cond time crowned. An, reg, 6. on the 12. of March he was againe solemnly crow∣ned. After this hee called into his hands all such things as he had either giuen or sold by patents, or otherwise: by which meanes he got a great sum of mony, and sailed into Normandy, where shortly after, peace was taken betwéene the two kings. Also by meanes of Elionar the old Quéene, Earle Iohn was reconciled to his brother. William fitz Isable, Shriue. William fitz Arnold. Shriue. Henry fitz Alwine. Maior. K. Richard sent messengers to the Pope,1195 An, reg, 6. com∣plaining vpon the Duke of Austrich, for misusing of him & his, as they came by distresse of weather through his country, whereupon the Pope excom∣municated
the Duke, & inioined him to release the couenants that be constrained the King to make. Robert Beasaunt Shriue. Iokt Ieiouse. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Fitz Leostane Maior. William with the heard.William with the beard mooued the common people to séeke their libertie, & not to be subiect to the rich and mightie: by which meanes he drew to him many great companies. The King being warned of this tumult, commanded him to cease from those attempts, but the people still followed him. He was taken in Bow Church in Cheape, but not without shedding of blood: for he was for∣ced by fire and smoake to forsake the Church. Hée with nine of his adherents had sentence of death, and were hanged. A false ac∣cuser of his elder bro∣ther in the end was hanged. God amend or shortly send such an end to such false brethren. 1197 An, reg. 9.This counterfeit friend to the poore, slew one man with his own hands, polluted Bow Church with his Concubine, and amongst other his dete∣stable facts, one was, hee falsely accused his elder brother of treason: which elder brother had in his youth brought him vp in learning, and done ma∣ny things for his preferment. Gerard de Antiloch Shriue. Robert Durant. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. King Richard, and the Earle of Flaunders con∣federated together. Roger Blunt. Shriue. Nicholas Duket. Shriue. An, reg. 10. 1198Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. King Richard ooke of euery hide of land through
England 5. s. The French King was intercepted by the army of King Richard, so that with much a doe he escaped into Cipres. Constantine Fitz Arnold Shriue. Robert de Beaw. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. King Richard turned his armes against the Ba∣rons of Poictow that rebelled against him,1199 he set their Cities & Townes on fire, spoiled their coun∣try, & slew many of his aduersaries cruelly: at the last came to the Dukedome of Aquitane: and be∣sieged the Castle of Chalne, where one Bertraine de Gordon, smote him with a venowmed dart,K. Richard wounded to death. which stripe the king litle regarded, but inuading the Castle, wan it, and put the souldiers in prison: of this wound aforesaide hee died the 6. day of A∣prill, in the yeare of our Lord 1199. when he had raigned 9. yeares 7. moneths, and was buried at Founteuerard: his heart was buried at Roan, and his bowels at the aforesaid Chalne. King Iohn. IOhn brother to Richard,An, reg, 1. began his raigne the 26. day of May, in the yeare of our Lord 1199. Of person he was indifferent, but of melancho∣ly complexion. Phillip king of France in a quarrell of Arthur the sonne of Ieffery, Iohns eldest brother, Duke of Britaine, made warre vpon King Iohn in Normandy, and tooke from him diuers Castles and Townes.
Shriuewick of London put to farm 1200K. Iohn granted the Shrifewick of London and Middlesex to the Citizens thereof for 300. pound yearely to be paide, as of ancient time. Arnold Fitz Arnold, Shriue. Richard Fitz Barthelmew. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. An, reg, 2 Tax.King Iohn required of euery Plow land 3. s. The king being diuorced from his wife Isabel, the Earle of Glocesters daughter, he passed ouer the sea, paied forty thousand markes to the French King, and returned into England with Isabel his wife, daughter to the Earle of Angolesme. Roger Dormer, Shriue. Iames Bartilmew. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. K. of Scots did homage 1201 An, reg, 3K. Iohn wēt to Lincolne, where he met with Wil∣liam king of Scots, Rotlond Lord of Gallowy, and many other noble men, which did to him homage. Walter Fitz Alis, Shriue. Simon de Aldermanbury. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. 1202 An, reg, 4.Arthur Earle of Britaine being made Knight by the French King, whose yonger daughter he had fianced▪ besieged the Castle of Mirable, in which Quéene Elianor was inclosed, but King Iohn came with a power, and deliuered his mother from dan∣ger:Arthur earl of Britaine ken. he tooke there his Nephew Arthur, William de Brawsa, Hugh Brune, and many others. Haile as bigge as hens egges, &c. Normand Brundel, Shriue. Iohn de Ely. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior.
Arthur Earle of Britaine,1203 An, reg, 5. Earle of Britaine murdered. from Falaise was brought to Roan, and put in the Tower vnder the custody of Robert de Veypont, where shortly af∣ter he was dispatched of his life The King of France tooke Lisie, Dandely, with the castle and vale de Ruell, in which were Robert Fitz Water, Sayer de Quincie, and many others: hée tooke the strong Castle vpon Seyne, builded by King Richard. Water Browne, Shriue. William Chamberlaine. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. Normandy, Angiou, Britaine, Maine,1204 An, reg, 6. Poi∣tow, and Touraine, were within a short time de∣liuered to King Phillip. King Iohn married Iane his bastard daughter to Lewelin Prince of Wales, and gaue with her the castle and Lordship of Elinsmore, in the Marches of South Wales. Thomas Hauarell, Shriue. Hamond Brond. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. The 14.Great frost. Dearth of corne. An. reg. 7 of Ianuary began a frost which conti∣nued till the 22. day of March: so that the ground could not be tilled, whereof it came to passe, that in Summer following, a quarter of wheat was sold for a Marke, which in the dayes of Henry the se∣cond, was sold for twelue pence. Iohn Walgraue Shriue. Richard Winchester. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. Great thunders and lightnings were séene, so
that many men and women were destroied,1206 An, reg, 8. besides cattell and houses ouerthrowne and burne corne in the fieldes was beaten downe with hai stones as bigge as goose egges. Iohn Holland, Shriue. Edmond Fitz Garrard Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. 1207King Iohn tooke the 13. part of all mouable goods, both of Lay & Religious throughout Eng∣land. An, reg, .The Monkes of Canterbury elected Stephen Langton to be their Archbishop. The Pope sent letters to King Iohn, humbly exhorting him to receiue the saide Stephen, being thereunto cano∣nically elected, the rather because he was an Eng∣lishman borne, and a Doctor of Diuinitie, &c. but king Iohn being greatly offended with the prom∣ting of the said Stephen, sent men in armour to ex∣pell the Monkes of Canterbury, and condemned them of treason. The origi∣nall of the Kings of Tartary.At this time began the kingdome of Tartars, in Tartaria. Quéene Isabel was deliuered of her first sonne named Henry. Roger Winchester, Shriue. Edmond Hardwell. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. 1208 England interdicted.W. B. of London. and E B. of Ely, and M. B. of Winchester, by the Popes commaundement, executed the interdiction vpon the whole realme, and they ceased through all England to mini∣string of Ecclesiasticall Sacraments, sauing of
them that were in perill of death,An, reg, 10 and Baptisme to children. The King set all the Bishoprickes and Abbies in the Realme into the custodie of Lay∣men, and commanded all Ecclesiastical reuenewes to be confiscated. This yeare was granted to the citizens of Lon∣don, by the kings letters patents,Maior of London yearely chosen. that they should yearely choose to them a Maior. Peter Duke, Shriue. Thomas Neale. Shriue. Hen Fitz Alwin Maior. The Exchequer was remoued to Northamp∣ton by the Kings commandement:Exchequer at North∣hampton. hee also gathe∣red a great Army, and went towards Scotland, as farre as the castle at Northampton, where the King of Scots came to them, and treated peace, for which he gaue 11000. Markes of siluer, and deliuered his two daughters for a pledge. After this he tooke homage of all fréeholders,Homage of freeholders An, reg. 11. and swore all men to his allegiance. The Arches and Stone bridge ouer the Thames at London, was this yeare fini∣shed by Serle Mercer, and William Alman,London bridge buil∣ded of stone then Procurators, or Maisters of the Bridge∣workes. Peter le Losne, Shriue. William Blund. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. The King commanded all the Iewes both men and women to bee imprisoned because hee would haue their money.Iewes ran∣some. The king brought Ireland vnder his subiection:
hee caused the lawes of England to bee execu there,An, reg, 12 A mint in Ireland. Taxe. and money to be coined, he raised a gr tax vpon all the Religious in England, whom  caused to pay such a ransome, that the sum ca to 100000. pound, besides 40000. pounds of th white Monkes. William de Brawse was chased out of England, and his wife and children murdered at Win▪ Adam Wetley, Shriue. Stephen la Grace. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. 1211 Army into Wales.The King went into Wales with a great for subdued all the Princes & Nobles, tooke 28. pla∣ges for their subiection, and returned. There  him messengers from the Pope,Legate frō Rome. which came  make an vnitie betwixt the King & the Bishope Canterbury, with the Monkes which were banished: but the Ambassadors returned without  end concluded. A great tax.After this the king tooke of euery knight whi was not with him in Wales, two markes of ∣uer of euery shield. Iohn Fitz Peter, Shriue. Iohn Garland. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin. Maior. Welsh in∣uaded Eng∣land.The Welshmen tooke diuers Castles of the King of England, cut off the heads of all the soul∣diers, burned many Townes, and with a great prey returned. 1211 Pledges hanged.The King caused the 28. pledges that th Welshmen deliuered him to be hanged. An Hermit in Yorkshire named Peter, prophesie
openly to King Iohn, and said,Peter of Pomfret. An, reg. 14. that vpon Ascenti∣on day next comming, he should bee no King, but the Crowne should bee transposed to another. This Peter was apprehended and put in pri∣son. The 10. of Iuly at night the cittie of London vpon the South side of the riuer of Thames,London bridge pe∣rished with fire. with the Church of our Lady of the Canons in South∣warke being a fire, and an excéeding great multi∣tude of the people passing the bridge, sodainly the North part by blowing of the South winde, was also set on fire, and the people which were euen now passing the bridg, perceiuing the same, would haue returned, but were stopped with fire, and it came to passe, that as they protracted time, the South end was fired, so that people throng∣ing themselues betwixt the two fires, there came to aide them many Shippes and vessels, into the which the multitude so vndiscreetely pressed, that the Shippes being drowned, it was saide, that there were destroyed about thrée thousand persons. Randolph Eland, Shriue. Constantine Iosue, Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior. Pandulph the Legate admonished the King to restore Stephen Langton to his Sea of Canterbu∣ry, and the Monkes vnto their Abbey:1213 The King calling to minde the manifold dangers hee was in, made promise by oath to bee obedient to the Court of Rome. Pandulph with the nobles of the realme, came
together at Douer vpon Ascention euen,K. Iohn re∣signed the Crowne. Peter of Pomfret. An, reg, 15. Stephen Langton returned. The King absolued. where the king did resigne his Crowne with the realme of England and Ireland into the Popes hands. When the Ascention day was past, Peter the Hermite bound to a horse taile, was drawne through the stréetes of Warham, and there both he and his sonne were hanged. Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other that were banished arriued at Douer, and went to Winche∣ster to the King, and absolued him. Richard Pri of Bermonsey, builded an house (against the wall of the said house of Bermonsey) called the Almor of Hospitall of Conuerts of S.S. Thomas hospitall. Maior of London. 24. yeares. Thomas. Henry Fitz Alwin Maior of London deceased, who had continued Maior of London foure and twentie yeares. Martin Fitz Alis, Shriue. Peter Bate. Shriue. Roger Fitz Alwine Maior. A ditch a∣bout Lon∣don.The ditch without the walles of London, 200. foot broad was begun. 1214 An, reg, 16.Pope Innocent sent Nicholas Bishop of Tuslane to release the interdiction which had continu∣ed 6. yeares, 3. moneths, and 14. dayes. Salomon Basing, Shriue. Saint Ed∣mondsbu∣ry burnt. An reg, 17.Hugh Basing. Shriue. Searle Mercer Maior. S. Edmondsbury was consumed with fire. 1215 The King meeteth the Barons.The King met with the Barons in a medow betwixt Stanes and Windsor, and there granted the liberties of England without any difficultie, the Charter whereof is dated, giuen by our hand
in Rimming mead betwixt Stanes & Windsore, the 16. day of Iune, the 17. yeare of our raigne, vnto which all the whole realme was sworne. The King sent vnto the realmes next adioyning, to procure him Souldiers, promising them large possessions. By meanes of Pandulph, the Pope dis∣anulled the aforesaid charter & liberties granted, and also excommunicated the Barons.The Barons excommu∣nicated. By the o∣ther messengers were procured a great number of men of war, which landing at Douer, the King forthwith besieged Rochester, and tooke it. Iohn Trauers, Shriue. Andrew Newland, Shriue. William Hardel Maior. The Pope excōmunicated the Barons by their peculiar names: but they notwithstanding sent to Phillip King of France, requiring him to send his son Lewis into this realme promising to make him King, which the French King refused to doe, till the Barons had sent him 24. pledges. Gwall a Legate was sent from the Pope into France, to forbid the going of Lewis into Englād:1216 The Barons sent for Lodowick. bt his perswasions nothing preuailed: he charged them vpon paine of excommunication. This not∣withstanding, Lewis with a great army arriued in the Isle of Thanet:An reg. 18. Lewis arri∣ued in Eng∣land. King Iohn being then at Douer, fled towards Gilford. Lewis subdued all the Castles in Kent, Douer onely excepted: then came he to London, where he was honourably re∣ceiued of the Nobles & Citizens: The King mar∣ched through Norfolke & Suffolke, till he came to Linne, and appointing Sauarice de Manlion to bée
Captaine there, began to fortifie the towne, but here filling his belly too much, he got a surfet and therewith fell into a laske, and when the messen∣gers of them that were besieged in Douer were come, and had declared their case, the disease, with griefe conceiued thereat, increased. The Kings treasure drowned.Moreouer great sorrow oppressed him, for that in his iourney hee had lost the ornaments of his chappel with other treasure & carriages at the pas∣sage of Welstreame, where many of his houshold seruants were drowned in ye water & quicksands: he died in the castle of Newarke on the 19.King Iohn died. of Octo∣ber 1216. where the Captaine of the castle causing his body to be bowelled, the same was conueied to Worcester, and there honourably buried, when he had raigned 17. yeares, & 5. moneths, lacking 8. daies.Issue of K. Iohn. Farendon. Hales, Godstow, and Knaris∣brough. He had issue two sons, Henry and Richard, and thrée daughters: Isabel, Elianor, and Iane. He founded the Abbey of Bowley in a new forrest of Southampton. He builded the Monasteries of Farendon and Hales Owen, he reedified the castle of Godstow, and Wroxal, and encreased the chap∣pell of Knarisbrough. Henry of Winchester. An, reg, 1.HEnry the eldest son of Iohn, of the age of 9. yeares, began his raigne the 19. of October, in the yeare 1216. hee was crowned at Glocester, in the presence of Wallow the Legate. He remained in the custody of William Marshall, Earle of Pembrooke.
Bennet Seinturer, Shriue. William Bluntiuers. Shriue. Iames Alderman Maior. When Lewis heard this,1217 An, reg, 2 hee wist not what to doe, whereupon compelled by necessitie, he sued for peace, and returned into France. Thomas Boxerell, Shriue. Raph Eiland Shriue. Serle Mercer Maior. Ranulph Earle of Chester, Saer de Quincie.1218 An, reg, 3 Earle of Winchester, with others, tooke their iourney towards Ierusalem. Iohn de Viel, Shriue. Iohn le Spicer. Shriue. Serle Mercer. Maior. W. Marshall died,Earle Mar∣shall died. An, reg, 4. and was buried at London in the new Temple, after whose death the King was gouerned by Peter Bishop of Winche∣ster. Richard Wimbleton, Shriue. Iohn Viel. Shriue. Serle Mercer Maior. King Henry was crowned at Westminster,1220 K. Henry crowned at Westmin¦ster. Castles of Chartley. Beston, Delacresse. An, reg, 5. by Stephen Langton, Archbishop of Canterbury. The new worke of our Lady Chappell at Westmin∣ster, was begun by King Henry. Ranulph Earle of Chester, builded the Castles of Chartley, Bestone, and the Abbey of De∣lacresse. Richard Renger, Shriue. Iohn Viel. Shriue. Serle Mercer Maior.
1221 Welshmen subdued. An, reg, 6.K. Henry subdued the Welshmen which rebel∣led. The Nobles granted to the king two markes of euery hide of land. William Earle of Arundell di∣ed, buried at Wimondham, a Priory of his foun∣dation. Richard Renger, Shriue. Thomas Lambert, Shriue. Serle Mercer Maior. 1222 Counterfeit Mary and Christ.A young man was brought before the Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, who willed himselfe to bee crucified, and to be called Iesus. And the old wo∣man that had bewitched the young man to such madnesse, and procured herselfe to be called Mary the mother of Christ. They were both closed vp betwéene two walles of stone, where they ended their liues in misery. The citizens of London fal∣ling out with the Bailise of Westminster, and the men of the suburbs at a game of wrastling,Feete and hands cut off. An, reg, 7. 1223 made a great tumult against the Abbot of Westmin∣ster: for the which their Captaine Constantine with other were hanged: the other that were cul∣pable had their féete and hands cut off. Richard Renger, Shriue. Thomas Lambert, Shriue. Serle Mercer Maior. King of Ie∣rusalem. An, reg, 8. 1224Iohn de Brennes, King of Ierusalem and chiefe maister of the Hospitall there, came into England and required aid to win Ierusalem, but returned with small comfort. Iohn Trauers, shriue. Andrew Bokerel, shriue. Richard Renger Maior. Gray friers.The Friars minours first ariued at Douer 9. in
number 5. of them remained at Canterbury, & did there build the first couent of friars minours, that euer was in England: the other 4. came to Lon∣don, and hired an house in Cornehill, of Iohn Tre∣nars: they were by the Citizens remoued to a place in St. Nicholas shambles, which Iohn Iwyn Citti∣zen and Mercer of London, appropriated vnto the Communaltie of the Citie, to the vse of the saide Friars. The whole Church was builded at that time by diuers Citizens. The King granted to the Commonaltie of the Citty of London to haue a common seale. Iohn Trauers, shriues.An, reg, 9. Andrew Bokerel, shriue. Richard Renger Maior. The 15.1225 A fifteene. Great char∣ter confir∣med. part of all mens goods moueable with∣in the realme, as well of the Clergy, as of the Lai∣tie, was granted to the King, and the King gran∣ted to the Barons and people, the libertie, which they long time had sued for. Roger Duke, shriues.An, reg, 10. Martin Fitz William, shriue. Richard Renger Maior. The King granted to the Citizens of London,Free warrē An, reg. 11. Free tole. frée warren, that is to say, frée libertie to hunt a certaine circuite about the city. And also that the Citizens of London should passe tol-frée through∣out all England, and that all weares in Thames should be destroyed for euer. Roger Duke, shriue. Martin Fitz William, shriue. Richard Renger Maior.
The king made all the Charters of the liberties and forrests to be frustrate,1227 Cancelled. An, reg, 12 alleadging that they were granted whiles he was vnder ward of other: so it followed, that who so would enioy the liber∣ties afore granted, must renew their Charters of the Kings new seale. Stephen Boxerell, Shriue. 1228 An. reg, 13.Henry Cocham. Shriue. Roger Duke Maior. The king corrected the measures and weights. Great thunder and lightning burnt many houses and slew both men add beasts. William Winchester, Shriue. Robert Fitz Iohn Shriue. Roger Duke Maior. 1229 An. reg. 14.Robert Bingham Bishop of Sarisbury by the kings helpe, prosecuted the building of the new Church at Sarisbury, which his predecessor Richard did translate. Stephen Bokerell, Shirues. Henry Cocham. Shirues. Roger Duke Maior. 1230 Darknesse in Pauls Church.Vpon the day of Saint Paul. when Roger Niger Bishop of London was at Masse in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, suddenly the weather waxed darke, and an horrible thunder-clay lighted on the Church, the same was shaken, as though it would haue fallen, & out of a darke cloud came such light∣ning, that all the Church séemed to be on fire: all men thought they should haue died: thousands of men and women ran out of the Church,An, reg, 15 and being astonished, fell vpon the ground void of all vnder∣standing: none of all the multitude tarried in the
Church, saue the Bishop and one Deacon, which stood still at the high Altar. Richard Walter Shrieues. Iohn Woborne Shrieues. Roger Duke Maior. Richard the kings brother married Isabel Coun∣tesse of Glocester,1231 An, reg, 16. late wife to Gilbert Earle of Glocester, late wife to William Marshall Earle of Pembrooke, and the marriage being scantly fini∣shed, the said William dyed, and was buried in the new Temple in London. Michael of S. Helen Shriue. Walter de Russel, Shriue. Andrew Bokerel, Pepperer, Maior The morrow after S.1232 An. reg. 17 Martins day began thun∣ders very horrible, which lasted 15. daies. Henry Edmonton, Shriue. Gerard Bar, Shriue. Andrew Bokerell, Pepperer, Maior.1233 Likenes of fiue Suns. The 7. of Aprill there appeared as it were foure Suns beside the naturall Sun, of a red colour, and a great circle of Christall colour. The king builded a faire Church,Houses of Conuerts. & many hou∣ses adioyning therunto in the city of London, not farre from the new Temple. In which house all the Iewes and Infidels that did conuert to the faith of Christ, might haue vnder an honest rule of life sufficient liuing, whereby it came to passe, that in short time there was gathered a great number of Conuerts,Hospitall at Oxford. An, reg, 18 which were baptized and instructed in the lawes of Christ. He also builded the hospitall of S. Iohn without the East gate of
Oxford, for sicke and strangers to be receiued in. Simon Fitz Mary, Shriue. Roger Blunt, Shriue. Andrew Bokerel Pepperer Maior. 1234 Salisbury burnt.Richard Marshall, and Leolyne Prince of North∣wales, with a great force inuaded the kings lande, and destroyed the same with fire and sword, from the coasts of Wales to Salisbury, which tow also they set on fire. This yeare was a great dearth and pestilence, so that many poore folks died for want of victuals. An, reg, 19.Ralph Ashy, Shriue. Iohn Norman, Shriue. Andrew Bokerell Pepperer Maior. 1235The Iewes at Norwich stole a boy, and circum∣cised him, meaning to haue crucified him at Ea∣ster: for which fact they were conuicted. S. Mary Spittle. An, reg, 20Walter Brune a Citizen of London, and Rosia his wife, founded the Hospitall of our Lady without Bishops-gate of London. Gerard Bate, Shriue. Robert Hardell, Shriue. Andrew Bakerell Pepperer Maior. 1236 High wa∣ters. Statutes of Marton. An reg, 21.K. Henry tooke to wife Elianor, daughter to Ray∣mond, Earle of Prouince. The Thames ouerflow∣ed the banks, so that in the great Palace of West∣minster men did rowe with wherries in the midst of the Hall. A Parliament at Marton wherein was made the statutes of Marton. Henry Cocham, Shriue. Iordan of Couentry, Shriue. Andrew Bokerell Pepperer Maior.
Octobon a Cardinall came into England as a Legate from the Pope.1237 This yeare passed stormy and troublesome weather, and very vnhealthfull. Iohn Toloson, Shriues.1238 Geruas the Cordwaiuer. Shriue. Andrew Bokerell Pepperer Maior. Octobon being lodged in the Abbey of Osney,Legate put to his shift the scollers of Oxford slew his master Cooke, & the Le∣gate for feare got him into the stéeple of the church, where he held him till the kings Officers cōming from Abingdon, conueied him to Wallingford, where hee accursed the misdoers. Otho de Kilkeu∣ney, a standard bearer to the schollers, was taken with 12. other, & cast into prison,Schollers did penance & long after went from S. Pauls Church in London to the Legates house, bare footed & bare headed, where they asked him forgiuenes.King in danger. An, reg, 23 1239 A Scholer of Oxford enterprised to haue slaine the King in his chamber at Wood∣stocke, was taken and pulled in péeces with horses Iohn Coders, Shriue. Iohn de Wilchale, Shriue. Richard Renger Maior. The K.Tower of London. An, reg, 24 1240 gaue the Earledome of Lecester to Simon Mountford. The Tower of London was fortified, which the citizens feared lest it were done to their detriment. Roger Bongry, shriue. Ralph Ashy, shriue. William Ioyner Maior. The stone gate & bulwarke which the king caused to be builded by the tower of London was shaken with an earthquake, & fel down:Bulwarke by the To∣wer. but the king com∣maunded the same to bee builded againe. Many
strange fishes came a shore,Monstrous fishes. wherof 40. were Sea∣buls, and one of a huge bignes passed through the bridge of London vnhurt, til he came as farre as kings house at Mortlacke, where he was killed. Aldermen An, reg, 125Aldermen of London, which had the rule of the wards of the Citty, were euery yeare changed. Iohn Gisers, Shriue. Michael Tony. Shriue. Gerard Bat, Maior. The Iewes were constrained to pay 2000. markes at two tearmes in the yeare,1241 Bulwarke by the To∣wer. An, reg, 26. or else to be kept in perpetuall prison. The walles and bul∣warkes that were newly builded about the tower of London, were againe throwne downe as it were with an earthquake. Iohn Viel, Shriue. Thomas Duresme. Shriue. Reginald Bongey. Maior. An. reg. 27. 1242K. Henry with a great army sailed into Norman∣dy, purposing to recouer Poiters, Guien, and o∣ther countries, but after many bickerings, to the losse of Englishmen, he treated peace. Iohn Fitz Iohn Shriue. Ralph Asswaie. Shriue. Reginald Bongey Maior. 1263 Great flouds.The Thames ouerflowed the bankes about Lambeth, & drowned houses and fields the spa of 6. miles, and in the great hall at Westminster, men tooke their horses backes. Hugh Blunt Shriue. Adam Basing, Shriue. Ralph Ashwie, Pepperer Maior.
Griffin the eldest son of Leoline prince of North∣wales,1244 Miserable death of Griffin. which was kept prisoner in the Tower of London, made of ye hangings, shéets, towels, &c. a long line, & put himselfe downe from the top of the tower: but being a very big man, the rope brake, and he fell on his necke.Robert Grofted. An, reg, 29. Robert Grosted Bishop of Lincolne, with other Prelates, complained to the king of the waste made of the Church goods, by a∣lian Bishops and Clearkes. Ralph Foster, Shriue. Nicholas Bat, Shriue. Michiael Tony. Maior. The King enlarged the Church of S. Peters in Westminster, pulling downe the old walles,1245 An, reg, 30 1246 and stéeple, and caused them to be made more comely. Robert of Cornehill, Shriue. Adam of Bentley, Shriue. Iohn Gisers, Pepperer Maior. The Church of S. Mildred in Canterbury,Canterbury burnt. An, reg, 31 and a great part of the Citie was burnt. Simon Fitz Marie, shriue. Laurence Froike, shriue. Iohn Gisers, Pepperer, Maior. King Henry let to frme the Quéene-hiue in London to Iohn Gisors then Maior,1247 Queene hiue.and his succes∣sors, and cōminalty of London for euer, for the summe of 50. pounds the yeare. A great plague was in England. Iohn Viell, shriues.Pestilence. An, reg, 32. 1248 Nicholas Bat, shriue. Peter Fitz Alwin Maior. By reason of the embasing of the coine, a great
penury followed. The towne of Newcastle vpon Tine, was bur∣ned, bridge and all. Earthquake An, reg. 33By a strange earthquake the toppes of houses were throwne downe, wals did cleaue, the heade of chimneyes and towers were shaken. Nicholas Fitz Iosey, shriue. Geffery Winchester shriue. Michael Toney Maior. 1249 A Mart at Westmin∣ster. An, reg, 34.The King made a Mart at Westminster to la 15. daies, which the citizens were faine to redéeme with 1000. pounds. Richard Hardell, Shriue. Iohn Tolason, Shriue. Roger Fitz Roger Maior. In October the sea flowing twise without ebbe, made so horrible a noise, that it was heard a great way into England,1250 Tempests. beside this in a darke night, the sea séemed to be on a light fire, and the was to fight one with another, so that the Marriners were not able to saue their ships. And at Winchesea,Winchelsea drowned. besides cottages for salt, & fishermens houses, bridges & mils, aboue 300. houses in that towne, with certaine Churches, through the violent rising of the sea were drowned. An, reg, 35.Humfrey Beas, shriue. William Fitz Richard, shriue. Iohn Norman Maior. 1251 Maior of London sworne. An, reg. 36.K. Henry granted, that where before the citizens of London did presēt their Maior before the king, wheresoeuer he were, and so to be admitted, now should come only before ye Barons of ye Exchequer.
Lawrence Froicke, shriue. Nicholas Bat, shriue. Adam Basing Maior. A great drought from Easter to Michaelmas.1252 Shepheards assembled. An, reg, 37. The shepheards of France & England took their iourney towards the holy land, to the number of 30000. but their number vanished in short time. William Durham, shriue. Thomas Wimborn, shriue. Iohn Toloson Draper Maior. The liberties of London were seized by ye means of Richard Earle of Cornwall,1253 Liberties of London seized. An, reg, 38. who charged the Maior that hee looked not to the Bakers for their ses of bread: so that the citty was forced to please the Earle with 600. Markes, and were restored. Iohn Northampton, shriue. Richard Pickard, shriue. Richard Hardell Draper, Maior. Edward the kings son, wedded Elianor the kings daughter of Spaine, his father gaue him ye Earle∣dome of Chester,1254 An, reg, 39. & the gouernance of Gwien and Ireland. Ralph Ashy, shriue. Robert of Limon. shriue. Richard Hardell Druper Maior. 142. Iewes were brought to Westminster, which were accused of crucifying a child at Lin∣colne, 18. of them were hanged,1255 An, reg, 40. Iewes han∣ged. the rest remained long prisoners. Stephen Do, shriue. Henry Walmond. shriue. Richard Hardell Draper Maior.1256 An, reg, 41 The Maior and diuers Aldermen of London, and
the Sherifes were depriued of their offices, & the gouernance of the Cittie committed to other. 1257Michael, Bokerell Shriue. Iohn the Minor, Shriue. Richard Hardel Draper Maior. King of Al∣maine.Hugh Bigot, chiefe Iustice of England, & Rog Turkleby, kept their Courts in the Guild hall  London, and punished the bakers vpon the Tuberell, and did many other things contrary to th lawes of the Cittie. Walles of London repaired. An, reg, 42. 1258The King caused the walles of the Cittie  London to be repaired. Richard Owell shriue. William Skwie shriue. Richard Hardel Draper Maior. The Lords held a Parliament at Oxford, whe were chosen 12. Péeres, which had authoritie correct the breakers of these ordinances: the King his brethren the Noble men and Barons, taking their oath to sée the same obserued.Mad Par∣liament. Twelue Peeres. A Iew drowned. An. reg. 43. A Iewe  Tukesbury fell into a priuy vpon the Saturd▪ and would not for reuerence of his Sabboath  plucked out: wherefore Richard of Clare Earle  Glocester kept him there till Munday, at whi time he was dead. Robert Cornehill Shriue. Iohn Adrian. Shriue. Richard Hardel Draper Maior. 1259 Oath to the King. An, reg, 44.The king cōmanded the Maior that he shuld ca to be sworne euery stripling of 12. yeares of a or vpward, to be true to ye king & his heires, & th the gates of ye city should be kept wt harnessed
Iohn Adrian, Shriue. Robert Cornhill, Shriue. Iohn Gisors Pepperer Maior. The Barons & nobles of the realme held a Par∣liament at London, in the new Temple,Parliament An, reg, 45 and the King held himselfe in the Tower of London. Adam Browning, Shriue. Henry Couentry, Shriue. William Fitz Richard Maior. K. Henry published at Pauls crosse,1261 K Henry absolued. An, reg, 46 the Popes abso∣lution for him & all his that were sworne to main∣tain ye articles made in the parliament at Oxford. Iohn Northampton, Shriue. Richard Pickard, Shriue. William Fitz Richard Maior. The Barons armed men against the King,Barons in armour. 1262 and all this yeare houered about London, without any notable of act rebellion. This yeare 1263.An reg. 47 1263 Sarazens attempt to conquer Christen∣dome. all Christian nations on the o∣ther side the sea, sustained great dangers & outra∣ges by the miscreant Sarazens: so as the Christi∣ans was constrained to vse their best meanes to suppresse them. And in Paris there was a great Councell held of Prelates and Barons, to deuise means for their countries safety. In the 10. yeare of the raigne of Richard the Emperour there was a blazing star séene 3. moneths.A blazing starre. Earle of Cornwall chosen Em∣perour. At this time there was a Schisme amongst the Princes Electors in Germany, and they elected Richard Earle of Corn¦wall, brother to K. Henry of England: he was cho∣sen in the yeare 1257. or as some say, in the yeare 1255. & with him was likewise chosen Aphonso,
King of Castile:Thomas Aquinas. he raigned 18. yeares: in his time flourished the great Clarke S. Thomas Aquinas. Ihn Taylor, shriue. Richard Walbroke, shriue. Thomas Fitz Thomas, Maior. There was slaine of Iewes in London to the number of 700.1263 Iewes slain for vsury. An reg, 48. the rest were spoiled, & their Sy∣nagogues defaced, because one Iewe would haue forced a Christian man to haue paid more then 2. d. for the vsury of 20. s. the wéeke. Robert Monpilet, Shriue. Osbert Suffolke, Shriue. Thomas Fitz Thomas Maior. 1264 Battell at Lewes. The King taken. An, reg, 49.A battell at Lewis betwéene K. Henry & the Ba∣rons, in which battell the King with his son Ed∣ward & Richard Earle of Cornwall, with many o∣ther Lords, were taken by Simon of Mountford, Earle of Leicester and the Barons. Gregory Rokesley, shriue. Thomas of Lafford, shriue. Thomas Fits Thomas Maior. 1265 Battell at Eusham.Edward being now at libertie, allied him with the Earle of Glocester & gathering to him a great po∣wer, warred so freshly vpon Simon of Leicester, that at the end, he with many other of the nobles, were slaine in the battell at Euisham. A parliament was holden at Winchester, when all the statutes made at Oxford,Parliament at winche∣ster. An, reg, 50 were disanulled. London was in great danger to haue bin destroy∣ed by the K. for displeasure he had conceiued, but the Citizens wholly submitted both liues & goods in the kings hands. The King gaue vnto his son
Edward, the Maior and 4. Aldermen: many other were committed to seuerall prisons. Edward Blund, Shriue. Peter Anger, Shriue. Thomas Fitz Thomas Fitz Richard Maior. The king gaue to diuers of his houshold seruants about the number of 60. houses & housholds with∣in the Cittie: so that the owners were compelled to redéeme their houses and goods,1266 Battell of Chesterfild. An, reg, 51. or else to auoid them. The 11. of May was the battell of Chester∣field against them that were disherited, where ma∣ny were slaine. Iohn hinde, shriue. Iohn Walrauen, shriue. William Richard Maior. Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester,1267 An, reg, 52. allying him∣selfe with the exiled Gentlemen, rose against the K. & the 8. of April with an army entred the city of London, & therein builded bulwarkes, & cast tren∣ches in diuers places: the King gathered an army, came towards London, pitched his tents at Staf∣ford, and taried there the space of one moneth. The sixt of Iune the Earle of Glocester in peace∣able manner rendred the Citie vnto the King. Iohn Adrian, shriue. Lucas Baecourt, shriue. Alin Souch Maior. Variance fell betweene the fellowship of Gold∣smiths and Taylers of London,1268 An, reg, 53 causing great ruf∣flings in the City, and many men to be slaine. For which riot, twelue of the chiefe Captaines were hanges.
Walter Haruie, Shriue. William Duresme, Shriue. Sir Stephen de Edward Maior. Great frost 1269 An. reg. 54.The riuer of Thames was so hard frozen from S. Adrewes tide to Candlemas, that men & beasts passed on foote from Lambeth to Westminster, the marchandise was carried from Sandwich and o∣ther hauens to London by land. Thomas Basing Shriue. Robert Cornehill, Shriue. Hugh Fitz Otonis Maior. 1270 An, reg, 55.The Nobles of England assembled at London to entreate of diuers matters, whereof there arose discord betwixt Iohn Warren Earle of Surrey, and Alin de la Souch Lord Iustice of Ireland, before the Iustice of the Bench, where the saide Alin Souch was wounded to death. Walter Potter, Shriue. Taylor. Shriue. Iohn Adrian Vintner Maior. 1271 An, reg, 56.The stéeple of Bow in Cheape fell downe, and slew many people, men and women. Richard King of Almaine, and Earle of Corn∣wall, brother to K. Henry, deceased, and was buri∣ed at Hailes. Gregory Rokesly, Shriue. Henry Walis, Shriue. Iohn Adrian Vintner Maior. 1272 Riot at Norwich. An, reg, 57.In Iune began a great riot in the City of Nor∣wich, through the which the monastery of the Tri∣nity was burned, wherupon the King rod downe, and making inquirie for the chiefe doers thereof,
caused 30. of them to be condemned, drawne, han∣ged and burnt. Richard Paris, shriue. Iohn Bedell, shriue. Sir Walter Haruie Maior. K. Henry died in the 16. of Nouember, in the yeare 1272. whē he had raigned 56. yeares, & 28. daies: he was buried at Westminster: he builded a great part of the same Church: he left for his heire, his eldest son Edward, Edmond Crowchbacke Earle of Leicester, and Lancaster, and two daughters, Beatrice and Margaret. King Edward, surnamed Longshankes. EDward the first after the Conquest,An, reg, 1. 1273 sonne to Henry the third, surnamed Longshanke, began his raigne the 16. of Nouember, in the yeare 1272. be∣ing then beyond the sea. Iohn Horne, shriue. Walter Potter, shriue. Sir Walter Haruie Knight Maior. This yeare fell a great variance at Oxford,An, reg, 2 1274 betwéene the Northerne and Irishmen, wherein many Irishmen were slaine. Nicholas Winchester, Shriue. Henry Couentry, Shriue. Henry Walles Maior. On St. Nicholas euen were great earthquakes,An, reg, 3
lightnings & thunder with a huge dragon, and a blazing starre which made many men sore afraid. Vsury was forbidden to the Iewes, and that they might bee knowen,Vsury for∣bidden. the King commaunded them to weare a Tablet the bredth of a palme vp∣on their outmost garmēts. A Frenchman brought into Northumberland a Spanish Ewe, as big as a Calfe of two yeares,1275 First rot of sheepe. which Ewe being rotten, infected so the country, that it was spread ouer all the Realme. Lucas Batecourt, shriue. Henry Frowicke, shriue. Castle of Flint. An, reg, 4. 1276Gregory Rokesley, maister of the Kings Mints, and therefore a Goldsmith I thinke. Maior. King Edward builded the Castle of Flint, streng∣thened the Castle of Rutland, & other against the Welshmen. There was a generall earthquake, by force whereof the Church of Saint Michael of the mount without Glastenbury,Blacke Fri∣ers in Lon∣don. fell to the ground. The blacke Friers Church at London, was builded by Robert Kilworby, Archbishop of Can∣terbury. Iohn Horne, Shriue. Ralph Blunt, Shriue. Gregory Rokesly Maior. An, reg, 5. 1277The statute of Mortmaine was enacted, Mi∣chael Tony was hanged, drawen, and quartered for treason. Robert de Aria. shriue. Ralph le Feuere, shriue. Gregory Rokesley, Maior. King Edward gaue vnto Dauid, brother to Leoline
Prince of Wales, the Lordship of Frodisham.An, reg. 6. 1278 Iohn Adrian, Shriue. Walter Langley, Shriue. Gregory Rokesley, Maior. Michaelmas Tearme was kept at Shrewsbu∣ry.An, reg, 7. 1279 Iewes exe∣cuted. Reformation was made for clipping of the Kings coine: for which offence 267. Iewes were put to execution. Robert Basing shriue. William Mazaliuer, shriue. Gregory Rokesley Maior. Whereas before this time the penny was wont to haue a double crosse with a creast,First halfe∣pence and farthings round. 1280 in such sort yt the same might be easily broken in the midst, or in 4. quarters, & so to be made into halfpenies or far∣things, it was now ordained, that pence, halfe∣pence, & farthings should be made round. At this time twenty pence weighed an ounce of Troy weight. Thomas Boxe, Shriue. Ralph le Lamere, Shriue. Gregory Rokesley Maior. Dauid brother to Leoline Prince of Wales,An, reg, 9. 1281 mo∣ued all Wales almost to rise against the King. William Farrendo Goldsmith, Shriue. Nicholas Winchester, Shriue. Gregory Rokesley Maior. There was such a frost that 5.Bridges broken downe. arches of London bridge, and all Rochester bridge was borne down and carried away, with many bridges more. William Mazaliue, Shriue. Richard Chigwell, Shriue. Henry de VVales Maior.
An, reg, 11 1282 Corne sold by waight. The tonne in Cornhill.The Bakers of London were first drawne vpon Herdels by Henry Walleis Maior, and corne was then first sold by waight. This Henry Walleis caused to bee erected the Tonne vpon Cornhill to be a prison for night wal∣kers, and other suspitious persons. The stocks market. 1283He also caused to be builded an house called the Stockes, to bee a market for flesh and fish in the midst of the Citie. The Iewes sinagogues destroied.Iohn Pecham Archbishop of Canterbury, sen∣deth commandement to the Bishop of London to destroy all the Synagoues of the Iewes, within his Diocesse. Ralph Blond, Shriue. Anktein de Beteuil, Shriue. Henry de Walleis, Maior. An, reg, 12 1284Leoline Prince of Wales was slaine, and his head was set vpon the Tower of London. Also Dauid the brother of Leoline Prince of Wales, was taken and beheaded. Iordan Godcheape, Shriue. Martin Boxe, Shriue. An, reg, 13. 1283Henry Walleis Maior. Edward the Kings first son, was borne at Car∣naruan in Wales. Phillip of France, surnamed the Faire, began his raigne in the yeare 1285. he builded the stately Palace for the Parliament in Paris▪ he tooke Guy the Earle of Flanders, and carried him & his two sons prisoners to Paris. In his time Pope Cle∣ment the 5. was consecrated at Lyons. And the Cathedrall Papall was transferred from Rome
vnto Auignon in France, and there remained 70.Knights Templars supprest, & Knights of the Rhods ordained. yeares during which transmigration, there were 3. Cardinals appointed to gouerne Italy. In this Kings raigne the Hospitelars of St. Iohn tooke Rhodes, and draue out the Turkes, and were afterwards called Knights of the Rhodes. This Phillip bare great hatred vnto the Kinghts Tem∣plars, which at this time flourished throughout Christendome, whose name & order of Templars, began presently after the conquest of the holy land by Godfrey of Bullen, as well for their religious resolute defending the Temple, suppressing all manner of thieues and robbers, that offended the Christians in Iudea, as their continuing warlike seruice vpon the common enemies of Christs reli∣gion, viz: the Turkes and Sarazens, who by their oath were bound not to turn their face from their enemies. This honorable order by degrées became most famous, & was by this time dignified and re∣ceiued in euery Christian nation: which Knights for the most part consisted of yonger brothers of noble birth and haughty courage, & were possest of faire pallaces, endowed with great priuiledges & reuenews for their maintenance. These men pre∣suming vpon their proper merits, kindred, ally∣nce, and large possessions, became very proud and insolent, but whether their great pride, or aboun∣dance of wealth, caused their sudden suppression, s not directly set downe in any history, therefore I submit my opinion vnto the saying of the holy Scripture, to wit, Pride goeth before destruci∣n. The Kings displeasure towards them preuai∣led
so far that hee procured the Pope to suppresse them with confiscation of their lands & goods, & in their places for the Christian seruice against the forenamed common enemies of our faith, they or∣dained the order of the Knights of the Rhodes. This King raigned 28. yeares, and was buried at S. Denys, read Gaguin 7. booke,  Emilius 8. booke. In the yeare 1522. the Isle of Rhodes was yéel∣ded vnto Sultan Solyman vpon Christmas day, af∣ter it had béene besieged 6. moneths with great strength and fury: and then that name and title of Knights of the Rhodes ceased: but for as much as the maintenance of such a speciall order was as propicious to the Christian seruice, as odious vn∣to Turkish infidelitie, the Emperour Charles the 5. in the yeare 1529. gaue vnto the late Knights of the Rhodes, the Isle of Malta, since which time they haue ben called the knights of Malta, hauing vpon all occasions & extremitie whatsoeuer, right worthily performed their oath, maintained their order and reputation: for which cause the inuerate malice of the Mahometists continued as great towards them, as to any former ordered Christian seruitors: whereupon, as well in ha to suppresse them, as to encrease further oppressi∣on vpon Christendom, the forenamed Solyman, t 10. of May 1565. sent Mustapha Basha with  mighty host against them who won certaine hol and forts within the Island. And with all violen they besieged their chiefe citie called Bourg by  and land, whom the forenamed Knights and the friends as religious & valliantly resisted, as w
insallying foorth vpon the strongest part of their e∣nemies campe, as maintaining their wals, water∣workes, & rampiers. Albeit of themselues it was not possible for them to make long resistance a∣gainst so strong & cruell enemies, hauing already endured 4. moneths terrible siege, by which time the K. of Spaine sent fresh supplies vnto them, and ing conioined, so stoutly repulsed Mustapha, that in gladly raised his siege, and departed with losse of 25000. of his men, and of Christians there were slaine 5000. besides 240. Knights of the order. Laurence Ducket Goldsmith,Ducket hanged vp in Bow Church. grieuously woun∣ded one Ralph Crepin in West Cheape: and then sled into Bow Church: after that, certaine euill disposed persons, friends to the said Ralph, entred the Church in the night time, and slewe the saide Laurence lying in the stéeple, and then hanged him vp, placing him as though he had hanged himselfe. But shortly after, by relation of a boy, the truth of the matter was known: for the which a woman and sixtéene men were put in prison, and after∣ward more, who all were drawn and hanged, saue the woman who was burnt. The great Conduit in Cheape was begun to be builded. Stephen Cornehill, shriue. Robert Rokesley, shriue. Gregory Rokesley Maior. A Iustes was proclaimed at Boston in the faire time, whereof one part came in ye habit of Monks, another in the sute of Canons, who had couenan∣ted
after the Iusts to spoile the faire,An, reg. 14. 1286 for the atchi∣uing of their purposes▪ they fired the towne in 3. places.Faire at Boston spoiled. An, reg, 15 Yarmouth Dnwich & Ipswich perished. 1287 Walter Blunt, Shriue. Iohn Wade, Shriue. Ralph Sandwich Maior. On New yeares day at night, as well through vehemencie of the winde, as violence of the se, many Churches were ouerthrowne and destroied, not onely at Yarmouth, Dunwich, and Ipswich, but also in diuers other places of England. Thomas Crosh, Shriue. Walter Hautaine, Shriue. Ralph Sandwich Maior. An, reg, 16. 1288The Summer was so excéeding hot, that many men died through the extremitie thereof: and yet wheate was sold at London for 3. s. 4. d. the quar∣ter, and such cheapnes of beanes and pease, as the like had not béene heard of. William Hereford, Shriue. Thomas Stanes, Shriue. Ralph Sandwich Custos. An reg. 17. 1289Great haile fell in England, & after insued great raine, that the yeare following wheate was raised from 5. d. the bushell to 16. d. & so increased yeare∣ly, till it was lastly sold for 20. s. the quarter. William Betaine, Shriue. Iohn of Canterbury, Shriue. Ralph Sandwich Maior. An, reg, 18 1290Rice ap Meredith, was by the Earle of Cornwall taken, drawen, hanged and quartered. Falke of S. Edmond, Shriue. Salomon le Stotell, Shriue. Sir Iohn Briton Custes.
The transgressions of diuers Iustices was tried out, & punished accordingly: some lost their goods,An, reg, 19 1291 and then were banished: some as wel of the Bench as of the Assises were sent to the Tower. The King banished all ye Iews out of England, giuing them to beare their charges till they were out of the realme:Iewes ba∣nished. the number of Iewes then ex∣pulsed, were 15. M. 9. persons. Thomas Romain Shriue. William de Lier. Shriue. Iohn de Breton. Custos. The wool staple was ordained to be at Sand∣wich. Ralph Blunt, Shriues.An, reg, 20 1292 Hamond Boxe Shriue. Ralph Sandwich Custos. King Edward adiudged Iohn Ballioll to bee true heire of Scotland.An, reg, 21: Iohn Bal∣lioll did ho∣mage for Scotland. Quéene Elianor died at Herdby, a towne neare to Lincolne, she was brought to Westminster, and there buried.1293 Queene deceased. The king made at euery place where she staied a costly crosse, with the Queenes image vpon it. Charing Crosse, and the Crosse in West Cheape of London, were two of them. The Minoresse,The Mino∣resse. a Nunnery without Algate of London, was founded by Edmond Earle of Leicester, brother to King Edward. Henry Bole, Shriue. Elias Russel, Shriue. Ralph Sandwich Custos. Thrée men had their right hands cut off in west Cheape for rescuing a prisoner rested by an Offi∣cer in the Cittie of London.An, reg, 22 1294
Robert Rokesly, Shriue. Martin Aunsbresby, Shriue. Ralph Sandwich, Maior. An, reg, 23 1295The water of Thames ouerflowed the bankes, and made a breach at Rotherheth beside London the low ground about Bermondsey and Toth, was ouerflowed. Henry Boxe, Shriue. Richard Glocester, Shriue. Sir Ralph Sandwich Maior. An, reg, 24 Castle of Beawma∣rish.The King passing with an armie against the Welshmen, builded the Castle of Beawmarish in the Isle of Anglesey. The Welshmen were con∣sumed by famine, their woods were felled, and ma∣ny castles fortified▪ Rice ap Meredith was brought to London. The Frenchmen arriued at Douer, and spoi∣led the towne.1296 Iohn of Dunstable, Shriue. Adam de Halingbery, Shriue. Sir Iohn Breton Maior. An reg, 25. 1297 K. Edward won Bar∣wicke.Iohn Baliol King of Scots, contrary to his alle∣giance rebelled: King Edward won the Castles  Barwicke and Dunbarre: hee slew of Scots 25. thousand: he conquered Edenborough, where he found the regall ensignes of Scotland. Thomas Suffolke, Shriue. Adam Fulham, Shriue. Sir Iohn Breton Maior. An, reg, 2.The King increased the tribute of the woolles tasking for euery sacke 40. s. where before th time they paid but halfe a marke.
The Scots by instigation of W. Wales ebelled,1298 and put the Englishmen to much trouble. Iohn de Stortford, shriue. W. de Stortford, shriue. Sir Iohn Breton, Maior. Fire being kindled in the lesser hall of ye pallace at Westminster,An, reg 27. 1299 The King pllace burnt. S Martins in the Vin∣try. the flame therof being driuen with winde, fired the building of the Monastery next adioyning, which with the pallace were both con∣sumed. S. Martins Church in the Vintry at London, was now builded by the Executors of Mathew de Calumbaris. Richard Rotham, Shriue. Thomas Sly, Shriue. Henry Waleis Maior. This realme was troubled with false money,An, reg, 2. Falle mony. 1300 called Crockden and Pollard, coined in parts be∣yond the seas, and vttered for sterling. K. Edward tooke to wife Margaret sister to Phil∣liple Beaw then King of France. Iohn de Amentiers, Shriue. Henry de Fingrie, Shriue. Henry Waleis Maior. K, Edward made his voiage against the Scots,An, reg, 29. 1301 wherein he subdued a great part of the land, tooke the castle of Estreueliue with other, and made the Lords sweare to him fealty. Lucas Hauering, shriue. Richard Campes, shriue. Elias Russell Maior. The K.An, reg, 30 1302 gaue to Edward his son the Princedome of Wales, and ioyned there unto the Dukedome
of Cornewall, and the Earledome of Chester. Robert Colleuer, shriue. Peter de Boscube, shriue. Elias Russel Maior. An, reg, 31 1303The Scots rebelling, made William Waleis their leader, wherefore the king hauing his army ready, passed ouer ye whole land, none offring him battel. Hugh Port, Shriue. Simon Paris, Shriue. Sir Iohn Blunt Maior. An, reg, 32. 1304Richard Grauesend Bishop of London deceased, who is reported to haue purchased the Charters & liberties of the Cittie of London, in the yeare of our Lord 1392. in the 16. of Richard the second. The vntruth whereof I haue thought good thus much to note. The Kings bench and exchequer returned.The K. returning out of Scotland, cōmanded the courts of the Kings bench and the Exchequer, which had now remained at Yorke seuen yeares, to be remoued to their old places at London. W. de Combematin, Shriue. I. de Bereford, Shriue. Sir Iohn Blunt. Maior. An, reg, 33 Draw the staffe. 1305K. Edw. ordained Iustices of Tirelebastō, against intruders into other mens lands, truce breakers, extortioners, murtherers, and such like offenders. W. Waleis, which had oftentimes set Scotland in great trouble, was taken & brought to London where he was hanged, headed, and quartered. Roger Paris, Shriue. Iohn Lincolne, Shriue. Sir Iohn Blunt Maior.
Robert Bruce caused himselfe to bee crowned King of Scots, wherof when King Edward heard,An, reg, 34 1306 he went with hast into Scotland, where he chased the said Robert Bruce, and tooke many of the Noble men prisoners, and brought Scotland into such o∣bedience, as he gaue of the lands, therof to his sub∣iects of England, with Markets, Faires, & War∣rens. Among other, I haue séene vnder the broade seale of the said King Edward, a Mannour called Retnes, in the County of Forfaire in Scotland, & neare the furthest part of the same nation, North∣ward, giuen to Iohn Ewer, and his heires,Iohn Ewer. aunce∣stors to the Lord Ewer that now is, for the seruice done in those parts, with market euery munday, Faire for 3. dayes euery yeare at Michaelmas, and free warren for the same, dated at Lauereost the xx. day of October, Anno Reg. 34. William Coser, Shriue. Reginald Thunderle, Shriue. Sir Iohn Blunt Maior. This yeare 1306.An, reg, 35. Sea-coale forbidden to be bur∣ned neare London. vpon sundry complaints of many of the Cleargy & Nobilitie resorting to the city of London, touching the great anoiance & dan∣ger of contagion growing by reason of the french of burning sea-coale, which diuers fire makers in Southwarke, Wapping, & East Smithfield, now vsed to make their common fires because of cheap∣nes hereof, & to forbeare the burning of bauin and fire coale, the King expresly commanded the Mai∣or and Shriues of London for with to make pro∣clamation that all those fire-makers should cease their burning of sea-coale, and make their fires of
such fuell of wood and coale as had béene formerly vsed. Reade the Record. The great new Church of the gray Friers in London was begunne to bee builded by the Lady Margaret Quéene,1307 second wife to Edward the first. Iohn of Briton, Earle of Richmond, builded the body of the church, the residue was finished by the Lady Mary Countesse of Pembroke, Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester, Margaret Countesse of Glocester, Elianor Spencer, Elizabeth Bourgh, sisters to Gilbert de Clare. King Edward sent messengers into England, & commanded that all that ought him seruice, should be ready at Carlile within 3. wéekes after the feast of S. Iohn Baptist, But himselfe being vexed with a bloody flixe, the 7. of Iuly departed this life at Burgh vpon the sands, in the yeare of our Lord 1307. when he had raigned 34. yeares, seuen mo∣neths, and odde daies: his body was buried at Westminster, vnto the which Church hee had gi∣uen landes to the value of an hundred pound by yeare: 20. pound thereof yearely to be distributed to the poore. Edward of Carnaruan. An, reg. 1.EDward the second, sonne to the first Edward, borne at Carnaruan, began his raigne the 7. of Iuly, in the yeare 1307. he was faire of body, but vn∣stedfast of maners, not regarding to gouerne his commonweale by discretion & iustice, which caused great variance betwéene him and the Lords.
Nicholas Pigot, Shriue. Nigellus Drurie, Shriue. Sir Iohn Blunt Maior. The King married Isabel the French Kings daughter.1308 The Lords enuying Pierce of Gauestone,Pierce of Gaueston exiled. An, reg, 2. Earle of Cornwall, a stranger borne, banished him the land. William Basing, shriue. Iames Borener, shriue. Nicholas Faringdon Goldsmith, Maior. The King sent for Pierce of Gaueston out of Ireland,1309 An, reg, 3 and gaue him the Earle of Glocesters sister in marriage, which caused him againe to rise in pride, scorning the Nobles of the realme. The Barons therefore declared to the King, that ex∣cept he would expell the saide Pierce from his com∣pany, they would rise against him, as against a periured Prince: whereupon once againe hee cau∣sed Pierce to abiure. Iames of S. Edmond, shriue. Roger Palmer, shriue. Thomas Romane Maior. Pierce of Gauestone returned into England,1310 An, reg, 4. and came to ye kings presence, who forgetting al oaths and promises, receiued him as a heauenly gift. The Church of Middleton in Dorsetshire, was consumed with lightning, the Monkes being at mattens. Simon de Corpe, shriue. Peter Blackney, shriue. Richard Reffam Mercer Maior.
Templars. condemnedTemplars in England, vpon heresie and other filthy Articles, whereof they were accused, were condemned to perpetuall penance in seuerall Mo∣nasteries. 1311 Pierce of Gauestone beheaded.The Barons of England being confederated against Pierce of Gauestone, besieged him at the castle of Scarborough, where they tooke him, and brought him to Warwicke castle, and caused his head to be stricken off. Simon Mermood shriue. Richard Gilford, shriue. Sir Iohn Gisors Pepperer Maior. 1312Quéene Isabel was deliuered of her first sonne named Edward, at Windsor. The Rhods won by the Christians. An, reg, 6.The Knights of the order of S. Iohn Baptist, called S. Iohn of Ierusalem, put the Turkes out of the Isle of Rhodes, and after that, wan vpon the saide Turkes daily for a long time. Iohn Lambyn, Shriue. Richard Gilford, Shriue. Sir Iohn Gisors Pepperer Maior. 1313 Battaile at Streueling. An, reg, 7.King Edward gathering a great power, mar∣ched towards Scotland to breake the siege of the Castle of Streuelin, where hee and his power en∣countred with Robert Bruce and the Scots: in the end whereof the English men were discomfited, and so eagerly pursued by the Scots, that many of the Noble men were slaine. This yeare 1313. according to the Chronicles of Germany,The French King bur∣neth all his diseased. Phillip king of France, surnamed the Faire, hauing his body full of venemous scabs & manginesse, caused all such of his subiects, as well
women as men, both in France and Flaunders, as had either the leaprosie, or meazelrie, to be bur∣ned. The cause of this his tyrannous rigour was because he had beene informed, that the saide lazar or pockey people had wilfully poysoned all the chiefe wels and standing waters. Some say, that this visitation was the diuine iustice of God vpon the King for suppressing the Knights Templars.All the Iewes in Germany burned. And in the yeare 1403. all the Iewes in Germa∣ny were burned, because they had poisoned all the wels and standing waters. It appeareth by for∣raine Chronicles, that the Iewes had a generall purpose to poison the Christians: for the Iewes in France did poyson the waters likewise, and were seuerely punished. Robert Gurdome, Shriue. Hugh Garton, Shriue. Nicholas Farendon Goldsmith Maior. The King caused his writs to be published for victuals,1314 Victuals prised. An, reg, 8. that no Oxe stalled or corne fed bee solde for more then 24. s. no grasse fed oxe for more then 16. s. a fat stalled cow at 12. s. another cow at 10. shillings. A fat mutton corne fed, or whose wooll is well growne, at 20. pence, another fat mutton shorne at 14. d. A fat hog of 2. yeares olde, at 3. s. 4. d. A fat goose at 2. d. halfe peny in the city at 3 d. A fat Capon at 2. d. in the citty at 2. d. halfe peny, A fat hen at one peny, in the citty at one peny halfe peny. Two chickins a peny, in the citie on peny halfe peny. Foure pigeons for one peny, in the citty three pigeons for one peny, 24. egges a peny, in the citty 20. egges a peny, &c.
Stephen Abingdon, Shriue. Hamond Chigwell, Shriue. Sir Iohn Gisors pepprer, Maior. 1315 A Tanners son claimed to be King. An, reg, 9. Mortalitie of men, Dogs flesh good meat. Children were eaten.A Tanners son of Exceter named himselfe the sonne of Edward the first, for the which hee was hanged at Northampton. The death increased through the abundance of raine that fell in haruest: so yt a quarter of wheat or salt was sold for xl. s. There followed this fa∣mine a grieuous mortalitie of people, so that the quicke might vnneth bury the dead. The beasts & cattel also by the corruptnesse of the grasse where∣of they fed, died: horse-flesh was counted great de∣licates, the poore stole fat dogs to eate: some in hid places, did eate the flesh of their owne children. The Théeues that were in prison,Theeues deuoured one ano∣ther. did plucke in péeces those that were newly brought amongst them, and gréedily deuoured them halfe aliue. Hamond Goodcheape, Shriue. William Bodele, Shriue. Stephen Abingdon Maior. There arriued in England two Cardinals, to make peace betwéene England & Scotland, and to reconcile vnto the K.1316 Two Car∣dinals rob∣bed. Thomas Earle of Lancaster. When they came neare vnto the towne of Der∣lington, certaine robbers, Gilbert Middleton and Walter Selbie being their Captaines, suddenly set vpon the family of the Cardinals, & robbed them of their treasure: but the Cardinals came to Dir∣ham, where they tarried a few daies for answere of the Scots, and so returned to Yorke. Gilbert Middleton was taken,An, reg, 10. carried to London, and
there drawne and hanged. Sir Iosseline Denuile & his brother Robert, with 220. in the habite of Friers, did many notable robberies, they spoyled the Bishop of Dirhams pallaces, leauing in them nothing but bare wals,Thieues like Friers. for the which they were hanged at Yorke. William Causton, Shriue. Ralph Ballancers, Shriue. Iohn Wengraue Maior. The new worke of the Chappell,New work of Paules. on the South side of the Church of S. Paul in London being be∣gunne, there were found in the foundation, more then 100. heades of Oxen and Kine, which then confirmed greatly the opinion of those, who haue reported, that of olde time it had béene the Tem∣ple of Iupiter, and that there was the sacrifice of beasts. Edward de Bruse, the king of Scots brother,1317 Edward Bruce be∣headed. An, reg, 11. who by the space of 3. yeares, had assaulted Ireland, and had crowned himselfe King, was taken by English men, and beheaded at Dundalke. Iohn Brior shriue. William Furneis, shriue. Iohn Wengraue Maior. The towne of Barwicke was betraied to the Scots, through the treason of Peter Spalding.Barwicke betraied. 1318 A murren of Kine. A great murrain of kine happened, dogs & rauens eating of the kine were poysoned, and did swell to death, so that no man durst eate any béefe. Iohn Pounting, Shriue. Iohn Dalling, Shriue. Iohn Wengraue Maior.
The king being at Yorke,Suburbs of Yorke burnt. the Scots entred Eng∣land, came to Yorke, and burnt the suburbs of the citty, & tooke sir Iohn of Britaine, Earle of Rich∣mond, prisoner, with many other. Many herdsmen, & certaine women of England, would goe séeke the holy land to kill the enemies of Christ,1319 Herdsmen and women went to∣wards Ieru∣salem. An, reg, 13. as they saide: but because they should not passe ouer the great sea, they slew many Iewes in the parts of Tolose, and Gascoine: wherefore ma∣ny of them were taken and put to death. Simon Abingdon, shriue. Iohn Preston. shriue. Hamond Chickwell pepperer Maior. Thomas Earle of Lancaster, with many Earles and Barons, came to Sherborn, and from thence with baners displaied to S.1320 The Barons in armour, An, reg, 14. Spencer banished. Albones, from thence they sent to the King being at London, requiring him to banish the two Hugh Spencers. At length the King granted to their petition, so that Hugh Spen∣cer the elder was banished, but the yonger Hugh could not be taken. Reginald at Conduit, Shriue. William Prodom, Shriue. Nicholas Farendon Goldsmith Maior. Iewes and leapers. Poysoned waters.Certaine leapers who had couenanted with the Iewes to poison all the Christians in Europe, laid poyson in Iewels, springs and pits: for the which many were burnt. 1321 Mortimer sent to the Tower.Roger Mortimer, the Earles of Richmond and Arundell, submitting themselues to the King, were sent to the Tower of London. After this, when the Kings Army, and the Army of the
Barons met neare vnto Burton vpon Trent,Thomas Earle of Lancaster beheaded. An, reg, 15 the Earle of Lancaster fled, and the King pursu∣ing them to Burbrige, Thomas Earle of Lancaster was taken and beheaded at Pomfret. Richard Constantine, Shriue. Richard Harkeny, Shriue. Hamond Chickwell pepperer Maior. Andrew Harkeley Earle of Carleil was charged with treason for making peace with the Scots,1322 An, reg, 16. for which he was sent to Yorke, hanged, headed, and quartered. Iohn Grantham, Shriue. Richard of Ely, Shriue. Hamond Chickewell pepperer Maior.1323 An. reg. 17. Roger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore gaue his kéepers a sléepy drinke, escaped through all the watches of the Tower, and passed into France. Adam of Sarisbury, Shriue. Iohn of Oxford, Shriue. Nicholas Farendon Goldsmith Maior.1324 An, reg, 18 The Queen sent into . King Edward sent the Quéene his wife vnto her brother the French King to establish the peace, who went ouer with a small company▪ by her me∣diation a peace was fully finished, whereupon Ed∣ward the Kings sonne went ouer. Bennet of Fulsham, Shriue. Iohn Cawson, Shriue. Hamond Chickwell pepperer Maior. Whiles the Quéene with her sonne remained in France longer then the Kings pleasure was,. reg, 19 & would not come againe without Roger Mortimer and other Noble men that were fled out of Eng∣land: the King banished them both, and all or
that tooke their parts. Gilbert Morden, shriue. Iohn Cotten, shriue. 1326 An, reg. 20. Qu. Isabell returned.Richard Britaine Goldsmith Maior. Isabell the Queene, with her sonne Edward, Ed∣mond of Woodstooke the Kings brother, Roger Mortimer, and many other Noble men that were fled out of England, arriued at Orwell besides Harwich in Essex: immediately the Earle Mar∣shall, the Earle of Leicester, the Bishops of Lin∣colne, Hereford, Diuelin, and Ely, being ioyned to the Quéene, made a great army. The Cittizens of London beheaded such as they tooke to be the Quéenes enemies, they tooke also Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exceter, and be∣headed him and two of his seruants,Bishop of Excester beheaded. because hee gathered a great army to withstand the Quéene. Richard Rothing, shriue. Roger Chanticle, shriue. Richard Britaine Goldsmith Maior. This Richard Rothing Sheriffe, builded  Parrish Church of Saint Iames at Garlick  in London,S. Iames. The Queen besieged Bristow. Spencer the elder exe∣cuted. The King taken. The Quéene besieged Bristow, wh was seene rendred, and the morrow after her cming, Hugh Spencer the elder was drawne  hanged. The King, Hugh Spencer the younger and Robert Baldocke, determined to flye into  Isle of Lombardy, but being in great danger  the sea, at last arriued in Wales, where they  taken, the King was committed to Henry  of Lancaster his kinsman. Spencer the yonger ex∣ecuted.Hugh Spencer was condemned at Herefor
where he was drawne, hanged, headed, and quar∣tered. Simon Reading was drawne and hanged. Robert Baldocke died in Newgate. The Quéene with her sonne Edward,K. Edward the second deposed. Roger Mortimer and other, went to Wallingford Ca∣stle, and before the twelfth day came to London, where they were ioyfully receiued. On the mor∣row after they held a Parliament, where by com∣mon decrée, they deposed the King, and elected Ed∣ward his eldest sonne. He was thus deposed, when he had raigned ninetéene yeares sixe moneths and odde dayes. Edward the third. EDward the third, about the age of fourtéene yeares,An, reg, 1. beganne his raigne the twenty fiue of Ianua∣ry, in the yeare of our Lord. 1326. In feates of Armes, he was very expert. At the beginning of his raigne hee was chiefely ordered by his Mother Isabell. The inhabitants of the Towne of Bury besie∣ged the Abbey, burnt the gates,The Abbey of Bury spoiled. 1327 wounded the Monkes, bare out all the gold and siluer, orna∣ments, bookes, charters, the assay to their coine, stamps, and all other things, appertaining to their mint, &c.
Liberties confirmed.The King confirmed the liberties of the Citty of London. The 22. of September at night King Edward the second was cruelly murthered in the Castle o Barkeley, by the practise of the Quéene his wife the Lord Mortimer, and the Bishop of Herefor He was buried at Glocester. Henry Darcy, Shriue. Iohn Hauten, Shriue. Hamond Chickwell Grocer Maior. An, reg. 2 1328Peace was made betwixt the Englishmen and Scots,Peace with the Scots. 1329 so that Dauid the sonne of Robert Brce married Ioane of the Tower King Edwards sister▪ By procurement of the old Quéene, and Roge Mortimer, Edmond of Woodstocke, Earle of Kent the Kings Vncle, was beheaded at Winchester. Richard Lazr. Shriue. Henry Gisors, Shriue. An, reg, 3 R. Morti∣mer exe∣cuted. An, reg, 4Iohn Stanland Maior. Roger Mortimer was taken by William Mtacute, and sent to London, where he was condemned and hanged. 1330 Blacke Prince borne.The 15. day of Iune was borne Edward  blacke Prince. Robert of Ely, Shriue. Thomas Whoorwood, Shriue. Sir Iohn Pultney Draper Maior. S. Laurence Poultney. An, reg, 5. 1331This Sir Iohn Pultney builded the Colledge  London, called Saint Laurence Pultney, and tle Alhalowes a Parish Church in Tha stréete, and also the Carmelite Fryars Church  Couentry.
Iohn Motking, Shriue. Andrew Aubury, Shriue. Sir Iohn Pultney Draper Maior. Henry Earle of Lancaster, and of Leicester,Hospitall of Leicester. An, reg, 6. 1332 founded the new Hospitall by the Castle of Leice∣ster, wherein were an hundred poore impotent per∣sons. The King of England with force came before Berwicke, where they that kept the Castle and Towne vsed many deceitfull treaties. Nicholas Pike, Shriue. Iohn Husband, Shriue. Iohn Preston Draper Maior. The Scots came with great multitudes,An, reg, 7. 1333 Battell at Holidowne min∣ding to dissolue the siege of Berwicke, whom the King couragiously met, and slewe of them eight Earles, 1300. horsemen, and of the common soul∣diers, 35000. neare vnto Halidon. The townsemen of Berwicke yéelded to the King of England, both the castle & the towne,King Ed∣ward won Berwicke. who placing garisons there, he sent Edward Baliol and other Nobles to kéepe the Realme of Scotland. Iohn Haman, Shriue. William Hansard, Shriue. Sir Iohn Pultney Draper Maior. Edward Baliol king of Scots did homage to king Edward at ew Castle vpon Tyne,An. reg. 8. 1334 K. of Scots did homage and shortly af∣ter he receiued homage of the Duke of Britaine or his Earledome of Richmond. Iohn Kingstone, Shriue. Walter Turke, Shriue. Reginald at Conduit Vintner, Maior.
An, reg, 6. 1335Part of the Vniuersitie of Oxford went t Stamford, because of a variance that fell be wée the Northerne and Southerne Schollers. Great wa∣ters.The Sea bankes brake in through all England▪ but specially in the Thames, so that all the cas and beasts neare thereunto were drowned. Walter Morden, Shriue. Richard Vpton, Shriue. Richard Wotton Maior. King Edward made his eldest sonne Ed Earle of Chester,An, reg, 10 1336 A Duke & sixe Earles created. and Duke of Cornewall. It was enacted that no wool should be conuai out of the Realme. Iohn Clarke, shriue. William Curtis, shriue. Sir Iohn Pultney Draper Maior. 1337The Towne of Southampton was burnt  the French Kings Galleys. Priuiledge to Cloath-makers.It was enacted that whatsoeuer Clothwor of Flanders, or of other countries would d and inhabite in England, should come quietly  the most conuenient places should bee asigned  them with great liberties and priuiledges. Admirable pestilence at Auignon in France. A warning to all cities & nations. Sheepe∣heards and heards-men died in the fields, so as there was none to say these sheep or kine are mine.This yeare 1338. as saith the French Chrocle, there happened in Auignon so strange & teble mortalitie, that brooks & riuers were red  bloud. And that from the graues and sepulch of the dead there issued streames of bloud.  vnheard of mortalitie, was foretold the Fren by father Robert a Iacobin Frier, who hear bewailed the sinnes and wickednesse of this Cty and other places, for the which hee often prthed
vnto them that God would surely visite them vnlesse they speedily repented: but they obeyed not his doctrine. This sickenesse continued a long time, and dispersed into Germany, and other na∣tions many a yeare after. Also it was enacted that none should weare any cloth made without the realme, the K. the Quéen, and their children onely excepted. The king caused to confiscate all the goods of the Lumbards,Goods of Monks con∣fiscate. and also all the Monks of the order of Clume and Citiaux, through the whole Realme. Walter Beale, shriue. Nicholas Craine, shriue. Henry Darcy Maior. King Edward with Quéene Phillip his wife,An, reg, 1 1338 Armes of England & Farnce ioy∣ned. and a great army, passed the Seas into Flanders and so to Colleine, where he made friendship with the Emperour, and was made his vicegerent. Hee quartered the armes of England and France. William of Pomfret, Shriue. Hugh Marberell, Shriue. Henry Darcy Maior. A sudden inundation of water at New Castle pon Tine,An, reg, 13 1339 New Ca∣stle drow∣ned. bare downe a péece of the Towne all, where an hundred and twenty men and wo∣en were drowned. The King appointed himselfe to be called King of England and of France. William Thorney, Shriue. Roger Fresham, Shriue. Andrew Aubery Grocer Maior. The King gathered a Nauy of two hundred,An, reg, 14.
and sailed towards Flanders,1340 Battell on the sea. where hee fought with the enemies a most cruell battell by sea, in the which the Frenchmen were ouercome, and slaine of them 30000. men. There was taen 200 ships and the rest fled. By the assistance of the Duke of Brabant and the Earle of Hainalt, with them of Gaunt and Cypres, he entred the North parts of France, and besieged the Citty of Turney. In the meane sea∣son the Earle of Henalt. Sir Walter Manny and Reignold Cobham, burnt 300. Townes great and small, taking preyes. Adam Lucas, Shriue. Bartholomew Maris, Shriue. An, reg. 15. 1341Andrew Aubury Grocer, Maior. Two Cardinals were sent from the Pope, who demanded a truce for thrée yeares betwixt the two Kings, in which space the title that the King of England pretended, might be discussed. Richard of Barking, shriue. Iohn of Rokesley, shriue. Iohn of Oxford Vintener Maior. An, reg, 16. 2342King Edward sailed ouer into Britaine, when he tooke diuers castles and other strong holds that resisted him. After this he besieged Vannes, and though Phillip de Valois came downe with a great multitude of people, yet a truce was taken and Vannes remained to the King of England. An, reg, 17. 1343 Florences of gold.Iohn Loukin, Shriue. Richard Keslinbury, Shriue. Simon Frances Mercer, Maior. King Edward commanded florences of Gold to
be made the penny of the value of vi. s. viii. pence, the halpeny and farthing after the rate. William Mountacute Earle of Salisbury con∣quered the Isle of Man from the Scots,K. of Man which Isle Edward the third gaue the same Earle, and caused him to be crowned King of Man. Iohn Steward, shriue. Iohn Alisham, shriue. Iohn Hamond Maior. King Edward held a solemne feast at his Castle at Windsor,Order of the Garter. 1344 Chappell at windsor 24 poore Knights. where he established the most honou∣rable order of the Garter, to the number of 26. Knights, which were chosen of the most noble and valiant persons of this Realme. He also augmen∣ted the Cappell, which his progenitors Kings of England had before erected, with 8. Canons in the Castle of Windsor, adding a Deane and 15. Canons more, & 24. poore knights, with other Mi∣nisters. Geffery Wickingham, shriue. Thomas Legge, shriue. Iohn Hamond Maior. The Scots to the number of 30000.An, reg, 19 1345 Scots inua∣ded West∣merland. William Dowglas being their leader, entred into Westmer∣land, and burnt Carlile and Penreth, with many other townes, wherefore the Bishop of Carlile, with Thomas Lucy, Robert Ogle, and a great num∣ber compassed them in the night season, and with lights and noises so disquieted them, that they nei∣ther durst goe out for victuals, nor giue their bo∣dies to sléepe, but at the last Alexander Stragon stoutly prepared to goe out for victuals,Scots ouer∣come. whom the Bishop and Robert Ogle met, and with a speare
thrust him through the body, so that the Scots were ouercome and slaine. Edmond Hemenball, shriue. Iohn of Glocester, shriue. Richard Leger Maior. An, reg, 16 1346 K. Edward sailed into France. K. Edward besieged Callice, Scots inua∣ded Nor∣thumber∣land.King Edward tooke shipping, and arriued at Hogges in Normandy, from thence hee went to Caen, in which iourney he burned the ships, in all the hauens round about, hee spoiled Caen to the bare wals, and tooke many prisoners. Hee besie∣ged Calice. Dauid le Bruce with all his power en∣tred the borders of Northumberlād, came to Bere Parke by Neuels crosse nigh Durham, spoyling and killing all that met them: then William Souch Archbishop of Yorke, the Lords Percy, Mn∣bray, Ralph Neuell, gaue them a sharpe battell wherein the Englishmen had the victory, the Scots put to slight.The King of Scots taken. In the chase were taken Dauid le Bruce the Earles of Meney, of Stradermes, of Fife, with others. Iohn Croyden, Shriue. William Clopton, Shriue. Geffery Witchingham, Maior. An, reg, 11. 1347 Calice wonWhen King Edward had long time besieged Calice, the French King came to breake the seege: but when he saw he could not fulfill his desire, hee set fire in the tents, and went his way: which whē the men of Calice perceiued, they yéelded the town and Castle. The misfor∣tune of one Emperor & foure Kings with other things wor∣thy memo∣ry.This yeare 1347. Lewis the fourth Emperour of that name fell from his horse and died thereof. And in the yeare 1390. Iohn King of Spaine, as
he was hunting a hart, fell from his horse & brake his neck. In the yeare 1395. in diuers parts were seene one great starre, and fiue little starres which séemed to fight with the great starre, and to pur∣sue it by the space of an hower, and after that there were diuers voyces heard in the aire like cryes, and after that a man was séene in the aire like copper, holding a launce in his hand, and hee threw fire after the starre, and suddenly all these sights vanished: In some places there were heard loud voices and great sounds of men fighting, and ratling of Armour, wherewith the people were much astonished. These prodigies came before a great battell which was fought this yeare in Hungary, where the Hungarians at this time had the victory, & slew of their enemies the Sarazens almost an hundred thousand: but the next yeare following, the Turkes & Sarazens had a mighty victory vpon Sigismond King of Hungary, and vpon the rest of the Christian army. Which dis∣comfiture of the Christians, the French Chroni∣cles very honestly records to be long of the proud disordered Princes and Gentry of France, who obstinately inclined more to their seuerall losses and riotous desires, then to their obedience in this speciall seruice of God. It happned this yeare also, being the yeare 1396. that the King of Arra∣gon riding after a Hart, fel from his horse & brake his necke, and not long after this King Richard came to vntimely death. And in the 400. the Duke of Brunswicke was murthered by a Knight. And this yeare in france there were haile∣stones
as big as goose egs.Strange haile. The Vni∣uersitie of Iypsicke founded. K. Edward chosen Em∣perour. About this time was that Vniuersitie of Lypsicke founded. K. Edward was by the Princes Electors chosen Emperour: but he refusing it, attended the wars in France. Adam Broson, Shriue. Richard Bas, Shriue. Thomas Leggy skinner Maior. Gualter Many founded the Charterhouse besides London neare to Smithfield, and was there bu∣ried.An, reg, 22. 1348 An, reg, 22 Charter∣house Church∣yard. Great pe∣stilence. The pestilence beganne in England about Lammas, so that very many that were whole in the morning, died before noone. In one day there was 20.40.60. and many times more dead bodies buried in one pit. About the feast of all Saints it came to London, and increased so much, that from Candlemas vntill Easter, in the Charterhouse Churchyard neare vnto Smithfield, more then 200. dead corps (besides the bodies that were bu∣ried in other Churchyards) where there euery day buried. Henry Pichard, Shriue. Simon Dolseby, Shriue. Iohn Loukin Fishmonger, Maior. An, reg. 23. 1349 A bloody procession.More then 120. persons of Zealand and Hol∣land, comming out of Flanders to London, some∣time in the Church of S. Paul, sometime in oth places of the Cittie, twise in the day, in the sight of the people, from the loines to the héeles couered with linnen cloath, euery one in their hand a whip with thrée cordes, beat themselues on their bodies going in procession, 4. of them singing in their own language, all the other answering them. Adam of Bury, Shriue. Ralph of Linne, Shriue.
Walter Turke Fishmonger, Maior. In Oxfordshire neare to Chippingnorton,An, reg, 24 A serpent with two heads. 1350 Battell on the sea. was found a Serpent hauing two heads and two faces like women, one face attired of the new fashion of womens attire, the other face like the old array and had wings like a bat. King Edward met the Spaniards vpon the Sea by Winchelsea & Rom∣ney, and slew them, and tooke 26. great shippes. Iohn Notte, Shriue. William Worcester, Shriue. Richard Killingbury Maior.An, reg, 25. Groats and halfe groats A new coine called a groate, and halfe groate, were coyned, but these were of lesse waight then the Easterlings, by reason whereof victuals and marchandise became the dearer. Iohn Wroth, Shriue. Gilbert Stinesthorpe, Shriue. Andrew Aubery Grocer Maior.An, reg, 26. 1351 The Castle of Guines was yéelded to the Eng∣lishmen dwelling in Callis. Iohn Peach, Shriue. Iohn Stotley, Shriue. Adam Frances Maior. King Edward altered the Chappell,An. reg. 27. S. Stephens at West∣minster. 1353 Dry sōmer. which his progenitours before time had founded, of S. Ste∣phens at Westminster, into a Colledge of xii. secu∣lar Canons, xii. vicars, & other ministers according¦ly. This sommer was called the dry sommer. William Wolde, Shriue. Iohn Little, Shriue. Adam Frances Mercer, Maior.An, reg, 28 1354 The staple of wooll was remoued from Flan∣ders,
and established sundry places of England:Wool-sta∣ple. Westmin∣ster. to wit, at Westminster, Canterbury, Chichester, Bristow, Lincolne, and Hull. William Totingham, shriue. Richard Smelt, shriue. Thomas Leggy Skinner Maior. An, reg, 29. 1355 Dissension at Oxford.A great dissension fell in Oxford betwéene a scholler & a vintner for a quart of wine, so that the scholler powred the wine vpon the vintners head, and brake his head with the pot, by reason wherof a great conflict was made betwéene the schollers and the Lay people of the Towne. Walter Frost, shriue. Thomas Brandon, shriue. Simon Frances Mercer Maior. An, reg, 30. 1356Edward Prince of Wales, nigh to the Citty of Poytiers, ioyned battell with K. Iohn of France, of whom the Prince by his martiall policy won a noble victory.French king taken, In this conflict King Iohn was ta∣ken, with his young son and many of his Nobles. Richard Notingham, shriue. Thomas Dolsel, shriue. Henry Pichard Vintner Maior. This Henry Pichard Vintner, Maior of Lon∣don in one day sumptuously feasted Edward King of England, Iohn king of France, the King of Ci∣pres, then arriued in England, Dauid King of Scots, Edward Prince of Wales, with many o∣ther Noble men,An, reg, 31 1357 &c. The King taking his iourney towards Scot∣land, besieged Barwicke, which was shortly ren∣dred vnto him. Edward Prince of Wales retur∣ned
into England with Iohn King of France,Iusts in Smithfield. and Phillip his son. Roial Iusts were holden in Smith¦field before the Kings of England, France and Scotland. Stephen Candish, Shriue. Bartholomew Frostling, Shriue. Sir Iohn Stodie Vintner Maior. This Sir Iohn Stody gaue vnto the Vintners of London,Almes hou∣ses. all the quadrant wherein the Vintners hal now stādeth, with the tenements round about, where he founded 13. houses for 13. poore people, which are there kept of charitie rent-free. Dauid le Bruce King of Scots was deliuered from the long imprisonment he had béene in,K. of Scots released. An, reg, 32 1358 his ransome being set at 100000. markes to be paaid the next 10. yeares following. Iohn Barnes, Shriue. Iohn Buris, Shriue. Iohn Loukin Stock fishmonger Maior. King Edward with a Nauy of ships passed the sea to Calice, & so into Burgundy.An, reg, 33 K. Edward inuaded Burgundy. 1359 In the meane season the Normans with a smal Nauy arriued at Winchelsea, & partly burnt the town, & slewe such as did withstand them, wherefore the Prelates of England assembled in armor:French∣men arri∣ued at Win∣chelsea. An, reg, 34 1360 but the french were gone. Simond of Benington, shriue. Iohn Chichester, shriue. Simon Dolfeby Grocer Maior. A finall peace was concluded,Peace with France Frenchking released. King Edward came into England, and straight to the Tower to sée the French King, where hee appointed his ran∣some to be thrée millions of Florences, and so de∣liuered him out of all imprisonment.
Iohn Penis, Shriue. Walter Berney, Shriue. Iohn Wroth Fishmonger Maior. An, reg. 35. 1362Men and beasts perished in England in diuers places with thunder and lightning. Friends were séene, and spake vnto men as they trauelled. William Holbech, shriue. Iames Tame, shriue. Iohn Peach Fishmonger Maior. Second mortlity, An, reg, 36. Subsidy of wooll.A great death & pestilence in England in which died Henry Duke of Lancaster, who was buried at Leicester. King Edward commanded all Pleas to be made in English, and not in French. 1363 An, reg, 37.This time was granted to the K. for 3. yeares 26. shillings 8. pence of euery sacke of wooll. Iohn of S. Albons, Shriue. Iames Andrew, Shriue. Stephen Candish Draper Maior. Great windA great winde in England ouerturned many stéeples and townes. The French King, the King of Cypres, and the king of Scotland came all into England, to speake with King Edward, who receiued them with great honour, and gaue them great gifts. reat frost. An, reg, 38 1364A frost in England lasted from the mids of Sep∣tember to the moneth of Aprill. Richard Croydon, Shriue. Iohn Hiltofte, Shriue. Iohn Notte Pepperer Maior. The French King dieth.The ix. day of Aprill, died Iohn King of France at the Sauoy beside Westminster, his corps was honourably conueyed to Saint Denis in France.
Iohn de Mitford, Shriue. Simon de Mordon, Shriue. Adam of Bury Skinner, Maior. Ingram Lord of Cowsey,An, reg, 39 1365 married Lady Isabell the Kings daughter. Iohn Buckleworth Shriue. Thomas Ireland. Shriue. Iohn Loukin Fishmonger, Maior. The King commaunded that peter-pence should no more be paide to Rome.An, reg, 40. Peter pence forbid. 1366 The 3. day of Aprill was borne at Burdeaux, Richard son to Edward the blacke Prince, who was after King of England. Iohn Ward, Shriue. Thomas Attalie, Shriue. Iohn Loukin Fishmonger, Maior. This Iohn Loukin stockfishmonger, foure times Maior of London, builded a chappell called Mag∣dalenes at Kingston vpon Thames,An hospital at Kingston to the which he ioyned an hospitall, wherein was a master, two Priests, and certaine poore men: he builded the pa∣rish Church of S. Michael in crooked lane. Edward Prince of Wales taking compassion vp∣on Peter K. of Spaine,An, reg, 41. The bastard brother disheriteth the lawfull. 1367 who was driuen out of his Kingdome by Henry his bastard brother, entered Spaine with a great puissance, and in a battell at Nazers, put to flight the foresaid bastard, he resto∣red the foresaide Peter to his former dignity: but not long after, Henry the bastard, whiles K. Peter sate at a table, suddenly thrust him through with a speare. Robert Girdler, Shriue. Adam Wimondhom, Shriue. Simon Mordin stock fishmonger, Maior.
An, reg, 43. Third pe∣stilence. Dearth of torne. 1396The third pestilence was this yeare, a bushell of wheat at London sold for 2. s. 6. d. Iohn Piel, Shriue. Hugh Holditch, Shriue. Iohn Chichester Goldsmith Maior. A great part of Gascoine fell from the Prince be∣cause of ye exactions he laid vpon them: also sicknes increasing vpon him, he returned into England. William Walworth, shriue. Robert Gayron, shriue. A chest with three lockes, and money to bee lent. An, reg, 45. Great sub∣sidie.Iohn Barnes Mercer Maior. This Iohn Barnes gaue a chest with 3. lockes, & 1000. Markes to be lent to yong men vpon suffi∣cient gage. The King demanded of the Cleargie and cōmonaltie a subsidie of 10000 pounds. The Bishops were remoued from the Chancelor, trea∣surer, & priuy scale, & Lay men put in their stead. Robert Hatfield, Shriue. Adam Staple, Shriue. Iohn Barnes Mercer Maior. An, reg, 46 1372The Frenchmen besieged Rochell, to the remo∣uing whereof was sent the Earle of Pembroke, with a number of men of armes: vpon whom fell the Spanish Nauy, who slew and tooke the Eng∣lishmen, and burnt their Nauy: the Earle and ma∣ny Noble men were carried into Spaine. Iohn Philpots, shriue. Nicholas Brember, shriue. Iohn Piel Mercer Maior. An, reg, 17. 1374Iohn Duke of Lancaster, entred France with a strong power, & passed through ye realme without battell: but in the deserts and mountaines of Al∣uerne,
for lack of victuals, many of his army died. Iohn Awbry, shriue. Iohn Fished, shriue. Adam of Bury Skinner, Maior.An. reg. 48. 1374 This yeare 1374. died the most famous & learned Poet Francis Petrarch, borne in Tuscany: he was of singular iudgement in al acts & sciences, a great Philosopher, and an excellent Poet & Orator: hee was very religious and vertuous: he despised the worlds vain-glory:Petrarch & Boccace. he died in his hermitage neare Pauia. And about the same time died the renow∣ned Iohn Boccace. This Boccace was a famous Poet borne in Florence: he wrote many excellent eloquent histories in diuers languages. Iohn Duke of Lancaster, with Simon de Sudbu∣ry, and other, assembled at Brudges to treate of peace, betwéene the realms of England & France. This treaty continued almost two yeares, and en∣ded without conclusion of peace. Richard Lyons, Shriue. William Woodhouse, Shriue. William Walworth Fishmonger Maior.An, reg, 49. 1375 Iohn hastings Earle of Pembroke comming into England, after hee had ransomed himselfe for a great masse of mony which he neuer paied, died. Iohn Hadle, Shriues.An, reg, 50 1376 Adam Bury late Maior, Richard Lions late shriue gold∣smith. William Newport, Shriue. Iohn Ware Grocer Maior. Richard Lions, & Adam of Bury citizens of Lon∣don, were accused by the Commoners, of diuers frauds & deceits which they had done to the King. Richard Lions for mony did wisely compound and
escaped, the other conueied himselfe into Flanders Prince Edward departed out of this life, & was buried at Canterbury,Blacke Prince de∣ceased. and then king Edward crea∣ted Richard sonne of Prince Edward Earle of Che∣ster, Duke of Cornwall, & Prince of Wales, and because the King waxed féeble and sickly, hee be∣tooke the rule of the land to Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster. Iohn Northampton, shriue. Robert Laund, shriue. Adam Staple Mercer, Maior. An, reg, 51 1377 K. Edward deceased, New AbbyKing Edward ended his life at his manour of Shene, the 21. day of Iune, in ye yeare 1377. when he had raigned 50. yeares, 4. moneths, & od daies, whose body was buried at Westminster. He buil∣ded the Abby of our Lady of Grace by the Tower of London. Hee newly builded Saint Stephens Chappel at Westminster, the Castle of Windsor, and the Nunnery of Detford. King Richard of Burdeaux. An, reg, 1.RIchard the second, the son of Prince Edward, being but 11. yeares old, be∣gan his raigne the 21. of Iune, in the yeare of our Lord 1377. In bounty and liberalitie he farre passed all his progenitors: but for that he was young, was most ruled by young counsell, and regarded nothing the counsels of the sage and wise men of the Realme, which thing turned this land to great trouble, and himselfe to extreame misery.
The Frenchmen arriued at Rye,The towne of Rye spoiled. spoiled the towne, and burnt it. Not long after they assailed Winchelsea, & were expulsed: but they burnt the towne of Hastings. Andrew Pickman, Shriue. Nicholas Twyford, Shriue. Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer Maior. The Frenchmen arriued at Southsex,1378 The Prior of Lewis taken by Frenchmen neare the towne of Rothington, where the Prior of Lewes with a small company met them, who with two knights, and an Esquire were taken prisoners by them. Iohn Bosehame, Shriue. Thomas Cornwalis, Shriue. Iir Iohn Philpot Grocer Maior. This Iohn Philpot gaue to the same Citty,Iohn Phil∣pot his charitie. cer∣taine tenements, for the which the Chamberlaine paieth yearely to xiii. poore people, euery one of them xii.d. the wéeke for euer, and as any of those xiii. persons dieth, the Maior appointeth one, and the Recorder another.1379 Iohn Halysdon, Shriues.2380 An, reg, 4 Winchelsea taken. William Barret, Shriue. Iohn Hodsey Grocer Maior. The French Kings Gallies tooke the towne of Winchelsea, put the Abbot of Battaile to flight, and tooke one of his Monkes. Walter Ducket, Shriue. William Knighthood, Shriue. William Walworth Fishmonger, Maior. This William Walworth increased the Parrish Church of S. Michael in Crooked lane Eastward, with a new Quire, and side Chappels, &c.
About this time the making of guns was found by a certain Almaine.1318 Great tax, Commons rebelled, Rebels en∣tred Lon∣don, Sauoy, S Iohns, Highbury burnt. Archbishop of Canter∣bury, the Prior of S. Iohns and a Friar be∣headed. Flemings beheaded. Essex men pacified. The King sen to Wat Tiler. An excéeding great tax was demanded, euery person 4. d. by meanes whereof the Commons in Kent & Essex rebelled, drue to∣gether, & went to Maidston: from thence to blacke Heath, & so to London, and entred the citty, where they destroied many goodly places, as the Sauoy, S. Iohns by Smithfield, the mannor of Highbury. They set out of the Tower of London Simon Sud∣bury, Robert Halles Prior of S. Iohns. William Ap∣pleton a friar Minor, and beheaded them on Tow∣erhill. They beheaded all men of Law, and Fle∣mings, they spoiled all bookes of Law, records, & monuments they could méet with, and set all pri∣soners at libertie. The king offered them peace, on condition they would cease from burning of houses, & slaughter of men, which ye Essex men tooke, & returned home: but the Kentish men remained burning, as afore. Whereupon the K. sent Sir Iohn Newton Knight, to Wat Tiler their Captaine, to intreate him to come and talke with him. The Knight doing his message Wat Tiler answered, that he would come at his owne pleasure, neuerthelesse hee followed softly, and when he came neare Smithfield, where the K. abode his comming, the K. commanded W. Walworth Maior of London, to arrest the rebell, which Maior, being a man of great boldnesse, straight way arrested him on the head, in such sort that he astonished him, & forthwith they which at∣tended on the King, thrust him in diuers places of his body: which when the commons perceiued,
they cried out,Wat Tiler arested and slaine. that their captaine was traiterous∣ly slaine: but the King rode vnto them, and saide: What meane you? I will be your Captaine, fol∣low me to haue what you wil require. In ye meane time the Maior rode into the city, raised the Citi∣zens, and shortly returned with a thousand well armed men, sir Robert Knoles a Citizen of London being their leader.The Citi∣zens of London de∣liuered the King. The king reioicing for this vn∣looked for aide, suddenly compassed the commons with fighting men, which commons foorthwith throwing downe their weapons, humbly craued pardon: which was granted, & charters to be deli∣uered to the captaines of euery shire, who then de∣parted home. The rude multitude being thus di∣spersed, the king made the Maior and fiue Alder∣men of London Knights for their good seruice.The Ken∣tish men pacified. Iack Straw being taken, confessed all the conspi∣racy, and lost his head at London. Iohn Moore, Shriue. Iohn Hinde, Shriue. Iohn Northampton Draper, Maior. King Richard married Anne, daughter of Ve∣selaus King of Bohem. In her daies began the vse of piked shooes,1388 Picked shoes, high heades, and long tailed gownes, which wo∣men riding aside vsed in England by customs tied in their knées with chaines of siluer and gilt. Also noble women vsed hih attires on their heads, pi∣ked like bornes, with long trained gownes and side saddles, after the example of the saide Quéene, who first brought that fashion into this land, for before women rode astride like men. The Marchants of England granted to the King a custome of wools, for foure yeares.
EarthquakeA generall earthquake the 21. of May, & a water shaking, that made the ships in the hauē to totter. Iohn Bal. Iohn wraw An, reg, 6.Iohn Bal was brought to S. Albones, and there drawne and quartered. Iohn Wraw Captaine of the rebels in Suffolke, he was taken, drawne and hanged. Adam Bawne, Shriue. Iohn Selyt, Shriue. Iohn Northampton Draper Maior. A counter∣feit phisitiā punished.A crafty deceiuer that tooke vpon him to be skil∣full in Physicke & Astronomy, when his presump∣tuous lyings could no longer bee faced out, was taken, set on horseback, with his face towards the horse taile, and so led about the citty, with a coller of iordans, and a whetstone about his necke, and rung out with basons. Sturre a∣gainst fish∣mongers. An, reg, 7. 1383The Fishmongers in London, through the councell of Iohn Northampton, then Maior, William Essex, Iohn Moore, and Richard Northbury, were greatly troubled, hindered of their liberties, and almost destroyed. Simon Winchcome, Shriue. Iohn Moore, Shriue. Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer, Maior. Iohn Northampton late Maior of London, with Iohn Moore,1384 Iohn Nor∣thampton cōdemned. An. reg. 8. Richard Norbury, and other, were con∣uict at Reading, condemned to perpetuall prison, and their goods confiscate, for certaine congregati∣ons by them made among the Fishmongers. Nicholas Exton, Shriue. Iohn French, Shriue. Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer Maior.
King Richard with an army entred Scotland,1385 The King entred. An, reg, 9. Earthquake burnt the country, and returned. The 18. of Iuly was an Earthquake. Iohn Organ, shriue. Iohn Churchman, shriue. Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer, Maior. This Nicholas Brember caused a paire of stocks to be placed in euery ward of London, and a com∣mon Are to bee made therewith to behead such as offended. The Duke of Lancaster went with a great ar∣my into Spaine,1386 An, reg, 10. to claime the Kingdome of Ca∣stile which was due to him in the right of his wife Constance, daughter to Peter King of Castile. William Stondon, Shriue. William Moore, Shriue. Nicholas Exton Fishmonger, Maior. Richard Earle of Arundell,1387 Rochell wine taken An, reg, 11. and Thomas Earle of Nottingham, encountred with a mightie fléete of Flemings, laden with Rochell wine, & tooke 100. ships & more, the which contained 19000. tuns of wine, which they brought to diuers parts of Eng∣land, whereby wine was then sold for 13. s. foure pence the tun. William Venour, shriue. Hugh Forstalfe, shriue. Nicholas Exton Fishmonger Maior.The nobles rise against the King. Thomas Duke of Glocester the Earles of Arun∣del, Warwick Darby, & Nottingham, considering how this land was misgouerned by a few persons about the K. intending reformation of the same, assembled at Radcote Bridge with a power of
forty thousand, came to London, and pitched in the fields neare to the tower, where the King kept his Christmas.1388 Shortly after they caused the King to call a parliament, whereof hearing Alexander Ne∣uell, Archbishop of Yorke, Robert Ver Duke of Ire∣land, and Michael de la Poole Earle of Suffolke, fled the land, & died in strange countries. The king by the counsell of the aboue named Lords, caused to be taken, Sir Robert Tresilian chiefe Iustice of England, sir Nicholas Brember, late Maior of Lon∣don, sir Iohn Salisbury knight, sir Iohn Beauchamp, sir Simon Burghley, sir Iames Barnes knight, & Iohn Vske, a Serieant at Armes, which by the authori∣tie of the said Parliament, were conuict of trea∣son, and put to death, Robert Belknap, Iohn holt, Iohn Locton, Richard Gray, William Burgh, and Robert Fulthrope Iustices, with the Lords which before had voided the land, were banished for euer. Thomas Austen shriue. Adam Carlohul, shriue. Nicholas Twyford Goldsmith Maior. 1389Statutes made of the Staple to bee brought from Middleborow to Calice. Iohn Walcot, Shriue. Iohn Louely, Shriue. William Venour Grocer Maior. 1390 Variance at Oxford. An, reg, 14In Oxford the Welsh and Southerne schollers assailed the Northerne, whereby many murders were done on each side. Iohn Francis, shriue. Thomas Viuent, shriue. Adam Bawne Goldsmith Maior.
This Adam Bawne, prouided that from parts beyond the seas, was corne brought to London plentifully: to the furtherance of which good work, the Maior and Citizens tooke out of the Orphans chest in their Guild-hall, 2000. markes to buy corne, and the Aldermen laid out each of them 20. pound to the like purpose. The good man of the Cock in Cheape at the litle conduit,1391 An, reg, 14 A Brewer at the cocke in Cheape murthered. was murdered in ye night time by a thiefe that came in at a gutter window, as it was known long after by the same thiefe, when he was at the Gallowes to be hanged for fellony: but his wife was burnt therefore, and thrée of his men drawne to Tyborne, and there hanged wrongfully. Iohn Chadworth, Shriue. Henry Venor, Shriue. Iohn Hinde Draper, Maior. Vpon Christmas day a Dolphin came vp the ri∣uer of Thames to London bridge foreshewing the tempests that followed shortly after,A Dolphin came vp to London. or else the di∣sturbance of the Citizens, which through ye Kings displeasure they came into: because the Londoners had denied the lending of 1000.1392 Liberties of London sei∣sed. An, reg, 16 pound which the king demanded of them. Hee caused the Maior, Shriues, & Aldermen to be summoned to a Coun∣sell at Nottingham, & there imprisoned them, dis∣anulling all their liberties, and made sir Edward Dalengrige Warden of London. Gilbert Maghfield, Shriue. Thomas Newington, Shriue. William Stondon Grocer Maior. When the King saw the Londoners sore repent
their trespasses,The King came to London. he came to London, where the ci∣tizens receiued him with so great glory, as might haue séemed to receiue an Emperour in his tri∣umph, & with such gifts did honour him, that the worth thereof could not bee estéemed. By this meanes the King became more tractable to grant them their liberties, and then the Kings Bench from Yorke,1363 An. reg. 17. and the Chancery from Nottingh were returned to London. Drew Barentine, shriue. Richard Whitingon, shriue. Iohn Hatley Grocer Maior. 1394 An, reg, 18Qéene Anne died at Shene in Southery, and was buried at Westminster. William Brumstone, Shriue. Thomas Knowles, Shriue. Iohn Froshie Mercer Maior. 1395 An, reg, 19·King Richard made a chargeable voyage into Ireland, which came to small effect. Roger Ellis, Shriue. William Skirrington, Shriue. William Moore Vintner Maior. 1396 An, reg, 20.The Kings of England and of France met be∣sides Calice, and there concluded a peace. King Richard tooke to his wife Isabell daughter to the French King. Thomas Wilford, Shriue. Tamber∣laine taketh Baiazeth, & rescueth Constanti∣nople.William Parker, Shriue. Adam Bawne Goldsmith, and Richard Whittington Mercer, Maiors. This yeare 1397. Tamberlaine being Lord of a a certaine wast countrey, and rude people in the
East, who not long before had assembled great numbers of strangers vnto his aid, & ouerthrown the Persians, vnderstanding that Baiazeth the Turkish Emperour had won diuers kingdomes and many strong Citties from the Christians, as also discomfited the Christian Emperiall army which consisted of Gréekes, Italians, Germanes, Hungarions, Seruians, Myssians, Frenchmen, and others: and that he still persisted in extreame pride of his inuincible strength & fortune, with a mightie hoast had besieged Constantinople eight yeares, being fully perswaded that there was no power vpon earth, that could redéeme the Cittie out of his hands, because he knew the Princes of Christendome to bee at dissention among them∣selues. And therupon secured himselfe, yt if Europ could not preuaile against him, there was no other power that durst encounter him. And whilest hée thus thought, the saide Tamberlaine the yeare a∣lone written, came vpon him with a very mighty hoast, & in a set battell vpon Mount Stella, where Pompey fought with Mithridates, hee ouercame this Baiazeth, being the fourth of that name, flew two hundred thousand Turkes, tooke him priso∣ner, put him in an iron cage, and so carried him in triumph from place to place. This Baiazeth was crowned in the yeare 1373. Amurah the second was crowned 1414. he was the first that ordained the Emperiall Band or guarde of renegate Chri∣stians commonly called Ianezaries. And in the yeare 1447. Constantine the 7. was crowned
Emperour of Constantinople,The City of Constanti∣nople recei∣ued that name of the Empe∣rour Con∣stantine the Great, hee was crow∣ned in the yeare of the world 4271 and in the yeare of our redempti∣on 309 he raigned Emperour 31. yeares, and died at 66. yeares of age, but the Citty of Constanti∣nople was of old time called By∣zantium & beareth for Armes in their Scut∣chion, a crosse be∣tweene 4. letters of B. signifying Bizantium the ancient name of that City. being before that, K. of Morea: he was surnamed the Dragon for his cruelty which he exercised vpon the Turkes, for reuenge whereof, & other ancient grudges, Maho∣met sonne of Amurat the 2. in the yeare 1452. af∣ter hee had done great spoiles and damage vpon Gréece, hee also conquered their chiefe Citie Con∣stantinople, & tooke Constantine the Christian Em∣perour prisoner, then cōmanded his head to be cut-off, and with great derision caused his head to bee showne throughout all the Turkish campe. And a∣mong other things of worthy note and obseruati∣on you shall vnderstand: that whereas the famous Citie Constantinople was at first dignified, reedi∣fied, enriched & aduanced by a Constantine, whose mothers name was S. Helen, the same Citie was lost, & subiugated vnto Turkish slauery by a Con∣stantine, whose mothers name was likewise Helen. This Mahomet was the second of that name, and the eight in ranke of Turkish Emperours, & was the first that arrogated to his title the name of Great, whose successors euer since haue béene cal∣led the great Turke, or grand Signor: Therefore Baiazeth the fourth, by reason of sundry his victo∣ries against the Christians, and cruell murthers which he had performed on his kindred & friendes, was surnamed the whirlwinde, or thunderbolt of heauen. And Tamberlaine after his conquest cal∣ling to minde all his fortunes, & considering how many mighty Princes he had subdued, surnamed himselfe the scourge of God. Thomas Duke of Glocester, King Richards
Vncle was murdered at Calice.1397 Duke of Glocester murdered. An, reg, 21. The Earle of Arundell and many other, were put to death for that they rebuked the King in cer∣taine matters somewhat liberally. Richard Askam, Shriue. Iohn Woodcocke, Shriue. Richard Whittington Mereer Maior. Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury,Westmin∣ster hall repaired. was banished the Realme. The King caused the great hall at Westminster to be repaired with a maruellous costly worke.1398 An, reg, 22. The Duke of Here∣ford accu∣sed the Duke of Norfolke. The two Dukes ba∣nished. Henry Duke of Hereford accused Thomas Duke of Norfolke of certaine words by him spoken, ten∣ding to the reproach of the kings person, which the Duke of Norfolke vtterly denied: whereupon a combat was granted them, but the king taking vp the quarrell, banished the Duke of Hereford for 10. yeares, and the Duke of Norfolke for euer. Iohn Wade, Shriue. Iohn Warnar, Shriue. Drew Barentine Goldsmith Maior. Ihon of Gaunt, D. of Lancaster, deceased,Duke of Lancaster deceased. & was honourably buried in S. Pauls Church at London The King exacted great sums of money of xvii.1399 Great exa∣ctions. shires of the realme, and laid to their charges that they had béene against him with the Duke of Glo∣cester, the Earles of Arundell and Warwicke, wherefore he sent to induce the Lords both spiri∣tuall and temporall, to make a submission by wri∣ting, acknowledging themselues to be traitors to the King, though they neuer offended him.Blanke Charters. Moreouer he compelled them to set their hands
to blankes, to the ende that so often as it pleased him, he might oppresse them. K. Richard sailed into Ireland: An, reg, 23.About Whitsontide King Richard sailed to∣wards Ireland. In the meane season Henry Duke of Hereford & of Lancaster, arriued in Yorkeshire, demanding the inheritance due to him by the death of his Father. There came to him, Henry Percie, Earle of Northumberland, Ralph Neuill Earle of Westmerland, and many other Lords with their powers, and went to Bristow, and besieged the Castle, where they tooke W. Scrope, Iohn Bushy, and Thomas Greene, and beheaded them. King Richard hearing of the Dukes arriuall, forthwith tooke shipping, and arriued at Milford hauen: but when hee vnderstood what preparation the Duke had made, he placed himselfe in the castle of Conway, desiring to talke with T. Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earle of Northumberland, which being granted, he came to the castle of flint, where hee had a briefe communication with the Duke of Lancaster. They tooke horse, & that night came to ye castle of Chester, from thence to West∣minster and from thence the King was sent to the tower of London, where he remained till the next Parliament, which was begun the morrow after Michaelmas day, at which time hee resigned to Henry Duke of Hereford and Lancaster, all his power & knightly title to the Crowne of England, and France,K. Richard deposed. when hee had raigned 22. yeares, 3. moneths, and odde daies.
HEnry the fourth,An, reg.  son to Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster was ordained king of England more by force then by law¦ful succession or election. He began his raigne the 29. of September, in the yeare 1399. William Walden, Shriue. William Hide, Shriue. Thomas Knowles Grocer Maior. The King caused the blancke charters made to King Richard to be burnt.The blanck Charters burnt. Conspiracy disclosed. Iohn Holland late Duke of Exceter, Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey, Edward Duke of Aw∣marle, Iohn Montacute Earle of Salisbury, Tho∣mas Spencer, Sir Ralph Lumley, Sir Thomas Blunt, Sir Benedict Cely, Knights, with others, conspi∣red against King Henry, and appointed priuily to murder him: but their treason being disclosed, they were all put to death. King Richard being in Pomfret castle, died the 14. day of February, his body was brought to London, & so through the Citie to Pauls C. bare faced, where he stood 3. daies for all beholders, frō thence he was carried to Langley, & there buried. The Welshmen rebell by the setting on of O∣wen Glendouerdew,1400 Owē Glen∣douerdew. An, reg, 2. whereof the King being certifi∣ed, went into Wales, but the Welshmen fled. Iohn Wakell, Shriue. William Ebot, Shriue. Iohn Frances Goldsmith Maior. This time was vsed exceeding pride in garments1401
gownes with déepe and broad sléeues,Sleeues of garments monstrous. An, reg, 3 commonly called peake sléeues, whereof some hung downe to the féete, and at least to the knées, ful of cuts and iagges. William Venor, Shriue. Iohn Eremingham, Shriue. Iohn Chadworth Mercer Maior. The Conduit vpon Gornehill in London was made. 1402 Cōnspiracy against king Henry. A stout fry∣ar executed Friars han∣ged.Certaine men affirmed King Richard to be aliue, for the which a Priest was taken at Warwicke, who was drawne, hanged, and quartered. Walter Waldocke Prior of Land, was likewise hanged, and headed. Certaine grey Friars were taken, of the which one Richard Fresby Doctour of Diuinitie was drawne and hanged. Sir Roger Clarindon Knight, a Squire and a Yeoman were beheaded, & eight gray friars han∣ged and beheaded at London, and two at Leicester, all which had published King Richard to be aliue. Owen Glē∣douerdew. K. Henry went into Wales. The first Duke of Millaine.Owen Glendouerdew inuaded all the shires that bordered neare vnto him. The K. went with a great power into Wales where he profited nothing. This yeare 1402. died Iohn Galias of Galiaso the first Duke of Millaine, being at first but viscount of Millaine, as his auncestors had béene before him: he was created Duke by Wencessaus the Em∣perour, for ayding him with a great army against Robert of Bauiere otherwise called Rupert Duke of Bauaria. Compotior vnto the Emperiall dig∣nitie, Wencessaus was despised of many, and his
lose gouernment generally misliked euen of his own brother Sigismond, with whom he had sharpe warres, and was by him taken and kept prisoner vntill he died of an Apoplexie. After his death. Robert became sole Emperour in the yeare 1400. who with all expedition & fury as well in respect of his owne particular malice, as in pretence of a speciall fauour towards his olde tryed friends the Florentines, he came into Italy with a very strōg army, with full purpose to vanquish and be auen∣ged of Galeaso the new Duke of Millaine, but the Duke so stoutly resisted the Emperour and all his adherents, as hée caused him to retire into Ger∣many: Notwithstanding the importunate sute of the Florentines vnto the Emperor that he should not depart out of Italy and leaue them in all ap∣parence of extreame daunger of their enemies whom they had so many wayes vexed: in reuenge whereof the said Iohn Galeazo entred into armes, but first slewe his Vncle Barnabas, then posiest himselfe of his vncles wealth and authority, and conquered Verona, Vincentia, Padua, Parma, & many other Italian Cities & territories, he made a large Parke for all sorts of beastes, and in the middle thereof he builded a stately Monastery. He was very faire, learned, & eloquent, but how long he raigned is vncertaine, because the Archbishop of Florence, and the supplement of Chronicles and Paulus Iouius differ about the beginning of his raigne, the Archbishop saith hee began in the yeare 1385. the Supplement saith in the yeare 1382. and Iouius saith in the yeare 1378. He raig∣ned
24. yeares, & died at 55. yeares of age, his son Iohn Maria being very yong, succéeded him in the yeare 1402. and was in his minority brought vp by his mother: after that he became tyrannous, he put to death many honest & vertuous people, and caused many of his enemies to bee eaten by dogs, he imprisoned his kind mother, where he constrai∣ned her to end her daies with great misery: he was slaine by his owne seruants as he was at Church hauing raigned ten yeares. Reade the supplement of Chronicles. Ferrara.The Dukedome of Ferrara, for want of heires male, returned to the Church againe, about the yeare 1596. and Pope Clement the 8. tooke posses∣sion thereof, and conuerted it to a commonwealth, retaining the regall power thereof vnto himselfe and his successors. Scots at Ha¦lidon hill.The Scots were ouerthrowne at Hallidon Hill. Earle Dowglas was taken, & many other: there were drowned in the riuer of Twéed about 500. Richard Marlew, Shriue. Robert Chicheley, Shriue. Iohn Walcot Draper Maior. An. reg. 4. 1403 Battell at Shrewsbu∣ry.A great battell was fought neare vnto Shrewes∣bury betwéene King Henry and Henry Percy the yonger, vnto whom was ioyned sir Thomas Percy Earle of Worcester, vncle to the said Henry, & al∣most all the Gentlemen of Ches-shire, Sir Henry Percy was slaine, sir Thomas Percy taken and be∣headed, and of the commons on both sides about 5000. slaine. Plimouth spoiled.The town of Plimouth was burnt by ye Britons
Thomas Falconer, shriue. Thomas Poole, shriue. William Askam Fishmonger Maior. The Frenchmen came to the Isle of Wight,An, reg. 5. 1404 Frenchmen inuaded the Isle of Wight. Dartmouth inuaded by the French∣men. but those of the Isle rising against them, they were glad to depart. The Lord of Cassels in Britain arriued at Black poole, 2. mile out of Dartmouth with a great Na∣uy. Where (of the rusticall people) hee was slaine, and xvii. ships were taken fraught with wines. William Louth, Shriue. Stephen Spilman, Shriue. Iohn Hinde Draper Maior. The sonne of Owen Glendouerdew was taken,Owens for taken. and 150. with him were taken and slaine. Richard Scrope Archbishop of Yorke,1405 Archbishop of Yorke a∣gainst King Henry. An, reg, 7. and Thomas Monbray Earle Marshall, imagined diuers ar∣ticles against the King, because he had put downe King Richard, offering themselues for those arti∣cles to liue and die, which caused great numbers of people to resort to them: but they were taken and presented to the King at Yorke, where they were both beheaded. Henry Berton, Shriue. William Cromer, Shriue. Iohn Woodstocke Mercer Maior. Iames the sonne of Robert King of Scots,1406 The King of Scots son taken. An, reg, 8. being nine yeares old, sayling towards France, was by tempest of weather driuen vpon the coast of Eng∣land, where being taken, he was presented to the King, and remained prisoner till the second yeare of Henry the sixth.
Nicholas Wotton, shriue. Geffery Brooke, shriue. Richard Whittington Maior. 1407 Great pe∣stilence. Rochester bridge new builded. An, reg, 9.A pestilence consumed in the Citty of London, about 30000. Sir Robert Knowles Knight deceased, he builded anew the bridge of Rochester: hee reedified the Church of the white Friars at London, where hée was buried: he founded a colledge at Pomfret, &c. Henry Pomfret, Shriue. William Hallon, Shriue. William Stonden Grocer Maior. A great frost.A frost lasted 15. wéekes. 1408 Earle of Northum∣berland, & the Lord Bardolph.Henry Earle of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolph came into England with a great com∣pany, pretending by proclaimation to deliuer the people from the great suppression that they well burdned with: but by sir Thomas Rokeby Shriue of Yorkeshire, he was encounted at Bramhaun∣nor, & there slaine: the Lord Bardolph was woun∣ded to death. Thomas Dacke, Shriue. William Norton, Shriue. Drew Barentine Goldsmith Maior. An, reg, 10 1409 Play at Skinners well. An, reg, 12.This yeare was a great play at Skinners well neare vnto Clarken well besides London, & was of matter from ye creation of the world: there were to behold the same the most part of Nobles and Gentiles in England, and forthwith after began a royall Iousting in Smithfield betwéene the H∣nowayes and our English Lords. Iohn Law, shriue. William Chichely, shriue.
Richard Marlow Irenmonger, Maior.1410 The Kings son beaten. An, reg, 12. Vpon the euen of S. Iohn Baptist, Iohn the Kings son being in East Cheape after midnight, a great debate happened betwéene his men, & men of the Court, till the Maior with other Citizens, ceased the same. K. Henry founded a Colledge at Battle∣field in Shropshire, where he ouercame Sir Hen∣ry Percy and other. Iohn Penne, shriue. Thomas Pike, shriue. Thomas Knowles Grocer Maior.Guild Hall in London builded. 1411 An, reg, 13 The guild Hall in London was began to be made newly by the foresaid Maior & Aldermē. A squier of Wales, named Rice ap Dee, which had long time rebelled against the King, was brought to Lon∣don, and there drawne hanged and quartered. Iohn Rainewill, Shriue. William Cotton, Shriue. Robert Chichely Grocer Maior. The K. caused a new coine of nobles to be made,1412 Fodringhai An, reg, 14. which were of lesse value then the old by 4. d. in a Noble. King Henry founded the Colledge of Fa∣dringhey in Northamptonshire. Ralph Leuenhinde, shriue. William Seuenoke, shriue. William Waldren Mercer Maior After the fortunate chances happened to K. Hen∣ry, being deliuered of all ciuill diuision, he was ta∣ken with sicknesse, & yéelded to God his spirit the 10. of March, Anno 1412. when he had raigned 13 yeares, 6. moneths, and odde daies: he was buri∣ed at Canterbury.
Hry the fifth began his raigne the 20.An, reg, 1 of March, in the yeare 1412. This Prince excéeded the meane stature of men: he was beautious of visage, his neck long, body slen∣der, and leane, and his bones smal: neuertheles he was of maruellous great strength, and passing swift in running. 1413 Sir Iohn Old-castle.Sir Iohn Old Castle, for diuers points touching the Sacrament, before the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, the Bishop of London, Winchester, and o∣ther, was conuict and committed to the Tower of London, out of the which he brake. Iohn Stotton, Shriue. Iohn Michael, Shriue. William Cromer Draper Maior. 1414 An, reg, 2Certaine adherents of Sir Iohn Olde Castle, as∣sembled them in Thickets field neare vnto the ci∣tie of London: but the King being warned, tooke the field afore them, and so took of them such num∣bers that all the prisoners about London were ∣led, diuers of them were after executed, Iohn N∣anset Esquire,Men for∣sweare the land. with 9. of his men slew Iohn Tibbey Clarke, Chancellour to the Quéene, for the which déed the said Esquier, and foure of his men fled to S. Anns Church within Aldersgate, and after for swore the land. Iohn Michael, Shriue. Thomas Allin, Shriue. Thomas Fawconer Mercer Maior. This Thomas Fawconer caused to breake the wall
of London neare vnto Colman stréet,Mooregate first buced An reg, 3 1415 Conspiracy and there to make a gate vpon the moore side, where was none before: He also caused the ditch to be cleansed. The King rode to Southhampton, where was discouered a great conspiracy against him by Ri∣chard Earle of Cambridge, sir Thomas Gray▪ and Henry Scrope, with other, who were executed at Southhampton. The King entred the sea with 1000. saile,K Henry sailed into Normandy Bttell of Agincourt. and the third night after arriued in Normandy. He laid siege to Hartflew, which was yéelded to him. Hee sought the battell at Agincourt, where hee had a maruellous victory. About this time Philip the French King began to set a custome or impost vpon Salt,The first impost vp∣on salt in France. which was neuer before. William Cambridge, Shriue. Allen Euerard, Shriue. Nicholas Wotton Draper Maior. K. Henry arriued at Douer.K. Henry returned. An. reg. 4. 1416 The Maior of Lon∣don with the Aldermen and crafts, riding in red, with hoods red and white, met with the King on blacke. Richard Whittington, Shriue. Iohn Couentry, Shriue. Henry Barton Skinner Maior. This yeare it was decréed by a court of common counsaile,An, reg, 5. 1417 that a lantherne & candle light should be hanged out at euery doore in the city in the winter. On Easter day at a Sermon in S.A fray in S. Dunstons Church. Dunstons in the East of London, a great fray happened, where∣through many people were sore wounded, & Tho∣mas Petwarden Fishmonger, slaine out of hand.
The beginners of the fray, which was the Lord Strange, & sir Iohn Russel knight, through the quar∣rell of their two wiues, were brought to the coun∣ter in the Poultry, & excōmunicated at P. Crosse. King Henry sailed into Normandy, and tooke the Castle of Tonke, and shortly after get Caen, Beyonx, and many other Townes and Castles. Henry Read, shriue. Iohn Gedney, shriue. Richard Marlow, Ironmonger Maior. An, reg, 6. 1418Sir Iohn Oldcastle was sent vnto London by the Lord Powes out of Wales: which sir Iohn was con∣uict by Parliament drawne to S. Giles field, han∣ged, and consumed with fire. The Parson of Wrotham in Norfolke, which had haunted New-Market-heath, and there rob∣bed and spoiled many, was with his concubine brought to Newgate of London, where he died. Iohn Brian. Ralph Barton. Brian de∣ceased, Shriue. Iohn Pernesse succeeded. Shriue. William Seuenoke Grocer Maior. W. Seuen∣oke. Almes hou∣ses and free schole at Seuenoke. An, reg, 7. 1419 This William Seuenoke founded in the towne of Seuenocke in Kent, where hee had béene nouri∣shed, a frée schoole, and xii. almes houses. King Henry besieged the Citty of Roan halfe a yeare and more, which was yéelded to him. Richard Whitingham, shriue. Iohn Butler, shriue. Richard Whittington Mercer Maior. Whitting∣ton colledg An, reg, 8. 1420This Richard Whittington builded the library in the Gray Friars Church in London: his Exce∣cutors of his goods builded Whittington Col∣ledge,
they repaired S. Bartholomews Hospitall in Smithfield, they bare some charges to the pauing and glazing of the Guildhall, and also of the libra∣ry there, they new builded the West gate of Lon∣don, of old time called Newgate. K. Henry was made Regent of France,K. Henry made re∣gent of France. & wedded Lady Katherine the Kings daughter of France at Troys in Champaine: the feast being finished, the King besieged and won many townes in France. Iohn Burler, Shriue. Iohn Welles, Shriue. William Cambrige Grocer Maior. The King suppressed the French houses of reli∣gious Monks & Friars, and such like in England.An, reg. 9. 1421 Religious houses up∣pressed. A charita∣ble Bishop. A Subsidie was demaunded, but the Bishop of Winchester lent the King 20000. pound to ay the matter. The King sailed into France. Richard Goslin, Shriue. William Weston, Shriue. Robert Chichely Grocer Maior. This Robert Chichely wlled in his testament,Robert Chichely his charity. that vpon his mind day, a competent dinner shuld be ordained for 2420. poore men, housholders of the Citty, and 20. pound in money to distribute a∣mongst them, which was to euery man two pence At this time such was the generall & capital com∣mand & sway of the King of England in France,The King of Englande sele vsed n the Court of Chance∣ry in Paris. (as her own Chronicles testifie) that in the Court of Chancery in Paris, all things were sealed with the seale of King Henry of England, and the great seale of England was there new made and vsed: wherein was the Armes of France & England: and as the King sate in his chaire of state, he held
two Scepters in his hands: that is to say, in his right hand was a scepter smooth & plaine, only the proportion of the French coine, commonly called a French crowne: & in his left hand he held a scepter full of curious arts, carued and wrought with the armes of England,All this & much more is very au∣thentically recorded in the French Chronicles. as is vsed in the English mo∣ny, and on the top thereof a Crosse. Presently vp∣on this, the french were so vexed with the english gouernmēt that they practised al meanes to extirp the English, as well by praiers as otherwise, and neuer ceased vntill they had obtained their desire: Calice onely excepted, which was English many yeares after. Henry the Kings sonne was borne at Windsor on the 6.An, reg, 10 1422 day of December. K. Henry being at Boys S. Vincent, waxed sicke & died the last of August in the yeare 1422. when he had raigned 9. yeares, 5. moneths, & odde daies: hee founded two Monasteries vpon the Thames, the one of the Religion of the Carthusians,Shine and Sion. which he named Bethlem, the other of religious men & women of S. Briget, which he named Sion. Hee founded Garter principall King of Armes. He lieth buried at Westminster. Henry of Windsor. An, reg. 1.HEnry the 6. being an infant of 8. mo∣neths olde, began his raigne the last of August in the yeare 1422. the gouer∣nance of the Realme was committed to the Duke of Glocester, and the guard of his per∣son to the Duke of Exceter, & to the Duke of Bed∣ford was giuen the the regiment of France.
William Eastfield, Shriue. Robert Tatarsall, Shriue. William Walderne Mercer Maior. The xxi. of October died Charles King of France,The French King died. by reason whereof the kingdome of France should come to King Henry, and the Nobles of France, (except a few that held with the Dolphine) deliue∣red the possession thereof to the Duke of Bedford, to the vse of King Henry. A subsidy was granted for thrée yeares,1423 Subsidy of woole. Newgate at London. fiue no∣bles for euery sacke of woolle that should passe out of the land. This yeare the West gate of London, called Newgate, was new builded by the Excecutors of Richard Whittington, Nicholas Iames, Shriue. Thomas VVadford, Shriue. VVilliam Cromer Draper Maior. Iames the yong King of Scots,An. reg. 2. K. of Scots released. who was taken by the Englishmen in the 8. yeare of Henry the 4. and had remained in England prisoner till this time, was now deliuered, and maried in S. Mary Oueries in Southwarke to the Lady Iane, daugh∣ter the Earle of Somerset. The battell at Vernoill in Perch, betwéene the Duke of Bedford Regent of France,1424 Battell as Vernell. An, reg, 3. and the Ar∣minakes, but the English party preuailed. Simon Seman, shriue. Iohn Bywater, shriue. Iohn Michael Stockefishmonger Maior. By a Parliament was granted to the King for 3. yeares to helpe him in his warres, a subsidie of 12. d. the pound of all Marchandise brought in
or carried out of the Realme, and 3. s. of euery tun of wine, which was called tonage or poundage but since it hath béene renewed at sundry Parlia∣ments, and now called custome. Strangers to be lod∣ged with English hosts.It was enacted that all the Marchant strangers should be lodged with English hosts, and within 40. dayes to make sale of all they brought, or else what remained to be forfeit to the King. William Mldred, shriue. Iohn Brokll shriue. Iohn Couentry Mercer Maior. An reg, 4. Debate be∣tweene the Duke of Glocester, and the Bi∣shop of WinchesterThe morrow after Simon & Iudes day the Maior caused a great watch to be kept with most part of the citizens in armor to stand by the duke of Glo∣cester against the Bishop of Winchester, who lay in Southwark with a great power of Lancashire and Cheshire men: but the matter was appeased by the Archbishop of Canterbury. The 28. of September was an earthquake, which continued the space of two houres. Iohn Arnold, Shriue. Iohn Higham, Shriue. Iohn Rainwell Fishmonger Maior. An, reg, 5 Wrd, dis∣chrged for fifteenes.This Iohn Rainwell gaue certaine tenements to the citie of London, for the which the same citie is bound to pay foreuer, such Fifteenes as well bee granted to the K. for Downgate, Billngsgate, and Algate ward, &c. This yeare the tower of the drawbridge of Lon∣don,1427 An, reg, 7. was begun by the same Maior. Henry Frowicke, shriue. Robert Otley, shriue. Iohn Godney Draper Maior. From the beginning of Aprill vnto Hallontide,
was so great aboundance of raine, that not onely hay, but corne also was destroyed. Thomas Duthouse, shriue. Iohn Abbot, shriue. Henry Barton Skinner Maior. The Duke of Norfolke passing through London bridge, his barge ouerwhelmed, so that 30.Duke of Norfolke escaped. persons were drowned, and the Duke with other that es∣caped were drawne vp with ropes. A Britaine murthered a widow in white chap∣pel parish without Algate of London, & bare away her goods, but being pursued, he took succour of the Church of S. George in Southwark,Murder quit with murder. from whence he was taken, & forswore the land. But as he hap∣pened to come by the place where hee had done the murder, ye women of the parish withstones, shéeps hornes, and kennell dung, made an end of him. William Russo, Shriue. Ralph Holland, Shriue. William Eastfield Maior. Before the towne of Champaine was taken a woman armed,1430 La Pucelle de Dieu. An, reg, 9. the Frenchmen called her La Pu∣cella de Dieu, through whom the Dolphin trusted to haue conquered all France. Walter Chartsey, Shriue. Robert Large, Shriue. Nicholas Wotton Draper Maior. Francis Sforce son to Sforce of Cutygnola,Francis Sforce made Duke of Milaine. was by his father Viscount Philip Maria, adopted for his heire, & caused him to beare the serpent in his Scutchion, which was the ancient Armes of the said Viscount. And in the yeare 1430 died Phillip Maria, & the yeare following, ye forenamed Francis
Sforce, by reason of his singular vertue & valour, was made Duke of Millaine: he was called Sforce because his father was so called, who was so sur∣named for his valour & Noble acts of chiualry: for albeit at the first hee was but of meane and lowe place▪ yet by his owne merit he attained by degrées the highest place in Campe, making all men to o∣bey & serue him by force, and was thereupon sur∣named Sforce, which name hath descended vnto his heires euer since. This Francis had many vic∣tories against Pope Eugenius, and against the Florentines, Venetians, and Mylaneseys: he had almost extirped the Gwelphes, and Ghibelines: he was feared and honoured of all Italy: he made peace with Venice & other cities: he reedified the great Castle of Millaine, and builded a faire hos∣pitall within the Citie, and gaue thereunto large reuenewes onely for the vse of the poore, hée was at great charges in building the Church of Saint Ambrose▪ he raigned 16. yeares, his soune Galease Maria succéeded him, who banished his owne mo∣ther, and abounded in all vices: he was slain in S. Stephens Church, hauing raigned 9. yeares, hée left behind him 4. children. Read the Supplement of Chronicles. 1431A commo∣tion at A∣bington An, reg, 10.At Abington began an insurrection of certaine lewde persons ye intended to haue wrought much mischiefe: but the chiefe authour being Balife of the towne, named VVilliam Mundeuile, a Weauor with others, were put to death. Iohn Adorley, Shriue. Stephen Browne, Shriue. Iohn VVels Grocer Maior.
This Iohn Welles caused the Conduit called the Standard in Cheape to be new builded. This yeare 1431.The King of England crowned in Paris. King Henry of England being but 12. yeares of age, was triumphantly crowned King of France in our Lady Church in Paris, in the presence of the English and French Cleargie and Nobilitie: and was with great honour gene∣rally receiued as King. The Frenchmen euer af∣ter called him little Harry, as appeareth by their Chronicles to this day. King Henry after he was crowned at Paris in France, shortly after returned into England,1432 An, reg. 11. and came to London, where hee was royally receiued of all the Crafts men riding in gownes of white, and red hoods imbrodered richly. Iohn Oluey, shriue. Iohn Paddesley, shriue. Iohn Perney Fishmonger Maior. Foure Souldiers of Calice beheaded,1433 An, reg, 12. and an hundred and ten banished, and before that time was banished an hundred and twenty. Thomas Chalton, Shriue. Iohn King, Shriue. Iohn Brokeley Draper Maior. The Earle of Huntington was sent with a company of Souldiers into France, where hee at∣chieued many enterprises. Thomas Barnewell, Shriue. Simon Eyre Shriue. Roger Otely Grocer Maior. The Thames was frozen,1432 An, reg, 13. Great frost that the Marchan∣dise which came to the Thames mouth, was car∣ried to London by land.
Thomas Catworth, shriue. Robert Clopton, shriue. Henry Frowicke Maior. An, reg, 14.Charles of France recouered the citty of Paris, the towne of Hartflew, and S. Denis. Thomas Morsted, Shriue. William Gregory, Shriue. Iohn Michael Fishmonger Maior. An, reg, 15. Part of Lon¦don bridge fell.The gate on London bridge, with the tower vpon it next to Southwarke: fell downe, & the 2. furthe arches of the saide bridge, and no man perished. 1437 An Alder∣man of Lon¦don War∣den of Norwich. An, reg, 16.King Henry put downe the Maior of Norwich, sent the Aldermen some to Lyn, some to Canter∣bury, tooke their Franchises into his hand, and ap∣pointed Iohn Wels sometime Maior of London to be Warden of Norwich. All the Lions in the Tower of London died. William Hales, Shriue. William Chapman, Shriue. VVilliam Eastfield Mercer Maior. 1438 An, reg, 17This VVilliam Eastfield builded the water con∣duit in Fléetstréete. Owen Theodor fowly hurting his kéeper, brake out of Newgate, but was again taken afterward. This Owen (as was saide) had priuily married Quéene Katherne, late wife to Henry the fifth, and had foure children by her. Hugh Diker, shriue. Nicholas Yoo, shriue. Stephen Browne Grocer Maior. Great wind Three men slaine.A great minde in London almost blewe downe one side of the stréete called the old Change. A stack of wood fell downe at Bainards Castle, &
killed 3. men. By the fall of a staire at Bedford,Eighteene men slaine. 1439 An, reg 18 Strumpets work ray hoods- where the shie day was kept 18. persons were slain. Many strumpets were set on the pillory and banished the city, except they wore their ray hoods Philip Malpas, Shriue. Roger Marshall, Shriue. Robert large Mercer Maior. It was ordained that all Marchant strangers should go to host with Englishmen,Parliament at Reading & to make sale of their Marchandises, and buy againe what they would within the space of 6. months, giuing their host for euery 20. s. worth 2. d. except the Easter∣lings. Also that euery housholder that was an ali∣ant should pay to the King xvi. pence the yeare,Orders for strangers. and euery seruant aliant vi. pence. Sir Rich VVich, Vicar of Hermetsworth in Es∣sex, was burnt on Tower-hill the 17 of Iune.1440 The postern of London sanke. An, reg, 19 The 18. of Iuly the posterne of London by East∣smithfield, against the Tower of London, sanke by night. Iohn Sutton, Shriue. William Wettinhall, Shriue. Iohn Paddesley Goldsmith Maior. A combate was fought at Tote hill betwéene two theeues,1441 A combate betweene 2 theeues. Roger Bo∣lingbrooke for necro∣mancy. Elianor Cobham apprehen∣ded. the appealer had the field of the defendant Roger Bolingbrooke with Thomas Southwell, were taken as conspirators of the kings death, for it was said, that the same Roger should labour to consume the Kings person by way of necremancy. Elianor Cobham Dutchesse of Glocester was ci∣ted to appeare before Henry Chichely Archbishop of Canterbury, to answer certaine matters of ne∣cromancy, witchcraft, sorcery, heresie, and treason, where (when she appeared) the foresaid Roger was
brought forth to witnes against her, and said, that she was the cause, & first stirred him to labour in that art. Then she was committed to the ward of Sir Iohn Steward Knight.An, reg, 29. A Witch burnt. Then was taken also Margerie Gurdmain, a witch of Ely, whose sorcery and witchcraft the said Elianor had long time vsed, wherefore the same witch was burnt in Smith∣field. William Combis, shriue. Richard Rich, shriue. Robert Clopton Draper Maior. Elianor Cobham did penanceThe ninth of Nouember, dame Elianor appea∣red before the Arch-bishop and others, and recei∣ued penance, which she performed. On the xvii. of Nouember she came from the temple bridge, with a taper of waxe of two pound in her hand through Fléetstréete to Paules, where she offered her Ta∣per at the Altar. On the wednesday next she went through Bridge-stréete, Grace-Church stréete to Leaden-hall, and so to Christ-Church by Algate. On friday she went through Cheape to S. Micha∣els in Cornehill, in forme aforesaid. Roger Bo∣linbrooke executed.The 18. of Nouember, Roger Bolinbrooke was araigned, drawne from the Tower to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered. Thomas Beaumont, Shriue. Richard Norden, Shriue. Iohn Athile Ironmonger Maior. An, reg, 21. 1443 Citizens of Norwich against the Prior. An, reg, 22.The Citizens of Norwich rose against the Prior of Christs Church within the same City, & would haue flered the Priory: they kept the Towne by strength against the Duke of Norffolke, & all his power, wherefore the King sent thither the chiefe Iudge Iohn Fortescue, with the Earles of Staf∣ford
and of Huntington, who indited many Citti∣zens, and the Prior also. Nicholas Wyfford, Shriue. Iohn Norman, Shriue. Thomas Catworth Grocer Maior. King Henry sent into France Embassadours,1444 An, reg, 25 W. de la poole Marques of Suffolke. Adam Molens, Robert Roes and others, to treate of a marriage be∣twéene King Henry, & Margaret the kings daugh∣ter of Cicill, and was concluded. Stephen Foster, shriue. Hugh Wich, shriue. Henry Frowicke Mercer Maior. On Candlemas eue in diuers places of Eng∣land, was heard terrible thunders with lightning, wherby the Church of Baldeoke in Hartfordshire the Church of Walden in Essex, & diuers others were sore shaken. And the stéeple of S.Pauls stee∣ple fired. 1445 Queene Margaret. An, reg, 24 Pauls in London, about 3. of the clock in the afternoone was set on fire in the midst of the shaft, but by the labor of well disposed people, the same was quenched. Lady Margaret landing at Porchester, went from thence by water to Hampton, from thence to the Abbey of Tich-field, and was there wedded to king Henry: she was receiued at the Black-heath by the Citizens of London, riding on horsebacke, in blew gownes and red hoods. Iohn Derby, Shriue. Godfrey Filding, Shriue. Simon Eyre Draper Maior. This Simon Eyre builded the leaden Hall in London,Leaden hall in London builded. to be a storehouse for graine & fewell (for poore of the Cittie) and also a beautifull Chappell
in the East end of the same.1436 An, reg, 25. Robert Horne, Shriue. Godfrey Boleine, Shriue. Iohn Olrey Mercer Maior. In a Parliament at Bury in Suffolke,The Duke of Glocester arested. 1447 An, reg, 26. Humphrey Duke of Glocester was arested, where soone after he died: he was buried at S. Albones. William Abraham, Shriue. Thomas Scot, Shriue. Iohn Gedney Draper Maior. George Scanderbag alias Ca∣striot.This yeare 1447. George Castriot, whom the Turkes in scorne called Scanderbeg, by fine policy, & warlike prowesse recouered from Amurath his kingdomes left by his father, viz. the kingdoms of Epyris and Albania, auntiently called Macedon: he won by force also from the Turkes, many pro∣uinces, cities, and strong holds. 2448 An, reg, 27.An English Knight named sir Francis de Arago∣nis tooke a towne of Normandy named Fogiers, against the truce: and this was the occasion that after the Frenchmen gate all Normandy. Willam Cantlow Shriue. William Marow Shriue. Stephen Browne Grocer Maior. Roan was yéelded to the French King. William Hulin, Thomas Cnings, Thomas Chalton Mercer Maior. Bishop of Chichester murdered. Blewheard hanged. 1450Adam Molins Bishop of Chichester kéeper of the kings priuy seale, was by shipmen slaine at ports∣mouth. Blewbeard a Fuller, taken beside Can∣terbury, for raising a rebellion was hanged and quartered.
The Duke of Suffolke was banished the land,Duke of Suffolke murthered. Iack Cade rebelled. who sailing toward France, was met on the sea by a ship of war, & beheaded: his corps was cast vp at Douer. The commons of Kent in great num∣bers assembled on blacke Heath, hauing to their Captaine Iacke Cade, against whom the King sent a great array, but by the said captaine and rebels, they were discomfited, & sir Humphrey Stafford, & William his brother, with many other slaine. After this victory the rebell came to London, entred the city, & strake his sword vpon London Stone, say∣ing: Now is Mortimer Lord of this city. Vpon the 3. of Iuly hee caused the Lord Say to be arrained, and at the standard in Cheape smot off his head: he also beheaded Sir Iames Cromer at the miles end: After this succéeded open robbery within the city. But the Maior & others sent to the Lord Scales, kéeper of the Tower, who promised his aide with shooting of Ordinance, & Matthew Gough was ap∣pointed to assist the Maior: so that the captaines of the Citie tooke vpon them in the night to kéepe the bridge, where betwéene them and the rebels was a fiery encounter. In conclusion the rebels got the draw-bridge, and drowned & spoiled many. This conflict endured till 9. of the clocke in the morning, in doubtfull chance: so that both parties agréed to desist from fight till the next day, vpon condition, that neither Londoner should passe into South∣warke, nor the kentishmen into London. Then the Archbishop of Canterbury & other passed to south∣warke, where they shewed a generall pardon for all offenders: whereupon the multitude retired home. The captaine fled through ye wild of Suffex,
and there was slaine.Iacke Cade slaine. Bishop of Salisbury murdered. After this the King rode in∣to Kent, where many were drawn and quartered. The 29. of Iune, William Bishop of Salisbury, was by his owne Tenants shamefully murdered. Iohn Middleton, Shriue. William Deere, Shriue. Nicholas Wyfford Grocer Maior. 1451Souldiars made a fray against the Maior of London the same day that hee tooke his charge at Westminster at night, comming from S. Thomas of Acres. Matthew Phillip, Shriue. Christopher Warton, Shriue. An, reg, 30. 1452William Gregory Skinner Maior. A commotion began by Richard Duke of Yorke and others, which was appeased for a time. Richard Lee, shriue. Ralph Alley, shriue. Godfrey Felding Mercer Maior. An, reg, 31. States crea∣ted.King Henry made his two brethren on the mo¦thers side, Edmond Earle of Richmond, and Iasper Earle of Pembrooke. 1453 An, reg, 32The 12. of October, the Quéene was deliuered of a Prince named Edward. Iohn Waldren, Shriue. Thomas Cooke, Shriue. Iohn Norman Draper Maior. The Maior of London first rowed to West∣minster. 1454Before this time, the Maior, Aldermen, & com∣mons were wont to ride to Westminster, whe the Maior should take his charge, but this Maior was rowed thither by water. A great fire next without Ludgate, in a Cord∣wainers house, which Cordwainer, his wife, thrée
mn and a maide, were all burnt. Iohn Field, Shriue. William Taylor, Shriue. Stephen Foster Fishmonger Maior.An, reg, 33 This Stephen Foster and Dame Agnes his wife builded the southeast quadrant adioyning to Lud∣gate of the citty of London, & also conueied there∣unto swéet water, sufficient for the ease of the pri∣soners, he also gaue forty pounds to the preachers at Pauls Crosse and Spittle. K. Henry came to S. Albons accompanied with the Dukes of Buckingham & Somerset,1455 first battell in S. Albons ye Earles of Pembroke, Northūberland, Deuonshire, Staf∣ford, Dorset & Wilshire, with other to the number of 2000. The King pight his banner in S. Peters stréet, & the Lord Clifford kept his barriers of the town, so that the Duke of Yorke with his power, might in no wise enter: but the Earle of Warwick gathering his men together, brake in on the gar∣den side in Holloway stréet, crying a Warwicke, & the duke of Yorke brake vp the barriers, & fought a fierce & cruell battell, in which was slaine on the Kings side, the Duke of Somerset, the Earle of Northumberland, the Lord Clifford, and many o∣ther. This done, the Duke of Yorke, the Earles of Warwicke and Salisbury, brought the King to London, where by Parliament,An, reg, 34 the Duke was made protector of the realm, the Earle of Salisbu∣ry Chancelor, & the Earle of Warwicke captaine of Calice. Iohn young, Shriue. Thomas Oldgraue, Shriue. William Marrow Grocer Maior.1456 An, reg, 35 The Duke of Yorke was discharged of the Pro∣tectorship.
A great ryot was committed is Lon∣don against the Lumbards and Italians. Iohn Steward, Shriue. Ralph Verney, Shriue. Thomas Cancings Grocer, Maior. 1457 Monstrou∣fishes.At Erith were taken 4. great fishes, whereof two were whales. Frenchmen landing at Sand∣wich, wasted the towne, & slew the inhabitants. Prisoners of New∣gate brake out. An, reg, 36.Sir Thomas Percy, Lord Egremount, & sir Ri∣chard Percy his brother being prisoners in New∣gate, brake out by night, & went to the King, other prisoners tooke the leads of the gate, & defended a long while against the Shriues, and all their offi∣cers. William Edward, Shriue. Thomas Reyner, Shriue. Godfrey Bolein Mercer, Maior. A faigned agréement was made betwéene the King and the Duke of Yorke.1458 the Queens Atturney slaine. An, reg, 37. A fray in Fléetstréet betwéene men of the Court, and the inhabitants of ye same stréet, in which fray the Quéenes Atturney was slaine: for this fact the K. committed the Gouernours of Furniuall, Clifford, and Barnards Inne to prison, and Wil∣liam Taylour Alderman of that ward, with many other were sent to Windsor Castle. Ralph Iossilin, Shriue. Richard Medtham, Shriue. Thomas Scot Draper, Maior. 1459 Printing first inuen∣ted.The Science of Printing was found in Ger∣many at Magunce. William Caxton of London, Mercer, brought it into England about the yeare 1471. and first practised the same in the Abbey of S. Peters at Westminster.
The Duke of Yorke,Bloreheath field An, reg, 38 the Earles of Salisbury and Warwicke, with a great hoast met the K. and other Lords vpon Bloreheath, where because Andrew Trolapa Captaine of Calice, the night be∣fore the battell should haue béene fought, fled with the best souldiers to the King, the Duke of Yorke, the Earles of March, Salisbury, & Warwicke also fled without battell. Iohn Plummer, Shriue. Iohn Stocker, Shriue. William Hulin Fishmonger, Maior. The thrée Earles with a puissant armie met King Henry at Northampton,1460 Battell at Northamp∣ton. Duke of Yorke clai∣med the Crowne. & gaue him a strong battell. In the end whereof the Kings hoast was dispersed, chased & slaine, & the King taken in the field. The Duke of Yorke made such claime to the Crowne, that by consent of a Parliament, he was preclaimed heire apparant. Richard Fleming, shriue. Iohn Lambard, shriue. Richard Lee Grocer, Maior. Quéene Margaret hauing gathered a company of Northren men neare to Wakefield, slewe Ri∣chard Duke of Yorke with his sonne Edmond.An, reg. 39 The Duke of Yorke slaine. The second battell in S. Albons. On Shrouetwesday the Quéene with her re∣tinue neare S. Albones, discomfited the Earle of Warwicke, and the Duke of Norfolke, and deli∣uered King Henry her husband. In this battell were slaine 1926. persons.Battell at Mortimers crosse. Edward Earle of March had a great battell a∣gainst the Earles of Pembroke and Wilshire at Mortimers crosse, where hee put them to flight, and slew many of their people.
The Earle of warwick fled from the King. The King & Queene fled to Yorke.The Earle of Warwicke fled from S. Albons to the Earle of March, & almost all the people of the South countries fell to him. King Henry with the Quéene, withdrew them towards Yorke. Edward Earle of March came to London with a mighty power of March men, and accompanied with the Earle of Warwicke the 26. day of Fe∣bruary, where he was ioyfully receiued. But ma∣ny wealthy Cittizens not liking of these doings conueied themselues out of the City, amongst the which were Philip Malpas Alderman, Thomas Vaugham Esquire, William Actlife with many o∣ther; who fearing the Quéenes comming to Lon∣don, shipped towards Antwerpe: but by the way were taken by a French ship, and at length deli∣uered for great ransome: it cost Philip Malpas 4000.Edward Earle of March pro∣claimed King. pound. Edward being elected, was proclai∣med by the name of Edward the fourth, on the 4. of March, and King Henry lost his Kingdome when he had raigned 38. yeares, 6. moneths, and odde dayes. Edward Earle of March. An, reg. 1.EDward Earle of March, began his raigne the 4. of March, by the name of Edward the 4. in the yeare 1460. Walter Walker be∣headed.The 12. of March Walter Walker, a Grocer that dwelt in Cheape, for words spoken touching K. Edward was beheaded. The 13. of March Edward tooke his iourney to∣ward the North, where betwéene Shireburne and
Todcastle, all the North part met him,Battell on Palme Sunday. & on palme Sunday the 29. of March, fought a great battell, in which were slaine Henry Percie Earle of Nor∣thumberland, Iohn Lord Clifford, Iohn Lord Ne∣uill, Leo Lord Welles, and many other of both parts, to the number of 357. and 11. persons: but King Edward got the field. The Duke of Exceter, the Duke of Somerset the Lord of Ros, the Lord Hun∣gerford and many other fled to Yorke to K. Henry,K. Henry fled into Scotland. and then they, with the King, Quéene and Prince, fled to Barwicke, and so to Edenbrough. George Ireland, shriue. Iohn Locke, shriue. Hugh Wich Mercer Maior. Faweonbridge Earle of Kent,1462 Conquer wonne. was appointed to kéepe the Seas with others, to the number of 10000. which landed in Britaine, & won the town of Conquer, with the Isle of Keth, &c. William Hamton Shriue. Bartholmew Iames, Shriue. Thomas Cooke Draper, Knight of the Bath. Maior. Quéene Margaret landed in the North,An, reg, 3 1463 where hauing but small succour, was faine to take the sea againe, and by tempest of weather was driuen to Barwicke, where shée landed, but lost her ships and goods. Robert Basset, Shriue. Thomas Muschampe, Shriue. Matthew Philip Goldsmith, Knight of the Bathe, Maior. K. Henries power being at Hexham,An. reg. 4. 1464 Battell at Exham. the Lord Mountacute with a power enclosed them round a∣bout: there were taken & slaine many Lords that
were with King Henry, but he himselfe was fled into Lancashire. K. Edward married.King Edward tooke to wife Elizabeth daughter to Iaquite Dutches of Bedford, late wife to Sir Iohn Gray. Coine en∣haunced.The King changed the coine both gold and sil∣uer, & ordained that the new groat wayed scantly 3. d. and that the noble of 6. s. 8. d. should goe for 8. s. 4. d. &c. Pestilence, Seriants feast.A great pestilence, and the Thames ouer frozen. In Michaelmas Tearme were made Serieants at Law, which held their feast in the Bishop of Elies place in Oldburne, to the which feast, the Maior of London with the Aldermen being bidden, re∣paired, but when the Maior looked to be set to kéepe the state in the hall, the Lord Gray of Ruthin, then Treasurer of England was there placed, where∣upon the Maior, Aldermen, and Commons depar∣ted home, and the Maior made all the Aldermen dine with him. Iohn Tate, Shriue. Iohn Stone, Shriue. Ralph Iossiline Draper, Knight of the Bathe Maior. New coine. An, reg, 5 1465A new coine was made, a Rose-noble at 10. s. the halfe noble at 5. s. and the farthing 2. s. 6. d. an angelet 6. s. 8. d. K. Henry the 6. takenKing Henry was taken beside the Abbey of Sal∣ly in Yorkeshire, from thence brough to Esilton, and there arested by the Earle of Warwick, Do∣ctor Manning Deane of Windsor, Doctor Bedle, and young Elerton being in his company, were brought to the Tower of London. A licence was
granted to conuey certaine Coteswoold shéepe into Spaine, which haue since greatly multiplied there. Sir Henry Wauer, Shriue. William Constantine, Shriue. Ralph Verney Mercer, Maior. Quéene Rlizabeth was deliuered of a daughter named Elizabeth.An, reg, 7. Iohn Browne, Henry Brice, Shriue. Iohn Stocton, Shriue. Sir Iohn Young Grocer, Maior. Many men were arested, and treason surmised against them, many of them were put to death, & other escaped for great sums of money. Amongst the which sir Thomas Cooke, sir Iohn Plomar, Hum∣phery Haward, and other Aldermen of London brought and charged with treason, and quit, not∣withstanding lost of their goods to the King, the value of 40000. markes or more. Anthony Wdnile, Lord Scales Iusted in Smith∣field with the bastard Burgony, & had the victory. Thomas Stalkbroke, Shriue. Humphrey Hayford, Shriue. Thomas Olgraue Skinner Maior. Sir Thomas Cooke Alderman of London,An, reg, 8. 1468 could not bee deliuered vntill hee had paied 8000. pound. Simon Smith, Shriue. William Hariot, Shriue. William Taylor Maior.Cordwai∣ner streete discharged of fifteenes. An, reg, 9. 1469 This William Taylor gaue the Citty of London certain tenements, for the which the city is bound to pay for euer, at euery Fiftéene granted to the King, for all such as shall dwell in Cord-waiuers
stréete ward, seased at 12. d. a péece, or vnder. The Earle of Warwicke adioyning himselfe with the Duke of Clarence, the Kings brother, stirred the Northen men, that they diuers times rebelled, and turned the King and realme to great trouble, but in the end therebels were suppressed in a battell at Banbury. Richard Gardiner, Shriue. Robert Drope, Shriue. Richard Lee Grocer Maior. George Duke of Clarence, Iasper Earle of Pem∣broke,An, reg, 10 1470 Richard Earle of Warwicke, and the Earle of Oxford; ariued at Plimouth, and another sort at Dartmouth, which all tooke their voyage to∣ward Exceter, and then Northward. K. Edward fled.King Edward fled from his hoast beside Not∣tingham, and the third of October hee tooke ship∣ping at Lin, & sailed into Flanders. The 6. of Oc∣tober the Duke of Clarence, the Earle of War∣wicke, the Archbishop of Yorke, the Lord of Saint Iohns, with others, entred the Tower of London, and King Henry being there prisoner,K Henry restored. they elected him to be their lawfull King, and forthwith rode with him through London to the Bishops palace, where he rested til ye 14. of October, on which day he went a Procession, crowned in Pauls Church. Iohn Crosby, shriue. Iohn Ward, shriue. Sir Iohn Crosby.Sir Iohn Stocton Mercer Maior. Sir Iohn Crosby late Shriue, builded Crosby place in London, hee gaue 300. Markes to the re∣pairing his Parrish Church of S. Helen, to poore householders 30. pound, to the repairing of Lon∣don
wall, and the Tower on London bridge, &c.Parliament at Pauls. A Parliament at Westminster, from thence pro∣céeded to Pauls, wherein King Edward was dis∣herited and all his children, and thereupon pro∣claimed Vsurper of the Crowne, and his Brother the Duke of Glocester traitors, and both attain∣ted, during this Parliament. Sir Thomas Cooke then being one of the Knights of the Shire for London, being an excellent well spoken man, and of a profound wit, shewed the great wrongs and losses he had sustained for his fidelitie to King Henry, and required restitution of 22000. Markes that hée had lost by force of the saide wrongs, and also he casting no perils, execu∣ted the vtmost of his wrongs against such as hée knewe bae any fauour to King Edward, of which he repented full sore afterward, and was faine to flie the land. King Edward landed at Rauensport with a small company of Souldiers,An, reg, 11. 1471 but by meanes of his bro∣ther the Duke of Clarence, who now returned to his part, he came to London, entred the Citty the 10. of Aprill, and tooke King Henry, and then went against the Earle of Warwicke, whom hee van∣quished and slew, with his brother Marques Mon∣tacute neare to Barnet, on Easter day. King Ed∣ward tooke his iourney Westward, where besides Tewkesbury, hee ouerthrew Quéene Margaret,Barnetfield Battell at Tewksbury and tooke her prisoner, with Prince Edward her sonne. Thomas the bastard of Fauconbridge with a rio∣tous company of shipmen and others of Essex and Kent, came to London,Thomas the bastard Knight. where being denied pas∣sage
through the Citty,Suburbs of Algate and Bishops fired. he fired the gates, wann the Bulwarkes at Algate, and entred the city, but the Citizens flewe such as entred, causing the o∣ther to flie, pursued them as farre as Blackewall, slaying many. King Henry the sixth Murthered.King Henry was murthered in the Tower of London, and after buried at Chertsey, since remo∣ued to Windsor. King Edward rode toward Kent, where he cau∣sed inquiry to be made of the foresaid riotous per∣sons, hanged the rich by the purse, and the other by the neckes. The Maior of Canterbury, with o∣thers, were beheaded there. Thomas the bastard of Fauconbridge was taken at Southampton, and beheaded. Iohn Allein, shriue. Iohn Shelley, shriue. An, reg, 12. 1472 The Earle of Oxford & his LadyWilliam Edward Grocer, Maior. The Earle of Oxford was sent prisoner to Guines, where hee remained so long as the King raigned. In all which time the Lady his wife might neuer come to him, or had any thing, but what the people of charitie would giue her,  what she gate with her néedle. Iohn Browne, Shriue. Thomas Bledlow, Shriue. Sir William Hampton Fishmonger Maior. An, reg, 13. 1473 Strumpets punished.This Maior punished many strumpets, caus them to ride with gray hoods, & banished them the city. He also caused stocks to be set in euery wa▪ William Stocker, Shriue. Robert Billisdon, Shriue. Sir Iohn Tate Mercer, Maior.
The Duke of Exceter was found dead in the sea betweene Douer and Calice.An, reg, 14 1474 Iohn Goose was burnt on the Tower hill. Edmond Shaw, Shriue Thomas Hill, Shriue Robert Drope Draper, Maior. This Robert Drope,An, reg, 15. 1475 builded the East end of the conduit vpon Cornhill. King Edward sailed into France with a great army to aide the Duke of Burgony, but by suit of the French King, a peace was concluded. Hugh Brice, shriue. Robert Colwich, shriue. Robert Basset Salter, Maior. This Maior did sharpe correction vpon Bakers for making light bread,An, reg, 16 Agnes Dain¦tie set on the pillory. he caused diuers of them to be put on the pillory. Also one Agnes Daintie for selling of mingled butter. Richard Rawson, shriue. Willam Horne, shriue. Ralph Iossilin Draper, Maior. By the dilligence of this Maior,London wall re∣paired. the wall about London was newly repaired betwixt Creplegate and Algate. King Edward in his progresse hunted in Tho∣mas Burdets Parke at a Bucke, and slewe many Déere, amongst the which one was a white Bucke. Thomas Burdet, when hee vnderstood thereof,An, reg, 17 1477 T. Burdet beheaded. wished the Buckes head in his belly that moued the King to kill it. Burdet was apprehen∣ded, accused of treason, condemned, drawne from the tower of London to Tiburne, and there beheaded.
Henry Collet, Shriue. Iohn Stokes, Shriue. Humphrey Hayford Goldsmith Maior. An, reg, 18. 1478George Duke of Clarence Edwards brother, in the Tower of London made his end in a But of Malmesey. Robert Harding, shriue. Robert Byfield, shriue. Richard Gardiner Mercer Maior. An, reg, 19. 1479A great dearth, and also a great death was in London, and diuers other parts of this Realme. Thomas Ilam, shriue. Iohn Ward, shriue. Sir Bartholomew Iames Draper Maior. Great Con∣duit. Theeues hanged and burnt.This Thomas Ilam Shriue, newly builded the great Conduit in Cheape. Théeues for robbing Saint Martins le grand in London, three were drawne to the Tower hill▪ and there hanged and burnt, other two were pres∣sed to death. Thomas Daniel, Shriue. William Bacon, Shriue. Iohn Browne Mercer Maior. An, reg, 21. 1481The Citizens of London lent the King 5000. Marks, which was repaired againe the next yeare following. Robert Tate, W. Wilking, shriue. Richard Chawry, shriue. William Harriot Draper Maior. An, reg, 22. 1482The Scots began to stirre, against whom the King sent the Duke of Glocester, & others, which returned without any notable battell.
William White, Shriue. Iohn Matthew, Shriue. Edmond Shawe Goldsmith Maior. This Edmond Shawe newly builded Creplegate of London from the foundation,An, reg, 23. Creplegate builded. 1483 which gate in old time had béene a prison, whereto the Citizens and others as were arested for debt, and like trespasses were committed. King Edward making great prouision for war into France, ended his life at Westminster, the 9. of Aprill, Anno 1483. when hee had raigned 22. yeares, one moneth, and odde daies, hee was buri∣ed at Windsor. He left issue, Edward the Prince,K. Edward deceased. and Richard Duke of Yorke, and 5. daughters, E∣lizabeth, that after was Quéene, Cicely Anne, Ka∣therine, and Briget. Edward the fifth. EDward the 5. about the age of 13.An, reg, . yeares began his raigne the 9. of Aprill, in the yeare 1483. which Prince raigned smal space, either in pleasure or libertie: for his vn∣naturall Vncle, Richard Duke of Glocester within 3. moneths depriued him not onely of his Crowne, but also of his life (as was said.) This Edward raigned two moneths and ten dayes. Richard the Duke of Glocester. RIchard the 3. brother to Edward the 4.An, reg, 1 L Riuers & others exe∣cuted. was proclaimed K. the 22. of Iune in the yeare 1483. hee put to death Anthony Woduile
Earle Riuers. Lord Richard Gray, the Quéenes brother, sir Thomas Vaugham, & sir Richard Hawes at Pomfret, and William Lord Hastings in the Tower of London, all in one day. He was crowned at Westminster on the 7. day of Iuly. After this were taken for Rebels against the King, Robert Rufe, Sergeant of London, Willia Dauy Pardoner, Iohn Smith Groome of King Edwards stirop, and Stephen Ireland wardroper in  Tower, with many other, who were charged th they had sent writings into Britaine to the Earl of Richmond, and of Pembroke, and also that they minded to haue stollen out of the Tower Prince Edward and his brother, for the which they we drawn from Westminster to the Tower-hill, and there all foure beheaded. Thomas Norland, Shriue. William Mattin, Shriue. Robert Bylisdon, Haberdasher, Maior. Duke of Buc¦kingham conspired.Grudge began betwéene King Richard and  Duke of Buckingham, insomuch that the Du conspired with diuers Noble men against hi intending to bring into the land Henry Earle Richmond, as heire to the Crowne: for wh conspiracy the Duke of Buckingham was beheded at Sarisbury. Fire at lea∣den Hall. 1484 An, reg, 2.The 30. of December, was a great fire at lden Hall in London, where through was burn much housing, and all the stockes for gunnes  other prouision belonging to the Citty. K. Richard began the high Tower at Westminter.
Richard Chester, T. Britaine, Shriues.Three Shriues & 3. Maiors in one yeare. Ralph Austry, Shriue. Thomas Hill Grocer, William Stocker Draper, Iohn Ward Grocer, Maiors. This Thomas Hall builded the Conduite in Grace stréete. King Richard being lodged in the Citie of Lon∣on at the Wardrop, sent for sundry Aldermen, d head comoners of the Citty, & instanced them  lend him certaine sums of money, vpon suffici∣t pledges, of the which persons he had granted of me 100. li. some 100. ma. some 40. li. or 50. mar.  assigned a Chapplen named Chaterton, to deli∣ the pledges, after the value of the sums bor∣ned, whereof was parcell, an helment of King Edwards, with the garnishing of gold, stone, and pearle, certaine cups of gold, also garnished with stone and pearle, and the twelue Apostles of sil∣uer and guilt, garnishing of his Chappell, &c. For the which kindnesse shewed vnto him by the Cit∣ens, hee gaue vnto the Chamber of London a  cup with a couer of gold, garnished with cer∣ne Kalaxes, Diamonds and Pearle, the which s valued at an hundred marke, but the money  him thus borrowed, was neuer repaied by his yes, nor the pledges redéemed. Colingborne Esquier,Colling∣borne ap∣prehended. was drawne from West∣inster to the Tower of London, and there on the  headed and quartered. Sir Roger Clifford Knight,1415 An, reg, 3 and one Forrescue re drawn through London, and at Saint Mar∣es le grand, Sir Roger would haue broke
from the Shriues and taken Sanctuary, but the Shriues tooke him againe: and had him to the To∣wer hill, where he was beheaded, and Fortesc had his pardon. M. Earle of Richmond ariued.Henry Earle of Richmond, Iasper Earle of Pembrooke, his vncle, the Earle of Oxford, and many other Knights and Esquires, with a small company of Frenchmen, landed at Milford han on the 6. of August, whose comming when it w heard of in Wales, diuers Noble men with the retinue gathered to him in great number. And th marching against King Richard at a village called Bosworth neare to Leicester,Battell at Bosworth. he met with his enemies the 22. of August, where betwéene them wa foughten a sharpe battell, in conclusion whereof, King Richard with diuers others were slaine and king Henry obtained a noble victory, and immediately the Lord Stanley crowned him King of England in the field, with the crowne which was tken of King Richards head. Richard was bu∣ried in the Gray Friars Church at Lei∣cester, when he had held the crowne two yeares and two moneths.
Henry Earle of Richmond. HEnry the seuenth borne in Pembrooke castle, began his raigne the 22.An, reg, 1 of Au∣gust, in the yeare 1485. Hee was a Prince of maruellous wisedome, pol∣licie, iustice, temperance, and grauitie, and not∣withstanding many and great occasions of trou∣ble and warre, hee kept his Realme in right good order, for the which he was greatly reuerenced of forraine Princes. On the 22. of August,Parson of S. Mildreds burnt. was a great fire in Bred∣stréete of London, in the which fire was burnt the Parson of S. Mildreds, and one other man in the Parsonage there. The sweating sicknesse began the 21. of Sep∣tember, and continued to the end of October.Sweating sicknesse whereof died in London 2. Maiors and 4. Alder∣men. Of the which sicknesse a wonderfull number died, and in London (besides other) died Thomas Hill Maior, in whose place was chosen William Stocker, who likewise deceased about 7. dayes after, In which space departed foure Aldermen. T, Ilam, R. Row∣son, T. Norland, and Iohn Stocker, and then was cho∣sen Maior, Iohn Ward, who continued till the feast of Simon and Iude. Iohn Tate, shriue. Iohn Swan, shriue. Sir Hugh Brice Maior. The 30. of October,Coronatiō First Yeo∣men of the Guard. King Henry was crowned at Westminster, he ordained a number of chosen archers to giue daily attendance on his person, whom he named Yeomen of the Guard.
Ioue to the King. An, reg. 2.King Henry sent vnto the Lord Maior of Lon∣don, requiring him and his Citizens of a prest of 6000. markes. Wherefore the Maior with his Brethren and Commons granted 2000. pound, which prest was repaied againe the next yeare fol∣lowing. Wheate & bay salt at a great price.Wheate was sold for 3. s. the bushell, and bay salt at the like price. The Crosse in Cheape was new builded. Iohn Perciuall, Shriue. Hugh Clopton, Shriue. Henry Collet Mercer Maior. Iohn Perciuall being the Maiors Caruer, was by Hugh Brice late Maior, chosen Shriue of Lon∣don for the yeare following. The king married Elizabeth the eldest daughter al Edward the fourth, by which meanes the two families of Yorke and Lancaster were vnited. K. Henry married. 1487 Stoke field by Francis Louel. An, reg. 3Francis Louel and Humphrey Stafford rebelled in the North: which commotion was quieted by the Duke of Bedford: there was slaine Iohn Earle of Lincolne, the Lord Louell, Martine Swart, and o∣ther there aboue foure thousand. This battel was sought high to a village called Stoke. Prince Ar∣thur.On the twenty one of September Quéene E∣lizabeth brought foorth her first sonne named Arthur. Iohn Fenkill, Shriue. William Remington. Shriue. William Horne Salter, Maior. King Henry comming to London, made W. Horne Maior of London, and Iohn Perciuall Alderman,
Knights, betwixt Hornsey and Iseldon. A prest for the King, in the Citie of London of 4000. pound, and shortly after was another prest of 2000. pound, which were both repaied againe the next yeare. William Isaake, Shriue. Ralph Tinle, Shriue. Robert Tae Mercer Maior. A taske of the tenth peny of all mens goods and lands was granted to K.148 Earle o Northm∣berland slane. An, reg, 5. Henry to aide the Duke of Britaine against the French King, through which taske the commons of the North made all insurrection, and slew the Earle of Northember∣land, wherefore Iohn Achamber their Captaine, with other, were hanged at Yorke. William Capel, Shriue. Iohn Brooke, Shriue. William White Draper Maor. Roger Shauelocke a Taylor within Lud∣gate of London, being a ma of great wealth,1490 An, reg, 6. flew himselfe, for whose goods was great busines betwéene the Kings Almer, and the Shriues of London. H. Coote, . Reuil, Shriue. Hugh Pemberton, Shriue. Iohn Mathew Mercer Maior. King Henry required a beneuolence,1491 Henry the Kings son borne. An, reg, 9. Conduit grace street. which was granted towards his iourney into France. Henry the Kings second sonne, borne at Gréen∣wich the 22. of Iune. The Conduit in Grace stréet was begun to bee builded by the Excecutors of Thomas Hill, late
Maior.Dearth of corne. Wheate was sold at London for twentie pence the bushell. Thomas Wood, Shriue. William Browne, Shriue. Hugh Clopton Mercer Maior. This Hugh Clopton during his life a Batcheler, builded a stone bridge at Stratford vpon Anon.Stone bridge at Stratford vpon Anon. 192 An, reg 8. King Henry tooke his voyage into France with a great Army to aide the Britons against the French King. William Purchase▪ Shriue. William Welbecke, Shriue. William Martin Skinner Maior. King Henry returned into England. Two Par∣done s were set on the Pillory in Cornehill thrée market dayes, for forging of false pardons, and for that one of them had fained himselfe to be a Priest, he was sent to Newgate, where he died: the other was driuen out of London with shame enough. 1493 fray against the stilliard men.A riot made vpon the Easterlings or Stilliard men by Mercers seruants, and others of the City of London, for the which many of them were sore punished. Robert Fabian, shriue. Iohn Winger, shriue. Sir Ralph Austrie Fishmonger Maior. This Ralph Austrie roofed with timber, & couered with lead the Parish Church of S. Martin in the Vintry, and also glazed the same Church, &c. K. Henry feasteth the Maior of London.King Henry holding his roial feast at Christmas at Westminster, on the twelfth day feasted the Maior of London Ralph Austry and his brethren
the Aldermen & Commoners: after dinner he dub∣bed the Maior Knight, and caused him & his bre∣thren to tary & behold the disguisings, & other dis∣ports in the night following, shewed in the great hall, hanged with arras, & staged all along on both sides, which disports being ended, the K. Quéene, and Ambassadors, and other States, being set at a Table of stone, 60. Knights & Esquires serued 60 dishes to the Kings messe, and as many to the Quéenes (neither fish nor flesh) & the Maior with 24. dishes to his messe of the same maner seruice, with sundry wines in most plenteous wise: Final∣ly, the King and Quéene being conueied into the Pallace, the Maior with his company, in barges returned, and came to London by the breake of the next day. Wheat was sold at London at 6. d. the bushell,1494 An, reg, 10 Salt and wheat at low price. Wine cheape. bay salt for 3. d. halfe peny. Nantwich salt for sixe pence the bushell, white herring for 6. s. the bar∣rell, red herring at 3. s. the cade, red sprats 6. d. the Cade, and Gascoine wine at 6. l. the tun. Nicholas Alwine, Shriue. Iohn Warner, Shriue. Richard Chaurie Salter Maior. Sir William Stanley was beheaded on tower hill. White herring being good, were sold for 3. s. 4. d. the barrell at London. Perkin Warbecke arriued at Deale in Kent, where, when hee and his company, saw they could haue no comfort of the country,1495 Perkin Warbecke. they withdrewe to their ships againe, but the Maior of Sandwich with certaine commons of the countrey, vickered
with the residue that were vpon the land, and tooke aliue of them 169. persons, who were hanged in Kent, Essex, Sussex▪ and Norfolke. An, reg, 11.Thomas Knesworth, Shriue. Henry Somer, Shriue. Sir Henry Coliet Mercer Maior. The 16. of Nouember was holden the Serie∣ants feast at the Bishops place of Ely in Hol∣borne, where dined the King, Quéene, and all the chiefe Lords of England. 1496 Entercourse An, reg, 12.In Aprill was concluded an amitie and enter∣course betwéene this land and the countrey of Flanders, &c. The Scots entred England, and by the setting on of Perkin Warbecke did much harme. Iohn Shaw, Shriue. Richard Haddon, Shriue. Sir Iohn Tate Mercer Maior. S. Antho∣nies in Lon∣don.This Iohn Tate newly builded and enlarged S. Anthonies Church in London, a Colledge of a good∣ly foundation▪ with a frée Schoole, and certaine almes houses for oore men. Sir Reignald Bray, with others of the Kings Counsell, declared to the Maior of London, that the K. desired to borrow of the Citizens 10000. li. The Maior desired respite till the 5. day follow∣ing, at which time was assembled at the Guild∣hall,A loane to the King. the common counsell, & thither came the fore∣named sir Reignald Bray with other of the Kings Councel, at which day with great submission and praier made vnto them to bee good meanes for the Citty vnto the Kings Grace: the commons lastly
granted to lend vnto the King 4000. li. which of his Grace was well and thankfully accepted▪ and truly repaied. By meanes of a Parliament that was granted to the King,1497 Blackheath field. a commotion was made by the Com∣mons of Cornewall, which vnder the leading of Iames Lord Audley, with Michel a Blacksmith, and other came to Blacke-heath, where the King met with them, discomfited and tooke their Cap∣taines, there was slaine of the rebels about 300. and taken about 1500. The Lord Audley was beheaded on the Tow∣erhill, the Blacksmith and Flamocke were hanged headed, and quartered at Tiborne. The King sent an Army into Scotland vnder the Earle of Surrey, and the Lord Neuell, which made sharpe warre vpon the Scots.Hailstones 18. inches. An, reg, 13. Perkin be∣sieged Ex∣cester. In Bedford∣shire at the Towne of S. Néedes, fell hailstones 18. inches about. Perkin Warbecke landed in Cornwall, went to Bodman, where being accom∣panied with thrée or foure thousand men, hee pro∣claimed himselfe King Richard the fourth, second sonne to Edward the fourth. From thence he went to Exceter and besieged it, which Cittie was vali∣antly defended by the inhabitants, but many of the rebels being slaine, they withdrew them to Taunton, from thence Perkin fled to Bewdley, where he tooke sanctuary, and was after taken and pardoned his life. Bartholmew Rede, shriue. Thomas Windought, shriue. William Purchas Mercer Maior.
Perkin brought to London.Perkin Warbecke was conueied vpon horse∣backe through Cheap and Cornehill vnto the To∣wer of London, and from thence backe againe through Candlewick stréete to Westminster with much wondring. 1498All the Gardens in Moore field, which had con∣tinued time out of minde, were destroyed, and of them was made a plaine field for archers to shoote in. Thomas Bradbury, Shriue. Stephen Ienings, Shriue. Sir Iohn Perciuaile Tailor Maior. An, reg, 14. Faigned Earle of Warwicke.A Shoomakers sonne was hanged at S. Thomas Watrings for naming himselfe to be Edward Earle of Warwick sonne to George Duke of Clarence, which Edward Earle of Warwicke, was then kept secret prisoner in the Tower of London. 1499 An, reg, 15 Wine, salt and wheate cheape.Gascoine Wine was sold at London for 40. s. the tune. A Quarter of wheate 4. s. and bay salt 4. d. the bushell. Iames wilford, Shriue. Richard Brond, Shriue. Nicholas Alwine Mercer Maior. Perkin Warbeck and Iohn a Water were executed at Tiborne. The Earle of warwick beheaded.Edward Plantagenet Earle of Warwicke sonne to George Duke of Clarence, was beheaded at Tower hill. Shortly after Blewet & Astwood were hanged at Tiborne. Iohn Hawes, shriue. William Stede, shriue. William Remington Fishmonger, Maior.
The King builded new his Manour at Shéene,1500 An, reg, 16. and named it Richmond. Hee also new builded Bainards Castle in London, and repaired Gréen∣wich. Laurence Ailmer, Shriue. Henry Hede, Shriue. Iohn Shaw Goldsmith Maior. The Maior caused his brethren the Aldermen to ride from the Guild-hall vnto the water side,An, reg, 17. when hee went to Westminster to bee presented in the Exchequer. He kept his feast in Guild-hall, whereas before the Maiors feast had béene kept in the Maiors house,Maiors feasts in the Guilde hall. or in the Grocers or Tailors hall: He afterwards caused the Archhouse, and o∣ther houses of Office to be builded at the Guild-hall, where since the feasts haue ben vsually kept. This Maior euery afternoone held a Court, and called before him matters, & redressed them with∣out expence of money: hee was a man of sharpe wit & bold spirit, by reason of the fauour he stood in with the King, Quéene, and other estates, in∣somuch that hee was sworne one of the Kings Counsell. The 14.Prince Ar∣thur mar∣ried. 1502 of Nouember Prince Arthur was mar∣ried in S. Pauls Church at London to Katherine daughter to Ferdinando King of Spaine, which Arthur the 2. of Aprill deceased at Ludlow, and was buried at Worcester. The 25.Iames King of Scots & Margaret the Kings daughter of England assured. of Ianuary at Pauls crosse was pub∣lished the assurance of Iames King of Scots, and of the Lady Margaret, eldest daughter to King Henry of England, in reioycing whereof Te De∣um was sung, bonefires made through the Citty,
and at 12. of the bonefires were set 12. hogshead of Gascoine to be drunke of all men freely. The dike called Turnmill brooke, and all the course of Fléete dike,Dikes of London cleansed. An, reg, 18. and other, were so scou down to the Thaines, that boats and fish, & fewe were rowed vp to Holborne bridge, as they had of olde time béene accustomed. Henry Kebel, Shriue. Nicholas Ninns, Shriue. Bartholmew Rede, Goldsmith Maior. Kings chap∣pell at west∣minster.The Chappell of our Lady at Westminsterd a Tauerne neare adioyning, were put downe, in which place a most beautifull Chappell is builded by King Henry the seuenth. Queene Elizabeth died. Kings of England brethren to the Mar∣chant Tai∣lors.Elizabeth Quéene of England died in childbed and was buried at Westminster. King Henry the seuenth being himselfe a brother of the Tailors, and linnen Armorers in Lon∣don, as diuers of his predecessors Kings before him had béene: (to wit) Richard the third, Ed the fourth, Henry the sixth, Henry the fifth, H the fourth, and Richard the second. Also Du 11. Earles 28. and Lords 5. Hee now ga them by this great Charter the Title of Mchant Tailors, as a name of worship to end for euer. The 8. of August, Iames the 4. King of Sco married Margaret the eldest daughter to He the 7.An, reg, 19 at Edenbrough. Christopher Hawes, Shriue. Robert Wats, T. Granger, Shriue. Sir Willlam Capell, Draper, Maior.
The 21. of Nouember at night, a perillous fire began vpon London bridge neare Saint Magnus Church, where 6. tenements were burnt. The 7. of Februry certaine houses more consumed with e against S. Buttelphes Church in Thames stréet. The 29. of Ianuary began a Parliament at Westminster. Edmond Dudley was speaker for the Commons,An aide to the King. wherein was granted to the King of lands, 6. d. in the pound, and of goods valued ten marks 6. d. and so vpwards, which in all rose to the quantitie of a Fiftéene. A new coine is ordained, that is to say, great nd halfe great, which bare but halfe faces,1504 An, reg, 20. A new coin & some greater of the value, 12. d. were coined. Robert Acheley, shriue. William Browne, shriue. Iohn Winger Grocer Maior. The prisoners of the Marshalsey in Southwark ake out,Prisoners brake out, 1505 An, reg, 11. and many of them being shortly after taken, were put to execution, especially those that d laine for felony. Richard Shore, Shriue. Roger Groue, Shriue. Thomas Knesworth Fishmonger Maior. This Thomas Knesworth builded the Conduit at Bishopsgate,Conduit at Bishopsgate he gaue to the Fishmongers cer∣taine tenements, for the which they bee bound to finde foure schollers at Oxford, & at Cambridge, euery of them 4. pound the yeare. Also to giue to twentie aged poore people of their Company to e∣uery of them a winter garment for euer. Also to giue the prisoners of Ludgate and Newgate,
euery yeare 40. s. King of Castile landed. 1506 An, reg, 22.Philip King of Castile, and his wife were wther driuen into England as they were passing to∣ward Spaine, who were honourably receiued  the Earle of Arundell. William Copinger, shriue. Thomas Iohnson, shriue. These Shriues being presented before the rons of the Exchequer, one William Copinger was admitted and sworne, but Thomas Iohn was put backe, till they knew further of the Ki pleasure. On the 10. of October, a commaunment was brought from the King to the  Maior,Shriues & Mior of London chosen by the Kings comman∣dement. that he should cause an election to be  for a new Shriue, at which day came into  Guild hall M. Edmond Dudley, the Kings Pdent, and there shewed the Kings letters that  Commons should name for the Kings pleas William Fitz William, Marchant Taylor, and derman for the yeare ensuing, which with  difficultie was granted. This William fitz Wil for the Kings gracious fauour to bee Shriue  yeare, gaue to the King 100. pound in ready ney, and hee was afterward of counsell to H the eight. Sir Richard Haddon Mercer, was also M by the Kings commandement. Fire in Warwicke lane. 1507 An, reg, 23.Sir Richard Haddon Mercer Maior. About Christmas was a Bakers house in wwicke lane burnt, with the mistresse of the ho and two women seruants. In Lent the King deliuered all prisoners
London, which lay for xl. s. or vnder. William Butler, Shriue. Iohn Kerkeby, Shriue. William Browne Mercer Maior. Who deceased the 22. of March,1508 An, reg, 24 and forth∣with Laurence Ailmer Draper was elected and orne, he tooke his oath at the Tower, and kept  feast. This yeare Sir William Caple was commaun∣d to ward by Empson and Dudley,Aldermen of London put in sute. and put in it by the King for things by him done in his ma∣altie, for that (he was charged) that false mo∣y had come to his sight, and had not done due unishment vpon the party that to him was ac∣used to be the coyner of it: but were this true or not, for that he would fall to no agréement, he was by Darby and Sympson, and other of their compa∣, whereof there was a Iury (bound to the dles of Dudley and Empson) indited, and af∣r by Dudley put in prison, some while in the unter, some time in the Shriues house, while William Butler was Shriue, and then deliuered vnto Thomas Exmew, and forasmuch as he would not agrée to pay the King 2000. li. was comman∣ded to the Tower, where he lay, till at length hee was let goe free. Also Thomas Knesworth that had béene Maior, and his Shriues Robert Shore, and Roger Groue, were sent to the Kings Bench, vnder the custodie  Sir Thomas Brandon, where they were put to their fine of 2000. pound. The Citty of Norwich was sore perished, and
neare consumed with fire,Norwich burned. for (as some haue writen) there was more then 160. houses consumed with most part of their goods. Stephen Genings Maior, Marchant tailour by the Kings letters for his election. Thomas Exmew, Shriue. Richard Smith, Shriue. This Stephen Genings founded a free Gramer Schoole at Woluerhampton in Stashire, &c. 1509 Hospitall of Sauoy.This yeare was finished the goodly Hospitall of the Sauoy néere vnto Charing Crosse, whi was a notable foundation for the poore, done by King Henry the seuenth, vnto the which bee purchased lands for the relieuing of 100. poore people. More by Indenture septipartite, dated the 19. yeare of his raigne, he established thrée Monkes▪ Doctors, or Batchelors of Diuinitie to sing, and to preach in Westminster Church diuers fea and euery Sonday for euer.Sermons founded. An anniuersary year∣ly of 20. li. to be distributed to the poore by 2.  péece, to 13. poore men, and 3. poore women, foun∣ded by him in an almes house for the same poore men & women, prouided in the saide Monastery 12. d. a yeare. Also a wéekely obit, and each of th to giue to 140. poore people, each one a peny. Eig brethren conuerses, to bee found meate, drink cloathing & lodging for euer. Thrée schollers  kept at the Vniuersitie, 10. li. the yeare to each  euer. The 13. poore men one to bee a Priest ag 45. yeares, a good Gramarian, the other 12. to  aged 50. yeares, euery Saturday the Priest
receiue of the Abbot or Prior, foure pence the day, and each other two pence halfe peny the day for e∣uer, for their sustenance, and euery yeare to each e a gowne, and a hood ready made, and to 3. wo∣men to dresse their meate, and kéepe them in their , each to haue euery Saturday 16. d. and uery yeare a gowne ready made: more to the 13. re men yearely 80. quarters of coales, & 1000.  good fagots to the vse of their hall, and kitchin  their mansion. A discréete Monke to be ouerséer to them, to haue 40. s. the yeare, &c. And to this  Abbot and Prior to be sworne. King Henry died at Richmond the 22. of Aprill,Henry the seuenth deceased. hen he had raigned 23. yeares, and 8. moneths, nd was buried at Westminster, in the new chap∣pell which he caused to be builded. Hee left issue Henry Prince of Wales, which succéeded in the kingdome, Lady Margaret Quéene of Scots, and lady Mary, promised to Charles King of Castile. Henry the eight. HEnry the eight at the age of eigh∣téene yeares began his raigne the two and twentieth of Aprill.An, reg. 1. The King married & crowned. Anno 1509. Of personage hee was tall and mighty, in wit & memory excel∣lent. The 3. of Iune he married la∣y Katherine his first wife: who had béene late wife  Prince Arthur deceased. On midsomer day the ing & Quéene were crowned at Westminster.
George Monex, shriue. Iohn Dogget, shriue. Thomas Bradbury Mercer, the 18. of October. Sir William Capell Draper, the 12. of Ianu∣arie, Maiors. Sir Richard Emson Knight, and Edmond Dudley Esquire,1510 Emson & Dudley ex∣ecuted. An. reg. 2. who had bene great Counsellors to Hen∣ry the seuenth, were beheaded on Tower hill, th 18. of August. This Edmond Dudley in time of his imprisonment, compiled a Booke intituled the  of Common wealth. Iohn Milborne, shriue. Iohn Rest, shriue. Henry Kebel Grocer Maior. This Henry Kebel builded Aldermary Church in London, and did many other workes of chariti in his life. Henry the Kings first sonne was borne on Ne yeares day, but died on S. Matthewes day n following. 1511 An, reg, 3.Nicholas Shelton, shriue. Thomas Mirfyn, shriue. 1512 An, reg. 4.Roger Acheley Draper Maior. The Nauies of England and France mée at Britaine Bay, fought a cruell battell, in wh the Regent of England, and a Caricke of Fra being grappeled together were burned, and the Captaines with their men all drowned, the English Captaine was Sir Thomas Kneuet, who with him 700. men. In the French Carike,  Sir Piers Morgan, with xi. hundred men. Iohn Collet Deane of Paules, erected one
Schoole in Pauls Churchyard in the year 1512 for poore mens children to be taught frée, &c.Paules Schoole. Robert Holdernes, shriue. Robert Fenrother, shriue. William Copinger, Fishmonger Maior. Sir Richard Haddon Mercer Maior. The stéeple and the lanterne on Bow Church in Cheape, was this yeare finished.Bow steple builded. In Iune the King with a great army in person went into France,1513 An, reg, 5 Turwin & Turney won. Scots field at bramston called Flo∣den field. and there conquered Turwin the 22. of August, and tooke the Citie of Turney by appointment, the 29. of of September. In this time Iames king of Scots inuaded this land with a mighty army, but by the diligence of the Quéene, with the policy and manhood of the Earle of Surrey, the Kings Lieuetenant, he was himselfe slaine at Bramstone with 3. Bishops, 3. Abbots, 12. Earles, 18. Lords, besides Knights & Gentlemen, & eightéene thousand Scots, and all the ordinance & stuffe taken the 9. of September. Iohn Dawes, Iohn Bridges, Shriue. Roger Basford, Shriue. William Browne Mercer, Maior. Sohn Tate Mercer. Maior. The seuenth of August peace was proclaimed betwéene the King of England & France during their liues.1514 An, reg, 6. All the hedges within one mile of London euery way were pulled downe,All fields laid open about Lon∣don. and the ditches filled vp in a morning by a number of yong men, Citizens of London, because those inclosers had béene hin∣derance to their shooting.
In October a marriage was made betwéene Lewis the 12. King of France, and Lady Mary the Kings sister of England. Iames Yerford, Shriue. Iohn Munda, Shriue. George Monox Draper Maior. This George Monox repaired the parish Church of Waltham-stowe in the County of Essex, and founded there an almes house for the poore men and women, and a frée schoole for children. Richard Hunne a Marchant Tailor of S. Mar∣garets parish in Brigestréete,Richard Hunne hanged. who had béene put in the Lollards Tower about the ende of October, was now the 5. of December, found hanged in the said Tower, and after burned in Smithfield. 1515 An, reg, 7.On New yeares Euen died the French K. Lewis the 12. And the 9. of Aprill a nw peace was con∣cluded betwéene the King of England, and Fran∣ces the new King of France. In the moneth of May Charles Duke of Suf∣folke,Duke of Sufflke med. Lady Mary the Kings daughter. 1516 An, reg, 8. dded the Lady Mary the kings sister, late Quéene of France. Henry Worley, Shriue. Richard Gray, W. Baily, Shriue. William Butler Grocer Maior. Lady Mary King Henries daughter was borne at Gréenewich on the xi. of February. Margaret Quéene of Scots, King Henries eldest sister, who had after the death of her first husband (Iames King of Scots slaine at Bramston) marri∣ed Archibald Douglas Earle of Anguish, fled into England,Queene of Scots fled. and lay at Harbottle, where shee was
deliuered of a child called Margaret. Thomas Seimer, Shriue. Iohn Thston, Shriue. Iohn Rost Grocer Maior. The Thames was frozen,Great frost 1517 An, reg, 9. This was called the ill May day many years after. that men with horse and carts might passe betwixt Westminster and Lambeth. On May euen was an insurrection of young persons and apprentises of London against Ali∣ens, of the which diuers were hanged, with their Captaine Iohn Lincolne a Broker, the residue to the number of 400. men, and 11. women tied in ropes all along, one after another in their shirts, came to Westminster hall with halters about their neckes and were pardoned. Margaret Quéene of Scots returned into Scot∣land, to the Earle of Anguish her husband.Queene of Scots re∣turned. Thomas Baldry, Shriue. Ralph Simon, Shriue. Sir Thomas Exmew Goldsmith Maior. Many dyed in Egland of the sweating sick∣nesse, & especially about London,1518 Sweating sicknesse. wherefore Tri¦nitie tearme was one day at Oxford, and then ad∣iourned to Westminster. The Cittie of Turney was deliuered to the French King.An, reg, 10 Iohn Alln, shriue. Iames Spencer, shriue. Thomas Mirsine Skinner Maior. The Earle of Surrey was sent into Ireland,1519 An, reg, 11. as  there, and the Earle of Kildare was  of that office.
Cardinall Campaius.In Iuly Cardinall Campaius came into Eng∣land from the Pope, to exhort King Henry to make warres on the Turkes. Iohn Wilkinson, Shriue. Nicolas Partridge, Shriue. Sir Iames Yarfords, Mercer, Maior. 1520 An, reg, 12.As K. Henry was at Canterbury with the Quéene in readinesse to haue passed the sea, he heard of the Emperour Charles cōming, with whom he met at Douer, & accompanied him to Canterbury, where after the Emperour had saluted the Quéene his aunt,King Hen∣ry went to Calice. hee tooke shipping into Flanders. The last day of May King Henry passed ouer to Calice, and met with Francis the French King at the Campe betwéene Arde and Guines, where were many great triumphs and goodly sights. Imediately af∣ter hee met with the Emperour, with whom hee went to Grauelin, and the Emperour returned with him to Calice, where he had great cheare. Iohn Skenington, shriue. Iohn Kyeme shriue. Sir Iohn Burges Draper Maior. The 27. of May was Edward Duke of Buck∣ingham beheaded. 1521 An, reg, 13 The King made de∣fender of the Faith. Alms hou∣ses by the Crotchet Friars.King Henry wrote a booke against Luther, and therefore the Bishop of Rome named him defen∣der of the Faith. Iohn Britane, Shriue. Thomas Pergetter, Shriue. Sir Iohn Milborne Draper Maior. This sir Iohn Milborne builded certaine almes houses adioyning to the Crotched friers church in
London, wherein he placed 14. aged poore people. The 6. of March the French King attached all Englishmens goods.Frenchmen attached. And all Frenchmens bodies and goods were attached at London. Charles the 5. Emperour, came into England,1522 An, reg, 14 The Empe∣rour came to London. & was honorably receiued into London by ye Maior Aldermen, & commons of the City the 6. of Iune, the King accompanying him: from thence he went to Windsor, and sate in the Stall of the Garter. After great feasts, iustes, and honourable enter∣tainment, hee departed to Hampton, and sailed from thence into Spaine. During this time the Earle of Surrey, Lord Admirall, burnt Morles in Britaine, not long af∣ter entred Picardy & burnt diuers towns & castles Iohn Rudstone, Shriue. Iohn Champneis, Shriue. Sir Iohn Munday Goldsmith Maior. The Lord Rosse, & the Lord Dacres of the North burned the towne of Kelsey in Scotland, with 80. villages, and ouerthrew 18. Towers of stone. The Emperour Charles, King Henry, & Ferdi∣nando Duke of Austrich, the Pope, the Cittie of Venice, and diuers others in Italy, were confede∣rate against the Frenchmen. The Turks besieged the Ile of Rhodes,The Turks tooke the Rhodes. 1523 & on Christmas day tooke it, to the rebuke of Christen∣dome, for their dissention and negligence. The Earle of Surrey burned 37. villages in Scotland, dispoiled the Countrey from the East Marches to the West.Parliament at the black Friars. A Parliament at the Blacke Friars in Lon∣don,
wherein was granted a great Subsidy. Christen King of Denmarke and his Quéen arriued at Douer, the 22. of Iune. came to Lon∣don,An, reg, 15 The King of Denmark arriued. and were lodged in the Bishop of Bathe place. The Duke of Suffolke was sent into France with an army of 10000. men, who passing the water of Some without battaile, tooke diuer Townes and Castles. Michael English, shriue. Nicholas Ienings, shriue. Sir Thomas Baldry Mercer Maior. Conspiracy at Couentry 1524 An, reg, 16.In December at the Citty of Couentry, Fracis Philip, Christopher Pickering, and Anthon Mainyle intended to haue taken the Kings treasure of his subsidie, as the same came toward London, therwith to haue raised men, and to haue taken the castle of Killingworth, and then to h made battell against the King, for the which they were drawen, hanged, and quartered at Tiborne, the other of their conspiracy were executed at Co∣uentry. Ralph Dodmer, Shriue. William Roch, Shriue. Sir William Baoly Draper Maior. 1525The 9. of March was great triumph made in England, for the taking of the French King be∣fore the Citty o auie. Priories suppressed. Greenwich to wer buil∣ded.Cardinall Wolsey obtained licence of the Pope to surprsie certaine small Priories, to the intent to erect two Colledges at Oxford and Ipswich. The Tower of Greenwich was builded. A truce betweene England and France.
Iohn Caunton, shriue. Christopher skew, shriue. Sir Iohn Allen Mercer Maior. The xi. of February foure Marchants of the Stilyard did penance at Paules, & Doctor Barnes bare a fagot. This yeare 1526. Charles the sonne of Gil∣brt Earle of Mounpensier,1526 Rome taken and sacked by the duke of Burbon. who not long be∣fore had married the Lady Iane, sole heire to the Dutchy of Burbon, in whose right hee was Duke of Burbon, vpon priuate discontent reuolted from his King Charles the 8. and then serued vnder the Emperour, & the King of England, and after that the said Duke the yeare aforesaid besieged Rome & sackt it, did great spoiles & extremities vnto the Cleargy, forced the Pope to flie into Castle-Ange∣lo, but himselfe was there slaine by a Friar, with the shot of a Caliuer. The 6. of September was proclamation for gold, the French Crowne 4. s. 6. d. The Angell 7. s. 6. d. The Royall 11. s. 3. d. &c. Stephen Pecocke, Shriue. Nicholas Lambert, Shriue. Sir Thomas Seymer Mercer Maior. In Nouember, December, & Ianuary,1527 An, reg, 19. Extreame raine and drought. fell such raine, that thereof ensued great floods, which de∣stroied corne fields, pasture, & beasts. Then was it dry till the 12. of April, & from that nime it rained euery day and night till the 3. of Iune. Such scarsitie of bread was at London, and all England, that many died for default thereof.Great fa∣mine. The bread carts comming from Stratford to∣wards London, were met at the Miles end by
the citizens, so that the Maior & Shriues were for∣ced to goe & rescue the same, & to sée them brought to the markets appointed. Wheate was then at xv. s. the quarter. Shortly after the Marchants of the Stilyard, brought from Danske such store of wheate & rye that it was better cheape at Lon∣don, then in any other part of the Realme. Iohn Hardie, Shriue. William Hollis. Shriue. Sir Iames Spencer Vintner, Maior. A French Craer of 30. tun, being manned with 38. Frenchmen, and a Flemish Craer of 27. tun, and 24.1528 An, reg, 20. A ship cha∣sed to the Tower wharfe. Flemings, méeting at Margate, the one chased the other along the Riuer of Thames to the Tower-wharfe of London, where Sir Ed∣mond Walsingham Lieutenant of the Tower staied them, and tooke their Captaines and men. The xvii. of Iune, the terme was adiourned till Michaelmas,Sweating sicknesse. because of the sweating sicknes that then reigned, & there was no such watch in Lon∣don at Midsomer, as before had béen accustomed. Ralph Warren, Shriue. Iohn Long. Shriue. Sir Iohn Rudstone Draper, Maior. 1529 An, reg. 21. Cardinall Woolsey.In April, May, Iune, & Iuly, Cardinal Campaius, with Cardinal Woolsey, sate at the Blacke friars in London, where before them was brought in question the kings mariage with Quéene Kathe∣rine, as to be vnlawfull: but they long time pro∣tracted the conclusion of the matter, which delay King Henry tooke very displeasantly. Cardinal Campaius departed towards Rome,
and shortly after Cardinall Woolsey was dischar∣ged of the Chancellorship, and the king seised all his goods, with his palace at Westminster, called Yorke palace, into his hands. Sir Thomas Moore was made Chancellor of Eng∣land. Michael Dormer, Shriues.Sir Tho∣mas Moore made Chan¦cellor. New testa∣ment prin∣ted. Walter Champion, Shriue. Sir Ralph Dodmer, Mercer, Maior. William Tindall translated the new Testament into English, & printed the same beyond the seas. A peace was agreed betwéene King Henry of England, the Emperour, the Frence King, the King of Boheme, and Hungary. In the moneth of October the King came to the blacke Friars, and began there a Parliament.Parliament at Blacke Friars. King Henry commanded the Bishops to call in Tindals translation of the new Testament,1530 An, reg, 23 Suit to the Court of Rome for bidden. and to sée another truly translated, to be set forth. King Henry vpon occasion of delay made by the Pope in his controuersie of diuorsment, caused proclamatiō to be made, forbidding all his subiects to purchase any thing from the Court of Rome. The plague of pest, being hot in the Cittie of London, blew crosses called Per signum Tau,Pest in London. were commanded to bee set ouer the doores of houses infected. It was proclaimed, that no Gascoine wine should be retailed aboue 8. d. the Galon. Also that taules calued betwixt the first of Ianury, and the first of May, should not be killed, but reared vp. William Dancy, Shriue. Richard Choping, Shriue.
Sir Thomas Pargetor Salter Maior. The Cardinall being conuict of a premunire was arested by the Earle of Northumberland, deliue∣red to the Earle of Shrewsbury,Cardinall Wolley died. and brought to Leicester Abbey, where he deceased the 29. of No∣uember, and was there buried. Cleargy in the premu∣nire K Henry supreame head.The whole Cleargy of England being iudged to be in the premunire, in their conuocation conclu∣ded a submission, wherein they called the King supreame head of the Church of England, and were contented to giue the King 100000. pound to pardon their offence.1531 A Cooke boyled. An, reg, 23. Richard Rise a Cooke was boiled in Smithfield for poysoning diuers persons at the Bishop of Ro∣chesters place. The xi. of Aprill vii. men with their horses, and a Ferriman,Thomas Bilney burned. were all drowned at Lambeth. Thomas Bilney was burned at Norwich. Richard Gressam, Shriue. Edward Altam, Shriue. Sir Nicholas Lambert Grocer Maior. In the moneth of Nouember, a Serieants feast was held at Ely house in Holborne. Looke more in the Suruey of London. 1532 An, reg, 24. Monstrous Fishes. The cleargy sworne.The 25. of May was taken betwéene London and Gréenewich two great Fishes, called Hurl∣pooles. The oath which the Clergy had vsed to make to the Bishop of Rome, was made voide by statute, and a new oath confirmed, wherein they confessed the King to be supreame head. Sir Thomas Moore after suite made, was
discharged of the Chancellorship.Sir Thomas Moore dis∣charged T. Audley Lord chan∣cellor Coiners executed. The first Duke of Florence. Thomas Audley Knight made Lord Chancellor. Fiue men were hanged, and quartered at Tower hill, for coyning and clipping. This yeare 1532. Alexander sonne of Law∣rence of Medicis, Duke of Vrban, was by the speciall sauour of his vncle, Pope Clement the 7. made the first Duke of Florence. By the aduice of his vncle, he gouerned his countrey, and exercised great iustice vpon his people, sate personally in the seate of iudgement, and gaue sentence, whereby he gained high estimation: hee married the Em∣perours daughter, and had no issue, but in the end hee inclined to lust, offered violence vnto modest Ladies. And for his reward his kinsman Law∣rence slew him by treason. Anno. 1537. After him succéeded Gosmo de Medicis, who tooke waning by the others folly, and gouerned his people very peaceably, and did many acts worthy of memory: he builded a colledge in Pisa, for the aduancement of poore mens children. The King suppressed the Priory of Christchurch in London, and gaue their Church,Christ Church suppressed. place & lands to Sir Thomas Audley. The xix.Tower of London repaired. of August William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury deceased. The King repaired the Tower of London. Lady Anne Bullein was made Marchiones of Pembroke. King Henry went to Calice, and so to Bulletin, where hee met with the French King. R. Rainold, N. Pichon, Shriue. Iohn Martin, Shriue.
Sir Stephen Pecocke Haberdasher Maior. The 12. of Aprill being Easter euen, the Lady Anne Bolein, who had béene priuily married to K. Henry,1538 An reg, 25. Queene Annecrow∣ned. Prince Ar∣thurs wid∣dow. Beefe and mutton sold by waight. was proclaimed Quéene of England, and on Whitsonday with solemnitie crowned at west∣minster. The 5. of Iuly Quéene Katherine was proclaimed Prince Arthurs widow. It was enacted that Butchers should sell their béefe and mutton by waight, béefe for an halfe pe∣ny the pound, and mutton thrée farthings: at that time fat oxen were sold for 26. s. 8. d. the péece, fat weathers for 3 s. 4. d. the péece, fat Calues the like price, a fat lambe for twelue pence. The But∣chers of London sold peny péeces of béefe for the reliefe of the poore, euery péece two pound and a halfe, sometime thrée pound for a peny, and 13. sometime 14. of those péeces for twelue pence, mutton 8. d. the quarter, and an hundred weight of béefe for 4. s. 8. d. Lady Eli∣zabeth borne.The 7. of September betwéene the houres of 3. & 4. of the clocke in the afternoone, was the Lady Elizabeth, daughter to K. Henry, borne at Gréen∣wich, and there christened in the Fryars Church. William Forman, shriue. Thomas Kitson, shriue. Sir Christopher Asken Draper Maior. A great fish was taken at Blacke wall, which was brought to Westminster to the King. The holy maide of Kent.The 20. of Aprill Elizabeth Barton a Nunne, professed at S. Sepulchres in Canterbury, Ed∣ward Bocking, and Iohn Deering, two Monkes of Christs Church in Canterbury. Hugh-Rich,
Warden of the Friars obseruants in Canterbu∣ry, and Richard Risby of the same house, Richard Maister, Parson of Aldington in Kent, and Henry Gold Priest, were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and there hanged and hea∣ded, &c. for sundry conspiracies in the matter of di∣uorse betwéene the Kings Maiestie, and Quéene Katherine. All the Priests through England,Oath to K. Henry & Queene Anne. called to bée sworne to the King, and Quéene Anne, and their heires, before the Archbishop of Canterbury: and all men through England were sworne in their shires and townes where they dwelled: for refu∣sall thereof, Iohn Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, Sir Thomas Moore late Lord Chancellour were sent to the tower of London, diuers other Priests religious, and lay men were sent to other prisons. The xv. of May was a great fire at Salters hall in Bredstreet. The xi. of Iuly Lord Dacres of the North was arraigned at Westminster of high treason,An, reg, 26. Fire in Bredstreet. Lord Da∣cres araig∣ned. Frier hou∣ses suppres∣sed. Fire at Tem¦ple-barre. The Kings stables burnt. where hee so wittily confuted his accusers, that to their great shame he was not found guiltie. The second of August was all the places of the obseruant Fryars, as Greenewich, Canter∣bury, Richmount, Newarke, and Newcastle, put downe. The fouretéenth of August was a great fire at Temple barre: the sixteenth of August was bur∣ned the Kings stable at Charing Crosse, wherein were burned many great horses, and great store of hay.
Nicholas Lues, Shriue. William Denham, Shriue. Sir Iohn Champneis Shinner Maior. The Popes authoritie abrogated.In a Parliament at Westminster, the Pope with all his authoritie was banished this realme, the King to be reputed and taken as supreme head of the Church of England, hauing full authoritie to reforme all errours, heresies, and abuses in the same. Also the first fruits and tenths of all spiri∣tuall dignities and promotions were granted the King,First fruits and tenths. with a subsidie of the laity of twelue pence in the pound. 1537 An, reg, 27. Charter∣house men.The Prior of the Charterhouse at London, the Prior of Beuall, the Prior of Exham, Reinolds a brother of Simon, and Iohn haile Vicar of Thisle∣worth, were all condemned, drawne, hanged, and quartered at Tiborne the fourth of May. The K. cōmanded all about his Court to poll their heads,Poled heads and caused his owne head to be polled. The 25. of May was in Saint Pauls Church at London examined 19. men and 6. women, borne in Holland,Hollanders heretikes. 14. of them were condemned, a man and a woman of thm were burnt in Smithfield, the other twelue sent to other townes there to bee burnt.This was the last Duke of Millaine, since which time that Citty hath beene go∣uerned by strangers This yeare 1537. died Francis Sforce the se∣cond of that name: this Francis Sforce was the ninth and last Tuke of Millaine: he was the son of Lewis Sforce, called the More: hee obteined his Dukedome by meanes of Prospero Colonno ge∣nerall of the Campe of the league betwéene the Emperour Carolus Quintus, and Pope Leo the
tenth, but with great difficulty: he married Chri∣stierna daughter to the King of Denmark: he was crowned Duke, Ann: 1523. he raigned with great troubles and vexations, by reason the Emperour had the greater hold, and stronger faction in his country, and was forced to flie: for griefe whereof to sée his subiects and friends become vassals to the Emperour, and his treasure giuen to stran∣gers, he fell into a great sicknesse, with extreame paine in one of his eyes and thereof died, & being opened, his heart was found all drie, and yet not∣withstanding his heart was swolne. In his time the Mylaneses expelled quite all the French garisons, with their chiefe captaine Monsieur Lawtrec out of their territories, because of sundrie vile practises and misdemeanours, wherewith the French grieued them. Presently vpon the death of the Duke, his countrey became a pray to many gouernors, and his wife Christi∣ans returned into Denmarke, and was after∣ward married vnto Anthony Duke of Lorraine: Shée was highly honoured of all Princes for her accomplished vertues, especiall for her singular patience in her vnfortunate marriage with her first husband, and her incessant paines and kinde∣nesse which shee performed in his extreame mise∣ries, and long sicknesse. The 18. of Iune 3. Monkes of the Charter-house of London, Exmew, Middlemore,Monkes executed. Bishop of Rochester beheaded. and Ni∣igate, were drawn to Tiborne, and there hanged  quartered. The 22. of Iune Doctor Iohn Fisher Bishop
of Rochester, was beheaded on the tower hill. Sir Thomas Moore be∣headed. Abbies vi∣sited.The 6. of Iuly Sir Thomas Moore was behea∣ded on the tower hill. The King sent Doctor Lee to visite the Ab∣beyes, Priories, and Nunneries in England, who put foorth all Religious persons that would goe, and all that were vnder the age of 24. yeares. Humphrey Monmouth, Shriue. Iohn Cotes, Shriue. Iir Iohn Allen Mercer Maior. Charitable deeds.This Sir Iohn Allen, gaue to the Citty of Lon∣don, a rich collar of Gold to bee worne by the Maior.L. Kathe∣rine Dow∣ager. The eight of Ianuary dyed Lady Katherine Dowager at Kimbalton, and was buried at Peter∣borow. Houses of Religion suppressed.In a Parliament was granted to the King and his heires, all religious houses of the value of 200 pound, and vnder, with all lands & goods to them belonging. 1536 An, reg, 28On May day King Henry being at a Iu at Gréenewich, sodainely departed to We∣minster. The next day Lady Anne Quéene, was had t the Tower, & there for things laide to her char shortly after beheaded.L. Roch∣ford execu∣ted. The 19. of May the Lord Rochford, brother to the said Quéene, Henry N∣ris, Marke Smeton, William Brierton, and Franci Weston, all of the Kings priuy chamber, about matters touching the Quéene, were put t death.
The 20. of May the King married Lady Iane, daughter to Sir Iohn Seimer,King Hen∣ry married Lady Iane. which at Whitson∣tide was openly shewed as Quéene, and on the Tuesday in the Whitson wéeke, Sir Edward Sei∣mer was created Vicount Beuchampe. The eight of Iune beganne a Parliament, and the Cleargy held a conuocation in Pauls Church,Articles by the King. Triumph at Westmin∣ster. where they published a Booke intituled: Articles deuised by the Kings highnesse. The nine and twentieth of Iune, the King held a great iusting at Westmin∣ster. Thomas Cromwell Secretary to the King,Thomas Cromwell. Vicar ge∣nerall. and master of the Rolles, was made L. Kéeper of the priuy seale, and Vicar generall ouer the spirituali∣tie vnder the King, and sate diuers times in the conuocation among Bishops, as head ouer them. The 22. of Iuly, Henry Duke of Richmond, and Somerset Earle of Northampton, a bastard sonne of king Henry, died, and was buried at Thetford. L. Cromwell Lord priuie Seale and vicegerent,Duke of Richmond. Pater no∣ster, Creede and com∣mande∣ments. sent out vnder the Kings spirituall seale, certaine iniunctions to the Prelates and Cleargy of the Realme: charging Curates to teach their Parishi∣oners the Pater Noster, Aue, Creede, and comman∣dements in English. In the beginning of October,Commoti∣on in Lin∣colnshire. at an assize for the Kings subsidie kept in Lincolnshire, the people made an insurrection, and gathered nine & twen∣tie thousand persons. Against those the King did send the Duke of Suffolke, the Earle of Shrews∣bury, and the Earle of Rutland, with a strong po∣wer, whereof, when the rebels heard they desired
pardon brake vp their armie and departed home,Lincolne∣shire com∣motion appeased. A riest and a but∣cher exe∣cuted▪ Commoti¦on in York∣shire. but their Captaines was apprehended and exe∣cuted. The 9. of October a Priest and a Butcher were hanged at Windsor, for words speaking in the be∣halfe of the Lincolne-shire-men. After beganne insurrection in Yorkeshire for the same causes, the people gathered to the number of forty thousand. Against those rebels the King sent the duke of Northfolke, the Earle of Shrews∣bury & the Marques of Exceter, with a great ar∣my, with whom a battaile was appointed to haue beene fought on the euen of S. Simon and Iude, but there fell such raine the night before, that the two Armies could not méete, whereupon they de∣sired the Duke of Northfolke to sue to the K. for their pardon, and that they might haue their liber∣ties,Commotiō appeased. &c Which the Duke promised, and rid post to the King, then lying at Windsor, to know his pleasure, and so appeased them. Aske, that was chiefe of this rebellion came to London, and was not onely pardoned but rewarded with gifts. Shriues.Robert Paget, William Bowyer. Maior.Rir Ralph Warreire Mercer. The Earle of Kildare and his vncles ex∣ecuted.The 22. d. December, the Thames being fro∣zen the King and Queene Iane rode through Lon∣don to Greenewich. The third of February was Thomas Fitz Garet, sonne and heire to the Earle of Kildare beheaded, and fiue of his vncles, draw∣en, hanged and quartered at Tiburne. In the same moneth Nicholas Musgraue, Th. Gilby, and others, stirred a new rebellion and besieged the
Cittie of Carlile, from whence they were driuen, and many of them taken and put to death. Also sir Frances Bigot, Sir Robert Constable and others began a conspicacy, and for the same were attain∣ted. The 29. of March,Another conspira∣cy. were twelue men of Lin∣colne drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered. In Aprill through certaine Commissions sent into Somersetshire to take vp corne,1584 Lincolne∣shire-men executed. An, reg, 29. A commo∣tion in So∣mersetshire the people be∣gan to make an insurrection, which was by master Pawlet & other allayed, the beginners to the num∣ber of 60. were condemned, whereof 14. were han∣ged and quartered, one of them was a woman. In Iune the Lord Darcy, the Lord Hussey, Sir Robert Constable, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir Frances Bigot, Sir Stephen Hamelton, Sir Iohn Bulmer and his wife, George Lumley, Nicholas Tempell, Robert Aske, William Thrift, Abbat of Fountaines, Antho∣ny Abbat of Geruaur, the Abbat of Riuers, Willi∣am Prior of Birlington, were all put to death: Sir Robert Constable at Hull, ouer the gate called Be∣uerley gate. Aske hanged on a tower at Yorke, La∣dy Bulmer burned in Smithfield, Lord Darcy be∣headed at tower hill, Lord Hussey at Lincolne, and the other suffered at Tiburne. The 26. of August, the Lord Cromwell was made Knight of the Garter. The 12. of October,Prince Ed∣ward borne was borne at Hampton Court, Prince Edward, and Quéene Iane lost her life the fourtéenth of October. Iohn Gresham, Thomas Lewine.Shriues.
Maior.Sir Richard Gresham Mercer. Alwin a Priest, Harsam Customer of Plim∣mouth, and Thomas Euell were hanged and quar∣tered at Tiburne. The 12. of May Fryer Forrest was hanged and burnt in Smithfield, for denying the Kings supre∣macy,1585 An, reg, 30 with him was burnt the image of Daruar Gathering of Wales. The 17. of May was a great fire at S. Margaret Pattens in London, where many houses and nine persons were burned. Edmond Coningsby for counterfeiting the Kings signe Manuel, and Ed∣ward Clifford for the same cause executed at Ty∣burne. Hangman hanged. Bible in e∣uery Church & a Register booke.The first of September was one Cartwell hangman of London, and two other hanged by Clerken well, for robbing a booth in Bartholmew faire. Thomas Cromwell Lord priuie Seale, Vice∣gerent to the K. sent foorth iniunctions to all Bi∣shops, and Curates through the Realme, char∣ging them to see that in euery parish Church the Bible of the largest volume, printed in English, were placed for all men to reade on: And that a booke of Register were also kept in euery Parish Church, wherin should be written euery wedding, Christning and burying. Shriues.William Wilkinson, Nicholas Gibson. Maior.Sir William Forman Haberdasher. Freechole and Almes∣houses at Radcliffe.Auis Gibson, wife to Nicholas Gibson Gro∣cer, by his licence, founded a free Schoole at Rad∣cliffe néere vnto London, she also builded there cer∣taine almeshouses for 14. poore and aged persons.
Henry Marques of Excester,Marques of Deuonshire executed. Earle of Deuon∣shire, Henry Poole, Lord Mountacute and Sir Ed∣ward Neuill, the ninth of Ianuary were beheaded on Tower hill, two Priests, Crofts, Colens, and Holland a Mariner, were hanged and quartered at Tiburne. The 17. of Nouember, the blacke Fryars in London was suppressed, the next day the white Fryars, the Gray Fryars, and the Monks of the Charterhouse. Iohn Lambert was burnt in Smithfield.Blacks Fri∣ers suppres∣sed. Execution in Pauls Church∣yard On Ashwednesday Iohn Potter and William Mannering hanged in Pauls Churchyard, for killing of Roger Cholmeley Esquire in the same place. The third of March, Sir Nicholas Carew Knight of the Garter, and master of the Kings horse, was beheaded at the Tower hill. Margaret Countesse of Sarisbury,1538 An, reg. 13. Gertrude wife to the Marques of Excester, Reignold Poole, sir Adrian Fortescue, and Thomas Dugley Knights of Saint Iohns, and diuers others were attained by Parliament. And all the religious houses in England, suppressed, and not suppressed, were granted to the King for euer. The eight of May the Cittizens of London mu∣stred at the mile end all in bright harnesse,Great mu∣ster at Lon∣don. with cotes of white silke, or cloth, and chaines of gold, in thrée great battels, the number was 15000, be∣sides whiflers and other walkers: who in goodly order passed through London to Westminster, & so through the Sanctuaray, and round about the Parke of Saint Iames, and returned home tho∣rough
Oldborne. The Vicar of Wans∣worth exe∣cuted. Clarken well sup∣pressed.The Vicar of Wansworth with his Chaplaine, his seruant, and Friar Warre, were hanged and quartered at Saint Thomas Waterings. The Nunnery of Clarkenwell, the Nunnery of Haliwell, the Priorie of Saint Marioueries in Southwarke, and Saint Bartholmew in Smith∣field, were suppressed. Shriues.Iohn Faire, Thomas Huntlow. Maior.Sir William Holleys, Mercer. This Sir William Holleys builded the beautifull Crosse in the Citie of Couentry.Couentry Crosse. The Regi∣ster booke of Parish Churches. Abbats of Reading and Gla∣stenbury executed. Pensioners appointed King Hen∣ry married Lady Anne of Cleue. This yeare 1539. the King commanded great English bibles to be kept in euery Church, and al∣so a generall Register booke for Christnings, wed∣dings, and burials, Anno 1539. The Abbat of Reading and two Priests were hanged and quartered at Reading. The same day was Richard Whitting Abbat of Glastenbury han∣ged and quartered on Tower hill, besides his Mo∣nastery, according to an old prophecy. In December were appointed to waite on the King 50. pensioners, or Squires, vnto whom was appointed 50. l. the péece yearely. The third of Ia∣nuary was the Lady Anne of Cleue receiued at Black-heath,1540 and brought to Greenewich, and the sixth of the same moneth married to King Henry.The Crom∣well Earle of Essex. 4. fifteens & a subsidy. An, reg, 32. The thirtéenth of Aprill was Thomas Crom∣well created Earle of Essex, and made great cham∣berlaine of England. In a Parliament was granted to the King a Subsidie of two shillings the pound of lands, and
twelue pence in goods, and foure Fiftéens. The Religious order of Knights of S. Iohns in England, named Knights of the Rhodes,Knights of Rhodes supprest. was dissolued, whose reuenewes were wondrous great. In May was sent to the Tower Doctor Wilson, and Doctor Sampson Bishop of Chicester,Note. for re∣lieuing certaine prisoners, which dnied the kings supremacy. For the same offence Richard Farmer,Richard Farmer in the pre∣munire. Grocer of London, a wealthy man, was commit¦ted to the Marshalsey, attainted in the premunire, and lost all his goods. The 9. of Iuly Thomas Lord Cromwell Earle of Essex committed to the Tower of London,L. Crom∣well be∣headed. K, Henry diuorced. Priests burnt and hanged, & others for denying the Kings supremacy. the 28. of Iuly hee was beheaded on the Tower hill∣with the Lord Walter Hungerford. King Henry was diuorced from Lady Anne of Cleue. The 30. of Iuly Robert Barnes, Thomas Ge∣rard, William Ierome Priestes, were burned in Smithfield The same day Thomas Abell, Edward Powell, and Richard Fetherstone were hanged and quartered for denying the Kings supremacy. The fourth of August were drawne to Tiburne sixe persons, & one led. Laurence Cooke Prior of Don∣caster, William Horne a lay brother of the Charter∣house, Giles Horne Gentleman, Clement Philpot, Edmond Bromham, Darby Kenham, Robert Birde, Geruace Carrow, all put to death for denying the supremacie. The eight of August Lady Katherine Howard was shewed openly as Queene at Hampton Court.K. Henry married a∣gaine.
Dry som∣mer. Note.Great drought and a great death of hote bur∣ning agues and flixes. The salt water flowed a∣boue London bridge. Shriues.William Laxton, Martin Bowes. Maior.Sir William Roch, Draper. 1541 An, reg. 33 Commoti∣on in York∣shire.Ralph Egerton, and Thomas Harman put to death for counterfaiting the Kings great scale. In Aprill certaine persons began a new rebellion in Yorkeshire, which were shortly taken and put to execution in diuers places, of which, Leigh, Tater∣sall, and Thronton, were put to death at London, Sir Iohn Neuell Knight, and ten persons more were put to death at Yorke. The mise∣ry of Bar∣barosso K. of Argier, and how hee obtai∣ned the Crowne.Barbarossa the King of Argier, his mother was a Christian, and in his youth through extreame pouertie was constrained to wander like a pedler, carrying chéeses and other like meane commodi∣ties into Spaine to get a poore liuing, and after that he gaue himselfe to Piracy vpon the sea, by which theft he enriched himselfe, and then consor∣ted with other strong théeues and robbers, by meanes whereof hee grew very strong, and well furnished with many exiles and wicked persons, and then hee assailed and surprised Argier which is in Mauritania, otherwise called Barbaria; then he ioyned with the great Turke, and made fierce warres by sea, wherein hee was wondrous fortunate: he did very great damage vnto Spaine, and chased Foratine Muleasem, the king of Tunis, out of his kingdome; but not being able to Main∣taine his fortunes against the Emperour Carolus quintus, the King of Tunis and others, by reason
hée wanted money and skilfull warriours, the forenamed Muleasem in the yeare 1535. was by Carolus quintus reestablished in his Kingdome of Tunis:The Chri∣stian reli∣gion prea∣ched in Tunis. for which kindnesse Muleasem permitted the preaching of the Christian faith, and in the yeare 1541. Carolus and Muleasem made a strong attempt, either to take or to extirpe the forenamed Barbarosso out of his Kingdome of Argier, but it tooke no effect: yet neuerthelesse, forasmuch as they had crost the sea to that intent, they meant to continue the siege which they had already planted before his chiefe city bordering vpon the Sea: but vpon the sudden there arose a most great and ter∣rible tempest, with fierce showers of haile and raine, which did the assailants extreame annoy∣ance; which the Argierians well perceiuing, issued forth with great courage, & made as great slaugh∣ter of their enemies, who were in a manner bea∣, and almost ouercome with the fury of the tempest: this was done about the beginning of October the yeare last mentioned: the Emperour hereupon was constrained instantly to retire with mighty losse of men, ships and gallies. Read Gua∣ and Paulus Iouius. The Countesse of Sarisbury was beheaded in the tower of London. Damport and Chapman,Countesse of Sarisbu∣ry behea∣ded. Damport & Chapman hanged, L. Dacres of the South put to death two of the Kings guard, were hanged at Greenewich in robbery. The 28. of Iune, Lord Leonard Gray, Deputie  Ireland, was beheaded on the Tower hill. The me day were hanged at Saint Thomas Wa∣ings, Mantile, Royden, and Frowds, Gentlemen,
for spoile and murther they had done in Nicholas Pelhams Parke, the Lord of Dacres of the South being in company, and on St. Peters day the Lord Dacres led led from the Tower to Tiburne, and there hanged. Progresse to Yorke.In August the King tooke his Progresse to¦wards Yorke. Shriues.Rowland Hill, Henry Sucley. Maior.Sir Mchaell Dormer, Mercer. Fire at El∣sing spittle.On Christmas euen at night began a great fire in the house called Elsing spittle nigh Cripplegate in London, which at that time was the house of Sir Iohn Williams. Master of the Kings Iewels, where many of those Iewels were burnt, & more imbezeled. The Lady Katherine Howard whom the King had married, for her vnchast liuing com∣mitted with Thomas Culpeper and Francis Deham,K. Henry King of Ireland. Qu Katha: beheaded. A maide boilded. was by Parliament attainted, Clpeper and Derham were put to death at Tiburne. The 2▪ of Ianuary the King was proclaimed king of Ire∣land. The 13. of February were beheaded with the Tower, the Lady Howard, otherwise called Queene Katherine, and the Lady Rochford. 1542 An, reg, 4. The Earle of Desmond the great Onele. Duke of Norffolke entred Scotland.The 17. of March, Margaret Dauie was boil in Smithfield, for poysoning thrée housholds th she had dwelled in. In the moneth of August, Iames Earle of Desmond in Ireland, submitted himselfe to the King The first of October the great Onele of Ireland was created Earle of Tiron, and his base  Mathewe Onele Barron of Dongaman.  Duke of Northfolke entred Scotland the 21.
October, burning & wasting all the Marches, and there tarried till the midst of Nouember. Sir Henry Hublethorne, Henry Amcots.Shriues. Iohn Coates, Salter.Maior. The King of Scots made a Roade into Eng∣land, and did much harme, but at the last Sir Tho∣mas Wharton, sir William Musgraue, with a few of the borderers met the Scots, where they being in number 15000. were ouerthrowne,Scots ouer∣throwne. Maxwell. 1543 An, reg, 35. in which con∣ict was taken the Lord Maxwell, the Earles of lencarne and Sassilles, with all the Captaines of the Army, & on St. Thomas euen were brought into the Tower of London. At new-yeares-tide they were sent home againe. The third of Iune the Obrine a Lord in Ire∣land, and diuers of the wild Irish submitted them to King Henry,K. Henry married. the said Obrine was created Earle of Clawdicard. The 12.K. Henry married againe. An Army into Lan∣dersey. of Iuly King Henry married Lady Katherine Parre, late wife to the Lord Latimer. King Henry, sent ouer 6000. men to Landersey, hither also came the Emperour with a great ar∣my, and shortly after came downe the French K. with a great Army, and offered to giue battaile to the Emperour, by reason whereof the siege was raised. Anthony Person, Robert Testwood, and Henry Fil∣er were burnt at Windsor. A great pestilence was at London,Tearme at S, Albons. and there∣re Michaelmas terme was adiourned to Saint Albons. Iohn Towles, Richard Dobs Shriues.
Maiors.Sir William Bowyer Draper, Sir Ra. Warren. At Hallontide a roade was made into Scot∣land by the Garrison there, who burned 60. villa∣ges, and tooke great preyes. This yeare chanced foure Eclipses, one of the Sunne the 24.4. Eclip. of Ianuary, & thrée of the Moone. Edward Seymer Earle of Hertford was made Lieutenant of the North, and sent thither with an army. Germain Gardiner.Germaine Gardiner and Larke Parson of Cheal∣sey, were executed at Tiburne for denying the Kings supremacy, with them was executed one Singleton, and shortly after Ashby. 1544 House blowen vp. Sir Iohn Dudley. An, reg, 36.The third of Aprill a Gunpowder house in east Smithfield was blowne vp, and therein burned 5. men, a boy, and a woman. Sir Iohn Dudley, Vicount Lisle, high Admirall of England, arriued with his Fléet of 200. saile in the Frith of Scotland, where he landed diuers of his men, he landed the residue at Lieth, and from thence marched in three great battailes, whereof the said Lord Admirall led the vaward, the Ear of Shrewsbury the rereward, and Edward Se∣mer Earle of Hertford, Lieutenant generall of the battaile. Here they found the Scots to the num∣ber of 6000. horsemen, besides many footmen rdy to haue stopped their passage,Lieth ta∣ken and spoiled. Edenbo∣rough burnt. but after certaine shotte on both sides, they suddenly leauing their artillerie fledde towards Edenbrough: then the Englishmen entred the town of Lieth, where th found such riches as they thought had not been in any towne of Scotland. The next day our army
went towards Edenbrough, where they beat the Scots from their Ordinance, and so entred the Canigate, and there slew a great number of the Scots, and set fire on the towne. The Letany or Procession was by the King commanded to be vsed in English in euery Parish Church.Procession in English. Proclamation was made for the inhaunsing of gold to 48. shillings,Coines in∣haunced. Base mo∣nie coined. and siluer to foure shillings the ounce. Also the King caused to be coined base monies. After Whitsontide the Duke of Norffolke and the Lord Priuie seale, with a great armie tooke their voyage toward France, and besieged Mut∣terell. The Duke of Suffolke with many other Noble men passed the seas, and encamped before Boloin on the east side. The 13. of Iuly,K H. went to Boloin. King Henry with a goodly com∣pany passed into France, and incamped on the North side of Boloine, after whose comming the towne was so sore battered with Gunshot, that after a moneths siege, the Captaine sent word to the King that they would yéeld the Towne, vpon condition that all which were within, might de∣part with bagge and baggage, and the Bulloiners departed to the number of foure thousand, foure hundred fifty and foure. The 25. of September the K. with his Nobili∣tie entred into high Boloine, & after turned from thence, landed at Douer the first of October. Iohn Wilford, Andrew Iudde.Shriues. Sir William Laxton, Grocer.Maior.
free schools at Oundale.This William Laxton founded a frée Schoole at Dundale in Northampton-shire, he also builded there certaine almeshouses for seuen poore almes men. Prise taken.This yeare was taken by the Kings ships of the English cost, the number of 300. French ships and more, so that the Gray Friars Church in London was laide full of wine, the Austen Friars & blacke Friars were laid full of herring & other fish, that were taken going into France. A beneuo∣lence de∣manded.The king demanded a beneuolence towards his Wars in France and Scotland. The Lord Chan∣cellour, the Duke of Suffolke & other of the kings Counsell sate at Baynards Castle, where they first called before them the Maior and Aldermen,An Alder∣man sent into Scot∣land. &c. And because Richard Read Alderman would not agrée to pay as they set him, hée was comman∣ded vpon paine of death forthwith to serue the K. in his warres of Scotland: who departed from London the 23.S. W. Roch sent to the Fleete. of Ianuary. Also sir William Roche Alderman, for words of displeasure taken by the Kings Counsell, was by them sent to the Fléete where he remained till passion Sunday. A fained miracle.A Priest did penance at Pauls Crosse, & there confessed, that himselfe saying Masse, pricke his finger and be bled the Corporas and Altar cloth,A false ac∣cuser set on the pillory, and well marked to be knowne. meaning to haue made the people belieue, that the miraculous host had bled which hee had consecrated. The 13. of February a Priest was set on the pillory in Cheape, and burnt in both cheekes with the letters F. and A. & a paper on his head, where∣in
was written, For false Accusing, which iudge∣ment was giuen by the Lord Chancellour in the Starre Chamber. A notable example of Iustice. In the beginning of March a rode was made in∣to Scotland by the English men, who went so far,A rode in∣to Scotland that a great Army of Scots be set them with thrée battailes▪ where the English men for the most part were slaine and taken at Panyer hough, among whom, Sir Ralph Eure, Lord Warden of the Cast Marches was slaine,Alderman of London taken pri∣soner. and Richard Reade Al∣oman of London with others taken prisoners by the Scots. Trinity Tearme was adiourned because of the Warres.1545 An, reg. 37 The French kings Nauy comming out of New uen and Deepe, arriued in Sussex afore bright Hsted, where they set certaine of their Soul∣diers a land, but the beacons were fired, and the men came downe so thicke, that the French men . The 19.Men burnt in the hedg∣hogge. of Iuly by misfortune of shooting off a ne in one of the Hedgehogges a shippe before Westminster, a firken of gunpowder fired, & slew en men, and the eight was drowned. The 20. of Iuly the king being at Portsmouth,Mary Rose was drow∣ned. a goodly shippe called the Marie Rose, with Sir George Carrow the Captaine and many other Gentlemen was drowned in the midst of the ha∣en. The 21. of Iuly, the French Gallies came afore orhmouth hauen, and landed certaine of their y in the Isle of Wight, and there burned and
incamped about two thousād men, but they went soone driuen away with losse of their Captaine and many souldiers. French men landed at new ha∣uen in Sus∣sex.Within few dayes after, the whole fléete remo∣ued from the Wight vnto a place in Sussex, cal∣led New hauen, and there landed many captaines and souldiers, who by the valiantnesse of the gen∣tlemen and yeomen were slaine and drowned, and the rest hardly recouered their Ships and Gallies. Earle of Hertford sent into Scotland. L. Admi∣rall burnt Treyport.In August the Earle of Hertford was sent in∣to Scotland with an Army of 12000. men, when he destroied diuers townes. The 9. of September sir Iohn Dudley Lord Ad∣mirall of England landed with sixe thousand men at Treyport in Normandy, and there burnt the towne and Abbie, and thirtie ships, with a bar that lay in the hauen. S. Giles Church burnt. Shriues. Maior. Chantries. Colledges, and Hospi∣tals giuen to the King.The 12. of September the Church of S. Gilen without Creplegate of London was burnt. George Barne, Ralph Alley. Sir Martin Bowes Goldsmith. A Subsidie of two shillings eight pence in the pound of goods, and foure shillings of land. All Colledges, frée Chappels, Chantries, a hospitals, were committed to the Kings order. 1546 The stewes put downe.The Stewes in Southwarke was put dow The 27. of Aprill being Wednesday in Ea wéeke, W. Foxley Pot-maker for the mint in th Tower of London fell a sléepe, who could not b wakned with pricking,Note this sleeper. cramping, or otherwis till the first day of the next tearme, which was  14. daies, & 15. nights. The cause of his thus slping
could not be knowne, though the same were diligently searched for by the Kings Physitians and other learned men, yea the King himselfe ex∣amining the said W. Foxley, and hée was in all points found as hee had slept but one night, and was liuing till the yéere of our Lord 1587. The 13. of Iune being Whitsunday, a peace was proclaimed betwéene the Kings of England and of France. The 16.Anne As∣kew and o∣thers burnt. of Iuly were burned in Smithfield for the Sacrament, Anne Askewe, Iohn Lassels, Ni∣cholas Ouerden Priest, Iohn Adlam Tailor, and Doctor Shaxton sometime Bishop of Salisburie preached at the same fire, and there recanted, per∣swading them to doe the like, but they would not. The 21. of August came into England Flaud,Admirall of France came to London. high Admirall of France, who brought with him the Sacre of Déepe, and 12. Gallies: he landed at the Tower wharse, where he was honourably re∣ceiued, & brought to the Bishop of Londons Pal∣lace, where he lodged two nights, and then rode to Hampton Court where the king lay. By the way Prince Edward receiued him with a company of 500. coates of veluet with one sléeue of cloath of gold, & halfe the coate imbrodered with gold, there was in all to the number of eight hundred horses. In September the water of Finsburie was brought to the Conduits at London wall.Conduit in Lothbury. Saint Stephens in Colemanstréete, and Saint Margarets in Lothburie. Richard Geruace, Thomas Cortese.Shrieues. Henry Huberthorne, Marchant Tailor.Maior.
Duke of Norfolke sent to the Tower.The 12. of December, Thomas Duke of Nor∣folke, and Henry Earle of Surrey his sonne was sent to the Tower. The third of Ianuary the Church of the late Gray Friars in London was opened. And that day preached at Pauls Crosse the Bishop of Ro∣chester, who declared the Kings gift to the Ciie of London, for the relieuing of the poore people, to wit, S. Bartholmew Spittle, the Church of the Gray Friars, and two Parish Churches, the one of Saint Nicholas in the shambles, the other St. Edwine in Newgate market,K. Henry his gift to the Cittie of London. all to bee made one Parish Church of the Gray Friars Church, and in lands he gaue for the maintenance of the same, fiue hundred markes by the yeare for ouer, to maintaine a Quire of Singing-men, viz. eight in number. Henry Howard Earle of Surrey, was beheaded on the Tower kill the 19. of Ianuary. Earle of Surry be∣headed. K. Henry deceased.The 28. of Ianuary King Henry deceased, ap∣pointed his first heirs to his son, Prince Edward: the second, Lady Mary, his daughter by Quéene Katharine: and the third, Lady Elizabeth, by the Quéene Anne Bolein. Hee deceased when hee had raigned 37. yeares, nine moneths, and odde daies, and was buried at Windsor.
Edward the sixt. Edward the sixt beganne his Raigne the 24. of Ianuary,An, reg, 1. 1546. when hee was but nine yeares old. King Hen∣ry his father by his will had appointed for his Priuy Counsell, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Chancel∣lor, the Bishop of Durham, with other to the number of sixtéene.Earle of Hertford L. Protec∣tor. K E. made Knight. L. Maior of London made knight. The first of February the Earle of Hertford was elected to be Protector of the Kings person. The 6. of Fe∣bruary the L. Protector in the tower of London, endued K. Edward with the order of Knighthood, and then Henry Hoblethorne, L. Maior of London knéeling downe, the King made him Knight. The 17. of February▪ sir Edward Seimer Earle of Hert∣ford, and L. Protector was created Duke of So∣merset, the L. Parre Earle of Essex, Marques of Northampton, Sir Iohn Dudley, Lord Lisle,Duke and Lords created. Lord Admirall Earle of Warwicke, Sir Thomas Wrio∣thesley, Lord Chancellor, Earle of Southampton, sir Thomas Seimer was made Lord of Sudley, and
high Admirall, Sir Richard Rich was made Lord Rich, Sir William Willowby, Lord Willowby, Sir Ed∣mond Sheiffield, Lord Sheiffield. K. Edward crowned, King Edward was Crowned at Westminster on the 20. of Februarie. 1557 D. Smith recanted.The 15. of May Doctor Smith recanted at Pauls Crosse. The Lord Protector and the rest of the Coun∣sell, sent Commissioners into all parts of the Realme, willing them to take all Images out of their Churches,Images for∣bidden. Procession forbidden. for the auoiding of Idolatry, with them were sent diuers Preachers to per∣swade the people from their beades, and at that time Procession was forbidden. Edward Duke of Somerset, and Iohn Earle of Warwicke, with a Noble Armie were sent into Scotland,Musklebo∣row field. and at a place called Muskleborough, the English men and Scots met, where betwéene them the 10. of September▪ was fought a cruell battaile: the victorie whereof fell to the English∣men, and of the Scots were slaine 1400, and ta∣ken prisoners 1500. 1. Rich L. ChancellerRichard Lord Rich was made Lord Chancel∣lour. Shrieues.Thomas VVhite, Robert Chersey, Maior.Sir Iohn Gresham Mercer. This Sir Iohn Gresham gaue to euery ward in London, ten pound to the poore, and to sixe score poore men and women, euery of them thrée yards of cloth for a gowne, of eight or nine shillings the yard: he gaue also to maidens marriages, and to the Hospitals in London, about 200. pounds in
money. He founded a frée schoole at Holt, a mar∣ket towne in Norfolke. All Colledges, Chauntries, frée Chappels, Hos∣pitals, Fraternities, Brotherhoods, and Guildes were granted to the King, and an Act made for the receiuing of the Sacrament in both kinds. The Church seruice was sung in English.1548 An, reg, 2. A goodly watch at Midsomer. The watch in London at Midsomer, was now againe vsed both on the Euen of Saint Iohn and Saint Peter, in as comely order as it had béene ac∣customed, which watch was greatly beautified by the number of more then thrée hundred dimilan∣ces and light horsemen,The siege of Had∣dington. that were prepared by the Citizens to bee sent to the rescue of the towne of Haddington in Scotland. On Saint Peters day Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester preached before the King,Bishop of Winche∣ster sent to the Tower. A priest of Cornwall executed. for the which he was sent to the Towre. The seuenth of Iuly a Priest was hanged and quartered in Smithfield, for that he had slaine M. Body, one of the Kings cōmissioners, others of his societie were put to death in other places. A great pestilence was in London,A great pestilence at London. wherefore commandement was giuen to all Curates and o∣ther, that no corps should be buried before sixe of the clocke in the morning, nor after sixe at night, and that there should at the buriall of euery corps be rung one Bell at the least, by the space of thrée quarters of an houre. William Lock, Iohn Ailife Knights, Shriues. Sir Henry Amcots Fishmonger, Maior. The 16. of September▪ S. Annes Church with∣in
in Aldersgate was burnt. S. Annes Church burnt. An, reg, 3. Lord Tho∣mas Sey∣mer behea∣ded.The 16. of Ianuary, Thomas Seimer, Lord Ad∣mirall, & brother to the Lord Protector, was sent to the tower of London. and the 20. of March be∣headed on the Tower hill. The 23. of Aprill sixe houses at Broken wharfe were burnt. 1549 Fire at bro∣ken wharfe. Commoti∣on in So∣merset shire.In May by meanes of a Proclamation for en∣closures, the commons of Somersetshire and Lin∣colneshire made a commotion, and brake vp cer∣taine Parkes of sir W. Harbardes, and Lord Stur∣tons, but sir William Harbarde flewe and executed many of those rebels. In Iuly the Commons of Essex and Kent, Suffolke and Norfolke, rose a∣gainst inclosures, and pulled downe diuers parks and hooses. Commo∣tion in Cornwall.Also the Commons of Cornewall and Deuon∣shire, required not onely that the inclosures might be disparked, but also to haue their old Religion: these besieged the Cittie of Excester, which was valiantly defended. Iohn Lord Russell, Lord Pri∣uie seale with a number of souldiers entred the Citie of Excester the fill of August▪ slew and tooke prisoners of the Rebels more then 4. thousand, and after hanged diuers of them in the towne & coun∣try about. The L. Gray also with strangers, horse∣men,Rebels subdued. in diuers conflicts slewe many people, and spoiled the Country. The last of Iuly W. Lord Marques of North∣hampton, entred the Citie of Norwich, and on the next morning the rebels also entred the towne, burned part thereof, put the Lord Marques to
flight, and flew the Lord Sheffield. Diuers persons were apprehended as aiders of the foresaid rebels,Martiall law. of the which one was han∣ged within Aldgate, and another at the Bridge foote toward Southwarke, both on Mary Mag∣dalens day. In the beginning of August,The french Kings gul∣lies inuaded Gernsey and Iersea. the French king determined to take the Isles of Gernsey and Iersey, did set there suddenly vpon our ships with a great number of Gallies, but were so manfully encountred by the Kings Nauy, that with the losse of a thousand men and great spoile of Gal∣lies, they were forced to retire into France. The eight of August the French Ambassadors gaue a defiance to the Lord Protector, whereupon all Frenchmen with their goods,French men apprehen∣ded. being no Deni∣zens, were apprehended. The rebels in Norfolke and Suffolke encam∣ped themselues at mount Surrey neare vnto Norwich,The Earle of War∣wicke went against the rebels. against whom sir Iohn Dudley Earle of Warwicke went with an Army, where mee∣ting with the rebels, they had thought all to haue died in the place, but God brought it to passe, that as well there, as in all other places, they were partly by power constrained, partly by pro∣mise of their pardon perswaded to submit them∣selues. The Earle of Warwicke entred the Ci∣tie of Norwich the 27. of August, when hee had flaine aboue fiue thousand of rebels, and taken their chiefe Captaine Robert Ket of Windam Tanner. The 20.Bishop of London depriued. of September Edmond Bonner Bi∣shop of London, was sent from Lambeth to the
Marshalsey, for a sermon, which hee preached at Pauls Crosse on the first of December. On the first of October hee was depriued of his Bisho∣pricke, and sent againe to the Marshalsey for dis∣obeying the Kings order in religion. Richard Yorke, Iohn Chester, Shriues. L. protector brought to the Tower.The 24. of October, the Duke of Somerset was brought from Windsor, riding through Old∣borne in at Newgate, and so to the tower of Lon∣don, accompanied with diuers Lords and Gentle∣men, with thrée hundred horses. The Lord Maior, Sir Ralph Warren, Sir Iohn Gresham, master Re∣corder, sir William Locke, and both the Shriues, with other knights, sitting on their horses against Soper-lane, all the officers with halbarts, and from Oldborne bridge to the Tower, certaine Aldermen or their Deputies on horsebacke in e∣uery stréete, with a number of householders stan∣ding with billes as hée passed. There was with him committed to the Tower, Sir Michael Stan∣op, Sir Thomas Smith, sir Iohn Thin Knight, Wolfe and Gray of Reading. K. E. rode through London.The 17. of October, King Edward came from Hampton Court to his place in Southwarke, and there dined, hee made master Yorke one of the Shriues, Knight, and then rode through the Citie to Westminster. Charitable deedes of sir Rowland  gift to Christs Hospitall.Sir Rowland Hill Mercer, the twentie eight of October, Maior. This sir Rowland Hill caused to bee made di∣uers causeyes, bridges, and frée schooles. He gaue to the Hospitall of Christs Church in London,
fiue hundred pound in ready money, and one hun∣dred pound at his decease. The twentie nine of Nouember, Robert Kete and William Kete his bro∣ther, were deliuered out of the Tower of Lon∣don, to sir Edmond Windam, Shriue of Norffolke,R. Kete and W. Kete hanged. to bee conuaied to Norwich, where R. Kete was hanged in chaines on the top of Norwich Castle, and W. Kete likewise hanged on the top of Win∣dam stéeple. In December the Scots tooke Bur∣tierag in Scotland,Holds in Scotland lost. and other holds then posses∣sed by Englishmen, where they slew man, woman and child, except Sir Iohn Luteroll the Captaine, whom they tooke prisoner. The 19. of Ianuary were murdered by S. Sepulchers Church without Newgate in London, two Captaines that had serued the King at Boline and elsewhere, she one was Sir Peter Gambo, the other Filicirga,Peter Gam∣bo murde∣red. which murders were committed by Charles Ganaro a Fleming, who came post from Barwicke to doe that acte: on the morrow he with three of his com∣panions were taken in Smithfield, and sent to Newgate, and the foure and twentieth of Ianua∣ry, they were all foure, Charles Gauaro,Gauaro & others han∣ged. Balthasar Gauaro, Nicholas Disalueron, & Francis Deualasco hanged in Smithfield. The 27. of Ianuary,An, reg, 4. Rebels hanged. Humphry Arundell Esquire Thomas Holmes, Winslow and Burie, Captaines of the Rebels in Deuonshire, were hanged and quar∣tered at Tiburne. The sixt of February the Duke of Somerset was deliuered out of the Tower. The tenth of February one Bell was hanged
and quartered at Tiburne, foe mouing a new re∣bellion in Suffolke. The house of Fernese made dukes of Parma.This yeare 1550. died Pope Paul the third, for∣merly called Alexander Fernese, hee was enstalled Pope, Anno 1534. in his youth, hee had two chil∣dren, viz. Peter Lewes, and the Lady Constance: This Pope ordained the general councels at Mā∣ta, at Vicentia, and Trent: he gaue the Empe∣rour fiue Gallies well furnished for his warres a∣gainst Barbarosso, hée met the Emperour Carolus Quintus, and Francis the French King at Nice in Prouince, to make peace betwéene them for ten yeares, and concluded a marriage betwéene his Nephew Octauio, and the Emperours daughter, widowe to Alexander de medicis, late Duke of Florence, and after that with consent of the Em∣perour, he made his forenamed sonne Peter Lewes Duke of Parma and Placentia, he died at foure∣score and foure yeares of age. Peace pro∣claimed. The liber∣ties of southwarke purchased.The last of March, a generall peace was pro∣claimed betwéene the King of England, France, the Emperour and the Scots. This time the Lord Maior of London & the Aldermen purchased all the liberties of South warke, which was in the Kings hands. The 12. of Aprill, D. Nicholas Ridley was en∣stalled Bishop of London.Boloine yeelded. Ioan But∣cher burnt. Rebels ex∣ecuted. The 25. of Aprill, the towne of Boloine was yéelded to the French. The second of May, Ioan Butcher was burnt in Smithfield for heresie, that Christ tooke no flesh of the Virgine Marie, Richard Lion, Goddard
Gorran and Richard Ireland were executed the 14. of May, for attempting a new rebellion in Kent. Trinitie Tearme was adiourned till Michael∣masse.Tearme ad∣iourned. In the moneth of August, a Millar of Battle∣bridge was set on the Pillory in Cheape, and had both his eares cut off, for seditious words by him spoken against the Duke of Somerset. Also Grig a Poulter that had béene taken for a cunning man in curing of diseases among wo∣men, being proued to be a craftie deceiuer, was on the eight of september set on the Pillorie in south∣warke, and the Lord Maior and the Aldermen ri∣ding through the faire, hee asked them and all the Citizens forgiuenesse. Augustine Hide, Iohn Lion, Shriues. Sir Andrew Iud, Skinner, Maior. This Sir Andrew Iud erected one notable frée schools at Tonbridge in Kent, wherein he brought vp and nourished in learning great store of youth, as well bred in that shire, as brought from other countries adioyning. Hee also builded almeshou∣ses for poore people nigh S. HelensAlmesnou∣ses by Saint Helens in Bishopsgate streete. Church in Lon∣don, & gaue lands to the Company of Skinners in the same Citie, amounting to the value of 60. l. 3. s. 8 d. the yeare, for the which they be bound to pay 20. l. to the schoolemen, 8. l. to the Vsher of the free schoole at Tonbridge, yearely for euer, and 4. shillings the wéeke to 6. poore people at S. Helens, 8. d. the péece wéekely, and 25. shillings 4. d. the yeare in coles amongst them for euer. More, Alice Smith of London widdow, late
wife to Thomas Smith of the same Citie Esquire, and Customer of the Port of London, in her last testament bequeathed landes to the value of 15. pounds by yeare for euer, to the Skinners, for the augmenting of the pensions of the poore, inha∣biting the eight almes-houses, erected by the saide sir Andrew Iud her father, in the said St. Helenes in Bishopsgate-stréete. She also hath giuen to the Hospitals, and to the poore of other parrishes, and good Preachers, the summe of 300. pound. As also to poore Schollers in the Vniuersities, the summe of 200. pound. Of which her last will and testa∣ment, she made her sonne Thomas Smith late shriue of London, and Richard and Robert Smith her Ex∣ecutors, who haue performed the same according to her godly and charitable mind. Arden mur∣dered.On Saint Valentines day at Feuersham in Kent, one Arden a Gentleman was murdered by consent of his wife, for the which fact she was the 14. of March burnt at Canterbury. Michael, ma∣ster Ardens man was hanged in chaines at Fe∣nersham, and a maiden burnt: Mosbie and his sister were hanged in Smithfield at London: Greene which had fled, came againe certaine yéeres after, and was hanged in chaines in the high way against Feuersham, and blacke Will the Ruffian that was hired to doe the act, burnt at Flushing in Zeland. Bishop of Winche∣ster depri∣ued. 1551The 14. of February, D. Stephen Gardiner Bi∣shop of Winchester was depriued of his Bishop∣pricke, and so committed to the tower againe. In∣to his place was translated Doctor Poinet.
The 24. of Aprill,An Arrian burnt. a Dutch man was burnt in Smithfield for an Arrian. The 25. of May an Earthquake at Blechingly,Earthquake Godstone, Titsey, Rigate, Croidon, Benington, Albery, and diuers other places in Southery. The 9. of Iuly,First fall of base money. the base monies coined in the time of King Henry the eight, and Edward the sixt, was proclaimed, the shillings to goe for 9. pence, the groat for thrée pence, which tooke effect imme∣diately. The sweating sicknesse began in London the ninth of Iuly, which was so terrible,Sweating sicknes. that people being in best health, were suddenly taken & dead in 24. houres, and twelue or lesse. And it is to bée noted, that this mortalitie fell chiefely on men of the best age, as betwéene thirty and forty yeares. Also it followed Englishmen, as well within the Realme, as in strange Countries, the first wéeke died in London 806. persons.Second fall of base money. The seuentéenth of August, the shilling which of late was called downe to nine pence, was called to sixe pence, the great to two pence, the halfe great to a peny, the peny to an halfe peny. Iohn Lambert, Iohn Cowper, Shriues. The sixtéenth of October, E. Seymer, Duke of Somerset, the Lord Gray of Wilton, Sir Ralph Vane, Sir T. Palmer, Sir Miles Partridge, Sir Mi∣chael Stanhop, Sir T. Arundell Knights, and di∣uers other gentlemen were brought to the tower of London: the next morrow, the Dutches of So∣merset was also brought to the tower.Liberties of the Stil∣yard seased. The liber∣ties of the stilyard were seased into ye kings hands
Maior.Sir Robert Dabs Skinner the 28. of October. New coine.The 30. of October was proclaimed a new coine both of siluer and gold, souerains of 30. shillings, Angels of 10.Muster of horsemen. Duke of Somerset beheaded. An, reg 6. Queene of Scots rode thorow London. Sir Ralph Vaine and other exe∣cuted. 1552 shillings, &c. The 6. of Nouember the old Quéene of Scots rode through London to∣ward Scotland, after shée had laine foure dayes in the Bishop of Londons Pallace. The first of De∣cember the Duke of Somerset was arraigned at Westminster, and condemned of fellony. The se∣uenth of December was a muster of horsemen be∣fore the King at S. Iames. The 22. of Ianuary Ed∣ward duke of somerset was beheaded on the tower hill. The 26. of February sir R. Vine, and sir M. Partridge were hanged on the tower hill. Sir M. Stanhope, with sir Thomas Aundell, were beheaded there. The last of April a house neare to the tower of London, with thrée last of powder, was blowne vp, the gunpowder makers being 15. in number, were all slaine. The 16. of May was a muster of horsemen be∣fore the King at Gréenewich. The 26. of Iuly began the preparing of the Gray Friars house in London, for the poore fatherlesse children,Christs Hospitall. and that moneth began the repairing of S. Thomas Hospitall in Southwarke, for poore im∣potent and lame persons. A monster.The third of August at Middleton, 11. miles from Oxford, a woman brought foorth a childe which had two perfect bodies from the Nauill vp∣ward, and were so ioyned together at the Nauill, that when they were laid in length, the one head and bodie was East, the other West, the legges of
both the bodies grew to it at midst, where the bo∣dies ioyned, and had but one issue for the execre∣ments: they liued 18. dayes, and were women children. The 8. of August were taken at Quéene brough 3. great fishes called Dolphins:Great fishes and the wéeke following, at Blacke wall were sixe more taken and brought to London. This moneth of August began the great prouision for the poore in London, toward the which euery man was contributary, and gaue certaine money in hand, and couenanted to giue a certaine wéekely. The 7.Great fishes of October were two great fishes called Whirlepooles, taken at Grauesend. William Garrard, Iohn Maynard. Shriues. Sir George Barne, Haberdasher, Maior. This Sir George Barne gaue a Windmill in Flusbury fielde to the Haberdashors of London,Charitable deeds of six G. Barnes. the profits rising thereof to bee distributed to the poore almes people at the same company. The seuenth of October were thrée great fish∣es called Whirepooles taken at Grauesend,Great fishes taken. which were drawne vppe to the Kings Bridge at West∣minster. In this moneth the King damanded of the mar∣chants aduenturers, by way of prost,Money bo∣rowed of the Mer∣chants. of euery broad cloth then shipped to Borwins mart, twen∣ty shillings sterling, to be paid at Anwerpe for cer∣taine debt there, and they to haue the Kings hand for the repaiment thereof, which did at that time mount to more then fortie and eight thousand pound.
The new seruice in English.The first of Nouember being the feast of all S. the new seruice Booke, called the Booke of com∣mon prayer, began in Pauls Church, and the like through the Citie, the Bishop of London, Doctor Ridley executed the seruice in the forenoone, and preached at Pauls Crosse in the afternoone. First chil∣dren in Christs Hospitall.The 23. of Nouember the children were taken into the hospital of the gray Friars, called Christs Hospitall. And also sicke and poore people into the Hospitall of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, in which two places the children and poore people should haue meat, drinke, lodging, and cloth of the almes of the Citie. On Christmas day in the afternoone, when the Lord Maior and Aldermen rode to Pauls, the children of Christs Hospitall stood from St.First shew of children in Christs Hospitall. Lau∣rence lane in Cheape towards Pauls, all in russet cotton; the masters of the hospitall formost, next the Physitians and Surgeons, which children were in number 340. King Edward kept his Christmas with open houshold at Gréenewich,Lord of merry dis∣ports. George Ferrers Gentle∣man being Lord of merry disports al the xii. daies, who so pleasantly and wisely behaued himselfe, that the King had great delight in his pastimes. On the fourth of Ianuary the saide Lord of merry disports came by water to the Tower, where hee entred, and after rode through Tower stréete, where he was met and receiued by Serge∣ant Vaus, Lord of misrule to master Iohn Mainard, one of the Shriues of London, & so conducted tho∣row the Cittie with a great company of young
Lords and Gentlemen, to the house of sir George Barne Lord Maior, where he with the chiefe of his company dined, and at his departure the Lord Maior gaue him a standing Cuppe with a couer, siluer and gilt, of the value of x. pound: the resi∣due of his Gentlemen and seruants dined at other Aldermens houses, and with the Shrieues. In the Moneth of Ianuary the King fell sicke of a cough, which grieuously increased,An. reg. 7. and at the last ended in a consumption of the lights. The first of March began a Parliament at Westminster, and brake vp on the 31. of March,Parliament, 1553. Subsidie. then being Good-friday, a subsidie was granted of 4. shillings the pound lands, and two shillings eight pence goods. The third of Aprill, being Munday after Ea∣ster day, the children of Christs Hospitall in Lon∣don, came from thence through the City to the sermon at saint Mary spittle, all cloathed in pln∣ket coats with red caps, and the mayden children in the same liuery with karchiefes, all which were there placed on the scaffold of eight stages, and there sate the Sermon time. The tenth of Aprill the Lord Maior was sent for to the Court, and at that time the King gaue to him for a workhouse for the poore and idle per∣sons of the Citie of London,Bridewell giuen to the Citie of London. The Sauoy suppressed. Voiage to Muscouie. his place of Bride∣well, and seuen hundred marks lands of the Sa∣uoy rents, with all the beds and bedding of the Hospitall of the Sauoy, toward the maintenance of the said workehouse. The 20. of May, by the encouragement of one
Sebastian Cabot, thrée great ships well furnished, were sent forth for the aduenture of the vnknown voiage to Muscouia and other east parts of the North seas. K. Edward deceased.King Edward being about the age of sixtéene yeares ended his life at Gréenewich on the sixt of Iuly, when he had raigned 6. yeares, 5. moneths, and odde daies, and was buried at Westminster. The tenth of Iuly was proclamation made of the death of King Edward, and how he had ordai∣ned that the Lady Iane, daughter to Francis Dut∣chesse of Suffolke,Lady Iane proclamed Queene. (which Lady Iane was marri∣ed to the Lord Gilford Dudley, fourth sonne to the Duke of Northumberland) should be heire to the Crowne of England. The 11. of Iuly Gilbert Pot, Drawer to Ninion Sanders Vintner,Gilbert Pot punished in Cheape. dwelling at Saint Iohns head within Ludgate, was set on the pillory in Cheape, with both his eares nailed and cleane cut off, for words speaking at the time of the Proclamation of the Lady Iane. Lady Ma∣ry fled.Lady Mary eldest daughter to King Henry the eight, fled into Framingham Castle in Suffolke, where the people in the country almost wholly re∣sorted to her. In Oxford Sir Iohn Williams, in Buckingham∣shire, Sir Edmond Pecham, and in diuers other places, many men of worship offering themselues as guides to the common people, gathered great powers, and with all spéede made toward Suf∣folke where Lady Mary was. Also the 13. of Iuly, by appointment of the
Counsell, the duke of Northumberland, the Earle of Huntington, the Lord Gray of Wilton, and di∣uers other, with a great number of men of armes set forward to fetch the Lady Marie by force, and were on their way as farre as Bury. The 19. of Iuly the Counsell assembled them∣selues at Baynards Castle, where they commo∣ned with the Earle of Pembrooke, and immedi∣ately with the Maior of London, certaine Alder∣men, and the Shriues, Garter King of armes, and a Trumpet came into Cheape, where they proclai∣med the Lady Mary (daughter to King Henry the eight, and Quéene Katherine) Quéene of England,Lady Mary proclaimed Queene. France and Ireland. The 20. of Iuly, Iohn Duke of Northumber∣land, being at Saint Edmonsbury, (and hauing sure knowledge that the Lady Mary was at Lon∣don proclaimed Quéene) returned backe againe to Cambridge, and about fiue of the Clocke in the e∣uening, he came to the market crosse, and caused the Lady Mary to be likewise proclaimed Quéene of England, but shortly after he was arrested in the Kings Colledge. And the 25. of Iuly hee with other was brought vp to the Tower of London, vnder the conduct of Henry Earle of Arundell: Thus was the matter ended without bloodshed, which men feared would haue brought the death of many thousands.
Queene Mary. An, reg, 1MAry the eldest daughter to K. Henry the eight, beganne her raigne the sixt of Iuly, in the yeare 1553. she came to Lon∣don. and was receiued with great ioy, & entred the tower the third of August, where Thomas Duke of Norffolke, Doctor Gardiner late Bishop of Winchester, and Edward Courtney, sonne and heire to Henry Marquesse of Excester, prisoners in the Tower discharged. The fifth of August,Bishops restored. Edmond Bonner late Bishop of London, prisoner in the Marshalsey, and Cuthbert Tunstall Bishop of Durham prisoner in the Kings Bench, were restored to their Seas: shortly after all the Bishops which had béene depriued in the time of King Edward the sixt were restored to their Bi∣shoprickes, also all beneficed men that were mar∣ried, or would not forsake their opinion, were put out of their liuings, others set in the same. Men drow∣ned at Lon∣don bridge.The 11. of August, certaine Gentlemen min∣ding to passe vnder London bridge in a whirrie,
were there ouerturned, and 6. of them drowned. The 13. of August, maister Bourne a Canon of Paules, preaching at Pauls Crosse, so offended sonne of the audience, that they breaking silence,Violence vnto a Preacher at Paules Crosse. cried pull him out, and one threw a dagger at him whereupon master Bradford and Iohn Rogers two Preachers of King Edwards time, with much la∣bour conuaied the saide master Bourne out of the audience into Paules Schoole. The 22. of August,The Duke of Northum¦berland beheaded. New coins. Iohn Duke of Northumber∣land. Sir Iohn Gates, & sir Thomas Palmer knights, were beheaded on the Tower hill. The 4. of September was proclaimed certaine new coines, a soueraine of gold of 30. s. the halfe soueraine 15. s. an Angell x. s. the halfe angell 5. s. Of siluer the great, halfe groat, and peny: Also bas coines to be currant as before.Subsidy pardoned. At the same day by proclamation was pardoned the Subsidie of foure shillings the pound lands, and 2. s. 8. d. the pound of moueable goods, granted in the last Par∣liament of King Edward. Thomas Ofley, William Hewet. Shriues. The last of September,Coronatiō. Quéene Mary rode through the Citie of London to Westminster. A Dutchman stood on the wethercocke of Pauls stée∣ple, holding a streamer in his hand of fiue yardes long, and bowing his knée when the Quéene rode by, vnder him were two scaffolds, one aboue the crosse, and the other beneath the bowle of the crosse, both set with streamers wauing, and tor∣ches burning. On the morrow the Quéene was crowned at
Westminster by Doctor Gardiner Bishop of Win∣chester. Grauesend barge ouer∣turned. Charitable deeds of sir Thomas White.The 25. of October the Barge of Grauesend was ouerturned, and 14. persons drowned. Sir Thomas White, Merchant Tailor Maior. This Sir Thomas White, a worthy Patron and protector of poore schollers and learning, ere∣cted a Colledge in Oxford now called S. Iohns Colledge, before Bernards Colledge: he also ere∣cted S. Iohns hall, sometime Glocester Colledge in Oxford, for one hundred of schollars or more, and adioyned it to his Colledge. Hee also erected schooles at Bristow and Reading: moreouer this worshipfull Cittizen in his life time gaue to the Cittie of Bristow, two thousand pounds of ready money to purchase landes to the yearely value of 120. pound, for the which it is agréed, that the Maior, Burgesses, and commonaltie of Bristow, in Anno, 1567. and so yearely during the tearme of ten yeares then next ensuing, should cause to be paide at Bristow an hundred pound of lawfull money. The 800. pound to be lent to sixtéene poore young cloathiers, and frée men of the same towne, for the space of ten yeares, fiftie pound the péece of them, putting sufficient sureties for the same, and at the end of tenne yeares, to be lent to other sixtéene at the discretion of the Maior, Aldermen, and foure of the common counsell of the saide Cit∣tie. The other 200. l. to be imploied to ye prouision of corne, for the reliefe of the poore of the same Ci∣tie, for their ready money without gaine to beta∣ken. And after the end of 9. yeares on the feast of
Saint Bartholmew, which shall be in Ann. 1577. at the Marchant-tailors hall in London, vnto the Maior and commonaltie of the Cittie of Yorke, or to their Attorney authorised, an hundred and foure pound, to be lent vnto foure young men of the said Citie of Yorke, frée men and inhabitants, (clothiers alwaies to bee preferred) viz. to euery one 25. pound, to haue and occupy the same for the tearme of tenne yeares, without paying any thing for the loane of foure pound ouerplus of the 104 pound, at the pleasure of the Maior and com∣monaltie for their paines to bee taken about the receits and paiments of the said 100. l. The like order in all points is taken for the deliuery of 104 pound in the yeare, 1578. to the Cittie of Canter∣bury in the yeare, 1579. to Reding, 1580. to the company of the Marchant-tailors, 1581. to Glo∣cester, 1582. to Worcester, 1583. to Excester, 1584. to Salisbury, 1585. to Worcester, 1586. to Norwich, 1587. to Southhampton, 1588. to Lincolne, 1589. to Winchester, 1590. to Oxford, 1591. to Hereford Cast, 1592. to Cambridge, 1593. to Shrewsbury, 1594. to Linne, 1595. to Bathe, 1596. to Darby, 1597. to Ipswich, 1598. to Colchester, 1599. to Newcastle. And then to begin againe at bristow 104. pound, the next yéere to the Citie of Yorke, and so forth to euery of the said Cities and townes in the like order as afore, and thus to continue for euer. More, this Sir Thomas White gaue vnto the Maior and commo∣naltie of Couentry, the summe of 1400. pound, to purchase landes and tenements to the value of
seuentie pound by the yeere, which the said Mai∣or and Communaltie did purchase by the onely procurement and aid of the said sir Thomas White, for the reliefe and preferment of the Common∣wealth of the said Citie of Couentry, being then in great decay. The rents and profits whereof, he hath deuised to be yeerely conuerted as follow∣eth. First, that twelue poore men Inhabitants of the foresaid Citie, shall haue paid vnto them in free almes, the summe of 24. pounds yeerely, the same to be paid vnto them vpon the xi. of March, yeerely, or within vi. daies after, viz. to euery of them xl. s. a peere for euer. Further, hee hath de∣uised, that for the space of tenne yeeres within one yeere after his decease, to foure poore young men of the said City xl. pound yeerely, viz. ten pound to each of them for ix. yeeres following the receit thereof, in freelone. And after those ix. yeeres be expired, to other iiii. poore young men of the said Citie, likewise for ix. yeeres, & so from ix. yeeres to ix. yeeres for euer. And after those ten yeeres be expired, he doth deuise that the said Maior, or Communaltie, and Bailifes of Couentry for the space of thirty yeeres, shall imploy the said xl. l. yeerely to two yong men of the said Citie for nine yeeres in free lone for euer, and so likewise after those nine yeers, from nine yeeres to nine for euer. And after those thirty yeeres bee expired, the said summe of forty pound, yeerely to be deliuered in free lone to one young man of the said Citie, for nine yeeres, and so likewise from nine yeeres to nine yeeres for euer.
And after that, he doth deuise the said summe of fortie pound, to bee paid and deliuered to the Towne of Northampton, the same to be deliuered to one young man for nine yeeres in free lone, and so from nine yeeres to nine yeeres for euer. And then the next yeere after that, to the Towne of Leicester, as aforesaid. And the next yeere after that, to the Towne of Nottingham, as aforesaid. And the next yeere after that, to the Towne of Warwicke, as aforesaid. And then againe to Couentry for one yeere, and so to the other townes aforesaid, one after another for euer. And he doth deuise to the Master and Wardens of the Marchantaylors, to see the said deuise truely exe∣cuted and performed according to the couenants, twenty s. yeerely for euer. And to the Maior, Recorder, and tenne Aldermen of Couentry for their paines in putting foorth the said money, sixe shillings eight pence to each of them for euer, and to the Steward and towne Clerke for making of the Bonds continually without any charge to those that receiue the said mony, twentie shillings yeerely for euer, this is in the Records remay∣ning in the Marchantaylors Hall. And further∣more, as I haue receiued from Saint Iohns Colledge in Oxford, the same Sir Thomas White inlarged the gift of 1400. pound aforesaid, to be deliuered to the Citie of Couentry, to the summe of 2060. pound, or thereabout, towards the pur∣chasing of lands, within the City of Couentry or neere to the same, the rents whereof to bee im∣ployed as is before rehearsed, with addition also
to pay yearely fortie pound to the said Colledge of Saint Iohns in Oxford, for annuitie for euer. Cardinall Poole re∣called.Cardinall Poole was sent for to returne to England. The 12. of Nouember, Doctor Cranmer Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, Lady Iane that was be∣fore proclaimed Quéene, and the Lord Gilford her husband, were araigned at Guild hall of London, and condemned of Treason. A treaty for marri∣age with the Queen.In the beginning of the month of Ianuary, the Emperour sent a Noble man called Ecmondine, and certaine other Ambassadors into England, to conclude a mariage betweene King Phillip his son, and Quéene Mary. Commoti∣on in Kent by Sir Th. Wiat.The 21. of December, began the Church ser∣uice to be done in Latine, as the same had béene left in the last yeare of King Henry the eight. The 25. of Ianuary, Sir Iohn Gage Chamber∣laine, certified the Lord Maior of London, that Sir T. WiatWiats in∣surrection. with certaine other rebels were vp  Kent, whereupon great watch was kept, and that night the Lord Maior rode about to peruse the same, and euery night after two Aldermen did the like, in the day time the gates of the Citie warded by substantiall Citizens. The 27. of Ianuary the Lord Treasurer came to Guild-hall from the Counsell to request the citizens to prepare 500. footemen well harnished, to goe against the said Wiat, which was granted, and on the morrowe were sent to Grauesend by water. The 29. of Ianuary the Duke of Norfolke
with the Captaine of the guard, & other souldiers,Duke of Norfolke sent against Wiat. and the Captaine and souldiers that were sent for London, minded to assault Rochester Castle where Wiat and his company lay, but the Cap∣taines of the Cittie and their souldiers fled ouer Rochester bridge to Wiat, so that the Duke was faine to returne againe to London with great feare of his life. Thus Wiats number being strengthned with the Quéenes ordinance and treasure, the 30.Wiat Strength∣ned with the queenes ordinance. of Ia∣nuary, he remooued to Blacke heath. Henry Duke of Suffolke father to Lady Iane, flying into Leicester-shire, and Warwicke-shire, made proclamation against the Quéenes Marri∣age with the Prince of Spaine, &c. But the people inclined not to him. The first of February the commons of the Ci∣tie assembled in their Liueries at the Guild hall whither the Quéene with her Lords came riding from Westminster, and there after vehement wordes against Wiat, declared that shée ment not otherwise to marry, then the Counsell should thinke both honourable and commodious to the Realme, and therefore willing them truely to as∣sist her, in oppressing such as contrary to their duties rebelled:Lord Willi∣am How∣ard Lieu∣tenant of the Citie of London. Shée appointed Lord William Howard Lieutenant of the Citie, and the Earle of Pembroke Generall of the field, which both pre∣pared all things necessary. Wiat entred South∣warke the third of February, wherefore the draw-bridge was broken downe, Ordinance bent to that part, general pardon proclaimed to all that
would giue ouer, and forsake their rebels. After Wiat had laine thrée dayes in Southwarke, hée turned his iourney to Kingstone on Shrouetues∣day in the morning, being the sixt of February, where he passed ouer the Thames▪ and purposed to haue come to London in the night▪ but by meanes that the carriage of his chiefe ordinance brake, he could not come before it was faire day. The same Shrouetnesday in the afternoone were two men hanged in Paules Church-yard,Two men hanged in Paules Church-yard. one late Shriue of Leicester, the other a Baker. On the morrow early in the morning, the Earle of Pembrooke and diuers other, were in St. Iames fields with a great power, and their Ordinance so bent, that Wiat was faine to leaue the common way, and with a small company came vnder St. Iames wall from the danger of the Ordinance, and so went by Charing Crosse vnto the Bel Sa∣uage nigh vnto Ludgate, without resistance, in at the which gate hée thought to haue béene recei∣ued, but perceiuing that he was defeated of his purpose,Wiat taken. he fled backe againe, and at Temple bt was taken and brought by water to the Tower of London. The tenth day of February the Duke of Suf∣folke which was taken in Leicestershire,The Duke of Suffolke brought to the lower. Lady Iane beheaded. Wiats men hanged. was brought to the citty of London by the Earle of Huntington, and one of his brethren with him, and so had to the Tower. The 12. of February Lady Iane, and her hus∣band Lord Gilford were beheaded. The 14. and 15. of February about the num∣ber
of 50. of Wiats faction, were hanged on twen∣tie pairs of Gallowes in diuers places about the Cittie. The 17. of February was proclamation made,Strangers banished the realme. that all strangers should auoid the Realme with∣in 14. daies next ensuing, vpon pain of their goods to be confiscate (all frée Denizens, Marchants, and Embassadors excepted.) The 22. of February, certaine of Wiats faction to the number of 400. and more, were led to Westminster, coupled together with halters a∣bout their neckes, and there in the Tiltyard, the Quéene (who looked foorth of her Gallery) pardo∣ned them. The 24. of February H. Gray,Duke of Suffolke beheaded. Duke of Suf∣folke was beheaded on the Tower hill. The 11. of Aprill, Sir Thomas Wiat was behea∣ded on the Tower hill, and after quartered,1554 Th. Wiat beheaded. his quarters were set vp in diuers places, and his head on the Gallowes at Hay hill neare Hide Parke, from whence it was after shortly stollen. The 27. of Aprill,W. Thom. quartered. Lord Thomas Gray was beheaded. William Thomas Gentleman for con∣spiring Quéene Maries death, was drawne to Tiburne and there hanged and quartered the 18. of May. The tenth of Iune Doctor Pendleton Preached at Paules Crosso, at whom a Gun was shot,A Gun sho at a Prea∣cher. the pellet whereof lighted on the Church wall, but the shooter could not be found. The 22. of Iune was proclamation made, for∣bidding the shooting in hand Gunnes, and bea∣ring
of weapons.An reg. 2. An impo∣sture. The 15. of Iuly, Edward Croft, about the age of 18. yeares stood on a scaffold at Paules Crosse all the sermon time, where shee con∣fessed, that shee being moued by diuers lewde per∣sons thereunto, had vpon the 14. of March last be∣fore passed, counterfeited certaine spéeches in an house without Aldersgate of London, through the which, the people of the whole Cittie were won∣derfully molested. The 19. of Iuly, the Prince of Spaine arriued at Southampton, after hee came to Winchester, and there going to Church was honourably recei∣ued of the Bishop,The mari∣age of K. Phillip & Q. Mary. and a great number of Na∣bles. On St. Iames day the marriage was solem∣nized betwéene him and Quéene Mary. Shortly af∣ter they came to London, where with great pro∣uision they were receiued of the Citizens the 18. of August. Shs.Dauid Woodrofe, William Chester. A Spaniard hanged.The 26. of October, a Spaniard was hanged at Charing-crosse, for killing of an Englishman in fight. Maior. Cardinall Poole.Sir Iohn Lion Grocer, the 28. of October. The 24. of Nouember, Cardinall Poole came into England, was by a Parliament restored to his old dignitie, and shortly after came into the Parliament house, where the King and Quéene and other States being present, hée exhorted them to returne to the communion of the Church. The next day the whole Court of Parliament desired the King and Quéene, and cardinall, that by their meanes they might be restored to the sea of Rome.
The 18. of Nouember,Q. Mary bruted to be with child. the Lord Maior of Lon∣don with the Aldermen in Scarlet, and the com∣mons in their best Liueries, assembled in Paules Church, where Doctor Chadsey one of the Pre∣bends Preached: hée read them a letter sent from the Counsell, the effect whereof was, that the Bishop of London should cause Te Deum to bée sung in all the Churches of his Diocesse, with continuall prayer for the Quéene, which was con∣ceiued and quicke with child as was thought: the letter being read, he began his Sermon with this theame: Ne timeas Maria, inuenisti enim gratiam apud Deum: which Sermon being ended, Te deum was sung. The second of December, Cardinall Poole came to Paules Church, where hée tarried till the King came from Westminster,Cardinall Poole came to Paules. and then the Lord Chancellour entred Paules Crosse, and prea∣ched a Sermon. In the which Sermon hée decla∣red that the King and Quéene had restored the Pope to his supremacy, and thrée Estates assem∣bled in the Parliament, submitting themselues to the same. The 27. of December,Prince of Peiemount. Emmanuel Prince of Piemount with other Lords were receiued at Grauesend, and so conueied to Westminster. The 9. of Ianuary,Prince of Orenge. the Prince of Orenge landed at London. The 4: of February Iohn Rogers Vicar of Saint Sepulchres was burnt in Smithfield.Ioh. Rogers burnt. The 22. of February ninetie nine horses and two Carriers laden with treasure of gold, and
siluer brought out of Spaine,The King of Spaines treasure. was conuayed tho∣row the City to the Tower of London, vnder the donduct of sir Thomas Gresham, the Queenes Mar∣chant and others. 1555. Earle of Deuonshire deliuered. Vse of Coa∣ches first in England.Against Easter the Earle of Deuonshire came to the Court, and about ten dayes after, the Lady Elizabeth came likewise to the Queene. This yeere Walter Ripon made a Coach for the Earle of Rutland, which was the first Coach (saith he) that euer was made in England, since to wit, in Anno 1564. the said Walter Ripon made the first hollow turning Coach, with pillars and arches for her Maiestie, being then her seruant. Also in Anno 1584. a chariot throne with foure pillars behind to beare a Canopy with a Crowne imperiall on the toppe, and before, two lower pil∣lars, whereon stood a Lion and a Dragon, the sup∣porters of the Armes of England. W. Flower burnt at Westmin∣ster.On Easter day a Priest named William Flower with a wood knife wounded another Priest as he was ministring the Sacrament to the people in S. Margarets Church at Westminster, for the which fact the said William the 24. of Aprill had his right hand smitten off, and for opinions in atters of Religion, was burned nigh vnto S. Margarets Churchyard. A Millars sonne fai∣ned to be King Ed∣ward the sixth.The tenth of May, William Constable, who had named himselfe to bee King Edward the sixt, was sent to the Marshalsey, and the 22. of May, hee was carryed about Westminster Hall before the Iudges, whipped about the Pallace, and then through Westminster into Smithfield.
The first of Iuly Iohn Bradford was burned in Smithfield for Religion.Bradford burnt. In this moneth of August was brought to Lin a monstrous fish of forty foote in length.An, reg, 3. Monstrous fish. King Philip went to Brussels in Brabant to vi∣sit the Emperour his father. Thomas Leigh, Iohn Machill. Shriues. In October fell such aboundance of raine,Great land waters. that for the space of sixe dayes, men might row with boats in Saint Georges fieldes, water came into Westminster hall halfe a yard déepe. The 26. of October,Ridley and Latimer. Doctor Ridley and Doctor Latimer was burned at Oxford for Religion. Sir William Garrard Haberdasher, Maior. The Quéene yéelded vp to the spirituall men the first fruits and tenths of all Bishopricks,First fruits and tenths restored to the Clergy. Be∣nefices, and Ecclesiasticall liuings. In this Par∣liament was granted to the Quéene, a Subsidy of the Laity, from fiue pound to ten pound, 8. pence of the pound, from ten pound to twenty pound, 12 pence of the pound, and from twenty pound vp∣ward, 16. pence of the pound, and all strangers double, and the Cleargy granted 6. shillings of the pound. St Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, chan∣cellor of England, died the ninth of Nouember,D. Gardi∣ner decea∣sed. and was  Winchester. William Conle,The mil∣ler, sonne faining to be King Ed∣ward, who had caused letters to be cast abroad, th King Edward was aliue, and to some shewed himselfe to be King Edward, the 13. of March was drawne, hanged, and quartered at Tiborne.
D. Cranmer burnt.The 21. of March, Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, was burned at Oxford for Reli∣gion. Cardinall Poole on Sunday next, was conse∣crated Archbishop of Canterbury. The 28. of March, a part of Newgate, called Mannings hall was burnt.1556 Newgate a fire. Conspiracy Certaine persons purposed to haue robbed the Quéenes Exchequer, to the intent they might bee able to maintaine warre against her. Vdall Throg∣morton, Peeham, Daniel, and Stanton, were appre∣hended, and diuers others fle. Throgmor∣ton and o∣thers exe∣cuted.The 28. of Aprill, Throgmorton and Richard V∣dall were drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered. The 12. of May a ship loaden with herneshaws was brought out of Brabant to Billinsgate, and the herons were there sold for xii. pence, or xiiii. the best. The ninetéenth of May, Stanton was likewise executed. The eight of Iune, Rossey Detike, and Bedell, were executed at Tiborne. Sands han∣ged.The 11, of Iune, Sandes, a younger sonne of Lord Sandes, was hanged at Saint Thomas of Wa∣terings for a robbery. Thirteene burnt at Stradford. An, reg, 4.The 27. of Iune, 13. persons were burnt at Stratford the Bow. The eight of Iuly, Henry Peckam, and Thomas Daniel were hanged and headed on the tower hill for conspiracy. This yeare in the moneth of August, sir Wil∣liam
Garrard Maior of London (being inuited) dined with the reader in the middle Temple,The Maiors sword put downe. from whence when the Maior departed, certaine Gen∣tlemen of the yonger sort, as well of that house as of the inner Temple, by force put and held downe the sword, before the Maior, till hée came to the outer gate next the stréete, for the which fact, within foure daies after, the two Readers with all their Companies of both houses, were sent for to the Rolles in Chancerie lane, where sate the Marquesse of Winchester, Lord Treasurer, as∣sisted with xi. other of the Quéenes Priuy Coun∣sell. These commaunded the two Readers, to de∣liuer the names of the principall doers in the fore-expressed action, the which if they refused to doe, themselues should bée committed. Whereupon (consulting a little) they presented the names of twentie, whereof the Lord committed fourtéene to the Fléete, and tooke bonds of the rest to ap∣peare in the Starre-Chamber the first day of the next Tearme: at the which day appearance be∣ing made, as well by those committed, as the o∣ther that were in bonds, through humble inter∣cession of all the head and chiefe learned men of euery Bench and Barre in the foure Innes of Court, their punishment was referred to the dis∣cretions of the Benches of those houses, where the faults were committed, and so all was ended in that course, and the prisoners with the rest dis∣charged, which notwithstanding were after for the most part expelled their houses, till vpon great submission, and long suit, they were resto∣red
by degrées and times. Conspira∣tors exe∣cuted. A great burning feauer, whereof 7. Aldermen died in London. Rose pence supprest.Cleba a Schoolemaster, and thrée of Lincolnes Inne, being brethren in Norfolke, were hanged and quartered at Burie for conspiracy. The last yeare began the hote burning feuers, whereof died many olde persons, so that in Lon∣don died seuen Aldermen, in the space of tenne moneths. The 19. of September the Rose pence being a base coine, made in the raigne of Henry the eight, and Edward the sixt were forbidden, to be any lon∣ger currant in England, but to be onely currant in Ireland. William Harper, Iohn White, Shriues. Sir Thomas Ofley Merchant-tailor, Maior. A false ac∣cuser well marked.The 21. of Nouember, a man was brought from Westminster with a paper on his head, ri∣ding, his face toward the horse taile, to the stan∣dard in Cheape, and there set on the Pillory, and after burned in both the chéekes with the letters F. and A. for falsely accusing one of the Court of the Common Pleas in Westminster of treason. Note this example.The 16. of December, a stranger borne, was arraigned for making keies to Newgate, to haue murdered the Kéeper, and let foorth the prisoners, at which time at his arraignement, hée thrust a knife into the side of his fellow prisoner, that had giuen witnesse against him, so that he was in pe∣rill of death thereby, for the which fact he was im∣mediately taken from the barre into the stréete be∣fore the Iustice hall, where his hand being first stricken off, he was then hanged on a gibit.
The kéeper of Newgate was arraigned and in∣dited,A warning for Gaolers Gun shot into the Court. for that the saide prisoner had a weapon a∣bout him, and his hands loose. The fourth of Ianuary a ship before Greene∣wich (the Court being there) shot off her Or∣dinance,The very like chan∣ced in Qu. Elizbehs time. one péece being charged with a bullet, which passed through the Court, and did no more hurt. The seuen and twentie of February, an Am∣bassadour came from the Emperour of Muscouy,Ambassa∣dour from Moscouy. who was receiued at Totenham by the Mer∣chants aduenturers of London, riding in veluet coates and chaines of gold, and by them conuaied through the Citie vnto Fanchuch stréete, where he lodged vntill the twelfth of May, and then re∣turned. The Lord Sturton murthered this men,A president of speciall Iustice. for the which he was conuaied from the tower of London to Salisbury, and there hanged with foure of his seruants, the 6. of March. A blazing Starre was séene at all times of the night, the 6.7.8.9. and 10. of March.A blazing starre. King Philip returned into England and the 12.K. Phillip returned into Eng∣land. of March passed through London, with the Quéen and the Nobles of the Realmes. The 23. of Aprill, Thomas Stafford and other so the number of 32. persons, cōming out of France,1557 A practise of rebellion tooke the Castle of Scarborough, which they en∣ioyed two dayes, and then were taken & brought to London. The 28. of May,T. Stafford beheaded. T. Stafford was beheaded on the tower hill, & on the morrow thrée of his com∣panions
were drawne to tiborne, and there han∣ged and quartered. Wars with France. Englishmen sent to Saint Quintans.The 7. of Iune open warre was proclaimed a∣gainst the French King. The sixt of Iuly the King passed ouer to Cal∣leis, and so into Flanders, where hée made great prouision of Warre against the French King: the Quéene sent ouer an Army of one thousand horse∣men, foure thousand footmen, and two thousand Pioners, to aide King Phillip, whereof the Earle of Pembrooke was generall. Anne of Cleaue dead An. reg. 5. S. Quin∣taines ta∣ken. Dearth and plentie.The fift of Iuly died the Lady Anne of Cleaue, and was buried at Westminster. The 18. of August the Towne of Saint Quin∣taines was taken by King Phillip, with the helpe of Englishmen, which much vexed the French. This yeare before haruest, wheate was sold for foure marke the quarter, malt at 44. shillings the quarter, beanes and Rie at 40. shillings the quar∣ter, and pease at 46. shillings 8. pence. But after haruest, wheate was sold for 5. shillings the quar∣ter, malt 6. shillings eight pence. Rie at thrée shil∣lings and 4. pence. In the Country wheate was sold for 4. shillings the quarter, malt 4. shillings eight pence, and in the same places a Bushell of Rie for a pound of Candles, which was foure pence. Richard Malerie, Iames Altham, Shriues. Sir Thomas Curteis Fishmonger, Maior. Calice lost by the En∣glishmen.The first of Ianuary the French men came to Calice with a great army, and within foure daies were masters thereof, and shortly after won all
the péeces on that side of the sea. The French King also inuaded Flanders, spoi∣led and burnt Dunkirke before King Phillip could come to the rescue. The 7. of Iuly, within a mile of Nottingham,1558 An, reg, 6. A won∣drous strange tempest. a tempest of thunder, as it came through 2. townes, beat downe all the houses and Churches, the bels were cast to the out side of the Churchyards, and some webbes of lead, 400 foote in the field, wri∣then like a paire of gloues, the riuer of Trent run∣ning betwéene the two townes, the water with the mud was carried a quarter of a mile, and cast against trées, the trees were pulled vp by the roots, and cast twelue score off. A child was taken forth of a mans hands, and carried a hundred foote, and then let fall, & so died, fiue or sixe men were slaine, there fell some hailestones that were fiftéene in∣ches about, &c. The quartaine agues continued more vehe∣mently then the last yeare passed,The last yeares vio∣lent feauers continued still. whereof died many old people, especially Priests, so that a great number of Parishes were vnserued. Iohn Halse, Richard Champion, Shriues. Sir Thomas Leigh Mercer, Maior. King Phillip being absent out of the Realme, Quéene Marie ended her life the 17. of Nouember in the yeare 1558. when she had raigned 5. yeares foure moneths, and odde daies. The same day de∣ceased Cardinall Poole, and a little before two of her Physitians, beside diuers Bishops and Noble men. Quéene Mary was buried at Westminster,Queene Mary di∣eth. and Cardinall Poole at Canterbury.
Queene Elizabeth An. reg, 1.THe 17. of Nouember 1558 came certaine newes vnto the Parliament house of the death of Quéene Mary, wherat many reioyced, and many lamented, and forth∣with her death being gene∣rally knowne,Q. Eliza∣beth pro∣claimed. they proclai∣med the Lady Elizabeth se∣cond daughter to King Henry the eight. Quéene of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, &c. In London & Westminster: the Quéene was then at Bishops hatfield, but not proclaimed there vntill two dayes after. The Cler∣gy attend the Queene at highgate.The Quéene came shortly after from Hatfield to the Charterhouse at London, and all the Bi∣shops met her by the way at Highgate, and knée∣ling acknowledged their allegiance. The Quéene remained at Charterhouse vntill the time of her Coronation,coronation and the 14. of Ianua∣ry she rode in triumph through London to the pal∣lace of Westminster, and the next day was crow∣ned by Doctor Oglethrop Bishop of Carleite▪
The 20. of Ianuary began a parliament,A Parlia∣ment. wher∣in the first fruits, tenths, and the supremacy were reserued and connexed to the Crowne: in this par∣liament time the Quéene granted licence for a frée disputation to bee held in Westminster Church,A disputatiō concerning some different points in Religion, but it came to no effect. The 24.The masse suppressed, and the ser∣uice in English. of Iune the booke of common Prayer was established, and the Masse cleane suppressed in all Churches. The 11. of Iuly the Citizens made a shew be∣fore the Quéene of armed men, of halberdiers, pikemen, and muskatiers. In the foresaide moneth,Supremacy Bishops deposed. All Monkes and mona∣steries sup∣pressed. the Quéene began to put in practise the oath of Spremacie vpon Bi∣shops and other chiefe officers, which diuers re∣fused and were depriued, and by authority of this parliament, all such Religious houses as were e∣rected by Quéene Mary, were now quite suppres∣sed. In August following all auncient Church re∣liques and new made Images in Queene Maries raigne,All roods & images pulled downe. were beaten downe and burned in the o∣pen streetes. The eight of September,Obsequies for the French King. a solemne obsequie was kept in Pauls Church for the French King, Henry the second, who died of a wound which hee receiued in running at tilt in Paris. Thomas Lodge, Roger Martin, Shriues.The Duke of Norffolk An, reg, 2. 1559 Sir William Hewet, Clothworker, Maior. The Duke of Norffolke is sent towards Scot∣land to encounter with the French faction, which
at this time was growne very strong in diuers parts of Scotland. The Lord Gray be∣siegeth Leeth. English Commis∣sioners be∣tweene the French and Scots.In Aprill the Lord Gray entred Scotland with ten thousand men, and besieged Leeth, where be∣twéene the French and the English were many hot skirmishes, and many slaine on either part. In May a noble man of France vpon his ear∣nest sute, obtained of the Quéene to send sir Willi∣am Cecill, her principall Secretary, and Doctor Wotton, to treat with the French men in Scotland, by whose wisedome the Scottish faction preuai∣led, and the French agreed to depart. The 5. of Iuly through shooting of a Gun in a house in crooked lane, a barrell of powder was set on fire, which blew vp foure houses, shattered diuers others, slew twenty persons outright, and hurt as many, besides great damage to houses and goods. All base mony sup∣pressed.This yeare the Quéene by consent of her coun∣cell, made Proclamation for the vtter abolishing and suppression of all manner of base copper mo∣nies, which vntill this time had béene currant throughout the Realme in diuers Kings raignes, and after this publication there was not any base mettall coined in England. Christopher Draper, Thomas Roo, Shriues. Sir William Chester, Draper; Maior. An, reg. 3. 1561 Marchant-tailors schoole.The 21. of March the wardens and assistants of the Marchant-tailors in London, founded the famous frée schoole in the Parrish of S. Laurence Pounteney, and M. Richard Hls of the same com∣pany, gaue 500. l. towards the purchase, wherein
the saide Schoole is kept. The x. of Aprill W Geffery was whipped from the Marshalsey vnto Bedlam,False Pro∣phes. for publishing that one Iohn Moore was Iesus Christ, which said Iohn Moore after he had béene well whipped, confessed himselfe a cosening knaue. The 4. of Iune betwéene 4. and 5.Paules stee∣ple burned. a clock in the after noone, there chanced a terrible tempest of thunder and lightning, and chiefly about London, where amongst many harmes, it fired the loftie spire of Pauls stéeple, and began about the toppe thereof, which was two hundred foote hie from the top of the stone battlemenes, the fire ceased not vntill it came down to the roofe of the Church, and consumed all the bels, lead and timber worke. Alexander Auenon, Humfrey Baskeruile.Shriues. Sir william Harper, Marchant-tailor.Maior. This Sir William Harpes founded a frée Schoole in the towne of Bedford,Free schoole at Bedford. where he was borne. The 15.An, reg. 4. of Nouember the Quéenes Maiestie published a Proclamation, wherein the restored to the Realme diuers small péeces of siluer money, as the péece of sixe pence, foure pence, thrée pence, two pence, and a peny, thrée halfe pence, and thrée farthings, and also forbad all forraine coines. In March a Mare brought forth a foale with one body and two heads, and a long taile grow∣ing out betwéene the two heads. A Sow forrow∣ed a Pigge with foure legges like to the armes of a man child, with hands and fingers, &c.Monstrons births. In Aprill a Sow farrowed a Pigge with two
bodies, eight feete, and but one head, many calues and lambs were monstrous, some with collers of skin about their neckes, like to the double cuffes of shirts and neckerchiefes then vsed. 1562 A mon∣strous child birth.The 14. of May a man child was borne at Ch∣chester in Sussex, the head, armes, and legs where¦of, were like an Anatomie, the brest and belly big, from the nauill a long string hanging about the necke, a coller of flesh like the ruffe of a neker∣chiefe, comming vp about the eares. The Quéenes Maiestie in September addres∣sed a band of her subiects to the towne of Newha∣uen in Normandy,Going to Newhauen vpon whose arriual the towns men and inhabitants ioyfully surrendred them∣selues and their townes, which was kept by Eng∣lishmen from September, 1562. to the twentie nine of Iuly, 1563. The gouernour of which band was the Earle of Warwicke, who with the Cap∣taines seruing there, & souldiers trained by them to knowledge of seruice together, with part of the old approued garrison of Barwicke, and at that time both manfully defend the place, and valiant∣ly encountred by sundry skirmishes with Countie Ringraue and his band, the most part wherof were atchieued to the great ouerthrows of the aduersa∣ries part, and singular commendations of ours. William Allin, Richard Chamberlaine, Shriues. Sir Thomas Lodge, Grocer, Maior. An, reg. 5. Tempest at Leicester. 1563The 16. of Ianuary great tempest of wind and thunder happened in the towne of Leicester, which vncouered 411. baies of houses, and ouerturned many.
When the Frenchmen with huge Armies as∣sembled out of all parts of France, to recouer the place of passage, the stopping whereof by our po∣wer was the double woe of their common wealth, there bred through the season of the yeare, and pu∣trification of the aire, a miserable plague among our men, which maruellously increased with the death of diuers of the best Captaines and Souldi∣ers, wherewithall there followed a cruell & quicke siege, whereat was present the young King him∣selfe, the Constable, and the best tried number of warlike Souldiers within the whole Country. The Cannons were placed, the Castle and walles were battered, and sundry breaches made beyond expectation, howbeit they were rewarded by our Sunners, our Captaines and souldiers, in coura∣gious order standing at seuerall breaches ready to defend their assaults, which perceiued by the ene∣my, they caused their trumpeters to sound the blast of emparle, that composition might be made, wherein both parties concluded, the towne was deliuered the 29. of Iuly. The plague of pestilence being in the towne of Newhauen,Pestilence in 108. Pa∣rishes in London, besides 11. in the sub∣burbs. through the number of souldiers that returned into England, the infection thereof spred into diuers parts of this realme, but especially the Citie of London was so infected, that in the same whole yeare, that is to say, from the first of Ianu∣ary, 1562. vntil the last of December, in An. 1563 the whole number of all that died of all diseases, as well within the city & liberties as in all out pari∣shes, was 23660▪ & of thē there died of the plague
twentie thousand, one hundred thirty sixe. Tempest at London.The 8. of Iuly, happened a great tempest of lightning and thunder, where-through a woman and thrée kine were slaine in the Couent garden neare Charing Crosse: in Essex, a man was torne in péeces, his barne borne downe, and his hay burnt. There was no tearme kept at Michaelmas. EarthquakeAn Earthquake in the moneth of Seytember, specially in Lincolne and Northampton shires. Edward Bankes, Rowland Hayward, Shriues. Sir Iohn Whight Grocer, Maior. The Maior taketh his oath at the Tower. An, reg 6. Lightning and thun∣der.The new Maior kept his feast at Guildhall, and tooke his oath at the outermost gate of the Tower of London. From the first of December to the twelfth, was such continuall lightning and thunder, that the like had not béene séene nor heard by any man liuing. In the moneth of December was driuen on the shore at Grunsby in Lincolneshire a monstrous fish in length xix. yards. his taile xv. foote broad, and vi. yards betwéene his eyes. Tearme kept at Hertford. 1564Hillary Tearme kept at Hertford Castle. Peace proclaimed betwéene England & France. Through sute of the Armorers there was on the vigile of Saint Peter a watch in the Citie of Lon∣don, which did onely stand in the high streete, in Cheape, Cornehill and so forth to Adgate. The Qu: progresse through Cambridg.The fift of August the Quéenes Maiesty in her progresse came to the Vniuersity of Cambridge, & was of all the Students most honourably recei∣ued
in the Kings Colledge. She made within S. Maries Church a notable Oration in Latine, in the presence of the whole learned Vniuersitie, to the Students great comfort. The next day shee went forward to Fincinbrooke. The 30.A good deuice. day of August was enacted by a com∣mon Counsell of the City of London, that all such Citizens as from thenceforth should bee constrai∣ned to sell household stuffe, should first cause the same to bée cried thorow the City by a man with a bell, and then to be sold by the common outcrier appointed for that purpose. The 20.Great floods in the thames. of September rose great floods in the riuer of Thames, where through the Marshes were ouerflowed, and many cattell drowned. Edward Iackeman, Lionell Ducket, Shriues. The second of October was an obsequie at Pauls for Faroinando late Emperour.Obsequio for Ferdi∣nando Em∣peror. Fiery im∣pressions. The seuenth of October at night all the North parts of the Element séemed to bée couered with flames of fire, procéeding from the Northeast and Northwest toward the midst of the firmament, and discended West. Sir Richard Mallorie Mercer, Maior. The 21.An, reg, 7. The thames frozen o∣uer. of December began a frost which con∣tinued so extreamely, that on Newyeares euen people went ouer and along the thames on the yee, from London bridge to Westminster, some plaied at the footeball, diuers of the Court being then at Westminster, shot at pricks set vpon the thames. And people both men and women went on the thames, in greater number then in any
stréete of the Citty. On the third day of Ianuary at night it began to thaw, & on the fift day was no yee to be seene betwéene London bridge and Lam∣beth, which sudden thaw caused great floods and high waters that bare downe bridges and houses, and drowned many people in England, especially in Yorkshire, Owes bridge was born away. The third day of February,Ows bridge born down H Stuart married the Queene of Scots. 1565 Henry Steuart Lord Darly eldest sonne to Matthew Earle of Linneaux, tooke his iourney toward Scotland, and in sommer fol∣lowing married Mary Quéene of Scotland. The 22. of Aprill, the Lady Margaret Coun∣tesse of Linneaux, was commanded to kéepe her chamber at the White hall, where she remained till the two and twentieth of Iune, and then by sir Frances Knowles and the guard conuaied her to the Tower of London by water. Tempests at Chels∣ford.The 16. of Iuly about nine of the clocke at night began a tempest of lightning and thunder, with showres of haile, which continued till thrée of the clocke in the next morning so terrible, that at Chelmisford in Essex, 500. acres of corne was destroied, the glasse windowes on the East side of the towne, and on the West and South sides of the Church were beaten downe, with all the tiles of their houses, besides diuers barnes, chimnies, and the battlements of the Church which were o∣uerthrowne. The like harme was done in many other places, as at Léedes, Crainebrooke, Douer, &c.Margraue & Marques of Baden. Christopher Prince, and Margraue of Baden, with Cicely his wife, sister to the King of Sweth∣land, in September landed at Douer, and the xi.
day of the same they came to London and were lodged at the Earle of Bedfoords place, where within foure dayes after shée trauelled, and was deliuered of a man childe, which child was christe∣ned in the Quéenes Chappell of White Hall, the Quéenes Maiestie being Godmother, gaue the child to name Edward Fortunatus. This yeare,Muster of horsemen. by commaundement of the Coun∣sell diuers musters of light horsemen in sundry dayes, and in seuerall places about the Citie of London were taken by the Maior and other com∣missioners for that purpose, by which meanes it happened on the eight of October (that Sir Rich∣ard Mallorie) riding through Tower stréet toward the tower hill there to haue taken muster, as was appointed,The Maior of London his sword seised. he was met by Sir Francis Iobson then Lieutenant of the Tower, and by him forbidden to enter the hill with the sword before him, where∣unto no answers by the Maior could be heard, but the sword was violently seased on by the Lieute∣nant and his men, and defended by the officers of the Maior, so that the Lieutenant called for more assistance out of the Tower, and the Maiors Offi∣cers were minded to haue raised tower stréet, and so more of the Citie, whereof was like to haue bin a great tumult, but the Lord Maior caused Pro∣clamation to be made, that no man should draw weapon, or strike any stroke, but euery man to depart, horsemen and all, till they were againe warned to appeare, which was on the same day seuen night, being likewise monday, and the xv. of October, that they did there muster before the
Maior in that very place on the tower hill before appointed, where, by the Counsels appointment, the Maior had the sword peaceably borne before him, as he had béene accustomed. Iohn Riuers, Iames Hawes, Shriues. Sir Richard Champion, Draper, Maior. An. reg, 8. The 17. of Nouember. Pauls gate blowen o∣pen.The 24. of December there rose a great storme of wind, by whose rage the Thames and Seas o∣uerwhelmed many persons, and the great gates at the West end of Saint Pauls Church in Lon∣don, were through the force of the winde then in the westerne part of the world blowne open. 1596 The Mar∣ques of Ba∣den retur∣neth. The urse in Corne∣hill.The Marques of Caden, and the Lady Cicely his wife, sister to the King of Swethen, now in the moneth of Aprill departed the land. Certaine houses in Cornehill being first pur∣chased by the Citizens of London, and cost them more then 3532. pound, were afterward sold to such as should carry them from thence, and then the ground being made plaine, possession thereof was giuen to Sir Thom. Gresham Knight, there to build a place for Marchants to assemble in, at his owne proper charges, who on the 7. of Iune, laide the first stone of the foundation, and forthwith the workemen followed with such diligence, that by the moneth of Nouember, in Ann. 1567. the same was couered with slate. The Queen progresse to Oxford.The 31. of August the Quéenes Maiesty in her Progresse came to the Vniuersity of Oxford, and was of all the Students honourably receiued. An. reg. 9.The 5. of September after disputations, the Quéene at the humble suit of certaine of her No∣bilitie,
made a briefe Oration in Latine to the V∣niuersitie, and the 6. her Maiestie bade them fare∣well and rode to Ricote. Richard Lambart, Ambrose Nicholas.Shriues. Iohn Langley, The 4. of Aprill.Maior. Sir Christopher Draper Ironmonger. Charles Iames, the sixt of that name,King Iames borne. sonne to Henry Stuart Lord Darly and Marie, King and Quéene of Scots, was borne in Edenborough Castle the ninetéenth of Iune last past, and the eightéenth of December solemnely christened at Sterling, whose Godfathers at the Christning were Charles King of France, and Philibert Duke of Sauoy, and the Quéenes Maiestie of England was the Godmother, who gaue a fount of gold curiously wrought and inameled, waighing 333. ounces. The 10. of February in the morning, H,King of Scots mur∣dered. Stuart Lord of Darly, before named King of Scots, by Scots in Scotland was traiterously murdered, the reuenge whereof remaineth in the mightie hands of God. The 22. of February the Lady Margaret Dowg∣las Countesse of Linoux, mother to the said King of Scots, was discharged out of the Tower of London. Within the space of ten moneths last past,7. Aldermē deceased in London. Ossestry burnt. died seuen Aldermen of London. The 22. of Aprill by great misfortune of fire in the towne of Ossestry in Wales, to the number of two hundred houses besides cloth, corne, cattel, &c. were consumed.
Milnall in Suffolke burnt.The 17. of May in the towne of Milnall in Suf∣folke, 37. houses besides barnes, stables, and such like, were consumed with fire in the space of two houres. Shan One∣le discom∣fited.Shan Onele who had rebelled against the Quéens Maiesty in Ireland, was this yéere with his great losse, manfully repelled from the siege of Dun∣dalke, by the Garrison thereof, and afterward through the valiancy of Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Deputie of Ireland, he was so discomfited in sun∣dry conflicts, that now hee determined to put a collar about his necke, and penitently to require his pardon. But Neile Mackener his Secretary perswaded him, first to trie the friendship of cer∣taine wild Scots that then lay encamped in Clan Iboy under the conducting of Alexander Oge, and Mac Gilliam Buske, whose father and vncle Shan Onele had lately killed; neuerthelesse hée went to the saide Campe the second of Iune, where after a dissembled entertainment, Gilliam Busk ministred quarelling talke,Shan One∣le slaine. and made a fray vpon Oneiles men, and then gathering together his Scots, hew∣ed in péeces Shan Onele, his Secretary, and all his company. Watch at Midsomer.On Saint Iohns Euen at night, was the like standing watch in London, as had béene on Saint Peters Euen two yeares before passed: this order of watch is still continued. The 29. of Iuly Charles Iames the yong Prince of Scotland,Coronation in Scotland after a Sermon made by Iohn Knokes, was crowned King of Scots at Sterling Church, and at that time the Quéene of Scots was pri∣soner
at Loughleuen. Sir Nicholas Throgmorton hauing talked with the Quéene of Scots at Loughleuen, returned out of Scotland in the moneth of August. Thomas Ramsey, William Bond, Shriues. Sir Roger Martin, Mercer, Maior. After a dry Sommer there followed a sharpe winter with such a scarcity of fodder and hay,An, reg, 10 Hay sold by waight. that in diuers places the same was sold by the waight, for fiue pence the stone, there followed also a great death of Cattell. In the moneth of Ianuary the Quéenes Ma∣iestie sent into the narrow seas, thrée of her Ships,Ships sent to the sea against the subiects of K. Phillip. named the Antilope, the Swallow, and the Aid, and one Barke, named the Phenix, the which were manned with 500. men: her Highnesse ap∣pointed the charge of those Ships and men to Wil∣liam Holstocke Esquire, Controwler of her Ships, who had commaundement to stay the subiects of King Phillip: and according to his charge, he vsed such diligence, that on the eleuenth of March next following, hee was with eleuen saile of Flemish Hoies vpon Boloine, which came from Roan, and in them foure hundred and odde Tunnes of Gas∣coine and French wines, which they intended to haue conuaied into Flanders, but William Holstock staied all the said Hoyes, and sent them to Lon∣don, where they made their discharge. More, on the 28. of March the saide W. Hol∣stocke seruing in the Antilope, as Admirall in his Company, W. Winter the younger being Vice∣admirall, seruing in the Aide, and Iohn Basing
Captaine of the Swallow, and Thomas Gauerley Captaine of the Phenix, met in the narrow Seas 14. saile of great Hulkes, which were come out of Portingale, and bound to Flanders, their chiefe lading being Portingale salt, and they had good store of Spanish Rials of plate, & also great store of spices, the which 14. Hulkes did maintain their fight for the space of two houres, but the said Wil∣liam Holstocke and his company tooke the same Hulkes, whereof sixe were sent into the riuer of Thames, and the Admirall, and Viceadmirall of the said Hulkes, being two great ships, which Wil∣liam Holstocke himselfe did take, were conuaied to Harwich, and there discharged. 1568 Great windes.The 28. of March, through vehement rage and tempest of winds, many vessels on the Thames, with two Tiltboates before Grauesend were drowned. Queene of Shots arri∣ued in Eng∣land.The 16. of May, Mary Q. of Scots after her escape made out of Loughleuen, where shee had béene long imprisoned, arriued at Werkington in England, hauing in her company to the num∣ber of 16. persons, besides 4. water-men, where she was staied, and conuaied to Carlile, and from thence to Bolton castle belonging to the L. Scrope, who with sir Ralph Sadler sent downe for that pur∣pose, had the custody of her, till she was commit∣ted to the Earle of Shrewsbury. Archbishop of Yorke deceased.The 26. of Iune, deceased Thomas Young, Arch∣bishop of Yorke at Shefield, and was buried at Yorke. The great hall, and Pallace whereof, hee had
pulled downe and destroied. Iohn Aleph, Richard Harding Salter, Iames Bacon, Shriues. The eleuenth of October were taken in Suf∣folke at Downam Bridge, 17. monstrous fishes,Monstrous fishes. some of them 27. foote in length, 2. miles from Ip∣swich. Sir Thomas Roe Marchant tailor, Maior. At the cost and charges of the Citizens of Lon∣don,New Con∣duit at walbrooke. An, reg, 11 The Burse for meeting of Mar∣chants. a new Conduit was builded at Walbrooke corner, neare to Dowgate, the water whereof is conuaied out of the Thames. The 22. of December was the first day that the Marchants left their méeting in Lombard stréete, and came into the Burse in Cornhill, builded for that purpose. The 27. of Ianuary a Frenchman & two Eng∣lishmen were drawne from Newgate to tiburne, and there hanged, the French man quartered, who had coined gold counterfaite, the English∣men, the one had clipped siluer, the other cast to∣ons of Tin. William Herbert Earle of Pembrooke, deceased the 17. of March, buried in Paules Church. The 28. of March the Pentioners were appoin∣ted in armour on horsebacke,1569 Muster of Pentioners. A Lottery at London. mustered before the Quéene in Hide Parke beside Westminster. A great Lottery of 400000. lots, euery lot 10. s. being holden at London in Paules Churchyard at the West doore, was begun to bee drawne the 11. of Ianuary, and continued day and night till the sixt of May. The 17. of August, an Ambassador from Musco∣nie,
landed at Tower-wharfe,Embassa∣dor from Muscouy. and was there re∣ceiued by the Lord Maior of London, Aldermen d Shriues in Scarlet, with the Marchants ad∣uenturers in coates of blacke veluet, all on horse∣backe. Terme ad∣iourned.The plague of pestilence somewhat raigning, Michaelmas Tearme was adiourned vnto Hilla∣ry Tearme. Henry Bechar, William Dane. Shriues. This William Dane by his Testament, and also Margaret Dane his wife gaue great Legacies to the poore. The 11. of October, Thomas Duke of Norf∣folke was brought to the Tower prisoner. Sir Alexander Anenon Ironmonger, Maior. No Maiors feast.This Maior went by water to Westminster, and there tooke his oath, but kept no feast at Guild-hall, lest through comming together of a multitude, infection of the pestilence might haue encreased. An, reg. 12. The Earles of Northū∣berland & Westmer∣land pro∣claimed traitors. Earle of Sussex Lieutenant generall a∣gainst the Earles.The 24. of Nouember the Quéenes Maiestie caused the Earles of Northumberland and West∣merland, who rebelled in the north, to be proclai∣med traitors, and forthwith prepared an Army for their suppression. The Earle of Sussex the Quéenes Lieutenant generall in the North, had on the 17. of Nouember there published the like proclamation against the said rebels, and also sent out to all such Gentle∣men as he knew to be of her Maiesties louing sub∣iects vnder his rule, which came vnto him with such a number, as he was able to make aboue fiue
thousand horsemen and footemen, and so being ac∣companied with the Earle of Rutland his Lieute∣nant, the Lord Hunsden Generall of his Horse∣men, William Lord Eure, who had the leading of the rereward of the footmen, and Sir Ralph Sadler treasurer, who all came to Yorke the 11. of De∣cember, they marched from Yorke toward Top∣cliffe the 12. sir G. Bowes comming from Bernards Castle met him, and was made Marshall of the Army: then they went to Northalerton, to Smoe∣ton, to Crofebridge, and so to Aclay, on the which day the Rebels fled from Durham to Exham. The Earle of Sussex went from Aclay to Dur∣ham: then to Newcastle, and the 20. of December to Exham, from whence the rebels were gone the night before to Naworth,Earle of Warwicke sent against the rebels. where counselling with Edward Dakers concerning their owne weakenes, as also how they were pursued by the Earle of Sussex and his power of 7. thousand. And moreo∣uer that the Earle of Warwicke, the Lord Clin∣ton, Lord Admirall of England, and Lord Vi∣count Hereford, with an Army of 12. thousand out of the South, whereof the said Earle of War∣wicke was generall, not farre behind them at Browne bridge. The next night the two Earles of Northum∣berland and Westmerland,The Earle of Northū∣berland and Westmer∣land. with sundry of the principall Gentlemen, fled to Hetlaw in Scotland. The other rebels were shortly after taken by the Earle of Sussex. The fourth and fifth of Ianuary did suffer at Durham to the number of sixtie sixe Constables1570 A caueat for Constables
and other, amongst whom an Alderman of the towne, and a Priest called Parson Plomtree, were the most notable. Then George Bowes Marshall finding many to be factors in the aforesaide rebel∣lion,Rebels ex∣uted. did sée them executed in euery market to  and other places, betwixt Newcastle and W∣therby, about 60. miles in length, and 40. mile in breadth. The 22. of February, Leonard Dacre hauing raised a number of people, the L. Hunsdn and o∣ther setting on him with a company of valiant souldiers, slue many of his people, and forced him to flye into Scotland. On Goodfriday the twentie seuen of March, Simon Digby, Iohn Fulthroppe Esquire, Robert P∣man,Traitors executed. Thomas Bishop the yonger Gentleman, wre drawne from the Castle of Yorke to Knauesmire, without the Cittie of Yorke, and there hanged, headed and quartered. The Earle of Sussex made iour∣ney into Scotland.The 17. of Aprill the Earle of Sussex with the Lord Hunsdon, master William Drewry high Mar∣shall of Barwicke, with all the garrison & power of the same, began a iourney into Scotland, and entred into Tiuidale, burnt, ouerthrew, and spoi∣led all the Castles, townes and villages before them, till they came to Craling. Sir I. Fo∣ster with a garison en∣tred Scot∣land.The same day sir Iohn Foster Warden of the Middle Marches with the Garrison of the same, entred into Tiuidale vpon Expas gate sixtéen miles from Warke, where in like order they burnt, razed and spoiled their country before them till they came to Castle Craling, which likewise
they ouerthrew, razed and burnt. There both the Armies met, and so marched by the Riuer of Tiwit, razing, burning and spoi∣ling Castles and piles along the Riuer, till they came to Godworth. The Lieutenant returned to Barwicke the 22 of Aprill. The Lord Scrope Warden of the West Mar∣ches, entred Scotland the 18. of Aprill,The Lord Scrope entred Scotland. burnt and spoiled almost the Doinfrées, tooke many priso∣ners, and returned safely. The Marches of Eng∣land were so guarded by the Lord Eure, sir George Bowes, and other of the Bishopricke, that not one house was burned, nor one cowe taken out of England. There were razed and ouerthrown, and burnt in this iourney, aboue fiftie strong Castles and piles, and aboue 3. thousand townes and vil∣lages. The 26. the Lieutenant, accompanied with the Lord Gouernour, the Marshall, and diuers lusty Gentlemen, Captaines, and souldiers, to the number of thrée thousand, set forward to Yorke, and so to Hewme Castle, which Castle was yéel∣ded, the Lord Gouernour, the Lord Marshall,Rebels ex∣ecuted at Barwicke. and other expelled the Scots, to the number of 160. persons, among whom were two Englishmen, which were carried to Barwicke, and there execu∣ted. The L. Lieutenant placed in the Castle Cap∣taine Wood, and Captaine Pikeman with two hundred souldiers, and so returned to Barwicke. The fourth of May, hee sent master Drewry Mar∣shall, with the number of 2000. to take Faust ca∣stle,
which at the first comming was deliuered to the Marshall, who expelled the Scots, and so re∣turned to Barwicke. Sir William Drewry set forward toward Eden∣borough with diuers Scottish bands to ioine with the Earles of Lineaur, Morton, Glencarne and Marre, with other of the Kings power of Scot∣land, in pursuing of the English rebels, and such as supported them. They came to Edenborough the 14. of May, and from thence to Lithcoe, where the Regent was slaine. The 17. the footemen marched to Fankirke, and Sir William Drewry with the horsemen marched to Sterling, to sée the King. The 18. they depar∣ted to the foote bands, and so together Marched by Glasco, where the Lord Hambleto ad besieged a house of the Lungs, but hearing of their comming they fled. The 23. our Generall with the whole Army, marched towards the Castles of Hamleton, and there had parley with Arthur Hamleton, but hée would not deliuer the Castle: from thence accom∣panied with the Earle of Lenox and Mortaine with the horsemen, marched to a faire house of the Abbots of Kelwing, which house they burned with 17. houses more, whereof one was the Lord Lanhaps. The 27. of May, Thomas Norton and Christo∣pher Norton of Yorkeshire,The Nor∣tons exe∣cuted. were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiburne, and there hanged, headed, and quartered. The 28. of May, the Castle of Hamleton was
yéelded to sir William Drewry,Hamleton in Scotland yeelde. Conspiracy in Norfolke and by him presently spoiled and burnt. A conspiracy was made by certaine Gentlemen and other in the country of Norffolke, whose pur∣pose was on Midsomer day at Harlestone faire with sound of Trumpet, to haue raised a number, and then to proclaime their pretence against stran∣gers and others. This matter was vttered by T. Kete vnto I. Kensey, who forthwith sent the same Kete to the next Iustice, before whom hee opened the whole matter, whereupon Master D. Drewry immediately apprehended Iohn Throgmorton, and after him many Gentlemen of the Citty of Nor∣wich, and the Country of Norffolke, and at the next Sessions of goale deliuery, at the Castle of Norwich, ten of them were endifed of high trea∣son, thrée of them were hanged, bowelled & quar∣tered, which were I. Throgmorton, Thomas Brooke, and George Dedman. The 4.Duke of Norffolke remoued. of August the Duke of Norffolke was remoued to the Charterhouse neare vnto Smith∣field. The same day was arraigned I. Felton for han∣ging a Bull at the gate of the Bishop of Londons Pallace,Felton ex∣ecuted. and also two young men for coyning and clipping, who all were found guiltie of high trea∣son. The 8. of August, I. Felton was drawne from Newgate into Pauls Churchyard, & there hanged before the Bishops Pallace gate, and being cut downe aliue, was bowelled and quartered. The Shriues returned to tiburne with two yong men,
which were there executed for coyning and clip∣ping. The 22. of August the Earle of Sussex and the Lord Scrope marched from Carlile with the Quée Army,A iourney into Scot∣land. and force of the North into Scotland, pas∣sing ouer the Riuer of Eske, Leuin, and Sarke, so to Dornocke wood, and then to Annonna, a strong house of the L. Harris, which they razed & ouerthrew with others thereabouts, from thence to Hodhim, which they blewe vp, from thence to Kennell, which they burnt, from thence to Dom∣frées, which they sacke, and ouerthrew a sumptu∣ous house belonging to the Quéene of Scots, then passing the riuer of Longher, they burnt and spoiled Cowhilles and Powtracke, and returned to Domfrées, and so to the towne of Bankende, which they burnt, with another house pertaining to William Maxwell, and so to the Castle of Cala∣uoracke, which castle they blew vp and returned. The 28. of August they marched towards Car∣lile, where by the way they burnt two houses the one being Arthur Greames, the other Rich George. Francis Barnam, William Box, Shriues. The fift of October happned a terrible tempest of wind and raine, by meanes wherof many ships and other vessels were drowned:High wa∣ters. the waters o∣uerflowing drowned many townes, villages, cat∣tell, houses and goods, beside many men, women, and children drowned in their beds. Sir Rowland Hayward Clothworker. Maior.
In the moneth of December the money sent out of Spaine to the Duke of Alua,An, reg, 13. then Gouer∣nour in the Low Countries, therewith to haue paied his Souldiers, was taken by the Quéene of Englands ships on the west vasts, brought a land there▪ and so to the Tower of London. Also a pro∣clamation was published of the causes why the same money was so staied here. The 23.Royall Ex∣change. of Ianuary the Quéenes Maiesty ac∣companied with her Nobilitie, came to sir Thomas Gresham in Bishops gate stréete of London, where he dined, and after returning through Corne∣hill, entred the Burse, which place shee caused by an Heralde to bee proclaimed the Royall Ex∣change. The 17. of February, at Kingstone,A strange kinde of earth re∣moued. neare Marclech, in the County of Hereford, was séene the ground to open, and certaine rockes with a péece of ground remooued, and went forward the space of foure daies. It remooued it selfe betwéene sixe of the clocke in the euening and seuen the next morrow, fortie paces, carrying great trées & shéep-coates, some with thréescore shéepe in them. The depth of the hole where it first brake out, is thirty foot, the breadth of the breach is eightscore yards, and in length aboue twentie score yards, it ouer∣threw Rinnastone Chappell. Also two high waies b remoued nigh an hundred yards, with the trées of the hedgerowes. The ground in all is 26. acres, and where tillage ground was, there is pasture left in place, and where was pasture, there is til∣lage ground gone vpon it.
1571 Parliament.The second of Aprill a Parliament beganne at Westminster, wherein was granted by the Cler∣gy a subsidy of sixe shillings in the pound, and by the temporalitie two Fiftéenes, with a Subsidy of 20. s. 8. d. in the pound. Doctor story exe∣cuted.The first of Iune Iohn Story a Doctor of the Canon law, who before had béene condemned of high treason, was drawne from the tower of Lon∣don to Tiburne, and there hanged, and quarte∣red. A combat appointed at Tuthill.The 18. of Iune there was a combat appointed to haue béene fought for a certaine Manour and demaine lands in the Isle of Harty in Kent; Si∣mon Low, and Iohn Ryme plaintifes, had brought a writ of right against Thomas Paramour, who offe∣red to defend his right by bataile, and the plain∣tifes aforesaid accepted to answere his challenge. Hereupon the said Paramour brought before the Iudges of the cōmon Pleas at Westminster one George Thorne, and the plaintifes brought Hen∣ry Naylor Master of defence. Thorne cast downe a gauntlet, which Naylor tooke vp: vpon the sun∣day before the battaile should be tried, on the next morrow the matter was staied, and the parties a∣gréed, that Paramour being in possession should haue the land. Tee quar∣rell of com∣bat staied.It was thought good that for Paramours assu∣rance, the order should be kept touching the com∣bat, and that the Plaintifes should make default of appearance, and that the Court should fit in Tuthill fieldes, where was prepared one plot of ground one and twenty yards square, double rai∣led
for the combat, without the West square a stage being set for the Iudges, representing the Court of common pleas. About ten of the clocke the Court of common pleas came to the place prepared: when the Lord chiefe Iustice with two other his associats were set, then Low was called to come in, or else loose his writ of right. Then the sureties of Henry Naylor were cal∣led to bring in the sayd Naylor, champion of Si∣mon Low, and shortly thereupon Sir Ierome Bowes leading Naylor entred the lists, bringing him downe till he came against the Iudges, and there making curtesie, Naylor put off his nether stocks, and so bare footed and bare legged, and his dublet sléeues tied vp to the elbow bare hea∣ded, came in as aforesaid. Then were called the sureties of George Thorn, and immediately sir Henry Cheiney en∣tring vsed the like order as Naylor had. After all this, the Lord chiefe Iustice rehearsing the man∣ner of bringing ye Writ of right by Simon Low, of the answere made by Paramour, and how Pa∣ramour had challenged to defend his right by his champion, and of the accepting the triall by law with his champion, then for default of appea∣rance in Low, he iudged the Land to Paramour, and dismissed the Champions. The 16 of Iuly Rebecca Chamber of Heri∣ettesham, for poysoning T. ChambersA woman burnt. her hus∣band, was burnt at Maidstone in Kent. The 7 of September the Duke of Norffolke
was remoued from the Charter house to the Tower of London.Duke of Norffolke sent to the Tower. B. of Salis∣bury de∣ceased. The twenty two of September deceased Iohn Iewell Bishop of Salisbury, in his life a most eloquent and diligent preacher, but a farre more painefull and studious writer, as his workes remaining witnesse. Shrieues.Henry Milles, Iohn Branch. Maior.Sir William Allen Mercer. The chri∣stiā victo∣ry against the Turks. The battel of Lepāto Anno reg. 14.The 9 of Nouember great reioycing was made at London, for the late come newes of a maruellous victorie obtained by the Christian army by sea, against the Turkes the sixt of October last passed, wherein was taken and sunke of the Turkes Gallies and Brigantines 230, there were slaine of the Turkes more then thirty thousand, beside a great number of priso∣ners taken, and about 12000 Christians that had béene slaues with the Turkes, were set at liberty. The 13 of Ianuary deceased sir William Peter knight,S.W. Pe∣ters de∣ceased. who had béene Secretary and of the priuy Councell to foure Kings and Quéens in this Realm, and seuen times L. Ambassadour abroad in forraine lands: he augmented Exce∣ster Colledge in Oxford, with lands, to the va∣lue of one hundred pounds by yeare. The 16 of Ianuary, Thomas Duke of Norf∣folke was arraigned in Westminster Hall,Duke of Norffolke araigned. and there by his Péeres found guilty of high Trea∣son.
The 11 of February Kenelme Barne and Ed∣mond Mather, were drawne from the Tower of London, and Henry Rolfe from the Marshalsée in Southwarke, all thrée to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, Barncy and Mather for conspiracy, and Rolfe for counterfei∣ting the Quéenes hand. The 12 of February was proclamation made for the sharpe punishment of such as conuaied bels, lead,A procla∣mation. and other Church goods out of the Parish Churches or Chappels. The tenth of March deceased sir William Pawlet knight, Lord Saint Iohn Earle of Wil∣shire, Marques of Winchester, knight of the Garter, one of the Quéenes Maiesties priuie Counsell, and Lord high Treasurer of England. He was borne in the yeare of our Lord 1483, he serued Henry the 7, Henry the 8, Edward the 6,1572. Quéene Mary, and Quéene Elizabeth. Himselfe did sée the children of his childrens children, growing to the number of 103. The 25 of March by the commandement of the Counsel, the Citizens of London assembling at their seuerall halles, the master collected the most actiue persons of euery their companies, to the number of 3 thousand, whom they appoin∣ted to be pikemen and shotte, the pikemen were forthwith armed in faire corslets,Souldiers trained. the gunners had euery of them his Callieuer, with the furni∣ture. To these were appointed diuers captaines, who to traine them vp in warlike feats, mu∣stered them thrice euery wéeke, sometime in
the artillery yard, teaching the gunners to han∣dle their péeces, sometime at the miles end, & in Saint Georges field teaching them to skirmish. On May day they mustred at Gréenewich be∣fore the Quéenes maiestie, where they showed many warlike feats,A shew at Green∣wich. but were much hindred by the weather, all day showring. It was enacted that all persons aboue the age of fouretéene yeares, being taken, vagrant, and wandring misorderly, should be apprehen∣ded, whipped, and burnt through the right eare with a hot iron for the first time so taken, the se∣cond time to be hanged. The mas∣sacre in France Duke of Norf. be∣headed. French Embassa∣dour.This yeare 1572, was the Massacar in Paris. The 2 of Iune Thomas Duke of Norffolk was beheaded on tower hill. Francis Duke of Memorency, and Betraude de Saligners, Knights of the order of Saint Mi∣chaell, Ambassadours for Charles king of France arriued at Douer. The 15 of Iune they repaired to the White hall, and there in her Graces chappell about one of the clocke in the after noone, the Articles of treaty, league or confederacy, and sure friend∣ship concluded at Bloys the ninetéenth of A∣prill, betwéen the Quéenes maiesty and the French King, being read, the same was by her maiesty and his Ambassadours confirmes to be obserued and kept. Earle of Northum∣berland beheaded.The 22 of August Thomas Percie Earle of Northumberland, now brought out of Scot∣land whither he had fled, was beheaded at York.
In the moneth of August sir Thomas Smith,Enlishmē sent to Ireland. one of the Quéens Maiesties priuie Counsell, sent his sonne Thomas Smith Esquire, into Ireland with a Colony or habitation of Eng∣lish men to inhabite the Ardes in Vlster. Richard Pype, Nicholas Woodroffe.Shriues. Sir Lionell Ducket, mercer.Maior. The 18 of Nouember was séene a star North∣ward,An. reg. 15▪ A strange starre. very bright and cleare in the contestation of Cassiopeia, which with thrée chiefe fixed stars of the said constellation made a Geometicall fi∣gure lozengewise, of the learned men called Rombus: this starre in bignesse at the flrst ap∣pearing, séemed bigger then Iupiter, and much lesse then Venus when she séemed greatest, also the said star neuer changing his place, was car∣ried about with the daily motion of heauen, as all fixed stars commonly are, and so continued almost sixe moneths. The same starre was found to be in place celestiall, farre aboue the Moone, otherwise than euer any comet hath béene séene, or naturally can appeare: therefore it is suppo∣sed, that the signification thereof is directed pur∣posely, and specially to some matter not natu∣rall, but celestiall, or rather supercelestiall, so strange, as from the beginning of the world ne∣uer was the like. The 14 of Nouember, Edward Earle of Dar∣by, Lord Stanley and Strange, L.The Earle of Darby deceased. and Gouernor of the Isle of Man, knight of the noble Order of
the Garter, and one of the Quéenes Maiesties Priuie Counsell, deceased: His life and death deseruing commendation, and crauing memory to be imitated, was such as followeth. His fide∣lity to two Kings and two Quéenes in dange∣rous times and great rebellions, in which time & alwaies as cause serued, he was Lieutenant of Lancashire and Cheshire. His godly disposition to his tenants, neuer forcing any seruice at their hands, but due payment of their rent. His libe∣rality to strangers, his famous houskéeping, his féeding of aged persons twice a day forty and odde, besides all commers thrice a wéeke appoin∣ted for his dealing daies, and euery good Friday 35 yeares relieued one with another 2700, with meate, drinke, and mony worth. His cunning in setting bones disioynted or brake, his chirur∣gery & desire to helpe the poore, his deliuery of his George and seale of the Lord Strange,An. reg. 15 with exhortation that he might kéepe it so vnspotted in fidelity to his Prince, as he had, and his hope that he died in the Quéenes fauour, his ioyfull parting this world, his taking leaue of all his seruants by shaking of hands, and his remem∣brance to the last day. The 18 of Ianuary William Lord Herbert Earle of Worcester, began his iourney toward France, to the christning of the Kings daughter there, in stead of the Quéenes maiesty of Eng∣land. The said Earle with many of his compa∣ny, were robbed vpon the sea of much of their baggage▪ and thrée or foure of their men slaine.
In the moneth of February through sundry hainous complaints brought to the Quéenes Maiesty and her Counsell,The nar∣row sea scoured. of Pirats that kept the narrow Seas, doing many robberies, as also the robbing of the Earle of Worcester, it plea∣sed her Maiesty to send one of her Ships named the Swallow, vnder the charge of William Hol∣stocke Esquire, controller of her highnesse shippes, who had with him the Gillian, the Barke Garet, and the Barke of Yarmouth, and 306 able Marriners, Gunners, and Souldiers in the said three shippes, and one Barke which scoured the narrow Sea, from the North for∣land as farre Westward as Falmouth in Corn∣wall, and tooke twenty ships and Barkes of sun∣dry nations, viz. English, French, and Flem∣mings, (but all Pirats) and in fashion of warre.Pirats on the West seas. He apprehended in those ships and Barkes to the number of 900 men of all nations, and sent them to Sandwich, Douer, Wight, and Ports∣mouth (whereof three of them that rebbed the Earle of Worcester were shortly after executed at Wight.) Also the said William Holstocke did rescue and take from the abouesaid Pirats, xv. other merchants shippes laden with mer∣chandises, yt were their prises,Pirats ex∣ecuted. being of sundry nations, and set at liberty the said fifteene mer∣chants shippes and goods: which done hee re∣turned. The 25 of March being Wednesday in Easter weeke, George Browne cruell murdered neare to Shooters-hill in Kent, a wealthy merchant of
London named George Sanders,1573. G. Sāders murdered. & Iohn Beane of Wolwich, which murder was committed by the procurement of mistresse Sanders, wife to the said George Sanders,G. Brown, Anne Sā∣ders, Anne Drury, & trusty Ro∣ger, hang∣ed. for the which fact, George Browne was hanged in Smithfield in London, the 20 day of Aprill, and after hanged in chaines neare vnto the place where hee had done the fact. Mistris Anne Sanders, mistris Anne Drewry, and trusty Roger mistris Druries man, were al as accessary, hanged in Smithfield on the 13 of May. Not long after Anthony Browne,A. Browne hanged at Yorke. brother to the forenamed George Browne, was for notable felonies conueied from Newgate to Yorke, and there hanged. This yeare the Quéene of England being mo∣ued by the Regent of Scotland, sent a power of 1500 Englishmen to the siege of Edenborow Castle, sir William Drewry knight Marshall of Barwicke, to be generall of her forces there, who with his Captaines and souldiers marched thitherward from Barwicke to Léeth, and from thence on the 25 of Aprill to Edenborough, en∣tred the towne, & the same day, summoned the Castle, raised mounts, & began the siege in fiue places,Edenbo∣rough ca∣stle yeeld∣ed to the English. continuing the same so hote, ye on the 28 of May, the Castle was surrendred into his hands, & his ensigne was set vp, and afterwards spred in sundry places of the Castle, and after∣wards, by him it was deliuered vnto the vse of the K. of Scots, part of the spoile was giuen to the souldiers, the Canons and artillery with certaine other instruments left to the King:
more you may reade in my Annales. The second of Iune,Haile in Northāp∣tonshire. a great tempest of raine happened at Tocester, in Northhampton shire, where-through sixe houses of that Towne were borne downe, and fourtéene more sore perished, the haile-stones were sixe inches about, one child was there drowned: and many shéepe with o∣ther cattell. The sixtéenth of Iune, T. WoodhouseThomas Wood∣house. Priest was arraigned in the Guild hall of London, and condemned of high Treason, who had iudgment to be hanged and quartered, and was executed at Tiburne, the 19 of Iune. The sixtéenth of August, Walter, Earle of Essex, accompanied with the Lord Rich, and di∣uers other Gentlemen, embarked themselues in seuerall ships at Lerpoole, and tooke their voy∣age towards Ireland.The Earle of Essex sailed into Ireland. The Earle after many and great dangers on the Sea, landed at Knock∣fergus. The Lord Rich with the like dangers, landed at Castle Kilcliffe; where being met by Captaine Malby, master Smith, and master Moore, was conductdd to master Malbies house, where he had in readines on the morrow mor∣ning 150 horsemen for their safegard to Knock∣fergus, beside 50 kernes. Sir Brian Makephelin on the 6 of Septem∣ber, came to Knockfergus, to the Earle of Es∣sex, and there made his submission. After him, Ferdorough Macgillasticke Roze, Oge, Macwilline did the like, and diuers others, sent their messengers to the Earle, to signifie,
that they were at his disposition, as the Baron of Dongarrow, Condonell, Odonell, and the Captaine Kylulto. The Earle of Essex, hauing the country of Clanyboy,Earle of Essex Ge∣nerall of Vlster. and other, the Quéenes Maiesty di∣rected her Letters to the Lord Deputie of Ire∣land, willing him to make the Essex Captaine generall of the Irish Nation, in the Prouince of Vlster, and to diuide the country won, Clany∣boy, and else-where, &c. Shrieues.Iames Haruey, Thomas Pullison. Maior.Sir Iohn Riuers, Grocer. An. reg. 16 A mon∣strous fish.The 6 of Iuly in the Isle of Thanet, a mon∣strous fish of the sea, did shut himselfe on shore, where for want of water, beating himself on the sands, he died. The length of this fish was twen∣ty two yards, the nether iaw, 12 foote, the ope∣ning, the thicknes from the back whereon helay, to the top of his belly, was 14 foote, his taile of the same bredth, betwéen the eyes, 12 foote, some of the ribs were 16 foot long, his tongue was fif∣téene foot long. Obsequie for the K. of France.The 7 of August, a solemne Obsequie was kept in Pauls Church in London, for Charles the 9. King of France. The 15 of August, being Sunday, Agnes Bridges, a maid about the age of 20 yeares, and Rachel Pinder, a wench about 12 yeres old, who both of them had counterfeited to be possessed by the diuell, stood at Pauls Crosse, where they ac∣knowledged their hypocriticall counterfeiting, requiring forgiuenesse of God, & the world: for
they had made the people beléeue many things. The 4 of September in the afternoone,A Ladde drowned in a chan∣nell in London. such a forme of raine hapned at London, as the like of long time could not be remēbred, wherethrough, the chanels of the City, suddenly ran with a for∣cible course, that a lad about the age of 18 yéeres, néere vnto Dowgate, was borne ouer with the streame, and by the same, carried from the con∣duit there, towardes the Thames, with such a swiftnes, that no man with staues, or otherwise, could stay him, till hee came against the cart whéele, that stood in the water gate, afore which time he was drowned, and found starke-dead. Thomas Blanke, Antony Gammage. Iames Hawes Hawes, Cloathworker. This Maior kept no feast at the Guild hall, but diued at his owne house,No Ma∣iors feast. with his brethren the Aldermen, the companies dined at their se∣uerall halles. Michaelmas Tearme,Terme ad∣iourned. Two tides in one houre. Fiery im∣pressions maruai∣lous. An. reg. 17 which had bin adiour∣ned by Proclamation, beganne at Westminster on the sixt of Nouember. The same sixt day in the morning, there happened two great tides in the Riuer of Thames: the first, by course, the other, within an houre after, which ouer-flowed the marshes. The 14 of Nouember, about midnight, diners strange impressions of fire and smoake were séene in the Aire, to procéede forth of a black cloud in the North, towards the South, which so continued til the next morning.
The next day following, the heauens from  parts did séeme to burne, and ouer our heads  flames from the Horizon round about rising  meete. Flies in February, the num∣ber strāgeThe foure and twentieth of February,  Tewkesbury a strange thing happened after  flood, which was not great. In the afternoon there came downe the riuer of Auen, great num∣ber of Flies and Béetles, such as in Sommer e∣uenings vse to strike men on the face, in great heapes, a foot thicke vpon the water, so that to credible mens iudgement, there were within a paire of buts length of those flies, about a hun∣dred quarters. The milles there-about, we dammed vp with them, for the space of foure dayes after, and then were cleansed by digging them out with shouels, from whence they came, as yet vnknowne, but the day was colde, and a hard frost. The 16 of February, betweene foure and fiue of the clocke in the afternoone,Earth∣quake. great Earth∣quakes happened in the City of Yorke, Worce∣ster, Glocester, Bristow, Hereford, and the Countries about, which caused the people to runne out of their houses, for feare they should haue fallen vpon their heads. In Tewkesbury, Bredon, and other places, the dishes fell from the cupbords, and the Bookes in mens studies from the shelues. In Norton Chappell, the people being on their knées at euening prayer, the ground mouing, caused them to runne away in great feare, fearing that the dead bodies
would haue risen, or the Chappell haue fal∣len: part of Rithing Castle fell downe, with certaine bricke Chimnies in Gentlemens hou∣ses. On Easter day, the third of Aprill,1575. Anabap∣tists at Pauls crosse. was dis∣closed a Congregation of Anabaptists, Dutch∣men, in a house without the barres of Algate, at London, whereof 17 were taken, and sent to prison, and foure of them bearing fagots, recan∣ted at Pauls crosse, on the 15 of May. The 17 of May, Mathew Parker,Archbi∣shop of Canter∣bury de∣ceased. Doctor of Diuinity, Arch-bishop of Canterbury deceased at Lambeth, and there was honorably buried. This reuerend Father examined throughly the English translation of the holy Bibles, wherein he partly vsed the helpe of his brethren Bishops, and other Doctors, and caused the same to bee newly printed in the largest Vo∣lume, for the furniture of many Churches then wanting. Also making diligent search for the antiquities of the Britons, and English Saxons, to the end those monuments might be carefully kept, he caused them to be well bound, and trimly couered, and such, whereof he knew very few copies to bee extant (amongst the which, whereunto I am witnesse, and was an helper, was Mathew Paris, Mathew Florilogus, and Thomas Walsingham) he caused to be prin∣ted. The famous Palace of his Sea at Canter∣bury decayed, hee renewed and fully restored with the charges of more then one thousand foure hundred pound.
He founded a Grammer schoole in Racha in the County of Lancaster, and did many other good déedes to Colledges, in giuing scholarships, Bookes, Money, and Plate, &c. The 21 of May, one man, and tenne women Anabaptists Dutch,Anabap∣tists bani∣shed. were in the consistory of Pauls, condemned to be burnt, only one woman was conuerted, the other were banished. Family of Loue.The 21 of Iune, stood at Pauls Crosse, fiue persons, termeth, the Family of Loue, who there confessed themselues vtterly to detest as well the Author of the Sect, H. N. as all his damnable errors and heresies. Anabap∣tists burnt.The 22 of Iuly, two Dutchmen Anabaptists were burnt in Smithfield. Thunder and haile.The 30 of Iuly in the afternoon, was a great tempest of lightning and thunder, wherthrough both men and beasts in diuers places were stric∣ken dead. Also at that time fell haile stones seuen inches about. The 26 of September, a Poulters wife in the Parish of Christs Church,Four chil∣dren at a burden. within Newgate in London, was brought to bed of foure chil∣dren at one burthen, all maiden children, and the same day moneth, the mother was buried, but all the foure children liuing, and were chri∣stened, but liued not long. Shrieues.Edward Osborne, Wolstone Dixie. Maior.Sir Ambrose Nicholas Salter. This Maior went by water to Westmin∣ster,
and there tooke his oath: hee kept no feast at Guild-hall, but dined at his owne house with his brethren. The Companies dined at their seuerall Halles. The 11 of February Anne Aueries wid∣dow, forswearing her selfe for a little money,An. reg. 18 God puni∣sheth per∣iury. that shee should haue paide for sixe pounds of w at a Shop in Woodstréet of Londun, fell immediatly downe spéechles, casting vp at her mouth, the same matter, which by Natures course, should haue béene voided downewards, till she died. A terrible example of Gods iudge∣ment, vpon such as make no conscience of swea∣ring, though it be against their owne elder brother. The 15 of February, Edmond Grindall,Archbish. elected. sometime Bishop of London, late Archbishop of Yorke, was in the Chapter house of S. Paules Church at London, elected Archbishop of Can∣terbury. The 5 of March, in the night, a Tilt-ooat,Tiltboat drowned. 1576. with about the number of thirty persons, com∣ming from Grauesend, toward London, were all drowned, one by excepted. The 15 of Iune, Martine Frobisher,Frobishers first voy∣age for the discouery of Cathay. with two small Barkers, and one Pinnesse, depar∣ted from Blackwall, vpon his voyage for the discouery of a passage to Cathay, by the North∣west seas. Vpon the first of Iuly, he had sight of Freesland, but durst not approch the same, by reason of the great Ice that lay along the coast:
not farre from thence he lost his pinnesse, and one of his Barkes, who mistrusting the danger of tempests, returned home, with report that their Generall Martine Frobisher was cast away, which Captaine notwithstanding conti∣nued his course Northwest, beyond any man that hath heretofore discouered, and the 20 of Iuly, had a sight of a high land, which hee na∣med Quéene Elizabeths foreland, and after that another foreland with a great passage, diuiding as it were, the two maine lands asunder, this place he named Frobishers straight. After hee had passed sixtie leagues further, he went a shore, found the same to be inhabited with sauage peo∣ple, brought one of them into his Barke, and returning, arriued in England in the moneth of August. One of his company brought from thence a péece of blacke stone, which being brought to certaine Goldfiners to make a say thereof, found it to hold gold (as they said) and that very richly. The moneth of August, many complaints be∣ing brought to the Quéene against the Flush∣ingers, for great spoiles and robberies by them daily committed vpon her Subiects, her maie∣sty gaue order to put foure good ships and two Barkes of her owne to the Seas, vnder the charge of master William Holstocke Esquire, controller of all her highnesse shippes, with 1100 men, victualled for sixe wéekes, in which time was by them taken eight Flushingers shippes, and bakes, prizes, and two hundred and
twenty Sea Rouers in them, who were sent to sundry prisons. Walter, Earle of Essex, and Earle Marshall of Ireland, Knight of the Garter,Earle of Essex de∣ceased. falling sicke of a laske, the 25 of August, deceased on the 12 of September, at Diuelon in Ireland, and was buried at Carmarthen in Wales. William Kempton, George Barne.Shrieues. Iohn Langley Goldsmith.Maior. The 17 of March,An. reg 19 Patricke Brunton ouertur∣ned. through a strange tempest which happened in the North, néere to a Towne called Richmond, not onely cottages, trees, barnes, and hay-stackes, but also the most part of a Church called Patricke Brunton, was ouer∣throwne, with most strange sights in the Aire, both terrible and fearefull. The 26 of March,1577. Charita∣ble acts of M. Lamb. Holborne conduite builded. the new conduit néere vn∣to Holborne, with one cocke at Holborne Bridge, were begunne to be founded by Wil∣liam Lambe, sometime Gentleman of the Chappell to Ring Henry the eight, now citizen and Cloth-worker of London. The water whereof is conueyed into pipes of Lead, to the said conduit, more then two thousand yards in length; all which, of his own costs and charges, amounted to the summe of 19 hundred pound, was fully finished the 24 of August, in the same yeare. The said W. Lambe hath giuen to the com∣pany of Stationers, 6 pound 13 shillings, foure
pence, in the Parish Church of S. Faiths vnder Pauls Church in London, to giue to twelue poore people euery friday, 12 pence in money, and 12 pence in bread. Item to Christs Hospitall in London, yeare∣ly for euer, 6 pounds, and 100 pounds in many to purchase lands. Item to Saint Thomas Hospitall in South∣warke, foure pounds yearely. Item to the Hospitall, called the Sauoy som∣time. 10 pounds at once, to buy bedding for the poore. Item to the Cloth-workers in London, 4 pounds in the yéere. Also more, his late dwelling house, with other, to the value of 30 pounds the yeare, to the intent they should hire a Minister, to say diuine seruice euery Sunday, Wednes∣day, and Friday, and that foure Sermons eue∣ry yeare, after his decease, bee preached in the Church, to the said house belonging, called S. Iames in the wall by Creple-gate, and also to giue to 12 poore men, yearely, on the first of October, to euery one a Gowne of good Fréese, ready made, a shirt of good locoram, & a strong paire of shooes. And 12 poor women, 12 gown of the like Fréese, 12 smockes, and twelue paire of shooes for euer. A Free schoole and almes houses at Sutton in Kent.Item he erected a frée Schoole, and sixe almes houses at Sutton valens in Kent, where hee was borne, and appointed for the Master, twentie pounds, and the vsher tenne pounds yearely for euer, and to the sixe almes-hou∣ses,
tenne pounds yearely, with an orchard and gardens. Item towards a free Schoole at Maidstone in Kent. Item to set poore Clothiers aworke, in the country of Suffolke, one hundred pounds. To the towns of Ludlow and Bridgenorth, each of them a hundred pounds. The 31 of May, Martine Frobisher,A Second voyage toward Cathay. with one Ship and two Barkes, furnished for that pur∣pose, sailed from Harwich, in Essex, towardes Cathay, by the Northwest Seas, and entred his straits, beyond Quéene Elizabeths fore-land, a∣bout thirty leagues, where he went on shore, and finding store of gold Ore (as he had bin en∣formed) fraught his Ship and Barke, caught a man, woman and child of that country, and then on the twenty foure of August, returning, arri∣ued at Milford hauen on the twentieth of Sep∣tember. The 20 of Iune, W.Worth the reading. Lumney a poore man in the Parish of Emely, in the county of Worce∣ster, being kept in prison by a wealthy Widow, he hauing a Mare of 22 yeares old, with Foale, within thrée daies after, his Mare foaled a Mare Colt, the which immediatly had an Vdder, out of the which was milked the same day a pint of Milke, and euery day after, gaue aboue three pintes, to the great sustentation of the said poore mans wife and children, the which Colt conti∣nued in that sort, long time after, as hath béene séene of many thousands.
Strange & sudden sicknes at Oxford.The fourth, fift, and sixt dayes of Iuly, was the Assises held at Oxford, where was arraigned and condemned one Rowland Ienkes, for his se∣ditious tongue, at which time there arose amidst the people a dampe, that almost all were smothe∣red, very fewescaped, that were not taken at that instant, the Iurors died presently: shortly after died Sir Robert Bell, Lord chiefe Baron, Sir Rode Olie, Sir W. Babington, Master Weneman, M. de Olie, high Shrieue, M. Dan∣uers, M. Harcourt, M. Kirle, M. Pheteplace, M. Greenewood, M. Foster, M. Nash, Ser∣ieant Baram, M. Stephens, &c. There died in Oxford three hundred persons, and sickened there, but died in other places, 200 & odde, from the sixt of Iuly, to the twelth of August, after which day died not one of that sicknes, nor one of them infected not another, nor any one wo∣man or child died thereof. Tempest in Norff.On Sunday, the fourth of August, betwéene the houre of 9 and 10 of the clocke in the fore∣noone, whilst the Minister was reading of the second Lesson in the Parish Church of Blib∣rough (a town in Suffolke) a strange and te∣le tempest of Lightning and Thunder, stroke through the wall of the same Church, into the ground, almost a yard déepe, draue downe all the people on that side, aboue 20 persons, then ren∣ting the wall vp to the Reuestry, cleft the doore, and returned to the Stéeple, rent the timber, brake the chains, and fled toward Bongey, sixe miles off: the people that were stricked downe,
were found groueling more then halfe an houre after, whereof a man and a boy were found stack dead, the other were scorched. The like flash of Lightning and crackes of Thunder, rent the Parish Church of Bongey, nine miles from Norwich, wrung in sunder the wires & whéeles of the clocke, slew two men which sate in the belfrey, and scorched another, which hardly es∣caped. The stone Tower of London Bridge,The tower vpon Lon∣dō Bridge new buil∣ded with timber. being decayed, was taken downe, and a new foun∣dation drawne, Sir Iohn Langley, Lord Ma∣ior of the City of London, laide the first stone, the 28 of August, in the presence of the Shrieues of London, and the two Bridge-Masters. Nicholas Backhouse, Francis Bowyer.Shrieues. Sir Thomas Ramsey, Grocer.Maior. This sir Thomas Ramsey,Sir Thom. Ramseyes gift, is of 243 l. the yeare, to Christs Hospitall Lord Maior of the City of London, with the goodly and vertuous Lady, Dame Mary his wife, both liuing, being seised of lands in the right of the said Dame Ma∣ry, and of her inheritance, haue giuen the fée sim∣ple of the same lands, being the yearely value of 243 l to Christs Hospitall in London. The rents and profits whereof are limited to be im∣ployed, as followeth, viz. vnto Peter House in Cambridge, shalbe giuen yearely forty pound to the finding of foure schollars, and two fellowes there. More, tenne pound yearely towardes
the relieuing of the poore, harboured in the Hospitall of Saint Bartholomew in London, and other tenne pounds yearely, to the relie∣uing of poore Prisoners, in the foure Prisons of London, to wit, Newgate, Ludgate, and the two Counters, this to be continued for euer, the residue to be conuerted towardes reliefe of the poore children of Christs Hospitall afore∣said. This gift she afterward in her widowhood, confirmed, and augmented greatly, both in her life, and by her Testament. A blazing Starre.The 11 of Nouember, at night, was seene a blazing Starre with a long streame, which was nightly séene, till eight of the clocke. An. reg 20 Sergeants feast.Tae 19 of Nouember, the new Sergeants at the Law, seuen in number, held their feast in the Temple of London. A warning to Coniu∣rers.The 17 of Ianuary, one Simon Pembrooke, dwelling in Southwarke, being vehemently suspected to be a Coniurer, by commaunde∣ment of the ordinary Iudge for those parts, ap∣peared in the Parish Church of Saint Saui∣our, at the court holden there: which Simon bu∣sied in entertaining a Proctor, and hauing mo∣ney in his hand, leaned his head vpon the pew, wherein the Proctor stood, which after he had done a certain space, the Proctor began to lift vp his head, to sée what he aild, and found him de∣parted out of life, and straightway the said Si∣mon fell downe, ratling a little in the throat, and neuer spake word after. This was done euen as the Iudge came into the church, who said it
was the iust iudgment of God, towards those that vsed Sorcery, and a great example to ad∣monish others to feare the iustice of God. After his clothes being opened, there were found a∣bout him diuellish bookes of coniuration, and abominable practices, a picture of a man, ha∣uing thrée dice in his hand, and this writing, Chance dice fortunately, and diuers papers of such like matters, as hee had dealt in for men, such as are mentioned in Leuiticus, the 20 chapter, the 6 verse. If any soule turne himselfe after such as worke with spirits, and after south∣sayers, to go awhooring, (saith the Lord) I will put my face against that soule, and will cut him off from among my people. The 3 of February, Iohn Nelson,Nelson executed. for de∣nying the Quéenes supremacy, was drawen to Tiburne, and there hanged and quar∣tered. The 10 of March,1578. deceased the Lady Marga∣ret, Countesse of Lineaux, and was buried at Westminster. The 31 of May, Martine Frobisher,Frobi∣shersthird voyage. with fiftéene saile of good ships well appointed, depar∣ted from Harwich in Essex, on his third voyage towards Cathay. The 31 of Iuly, after many attempts, and sundry times being put backe by Ilands of Ice in his straites, he came to anker in the Ilands, now by her Maiesty named Meta incognita, wheras in the yere before, they fraght their shippes with the like Ore, and then on the last of August, returning thence, arriued safely
in England, about the first of October. Shrieues.George Bond, Thomas Starky. Maior.Sir Richard Pipe, Draper. An. reg. 21 Cassimere receiued.The 22 of Ianuary, about 7 of the clocke at night, Iohn Cassimere, Count Palatine of the Rhene, and Duke of Bauaria, landing at the Tower of London, was there by diuers Noble men, and others, honorably receiued, and con∣ueyed by cresset-light, and torch-light to Sir Thomas Gressams house in Bishops-gate stréet, where hee was feasted and lodged till Sunday next, and then by the Nobility, brought to the court at Westminster, and after lodged in Sommerset-house. On the eight of February, he was made Knight of the Garter, and on the fourtéenth of February, departed from London homewards, with great rewards giuen by the Quéenes Maiesty, the Nobility, and men of honour. Deepe snow upon a sudden.The fourth of February, and the night fol∣lowing, fell such abundance of snow, that on the fift in the morning, the same was found at London, to be two foot déepe in the shallowest, and otherwise being driuen by the winde very boistrous in the Northeast, on bankes, an ell, or yard and a halfe déepe, in the which drifts of snow in the countries, many cattell, and some men and women were ouer-whelmed and lost, it snowed till the eight day, and fréezed till the tenth. When following a thaw, with continuall
raine a long time after,Greatland waters which caused such high floods, that the Marshes and low grounds being drowned, the water rose so high in Westminster hall, that after the fall thereof, some fishes were found there to remaine. The 20 of February deceased sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Kéeper of the great Seale of Eng∣land,Lord Kee∣per decea∣sed. who was honourably buried vnder a sumptuous monument in Pauls Church of London, the 9 of March. The 25 of Aprill sir Thomas Bromley knight,1579 Lord chā∣cellor. was made Lord Chancellor of England. The 14 of Aprill,An here∣tick burnt at Nor∣wich. Matthew Hamont of Hi∣thersey, thrée miles from Norwich plough∣wright, for denying Christ to be our Sauiour, and publishing diuers other horrible heresies, was conuented before the Bishop of Norwich, condemned in the consistorie, and deliuered to the Shrieues of Norwich to bée executed: but because he had spoken words of blasphemy a∣gainst the Quéenes Maiesty and other of her Counsell, he was by the Maior Sir Robert Wood, and Sergeant Windam Recorder, con∣demned to lose his eares, which were cut off the thirtéenth of May in the Market place of Nor∣wich, and on the 20 of May he was burnt in the Castle ditch there. This yeare Marke Scalior,A locke & key weigh¦ed but one wheat corne. Blackesmith of London, for triall of his workemanship made one hanging locke of Iron, stéele and brasse of eleuen seuerall péeces, and a pipe key, all cleane wrought, which waied but one graine of gold.
He also at the same time made a chaine of gold of forty thrée linkes, to which chaine the locke and key being fastned and put about a fleas necke,Great art and labor to very small pur∣pose. she drew the same with ease. All which locke and key, chaine, and flea, wayed but one graine and a halfe: a thing most incredible, but that I my selfe haue séene it. The traite∣rous fact of Thomas Apple∣tree.The 17. of Iuly the Quéenes Maiesty being on the riuer of Thames, betwixt her Mannor of Gréenwich and Depford, in her priuy barge, ac∣companied with the French Ambassadour, the Earle of Lincolne, and, others; it chanced that one Thomas Appletree, seruingman in the com∣pany of others, rowing vp and downe the Thames, hauing a Calliuer charged with a bul∣let, & shooting at randon, by misfortune shot one of the watermen (the second next vnto the bales of the said barge which sate within sixe foote of her Highnesse) cleane through both armes, for the which fact the said Thomas was on the 21 of Iuly brought to the water side, where was a Gibbet set vp, and when the hangman had put the rope about his necke, he was by the Quéenes pardon deliuered from execution. Iohn Fox deliuered 269 Chri∣stians out of the Turkes hands.This years Iohn Foxe of Woodbridge, Willi∣am Wicnor, Robert Moore Englishmen, hauing béene prisoners in Turkey about the space of thirtéene yeares, with more than 260 other Christians of diuers nations, by killing of their kéeper, meruailously escaped, and returned to their natiue countries. Great wa∣ter floods.In the month of September and October fell
great winds and raging floods in sundry places of this Realme, where through many men, cat∣tle, & houses, were drowned. In ye town of New∣port the cottages were borne downe and the corne lost, pasture ground ouerwhelmed, cattell drowned. In the towne of Bedford the water came vp into the Market place, where cubbords, chests, and formes, swam about the houses, their fuell, corne and hay was wract and borne away. Also the towne of Saint Edes in Hun∣tingtonshire was ouerflowed suddenly in the night, when all men were at rest, the waters brake in with such force, that the towne was all defaced, the Swannes swam downe the Market place, and all the towne about the boates did floate. Gormanchester was suddenly supprest, their houses full of water, and their cattell de∣stroied. Martin Calthorpe, Iohn Hart.Shrieues. Sir Nicholas Woodroofe, Haberdasher.Maior. On the 21 of September,An. reg. 22 Sir Tho∣mas Gre∣sham de∣ceased. Sir Thomas Gre∣sham knight, agent to the Quéene (who had builded the Royall exchange in London) decea∣sed suddenly at his house in Bishops gate stéets of London, and was buried in the parish Church of S. Elen there. The 6 of Aprill being Wednesday in Easter weeke,1580 Earth quake ge∣nerall. about sixe of the clocke towards the eue∣ning, a sudden earthquake happened at Lon∣don, and generally throughout England, by
violence whereof, the great clocke bell at West∣minster strooke against the hammers, as diuers clocks and bells against their hammers and clap∣pers both in the City and country did the like. In London a péece of the Temple Church fell downe. In the late dissolued Church of the Gray Friars now called Christs Church, in the Sermon time one falling from the top, killed a yong man out of hand, and one other stone so bruised a maiden, his fellow seruant both to one master, that she liued but 4 daies. Diuers other were sore bruised running out of the Church. Some stones fell from the Church of Saint Paul in London, and some from the Church of Saint Peter at Westminster, diuers chimnies with shaking lost their tops, and ships on the riuer of Thames and on the Seas, were séene to totter: this earthquake continued about London not passing one minute of an houre, but in East Kent, and the sea coast, there∣about it was felt three times, to wit, at 6.9.11. of the clocke. The first of May, after 12 of the clocke in the night, was an earthquake felt in diuers places in Kent, namely at Ashford, great Chatte, &c. which made the people there to rise out of their beds, and to runne to their churches to call vpon God, by earnest praier to be merci∣full vnto them. Strange haile.The 13 of Iune about 6 of the clocke in the morning, at Shipwash within Bothell Baro∣ny in Northumberland, there happened a tem∣pest of lightning and thunder, after the which
of a sudden, came great showers of haile, a∣mongst the which were stones of diuers shapes. The 17 of Iune,A mon∣strous child. in the Parish of Blansdon in Yorkeshire, after a great tempest of lightning and thunder, a woman of foure score yeares old named Alice Perin, was deliuered of an hideous monster, whose head like vnto a sallet, the fore part of his body like a man, but hauing eight legges, not one like another, and a taile of halfe a yard long. About the 18 of Iuly,Souldiers transpor∣ted into Ireland. the Lord Gray tooke his voiage towards Ireland, as Lord Deputy thereof, after whom were sent diuers bands of lusty souldiers, both horsemen and footmen, vn∣der the leading of expert captaines. The 23 of September at Fennistanton in Huntingtonshire, one Agnes,child mō∣strous. wife to William Linsey, was deliuered of an vgly and strange monster, with a face blacke, mouth and eyes like a Lyon, and both male and female. Ralph Woodcocke, Iohn Allot.Shrieues. The eight of October appeared a Crinicall or blasing starre, bushing toward the East,Blasing Starre. which was nightly séene more than two monthes after. The eightéenth of October,Sergeants feast. were made 8 Ser∣geants at law, to wit, William Fleetwood Re∣corder of London, Edward Flowerdew, Thomas Snagge, William Periam, Robert Halton, Iohn Clench, Iohn Puckering, Thomas Walmsley, and
held their feast in the new temple at London. The 19 of October, proclamation was pub∣lished at London, for the apprehension, and se∣uere punishing of all persons suspected to be of the familie of loue. Maior.Sir Iohn Braunch, Draper. There arriued vpon the West coast of Ire∣land, certaine companies of Italians and Spa∣niards sent by the Pope to aide the Earle of Desmond in his rebellion, which fortified them∣selues strongly neare Smerwicke, in a fort which they called Castle delore, there erecting the Popes Banner against her Maiesty: which when the Lord Gray of Wilton deputy of Ire∣land vnderstood, marched thitherward, and the sixt of Nouember, hearing of the arriuall of foure or fiue of the Queenes Maiesties ships, & also of three barkes, fraughted from Limorket and Korke with victuals, on the morrow after marched towards the fort, vnto which he gaue so hot an assault, that on the ninth of Nouem∣ber the same was yeelded, all ye Irish men & wo∣men hanged, & more then 400 Spaniards, Ita∣lians, & Byscaies at ye time put to the sword, the Coronell, Captaines, Secretary, & other (to the number of 20) saued for ransome. In which for∣tresse was found good store of money, bisket, ba∣con, oyle, wine and diuers other prouisions of victuall, sufficient for their company for halfe a yeare,An. reg. 23 beside armour, powder, shot, and other
furniture for two thousand men and vpwards. The 28 of Nouember, were arraigned in the Kings bench, William Randall for coniuring to know where treasure was hid in the earth, and gods felloniously taken, Ralph Spacie, and Chri∣stopher Waddington for being present, Randall, Elas, Spacie, and Waddington were found guil∣ty, and had iudgement to be hanged, Randall was executed, the other were repriued. About the foure and twentith of December in the towne of Walsam in the County of Sus∣sex, a Child of eleuen yeares old,Strange speeches of a child. named William Withers, lay in a trance, and then comming to himselfe againe, vttered to the standers by many strange speeches, against pride, coueteousnesse, and coldnesse of Charity, &c. About the 12 of Ianuary proclamation was published at London,Against Iesuites & massing priests. for reuocation of sundry the Queenes Maiesties subiects remayning be∣yond the seas vnder colour of study, and yet li∣uing contrary to the lawes of the Realme. And also against the retayning of Iesuites and mas∣sing Priests, sowers of sedition, and other trea∣sonable attempts, &c. The 13 of Ianuary, a man was drawne to S. Thomas of Watrings, & there hanged, headed, & quartered, for begging by a licence, wherunto the Queenes hand was counterfeited. The sixteenth of Ianuary the Parliament began at Westminster,Parliamēt at West∣minster. and on the twentith of Ianuary the Queenes maiesty went from White hall, to the Parliament house by water.
Iusting at Westmin∣ster.The 22 of Ianuary triumphant iusting was accomplished at Westminster, where many of the beholders as well men as women sore ht, some maimed, and some killed by falling of scaffolds. Mice de∣uoured grasse.About Halontide last past, in the marshes of Dainsey hundred, in a place called Southmin∣ster, in the County of Essex, there suddenly ap∣peared an infinite multitude of Mice, which o∣uerwhelming the said marches, did sheare and gnaw the grasse by the roote, spoyling and tting the same with their venemous teeth, in such sort, that the cattell which grased there, were smitten with a morraine and died therof, which vermine by policy of man could not be destroied, till it came to passe that there flocked together all about the same marshes, such a num∣ber of Owles, as all the shire was not able to yeeld, whereby the marsh-holders were shortly deliuered from the vexation of the Mice, the like of this was also in Kent. The 4 of Aprill, the Queene dined at Dep∣ford,Francis Drake knighted· and there after dinner entred the shippe wherein captaine Drake had sailed about the world, and being there, a bridge that her Maie∣sty came ouer brake, being vpon the same th 200 persons, and no hurt done by the same, and there she knighted Captaine Francis Drake i in his ship. The Banqueting house builded at Westmin∣ster,1581 beginning on the 26 of March, and fini∣shed on the eighteenth of Aprill, in which me
space, to wit,Banque∣ting house at West∣minster. Ambassa∣dors out of France. on the sixtéenth of Aprill arriued at Douer certaine noble men of France, to wit, Francis Burbon, Prince Daulphine of Auergne, Arthur Casse Marshall of France, Lodowike Lusigaian, Lord of Lansac, and others. These came from Grauesend by water to London, and so to the Court; then being at Westminster, where they were honourably entertained, the Nobles and gentlemen desirous to shew them all crtesie, prepared a triumph in most sump∣tuous order, vpon Whitson Munday & Tews∣day: the chiefe chalengers of which attempts,Iousting, tourney∣ing and barriars. were the Earle of Arundell, L. Windsor, Philip Sidney and other, the defendants to the number of one and twenty, all which of them sixe courses against the former chalengers, who performed their parts valiantly. The 21 of Iune in the night,Crosse in Cheap de∣faced. the lowest I∣mages about the Crosse in Cheap, were broken and defaced, whereupon proclamation was made, that who so would bewray the doers thereof, should haue forty Crownes, but no∣thing came to light, but an euill end befell the doer. This yeare were to be séene in London two Dutchmen of strange statures,Two men of strange stature. the one in height seuen foot and seuen inches, in breadth betwixt the shoulders thrée quarters of a yard and two inches, the compasse of his breast one yard halfe and two inches, and about the wast one yard, quarter, and one inch, the length of his arme to the hands a full yard, a comely man of
person, but lame of his legs, for he had broken them with lifting of a barrell of Béere. The o∣ther was in hight but thrée foot, he had neuer a good foot nor any knée at all, and yet could dance a galliard, he had no arme, but a stump to the el∣bow or little more on the right side, on the which singing he would daunce a cup, and after tosse it about thrée or foure times, and euery time receiue the same on the said stumpe, hée would shoote an arrow néere the marke, flourish with a rapier, throw a bowle, beat with a ham∣mer, hew with an axe, sound with a trumpet, and drinke euery day tenne quarts of the best béere, if he could get it. Prisoners arraigned for not cō∣ming to Church.The 18 of Iuly were brought from the Fléete, the Gatehouse, Newgate, and the Coun∣ters, sundry prisoners indicted for refusing to come to the Church, all which being conuicted by their owne confession had iudgement accor∣dingly to pay twenty pounds for euery moneth of such wilfull absence. Shriues.Richard Martine, W. Webbe. Maior.Sir Iames Haruy, Ironmonger. Monsieur Duke of Anioue came in∣to Englād An. reg. 24.The first of Nouember Monsieur the French Kings brother Duke of Anioue, and other No∣bles of France hauing lately arriued in Kent, came to London, and were honourably receiued and retained at the Court with great banque∣ting. Campion & others executed.The first of December Edmond Campion
Iesuite, Ralph Sherwin, and Alexander Brian Seminary Priests, hauing béene arraigned and condemned for high treason, were drawne from the tower of London to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered. The first of February the Quéenes maiesty,Monsieur returneth, and is ho∣nourably conuaied toward the sea. with her whole Court accompanied Monsieur Duke of Anioue from Westminster to Canter∣bury, where, when she had feasted all the French Nobility, either tooke leaue of another, and her Maiesty returned. The sixt, the Duke lodged at Sandwich, and on the next morning tooke the sea, being accompanied with the Earle of Leicester, the Lord Hunsdon, the Lord Howard, knights of the Garter, the Lord Willowby, Lord Windsor, Lord Shefild, Lord Hyward, and Lord Audley, Mr. Sidney, sir George Cary, Ma∣ster Iohn and Robert Cary, and a great number of Gentlemen, so as the whole traine that atten∣ded vpon the said Earle, was one hundred gen∣tlemen, and more then thrée hundred seruing∣men. The Lord Hunsdon, had of gentlemen and others to the number of one hundred and fifty, and the Lord Hayward had as many,Duke of Anioue re¦ceiued in∣to Zeland. all which sailed in 15 ships to Flushing in Zeland, where the Prince of Orenge and the States of the Low Countries, receiued the said Duke and our Nobles of England with great ioy,Duke of Anioue created Duke of Brabant, &c. conducting them from thence to Middleborow, and then to Antwerpe, where before the twen∣tith day of the same moneth, they solemnely created the said Duke of Anioue, Duke Lothyer,
Braband, &c. and our Nobility returned into England. 1581. Paine ex∣ecuted, at Chelms∣ford.Iohn Paine Priest being indicted of high trea∣son for words by him spoken, was arraigned & condemned at Chelmsford, and there executed on the second of Aprill. The Con∣duit in Fleetstreet newly built.This yeare the water Conduit in Fléetstréete was new builded with a larger Cesterne at the charges of the City. The fiftéenth of May at night about ten of the clocke a blasing starre appeared, descending in the Northwest,A blasing starre. the beard whereof streamed Southeast. 7. Priests executed at Tiburn.The 28 of May, Thomas Ford, Iohn Sheret, and R. Iohnson Priests, hauing bin before con∣demned of high treason, were drawne from the Tower of London to Tiburne, and there hang∣ed and quartered. And on the 30 of May, Luke Kerby, William Filby, Thomas Cotten, and Lau∣rence Richardson, were for the like treason in the same place likewise executed. Lord Wil∣owby Ambassa-into Den∣marke.The 14 of Iuly, Peregrine Bartue, Lord Wil∣lowby of Eresby, appointed Ambassador to Frederick King of Denmarke, with the Garter, imbarked at Kingstone vpon Hull, and prospe∣rously arriued at Elismore in Denmarke, on the twentith of the same moneth. On the foure∣téenth of August, the said King receiued robes of the order, ware the Garter, Collar & George, and the Lord Ambassadour returning with his traine, arriued at Bromtholine in Norffolke, on the twentith of September.
This yeare was first founded a publike lecture in Surgery,The Le∣cture of Surgery first foun∣ded. to begin to be read in the Colledge of Physitions in London, Anno 1584. the sixt of May, &c. by Iohn L. Lumley, and Richard Caldwell D. in Physicke. The Reader whereof, to be a Doctor of Physicke. The 19 of Iuly certaine firkins of gunpow∣der (to the number of seuen) and as many more firkens of Sturgeon,A strange misfor∣tune of gunpow∣der on Galley key▪ laden in a cart vpon Gal∣ley key, some small portion of the same powder being shed on the ground, the horse in the said Carre strooke fire with his foot, and fired all to∣gether, where through the Sturgeon was blowne away, some into the Thames, some else where, one firken was driuen through alomed wall that was boorded ouer, the Crane on the wharfe with the houses neare to adioyning sha∣tred, many men and horses so blasted, the 3 men and 7 horses died thereof. The 12 of August there arose a great tempest of lightning, thunder, whirlewind, and raine,A strange tempest in Norffolke. be∣side hailestones fashioned like to the rowels of spurs, 2 or 3 inches about, in the Country of Norfolke, betwéene the townes of North Wal∣sam, & Worstéed, which tempest beat the corne flat to the ground, rent vp many great trées, and shiuered them in péeces, or wound them like writhes, at Hemming (a mile from Worsted) the west doore of the Church weighing more then 300 weight, was lifted off the hookes, & blowen ouer the Font within one yard of the Chancel doore, the top of the Church was riuen vp, and
the lead blowen away, fiue webbes of Leade were rufled vp together like a gloue, and blown into the field without the Churchyard. At East Russen were many barnes blowne downe. Shrieues.William Roo, Iohn Hayden deceased the twenty foure of Nouember, and Cuthbert Buckle succeeded. Maior.Sir Thomas Blanke Haberdasher. Terme kept at Hartford.Michaelmas terme was adiourned to the Castle of Hertford, there to begin in Crastina Animarum. Thames Water brought into the high strets of Londō.Peter Morris frée denizon, conuaied Thames water in pipes of Lead, ouer the stéeple of Saint Magnus Church: at the North end of London bridge, & so into diuers mens houses in Thames stréet, Newfishstréet, and Grasse street, vp to the Northwest corner of Leaden hall (the highest ground of London) where the waste of the main pipe ranne first this yeare on Christmas euen, and since being diuided into foure spouts, oft times running foure waies, plentifully seruing to the commodity of the inhabitants neare ad∣ioyning in their houses, and also clensing the kennels of the stréet towards Bishops gate, Algate, the Bridge, and the Stocks market. But now no such matter, priuate commodity being preferred, common commodity is neg∣lected, and not reformed as was promised. The 17 of Ianuary in the Parish of Armi∣tage, in a place called Blackemore in Dorcet∣shire,
a péece of ground contayning three acres remoued from the place where it was first plan∣ted, and was carried cleane ouer another close,Ground remoued in Docet∣shire. where Alder and Willow trées grow,An. reg. 25 the space of forty goad (euery goad contayning 15 foote) and hath stopt vp a high way that directed to∣wards the market towne of Cerne, and yet not∣withstanding the hedges wherewith it was in∣closed, enuiron it still, and the trees stand there∣on bolt vpright, sauing one Oke that is well nigh twenty loads, remoued the place, whereas this ground had his being, is left like vnto a great pit. The 23 of Ianuary being Sonday,A gratious admoniti∣on to keepe the Sabbaoth. about 4 of the clocke in the afternoone, the old and vnder∣propped scaffolds round about the Beare-gar∣den, on the South side of the Thames, ouer a∣gainst the City of London, on excharged with people, sell suddenly downe, whereby to ye num∣ber of 8 persons men and women were slaine, & many others sore hurt and bruised. A friendly warning to such, as more delight themselues in the cruelty of beasts, then in the workes of mer∣cy, the fruits of true possessed faith, which ought to be the Sabboth daies exercise. This yeare 1583,1583. The Prince of Orenge slaine. Note. William Prince of Orenge was slaine by Iohn Iowrigny a Wallon Souldi∣er, who notwithstanding sundry extreame tor∣ments inflicted vpon his body and limbs in prison, as also hauing his flesh pluckt off with hot pincers vpon an open stage, yet he ne∣uer shrunke, nor craued any fauour, neither
repented him of the fact, but feared he had not slaine him. The Arch bishop of Collē ex∣pulsed for marrying a wife.About this time the Archbishop of Collen being well in yeares, married a wife, whereupon the Emperor with other Princes of Germany, made war vpon him, and forced him to flie into Holland for aid, but could not preuaile; & forth∣with there was an other preferred in his roome, and all was quiet. A house blowne vp with gun∣powder in Fetter-lane.On the sixtéene of Aprill about eight of the clocke in the morning, a gunpowder house in Fetter-lane, and diuers other houses neare ad∣ioyning, were blowen vp, with the spoile of fif∣téene hundred waight of powder, two men and one woman were slaine, and diuers other per∣sons sore hurt, and some strangely saued. Alasco of Poland.Albertus Alasco frée Baron of Lasco, Vai∣noide, or Palatine of Siradia in Poland, arri∣ued at Harwich in Essex, and on the last of Aprill, came by water to Winchester house in Southwarke, where he remained for the most part of his abode here. Elias Thacker was hanged at Saint Ed∣mond bury in Suffolke on the fourth of Iune, Iohn Coping on the sixt for spreading certaine bookes seditiously penned by one Robert Brown against the Booke of Common praier, establish∣ed by the Lawes of this realme. On the ninth of Iuly deceased Thomas Ratcliffe, Earle of Sussex, Lord Chamberlaine to her Maiesty, and knight of the Garter, at Bermendsey besides London, and was on
the 28 of Iuly, conueyed through the same city of London, toward Newhall in Essex, there to be buried. Edmond Grindall Doctor of Diuinity,Archbish. of Can∣terbury deceased. Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, deceased in Croydon, in Surrey, on the 6 of Iuly, and was there bu∣ried. Barnard Randolph Esquire, common Ser∣gean of the city of London, deceased on the 7 of August. This man in his life-time, deliuered to the company of the Fish-mongers in London, the summe of nine hundred pounds,Iustice Randolph his chari∣ty of 900 pounds. to be im∣ployed towards the conducting of Thames wa∣ter, cesterning the same in Lead, and castleying with stone in the Parishes of Saint Mary Mag∣dalen, and Saint Nicholas Colde Abbey, néere vnto Fish-stréet, seuen hundred pounds. The other two hundred pounds, to pay for euer yearely the summe of tenne pounds, viz. to∣wards the maintenance of a poore scholar in the Vniuersity of Oxford, yearely foure pounds: towards the mending of the high-wayes in the Parish of Tisehurst, in the County of Sussex, foure pounds. And to the poore people of the Parishes of Saint Nicholas Oliue in Bred-stréet, and Saint Mary Magdalen, néere old fish-stréete, forty shillings. More, he bequeathed to be bestowed in lands or annuitie, to the reliefe of the poore, inhabiting in the Wards of Quéene-hith, and castle Bay∣nard, in the city of London, and in the afore-said Parish of Tisehurst, in the County of Sussex,
the summe of 1000 pounds, a faire Legacie, if it be performed. At this time Py∣rats, and great Ro∣uers trou∣bled the Seas.In the moneth of Iune, were sent to the seas, a ship, called the Barke Talbot, and a smal Barke, both manned with one hundred men, vnder the charge of William Borough Esquire, Clerke of her Maiesties Nauie, for the appre∣hending of certain out-ragious sea-rouers, who for that they were many in number, and well appointed, so boldly behaued themselues, as that shortly after, it was confidently bruited, that they had vanquished in fight the said Ship and Barke, but within few dayes after, beyond all exspectation, they were by the said W. Bo∣rough and his company, discomfited and taken, to the number of ten saile,Sea Ro∣uers ap∣prehen∣ded and executed. whereof thrée prises, and some of the chiefe Pirats, namely T. Wal∣ton, alias Purser, Clinton, Athinson, W. Ellis, W. Valentine, alias Bagh, T. Beuen, and foure more, on the ninetéenth day of August, were hanged at Wapping. Walton as he went to the Gallowes, rent his Venetian Bréeches of crim∣son taffata, and distributed the same to such his old acquaintance as stood about him: but At∣kinson had before giuen his murrie Veluet dou∣blet, with great gold buttons, and his like colou∣red Veluet Venetians, laid with great gold lace, which he had worne at the seas of Porbeke, vn∣to such of his friends as pleased him. An here∣tick bur∣ned at Norwich.On the 17 day of September, Iohn Lewes, who named himselfe Abdoit, an obstinate He∣reticke, denying the Godhead of Christ, and
holding diuers other detestable heresies, was burned at Norwich. On the 22 of September, Albertus de Lasco,Palatine of Siradia in Poland returned. Palatine of Siradia in Poland, after he had wel viewed the order of our English Court and No∣bility, with other places of this Realme, especi∣ally, the Vniuersity of Oxford, he returned to∣wards Poland. On the 23 day of December, Iohn Whitgift,Doctor Whitgift Archbish. of Canter∣bury. Doctor of Diuinity, late Bishop of Worcester, was at Lambeth, translated to the Arch-bishop∣rick of Canterbury. The 25 of September, a monstrous childe was borne in Yorke-shire, hauing two heads. William Masham, Iohn Spencer.Shrieues. Sir Edward Osborne, Clothworker.Maior. The tenth of October, at Caster in Norfolke,A mon∣strous fish. about two miles from Yarmouth, there was a Fish, by force of the Easterly winde, driuen a∣shore, the length whereof, from the necke to the taile, was, seuentéene yards and a foote, the head was great, for the chap of the iaw was thrée yards and a quarter in length,An. reg 26 with téeth of thrée quarters of a yard compasse, great eyes, and two great holes ouer them, to spout water, her taile was fourtéene foot broad in thicknes, from the backe to the belly, she was foure yards and a halfe. This yéere 1583, the Quéene being at Barne Elmer, at the earnest suite of sir Francis
Walsingham, shee entertained twelue Players into her seruice,Players. and allowed them wages and li∣ueries, as Groomes of the Chamber, and vntill then she had none of her owne, but diuers Lorde had Players. Iames Earle of Desmond in Ireland, secret∣ly wandring without any succour, being taken in his cabine by one of the Irish,Desmonds head set on Londō bridge. his head was cut off, and sent into England, where the same (as the head of an Arch rebell) was set on Lon∣don Bridge, on the 13 of December. The 13 of December, through negligence of vndiscréet persons, brewing in the Towne of Nantwich,Nantwich in Che∣shire burnt. the fire being carelesly left, set vpon some light matter, and so burst forth to the roofs of the house, and in short time increased, that from the West end of the Towne, the flame was dispersed so furiously, that in short space a great part of the South side, and some of the East side, was burned downe to the ground. Which fire beginning at sixe of the clocke in the Euening, and continuing till sixe of the clocke in the Morning, consumed in a manner, all the whole towne, and about the number of two hundred houses, beside brew-houses, barnes, sta∣bles, &c. In all about 600 houses. Someruile Arden & others ar∣raigned.Iohn Someruile of Edstow in Warwickshire, of late discouered and taken in his way, com∣ming to haue killed the Quéene, confessed that he was moued thereunto by certaine traiterous persons, his kinsmen and allies, and also by of∣ten reading of certaine seditious bookes lately
published: for the which the same Someruile, Ed∣ward Arden Esquire, Mary Arden his wife (fa∣ther and mother in Law to the said Someruile) and Hugh Hall Priest, were on the 16 of De∣cember, arraigned in the Guild hall of London, where they were found guilty, and condemned of high treason. On the 19 of December, I. Someruile,Someruile strangled himselfe. and E. Arden, being brought from the Towre of Lon∣don, to Newgate, and there shut vp in seuerall places, within two houres after, Someruile was found to haue strangled himselfe. And on the morrow after, E. Arden was drawne from Newgate, into Smithfield, and there hanged,Arden ex∣ecuted. bowelled and quartered: whose head with So∣meruiles, was set on London Bridge, and his quarters on the gates of the City. On the 10 of Ianuary, William Carter was arraigned and condemned of high treason,Carter ex∣ecuted for printing of trayte∣rous books for printing a seditious and traiterous booke, inti∣tuled, A Treatise of schisme, and was for the same on the next morrow, drawne from New∣gate to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, and forthwith a booke was pub∣lished, intituled, A Declaration of the fa∣uourable dealing of her Maiesties Commissio∣ners, &c. The 7 of February,Fiue exe∣cuted for treason. were arraigned at West∣minster, I. Fenne, George Hadocke, I. Munden, I, Nutter, and Thomas Hemerford, all fiue were found guiltie of high treason, and had iudge∣ment to be hanged, bowelled, and quartered,
and were executed at Tiburne, on the 12 of Fe∣bruary. 1584. Throg∣morton executed.The 21 of May, Francis Throgmorton Es∣quire, was arraigned in the Guild-hall of the ci∣ty of London, where being found guilty of high treason, he was condemned, and had iudgment to be drawne, hanged, bowelled and quartered. The tenth of Iuly next following, the same Francis Throgmorton was conuayed by water, from the Tower of London, to the Blacke Fry∣ars staires, and from thence by land to the Ses∣sions hall in the old Baily, without Newgate, where he was deliuered to the Shrieues of Lon∣don, laid on a hurdle, drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered. Antwerpe besieged, & yeelded to the Duke of Parma.This yeare 1584, the rich and most flouri∣shing City of Antwerpe, was strongly be∣sieged by Alexander Duke of Parma, with eleuen thousand men: All which was in vaine, except hee could stoppe all reliefe by water, therefore he made a Bridge ouer the great Riuer of Scheld, by meanes whereof, the Citizens were wholly impeached of all ma∣ner of succour, so as they were constrained to submit themselues again to the King of Spaine gouernment, hauing endured a yeares siege: during which time,Citizens become resolute souldiers. fiue hundred gallant Mar∣chants, at their owne charges, became resolute Souldiers, skirmishing daylie with the e∣nemy, vntill by their owne forwardnesse, and the chance of warre, they were either slaine or taken.
Stephen Slanie, Henry Billingsley.Shrieues. Sir Thomas Pullison, Draper.Maior. The 12 of Nouember,An. reg. 27 the Quéene (retur∣ning after her Progresse) came to her Manor of S. Iames, where the Citizens of London, to the number of two hundred, in coates of Veluet, and chaines of gold, on horsebacke, and 1000 of the Companies on foot, (hauing torches ready, to giue light on euery side, receiued and wel∣commed her. And on the twenty foure day of the same moneth, her Maiesty and the Lords, rode to the Parliament, which was that day begun at Westminster. In the moneth of Ianuary deceased Edward Fines, Lord Clinton, Earle of Lincolne,Earle of Lincolne deceased. and Lord Admirall of England, Knight of the Gar∣ter, and one of her Maiesties priuy Councell, and was buried at Windsor. The 21 of Ianuary, Iesuites,Semina∣ries, and massing Priests ba∣nished. Semina∣ries, and other Massing Priests, to the number of 21, late prisoners in the Tower of London, Marshalsey, and Kings Bench, were shipped at the Tower Wharfe, to bee conueyed towardes France, and banished this Realme for euer. Henry Earle of Darby,Earle of Darby Ambassa∣dour into France. appointed by her Maiesty, Ambassadour to Henry, the third French King, to inuest him with the order of the Garter, on the 26 of Ianuary passed with his traine from London to Grauesend, and from thence to Douer, where they embarked &
landed at Calleis on the first of February, and returning againe, landed at Douer on the 11 of March. W. Parry executed.The second of March, W. Parry was drawne from the Tower, through the city of London, to Westminster, and there in the Palace Court, hanged and quartered for high treason, as may appeare by a booke, intituled, A true and plaine declaration, of the horrible treasons, pra∣ctised by William Parry, &c. hee was a cunning Traitor. This yéere, sir Walt. Mildmay Knight, one of her Maiesties priuy Councell, founded a Col∣ledge in the Vniuersity of Cambridge, and na∣med it Emanuel colledge.Emanuel Colledge founded. 1585. Parliamēt dissolued.The twenty nine of March, the Parlia∣ment was dissolued, at the breaking vp where∣of, her Maiesty in the Parliament house, made an Oration, as ye may reade in my larger labours. About the 24 of Aprill, by commandement from har Maiesty, the citizens of London ap∣pointed out of the companies of the same city, to the number of foure thousand men with ar∣mour ensignes, &c. the greater part whereof were shot,Citizens of London trained vp with shot. the other were pikes and halbarts in faire corslets, all these were trained vp vnder ex∣pert Captaines, and other officers, who muste∣red and skirmished daily at the Miles end, or in Saint Georges field, and on the 18 of May, mustred in the Parke of Gréenewich, and skirmished before the Quéenes Maiesty, who
gaue them thankes. The 25 of April,Earle of Arundell sent to the Tower. Philip Howard Earle of A∣rundell, was brought to the towre of London, for attempting to haue passed beyond the Seas, without licence of the Quéene. On the twentieth of Iune, Henry Percy, Erle of Northumberland, prisoner in the towre of London, vpon vehement suspition of high treason, was found there to haue murdered him∣selfe, as more at large in a larger booke I haue set downe. The 26 of Iune, arriued at London,The soue∣raignty of the Low Countries presented to her Ma∣iesty, and a pedigree drawne to proue the Q' title to those pro∣uinces by descent. Depu∣ties for the States of the Netherlands, who were lodged about the Tower stréete, and had their diet worshipfully appointed at the char∣ges of her Maiesty, in the Clothworkers hall. Those on the 29 of Iune, repayred to the Court then at Gréenewich, where they pre∣sented to her Maiesty, the soueraignty of those countries. The 4 of Iuly, Charles, Lord Howard, late Lord Chamberlaine, was made Lord Admirall: and Henry, Lord Hunsdon, was made Lord Chamberlaine of the houshold. The 5 of Iuly, T. Awfield Seminary Priest,Awfild & Welby executed. and T. Welby Dyer, were arraigned at London, found guilty, and had iudgment to be hang∣ed, as Felons, for publishing of bookes, contay∣ning false, seditious, and slanderous matter: these were on the next morrow executed at Tiburne. The sixteenth of Iuly, Sir Francis Rus∣sel
Knight, Lord Russell, third sonne to Francis Russell, Earle of Bedford, was slaine with a dagge in the borders of Scotland, beside Barwicke, by a Scot, as they met vpon a truce day. On the next morrow, Francis Russell, Earle of Bedford, Knight of the Garter, and one of her Maiesties priuy Councell, Father to the late named Sir Francis Lord Russell, slaine on the borders of Scotland,Earle of Bedford deceased. deceased, and was honourably buried at Cheineies in Bed∣ford-shire. Souldiers transpor∣ted into the Low Countries by com∣mission.In the moneth of Iuly, Souldiers were pressed in the Citie ef London, and being furni∣shed for the warres, at the charges of the com∣panies, set forth towards the Seas, on the 13 of August, and were transported ouer into Holland, Zeland, &c. as other the like Sruldi∣ers, out of other parts of the Realme before had béene. Ground and trees sunke.On the fourth of August, at the end of the Towne called Motingham, in Kent, 8 miles from London, the ground began to sinke, thrée great Elmes being swallowed vp, and driuen into the earth, past mans sight. The fourtéenth of September, Sir Francis Drake Generall, as well by ses, as by land, Chri∣stopher Carlile Esquire, Lieuetenant Generall, Martine Frobisher, with diuers other Gentle∣men Captaines, and two thousand and three hundred Souldiers and Sailers in twentie two Shippes and Pinesses, departed from Pli∣mouth: and passing by the Isles of Bayon, and
the Canaries, arriued at Saint Iago, which citty they tooke and burned: after, they sailed to Saint Domingo, which they spoiled and ransomed: from thence to Cartagena, which they also tooke, spoyled and ransomed: and re∣tiring homewards, razed and burned the city and Fort of S. Augustine, in Terra florida, and the 27 of Iuly, in Anno 1586, arriued at Pli∣mouth: their souldiers and saylers got but small spoyle. The ninetéenth of September,Seminary Priests banished. to the num∣ber of two and thirty Seminary Massing Priests, and other late prisoners in the Towre of London, Marshalsey, Kings Bench, and other places, were imbarked, to be transported ouer into the costes of Normandy, to be banished for euer. Antony Ratcliffe,Shrieues. Henry Pranell Sir Wolstone Dixie, Skinner.Maior. In the moneths of Nouember and Decem∣ber, many men and horses were shipped at the Tower wharfe, to be transported ouer into the Low countries. The 2 of December,An. reg. 28 Fredericke Lord Wind∣sor, deceased at Westminster,The Earle of Leice∣ster Lieu∣tenant ge∣nerall of the Low countries. and was honou∣rably buried at Bradenham, in Buckingham∣shire. And on the sixt of December, the Lord Ro∣bert Dudley, Erle of Leicester, Lord Lieutenant Generall, with his traine, entred the Towne
of Colchester in Essex, where he lodged at the house of sir Thomas Lucas, on the next day he set forward to Harwich: and on the eight of De∣cember, the said Earle, accompanied with the Earle of Essex, the Lord North, the Lord Aud∣ley, sir W. Russell, sir Thomas Sherley, sir Ar∣thur Basset, sir Walter Waller, sir Geruaise Clif∣ton, and other with his traine, to the number of 50 sailes of shippes and hoyes, set forward to∣wards Vlushing, where, by sir Philip Sidney Gouernor, and others, he was honorably enter∣tained, as he was the like into all other townes of the Low countries. The Quéene tooke order for the peopling and inhabiting of the countries, late belonging to the Earle of Desmond, to which end, diuers honou∣rable and worshipfull Gentlemen, prouided to be vndertakers of signories there, whereof some went into the said Country, others according to order taken, sent their people, among which were,Desmond in Ireland, peopled of the Eng∣lish natiō. Sir Christopher Hatton, sir Walter Raw∣leigh, sir William Courtney, sir Richard Moli∣nox, sir George Bourchire, sir Edward Fitton, sir Valentine Browne, sir Walter Luson, Iohn Popham, her Maiesties Atturny Generall, and others. The nineteene of Ianuary, Nicholas De∣uorox, alias Wodson, was condemned for trea∣son,Order for plantati∣on in Ire∣land. in being made Priest at Reymes in France. Also Edward Barbat, being made Priest as aforesaid, and comming into this Re∣alme, was likewise condemned of treason, and
both drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged, bo∣welled and quartered, on the one and twentieth of Ianuary. On the same day,Archbish· of Canter∣bury cal∣led ro be of the pri∣uy Coun- a Wench was burnt in Smithfield, for poysoning of her Aunt and Mistrisse, and attempting the like to her Vncle. On the feast day of the purification of our blessed Lady, Doctor Iohn Whitegift, Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, William Lord Cobham, Warden of the fiue Ports, and Thomas, Lord Burckburst, were chosen and taken to bee of her Maiesties priuie Councell: the two first were sworne on that day, and the third on the next morrow. The eleuenth of February,T. L. lost his eares for trea∣cherously practising to enioy the goods and lands of his na∣turall kinsmen. Thomas Loue∣lace was brought prisoner from the Tower of London, to the Starre-chamber, against whom her Maiesties Atturney did informe, that the same Louelace, vpon malice conceiued against Leonard Louelace, and Richard Louelace, his cousin germanes, had falsely and deuilishly contriued and counterfeited a very traiterous Letter in the name of Thomas Louelace (ano∣ther brother of the said Leonard and Richard, then resident beyond the Seas) purporting that the same Thomas should thereby incite and pro∣uoke the said Leonard, to procure the said Ri∣chard, to execute her Highnes destruction, with other circumstances of treason. This Letter he cast in an open high-way, pretending thereby, that vpon the discouery
thereof, his said kinsmen Leonard and Richard, should be drawne in question for the treasona∣ble matter against, her Maiesty in that bill con∣tained, euen in the highest degrée, for which of∣fence, her Maiesties Atturney prayed, that the said Thomas, then prisoner, might receiue con∣digne punishment.A notable & praise∣worthy ensample of Iustice. Whereupon the Court ad∣iudged him, that he should be remitted to the Tower, from whence he came. That he should be caried on horsebacke about Westminster hal, with his face to the horsetaile, and a paper on his backe, wherein to be written: For counter∣feiting of false and trecherous Letters against his owne kindred, containing most trayterous mat∣ters against her Maiesties person. And from thence to be caried in that maner, and set on the pillory in the Palace at Westminster, and there to haue one of his eares cut off, also to be caried in like maner into London, and set on the pillo∣ry on market day in Cheape, with the like pa∣per. And after that, caried into Kent, and at the next Assise there, to be set on the pillory with the like paper, and his other eare to be cut off: also to be set on the pillory, one market day at Can∣terbury, and another at Rochester in the like manner, and at euery the said places: this order taken touching this offence openly read, the sen∣tence whereof was duly executed. Strange sicknes at Excester.The 14 of March, at the Assises kept at the City of Excester in Deuonshire before Sir Ed∣mond Anderson, L. chiefe Iustice of the com∣mon pleas, Sergeant Floriday, one of the Ba∣rons
of the Exchequer, and other Iustices, there happened a strange sicknesse: first, amongst the prisoners, and then amongst other persons, and beside the prisoners, many of all degrées died thereof, namely Serieant Floriday, Sir Iohn Chichester, Sir Arthur Basset, and Sir Bernard Drake Knights, Tho. Carew, Richard Carie, I. Fortescue, I Waldran, and Tho. Risdone Es∣quires, and Iustices of the peace: of the common people died, very many Constables, Reues, Tithmen, and Iurors, and namely of one Iury being twelue of them, died eleuen. The seuentéene of March a strange thing happened, Master Dorington of Spaldwickt,A strange worme found in the heart of a horse. in the Countie of Huntington Esquire, one of her Maiesties Gentlemen Pentioners, had a horse which died suddenly, and being ripped to sée the cause of his death, there was found in the hole of the heart of the same horse, a strange worme, which lay on a round heape, in a Call or skinne, in the likenesse of a Toade, which being taken out & spread abroade, was in forme & fa∣shion not easie to be described, the length of which worme, diuided into many graines, to the number of 50, spred from the body, like the bran¦ches of a trée) was from the snout to the end of the longest graine, 17 inches, hauing foure issues in the grains, from whence dropped forth a red water, the body in bignes round about, was 3 inches & a halfe, the color whereof was very like to a mackarell. This monstrous worme found in maner aforesaid, crawling to haue got away,
was stabbed in with a dagger, and died, which after being dried, was shewed to many honou∣rable persons of the Realme. 1586. Seminary Priests ex∣ecutedThe 18 of Aprill, in the Sises holden at Lon∣don, in the Iustice hall, William Tompson, made Priest at Reymes in France, and remai∣ning within this Realme, was condemned of treason. Also Richard Lea, made Priest at Lions, was likewise there condemned, which said Wil∣liam and Thomas, were both on the twentieth of April, drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled, and quartered. Sir Henry Sidney de∣ceased.The first of May sir Henry Sidney, knight of the Garter, Lord president of Wales, departed this life, and was honourably buried at Pen∣shurst in Kent. Ambassa∣dors from the K. of Denmark.The 8 of May, arriued at London on the Tower Wharfe, Henry Ramelius, Chancellor for Germany, Ambassadour from Frederick the second King of Denmarke, vnto the Quéenes Maiesty of England, he was honourably recei∣ued of the Lord Talbot, the Lord Cobham, and other great estates, and by them conuayed through Tower stréete, Fanchurch stréet, and Grace-stréet, into Bishops-gate stréet, to Cros∣by place, where he remained till hee had finished his Ambassage, and returned on the thirtieth of May towards Denmarke. Wolston Dixie Maior, 1586, founded a frée schoole at Bosworth, in Leicester-shire, en∣dowed with twenty pounde land by yéere & bet∣ter: more, he gaue to the gouernors of Emanuel
Colledge in Cambridge, 600 pounds to buy land, for the mainteinance of two scholarships, and two fellowships there, the scholars to come forth of Bosworth schoole: he gaue also toward the erecting of Emmanuel Colledge 50 pounds, to Christs hospitall in London, 42 pounds the yeare for euer, toward the Diuinity lecture, to S. Michaell bassings hall in London 10 pounds the yeare for euer. Vnto his company of Skin∣ners, 500 pounds, to be lent vnto young men of that company, viz. 200 pounds to foure yong men marchant Aduenturers for 3 yeare, at 3 pounds 6 shillings, 8 pence the yeare, and thrée hundred pounds to ten other, after the same rate, part of the profits to be spent in coles year∣ly to the poore of Saint Michaels parish, Basing hall, for euer. To Saint Bartholmewes hospi∣tall, and Saint Thomas hospitall 50. l. to each. The poore of Bridewell 20. l. To the poore of Newgate 20. l. To the poore of the Compters 10. l. to each, to Ludgate 10. l. To Bethlem 10. l. To the foure prisons in Southwarke 20. pounds thirtéene shillings and foure pence. To poore maides marriages 100. l. To poore stran∣gers of the Dutch and French Churches 50. li. To the poore of Basings-hall 10. l. To the poore Eling in Middlesex, foure pounds. And 200. to∣ward building of the Pesthouse. The 17.The Earle of Arun∣del censu∣red in the Star-chamber. of May Philip Earle of Arundell was conuaied from the Towre of London to Westminster, and there in the Star-chamber, by the Counsell condemned to pay 10000. l. fine
for his contempt, and to remaine in prison at the Quéenes pleasure. League with the King of Scots.A Commission was erected from her Maie∣sty, tending to the ratifying of a firme League of amity, betwéene her Maiesty and Iames King of Scots, which League being articuled, Commis∣sioners were appointed, Edward Earle of Rut∣land, W. Lord Euers and T. Randolph Esquire, who with their Traine came to Barwicke on the 19. of Iune, were the Ambassadors of Scot∣land being present, they accomplished the mat∣ter, according to the commission, the Articles of the said league in all and euery part sufficiently confirmed on 1. of Iuly, which being done, the said Earle of Rutland with his traine returned home. Master Randolph went into Scotland to take his leaue of the King and returned into England. Captains of the ar∣tillery gar¦den, other wise called London Captaines.This yéere 1586. certaine Merchants and o∣ther gallant actiue Citizens at their owne pro∣per charges onely for their countries seruice and defence, practised wéekely diuers feats of Armes, and by orderly course euery man bare al degrées of Offices from the corporall to the captaine: and when they had by vsuall practise attained vnto some perfection with obseruation of Mar∣tiall discipline, then they trained the common souldiers of the City & taught them the manag∣ing of their péeces, pikes, & halbeards, to march, countermarch, and ring: this president was ta∣ken from the Marchants of Antwerp. The 18. of Iune Henry Elkes clarke, for
counterfeiting the Quéenes signe manuell,Elkes exe∣cuted for counter∣feiting the Q. signe manuell, to a presentation of the personage of all Saints in Hasings, directed to the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, or to his Comissary generall (the Diocesse of Chichester doing void) that he might be insti∣tued Parson there, was drawne to Tiburne & there hanged and quartered. A Lottery for maruellous rich and beautifull Armor,A lottery at Londō for rich armour. was begun to be drawne at London in Pauls Church yeard, at the great West gate (an house of timber and boord being there erect∣ed for that purpose) on Saint Peter and Pauls day in the morning, which Lottery continued in drawing, day and night for the space of two or thrée daies. Tho.Tho. Can∣dish his voiage. Candish hauing of his owne charges built and furnished for two yeares prouision, a ship called the Desire, of 140. tun, & a lesse of 60. tuns, named the Content ioyning thereto a barke of 40. tuns named Galliane, in which fléet were 125 men, set saile from Plimoth on the 21 of Iuly, and began his voiage about the Globe of the earth, which voiage he finished in the space of two years & lesse then two moneths, as ye may read in R. Hacluyt. In the moneth of Iuly,Great re∣ioicing in London for appre∣hension of traitors. diuers traiterous per∣sons were apprehended, and detected of most wicked conspiracie against her Maiesty, and also of minding to haue stirred vp a gene∣rall rebellion throughout the whole Realme. For ioy of whose apprehension, the Citizens of London on the 15 of the same moneth at night,
and on the next morrow caused the Bels to be rung, and bone fires to be made, and also ban∣queted euery man according to his ability, some in their houses, some in the stréets, with singing of Psalmes and prasing God for preseruing of her Maiesty, and people of this Land: which do∣ings of the Citizens were so well accepted of her Maiesty, as by her letters to them directed may appeare. Traitors indicted.The seuenth of September certaine of these wicked Subiects were indicted, first for inten∣ding Treason against the Quéenes owne per∣son, secondly, for stirring ciuill wars within the Realme, and thirdly for practising to bring in forraine power to inuade the Realme, 7 of them appeared at Westminster, on the thirtéenth of September, who all pleaded guiltie, and were condemned. On the fiftéenth of September, other 7 were likewise arraigned, who pleaded not guilty, were found guilty by the Iurie, and had iudge∣ment. These traitors 14 in number were executed in Lincolnes Inne fields, on a stage or scaffold of timber strongly made for that purpose, euen in the place where they had vsed to méet,Traitors executed. and to confer of their traiterous practises, there were they hanged bowelled and quartered, seuen of them on the 20 of September, to wit, I. Ballard Priest, A. Babington Esquire, I. Sauage gentle∣man, R. Barnewell, gentleman, Chidirke Tich∣borne Esquire, Charles Tilney Esquire, E.
Abington Esquire. The other 7 were likewise executed on the 21 of September, to wit, T. Sa∣lisbury Esquire, Henry Dunne Gentlemen, Edward Iones Esquire I. Trauarse gentleman, I. Charnocke Gentleman, R. Gage gentleman, Ierome Belamie gentleman &c. The twenty two of September,Sir Philip Sidney wounded, and died thereof. sir Philip Sidney knight, a most valiant and towardly gentleman, sonne and heire to sir Henry Sidney late deceased, in seruice of his Prince and de∣fence of his country, in the warres of the Ne∣therlands, was shot into the thigh with a mus∣ket, at Zutphen in Gelderland, whereof he died on the 17 of October, whose body was conuaied into England, & on the 16 of February conuai∣ed from the Minories without Algate of Lon∣don through the principall stréets of the same Citie, accompanied of many honourable per∣sons vnto S. Pauls Church and there honou∣rably buried, the Captaines of the Artillery Garden being 250 in number, all in mourning habit, accompanied the Corps to Church, these Captaines at this time flourished. The eight of October, Iohn Low,Seminary Priests executed. Iohn A∣dams, and Richard Dibdaile, being before con∣demned for Treason in being made Priest by authority of the Bishop of Rome, were drawne to Tiburne and there hanged bowelled and quartered. Robert House, William Elkin.Shrieues. Sir George Barnes, Haberdasher.Maior.
Ludgate at Londō new buil∣ded.One of the West gates of the City of Lon∣don, commonly called Ludgate, being sore de∣caied, & in perill to haue fallen, was taken down, the prisoners thereof in the meane time remai∣ning, in the Southeast quadrant, to the same gate adioyning; which quadrant, for the ease of the prisoners was sometimes builded by Stephē Forstar, Fishmonger, Maior, and Dame Agnes his wife, &c. And this yeare the said gate was a∣gaine not onely newly, but also strongly and beautifully builded at the charges of the Citi∣zens of the same City. The foundation whereof in the name and presence of Sir Wolston Dixie Maior, certaine Aldermen, Anthony Radcliefe, & Henry Prannel shrieues, was laid on the second of May, & forthwith so diligently applied, that the same gate was fully finished in the space of sixe monthes or lesse, so that on the twenty nine of October in the same yeare the said gate was set open to Sir William Cecill Knight Lord Treasurer, who first entred the same on horse∣backe, accompanied of the Earle of Darby, and diuers other honourable persons & noble men of her Maiesties priuy Counsell, who all rode to the Guild hall, where, on the same day George Barne Lord Maior of that City kept his feast, after he had taken his oath and charge in the Exchequer at Westminster. On the same 29 of October the Archbishop of Canterbury, the L. Treasurer and the Earle of Darby,Parliamēt at West. representing the Quéenes Maiesties person, began the high Court of Parliament by
proie, which Session of Parliament was at this state assembled for triall of matters concerning Mary Quéene of Scots &c. The 23 of Nouem∣ber the Earle of Leicester, Lieutenant generall of her Maiesties forces in the vnited Prouinces of the Low countries, returning from thence arriued at London. The second day of December the Parlia∣ment was proroged vntill the 15 of February:Parliamēt against the Queene of Scots. the substance of matter handled in the same Session of Parliament, concerning the Queen of Scots is set downe in a letter learnedly pen∣ned, and published, directed to the Earle of Lei∣cester. The 6 of December,Proclama∣tion a∣gainst the Queene of Scots. the Lord Maior of Lon∣don, assisted with diuers Earles, Barons, the Aldermen in their scarlet, the principallest offi∣cers of the Citie, the greatest number of Gentle∣men of the best account in and about the City, with the number of eighty of the grauest Ci∣tizens in coats of veluet and chaines of gold, all on horsebacke in most solemne and stately manner, by sound of foure Trumpets, about ten of the clocke in the forenoone, made open and publike proclamation and declaration of the sentence lately giuen by the Nobility against the Queene of Scots, vnder the great Seale of England, bearing date at Richmond the fourth of December, being openly read by Ma∣ster Sebright, Towne-Clarke of London, and with loud voice solemnely proclaimed by the Serieant at Armes of the said Citie,
in foure seuerall places, to wit, at the Cros Cheap, at the end of Chancery lane in F stréet, ouer against the Temple, at Leaden corner, and at S. Magnus corner neare Lon bridge; during which time, like solemne clamations were made with great solemnity the country of Middlesex, namely in the Pa∣lace at Westminster, without Temple Bar in Holborne, by the Shrieues of London  Middlesex, assisted with sundry Noblemen  Gentlemen of good account, and the Iustice  Peace of the said country, to the great and wderfull reioycing of the people, as it séem ringing of bells, making of bonefires, and ing of Psalmes. The Quéenes Maiesty foreséeing the grall dearth of corne and other victuals, grow partly through the vnseasonablenesse of  yeares past, partly through the vncharita gréedinesse of such as bee great corne maste but especiallie through the vnlawfull and  much transportation of graine into for countries, by the aduice of her honour Councell, published a proclamation, and b of orders, to be taken by her Iustices, for reli of the poore, notwithstanding all which, the cessiue prices of graine still encreased, so  wheat and meale was sold at London for  the bushell, and in some other parts of t Realme dearer. The 8 of February being Wednesday according to sentence lately giuen by the nobili
Mary Steward Quéene of Scots,Queen of Scots after 19 yeeres imprison∣ment in Scotland & Englād was be∣headed. about tenne of the Clocke before noone, was executed and suffe∣red death, by beheading vpon a scaffold set vp for that purpose, at the great Hall of the Castle of Fodringay, in the presence of George Tal∣bet Earle of Shrewsburie, Henry Grey Earle of Kent, principall Commissioners, and others the Gentlemen of the Country neare adioy∣ning, to the number of about 300, all her appa∣rell was burned, but her body with the head was royally buried at Peterborow, on the first day of August next following. The 15 of February the Parliament began at Westminster,Parliamēt at West∣minster. wherein was granted to her Maiesty towards her charges for the defence of this Realme, a subsidy by the Clergy of 6 shil∣lings the pound, and of the temporalty two shillings eight pence goods, and foure shillings lands, with two fiftéenes &c. Munday the twenty foure of Februarie a man hanged for felony at Saint Thomas of Waterings being begged by the Chirurgions of London, to haue made of him an Anatomie, af∣ter he was dead to all mens thinking, cut down, stripped, laid naked in a Chest, throwne in a Carre, and so brought from the place of executi∣on through the Borow of Southwarke,A man re∣uiued af∣ter he had beene ex∣ecuted. and the city of London, to the Chirurgions hall, neare vnto Aldersgate, the chest being there opened and the weather extreame cold, he was found to be aliue, and liued till thursday next following, and then died.
The twentie thrée of February a gunpow∣der house at Radriffe was blowne vp with much harme. Sir Thomas Bromley knight, Lord Chancel∣lour of England, deceased on the 12 of Aprill, and was buried at Westminster. The first making of great roūd Globes.This yeare 1587, Master William Sanderson of London Fishmonger, attained the perfection of making the great round globes, viz. Celestiall and Terrestriall. On the 16 of Aprill, deceased the Dutchesse of Somerset at Hanworth, and was buried at Westminster. Eale of Rutland deceased.Edward Earle of Rutland, Knight of the Garter, departed this life at London on the 18 of Aprill, and was very honourably conuaied from thence to his Castle of Beauoyre, and bu∣ried in the Parish Church at Bettifford. The 29 of Aprill, Sir Christopher Hatton knight late Vicechamberlaine, and one of her Maiesties priuy Counsell,Sir Chri∣stopher Hatton L. Chancel∣lour. was made Lord Chancellor of England at Croidon, & on the 3 day of May, being the first day of the tearme, he rode from Ely place in Holborne to Westmin∣ster, there to take his oath, before whom went about the number of forty, his gentlemen in one liuery and chaines of gold, diuers Pentioners and other Gentlemen of the Court vpon foot∣clothes, the officers and Clarkes of the Chance∣ry, and then the Lord Chancellour, hauing on his right hand the Lord Treasurer, and on the left hand the Earle of Leicester, after whom
rode certaine of the Nobility, the Iudges of the Realme, and many knights. The 22 of May was published by proclama∣tion an order,Clothes to be trans∣ported ge∣nerally. granted by the Quéene in fauour of her Subiects, for the transporting of clothes out of the Realme, to wit, that the Merchants of the Stilyard resident in London, and all o∣ther Merchants, strangers, or other of the realme, may buy of the Clothiers, any cloth vn∣wrought, vnbarbed or vnshorne, and shall haue full liberty to ship and carry away out of the port of London, any such cloaths: and further, that all Merchants, strangers, and English, that shall not haue liberty to buy cloathes at Black∣well-hall, or within the liberties of the City of London, may buy all manner of clothes, in the Citie of Westminster. The 18 of Iune Robert Earle of Leicester was made Lord Steward of the houshold, & Ro∣bert Deuorex Earle of Essex, was made master of her Maiesties horse. The fiftéene of Iune Robert Earle of Lei∣cester tooke shipping at Margate in Kent, to∣ward the Low Countries, where he remained not long but returned. This yeares was a late spring, and a cold Sommer,A strange backward spring. so that at Midsomer Peason in the cods were sold at London for 8 pence the pecke, yet after were plenty, no cherries ripe till Saint Iames-tide or Lammas, and then such plenty that they were sold for a penny the pound. The 7 of September sir Thomas Henage was
made Vicechamberlaine. Shrieues.Thomas Skinnet, Iohn Catcher. Maior.Sir George Bond Haberdasher. An. reg. 30Richard May Merchant-tailor lately decea∣sed, gaue to the Chamber of London 300 poūds, toward the new building of the Blackwell Hal, which at length tooke effect. Vpon this gift the said Blackwell hall was taken downe,Blackwell hall. a new foundation was laide, and within the space of ten moneths after, with the charges of 2500 l. the same was finished. 1588Great prouision was made this yeare both by Land and Sea, to withstand the inuasion by the Spanish Armado against the Realme, for be∣sides the generall forces of the Realme appoin∣ted to be mustered, trained, and put in readinesse in the seuerall shires, for the defence of the land there was also a leauy made of two seuerall ar∣mies, the one to make the body of a campe to re∣side at Tilbury in Essex,Campe at Tilbury. to encounter with the Enemy, if he should attempt to land in any place of that country, whereof the Earle of Lei∣cester, Lord Steward of her Maiesties houshold was Lieutenant Generall, as also of the Armies leuied against forraine inuasion. The other to be imploied for the guard of her highnesse per∣son, vnder the charge of the right Honourable the Lord Hunsden, Lord Chamberlaine to her Maiestie. The campe at Tilbury, consisting both of horsemen and footemen, raised out of
all the shires, were of Lancers 253, of light hors∣men 769, of footmen 22000. the armie for the guard of her Maiesties person, Lances 481, light horsemen 1431. footmen 34050. The Na∣uie set forth and armed to the seas, consisted partly of her Maiesties shippes, partly of the ships of her subiects, which were furnished out of the Port townes whereunto they belong∣ed, of this Nauie, the chiefest and greatest part was vnder the charge of the Lord Charles Howard of Effingham, Lord Admirall of Eng∣land, and were addressed to encounter with the Spanish Fléet: the rest of the ships were assig∣ned vnto the Lord Henry Seimer, Admirall of the Fléete to guard the narrow Seas, and to impeach the issuing forth of the ships and ves∣sels, prepared by the Duke of Parma at Dun∣kirke. The 23 of May, the Lord Admirall came to Plimouth with the Fléet aforesaid, finding there Sir Francis Drake in a readinesse with more then 50 ships and pinnaces. The 24 of Iune the Lord Admirall issued out toward the Sea from Plimmouth: he diuided her Maie∣sties Fléet into thrée parts, viz. Sir Francis Drake Vice Admirall in the Reuenge with o∣ther, towards the Islands of Sillie, Iohn Haw∣kens Rere-Admirall in the Victory, with other toward the Isles of Vshent: And the Lord Ad∣mirall with the rest, remayning in the sléeue, ap∣pointed other there, all to discerne, if the Spa∣nish forces did any way passe.
The 19 of Iuly, intelligence was brought to the Lord Admirall by a pyrate Pinnis, whose captaine was Thomas Fleming, that the Spa∣nish Fléete was séene in the sea. The 20 of Iuly, the Lord Admirall made to∣ward the Sea, and the same day had sight of the Spanish Fléete, in number by estimation 158 sailes. The Lord Admirall cast about toward the Land to interrupt them from approaching, & hauing got the wind of them, prosecuted them all that night, and so continually, from place to place, vntill the second of August, in which space hauing by the power GOD wonderfully ouer∣come them, he returned to Margate in Kent. Now the Campe being kept at Tilbury in Es∣sex,Her ma∣iesty went to the Campe at Tilbury. vnder the charge of the Earle of Leicester, the ninth of August her Maiesty repaired thi∣ther; where all the whole Campe being set in order of Battaile, she passed through euery rank of them, to their great reioycing, & lodged that night, and the night following, in the house of Master Edward Rich a Iustice in the Parish of Hornedon. On the next morrow her Maiestie returned to the Campe, and on the twelfth re∣turned to Saint Iames, and shortly after the Campe was dissolued. Sermon of thanks∣giuing.Sonday the 20 of August Master Nowell Deane of Pauls, at Pauls Crosse, in the pre∣sence of the Lord Maior, the Aldermen in Scar∣let, the Companies in their liueries, preached, mouing them to giue land vnto God, for the great victory giuen to our English Nation, by
the ouerthrow of the Spanish Fléete. The 26 of August,Semina∣ries & o∣thers exe∣cuted. at the Sessions hall neare vnto Newgate, were condemned 8 persons, for being made Priests beyond the Seas, and re∣mayning in this Realme contrary to a Sta∣tute; foure Temporall men for being reconci∣led to the Romish Church, and foure other for relieuing the others. The 28 W. Deane and H. Welby were hanged at the Miles end, W. Hun∣ter, R. Morton, and Hugh More at Lincolnes Inne fields, T. Acton at Clarken well, T. Ful∣ton, and Iames Clarkeson, betwéene Brainford and Hounslow. The 30 Richard Flower, G. Shesley, Richard Leigh, Richard Martin, Iohn Roch, and Margaret Warde gentlewoman, who had conueied a cord to a Priest in Bridewell, whereby he escaped from thence, were hanged at Tiborne. This yeare 1588,The trans∣ferring of the Greek patriarke from Greece into Rus∣sia. the Patriarke of the Gréeke Church came from Chyo, alias Syo in Gréece, vnto the City Mosco in Russia, and for a certaine summe of money resigned all his Ec∣clesiasticall Iurisdiction, state, stile, and dignity, vnto the Metropolitan of Mosco and his suc∣cessors for euer, which done, the old Patriarke left Mosco, and in his returne towards Grecia, the Turkes robbed him of all his treasure, and slue him. A iust reward for his cowardise and couetousnesse. The 2 of September at night, a vehement fire brake foorth against the Dutch Church in London, to the great terrour of the whole City,
but by the burning of one house, and pulling downe of some other the fire was quenched. The 4 of September, deceased Robert Dudley Earle of Leicester,Earle of Leicester deceased. Lord Steward of her Maie∣sties houshold, lieutenant generall, and Marshal of England, at Cornebury in Orfordshire, from whence hée was conuaied to his Castle of Kenelworth, and from thence to Warwicke, where hee was honourably interred. He had in his towne of Warwicke, founded one Hospitall of an old guilde, giuen him by the townes for twelue poore men, endowing the same with lands to the yearely value of 200. pound, and fifty load of Wood out of Killingworth Parke, and gaue to the same Hospitall, by his Te∣stament, 200 pounds in money, for a stocke: hée was extreame tyrannous in authority. Banners taken frō the Spani∣ards shew∣ed at Pauls Crosse.Vhe 8 of September, the Preacher of Pauls Crosse moued the people to giue God thankes for the ouerthrow of our enemies the Spani∣ards, and there were shewed 11 ensignes or ban∣ners, takn in the Spanish ships by our men, and on the next morrow hanged on London bridge towards Southwarke, where then the Faire was kept, being our Lady day. Shrieues.Hugh Offley, Richard Saltonstall. Maior.Sir Martin Calthorp Drapor. Seminary Priests ex∣ecuted.The 5 of October Iohn Welden and William Hartley made Priests in France were hanged, the one at Miles end, the other at Holliwell; Ro∣bert Sutton, for being reconciled to the Church
of Rome was hanged at Clarkenwell. The 8 of October at night was burnt one sta∣ble with horses about the number of twenty at Drury house, neare to the Strand.Stable and horses burnt. An. reg. 32 The 19 of Nouember was this yeare kept holy day throughout the Realme, with ser∣mons, singing of Psalmes, Bone fires, &c. for ioy and thanksgiuing vnto God, for the ouer∣throw of the Spaniards, our enemies on the sea, and the Cittizens of London assembled in their Liueries that day at a Sermon at Pauls Crosse tending to that end. The 24 of Nouember being Sunday, the Quéenes Maiesty hauing attendants vpon her,The Qu. Maiesty came to Palus. the Priuy-Counsel, Nobility and other honora∣ble persons, aswell spirituall as temporall in great number, all on horse backe, did come in a chariot throne, made with foure pillars behind to haue a Canopy, on the top wherof was made a crowne imperiall, and two lower pillars be∣fore, whereon stood a Lion and a Dragon, sup∣porters of the Armes of England, drawne by two white stéeds from Somerset house, to the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul &c. At the tem∣ple Barre, the Lord Maior and his Brethren the Aldermen in Scarlet receiued and welco∣med her Maiesty to her city, deliuering to her hands the Scepter, which her Highnesse deliuered to the Maior, who bare the same be∣fore her. The Companies in their Liueries stood along to Pauls Church, where at the great west dore she dismounted about 12 of the clock,
and was receiued vnder a canopy by the Bishop of London, the Deane & others of the Clergy, to the number of more then 50. all in rich Coapes, and by them brought to a Closet, towards, the Pulpit Crosse, where she heard a Sermon made by Doctor Pierce, Bishop of Salisbury, and then returned to the Bishops Pallace, where she dined, and returned to Somerset house by Torchlight. Great winde.The 5 of Ianuary at night, a great wind in the Northeast ouerturned trées, and otherwaies did great harme in very many places. The Qu. receiued into West∣minster.The 30 of Ianuary, the Quéenes Maiesty came from Richmond to Chelrich, and so to Westminster, and was receiued by the Maior, Aldermen and commoners of her city of Lon∣don, in coates of veluet, and chaines of gold, all on horse-backe with the Captaines of the citty, betwixt 5. and 6. of the clocke at night by torch∣light. Souldiers punished for abu∣sing their Captains.The first of February two Souldiers were set on the Pillory at the Leaden hall, whereon they stood by the space of thrée houres, the one had his eare nailed, the other his tongue pierced with an aule, which aule remained in his tongue till hee was taken from the Pillory, for abusing their captaines, and Gouernours with had spéeces. A Parlia∣ment.The 4 of February began the Parliament at Westminster. An Here∣tick bur∣ned.About this time Francis Ket, M. of Art of Wimondham, for holding diuers detestable
opinions against Christ our Sauior, was burnt néere to the city of Norwich. The 5 of February,Marshall Law. two souldiers were han∣ged on trées at the Miles end, for being muti∣nous. The 29 of March, being Easter Euen,1589. Parliamēt dissolued. the Parliament brake vp at Westminster, where∣in was granted two subsidies, of two shillings eight pence the pound the péece, foure fiftéenes, and a tenth. The 14 of Aprill, Philip, Earle of Arundell,Earle of Arundell arraigned. was arraigned at Westminster of high treason, and found guilty by his Péeres, had iudgment accordingly. The 18 of Aprill, Sir Iohn Norris, and Sir Francis Drake, Generals, with sixe of her Maie∣sties ships, 20 ships of warre, and 00 fit for burden, hauing in them a choice company of Knights, Captaines, Gentlememen and souldi∣ers, departed from Plimouth, and the 23 of the same, arriued at the Groine. The 26, they tooke the lower Town, with great store of ordinance,Voiage to Portugall. victuals, cables, and other furniture for shipping. About the 6 of May, they fought with the Spa∣niards, at Borges bridges, where the enemies fled with the losse of 700 men. The lower town of Groine was burned, and the ninth of May, our Fléet set saile the thirtéenth, the Earle of Es∣sex, sir Philip Butler, and sir Roger Williams met the said Fléet, so that on the sixtéenth, the whole Nauie arriued at Phinicha, where they set a land, and the same day wanne both Towne
and Castle. After this they diuided the Armie, whereof part marched with Sir Iohn Norris, by land, to Lisborne, the rest with Sir Francis Drake, passed by Sea to Cascales. The twenty fourth, our men entred the suburbes of Lisborn, where they obtayned rich spoyles, and plenty of euery good thing. The twenty seuenth, the Ar∣my left Lisborne, and came to Cascales, without any great fight or skirmish, where they tooke the castle, and thence returned for England, but landing at Vigo, they tooke the towne, and wa∣sted the country. Norris & Drake re∣turne frō Portugall.The 21 of Iune, sir Francis Drake arriued at Plimouth: and the third of Iuly, sir Iohn Nor∣ris, with the rest of the Fléet, arriued there also, the two Generals being offended the one with the other. L. Maior deceased.The third of May, deceased Martin Calthrope Lord Maior of London, M. Richard Martin Al∣derman succeeded. Maior.Richard Martin Goldsmith, the 5 of May. Lightning and thun∣der.The first of August at night, was the greatest lightning and thunder about London, that euer was séene or heard, of any man liuing, and yet but small hurt done, thankes bee to God tharefere. Sir Iohn Norris, and sir Francis Drake be∣ing returned, as you haue heard, many of their sailers and souldiers, shortly after their landing, fell sicke, and died, of a stinch bred amongst
them on shipbord, othersome of them so rudely behaued themselues, about the country, and elsewhere,Sailers & souldiers executed. that diuers of them being apprehen∣ded, on the 27 of August, one of them was han∣ged on the end of a signe, at an Inne doore, in Kingston vpon Thames, for a terror to the rest: and on the 29 of August, two more of them were hanged in Smithfield, two at the Tower∣hill, two besides Westminster, and one at Ti∣burne. It was now vsuall with sailers and others, at their returne of such voyages, to rob, pilfer and mutiny at their arriuall. In the moneth of September,Souldiers sent into France. the Citizens of London furnished 1000 men to be sent ouer into France, to the aiding of Henry late King of Nauarre, then challenging the Crowne of France. Richard Gurney, Stephen Some.Shrieues. The 21 of October,Serieants feast. Richard Martin Maior of London, accompanied with his brethren the Alderman, being inuited guests, rode to the Serieants feast, then holden in the new Temple hall, and at the Temple gate, the Lord Maior was by certaine young Gentlemen, denied to enter with his sword before him, whereupon he with his brethren returned home. Sir Iohn Hart Grocer, the 28 of October.Maior. The 6 of Nouember, Lodowicke Griuell of
Warwickshire Esquire,Lodowick Griuel pressed to death. was brought from the Tower of London, to Westminster, and the at the Kings bench barre, for murther, and other notorious trespasses, wherewith he was char∣ged, arraigned and found guilty: but standing mute, had iudgement to bee pressed to death, which iudgement was put to execution in the Iayle of the Kings bench in Southwarke,An. reg. 32. on the 14 of Nouember, on the which day, for the same fact, his man was hanged in the Palace court at Westminster. Citizens of Londō frighted by fire.In this moneth of Nouember, the citizens of London, were sundry times affrighted by casu∣altie of fire: first on the 20, about 4 of the clocke in the morning, on Fish-stréete hill, where one large house was burned to the ground, and some people, in helping to quench, were consumed, and the houses next adioyning: also the one side of Saint Leonards Church was sore spoiled. On the 22 at night, about 11 of the clocke, one other house, ouer against the first, on the other side of the way, was in great danger, but soone slaked. On the twenty sixt, about one of the clocke in the morning, one other house, and some people were burnt, on the backside of the first house burnt, and other houses neere about, were sore spoyled, &c. Tempest of winde.The 5 of Ianuary, about fiue of the clocke in the euening, before twelfth day, began a great and terrible tempest of winde in the South∣west, which continued with great vehemency, till about eleuen of the clocke of the same night,
this in the city of London, blew the Tiles off mens houses, and caused them to feare the o∣uerthrow of their houses. The lesser west gate of Saint Paules Church,A doore of Pauls blowne o∣uer. next to the Bishops Palace, was broken, both boltes, barres and lockes, so that the same was blown ouer. In the countrey, houses and barnes were borne ouer, & some blowne farre from the pla∣ces wheron they had stood, besides trees in great numbers, blew vp by the roote. On the seas, no man can tell what harme was done. At South∣hampton, the ships and barkes riding at anchor, were driuen aland, and sunke, the like was ne∣uer séene. Sir Iohn Hart, Knight,Sir Iohn Harts bountie. Alderman of Lon∣don, builded a frée Schoole, in Cuccold, alias Coxold in Yorkeshire. And endowed it with thirtie and fiue pounds a yéere for euer. He like∣wise gaue fin to Sussex, Sidney Colledge in Cambridge, two Fellowships, and four Schol∣larships, viz. forty and fiue pounds a yéere, for euer. The 21 of February, Ambrose Dudley, Earle of Warwicke deceased, and was buried at Warwicke. This yeare 1589,A new kinde of weauing. was deuised and perfe∣cted, the Art of knitting, or weauing of silke stockings, Wastcoteh, Couerlets, and diuers other things by ingines, or stéele Loomes, by William Lee, somtime Master of Arts of Saint Iohns colledge of Cambridge: and sixtéen yéeres
after this, he went into France, and taught it to the French, because he was not regarded in Eng∣land. A Wench burnt.The 5 of March, a Wench was burned in Saint Georges field without Southwarke, for poysoning her Mistris and other. The Duke of Guise slaine.This yeare 1589, Henry Duke of Guise, and his brother the Cardinall Guise, were both slaine by commaundement of the French King Henry the third. This Duke was wonderously beloued of the Clergy, and of the Peeres and commons of France: he was also very highly e∣stéemed of the Conclaue, and of many other for∣raine Princes. The manner of his death was taken very grieuously, especially by such as had combinde themselues in league to suppresse the Protestants, and preferre the Romane Catho∣like Religion, Within a while after, the said King Henry the third was also slaine by a Frier, in reuenge of the death of the two brethren before named, and the Frier himselfe was instantly slaine by such as were about the King, who slew him with the said enuenomed knife, wherewith hee stabd the King.The Frēch K. slaine. This Henry the third, was the last of the house of Valois. And presently vpon his death, Henry of Burbon, King of Nauarre, laid iust claime to the crowne, who with great difficultie, and almost eight yeares, sharpe warres with the Leagers, he got peaceable pos∣session of the whole Kingdome. But at the first, the Leagers droue him into diuers extremities,
and forced him to flie into Déepe, where he was ready to haue embarked for England, if the Quéene had not spéedily sent a resolute Armie vnto him, vnder command of the Lord Wil∣lowby. And from that time, the Quéene ayded him with diuers Armies, vnder the commaund of the Earle of Essex, Generall Norris, sir Roger Williams, and many others, besides incessant supplies, vpon sudden occasions from Lon∣don, Kent, Essex, Suffolke, Surrey, Sussex, and Hamhshire, both of horse, men, and muni∣tion. The next yeare following,Paris be∣sieged. the great and an∣cient Citie of Paris was besieged by their new King, Henry the fourth: which City vntill their day of visitation, was a glorious and a flouri∣shing City, and the most populous of all the ci∣ties in Europe, vntill for their better defence, they were constrained to pull downe all their suburbes: and albeit the siege held not full fiue moneths, yet such was the extremitie of famine vnto all the inhabitants, as it may well be said to be greater and more miserable, then either the siege of Samaria, or Ierusalem: for, after they had eaten vp all manner of herbage and carrian, and all manner of moist leather, with whatsoeuer else they could get to eate, they did eate many children: concerning which, and ma∣ny other memorable and capitall Accidents, you may reade more at large in my larger Chro∣nicle. Yet sith I haue speken thus much of France, I will also for thy further delight, giue
thee a touch of some of the chiefe ancient Kings thereof.The first K. of Frāce. Faramond was the first King of France, in the yeere 431, and raigned 11 yéeres. Clodo∣uius, alias, Clouis, was the fift King of France, in the yeare 485, he was the first King of France that was christened, he was baptized by S. Remy, Arch-bishop of Reynes, after diuers victories vpon his enemies, and had enlarged his territories. Pope Anastasius sent him the name and title of Patrician and Consull, with a crowne of gold, richly adorned with precious stones. At this time, the Arrian heresie much troubled Christendome. Clotarius, alias, Cotane, the first & seuēth King of France, his son Cranus wt a strong faction,Disobedi∣ence se∣uerely pu∣nished. rebelled against him, whō he ouerthrew in battaile, tooke him prisoner, & bur∣ned him, his wife and children, and the chiefe of his seruants, Pepinus, alias, Pepin, the Briefe, began in the yeere 750. He instituted the Parlia∣ment at Paris. Carolus Magnus, alias, Charles le Maine, so called, for his many noble Acts which he did, for the generall good of Christen∣dome, beganne his raigne in the yéere 800, hee was King of France forty six yeares, and Em∣peror thirtéene yeares, and died at 71 yeares of age. Vlfring∣hampton burnt.On Wednesday in Easter wéeke, by shooting of a Gunne, in the Towne of Vlfringhampton, in Staffordshire, about the number of 80 hou∣ses were burned. Souldiers transpor∣ted.In the moneth of April, 3000 footmen were sent from hence into Britaine in France, vnder
the conduct of Sir Iohn Norris, Knight, to ioyne with the Prince, sonne of the Duke Mount∣poinsier, and Generall of the French Kings for∣ces in the Prouince: which company, were of∣ten since supplied. About this time,Free Schooles and hospi∣tals foun∣ded. (as I am informed) Robert Iohnson, a zealous Minister, Preacher and Parson of Northlumffingham, in the County of Rutland, finding the poore of those quarters, to be vnprouided for, and no Grammer Schoole erected in that country, for edification of youth, at his owne proper costs and charges, caused two faire free Gramer Schools to be builded in O∣kam, and Vppingham, the two market townes of that shire, and in each of them prouided a Schoolemaster, and an Vsher: more, he caused Hospitals to be builded in the said Towns, both called Christs Hospitall: in euery of which may be placed twenty foure poore people: and for their maintenance héere, he bought and procured lands of the Quéen, with a corporation & mort∣maine for the same. This man hath left a good example to the other Ministers and Preachers, to the glory of God, for hee preached both by word and life, not to inrich himselfe, but was bountifull to the poore, both in his own Parish, where he was maried, and kéepeth a good house, and also in the Towne of Stamford, where hee was borne: in which Towne, for many yeares together, hee caused forty poore mens children to be taught at his charges. The 21 of September, being the Feast of
Saint Mathew in the afternoone, was a great stir at Lincolnes Inne, by Prentisrs, and o∣thers, against young Gentlemen students at Law there, for some rude demeanore, late before by them done, against the inhabitants of Chan∣cerie Lane, which had like to haue growne to great mischiefe, had not the same béene by wise Magistrats soone appeased: for the vprore grew great and violent, suddenly. Shrieues.Nicholas Mosley, Robert Brooke. Maior.Sir Iohn Allot Fishmonger, the 28 of Oct, An. reg. 33Hee deceased in the moneth of September, next following, and sir Rowland Heyward cloth∣worker, serued out the rest of that yéere. A puruei∣er hanged.In the moneth of Ianuarie, one Nichols a Purueyer, for conuerting to his owne vse, cer∣taine prouision taken for her Maiesty, was han∣ged for example to other the like purueyers. Bold im∣postures that dis∣tracted the peo∣ple.The 16 of Iuly, Edmond Copinger, and Henry Artington Gentlemen, came into Cheap, and there in a carre, proclaimed newes from heauen, (as they said) to wit, that one William Hacket Yeoman, represented Christ, by parta∣king his glorified body, by his principall spirit, and that they were two Prophets, the one of mercie, the other of Iudgment, called and sent of God, to assist him in his great work, &c. These men were afterward apprehended. The 20 of Iuly Hacket, was arraigned, and found guilty, as to haue spoken diuers most false and trayte∣rous
words against her Maiesty, to haue rased and defaced her Armes, as also her picture, thru∣sting an iron instrument into that part that did represent the brest and heart, &c. For the which he had iudgment, and on the 28 of Iuly, brought from Newgate, to a gibbet by the crosse in Cheape, where being moued to aske GOD and the Quéene forgiuenesse, he fell to rayling and cursing of the Quéene, and began a most blasphemous prayer against the diuine Maie∣sty of GOD,Hacket hanged. he was there hanged and quar∣tered. His immodest spéeches at his arraignment and death, vtterly disgraced all his former-see∣med sanctity, wherewith he had shroudly posses∣sed the common people. The next day, Edm. Copinger,Copinger died in Bridewel. hauing wilful∣ly abstained from meat, and otherwise tormen∣ted himselfe, died in Bridewell, and Henry Ar∣tington, long after in the Counter, submitting himselfe, writ a Book of repentance, and was deliuered. The people had formerly receiued a very reuerent opinion of them. In this moneth of Iuly, Robert Deuorex, Earle of Essex, was by her Maiesty appointed to haue the charge and conduction, as her Lieu∣tenant Generall of 4000 footemen, and some number of horsemen, and Pioners sent into France, for the assistance of the French King, a∣gainst the confederats of the League. In which expedition, he was also honorably accompanied with sundry Gentlemen Souldiers, that volun∣tarily followed him in his seruice.
Shrieues.William Rider, Benedict Barnham. Maior.Sir William Webbe. Proclama∣tion a∣gainst Ie∣suites and Semina∣ries.In the moneth of October, a Proclamation was published, contayning a declaration of troubles, pretended against the Crowne, by Seminaries and Iesuites, &c. For the preuen∣ting whereof, charge was giuen to all Officers, to looke to their charges, for defence of the Re∣alme: and speciall Commissioners were appoin∣ted in all Shires, to enquire out the said Se∣minaries, and such as might be reconciled by them, &c. Bren O Royrke apprehen∣ded.On the 28 of October, Bren O Royrke, a great man of Ireland, was arraigned at West∣minster, where hee was found guilty of high treason, and after for the same, executed at Ti∣burne, on the third of Nouember, as more at large I haue expressed in mine Annales. The 20 of Nouember, sir Christoper Hat∣ton,An. reg. 34 Lord Chā∣cellor de∣ceased. Knight, Lord Chancellor of England, de∣ceased at his house in Holborne, commonly cal∣led Ely house, because it belongeth to the Bi∣shop of Ely. On the 16 of December, he was honorably buried in Saint Pauls Church at London, one hundred poore people, hauing gownes and caps giuen them, and goe before him, of Gentlemen and Yeomen in gownes, cloakes and coates, more then thrée hundred, with the Lords of the Councell, and other, be∣side 80 of the guard, that followed, &c. A sump∣tuous
monument for him, was since prouided in Pauls Church. The 10 of December, three Seminaries,Semina∣ries & o∣thers exe∣cuted. for being in this Realme, contrary to Statute, and foure other for relieuing them, were executed, to wit, Ironmonger, a Seminary, and Swithen Welles, Gentleman, in Graies Inne fields: Bla∣ston and White, Seminaries, and three other their abetters at Tiburne. The fourteenth of Ianuary,Captaine Cosby ex∣ecuted. Captaine Arnolde Cosby, an Irish-man, did forcibly set vpon Iohn, Lord Burke, (also an Irish-man) neare to the Towne of Wansworth, in the County of Surrey, and there vpon a malicious intent, did wilfully murder him, gi∣uing him one mortall wound with a Rapier, by meanes whereof, hee fell downe, and after that, the said Cosby with a dagger, gaue vn∣to the said Lord Burke, twelue, or more, grie∣uous and seuerall wounds, of the which mor∣tall wound, hee died within two houres after, For the which fact, Cosby was hanged on a gib∣bet, neare vnto Wansworth, on the 27 of Ia∣nuary. The 18 of February, Thomas Parmort,A Semi∣nary exe∣cuted in Paules Church-yard. was conuicted of two seuerall high treasons, the one for being a Seminary Priest, and remaining in this Realme, and the other for reconci∣ling Iohn Barwis, against the forme of a statute. The said Barwis was likewise conuicted of trea∣son, for being so reconciled, and also of felony, for relieuing the said Priest, Thomas Parmort
was executed in Pauls Church-yard, on the 20 of February. In the moneth of February, Sir Edmond Yorke,Souldiers sent into France. Knight, conducted ouer into France, two thousand footmen, sent from hence, for the seruice of the French King, which vpon their arriuall, remained vnder the charge of Sir Ro∣ger Williams, Generall of the English compa∣nies there. The twenty seuenth of Aprill, Sir Iohn Par∣rat Knight,1592. was arraigned at Westminster, found guilty of treason, and had iudgment in the same place, on the 16 of Iune, but died in the Tower. Tiltboat drowned.The fourth of May, a Tiltboate of Graues∣end, hauing in the same Boate about the num∣ber of forty persons, was ouer-runne by a Hoy, so that the greater part of those people were drowned ouer against Gréenewich, the Court then being there, and the Quéene beheld the mischance. New Lord Keeper.The 4 of Iune, Sir Iohn Puckering made Lord Kéeper of the Great Seale. Executiō in Smith∣field for poisoning Almes houses founded by the Marchant Taylors.In the moneth of Iune, a young man was hanged in Smithfield, and a woman was burnt, both for poisoning of her husband, a Goldsmith. The Marchant Tailors in London, this yeare founded faire Almes-houses, vpon a plot of ground neare vnto East Smithfield, in the Parish of S. Botolph without Aldgate, which plot of ground was giuen to them by Richard Hilles, sometime Master of that Company,
as also one hundred load of Timber by Antho∣ny Ratcliffe of the same society, Alderman: In these Almes houses fouretéene charitable men, brethren of the said Merchant-Tailors yet li∣uing, haue placed fouretéene poore aged sole wo∣men, which receiue euery one of them of their founder, sixtéene pence or better wéekely, be∣sides 8. pounds, 15 shillings yearely paide for of the common treasurie, to the said Company for fuell. The fourth of September a woman was burnt in Smithfield,A woman burnt in Smitfield. The riuer of Thames seemed to be almost voide of water, and many things were foūd by diuers as they walked vp on the low sands. for poysoning of her hus∣band. Wednesday the sixt of September, the winde West, as it had béene for the space of two daies before very boisterous, the Riuer of Thames was made voide of water, for forcing out the fresh and kéeping backe the salt; that men in di∣uers places might goe 200 paces ouer, and then fling a stone to the Land. A Colliar on a Mare rode from the North side to the South, and back againe, on either side London Bridge, but not without perill of drowning both waies. Iohn Gerrard, Robert Taylor.Shrieues. Sir William Roe Ironmonger.Maior. This Maior rode from the Guild-hall to the Tower, and there tooke his oath,No Ma∣iors feast. being accom∣panied of the Aldermen, Recorder and Shriues, the Liuery and Batchelers of the Ironmongers, the liuerie of the Haberdashers, and no more,
these dined at the Lord Maiors house, and at the Halls of these two Companies, and this was done by the appointment of the Quéenes Coū∣sell, for auoiding infection of the plague. Tearme kept at Hartford. An. reg. 35Michaelmas Terme was kept at Hartford, & began on Crastina animarum. The third of Nouember deceased sir Iohn Pa∣rat in the Tower of London. A butch∣ers daugh∣ter sayd she was daughter to King Philip and Queene Mary.The 13 of December, a certaine gentlewo∣man by the Councels commandement was whipped through the City of London, for affir∣ming her selfe to be the daughter to Philip king of Spaine, as she had béene perswaded (by some accounted Sooth-saiers, after proued liers) for she was knowne to be a Butchers daughter in Eastcheape. Parliamēt at West∣minster.The 19 of February, the Parliament began at Westminster. The 21 of March, Henry Barrow gentle∣man, Iohn Greenewood Clarke, Daniel Studley Girdler, Sapio Bislot gentleman, Robert Bow∣ley Fishmonger, were indicted of felony, the said Barrow and Greenewood for writing sun∣dry seditious bookes,Barrow & Greene∣wood han∣ged. tending to the slaughter of the Quéen and State: Studley, Billot and Bow∣ley, for publishing and setting forth the same Bookes, and on the 23, they were all arraigned, found guilty, and had iudgement on the last of March, Henry Barrow and Iohn Greenewood, were brought to Tiburne, and there hanged on the 6 of Aprill. The tenth of Aprill the Parliament at West∣minster
brake vp for a time,Parliamēt dissolued. wherein was granted thrée Subsidies of two shillings eight pence the pound goods, & foure shillings lands, and 6 fifteenes. About the same time Penry, a principall pen∣ner and publisher of bookes intituled Martin Marre prelate,Penry ap∣prehen∣ded and hanged. was apprehended at Stebben∣heth by the Vicar there and committed to pri∣son. In the moneth of May he was arraigned at the Kings Bench Barre, condemned of Fe∣lony, and afterward conuaied from the Goale of the Kings Bench to Saint Thomas Water∣ings, and there hanged, this pernitious booke much troubled the people. The 19 of Iuly the Court of Assise for Sur∣rey, was holden and kept in S. Georges field,Court of Assises kept in S. Georges field. in a Tent there set vp for that purpose, many prisoners were there arraigned, ninetéene were burnt in the hand, but none executed. This As∣sise was ended the same day, which was thought would haue lasted thrée daies, but the Iustices (all duties being paid) made hast away, for feare of being infected with the pestilence. This yeare was no Bartholmew faire kept at London,No Bar∣tholmew faire at London. for the auoiding of concurse of peo∣ple, whereby the infection of the pestilence might haue increased. Paul Banning, Peter Hawghton.Shriues. Sir Cuthbert Buckle Vintner.Maior. For part of ye yeare, sir Rich. Martin goldsmth.An. reg. 36
Number of the plague di∣ed in Lon∣don.The whole number this yeare buried within the Citie of London, the suburbes and other pla∣ces adioyning, as well of the plague, as of the other diseases, from the 29 of December in the yeare 1592, vntill the 20 of December, 1593 was as followeth. Within the walls of all dis∣eases, 8598, whereof the plague, 5390, without the walles & in the liberties, 9295. the plague 5285. so that within the City and Liberties, of all diseases 17863. whereof the Plague was 10675. Prince Henry borne.The 19 of February 1593. at Edenburght in Scotland was borne Prince Henry the eldest sonne of King Iames the 6. King of Scots. A Semina∣ry execu∣ted.The 18 of February Harington a Seminary, was drawne from Newgate to Tiborne, and there hanged, cut downe aliue, strugled with the hangman, but was quartered. Lopez ar∣raigned.The last of February, Rodoricke Lopeza a Portugal (as it was said) professing Physicke, was arraigned in the Guild-hall of London, found guily, and had iudgement of high Trea∣son, for conspiring her maiesties destruction by poyson. 1594. Great wind ouer turned trees.In this moneth of March were many great stormes of winde, which ouerturned trées, stéeples, houses, barnes, &c. namely in Wor∣cester-shire, in Beaudley forrest many Oakes were ouerthrowne. In Horton wood of the said shire, more then one thousand fiue hundred Oakes were ouerthrowne in one day, namely, on the Thursday next before Palmesunday.
In Stafford-shire, the shaft of the stéeple in Stafford Towne was rent in péeces along through the midst, and throwne vpon the Church, wherewith the said roofe is broken: 1000 pounds will not make it good. Houses and Barnes were ouerthrowne in most places of those shires. In Canke wood more then 3000 trées were ouerthrowne: many stéeples more or lesse aboue 50. in Stafford-shire were perished or blowne downe. The 11. of Aprill was a great raine,Great raine. which continued more then 24 houres long, and with∣all a great North winde. The 14 of Aprill, a woman was burnt in Smithfield, for killing of her husband.A woman burnt for pety Tre∣son. The 16 of Aprill Ferdinando Earle of Dar∣by deceased at Latham, in a very strange man∣ner. The second of May came downe great flouds,Great flouds. by reason of sodaine showres of haile and raine that had fallen, which bare downe houses, Iron milles, the prouision of coles prepared for the said mils, it bare away cattle, &c. The second of May,Serieants dinner. the new Serieants of the Law in number ten, held their dinner in the Temple. The third of Iune deceased Iohn Aylmer Bishop of London, at Fulham,Bishop of London deceased. and on the 26 of Iune was solemnly interred in his Cathedrall Church of Saint Paule in London. The 7 of Iune, Doctor Lopez,D. Lopez & others executed. and two o∣ther Portugals, were drawne from the Kings
Bench in Southwarke, to Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered. Maior of London deceased. Sir Ri∣chard Mar¦tin Maior. Ships set out by the Citizens of LondonThe first of Iuly, deceased Sir Cuthbert Buckle, Lord Maior of London, and on the next morrow was elected Sir Richard Martin to be Maior for the rest of that yeare, & on the third of Iuly, he tooke his oath at the Tower of Lon∣don. The fiftéene of Iuly by a common Counsell in the Guild hall was graunted (according to a precept from her Maiesty) that sixe ships and two pinnaces should be set forth at the charges of the City, the same to be ready with men, mu∣nition and victuals for thrée moneths by the last of Iuly. Souldiers set out by the Lon∣doners.More on the 17 of Iuly, the same Common Councell, according to another precept granted 450 men on foote to be likewise set out by the citizens, towards the charges whereof a fifteenth was seized and paid. This yeare in the moneth of May, fell many great raines, but in the moneth of Iune and Iu∣ly much more, for it commonly rained day and night till Saint Iames Eue,Great raine. & on Saint Iames day in the afternoone it began againe, and con∣tinued for two daies together: notwithstan∣ding there followed a faire haruest in the month of August, but in September great raines rai∣sed high waters,Bridges at Cābridge and at Wareborn downe. such as staied the carriages, and bare downe bridges, as at Cambridge, Ware, and elsewhere. Also graine grew to be of a great price, as a strike or bushell of Rie 5 s, a bushell
of wheat 6, 7, or 8 s, &c. which dearth happened more by meane of ouermuch transporting by our Merchants, then the vnseasonablenes of the weather passed. This yeare Beuis Bulmar an ingenious Gen∣tleman made an engine at Broken wharfe,Thames water connaied into Lon∣don. thereby from thence to conuay Thames water vp into the Citie, sufficient to serue the whole West part thereof, being conuaied into mens houses by pipes of lead. The same Gentleman on the 18 of October gaue vnto sir Richard Martin then Lord Maior of the City of London, and to the Citie for euer, one cuppe of siluer with a couer, weighing 137 ounces of fine,A siluer Mine foūd bet∣ter then the Sterling; the siluer of which cup with other (he said) was digged out of the mine in England, in the moneth of August last be∣fore passed. Robert Lee, Thomas Benet.Shrieues. Sir Iohn Spencer Clothworker.Maior. The 30 of December a woman was burnt in Smithfield for coyning of money.An. reg. 37 A woman burnt in Smithfield Bishop of London elected. The same day D. Fletcher B. of Worcester was elected B. of London. The 26 of Ianuary William Earle of Darby married the Earle of Oxfords daughter,Earle of Darby married. at the Court at Gréenewich. The tenth of February two souldiers or Cap∣taines, named Yorke and Williams,Yorke and Williams executed. were execu∣ted at Tiburne for fellony.
1595 A Iesuit executed.The 10 of February Southwell a Iesuite, that long time had laine in the Tower of Lon∣don, was arraigned at the Kings Bench barre, he was condemned, and on the next morrow drawne from Newgate to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered. Great dearth of corne and other vi∣ctuals.This yeare by meanes of the late transporta∣tion of graine into forraine Countries, the same was here growne to an excessiue price, as in some parts of this Realme, from fourtéene shil∣lings to 4 markes the quarter. Disodered youthes punished.On the 27 of Iune, certaine yong men ap∣prentises and other, were punished by whip∣ping, setting on the Pillory, &c. for taking of but∣ter from the maket women in Southwarke, af∣ter the rate of three pence the pound, whereas the sellers price was 5 pence the pound, they would be their owne caruers. Coiner and a cunning cosoner punished.Certaine men for coyning were hanged, and also a Scriuener in Holborne was hanged, and quartered for taking the great seale of England from the olde patent and putting the same to a new. On the 29 of Iune being Sonday in the af∣ternoone, a number of vnruly youths on the Tower hill, being blamed by the Warders of Towerstreete-ward to seuer themselues and depart from thence,Vnruly youths on the tower hill appre∣hended for being ther assembled to do vio∣lence to the Lord Maior and to make insurrecti∣on. threw at them stones, and draue them backe into Tower stréete, and were heartned thereunto by a late Souldier, soun∣ding of a trumpet, but the trumpeter and ma∣ny other of them being taken by the shrieues of
London, and committed to prison. About 7 of the clocke the same night, sir Iohn Spencer Lord Maior rode to the Tower hill, attended by his officers and others, to sée the hill cleared of all tumultuous persons, where about the middle of the hill, some warders of the Tower or Lieu∣tenants men told sir Iohn that the sword ought not to be borne vp there, and two or thée catch∣ing hold thereof, some bickering was there, and she sword bearer hurt, but the Lord Maior sée∣ing the hill cleared of all trouble rode backe, the sword bearer bearing vp the sword. The two & twenty of Iuly,Vnruly youths ex¦ecuted on the Tower hill, they died pe∣nitent. in presence of the Earle of Essex, and other sent from the Queene, were arraigned in the Guild-hall of London, fine of those vnruly youths that were on the Tower hill apprehended, they were condemned, and had iudgement to be drawne, hanged and quartered, and were on the twenty foure of the same month drawne from Newgate to the Tower hill, and there executed accordingly. Sir Thomas Wilford knight,Sir Tho. Wilford Prouost Marshall within Londō h behaued himselfe very mild∣ly and dis∣creetly. Prouost Mar∣shall for the time in the City of London rode about, and through the city of London daily, with a number of men well mounted on horse∣backe, armed with cases of pistols, &c. This Marshall apprehended many vagrant and idle people, brought them to the Iustices, who com∣mitted them, &c. Thomas Low, Leonard Haliday.Shriues. Sir Stephen Slany Skinner.Maior.
Two mar∣shals in London at one time.This yeare in February, 1595. the Lord Maior and Aldermen, as well for expelling va∣grant people out of the City, reforming of com∣mon abuses to be aiding to Clarks of the Mar∣ket, for redresse of forrainers false waights and measures, as to be assistant vnto all Constables and other ciuill officers for the more spéedy sup∣pression of any distemperature that may arise by youth, or otherwaies; they ordained two Mar∣shals,An. reg. 38 viz. Master Reade, and Master Simson, and after them Master Roger Walrond was ad∣mitted alone. Notorious knaues. The 20 of February fiue men for couzonage and counterfeiting of Commissions, &c. were set on the Pillory in West Cheape, some of them had their eares nailed and cut off, others that had before lost their eares were burnt in their cheekes, and forehead. A Pinnace made in the Leadē Hall by a Land Carpenter being ne∣uer taught nor vsed to make any Ships or Boats.This yeare a certaine Pinnace was made by a House-carpenter, in the Gréene-yeard of Lea∣den hall in London, it was about some 5 tun, to be taken a sunder, and set together with vi∣ces; the same was finished and launched out of Leaden hall on the 12. of March in the night, and drawne by strength of men and horses on a sléed with wheels made for that purpose, to∣wards Algate, where about the parish Church of S. Catherine Christs Church, the wheeles ta∣king fire on the Axeltrées, were broken about one of the clocke in the morning, where it staied till the next night, and then was drawne to the Tower hill, where the same was calked
and pitched, and on the xx. of March drawne and lanched into the riuer of Thames, at the water gate by the Tower, and from thence by water drawne to Ratcliffe, and there tackled. The ninth of Aprill being good Friday in the afternoone,1596. Souldiers pressed & discharged the Lord Maior and Aldermen were sent from the Sermon in Paules Church-yeard, and forthwith vpon precept from the Councell, pressed 1000. men, which was done by eight of the clocke the same night, and before the next morning they were purueied of all manner of furniture for the warres, ready to haue gone to∣wards Douer, and so to the aid of Callis against the Spaniards, but in the afternoone of the same day, they were all discharged. And on the 11.Souldiers pressed. of Aprill being Easter day a∣bout tenne of the clocke came a new charge, so that all men being in the parish Churches ready to haue receiued the Cōmunion, the Aldermen,The Spa∣niards win Callis. their deputies, and Constables, were faine to close vp the Churchdoores, till they had pressed so many to be souldiers, that by 12. of the Clocke, they had in the whole City 1000. men, and they were forthwith furnished of armour and weapons, &c.Souldiers sent to Callis. And they were for the most part that night and the rest on the next morning sent away, to Douer, as the like out of other parts of the Realme, but returned againe about a wéeke after, for the French had lost Callis, &c. And in Iune 1598. the towne of Callis was quietly restored backe to the French.
L. Keeper deceased.The last of Aprill at night, deceased Sir Iohn Puckering L. kéeper of the great Seale, he died of a great palsie, wherewith he had béene taken on the 26 of Aprill at night. On May day proclamation was made, that all souldiers appointed to sea, should in all hast passe to Portesmouth,Soldiers to the sea. &c. to the Earle of Essex, and other the Nobility there. New L. Keeper.The 6 of May sir Thomas Egerton Master of the Rolles, was made Lord Kéeper, and had de∣liuered vnto him the great Seale. The 11. he rode (accompanied of the Nobility and others in great number) to Westminster, and there tooke his place. Water flouds. These in∣undations were very strange & terrible.In this moneth of May (as afore.) fell conti∣nually raines euery day or night, whereby the waters grew déepe, brake ouer the high waies, namely, betwixt Ilford and Stradford ye Bow, so that market people riding towards London, hardly escaped, but some were drowned: also towards Lambeth in the high way, people not on horsebacke were borne on mens backes, and rowed in wherries in Saint Georges field. Robert Earle of Essex and Charles Howard, high Admirall of England,Cadize voyage. imbarked with 150. good saile of ships on the first of Iune weighed anchor, and hoised vp sailes, outward their iour∣ney from Plimmouth towards Spaine, and wonne Cadiz, and returned with great booties and spoiles. The 22 of Iuly Henry Carey Lord Hunsdon,
and Lord Chamberlaine deceased at Somerset house without Temple barre,L. Cham∣berlaine deceased. and was honou∣rably buried at Westminster: about the same time also deceased Sir F. Knoles, one of her Ma∣iesties priuy Counsell. Sunday the eight of August,Triumph in Londō for victory in Spaine. great triumph was made in London for the good successe of the Earle of Essex, and his company in Spaine, the winning, sacking and burning of the fa∣mous Towne of Cadiz, the ouerthrow and bur∣ning of the Spanish Nauie, and other accidents. A Serman of thanksgiuing was preached at Paules Crosse in the forenoone, and bon-fires with great ioy. In the yeare 528,The Ciuil Lawes re∣duced in∣to order. and in the 2 yeare of Iusti∣nian the Emperor, he gaue charge that his first Cod should be composed of the Gregorian, Theodosian and Hermoginean Code. In the third yeare of this Emperour, the first Code came forth. In the fourth yeare he commanded the Di∣gests to be composed. In the seuenth yeare of his raigne the Insti∣tutions were set forth, and within one moneth after them came forth the Digests. In the eight yeare came forth the new Code of Iustinian. In his ninth yeare, which was in the yeare of our Lord 535 diuers nouell constitutions were published. The 15 of August a new house of Timber not full finished in Fléetstréete, sodenly fell downe,A war∣ning to Carpen∣ers.
and with it one old house adioyning, by the fall whereof the good man, with a man-seruant and a child were killed. In the moneth of August began a new col∣lection, for so releeue the poore in this City, so that besides their ordinary pensions in money giuen to them, they also receiued wéekely two shillings,Too good to last long. bread ready baked, euery lofe weigh∣ing 24 or 26 ounces the péece: but this charity lasted but a while. The 29 of August, the Duke of Bolloine be∣ing arriued in England, came to the Court at Greene-wich,Duke of Bolloine came into England. and there by oath for the King his Master, confirmed the League of amity betwixt the two Realmes of England and France. Souldiers sent into France.Shortly after souldiers were sent ouer to aide the French in their warres. Earle of Shrewsbu∣ry Ambas∣sador into France.The 16 of September, Gilbert Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, and sir Anthony Mildmay Knight, Ambassadors, with Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and other, to the number of more then two hundred horse, departed towards France, arriued at Deepe on the twenty thrée, had audience of the King, who most princely welcomed them on the 7 of October, the fideli∣ty or oth of the league was solemnly taken, the order of the Garter most royally performed, and the Ambassadors returning with great ho∣nours, arriued in the Downes on the 27 of October.
Richard Godard, Iohn Wats, 28 Septem.Shrieues. Thomas Skinner Clothworker 28 Oct.Maior. Henry Billingsley 31 December. Through the diligent carefulnesse of T. Skin∣ner Maior prouision was made for corne to be brought from Danske,Prouision made for grain frō beyond the seas. & other the Gaft Coun∣tries, by our Merchants, vnto whom was gran∣ted custome and stowage frée, as also to make their owne price, or transport to any part of this Realme, whereupon it followed (were the price neuer so high) this City neuer wanted for their money. This yeare, like as in the moneths of Au∣gust, September, October, and Nouember,Great lād waters. fell great raines, whereupon high waters followed:Dearth. wheat in meale was sold at London for ten shil∣lings the bushell, Rie sixe shillings, and Oate∣meale eight shillings. The 17 of Nouember, a day of great triumph,An. reg. 39 Great tri∣umph for the pros∣perous raigne of her Maie∣sty. for the long and prosperous raigne of her Ma∣iesty at the Court, the Earle of Cumberland Champion for the Quéene, the Earle of Essex, Bedford, Southampton, & Sussex, with other, ranne at the tilt most brauely. Sunday the fift of December, great num∣bers of people being assembled in the Cathedrall Church of Wels in Somersetshire,Tempests in the Ci∣ty of Wels. in the Ser∣mon time before noone, a sudden darkenesse fell among them, and storme and tempest fol∣lowed, with lightening and thunder, such as
ouerthrew to the ground them that were in the body of the Church, all which Church séemed to be on a light fire, a loathsome stench following, some stones were stricken out of the Bel tower, the wires and irons of the Clocke were molten: which tempest being ceased, and the people come to themselues, some of them were found to be marked with sundry figures on their bodies, and their garments not perished, nor any marked that were in the Chancell. The 30. of December at night, deceased Peter Hauton,T. Skinner Maior de∣ceased: he spent more of his time then any of his predeces∣sors. H. Billing∣sley Maior an Alderman of London, and the same night also deceased Thomas Skinner Lord Maior of the same City. Whereby was made frustrate the great hope that men had conceiued of his good gouerment to come. And on the next mor∣row being the last of December, Henry Billings∣ley Haberdather, was elected Maior, who being chiefe customer for her Maiesty, on the twelth euen, sate in the Custome house with the sword before him lying on the table. The eleuenth of Ianuary he tooke his oath at the Tower of London. In the moneth of May, Souldiers were pres∣sed in the city of London to the number of 550. with all the furniture,1597. Souldiers trained & sent to the sea. at the charges of the Cit∣tizens: these were trained to the field, out of which was picked 400. and the rest dismissed: these and other picked men out of diuers Shires about the number of 6000. most brauely funi∣shed of all things necessary, besides the supersflu∣ities of voluntaries, who spared for no cost,
namely, in gold lace and feathers, vnder conduct of Robert Earle of Essex, were sent to the seas: they set from the west coasts of England, about the tenth of Iuly, being Sunday, & on monday the same fléet was sailed out of sight from Eng∣land, but the 17. being Saturday, hauing the winde against them, as the like for thrée or foure daies before, a tempest of lightning and thunder, raine, and darkenesse, shooke and dispersed them, wherevpon they returned: Sir Water Rawley, with forty saile came to Plimmouth, and after∣ward the Earle and others, to Falmouth, some of their company wanting, namely, the Lord Thomas Howard, the Lord Mountioy, the Lord Rich, and other: the gallants or voluntaries came home againe, but not with such iollity, as they went out, for many left their Feathers at sea. About the twenty seauen of October, was newes that the Earle of Essex was returned, ha∣uing before sent home thrée or foure ships ve∣ry richly laden, and lately taken: he left the fléet to pursue the action in taking more. This Summer arriued héere an Embassador from the King of Polonia, and had audience the twenty fiue of Iuly, whose Oration was pre∣sently answered by her Maiesty in Latine. This yeare the Earle of Essex and the Lord Thomas Howard, the Earle of Southampton,The Islāds voiage. sir Water Rawleigh, & other braue Commanders, with 18. of the Quéenes ships, & many English Marchants ships, and 12. Hollanders shippes, made a warlike voiage to the Isles of Terceres.
In the moneth of August, the price of Wheate in the Markets of London, fell from thirtéene shillings the bushell, to ten shillings: Rie from nine shillings, to sixe shillings, and so to thrée shillings, but then rose againe to the old greatest price. Ambassa∣dors from Denmark.This yeare also, Arnold Whitefield, Chan∣cellor of Denmarke, Ambassador, and Christian Barnkun his assistant from the King of Den∣marke, arriued héere: these had audience at the Court, then at Tibols, on the seuenth of Sep∣tember, and were answered by her Maiesty, without pawse to euery point of their ambas∣sage, and feasted. Shrieues.Henry Roe, Iohn Moore, 28 September. Maior.Richard Saltonstall, Skinner. 28 October. Lectures read in Sir Thomas Greshams Colledge.Monday, the 3 of Octob. began the reading of the Diuinity lecture in Sir Tho. Greshams Col∣ledge, by him founded in Bishops-gate stréet. Earle of Notinghā created. Parliamēt at Westm.The 23 of October, the honourable Lord Charles Howard. Lord high Admirall of Eng∣land, was created Earle of Notingham at West∣minster. The cause of this spoyle of the people was the indiscreet behauiour of the in∣feriour Marshals.A Parliament began at Westminster, on the 24 of October: on the which day diuers peo∣ple were smuldered and crushed to death, pres∣sing betwéene White-hall, and the Colledge Church, to haue séene her Maiesty, and No∣bility ryding in their Robes to the said Parlia∣ment.
This yeare,An. reg. 40 Price of Pepper. Pety trea∣son. Pepper was sold for eight shil∣lings the pound. The 25 of Ianuary, one named Ainger, was hanged at Tiburne, for wilfully and secretly murdering of his owne Father, a Gentleman, and a Counsellor at the Law at Graies Inne, in his chamber there. The ninth of February,A Parlia∣ment. the Parliament ha∣uing granted thrée Subsidies, of foure shillings the pound lands, and two shillings eight pence the pound goods, and sixe fiftéenes was dissolued and brake vp. On the third of Aprill, Twiford Towne in Deuonshire was burnt by casuality of fire,1958. Twiford Towne burnt. be∣ginning in a poore cottage, a woman there fry∣ing pancakes with straw, the same fired the house, and so to the Towne, about one of the clocke in the afternoone: the rage of which fire, lasting one houre and a halfe, consumed 400 hou∣ses, burned downe, one hundred and fifty thou∣sand pounds consumed in money, Plate, Mar∣chandise, houshold stuffe, and houses: fifty persons, men, women, and children, consumed: an Almes-house preserued with poore men there∣in in the midst of the flames: two thousand pounds wéekely was bestowed there in the mar∣ket on Mondaies in Deuonshire Carsies, nine thousand people maintained by the cloathing of that town, in Cornwall, and Sommersetshire. It was the Earle of Deuonshires chiefe seate, where yet standeth his castle or court place. Thus much certified to her Maiesty.
Sir Ro∣bert Cicil returneth out of France.On the first of May, Sir Robert Cicil, and o∣ther Ambassadors, returned out of France, and came to the Court. The 12 of Iuly, one Iohannes, alias, Buckley, a Priest made beyond the Seas,A Iesuite executed. hauing béene arraigned in the King Bench, on the third of Iuly, and there condemned of Treason, for comming into this Realme, contrary to a Sta∣tute, was drawne to Saint Thomas a Wate∣rings, and there hanged and quartered, his head set on the pillory in Southwarke, his quarters in the high-wayes towards Newinton, Lam∣beth, &c. Lord trea∣surer de∣ceased.On the fourth of August, Sir William Cicil, Knight of the Order, Lord Burleigh, Master of the Wardes and Liueries, Lord high Treasurer of England, a famous Counseller to the Quéene Maiesty, during all her raigne, and likewise had béene to King Edward the sixt; who for his sin∣gular wisedome, was renowned throughout all Europe, departed this mortall life, at his house by the Strand, his body was conuaied to West∣minster, with solemne funerall, and from thence secretly to Stanford, and there buried among his Ancesters. The King of Spaine dieth.The third of September, died Philip the second of that name, King of Spaine, at Ma∣drill, at 72 yeares of age, his sonne Philip suc∣ceeded him. Doctor Cotton, Bishop of Excester.This yeere 1598, the 12 of the moneth of Nouember, William Cotton, Doctor of diuini∣ty, sometimes Cannon of Paules, was consecra∣ted
Lord Bishop of Excester. He strongly main∣tained the Rites, and Gouernement of the Church. And liued so long, that hee saw the change of Bishops, throughout all the Bishop∣rickes of England and Wales. The first of September, in the afternoone,Thunder and light∣ning. thunder and lightning at London, two great cracks, as it had béene the shooting of great Or∣dinance, some men smitten at the Posterne by the Tower of London, and one man slaine at the Bridge-house in Southwarke, ouer against the Tower. Edward Holmdon, Robert Hampson,Shrieues. the 28 of September. Sir Stephen Some, Grocer,Maior. the 28 of O∣ctober. The second of October,Earle of Comber∣land re∣turned from the seas. arriued the Earle of Comberland, being returned from the seas, and hauing made spoyle of the strong Towne and Castle of Saint Iohn de Portarico, &c. The 9 of Nouember, Squire of Gréenwich was arraigned at Westminster,Squire executed for high Treason. condemned of high Treason, and on the thirteenth, drawn from the Tower, to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered. The 14 of Nouember,The Qu. receiued. An. reg. 41 the Quéenes Ma∣iesty came to Westminster, and was there most royally receiued by the Maior of London, Aldermen and Shrieues in scarlet, and a great number of wealthy Citizens, in Veluet coates,
and chaines of gold, all on horse backe in the e∣uening by Torch-light. In the moneth of December, great frosts, the Thames nigh ouer-frozen at London.Great frosts. Souldiers sent into Ireland. In the beginning of the moneth of Ianuary, soul∣diers in diuers shires, as also in the City of Lon∣don, were pressed and furnished of all things ne∣cessary for the warres, and were sent into the Low countries there to serue, in place of old souldiers, from thence to bee transported into Ireland. The subsidy men in the city were seased at eight pence the pound, goods, or lands, toward this charge. Also in this moneth, great lones of money were demanded and granted, by the citizens of London. Souldiers into Ire∣land.The moneth of February, a fiftéene was granted, and paid by the citizens of London, for the setting forth of more souldiers into Ireland. 1599. Earle of Essex rode towards Ireland.The 27 of March, about two of the clocke in the afternoone, Robert Deuereux, Earle of Es∣sex, Lieutenant Generall, Lord high Marshall, &c. departed from his house in Seding lane, through Fenchurch stréet, Grace-street, Corne∣hill, Cheape, &c. toward Iseldone, High-gate, and rode that night to Saint Albons, towardes Ireland: he had a great traine of Noblemen and Gentlemen, on horsebacke before him, to ac∣company him on his iourney, his coaches fol∣lowed him: he had also (by the pleasure of God) a great showre or twaine, of rain and haile, with some great claps of thunder, as he rode through Islington.
The moneths of March, Aprill, and May cold and dry, but on Whitsonday great haile and high waters, the like of long time had not béene séene, the extreame violence of this Tem∣pest made London stréetes more fresh and faire then euer was séene before. In the Moneth of August by the Quéenes appointment (politickly to preuent daungerous annoiance of her estate,Ships sent to the seas and men trained for the warres. then feared to haue hap∣pened, but not expressed) the Citizens of Lon∣don were charged with the furniture and setting forth to sea, of twelue ships, since increased to 16. &c. Also with 6000. men and furniture for the warres, which men with all spéede were made in a readinesse. Thrée thousand of them were daily trained in the field vnder Captaines, Citizens of the same City, from the sixth of Au∣gust, &c. The other thrée thousand appointed to attend vpon her Roiall person, were also like∣wise trained vnder Captaines, in braue furni∣ture, for they were housholders of account: all which their charges was partly borne by them∣selues, the residue performed by subsidies le∣uied of the Citizens. In this meane time, to wit, on the fifth of August at night by commandement from her Maiestie, the chaines were drawne thwart the stréetes and lanes of the Citie, and Lan∣thornes with light of candles, hanged one at e∣uery mans dore, there to burne all the night, and so from night to night, and great watches kept in the stréets, which so continued a long time.
The City and Citizens kept vnusuall watch and ward, and all sorts of people were much a∣mazed and frighted, as well by reason of prepa∣ration for wars, not knowing any cause, as also by the soddaine strange, and terrible rumors and reports of the Spaniards fierce approach. Also many thousands of horsemen and foote∣men chosen persons, well appointed for the warres, trained vp in armor, with braue liue∣ries, vnder valiant Captaines in diuers shires, were brought vp to London, where they were lodged in the suburbes, townes, and villages neare adioyning, from the eight of August, till the 20. or 23. in which time the horsemen were shewed in Saint Iames field, the footemen trai∣med in other grounds about the City, and then all discharged homewards, with charge to be al∣waies ready at an houres warning. And so it followed, that on the 25. of August at night, Posts were sent after them, to recall the horse∣men, presently to returne to London with all spéede possible, which charge they prepared to performe. But on the 27. of August the said Posts were likewise sent to stay them at home, or to returne them backe, whose forwardnesse in seruice of the Quéene was such, as the like hath not béene séene or heard of, towards any Prince of this Realme, such was the dutiful∣nesse of her louing and obedient subiects. The 26. of August, being Sunday in the morning before sixe of the clocke, by the commandement from the Quéene, the 3000. souldiers trained
vp by the Citizens, were all in Armour, in the open stréetes, attending on their Captaines, till past seuen of the clocke: at what time being thorowly wet by a great showre of raine, were sent home againe for, that day. On the next morrow, being the 27, the other 3000 Citizens, housholders, and subsidy men, shewed on the Miles end, where they trained all that day, and other vntill the 4 of September, and so ceased they training: and whatsoeuer had béene fore∣séene, and wisely preuented by the Quéene, and her Nobility, (whereof the Comminalty were vtterly ignorant for that time) a good Peace within this Realme hath since followed, which God long continue among vs. Humfrey Wilde, Roger Clarke,Shrieues. the 28 of September. Sir Nicholas Mosley, Clothworker,Maior. the 28 of October. This Roger Clarke Shrieue, bidding the Companies of London to dine with him,Note. as had béene accustomed by other Shrieues his pre∣decessors, tooke no beneuolence of them towards his charges. On Michaelmas euen, Robert, Earle of Es∣sex, Lieutenant Generall for Ireland,Earle of Essex re∣turned out of Ire∣land. hauing se∣cretly returned into England, came to the Court at Nonsuch, & spake with the Quéene, and on the second of October, was for contempt, &c. committed to the Lord Kéeper.
The peo∣ple igno∣rantly muttered many things.On the 29 of Nouember, the Lord Kéeper, and other Lords of the Counsell, in the Starre Chamber, perswaded against rumorous talke of the Earle of Essex. The Arch∣dukes en∣stalled.In December, the late Cardinall Albertus, and Isabella his wife, Daughter to the late King of Spaine, with great pompe in Antwerpe, were sworne Arch-dukes. An. reg. 42A Tilt-boat from London, towards Graues∣end, lost against Woolwich, with 40 persons, men and women, whereof 11 were saued. Twenty prisoners sent to Wisbich Castle.The 19 of Ianuary, 16 Priests, and foure lay men, were remoued out of diuers prisons, in, and about London, and sent to the Castle of Wisbich, in Cambridge-shire, whereof one was a Bishop of Ireland, and another a Franciscan Frier, of the rule of the Caputians, which wore his Friars wéede all the way as he went, a thing not séene in England many yéeres before. L. Mount∣ioy sent into Ire∣land.The eight of February, Charles Blunt, Lord Mountioy, departed towards Ireland, as Lieue∣tenant there: souldiers out of diuers shires were sent before him, and also after him in the month of February, namely the Citizens of London, at their owne charges, furnished and sent 300 at that time into Ireland. The 21 of Iune, Iohn Rigby was drawne from the Kings Bench in Southwarke,1600. to S. Thomas Waterings, and there hanged and quar∣tered, for being reconciled contrary to the Sta∣tute. In the month of Iuly, were drawn, hanged,
and quartered at Lincolne, two Priests,Executi∣on of Se∣minaries. named T. Hunt and Sprat, for comming into this Realme, contrary to the Statute: two other Priests, Edward Thing, and Robert Nutter, were likewise executed for the like offence, at Lancaster. Also T. Palafer a Priest, executed at Durham, and a Gentleman with him, for relie∣uing and lodging him in his house. In the moneth of Iuly,Souldiers sent into Ireland. the Citizens of Lon∣don sent out 300 souldiers into Ireland with their furniture: also out of diuers shires, souldi∣ers were likewise furnished and sent thither. This yéere, in the moneth of April, Richard,The Bi∣shop of London Ambassa∣dour to Emden. Bishop of London, with other Commissioners, to wit, Doctor Perkins, and Doctor Swale, were sent Ambassadors to Emden, there to treat with the Commissioners from the King of Denmark, who had long remained there for that purpose: but their commission expired, they were retur∣ned ere Ambassadors were come there: where∣upon our Ambassadors also returned into Eng∣land, the 8 of Iuly next following. In which seruice, the said Reuerend Father, so wisely, bountifully, & honorably caried himselfe, that the Quéene very graciously accepted his procée∣dings. The fifth of Iune, the Earle of Essex was called before the Lords of the Councell,The Earle of Essex suspended from his office. at the Lord Kéepers, where for matters laide to his charge, hee was suspended from vse of diuers offices, till her Maiesties pleasure to the con∣trary, to kéepe his house, as before: whereat the
people still murmured. Conspira∣cie against the King of Scots.The 5 of August, Charles Iames, King of Scots, in Scotland, escaped a strange and strong conspiracie, practised by the Earle of Gowry, and his Brother, as at large appeareth in a booke thereof extant, first published, and printed in Scotland, and since in England. Meanes for an in∣treaty of peace to be had.A peace being concluded at Veraine in France, in the yeare 1598, betwéene Henry the fourth, King of France and Nauarre, and Phi∣lip the second King of Spaine: The Quéene of England, was likewise inuited by the French King, her confederate allye, to dispose her selfe vnto a like treaty of amity with Spaine. To the effecting whereof, he had procured the con∣sent of the K. of Spaine, then liuing. After whose decease, Philip the third, succée∣ding his Father in the Crowne, the same was againe reuiued and solicited by Andreas of Au∣stria, the Gouernour of the Low Countries, and the Bishop of Constance, both for the house of Burgundy, and Kingdome of Spaine, after∣wards ratified by the Arch-duke, Albert retur∣ned out of Spaine, with the Infanta his wife. Vpon which former promise made vnto her Maiesty, shee was at length induced to condis∣cend vnto a treaty of peace at Bolaigne in France, a place chosen by mutuall agreement on either side, with the assent and good liking of the French King; whether both Princes sent their Ambassadors, furnished with ample power and authority in that behalfe, where the English
Ambassadors arriued the sixtéenth day of May, in this present yeare, 1600, being the day pre∣fixed for this assembly, and the Spanish, the se∣uentéenth of the same moneth. The Commissio∣ners on the English side were these, Sir Henry Neuel Knight, her Maiesties ordinary Ambas∣sador, resident with the French King, Iohn Harbert, Esquire, her Maiesties Secretary in the North part, and Thomas Edmonds Es∣quire, her Maiesties Secretary for the French tongue. The Commissioners for Spaine, were Baltazar de Caniga, and Fonseca, Am∣bassador resident for the King of Spaine, with the Arch-duke of Austria in the Low Coun∣tries, and Ferdinando Carillo, Doctor of the ciuill Law, vnto whom were adioyned on the Arch-dukes part, Iohn Richardot, President of the counsell of the said Arch-duke, and Lewis Verraken, the said Arch-dukes Audiencer. The Commissioners on both sides, being viewed and considered of, some question for the presidencie and superiority of place, fell into disputation and debate, her Maiesty challenging the same, as due vnto her, before the time of the Emperour Charles, (as appeareth by Vola∣teran) in the time of King Henry the seuenth, her Highnes Grandfather, when this self-same dif∣ference betwéene both those Crownes comming into question, the Pope preferred England, and adiudged vnto this Crowne, the most ho∣nourable place: but forasmuch as the same was contradicted by the Spanish Commissioners,
who not onely refused to yéeld presiansie vnto her Maiesty, but also to admit an equality, or of any other indifferent and middle course, where∣by the honour of her Maiesty might bee prefer∣red; the present treaty (which hitherto was perfourmed, onely by some priuate visitations and conferences of some one or two of the Commissioners on either side, without com∣ming to any generall méeting or colloquie) was on the second day of August, in the yeere afore∣said, for this time delayed, and by mutuall as∣sent of the Commissioners on both sides, ac∣cording to their seuerall authorities, respectiue∣ly granted vnto them in that behalfe, suspended, vntill the the end of sixtie dayes following, in which meane while it might be vnderstood, what should be the determination of both Princes, for a further  preceeding in the said colloquie of peace at some other time and place, wherein as yet no certaine resolution hath béene hitherto taken. Ambassa∣dors from Barbary.The 8 of August, 1600, came Ambassadors from Abdela Wayhetanow, King of Barbary, the chiefe whereof was his Secretary, diuers in commission with him were Artificers and Trades-men:Right Turkish charity. they were very bountifully en∣tertained at the Quéenes charges, during their sixe monthes abode, they were very subtle and vnthankfull, they abhorred to giue any manner of Almes vnto any poore Christians, they sold their broken meat vnto such as would giue most for it, they killed all their owne meat in the Am∣bassadors
house, as Lambes, and all kinde of Pullen, &c. which they vsually killed, turning their faces towards the East, they vsed to wash their owne féete twice or thrice aday, and some∣times to wash their bodies: they vse beades, and pray to Turkish Saints: they diligently obserued the manner of our weights and mea∣sures, and all things else that might auaile their natiue Marchants, and preiudice the Eng∣lish Nation. The 18 of September,Ambassa∣dors from Russia. came Embassadours from Borris Pheodorwich, Emperour of Rus∣sia, which said Borris was newly come vnto that dignity by vsurpation, onely by meanes of his greatnesse in popularity, hauing as he supposed long before made away the late immediat Heire Demetrius, second sonne to old Ivan Vasselo∣wich, and yonger brother to the late Pheodor Vasselowich. This Borris at his first comming to the crowne, was as bounteous and liberall vnto all sorts of people, as he was when he was a subiect; but within a while after he grew very couetous, and desirous to fill his treasure, by meanes whereof within sixe yéeres hee was as generally hated of all the Russians, as euer he was beloued: of whose sudden and vnexspected downefall, you may reade at large in the third yeare of King Iames. About the last of August, Robert,Earle of Essex set at liberty. Earle of Essex was set at liberty. The 10 of September,They were sent home at the Q. charges. the said Embassa∣dors of Barbary, were againe conueyed to the
Court at Oatlands,They were sent home at the Qu. charges. there to take their leaue of her Maiesty, but were required to stay, to sée the Iusting, and other triumphs at Westminster, on the 17. of Nouember. Souldirs sent into Ireland, run awaies punished.In the moneth of September, souldiers prest, in, and about the City of London, to the number of 350. and likewise out of diuers shires were sent towards Ireland, wherof diuers run∣ning from their Captaines and colours, were afterward taken and hanged for example to others. Ambassa∣dors from Russia and Muscouia.The 18. of September, Ambassadors from Muscouia or Russia, landing at Tower wharfe, were there receiued by the Aldermen of London, in scarlets, the Muscouy Marchants, and a number about two hundred, of the principall companies in veluet Coats, and chaines of gold, all well mounted, conueied them in ca∣ches, from the Tower to the house sometime pertayning to Sir Cuthbert Buckell, Ma∣ior. The 14. of October, the said Ambassadors rode to the Court, and had audience before the Quéene. Hospital in Croydon founded.This yeare the most Reuerend Father in God Iohn Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry, did finish that notable monument of our time, to wit, his Hospitall of the holy Trini∣ty in Croydon, in the County of Surry, by him there founded & builded of stone and bricke, for the releise and sustentation of certaine poore people. As also a faire Schoole-house for the
increase of literature, together with a large dwelling house for the Schoolemaster: and these premisses he hath through Gods assistance in his owne life time performed, for as (my selfe haue heard him say) he would not be to his Ex∣ecutors a cause of their damnation, remembring the good aduice that an ancient Father hath left to all posterity. Tutior via est, vt bonum quod quisquis post mortem sperat agi per alios, agat dum viuit ipse per se: It is a way farre more safe for a man to do good and charitable déedes by himselfe, whilst he liueth, then to hope that others will do the same for him after his death. Thomas Smith, Thomas Cambell,Shrieues. the 28 of September. William Crauen, the fourteenth of Februa∣rie. Sir William Rider Haberdasher,Maior. the 28 of October. The 13 of Nouember, the Quéene being most honourably attended on by the Prelats, Nobles, and Iudges of this Realme, was re∣ceiued neere vnto Chelsey, by the Lord Maior of London with his brethren the Aldermen, in scarlet, besides to the number of 500 Citizens, in coats of veluet, and chaines of gold, on horse∣backe, euery of them hauing two staffe-torches to attend on them, and they all wayted on her to her Pallace at Westminster.
An. reg. 43 Iusts at Westmin∣ster.The 17 of Nouember, there were most prince∣ly Iusts performed at White-hall in honour of the Quéenes holy day by thrée Earles, foure Lords, seauen Knights and nine Gentlemen, her Maiesties Pentioners. At these Iusts was so great an assembly of people, as the like hath not béene séene in that place before. There were also present sundry Ambassadors, as namely from the French King, the King of Barbary, and Fez, and the Emperour of Russia. Tempest.The fift of February in the morning being Sunday, a great tempest of winde brake the Windmill beyond Saint Giles in the field without London, the Miller throwne one way, an other man an other way, one North, the o∣ther South, a part of the Mill roofe, and halfe the milstone in like manner throwne. Drumlers made in great hast to little purpose.Notwithstanding, that for many yeares to∣gether vpon sundry deuises, the City was con∣tinually charged either with building, or fur∣nishing ships and souldiers to Sea, or else in trayning, mustering, or leuying and sending souldiers well appointed, either into Ireland or Holland, or into both: all which were euer per∣formed with wondrous dexterity, so as their great trouble and charges for sixtéene yeares space neuer ceased. Ouer and besides all which, it hapned the last yeare, vpon a strong report of the Spaniards preparation for a second inuasi∣on, that the City was at extraordinary charges in building and altering the vpper decks of many great strong hoyes, and new cutting in
them lower port-holes apt for the ready vse of great Ordnance,Gallies made by the Citi∣zens of London, and giuen to the Queene. which vessels so altered and prepared for warre were called Drumlers. And this yeare the Citizens gaue fiue fiftéenes towards the new making and ample furnish∣ing of two Gallies. And when these costly Gallies were lanched, rigged, and in all points furnished, then the City gaue them vnto the Quéene. The Crosse in Cheape was partly repayred, which the Quéene thought had beene fully re∣payred, for so she commanded it should. Sunday the eight of February,Earle of Essex his rising. about ten of the clocke before noone, Robert Deuoreux Earle of Essex, assisted by sundry Noblemen and Gen∣tlemen in warlike manner-entered the City of London at the Temple barre, crying for the Quéene, till they came to Fenchurch stréet, and there entered the house of Master Thomas Smith, one of the Shiriffes of London, who fin∣ding himselfe not master of his owne house (by meanes of the strength the Earle brought with him) and being ignorant of his intent and pur∣poses, conueied himselfe out at a backe gate to the Maior, whereupon the Earle with his Troupe turned into Grace-stréete, & there per∣ceiuing himselfe with his Assistants to be pro∣claimed Traitors, also the Citizens to be rai∣sed in Armes against him, he with his fol∣lowers wandering vp and downe the Citie, towardes Euening would haue passed at Ludgate, which was closed against him,
so that he was forced to returne to Quéene Hithe, and from thence by water, to his house by the Strand, which he fortified; he vnder∣standing that great Ordnance was brought to haue beat it downe, he yéelded and was conuei∣ed to the Tower about midnight. The 17 of February, Captaine Thomas Lee was drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled, and quartered for conspiracy a∣gainst the Quéene: he tooke his death constant∣ly, confessing he had diuers waies deserued it, but to be innocent of that he was condemned for, &c. A Semi∣narie exe∣cuted.The eightéenth of February, Iohn Pibush a Seminary Priest, after seuen yeares imprison∣ment in the Kings Bench, hanged and quarte∣red at Saint Thomas Waterings, for cōming into the Realme, contrary to the statute Anno twenty seuen of the Quéenes raigne. The Earls of Essex & Southāp∣ton arraig∣ned.The 19 of February, the Earle of Essex and the Earle of Southampton were both arraig∣ned at Westminster, and found guilty of high Treason. The Earle of Essex beheaded.Ashwednesday, the fiue and twenty of Fe∣bruary, the Earle of Essex was beheaded in the Tower, betwéene the houres of seuen and eight of the clocke in the morning, being present, the Earles of Hartfort and Cumberland, the Lord Thomas Howard Constable of the Tower for that time, and not passing sixty or seuenty per∣sons more: the Hangman was beaten as he re∣turned thence, so that the Shrieues of London
were sent for, to assist and rescue him from such as would haue murdered him. The 27 of February, Marke Bakworth,Executiō of Semi∣naries. and Th. Filcockes Seminary Priests, were drawne to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered, for comming into the Realme contrary to the Statute. And the same day a Gentlewoman called Mistresse Anne Lina, a Widow,A Gentle∣woman hanged. was hanged in the same place, for reléeuing a Priest in her lodging contrary to the said statute. The last day of February, a young Gentle∣man, named Waterhouse,One han∣ged for libelling. was hanged in Smith∣field, for speaking and libelling against the Quéenes proclamation, and the apprehending of the Earle of Essex: at this time Libellers a∣bounded. The fifth of March, the Earle of Marre,Ambassa∣dors from Scotland, the Lord of Krynters, in Commission, Ambassa∣dors, and others from Scotland, came to Lon∣don, and were lodged by the Exchange, in the house of Master Anthony Ratcliffe. The 13 of March, Sir Gelly Merike Knight,Merike and Cuffe executed. and Henry Cuffe Gentleman, were drawne to Tiburne, the one from the Tower, the other from Newgate, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, as being actors with the Earle of Essex. The 15 of March, in the night, a new Scaffold was carried from Leaden Hall in Lon∣don to the Tower hill, and there set vp by Torchlight.
Danuers and Blunt executed.The 18 of March, Sir Charles Danuers, and Sir Christopher Blunt Knights, were vpon the new scaffold on the Tower-hill beheaded. 1601In the Moneth of May, fiue fifteenes were leuied in London, toward the setting out of Gallies to the Seas (as was appointed by the Queene) and charges about the Earle of Essex, when he entered the City. The 20 of Iune Proclamation was made at London for deliuering of Prisoners to serue in the Gallies, made at the charge of the Citi∣zens. Bold offē∣ders se∣uerely punished.Two men were set on the Pillorie in Fleet∣street, whipped with gags in their mouthes, and their eares cut off, for attempting to haue rob∣bed a Gentlewoman in Fetter lane in the day time, putting gags in the mouthes of the ser∣uants of the house because they should not cry. One of these theeues was afterwards hanged and quartered at Saint Thomas Waterings. The Earle of Shrews∣burie and Worcester of coūsel. Souldiers sent to the Low coū∣tries.Gilbert Talbot Earle of Shrewsburie, Ed∣ward Earle of Worcester, & sir Iohn Stanhope were called to be of the Queenes Councell. In the moneth of Iuly 1000. souldiers were sent to the Low Countries, set out at the char∣ges of the Citizens of London, 3 l 10. s. a man. More 800 souldiers set out by the Shires. Desmond brought out of Ire∣land.The 26 of August, Desmond and an other Knight brought out of Ireland, were conueied to the Tower of London. About the 5 of September certaine Noble∣men, and other of France, to the number of 300
persons arriued at the Tower wharffe,Marshall Biron of France. the chiefe of them were conueied in Coaches through the City into Bishopsgate streete, and there the principall, namely Marshall de Biron was lodged in Crosby place, the other neere adioy∣ning to Corne-hill. Henrie Anderson, William Glouer,Shrieues. the 28 of September. Sir Iohn Garrard Haberdasher,Maior. the 28 of O∣ctober. About the 13 of October,Lady Ramsey. An. reg. 44 400 souldiers were set out of the City of London. In Nouember the Lady Mary Ramsey, wid∣dow to Sir Thomas Ramsey, sometime Maior of London was buried in the Parish church or Hospitall of Christs church by Newgate mar∣ket: A charitable dole or almes was giuen for her, on the same day in the afternoone at the Lea∣den hall 17 poore weake people were there among the sturdy beggars crushed and troden to death.17 poore people murdered. The 19 of December,Parliamēt dissolued. with the grant of Sub∣sidies and Fifteenes the Parliament was dis∣solued. Lightning and thunder often before Christ∣mas, and in the holy dayes,Lightning thunder & earth∣quake at Christmas. and an Earthquake at London on Christmas euen at noone. In the moneth of Ianuary newes came out of Ireland,Victors in Ireland. that on Christmas day the Spani∣ards and Irish were ouercome and slaine in
great numbers, and the Englishmen were victors. Bonefires for victory in Ireland.The 18 of Ianuary at night bone-fires were made at London with ringing, &c. For ioy of newes out of Ireland, the victory of our Eng∣lish there against Tyrone. Windsor boat cast away. 1682 Executiō.Windsor boate was cast away against the Blacke Fryers stayres at London by tempest. The ninetéenth of Aprill, Peter Bullocke Stationer, and one named Ducket, for printing of bookes offensiue were hanged at Tiborne. Semina∣ries exe∣cuted.The 20 of Aprill, Stichborne, William Ken∣son, and Iames Page, Seminarie Priests were drawne to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowel∣led and quartered, for comming into this realme contrary to the statute of An. 27. &c. Great le∣uying of souldiers to aid Hol∣land.In the moneth of May, great pressing out of Souldiers about London, to be sent into the Low Countries. The 22 of Iune, proclamation was publish∣ed for the pulling downe of late builded houses,Proclama∣tiō against late buil∣ding and Inmates, but neuer the bet∣ter. and the auoiding of Inmates, in the City of London, Westminster, and for the space of three miles distant of both these Cities; but little hurt was done, and small effect followed, more then of an Act of Parliament, made to that purpose: those Cities are still increased, and pestred with cottages and Inmates, to the great infection of them both. Seditious persons punished.The last of Iune, Atkenson a customer of Hull, was set on the Pillory in Cheape, and with him three other, who had beene brought
thither on horse backe, with their faces towards the horse tailes, and papers on their heads. They were there whipped on the Pillory and lost their eares by iudgement of the Star-chamber, for slanderous words by them spoken, against the Counsell. The same last of Iune in the afternoone fell great lightning and thunder with hale-stones in many places of nine inches compasse,Tempest of thunder and haile. which at Sandwich in Kent lay a foot déepe on the ground, brake the glasse windowes of their Churches, and many tiles of their houses, some barnes were fired by lightning. About the first of August,Souldiers to Ireland the citizens of Lon∣don set out and furnished 200 souldiers to∣wards Ireland. Iames Pemberton, Iohn Swinarton,Shrieues. the 28 of September. Sir Robert Lee Merchantailor,Maior. the 28 of October. In the moneth of Ianuary,An. reg. 45 the citizens of London were charged with ships to sea, to lie before Dunkerke, two ships and a Pinnace, fur∣nished, manned and maintained. The 17 of February William Anderson alias Richardson, a Seminary Priest,Semina∣ries exe∣cuted. was drawne to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quar∣tered, for being found in England contrary to the statute of Anno 27. &c. In the moneth of March, the Quéene lying
at Richmont,Staight watches kept. dangerously sicke, straight wat∣ches were kept in London with warding at the gates, lanthornes with lights hanged out all the night, at which newes the people were sore perplexed. Queene Elizabeth deceased.Thursday the foure and twenty of March, about two of the clocke in the morning, decea∣sed Quéene Elizabeth at her Mannor of Rich∣mont in Surrey, being then aged seuenty yeeres, and had raigned, forty foure yeares fiue moneths and odde daies. Whose corps was priuily conueied to Whitehall, and there remai∣ned till the 28 of Aprill, and then buried at Westminster. King Iames proclai∣med.The same day aforesaid, the Nobility and Priuie Counsellors of Estate, with as great peace, prudence and prouidence, as the heart of man could imagine, assembled themselues to∣gether, and farre beyond the generall imagi∣nation of all men, being a matter most remarke∣able, tooke speedy order, aswell for the instant manifesting the Quéenes death, as in publish∣ing to the whole Realme, for their lasting com∣fort, the true and lawfull successor. And about eleuen of the clocke the same Thursday in the forenoone,There were 37 Earles & Barons & Bishops dined that day with Master Shrieue Pember∣tō, besides Iudges & chiefe gē∣try that dined with Master Shrieue Swinartō. which according to the computation of the Church of England is the last day of the yeare 1602, being accompanied with the Lord Maior, Aldermen and Shrieues of London, and very many others of most reuerend and hono∣rable quality at the high Crosse in Cheapeside, proclamed Iames the sixth of that name King of
Scotland, to bee the right King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the Faith, being lineally descended from Mar∣garet, the eldest daughter to King Henry the seuenth, by Elizabeth his wife, which was the eldest daughter of King Edward the fourth, the said Margaret was married to King Iames the fourth of that name, King of Scotland, in the yeare of our redemption, 1503 who had issue Iames the fifth, who was Father to Mary Quéene of Scotland: And the said Mary was mother to Iames the sixth, now sole Mo∣narch of the whole Island of great Brittaine, and King of France and Ireland, this forena∣med Proclamation was most distinctly and au∣dibly read by Sir Robert Cecill principall Se∣cretary vnto Quéene Elizabeth. Also the Lords and Priuie Councellors of Estate with great diligence, sent spéedily condigne Mes∣sengers vnto his Maiesty into Scotland, who manifested their whole procéeding with ten∣der of their zealous loue and duety, and the peoples vniuersall ioy, and great desire to sée their King, which his Maiesty most gratiously accepted, approued all their procéedings, and returned them all princely thankes, authori∣zing the Lords and others late Priuie Coun∣sellors of Estate to the Quéene, to persist as they had begun, vntill he came personally vnto them. This change was very plausible, and well pleasing to the Nobility and Gentry, and
generally to all the Commons of this Realme, among whom the name of a King was then so strange, as few could remember, or had séene a King before, except they were aged persons, con∣sidering that the gouernment of the Realme had continued neere the space of 50. yeares vn∣der the raigne of two Quéenes, which is the far greater part of an old mans age, but tidings hereof being brought to the King in Scotland, he called a Councell to him, and taking order for setting all things in his realme of Scotland, began his voyage towards England.
King IAMES. PResently vpon the death of Queene Elizabeth of famous me∣mory,An. reg. 1. the Nobilitie of this Land and Priuy Counsellors of E∣state vnto the said Queene, ac∣knowledged the immediate right of Iames the sixt, then King of Scots, and within sixe houres after her death, the said Lords and Counsellors, gaue full satisfaction vnto the people by three Proclamations, the first at the Court gate, the second at the high Crosse in Cheape, and the third at the Tower, by the name of Iames the 1. King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, defendor of the Faith, &c. The King being then full 36 yeares of age, and crowned King of Scots in his infancy, began his raigne ouer the great Isle of Britaine the 24 of March 1602. The Nobility and State aforesaid, with all speed sent Sir Charles Pearcy and Master Thomas Sommerset with letters vnto the King, signifying the death of the Queene, and tender
of all their duties, loue and allegiance; but Sir Robert Cary rid poste and brought the first newes to the King, and as he rode gaue know∣ledge vnto his brother Sir Iohn Cary, then Go∣uernor of Barwicke. This calme and discréet course of the English Lords, in proclaiming the King, and quiet setling the whole Estate, with∣out faction or interruption, was as plausible vn∣to all his Highnesse Subiects as admited of all forraine nations. 1603. The King Beginneth his iorney for Eng∣land.The 5. of Aprill the King came from Eden∣borough to Dunglasse, and the next day to Bar∣wicke, and vpon the morrow after came newes of many disordered persons that were in Armes in the borders, whereat the King was somewhat troubled, and forthwith there was power sent to suppresse them, and after that when the King came to London, he with the aduice of the Lords of his Counsell, set all the parts of the north∣borders in as good condition as any other part of his dominions. The kings iorney frō Barwicke. to LondonThe 8. of Aprill the King went from Bar∣wicke to Wytherington, and then to Newca∣stle, and from thence to Durham, to Yorke, to Grimstone, to Dancester, to Newarke vpon Trent, to Beuercastle, to Burleigh, to Hin∣chingbrooke, to Godmanchester, to Royston, to Standon, to Theobalos, where the Lords and ether of the Priuie Councell, and many other of the Nobility, attended his comming, and did their homage vnto his Maiesty: And here the King made of his Priuie Councell, the Lord
Henry Howard, the L. Tho. Howard, who was also made L. Chamberlaine, and the L. Mount∣ioy, there the King made 28 knights. The 10 of Aprill diuers prisoners were dis∣charged out of the Tower,Prisoners dischar∣ged. among whom the Earle of Southamton was the chiefest. The 27 of Aprill,Diuers slaine by Gunpow∣der. there were thirtéene per∣sons slaine, and blowne in peeces, by misfor∣tune, at the Gunpowder mill at Redriffe. The 7 of May his Maiesty came from Theo∣balds to London, against which time Master Iames Pemberton and Master Iohn Swinnarton,The Lord Maior, Shrieues and chiefe Citizens, ride to re∣ceiue the King. shrieues of London and Middlesexe had furnish∣ed themselues with 80 men on horse backe, in faire Liueries, but Master Pemberton being sicke, M. Swinnarton with the whole traine at∣tended at Waltham to receiue his Maiesty, as the shrieues of other Coūties had formerly done in all the Kings progresse from Scotland. And at Stanford hill three miles from London, the L. Maior & Aldermen in scarlet robes, accompa∣nied with the chiefe officers & councellors of the City, & 500. graue Citizens in veluet coats and chains of gold wel moūted, attēded his Maiesty: there met him also diuers his Highnes officers as Sergeants at armes, Heralds, & Trūpeters, eue∣ry one in due place: ye Duke of Lenox bare the sword, the L. Tho. Howard receiued his Maiesty into the Charterhouse, where he staied 4 daies & made 80 knights; you shall vnderstand ye whilst the King was in his iourney,Prisoners released. many prisoners were released out of diuers prisons & the Maūdy
very solemnly performed. And the 28 of Aprill at Westminster a very Royall obsequy for the late Quéene Elizabeth,Funerall for Queen Elizabeth according to the Kings appointment by his letters to the Lords of the Priuy Councell, all auncient English rites and customes were fully obserued, except on∣ly the feast of Saint George, which his Maiesty deferred vntill his personall comming vnto some of his owne palaces. Proclama¦tion.The 7 of May proclamation was made for suppression of all manner of former Monopo∣lies that hindered commerce, and protections that impeached mens suits in Law, and against the annoyance and oppressions done by ye Salt-peter men, Purueyors, and Cardmakers. Barons Created.The 11 of May, the King rode priuately from the Charterhouse to White-hall, and went from thence by water to the Tower of London, and there the 13 of the same he made Barons, viz. Robert Lord Cecill Baren of Essenden, Robert Lord Sydney Baron of Penshurst, Wil∣liam Lord Knowles Baron of Graies, Edward Lord Wotton Baron of Marley: he also made xi knights. Procla∣mations.The 16 of May, Proclamation was made to prohibite all manner of persons from killing of Déere, and all wilde foule, according to the Te∣nour of diuers statutes, for preseruation of the Kings game of hunting and hawking. The 19 of May, proclamation was made for the suppression of disordered persons in the North-borders, and for the mutuall peace and
amity of both Kingdomes. The 20 of May, the King made Knights,Knights made. sir Iulius Caesar, sir Roger Wilbram, masters of the requests, sir William Waad, sir Thomas Smith, sir Thomas Edmonds, clerks of the priuy Coun∣cell, and sir Thomas Lake, Clerke of the Sig∣net. The twenty two of May, the King knighte sir Robert Lee, Maior of London,The Lord Maior of London knighted. sir Iohn Crooke Recorder, and sir Edward Cooke, his Highnes Atturney generall. And that day the King made a great feast, and was serued with great state, and at night sundry fire-workes vpon the Thames, the Court being at Gréene∣wich. In the last yéere,Sergeants feast. and last terme of Quéene E∣lizabeth, there was a call of Sergeants at Law, viz. Thomas Couentrie, Robert Houghton, Laurence Tanfield, I. Crooke, Thomas Foster, Edward Philips, Thomas Harris, Iames Altham, Henry Hubert, Augustine Nichols, and Robert Barker: these receiued writs from the Quéene, de statu & gradu seruientum ad legem suscipien∣di, returnable tres Pascae next following, being the second returne in Easter terme: but the Quéene dying in the meane time, their Writtes abated, which notwithstanding the King being aduertised thereof in Scotland, from the Coun∣cell of England, of their late election, gaue or∣der for the rest of their procéedings, according to their ancient laudable customes, so far forth, as that they procéed by new Writs, in his name
returnable the day aforesaid, and added vnto their number thrée others, viz. Iohn Sherly, George Snig, and Richard Hutton: these foure∣téene, vpon Tuesday the seuenth of May, being the next day after the returne of their writs, made their appearance before sir Thomas Egerton, Lord Kéeper of the great Seale, in the high Court of Chancerie, and were then sworne Sergeants at Law, and vpon Tuesday following, being the 24 of May, they were admitted to the Common pleis barre, and the same day kept their solemne feast in the middle Temple hall. At this feast, Sir E. Phi∣lips was chosen the Kings Sergeant: you shall vnderstand, that albeit some of the Sergeants were knighted, yet amongst themselues they had no precedence, but euery man held his place according to his antiquity. Note. Presump∣tion puni∣shed.The 1 of Iune, there was one whipped through London for presuming to come to the Court, hauing his house infected. Valentine Thomas executed for high treason.The 4 of Iune, Valentine Thomas hauing béene many yéeres prisoner in the Tower, was arraigned at the Kings Bench Barre, and there condemned of high treason, for conspiracy a∣gainst our late Quéene, and some of her Coun∣cell, and the 7 of Iune about sixe of the clocke, he was drawne from the Kings Bench in South∣warke, to S. Thomas Waterings, and there hanged and quartered. Ambassa∣dour.About this time came Ambassadors from ma∣ny forraine Princes, namely Monsieur Rosney,
from the French King, Don Iohn de Tassis, from the King of Spaine, others came from the Arch∣duke, from the King of Poland, the Signory of Venice, the Duke of Florence and the States of Holland. The twenty one of Iune Roger Earle of Rutland was sent Ambassador vnto Christianus the fourth King of Denmarke to solemnise the Baptisme of his sonne,The Earle of Rutland Ambassa∣dor into Denmark. and to present him with the Garter, being attended by W. Segar Norroy King of Armes, he returned into England the thirtieth of Iuly. The 2.The great Ladies of England doe their homage to the queen. Knights of the Gar∣ter. of Iuly the King solemnized the feast of S. George at Windsor, and enstalled Prince Henry Knight of the Garter, and there the chiefe Ladies of England did their homage vnto the Quéene. There were also made Knights of the Garter with Prince Henry, the Duke of Lenox, the Earle of Southampton, the Earle of Marre, and the Earle of Pembrooke. Within few daies after were made diuers Proclamations for the apprehension of Antho∣ny Copley, Sir Griphin Markham Knight,Proclama∣tions. The Lord Cobham, and the Lord Grey and Sir Walter Rawleigh apprehen∣ded. and William Watson, and William Clearke Priests, and about the same time were apprehended as traytors the Lord Cobham and his brother, the Lord Grey, sir Walter Rawleigh and others. The 21. of Iuly, at Hampton Court, Henry Wrihesley Earle of Southampton was crea∣ted and restored,Cration of Earles and Ba∣rons. the Lord Thomas Howard cre∣ated Earle of Suffolke, Charles Lord Montioy
created Earle of Deuonshire, Sir Thomas E∣gerton Baron of Elesmire, sir William Russell Baron of Thornehaugh, sir Henry Grey, Ba∣ron of Grooby, sir Iohn Peter, Baron of Writ∣tle, sir Iohn Harington, Baron of Exton, sir Henry Danuers, Baron of Dawnsey, sir Tho∣mas Garrerd, Baron of Gerrardes Bromley, sir Robert Spencer,Sir Tho∣mas Ed∣monds Ambassa∣dour. Baron of Wormeleighton, sir Thomas Edmonds is sent Ambassadour Lieger to the Arch-duke. The twenty thrée of Iuly, the King made sixty and one Knights of the Bath. Knights of the Bath. Coronati∣on.Against this time of Coronation, the citizens had made wondrous great prouision; but through the terrible encrease of pestilence in the City and Suburbes, their sumptuous Page∣ants, and other triumphant entertainments, stood like ruines, being not yet finished, and the King constrained to omit his former determina∣tion, in ryding through London, as Kings haue accustomed, and all Londoners prohibited by Proclamation from comming at Court: there died that wéeke of all diseases, eleuen hundred and thrée: the twenty fiue of Iuly being Mun∣day, and the feast of Saint Iames the Apostle, King Iames the first of that name, King of Eng∣land, and the most noble Lady Quéene Anne his wife, were both crowned and anointed at West∣minster, by the most reuerend Father in GOD, Iohn Whitgift, L. Archbishop of Canterbury, in presence of all the Nobility, and diuers others, namely, Sir Robert Lee, Maior of London, in
a Robe of crimson Veluet, & all the Aldermen in scarlet gownes, and twelue Citizens admitted to attend them. The twenty sixt of Iuly,The Al∣dermen of London knighted. the King sent for all the Aldermen of London, to Westminster, and knighted them, and the same day the King knighted sir Christopher Parkens, Doctor of the Law, Master of the Requests, and Deane of Carlil. At this time,The 5 of August, to be kept holy day. the Bishops commanded the 5 of August to be held as a Holy-day, with pray∣ers, preaching and thanksgiuing to God for the Kings escape from being murthered by Earle Gowry in Scotland. The plague encreased still most grieuously in London, and thereupon it was ordayned,A holy decree. that euery Wednesday there should be a generall fa∣sting and prayer, with preaching throughout the land, to draw the people vnto humble and hear∣ty repentance of their sinnes. This yeare,Faires for∣bidden. Terme at Winche∣ster. No Ma∣iors feast at Guild hall. Inmates suppressed Bartholmew Fayre was forbid∣den, and Michaelmas tearme adiorned vnto Mensem Michaelis, and to be kept at Westmin∣ster: but by reason of the sicknes, it was after∣ward held at Winchester, and the Lord Maiors triumphs and great feast at Guild hall was this yéere omitted. At this time there was a strict Proclamation against Inmates, and diuers new built houses and sheds, standing noysome∣ly, chaking the stréetes, or other places, all which were by expresse order beaten downe, there was also great care and prouision for the
banishing of Rogues and Vagabonds,Rogues banished. accor∣ding to the tenour of the Statutes in that be∣halfe. Shrieues.Sir William Rumney, Sir Thomas Middleton, Shrieues. Maior.Sir Thomas Bennet Mercer, Maior. The Lord Spencer sent Am∣bassadour to the Duke of Wyten∣berge.The 8 of October, Robert Lord Spencer, was sent by his Maiestie vnto Fredericke, Duke of Wytenberge, to inuest him Knight and Com∣panion of the most noble Order of the Garter, and returned before Christmas. The 4 of Nouember, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Grey of Wilton,Prisoners carried from the Tower vn∣to Win∣chester. were conueied from Lon∣don Tower vnto Winchester, to be arraigned, and to that purpose the 19 of Nouember, were also conueyed from the Tower to Winchester, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir Griffin Markham Knights, George Brooke, brother to the Lord Cobham, Anthony Copley Gentleman, William Watson,Arraigne∣ment at Winche∣ster. and William Clearke Priests, and the same day out of the Gate-house at Westmin∣ster, went Sir Edward Parham Knight, and Brooksby Esquire of Leycester-shire, they were all condemned of high treason, saue onely sir Edward Parham, who was acquitted by the Iury. The 29 of Nouember were executed the two Priests, and sixe dayes after was George Brooke hanged, and the ninth of De∣cember,Executiō. sir Griffin Markham, and the two Ba∣rons, after they had bin seuerally brought vpon
the scaffold in the Castle of Winchester, and had made their confessions, and prepared them∣selues likewise seuerally to die, vpon the sudden, the Kings warrant, written with his owne hand, was there deliuered to sir Beniamin Tich∣borne, high Shiriffe of Hamshire, commanding him to stay execution: these thrée, and sir Walter Rawleigh, were returned prisoners to the Tower, the 15 of December. From the 23 of December, 1602,The great Plague in London. The whole land visi∣ted with sicknes except London. vnto the 22 of December, 1603, there died of all diseases, within London and the Liberties, thirty eight thousand, two hundred, and forty foure, where∣of, the plague, thirty thousand, fiue hundred, seuenty eight: and the next yéere following, London was cleare of that infection, and then were all the shires in England grieuously visi∣ted: note the worke of God. The 29 of February died the most renowned and reuerend Father in God, D. Whitgift,Archbi∣shop of Canterbu∣ry decea∣sed. Archbishop of Canterbury, he was a holy & mer∣cifull man. The 5 of March, was Proclamation made,Proclama∣tion. for the authorizing the Booke of Common prayer. The thirtéenth of March,Creation of Earles. the Lord Hen∣ry Howard, was created Baron of Marne∣hill, and Earle of North-hampton, and Thomas, Lord Buckhurst, was created Earle of Dorset. This yeare, sir William Rumney, & sir Tho∣mas Middleton, shriues of Londō, through their
great paine and diligence, cleansed the City of Rogues and lewd people, which at that time swarmed excéedingly. The King, Queene, & Prince, with al the Nobility, ride in state through London.The 15 of March, the King, Quéene and Prince, with the Lords spirituall and tempo∣rall, the Gentry and all Officers, aswell of ho∣nor and armes, as otherwise, passed most trium∣phantly from the Tower, through the high stréetes of his Highnesse Royall Chamber of London, to Westminster, and all the way hee went, euen from his first entrance into the City, vntill he came to Temple barre, his Maiesty was receiued and attended by the Lord Maior, in a Robe of crimson Veluet, bearing a golden Scepter in his hand, and the graue Citizens of euery Company in their Liueries, standing in their stalles with great state, hauing their ban∣ners and bannerets displayed on the one side of the streetes, and the other side very strongly rayled, to giue frée passage, and kéepe backe the violent pressing of the multitudes of people, which at that time excéeded, as well in houses, as otherwise,The secōd Pegeant was set vp at the charges of the Itali∣ans, & the third at the char∣ges of the Nether∣landers. and at this time, the former gates of Pageants, being seuen in number, were all most sumptuously beautified and adorned with solemne orations, melodious harmony, and di∣uers ingenious deuices: the first Pageant stood in Fan-church street, the second in Gracious street, the third in Corn-hill, the fourth at the East end of Cheape side, and at the East side of the high Crosse in Cheape, was erected a low Gallery, wherein stood the Aldermen, the
Chamberlaine, the Towne Clerke, with the Counsell of the City, where Sir Henry Moun∣tegue, Recorder of London, after his Oration in the behalfe of the Lord Maior, and the whole body of the City, presented thrée Cups of gold; one for the King, the second for the Quéene, and the third for the Prince. The fift Page∣ant stood at the West end of Cheape, the sixt in Fléet-stréete, and the seuenth at Temple Barre: at this time, all the chiefe Conduites ran Claret wine: there was an other Pageant erected in the Strand, at the charges of the inhabitants there-abouts. The 19 of March beganne the Parliament at Westminster,A Parlia∣ment. and continued vntill the 7 of Iuly, and was there proroged vntill the 7 of February next after. Sir Edward Denny was made Baron of Waltham by writ,Sir Edw. Denny, Baron of Waltham. and sate in his Robes in the Parliament house, the day wherein the Par∣liament was adiourned. Sir Thomas Smith,1604. An. reg. 2. Ambassa∣dor to Russia. late Alderman of Lon∣don, is sent Ambassador vnto Borris Pheodor∣wich, Emperor of Russia. This yéere,The King granteth a Corpora∣tion vnto the Felt-makers of London. his Maiesty by his Letters Pat∣tents, incorporated the Felt-makers of London by the name of Master, Wardens, and Commu∣nalty of the Art or Mysterie of Felt-makers of London, graunting vnto them thereby di∣uers priuiledges and liberties for the good go∣uernment of the same corporation: this was the first Company that the King incorporated, and
was obtained by the humble and earnest suite of Richard Banister, Iohn Sands, Hugh Philips, Ro∣bert Browne, & others, Felt-makers of London. Peace with Spain proclay∣med.The 5 of August, arriued Don Iohn de Velas∣co, Constable of Castile, being sent from Philip the third King of Spaine, to take the oath of the King of England, for ratification of the Ar∣ticles of Peace, then agreed vpon by certaine English Lords, authorized by the King, and by former Commissioners, sent the last yeere from Spaine and the Arch-duke, which said Don Iohn, with all the Commissioners, vpon Sun∣day, the 19 of August, were most royally enter∣tained and feasted at Whitehall, and the same forenoone, the King in his owne Chappell, was sworne vnto the foresaid Articles,Ostend besieged 3 yeares & 3 months. and in the af∣ternoon the Peace was proclaimed with Spain and the Arch-duke, at the Court, and in Lon∣don. And this moneth, the Arch-duke wonne the strong Town of Ostend in Flanders, after it had béene besieged with all extremity, 3 yéeres, and 3 moneths. The Lord Robert Cecil cre∣ated Vis∣count Crāborn.The 20 of August, the Lord Robert Cecill, Baron of Essenden, was created Viscount Cranborne. The Cu∣stomes of merchan∣dise let to farme.In October, the Customes of Merchandise were raised both inward and outward, and were then let to farme. K. Iames proclay∣med King of Great Brittaine.The 24 of October, with great state, by a King at Armes, and Heralds, and two Ser∣geants at Armes, assisted by the L. Maior and Aldermen, K. Iames was proclaimed in London,
King of Great Brittaine, France and Ireland, Defendor of the faith, &c. Sir Thomas Hayes Knight.Shrieues. Sir Roger Iones Knight. Sir Thomas Low Knight, Haberdasher.Maior. The 10 of December,D. Ban∣croft arch∣bishop of Canter∣bury. the most reuerend Father in GOD, Richard Bancroft, Do∣ctor of Diuinity, late Lord Bishop of London, was translated to the Archbishoprick of Canter∣bury. The 24 of December Richard Vaughan,D. Vaugh∣an, Bishop of Londō. Do∣ctor of Diuinity, late L. Bishop of Westchester, was by his Deputy, installed Bishop of London in Pauls Church. The 4 of Ianuary, at Whitehall,Sir Philip Harbert married. sir Philip Harbert, brother to the Earle of Pembrooke, ma∣ried the Lady Susan Vere, yongest daughter to the Earle of Oxford; the King himselfe gaue her in mariage. The 6 of Ianuary in the afternoone, Charles D. of Albany, second son to K. Iames, Robert,Knights of the Bath. L. Willoughby, the L. Chandois, William, L. Compton, the Lord Norris, William Cecill, son and heire to the L. Viscount Cranborne, Allaine Percy, brother to the Earle of Northumber∣land, Thomas Somerset, second sonne to the Earle of Worcester, Francis Manners, brother to Roger, Earle of Rutland, Ftancis Clifford, bro∣ther to the Earle of Cumberland, Thomas Howard, second sonne to the Earle of Suffolke,
and Iohn Harington, Sonne and Heyre to the Lord Harington. All these were made Knights of the Bath, and two dayes after that, they performed all appropriate Rites and Cere∣monies. And the same time the fore-named Duke Charles, was also created Duke of Yorke,The Duke of Yorke created. being not full foure yéeres of age, the Earles of Oxford and Essex were his es∣quires. Lyons whelped in the Tower.The twenty sixt of February was a Lyon whelped in the Tower, which whelpe was ta∣ken from the Damme, and brought vp by hand, as the King had commaunded, by rea∣son that the same Lyonesse, in August last, had whelped a Lyon, and spoyled it, by car∣rying it in her mouth vp and downe the denne, to hide it: this yong Lyon liued but sixtéene dayes: after this, the King caused a conue∣nient place to bee made, néere to the Lyons Denne for the Lyonesse to bréede in: and the same Lyonesse afterward, brought foorth two Lyons at one litter, and they liued, and became as lusty as any other in the Tower: these foure were the first that ouer were whelped in the Tower. All Iesu∣ites & Se∣minaries banished by Procla∣mation.The 22 of February 1604, Proclamation was made against all Iesuites and Seminaries, and that they should forthwith depart out of the kingdome. A Procla∣mation for esta∣blishing the Epis∣copall au∣thority, & the booke of commō prayer.The 5 of March, Proclamation was made for confirmation of the Ecclesiasticall gouernment of the Church of England, and the Booke of
Common prayer, as it hath béene vsed in the time of Queene Elizabeth, &c. The 28 of March 1605, the Earle of Not∣tingham, Lord high Admirall of England, im∣barked for Spaine, to take the Kings oath, for confirmation of the Articles of Peace, lately a∣gréed vpon, & returned the ninetéenth of Iune:An. reg. 3. 1605. The Lord Admirall sent to the King of Spaine, to take his oath. he left sir Charles Cornwallis Ambassador Lie∣ger in Spaine. The 19 of Aprill, Edward, Earle of Hert∣ford, was likewise sent Commissioner into Flanders, to the Archduke and Dutchesse, to take their oathes for confirmation of the said Peace, and returned the 20 of May.The Earle of Hert∣ford go∣eth to take the oath of the Archduke. A charita∣ble deed. At this time Ro. Doue of London, Marchant-taylor, gaue competent maintenance for euer, for the tolling of a Bell in Saints Sepulchres Church, to cause good people to pray for such prisoners as are to be executed out of Newgate, and to cease when they are executed: this Bell doth begin to toll at sixe of the clocke in the mor∣ning, & the same is made knowne vnto the priso∣ners, that the said Bell is to put them in mind to prepare themselues for death, &c. The 29 of March was borne Philip,The Prince of Spaine borne. Prince of Spaine, son to Philip, the 3 of that name. At Gréenwich the 8 of Aprill, was borne the Lady Mary,The Lady Mary borne. Daughter to our Soueraigne Lord the King, betwéene 11 and 12 a clocke at night. The twenty one of February last died Cle∣ment the eight, Pope of Rome,3 Popes in sixe weekes. after hee had
raigned full thirtéene yéeres, after him succéeded Leo the eleuenth, who dyed within fourtéene dayes after his instalment, and after him came Paul the fift. Knights of the Garter elected.The Feast of Saint George was kept at Gréenewich, where the King elected the Duke Vlricke, brother to our most gracious Quéene Anne, and Henry, Earle of North-hampton, knights of the Garter. At Gréenewich the fourth of May, the King made Earles and Barons,Creation of Earles & Barons. viz. Sir Robert Ce∣cill, Viscount Cranborne, Baron of Essenden-was created Earle of Salisburie, Thomas Cecil, Lord Burghley, elder brother to sir Robert Ce∣cil, was created Earle of Excester, Sir Philip Harbert, younger brother to the Earle of Pem∣brooke, was created Baron of Shurland, and Earle of Montgomery, Rober, Sidney, Baron of Penhurst, was created Viscount Lisie, Sir Iohn Stanhope was created L. Stanhope of Ha∣rington, Sir George Carew, was created Lord Caew of Clopton. M. Thomas Arondell, was created Lord Arondell of Wardour, and M. William Cauendish, was created Lord Cauen∣dish of Hardywicke. The Lady Mary christned.The next day after, being Sonday, the Lady Mary was christned. The pre∣tended sleeping preacher.Vpon May day last, Richard Haydocke, a Physition, asked forgiuenesse of the Lord Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, for deluding the King, and many others, vnder pretence of being in∣spired, and to preach in his sléepe by night, with
which deceite he had so strongly possest the vul∣gar, as it was hard to remoue them, although he confessed the abuse. The 19 of May, the Quéene was churched,The Qu. churched. and two dayes after, the King made twelue Knights. In this moneth, Iohn Lepton of Kepwicke,Master Leptons swift iour∣ney be∣tweene London & Yorke. in the County of Yorke Esquire, a Gentleman of an ancient Family there, and of good reputa∣tion, his Maiesties seruant, and one of the Groomes of his most honourable Priuy Cham∣ber, performed so memorable a iourney, as I may not omit to record the same to future ages, the rather for that I did heare sundry Gentle∣men, who were good horsemen, and likewise many good Physicions affirme it was impos∣sible to bee done without daunger of his life. Hee vndertooke to ride fiue seuerall times betwixt London and Yorke in sixe dayes, to be taken in one wéeke, betwixt Monday mor∣ning, and Saturday following: he began his iourney vpon Monday, being the 20 day of May, betwixt two and thrée of the clocke in the morning, forth of S. Martins, néere Aldersgate, within the City of London, and came into Yorke the same day, betwixt the houres of 5 and 6 in the afternoone, where he rested that night: the next morning being Tuesday, about 3 of the clock, he tooke his iourny forth of York, and came to his lodging in S. Martins, afore∣said, betwixt the houres of 6 & 7 in the afternoon,
where he rested that night: the next morning being wednesday, betwixt 2 and 3 of the clocke, he tooke his iourney forth of London, and came into Yorke about seuen of the clocke the same day, where he rested that night: the next mor∣ning being Thursday, betwixt two and thrée of the clocke, he took his iourney foorth of York, and came to London the same day, betwixt 7 and 8 of the clocke, where he rested that night; the next morning being Friday, betwixt two and thrée of the clocke, he took his iourney towards Yorke, and came thither the same day, betwixt the houres of 7 and 8 in the afternoone, so as he finished his appointed iourney, (to the admira∣tion of all men) in fiue dayes, according to his promise: and vpon Monday, the 27 of this mo∣neth, he went from Yorke, and came to the Court at Gréenwich vpon Tuesday, the 28, to his Maiesty, in as fresh and chearefull maner, as when he first began. Duke Vl∣rich retur∣neth to Denmark.The first of Iune, Prince Vlricke, Duke of Holstaine, &c. embarked for Denmarke. The King maketh speciall prouision for the breeding of Lyons in the Tower.About this time the King caused a conueni∣ent place to be made on the backe part of the Lyons Denne, for the Lyons to bréed in, which tooke good effect: reade my large Booke, con∣cerning the Tryall and Conclusions with the Lyons, touching their Instinct of Nature, in not fearing the Cocke, nor greedy deuouring the Lambe, as also the vndaunted Courage of the English Masties, against the fiercest Lyon in the Tower.
The 15 of Iune Thomas Dowglasse was committed to the Tower, who arriued in Eng∣land but thrée daies before, being then sent pri∣soner by the County Palatine of the Rheine,Thomas Dowglasse sent priso∣ner out of Germany, and after that con∣demned & execu∣ted for his treason. the 26 of Iune the said Thomas Dowglasse was brought to the Sessions house at Newgate, and there condemned of high treason, viz. for coun∣terfeiting the Kings Priuie signet, and for counterfeiting the Kings hand vnto Letters of his owne deuising vnto diuers Princes of Ger∣many, &c. and the next day after his triall he was drawne, hanged, and quartered in Smith∣field. The second of Iuly 1605 seauentéene Scot∣tish Ministers contrary to the Kings former ex∣presse commandement held a solemne assembly at Aberdine in Scotland,An vn∣lawfull as∣sembly of Ministers. who being conuen∣ted for the same before the Councell of Scot∣land, vtterly denied not onely their Lordships authority in that behalfe, but the kings also, say∣ing, that in matters Ecclesiasticall, they neither owe nor ought to knowledge themselues in any subiection, either to the King, or to any tempo∣rall Counsell, and that all spirituall differences should be tried and determined by the Church, as competent Iudges, &c. Iustifying their vo∣luntary méeting to be good and warrantable by the word of God, alleadging the seuerall as∣semblies of the Apostles without knowledge or consent of any temporall estate, &c. for which riot, and for denying the Kings supremacy in causes Ecclesiasticall, sixe of the chiefe of them,
the tenth of Ianuary following at Blackenéese were arraigned and condemned of high trea∣son. The fift of Iuly arriued at London, Prince George Lodwicke Langraue, of Lutenburgh, &c.A speciall Ambassa∣dor from the Em∣perour of Almaine. being sent Ambassador from Rodolphus the second of that name, Emperour of the Romans, vnto the Kings Maiestie, to congratulate his peacefull enioying this Kingdome, and the rest of his lawfull inheritance, and for continuance of ancient amity with the King of Great Brit∣taine, and the Emperours emperiall dignity: this Ambassador was accompanied with thrée Earles, and 24 Knights and Gentlemen, he had a guard of muskets, and an hundred other com∣mon persons, and returned the 22 of Iuly. A procla∣mation against Pirats and peace-breakers.The 8 of Iuly proclamation was made a∣gainst Pirats, and other English Mariners and Souldiers, who vnder pretence of seruing the States, robbed diuers Englishmen and other Nations, who made complaint thereof vnto his Maiesty: This is the third Proclamation a∣gainst Pirats. Shiriffe Iones died and a new shiriffe chosen in his place.The 24 of Iuly died shireiffe Iones, and two daies after Oliuer Stile Grocer was chosen shiriffe for the remainder of that yeare, but the said Oliuer Stile was not chosen Alderman, but remained as a Commoner, because he had paid a fine before, to acquite himselfe thereof, and as he supposed of all other publicke offices, wherein he deceiued himselfe. The first of August, died Sir Edmond An∣derson
Lord Chiefe Iustice of the  Pleas, a man very famous for Law,The Lord Anderson deceased. Equity and Conscience, he sate Iudge of that High Court thrée and twenty yeares, he abhorred briberie, he was vtterly against all Monopo∣lies, and Polipragmaes in concealements: af∣ter him succéeded Sir Francis Gawdie, a most iust Iudge, and a great Lawier, he died the 15 of December next following. The 11 of August the King made Proclama∣tion to redresse the misimployment of lands and goods,A procla∣mation for continu∣ance of things gi∣uen to charita∣ble vses. and other things giuen to charitable vses. William Caluerley of Caluerley in Yorke∣shire Esquier, murdered two of his owne chil∣dren in his owne house,A cruell homicide. then stabd his wife into the body with full entent to haue killed her, and then instantly with like fury went from his house to haue slaine his youngest Child at nurse, but was preuented: he was prest to death in Yorke the 5 of August. The 27 of August the King,The kings progresse to Oxford Quéene & Prince with many of the Nobility being accompanied with the Ambassadors of Spaine and the Arch∣duke, were very royally receiued into Oxford, where the King heard sundry disputations, and himselfe made an Oration in Latine in presence of the whole assembly, and for thrée daies space they were most sumptuously feasted by the Earle of Dorset, Lord Treasurer of Eng∣land and Chancellour of that Vniuersity, who also gaue frée entertainement vnto all
commers from morning vntill night during the Kings abode in Oxford. The Woodmō∣gers and Carmen of London made a corporati∣on.The 29 of August 1605. the King by his Letters Pattents did incorporate the Wood∣mongers and Carmen of London, and the Sub∣urbes to be a Body Corporate and Politicke for euer, by the name of Master Wardens and Fellowship of Woodmongers, Thomas Hunt, and Marke Snelling and Cuthbert Coleman were the first Master and Wardens thereof. A speciall Ambassa∣dor from the King of Den∣marke.The last of August arriued at London Hen∣ricus Remelyus Principall Secretary of Estrate vnto Christianus the 4 King of Denmarke, to be enstalled Knight of the Garter in his Kings right, to whom the order of the Garter was sent two yeares before, he returned the 28 of Sep∣tember. The Arch∣bishop of Can∣terbury sworne a priuy Counsel∣lor.The 29 of September the L. Archbishop of Canterbury was sworne a Priuy Counsellor of Estate at Hampton Court. About the 20 of September sir Thomas Smith returned out of Russia, being sent thither Am∣bassador the last yeare vnto the Emperour Bo∣ris Pheodorowich Godonoua,Sir Tho. Smith re∣turneth from Mos∣co. Demetri∣us came out of Po∣land and was brought vp there. at whose arriuall there he found the country in vprore, and the Emperour in open warres against Demetrius, who claimed the crowne, then entered his ter∣ritories with an armie of Polonians, and se∣conded by certaine discontented Russians, all which notwithstanding the Emperour vsed and entreated him very respectiuely, and became so gratious with him as the Emperour graunted
all that he desired, and being returned from Mosco to Vollogda to embarke for England, he vnderstood that the said Boris Pheodor had poi∣soned himselfe, and that his sonne Pheodor Bo∣rossowich succéeded him, who vpon knowledge that the English Ambassador was not yet de∣parted, dealt as kindly with him as his father had done, as well in accepting his letters, as promising to confirme whatsoeuer his father graunted, but this yong Emperour died within eight wéekes after his coronation: and the fore∣named Demetrius the supposed sonne to the an∣cient Euan Vaselowich obtained the crowne, which said Demetrius after his counsell had due∣ly informed him of the serious purposed and dis∣creet carriage of the English Ambassador from the King of England, and that he remayned yet in Russia, with all spéed sent Gauarillo Salma∣noue a great Courtier vnto his Lordship, with commission to giue him a honourable dispatch, and to signifie his Maiesties most earnest desire to be in loue and amity with King Iames of England, aboue all the Kings in the world. Thomas Pearcy, Robert Catesby,The pra∣ctise of the blow∣ing vp of the Parli∣ment house. Thomas Winter and others in the last yeare of the raigne of Quéene Elizabeth, by the instigation of cer∣taine Iesuits, practised with the king of Spain, to send a well furnished Army vpon England, promising him great aide to entertaine them at their arriuall at Milford Hauen, & to that pur∣pose the King promised to send them fifty thou∣sand pound for leuying of horse and oot, and
preparation of Munition in England to second them: but whilst this was in a manner con∣cluded, Quéene Elizabeth died, and the King of Spaine vpon certaine knowledge that King Iames was established, dispatched his Ambassa∣dors and Commissioners for England, for con∣firmation of a lasting Peace betweene them, yet neuerthelesse the said Robert Catesbie sent Thomas Winter againe to the King of Spaine to resolicite their former proiect, but the King answered him, your old Queene is dead with whom I had warres, and you haue a new King with whom I haue euer beene in good peace and amity, and for continuance there∣of I haue sent my speciall Commissioners, and vntill I sée what will become thereof, I will not hearken vnto any other course whatsoeuer. When Winter returned, and made this knowne vnto Catesby, Pearcy and the rest, then they beganne to cast about what they might doe of themselues to aduance the Roman Catholicke Religion, but first they would see the euent of the first Parliament, if that would mitigate any former Lawes, and trie what good the Conclusion of Peace with Spaine would doe vnto them before they at∣tempted any further: but when they percei∣ued that neither Parliament, nor publicke Peace sorted in any part to their desire, and that the Peace concluded was rather a more ready meanes for the Law to proceede against them then otherwise, because the Peace
concerned onely the Amitie of Christian Prin∣ces for the generall good of Christendome, without any particular or priuate respect: then Catesby told the rest, hee had a deuice in his head that should free them, and the rest of the English Catholiques from their oppres∣sions, and when he had found out fit Ministers for execution of his deuice, after they had ta∣ken oath and Sacrament for secresie, hee tolde them hee had deuised the meane to vn∣dermine and blow vp the Parliament house, at the instant when the King, Queene, Prince, Peeres, and Commons were all assembled, which proiect they presently embraced, and forthwith Pearcy hired certaine lodgings close to the Parliament house: and then they ap∣pointed Miners, who with great difficulty dig∣ged and vndermined a part of the wall, but af∣ter a while they vnderstood that the Vaut right vnder the Parliament house was to bee let to hire, then Guydo Fawkes went and hired it: this Fawkes was of late a Souldier in Flan∣ders, and for this purpose was sent for, who by consent of the rest changed his name, and was called Iohn Iohnson Master Pearcies man: af∣ter they had hired the Vant, they secretly con∣uaied into it thirty and sixe barrels of powder, and couered them all ouer with Billets and Fa∣gots.The dis∣couery of the gun∣powder treason. About tenne daies before the Parliament should beginne, an vnknowne party in the E∣uening met a seruant of the Lord Mounteagles
in the street, and deliuered him a letter, h∣ing him speedily to giue it vnto the Lord, which he did: when his Lord had read it, and obseru the dangerous contents, with a speciall ca, not to appeare the first day of Parliament,  was amased, and forthwith deliuered it to the Earle of Salisbury the Kings principall Secre∣tary, a chiefe Counsellor of Estate: when th Earle had indiciously obserued the stran Phrase and Tenor thereof, with the terrible threates therein against the whole State, he ac∣quainted the Lord Chamberlaine therewith, & then they conioyned vnto them the Lord Ad∣mirall, the Earles of Worcester and Northamp∣ton, who instantly consulted what was fittest to be done, omitting neither time diligence nor industry, all which notwithstanding, they could not as yet find out the depth of this mysterie, and were therefore much troubled in minde, because the appointed day of Parliament draw neare, which was Tuesday the fift of Nouem∣ber: vpon the Saturday before, the King being returned from hunting, the said Lords acquain∣ted his Highnesse with what had past, and when his Maiesty had well noted the strange con∣tents of the letter, which purported the sodaine ruine of the State, the King said notwithstan∣ding, the sleight regard which might be giuen to scattered Libels, yet this was more quicke and pithie then was vsuall in libels, and willed them to search in all places, as well not dayly frequen∣ted, as of vsuall repaire; and concerning any
forraine disturbance or inuasion, he well knew the present force and preparation of all Christi∣an Princes, and that whatsoeuer practise of trea∣son was now in hand, it must be performed in some vnsuspected place, and by some home-bred traytors: thereupon new search was made in all places about the Court and the Parliament house, but could not as yet finde any thing wor∣thy their labours: all which searches were per∣formed with such silence and discretion, as there ose no manner of suspition either in Court or City, the Lord Chamberlaine whose office it most concerned, neuer rested day nor night, and the night before the Parliament, as Sir Tho∣mas Kneuet with others scowted about the Par∣liament house, espied a fellow standing in a cor∣ner very suspitiously, and asked him his name, what he was, and what he did there so late, who answered very bluntly his name was Iohn Iohnson Master Pearcies man, and kéeper of his ledgings. Sir Thomas Kneuet continued still his search in all places thereabouts, and retur∣ning thither againe, found him lingering there still, searched him, and found vnder his cloake a close Lanterne, and a burning Candle in it: and about him other signes of suspition, that he stood not there for any good: then the Knight entered the Vaut, where they found the powder couered with billets and fagots as afore-said, and then the Lord Chamberlaine caused the Traytor to e bound, and being now about thrée a clocke in the morning he went vnto the King, and
with excéeding gladnesse told his Maiesty the treason was discouered and preuented, and the traitor in hold, the King desired to sée Fawkes, who when he came before the King vsed like trayterous and audacious spéeches as he did at his first apprehension, affirming himselfe was the onely man to performe this treason, saying, it sore vexed him that the déed was not done, and for that time would not confesse any thing touching the rest of the Conspirators, but that himselfe onely and alone was the contriuer and practiser of this treason. Betwéene fiue and six a clocke in the mor∣ning the Councel gaue order to the Lord Maior of London to looke to the City, & in very calme manner to set ciuill watch at the city gates, sig∣nifying therewithall that there was a plot of treason discouered, and that the King would not goe to Parliament that day: and the same day in the afternoone, the manner of the treason was by Proclamation made knowne vnto the peo∣ple, for ioy whereof, there was that night as many bonefires in and about London as the stréetes could permit, and the people gaue hum∣ble and hearty thankes vnto Almighty God for their King and Countries right blessed escape. Within 3 daies after two other proclamati∣ons were made, signifying vnto the people who were the chiefe conspirators, with commande∣ment to apprehend Pearcy and Catesby, and to take them aliue if it were possible, which said Pearcy and Catesby were gone to Holbach in
Warwickshire to méet Winter, Grant, and o∣thers: where vnder pretence of a great hunting, they meant to raise the country, and surprise the Lady Elizabeth from the Lord Harington, whom they meant to proclaime Quéene, and in whose name they meant to enter into Armes, being perswaded that the King, the Prince and Duke of Yorke were by that time blowne vp in the Parliament house: but when they knew their treason was knowne and preuented, and saw the Kings forces round about the house, so as they could not escape, Pearcy and Catesby very desperately issued forth, and fighting backe to backe were both slaine with one musket shot. Saturday the ninth of Nouember the King went to Parliament, wherein the presence of the Quéene, the Prince, the Duke of Yorke, the Ambassadors of the King of Spaine, and the Archduke, and all the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and Commons of the same, he made a very solemne oration, manifesting the whole complot of this Treason. Sir Clement Scudamour Knight,Shrieues. and Master Iohn Iolles Shrieues. Sir Leonard Halliday Merchantaylor Maior.Maior. At this time the solemne triumphes & plea∣sant trophies in honour of the Lord Maior,The Lord Maior. triumphés and the City of London were held two seuerall daies, viz. the day of his oath, and all Hollonday, but there was none in thrée yeares after by
reason of continuall sicknesse. The Lord Knowles married.The 19 of Ianuary the Lord William Knowles Baron of Graies maried Elizabeth Howard eldest daughter vnto the said Thomas Earle of Suffolke. A present from the King of Spaine.The 4 of Ianuary the Spanish Ambassador deliuered a Present from King Philip his master vnto King Iames, viz. six Ienets of Andalusia, with rich saddles and saddlo cloaths, and all other things suteable. Sir Georg Carew Ambassa∣dor in France.Sir George Carew is sent Ambassador Lie∣ger into France. The 19 of Ianuary a great Porpos was ta∣ken aliue at Westham, in a little Créeke, a mile and a halfe within the land,A great Whale came vp as hie as Wolwich. and was presented vnto Francis Goston Esquire, chiefe Auditor of the Imprests, and within a few dayes after, a verie great Whale came within eight miles of London whose length was diuers times séene aboue the water, and the same was iudged to be a great deale longer then the longest ship in the Riuer. Three en∣tire Subsi∣dies, and six fifteens giuen by the tēpo∣ralty, and foure Sub∣sidies giuē by the Clergy.A few dayes before Christmas the Parlia∣ment brake vp, and began to sit againe the 22 of Ianuary being Tuesday, and continued vntill the 27 of May next following, in which Parlia∣ment they gaue the King and his successors thrée entire Subsidies, and sixe fiftéenes, and then the Parliament was prorogued vntill the 18 of Nouember: at this time the Clergy gaue vnto the King and his Successors foure entire Sub∣sidies: And in this Parliament it was enacted
that the 5 of Nouember for euer should be kept holy day,The 5 of Nouem∣ber orday∣ned holy day. with preaching and thanksgiuing vn∣to Almighty God for his mercy, in preuenting the terrible danger of the late practise by Pearcy, Catesby and the rest, to blow vp the Parlia∣ment house. The 27 of Ianuary at Westminster were ar∣raigned Thomas Winter, Guydo Fawkes,Arraigne∣ment of Traytors at West∣minster. Ro∣bert Keyes and Thomas Bates for plotting to blow vp the Parliament house, digging in the mine, taking oath & Sacrament for secresie, &c. and Robert Winter, Iohn Graunt, Ambrose Rookewood, for being acquainted with the trea∣son afterward, giuing their full consent thereun∣to, and taking oath and sacrament for secresie, and sir Euerard Digby for being made acquain∣ted with the said treason, yeelding assent, and taking his corporall oath for secresie: all which indictments were prooued against them, and by themselues confessed, and thereupon had iudge∣ment giuen them to be drawne, hanged and quartered, their limbes to be set vpon the Citie gates, and their heads vpon the Bridge: accor∣ding to which sentence the thirtith of Ianuary, Sir Euerard Digby, Robert Winter,Execution in Londō and West∣minster. Iohn Grant & Bates were executed at the west end of Saint Paules Church, and the next day after the other foure were executed in the Parliament yeard, 6 of the 8. acknowledged their guiltinesse in this horrible treason, and died very penitently, but Graunt and Keyes did not so. Saturday the 22 of March betwéene sixe and
seuen a clocke in the forenoone,A terrible rumor that the King was slaine. a rumor was so∣dainely spread throughout the Court, and the City of London, that for certaine the King that morning was slaine as he was hunting in Okeeing Parke, 20 miles from London, which dreadfull newes still encreased vntill nine a clocke, being seconded by infinite suggestions, by reason whereof it was generally receiued for truth, and thereupon the Court gates were kept shut, the Lord Maior began to set guard at the City gates, and to raise their trained souldiers: Sir William Wade Lieutenant of the Tower did the like with his hamlets within his Liber∣ties, and the Parliament was greatly amased: but by 11 a clocke the ioyfull newes of ye Kings good health was made knowne in London by proclamation, as it had béene an houre before at the Court gate, whereat the people began to re∣uiue their vexed spirits, which vntill then were wondrously surcharged with hearts griefe, yea men and women, old matrons, and yong vir∣gins made exceeding great lamentation: this flying terror went three daies iourney into the country before it was fully supprest. An. reg. 4. Henry Garret ar∣raigned. 1606Friday the 28 of March 1606 in the Guild∣hall in London was arraigned and condemned Henry Garnet Prouinciall of the Iesuites in England, for being acquainted with the Gun∣powder plot, and concealing the same, for the which he was adiudged to be drawne, hanged & quartered, and his head to be set vpon London bridge, and according to that sentence he was
executed the third of May at the west end of S. Paules Church,Garnet executed. where he acknowledged the greatnesse of his offence in concealing the trea∣son, and besought all Catholikes to forbeare and desist from treason, & all other violent attempts whatsoeuer against Kings and Princes, saying that all such practises were vtterly against the Catholicke Religion. The twenty nine,Great winds and flouds and shipwrack. and thirtith of March the wind was extreame violent, so as it caused much shipwracke vpon the coasts of England, France & the Low countries, it brought in the sea and drowned much cattell, and in Picardie neare Dyope, it blew downe a stéeple which slue fourescore persons in the fall thereof, in Flan∣ders and vp towards Germany, there were ma∣ny Churches, Townes, Wind-milles, and trees blowne downe, and the 8 of Iune following it rained 24 houres, and the next day there ose strange land-waters which carried away mils, trees and houses, made new currants where ne∣uer any was seene before, it brake downe the heads of pooles and trenches, and carried quite a∣way great quantities of cattell, timber and other things from off vp land grounds. The 24 of Aprill arriued Don Iohn de Men∣doza, Marques of Saint Germaine,A speciall Ambassa∣dor from Spaine. from the King of Spaine vnto the King of Great Brit∣taine, to congratulate his happy deliuerance frō the late pretended treason, and to deliuer cer∣taine presents from Queen Margaret of Spain, vnto Queene Anne of Great Brittaine, viz.
a robe of morrey satten,Presents from the Queene of Spaine vnto the Queen of Great Bri∣taine. imbrodered all ouer with amber leather, & in many places with gold, vpon the fore part thereof was forty eight tags of beaten gold, three ynches long, hollow with∣in, and filde with amber greece very curiously wrought, and two large chaines of amber greece, two Karkanets of Amber gréece, a veluet Cappe with gold buttons, pleasantly enameld like the tagges, euery of these were seuerally in∣closed in an ouall boxe of gold, & were presented all together in a vessell of gold like vnto a Ba∣son. Knights of the Gar∣ter made.Tuesday the 20 of May at Windsor were enstalled Knights of the Garter Robert Earle of Salisbury, and the Lord Thomas Howard Vis∣count Bindon. Lords brought from the Tower & censured in the Star chamber.The third of Iune, Henry Lord Mordant, and Edward Lord Sturton were conuicted in the high Court of Star-chamber of diuers mis∣prisions and contempts, and for the same the Lord Mordant was censured to pay ten thou∣sand markes, the Lord Sturton sixe thousand markes, and imprisonment during his Maie∣sties good pleasure. A procla∣mation a∣gainst all Iesuits & Semina∣ries.The tenth of Iune proclamation was made for the banishing of all Iesuits, Seminaries and Roman priests. The Lady Sophia daughter to our Soueraign Lord the King was borne at Gréenewich vpon Sonday the 22 of Iune, at thrée a clocke in the morning,The Lady Sophia borne. and died the next day, and vpon Thursday next after was very solemnly con∣uaied
by barge, couered with blacke veluet, ac∣companied with thrée other barges couered with blacke cloth, vnto the Chappell royall in West∣minster, and was there enterred by Doctor Barlow Lord Bishop of Rochester, where were present all the great Lords of the Councell with the Heralds and chiefe officers of the Court. The 27 of Iune Henry Earle of Northum∣berland was brought from the Tower vnto the Starre-chamber,The Earle of Northū¦berland conuicted in the Star chamber. and there conuicted of diuers misprisions, contempts and offences, and for the same was adiudged to pay thirty thousand pound and to be remooued from the place of a Priuy Counsellor, and from being Captains of his Maiesties Pentioners, and from all other offices which he held of his Maiesties grace and fauour, and to remaine prisoner du∣ring life. At this time returned Signior Nichola Mo∣lyno of honourable family, hauing béene here thrée yeares Ambassador Lieger for the Signo∣ry of Venice,Ambassa∣dor from Venice. whom the King honoured with Knight-hood, and in his stead came the honoura∣ble Signior Georguo Iustiniano from the Duke and State of Venice, of which most famous and flourishing city, I haue here very briefly set downe the first foundation and State thereof as followeth. Bleda and Attilla Brethren Kings of the Hunnes, after they had made great excursions and spoyles vpon Illyria and Thrace, as farre as Thermopyle, Attilla desirous to be sole So∣ueraigne
slue his brother Bleda,The Ori∣ginall and State of Venice. then he subdu∣ed most nations Eastward, and after that with fiue hundred thousand men he inuaded the Roman Empire, viz. the Romans and Visy∣gotes, who encountred him with diuers Ar∣mies, he passed violently through Italy, and forced the people to flie from City to City and other places, of which sort some went and posses∣sed certaine very small Islands in the sea, which then were not well knowne by any name: but were afterward called Venice as you may read: he also inuaded France, and besieged Orleance in the yeare of the world, 4414. and after Christ, 452 and gaue battaile vnto Detyus Aefius the Vice Emperour, and Theodoric King of Vys∣gotes: the fight continued one whole day, wherein was performed all martiall prowes, and two hundred thousand slaine on both sides, yea, such was the effusion of bloud, that very many dead bodies floted vp and downe, as it had béen a brooke of bloud: in this fight Attilla had the worst, yet neuerthelesse, he reencouraged him∣selfe, and furiously assailed Italie, and had vtter∣lie spoiled it, if the Pope had not humbled him∣selfe before him, then he returned into his owne Country of Hungarie: The Emperour Valen∣tinian the third, being in a manner constrained, gaue him his sister in mariage, after that he ma∣ried an other, at which Nuptiall he became so drunke, that he died thereof: the City of Ve∣nice being at first but a small thing was gouer∣ned by Consuls, who resisted Pelagius, Nestorius
and Pharamond the first King of France, then it increased and was gouerned by Tribunes. And in the yeare, 582. Pope Pelagius the se∣cond, in a Councell of twenty Bishops by meanes of the Archbishop of Aquilea, it was a∣gréed that Grado should be the Metropolis of Venice and Istria, by reason that Grado was then more Noble and populous then Venice, & so continued vntill the yeare, 654. Afterward Mallo Mocco and Palestina by meanes of a great assembly of people from Padua and Mount Telice, which came in company of the Bishop of Padua, Venice was greatly increased: this was done when Padua had beene destroyed by the Lombards, the third and fourth time, in the yeare 593. And in the yeare 654 vnto the fore∣said ten Tribunes, were added two more to rule in Hyraclia, which Hyraclia tooke his name of Hyraclius the Christian Emperour: the said Hyraclia in the yeare 603 was reedified and en∣larged by Bishop Magno, but Rotaryo King of Lombards still exercising his crueltie, destroyed Oderzo and other places, as also there was ci∣uill wars a long time in most parts of Italy, so as many auncient Noble habitations being ru∣inated,These Islands vntill then were not known by any name. the distressed persons for their conueni∣ent safety resorted and inhabited these foresaid small plots or Islands, lying in the sea, the chiefe whereof was then call Ryuo Alto, and is now called the Ryalto, which they found to lie com∣modious for traffique and Nauigation: then they encreased so fast in people and building
that these petty plots or Islands became well inhabited, and therein with great Christian pie∣ty erected eight faire goodly Churches with ma∣ny stately pallaces, so as the City was growne very great, and these last twelue Magistrates of Tribunes continued vntill the yeare 697. and was then by the forenamed Hyraclius & Pope Sergius the first, in the generall Councell of A∣quilea: those foresaid Islands, were called Ve∣nice, and by vertue of the same Councell it was ordained that they should choose themselues a Duke out of their City successiuely for euer: and for conclusion of peace after long dissension betwéene Grado and Venice, the Pope was con∣tent that the Patriarchie of Grado should be transferred vnto Venice, since which time, he hath there held his Cathedra, and the Venetians haue béene gouerned by Dukes, assisted by Se∣nators, Paulus Lucius was the first Duke, and haue so continued Dukes by election vntill this present yeare 1606. with great honour and pro∣sperity, ouer whom Leonardo Donato now raigneth, there haue béene ninety & one Dukes, since the forenamed Councell. Sir Edw. Cooke Lord chief Iustice of the com∣mon pleas.At this time the King made Sir Edward Cooke Lord chiefe Iustice of the common Pleas, after he had béene fouretéene yeares his Maiesties Solicitor and Atturney generall. A Tombe for Queen Elizabeth.This yeare at the appointment and charges of the King the stately Tombe for Quéene Eli∣zabeth was fully finished, and set vp in a little Chappell on the North side of the high Altar
in the Chappell Royall at Westminster and her Image or Status placed amongst the Pictures of other Kings and Quéenes in an vpper roome on the North side of the high Alter in the Ab∣bey Church at Westminster, which said, Ima∣ges of former Princes were wont to stand in a darke lost or Chappell behinde the high Al∣tar, and were remooued thence into a more light∣some place by Doctor Neile, Deane of West∣minster, which sayd Deane repayred the Tombe of Anne of Cleaue, gaue a rich Al∣tar Cloath vnto the Church, and reformed the impeachments of light in the Quire thereof.A mon∣strous mo∣ther. The 15 of Iuly the wife of Richard Hom∣wood of East Grimsted in Sussex without any knowne cause murdered her owne thrée chil∣dren, and threw them into a pit, and then cut her owne throat likewise. Thursday the 17 of Iuly,The King of Den∣marke arriueth in Englād. Christianus King of Denmarke with eight shippes cast anker be∣fore Graues-end, and the next day King Iames with Prince Henrie and diuers Nobles went thither to him, and dined a ship-boord, and after diner both Kings came to Gréenewich, where Christianus and all his traine were royally en∣tertained. The 24 of Iuly these Kings rode progresse together, and for foure daies space they and their traine were worthily feasted by the Earle of Salisbury at Theobalds: and vp∣on Thursday the last of Iuly, both Kings with all magnificence rode through London, against which time, and vpon very short warning the
Citizens had made diuers Trophies, viz. a Bo∣wer of the Muses at the East end of Cheape∣side; a braue stately Pageant with delicate musicke, eloquent Orations, and variable plea∣sant deuises, at the West end of Cheapeside, vpon the South side whereof sate the Lord Maior, and Aldermen in Scarlet Robes, where Sir Henry Mountegue Recorder of London, af∣ter his solemne Oration in Latine, presented the King of Denmarke with a faire Cuppe of gold: and vpon the Fountaine in Fléetstréete was a pleasant pastorall deuise with musicke and pleasing songs: and for their more State and easie passage, the Stréetes were rayled in, on the one side, and the Companies sate in their Liueries on the other side in as great brauerie as is vsed at a Coronation: And that night the Kings were lodged at White-hall: the next day the King of Denmarke after he had séene and noted the rare Architecture and stately monu∣ments in the Chappell royall at Westminster: he suruaied Paules Church, and on the toppe of the stéeple thereof, he caused the Kéeper of the stéeple to take the iust length and breadth of his foot in the leade: from thence the King went to the Royall Exchange, and to the Tower, where Sir William Wade banqueted him and all his attendants;Sir Willi∣am Wade. and within few daies after that, the Earle of Rutland feasted all the King of Denmarkes Priuy Counsellors, hauing made his prouision to haue feasted the King also.
Sonday the 10 of August the King of Den∣marke with his Counsell and chiefe Gentle∣men were royally feasted by the King of Great Brittaine in the Elizabeth Ionas at Chatham,The King of Den∣marke re∣turneth. and the next day Christianus feasted King Iames Quéene Anne, Prince Henrie, and others of the Nobility in his owne shippe, and about foure a clocke in the afternoone, all princely comple∣ments being performed, they tooke their leaue one of another: and the Thursday following the King of Denmarke with all his ships and traine, hauing a faire wind set saile of Denmark. The King whilest he was in England heard two sermons in Latine, and dealt bountifully and royally with all men. The 24 of September the French King bap∣tized his Sonne the Prince Dolphin,Prince Dolphin of France christned. being then full fiue yeares of age. This yeare diuers churches in London were well repayred, and somewhat beautified,Churches repaired. namely, Christ-church, Trinity Church, Saint Brides church, and Bow-church with others: The city also very carefully clensed their ditches and common shewers, and made floud gates in Holborne ditch, and Fléet ditch: and beyond all expectation they turned Moorefield into diuers pleasant and princely walkes, and planted it round on all sides and quarters with good store of young trées, and rayled it round in like man∣ner to preserue the walkes,Morefield otherwise called the new walks and keepe the trees from violence, and defended the out-sides therof with a new strong bricke wall: there was
also made diuers vauts vnder ground, some to conuey away fowle water without offence, and one to bring fresh water into the towne ditch to keepe it sweet. This field was euer vntill this present a rude noysome place like a Lay-stall, halfe enuironed with stincking ditches, very offensiue to the City and all passengers: Sir Leonard Hallyday Lord Maior was very for∣ward and carefull to the furtherance of this worke, and for contriuing to bring a riuer to the North part of London to serue the City, and to clense their ditches and sewers; and what he could not performe in his Maiorality, his Suc∣cessor Sir Iohn Wats did his full endeauour to accomplish: and Master Nicholas Leate a graue wise, and wealthy Citizen was wondrous pain∣full and industrious in the furtherance of this worke,A truce betweene the Empe∣rour of Germany and the great Turke. and of the rest thereunto adioyning: also there were many thousands of worthy citizens wondrous earnest to expresse their bounty to∣wards the bringing of the foresaid riuer to the city, according to the Tenor of a statute lately made for them in that behalfe. This yeare was concluded a truce for 15 yeares betweene Rodolphus the second of that name Emperour of Almaine, and the Great Turke. ShrieuesWilliam Walthall, Iohn Leman a batchelor. Maior,Sir Iohn Wats knight, Clothworker Maior. The 18 of December, the Lords, Knights,
and Brgesses of the Parliament had leaue to go home vnto their houses, and the tenth of Fe∣bruary they all began to sit againe. The sixt of Ianuary at Whitehall with very great solemnity the Lord Iames Hay was mari∣ed vnto Honora the daughter and heire of the Lord Edward Denny.The Lord Hay mari∣ed. The twentith of Ianuary if pleased God to send a mighty west wind which continued six∣téene houres, which brought in the sea,Great flouds. by rea∣son whereof, and of high spring tides, both which encountred the land waters, after a great raine; which caused the Riuer of Seuerne be∣ginning as farre as the mount in Cornewall, to ouerflow her bankes all along on both sides vp into Somersetshire, and Glocestershire, in some places the Waters ouerflowed their Bankes, thrée foote, in other places fiue foote, and some places seuen foote, by meanes of which so∣daine inundation, much people and cattell were drowned, diuers Churches and villages borne downe and spoiled, and some vtterly destroyed, & in Wales in diuers places, it did most harme in manner as aforesaid,A Semi∣nary exe∣cuted Reconcili∣ation be¦tween the Graue of Emden & his Sub∣iects. the like whereof in Eng∣land is not knowne to be mentioned in any Chronicle. The 26 of February Robert Drewrie a Se∣minary was executed at Tiburne. The 1 of March a peace and reconciliation was concluded and proclaimed betwéene the Graue of Emden, and the City of Emden, and the Graue entered and tooke possession of the
City, his Subiects assured him his royalties and profits, and concerning all other differences be∣twéene the Graue and the Citizens it was a∣gréed the same should be determined by the Emperour, this was done after the people had wasted their wealth, and were wearied with thrée yeares warre. An. reg. 5. 1607 The King manifest∣eth his minde to both hou∣ses.Tuesday the last of March, the Lorde Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament came before the King at Whitehall, vnto whom he made a solemne spéech. And from that time the houses sate not vntill the 20 of Aprill following, and the 2 of May the King made an other solemne spéech vnto the said Lords, Knights and Bur∣gesses concerning the vnion. Great flouds in diuers houses.Maundy thursday the 2 of Aprill, there hap∣pened great inundations of water in Kent, Es∣sex, Suffolke and Norffolke. And the 17 of A∣prill there arose in the City of Couentry a most strange and dreadfull inundation. The 8 of May ariued Prince Ienuille of the house of Lorraine, second sonne to Henry late Duke of Guise, which was slaine in the yeare 1589 he was very honourably feasted and en∣tertained by the King.Prince Ienuile came into England. And the 22 of May he accompanied the King, Quéene and Prince vn∣to Theobalds, where they were royally feasted and entertained with pleasant and ingenious deuises by the Earle of Salisbury, being the ap∣pointed day, in which his Maiesty came to take possession thereof. Tuesday the 25 of May, the said Prince Ienuille with others ran at Tilt at
White-hall, viz. The Prince Ienuille. The Duke of Lenox. The Earle of Arundel. The Earle of Pembroke. The Earle of Montgomerie. The Vis∣count Haddington. The L. Compton. The L. Hay. Sir Henry Cary. Sir Richard Bulkley. Sir Richard Preston. Sir Henry Guntrot. And the 29 of May the said Prince returned into France. About the middle of May,Vnlawfull assemblies to lay opē inclosures. certaine common persons assembled themselues in Northamp∣tonshire, Warwickshire, and Leicestershire: they cut and brake downe hedges, filled vp ditches, and laide open all such enclosures of commons and other grounds, as they found en∣closed, which of ancient time had béen open, and imploied to tillage. And the last of May, they were straitly commanded by Proclamation to surcease their disorder, but yet they ceased not: whereupon the Sheriffes and Iustices had au∣thority giuen them, to suppresse them by force. And after that, the King sent certaine Noble∣men and Iudges to punish the wilfull offenders according to law. And the 28 of Iune, the King made another proclamatiō, signifying his great vnwillingnesse to haue procéeded against them, either by marshall law, or ciuill iustice, if lenity or gentle admonition might any way haue pre∣uailed with them, to desist from their turbulent rebellions and traiterous practise. Tuesday, the second of Iune,Doctor Rauis lord Bishop of London. in Pauls Church, the right reuerend Father in God Tho∣mas Rauis, Doctor of Diuinity, late Bishop of
Glocester, was by his deputy Doctor King, Deane of Christ-church, enstalled Lord Bishop of London. He died the 14 of December, 1609. Friday the 12 of Iune, the King dined with the Lord Maior,The King dineth with the Lord Maior, and made free of the Cloath-workers. and after dinner went into Cloath-workers Hall, and was there made frée of that company. At that time also were made frée sir Patricke Murry knight, gentleman of the Kings Bedchamber, sir Arthur Arston knight, sir Hugh Carmychel knight, Iames Medow Doctor of Diuinitie, one of the Kings Chap∣laines, and others. The 16 of Iuly, being the great feast day at Merchantailors hall, the Lord Maior feasted all the Aldermen that were not frée of the Mer∣chantailors, and with them these honourable Personages following, viz. Patricke Steward, Earle of Orqueney, sir Iohn Ramsey knight, Lord Viscount Hadington, sir Iohn Selby knight, Edward Ramsey gentlemen Sewer to the King. These were also made frée of the Cloathworkers, sir William Stone being then Master of the company, Henry Walton, Thoms Bostocke, Richard Boothe, and William Kymber Wardens. His Maie∣stie paieth 600000. l. which was lent vnto Elizabeth. Ambassa∣dors from the StatesThe third of Iuly, the Kings Maiestie repai∣ed thréescore thousnd pound vnto the Citizens of London, which summe the Londoners had lent vnto Quéene Elizabeth the 3 of Februarie 1598. On Saturday, being the fourth of Iuly, ar∣riued Iohn Berke, chiefe Councellor of Dort,
and Iames de Maldere Knight, Lord of Heyes, and had audience the sixth of Iuly: they were honourably entertained and feasted in many places. The fourth of Iuly, the right honourable sir Thomas Kneuit knight,Sir Tho∣mas Kne∣uit made Baron. was called by writ to the Parliament, by the name and title of Ba∣ron of Escricke, and sate that day in his roabes among the Barons, being the last day of that Parliament, holden vpon prorogation,A Parlia∣ment. and so againe proroged vntill the 16 of Nouember fol∣lowing. Sunday the 5 of Iuly,Sir Iulius Caesar made a Priuie Coūsellor. sir Iulius Caesar knight, Chancellor of the Exchequer, was sworne a Priuie Councellor of Estate. Thursday the 16 of Iuly 1607 the Kings most excellent Maiestie, with Prince Henry,The King & Prince feasted at Merchan∣tailors hall. and diuers honourable Personages, dined at Merchantailors hall, and were most ioyfullie entertained with great varietie of melodious harmony of voices and instruments, and plea∣sant spéeches (being the day they held their feast for the election of Master and Wardens) and after dinner Master Iohn Swinnarton the Ma∣ster, and Richard Wright, Andrew Osborne, Ed∣ward Atkinson, and William Albany the foure Wardens of the Company, being accompanied with master Baron Southerton, and sir Leonard Halliday, sir William Crauen, sir Iohn Swyner∣ton, knights, and Aldermen, and Ieffrey Elwes Alderman, being all members of that Company, resorted to the Kings most excellent Maiestie,
who dined in their chamber called the Kings Chamber, and sir Henry Mountague knight, Recorder of London being there present, did in the name of the whole Company most humbly thanke his Maiesty, for that it had pleased him to grace it with his royall presence that day. And the Master of the Company did present his Maiestie with a purse full of gold, & Richard Langley the Clarke of the Company, did deliuer vnto his Maiesty a roll, wherein was entred the names of seuen Kings, one Quéene, seuentéene Princes and Dukes, two Dutchesses, one Archbishop, thirty one Earles, fiue Countesses, one Viscount, twenty foure Bishops, sixty sixe Barons or Lords, two Ladies, seuen Abbats, seuen Priors, and one Sub-prior (omitting a number of Knights, Esquires &c.) who had béen frée of the Company, which his Maiestie most gratiously accepted, and said, that he himselfe was frée of another Company, yet he would so much grace the Company of Merchantailors, that the Prince his eldest sonne should be frée thereof, and that he would sée and be a witnesse, when the garland should be put on his head. And then they in like manner resorted to the Prince, who dined in the great hall. And the said Master presented his Highnesse with ano∣ther purse full of gold,Prince Henry made free of the Merchan∣tailors. and the Clarke deliuered his Highnesse a like roll, which were also gra∣tiously accepted, and his Highnesse said, that not onely himselfe would be frée of the Compa∣ny of Merchantailors, but commanded one of
his Gentlemen, and the Clarke of the Compa∣ny to goe to all the Lords present, and require all of them that loued him, and were not frée of o∣ther companies, to be free of his Company: whereupon those Lords whose names ensue (with humble thankes to his highnesse) accepted of the freedome: viz. Iohn Berke Lord in Godschalckcoort, &c.Strangers. Coun∣celler of Dort in Holland. Sir Iames du Maldere knight, Lord of Heyes, &c. Counceller of Zeland. Sir Noel de Caron knight, L. of Schoonwal, &c. Ambassador Lieger from the States, &c. The Duke of Lenox. Earle of Nottingham Lord Admirall. Earle of Suffolke Lord Chamberlaine.Noblemē. Earle of Arundell. Earle of Oxenford. Earle of Worcester. Earle of Pembrooke. Earle of Essex absent, yet entred by order from the Prince, vnder his Highnesse owne hand. Earle of Northampton. Earle of Salisbury principall Secretary to the King. Earle of Montgomery. Earle of Pearth. Lord Viscount Cranborne. Lord Euars. Lord Hunsdon. Lord Knolles. Lord Haye.
Lord Sanker. Lord Borley. M. Howard. Sir Iohn Harington. Knights.M. Sheffield. Sir Thomas Challoner, Gouernor to ye Prince. Sir Roger Ashton Master of the Wardrobe, & Gentleman of the Kings Bed-chamber. Sir Thomas Vauasor, Knight Marshall. Sir Dauid Fowlis. Sir Dauid Murry. M. Doctor Mountague, Deane of the Chappell. M. Adam Newton Deane of Durham, and Tu∣tor to the Prince. Sir Thomas Sauage. Sir Lewes Lewknor, M. of the Ceremonies: and many other Knights, Esquires, and Gen∣tlemen seruants to the King, Queene, and Prince, and to Noblemen. The new Master & Wardens of the Merchan∣tailers.The new Master and Wardens chosen in the presence of the King and Prince, was Iohn Iohnson Master of the Company, and Thomas Owen, Richard Scales, Iohn Woller, and Ran∣dolph Wolley Wardens. The Earle of Arun∣dels eldest sonne.The next day the King christened Iames, the eldest sonne of Thomas Earle of Arundel, borne of Alethea, youngest daughter to Gilbert Earle of Shrewsbury, the Earle of Suffolke and the Lady Arbella were the other gossips. The Earle of Tyrone and other Irish lords fled out of Ireland.About the beginning of September, there fled out of Ireland into the parts beyond the Seas, Hugh Earle of Tirone, Terconnel, Hugh Baron of Don Gannon, Caffer Oge Odonnel,
brother to the Earle of Terconnel, Orto Oge Oneale, Nephew to the Earle of Tyrone, the Countesse of Tyrone, and two of the younger sonnes of Tyrone, and the sonne and heire of the Earle of Terconnel, being an infant of one yeare of age, or thereabout, with diuers other their seruants and followers, they imbarked at Lugh∣swillie. The seuenth of September was borne Duke Charles, second sonne to the King of Spaine.The King of Spaines second son borne. Wednesday the 16 of September died the Lady Mary,The death of the La∣die Mary. daughter to our Soueraigne Lord the King, and was solemnly interred at West∣minster the twenty thrée of the same, in a vaut of the same Chappell, and in the same manner as was her sister the Lady Sophia. Sir Ieruais Clyfton of Layton Bromeswold Knight, was made Baron by writ,Sir Iaruais Clyfton made barō The Lord Awbignye maried. by the title of Baron of Layton Bromeswold, and sate in his roabes with the Lords in the Parliament house, the 16 of Nouember, being the day of the adiornment of the Parliament. And the twen∣tith day of Iuly following, the Lord Esme Ste∣wart, Lord of Awbigny in France, gentleman of his Maiesties Bedchamber in England, and sole brother vnto Lodouicus Duke of Lenox, maried Katherin in the onely daughter and heire of the said Lord Clyfton. The first day of March in the second yeare of his Maiesties raigne,Inmates & increase of building forbidden by procla∣mation. Also the preserua∣tion of timber & vniformity of building through∣out Lon∣don com∣manded by procla∣mation. proclamation was made, straitly prohibiting all increase of buil∣dings within the city of London, and one mile
thereof,Contem∣ners cen∣sured in the Star-chamber. and expresly commanding all persons to build all the fore front and windowes of al their new buildings, either of bricke or stone, but it tooke small effect: whereupon the 12 of October this present yere 1607 Proclamation was made again to the same effect, & commanding them to build all their vtter wals & windowes, either  brick or stone. And ye 16 of October there were 2 censured in the the star Chamber, for building contrarie to the tenour of his Maiesties firs Proclamation. The old rottē Ban∣quetting house of timber ta∣ken down, and a new builded of bricke and stone.This yeare the King new builded the state∣lie Banquetting-house, with increase of many faire lodgings at Whitehall. Prouision for such Preachers as shall preach at Pauls Crosse.Doctor Ailmer, late L. Bishop of London, and the right honourable Elizabeth Countesse Don∣ger of Shrewsbury, haue giuen certaine sums of money for the better maintenance of sermon hereafter at Pauls Crosse, and Thomas Russell Draper, hath likewise giuen ten pound a yeare for euer, to be giuen vnto such vnbeneficed Preachers as shall preach at Pauls Crosse, whereupon the Lord Maior and Court of Al∣dermen for the due imployment of the foresaid summes, and encrease of the same, haue further prouided for the said Preachers, so as euery o them, being vnbeneficed, shall not onely re∣ceiue a grauitie in money, but also euery one that shall preach there, shall at his pleasure be fréely entertained for fiue daies space, with swéet conuenient lodgings, fire, candle, and all other necessarie, viz. from thursday before their ap∣pointed
day of preaching, vntill tuesday mor∣ning following. Geffrey Elwes, Nicholas Style.Shrieues. Sir Henry Row Mercer, Maior.Maior. The 16 of Nouember,The disco¦uerie of the Earle of Tyrons treason. proclamation was made concerning the Earle of Tyrone, Tercon∣nell, and others of Ireland, signifying their pur∣pose and practise to extirpe the English nation out of Ireland, and to conferre and yéeld the kingdome of Ireland vnto the Pope, and Ty∣rones soliciting forraigne Princes to attempt the conquest thereof. The 20 of December, proclamation was made to apprehend the Lord Maxwell,The Lord Maxwell brake out of prison. who wounded the Porter and so brake prison out of Edenbrough Castle. This Lord Maxwell aided Iames Macdonell to escape likewise. The 24 of December,Sir Tho∣mas Parry sworne a Priuie Counsel∣lor of Estate. sir Thomas Parry Knight, Chancellor of the Dutchie, was sworne a Priuie Counsellor of Estate. The 8 of December began a hard frost, & con∣tinued vntill the 15 of the same, and then thaw∣ed: and the 22 of December it began againe to fréeze violently,A great frost. so as diuers persons went halfe way ouer the Thames vpon the Ice: and the 30 of December, at euery ebbe many people went quite ouer the Thames in diuers places, and so continued from that day vntill the third of Ianuary: the people past daily betwéene London and ye Banke-side at euery halfe ebbe, for the floud remooued the Ice, and forced the people daily to tread new paths, except onely
betwéene Lambeth and the ferry at Westmin∣ster, the which by incessant treading, became ve∣ry firme and frée passage, vntill the great thaw: and from Sunday the tenth of Ianuary, vntill the fiftéenth of the same, the frost grew extream, so as the Ice became firme, and remoued not, & then all sorts of men, women, and children, went boldly vpon the Ice in most parts; some shot at prickes, others bowled and danced, with other variable pastimes; by reason of which concourse of people, there were many that set vp boothes and standings vpon the Ice, as Fruit sellers, Victuallers, that sold béere and wine, Shooma∣kers, & a Barbers tent, &c. Euery of them had fire néere their beings. The 15 of Ianuary it began somewhat to thaw, and so continued 4 daies together: yet neuerthelesse the great Ice vpon the Thames held firme and passable, and became somewhat smooth, like as in the last great frost in the yeare 1564. which till then were very craggy and vncertaine. The 19 of Ianuary the frost began againe, but not violent∣ly vntill Sunday the 24 of Ianuary, and then held on vntill the 30 of the same.All the Harti∣chokes in gardens a∣bout Lon∣don were kild with this frost. The 1 of Fe∣bruary the Ice began to breake by little and lit∣tle, and the next day in the afternoone, all the Ice was quite dissolued and cleane gone, so as no signe remained thereof: many bridges were spoiled by this frost, and much fowle perished, especially smal birds which in many places were found frozen to death: this frost was more grie∣uous in Ireland and France, then in England.
The 9 of February,Viscount Hadingtō maried. sir Iohn Ramsey knight Baron of Barnes Viscount Hadington, maried Elizabeth the eldest daughter of Robert Earle of Sussex, the King gaue her in mariage, and at dinner the King dranke to the bride and bride∣grome in a faire cup of gold which he gaue him. And with it a patent of 600 pound yearely pen∣sion out of the Exchequer to the longest liuer of them both: this the King did to reward his faith∣full seruice against the dangerous treason of Earle Gowry in Scotland. The 10 of March was laid the first stone for the new building of Algate,Allgate new buil∣ded. but it was not fully finished vntill the end of the next yeare after, this old gate was taken downe and new builded at the charges of the Citizens. The eleuenth of Aprill George Ieruas a Se∣minarie,An. reg. 6. 1608 A Semina¦rie execu∣ted. was drawne to Tiburne and there ex∣ecuted. The eleuenth of Aprill being Monday,S. Edmōds Bury spoi∣led by a sudden fire. th quarter Sessions was held at Saint Edmonds∣bury, and by negligence an out malt-house was set on fire, from whence in most strange and sud∣den manner, through fierce windes, the fire came to the farther side of the Towne, and as it went, left some stréets and houses safe and vn∣touched: the flame flew cleane ouer many hou∣ses néere vnto it, and did great spoile to many faire buildings farthest off, and ceased not vntill it had consumed 160 dwelling houses, besides other, and in dammage of wares and houshold stuffe, to the full value of thréescore thousand
pound.The King was very forward to do them any fauor. The King shewed great kindnesse to the distressed inhabitants, as well in giuing them fiue hundred load of timber to repaire their buildings, as in preferring their best meanes to raise their generall and particular estates, and in giuing them a new Charter. The Knights and chiefe Gentlemen of that County perfor∣med likewise great kindnesse vnto the Towns∣men: the Citie of London gaue kindly towards their reliefe. The 17 of Aprill Doctor Montague, Deane of the Kings Chappell,Doctor Mounta∣gue Lord Bishop of Bath and Wels. was consecrated Bishop of Bath and Wels, by the Lord Archbishop of Canturbury. At this consecration were present Prince Henry, the Duke of Yorke, and most of the great Lords of the Priuie Counsell, and di∣uers Bishops. The Earle of Dorset dieth.The 19 of Aprill, at Whitehall died Tho∣mas Earle of Dorset, Lord high Treasurer of England. He died suddenly at the Counsell Table. The oth of allegiance ministred vnto suspi∣tious per∣sons.The 29 of Aprill, proclamation was made, commanding the oth of allegiance to be mini∣stred vnto all persons that should come from be∣yond the seas, onely to distinguish honest sub∣iects from traiterous practisers, and not for any point or matter in religion: all knowne Mer∣chants and others of honest state and quallitie were exempt from taking this oth. This pro∣clamation was made, by reason that many sus∣pitious persons of base sort came daily from be∣yond seas, and refused to take the oth.
At this time Henry Earle of Northampton was made Lord Priuie Seale.The Earle of Nor∣thampton made L. Priuie Seale. Friday the 6 of May, Robert Earle of Salis∣bury was sworne Lord high Treasurer of Eng∣land at Westminster, being accompanied with the most part of all the Earles and Barons,The Earle of Salisbu¦ry made Lord high Treasurer of Eng∣land. and with an extraordinary company of Knights and others of honorable ranke and qualitie; & that day he feasted the King, Quéene, and Prince, the Lady Elizabeth, the Duke of Yorke, and all the Counsell. The 20 of May at Windsor were made knights of the Garter,The Earls of Dunbar & Mont∣gomery made Knights of the Gar∣ter. Francis Earle of Comber∣land is the other lord Lieu∣tenant. George Earle of Dun∣bar, Baron Hume of Berwick, Lord of Nor∣ham, Lord high Treasurer of Scotland, one of the two Lords Lieutenants in equall authority ouer the middle shires of Great Britaine, some∣time the borders of both the kingdomes Lord Gouernour and Captaine for his Maiestie of the said towne of Berwick, and the Garrison thereof, and one of his Maiesties most Honou∣rable Priuie Counsell: and Philip Earle of Montgomery, Baron of Shurland. In the moneth of Iune the King knighted Sir Alexander Hay,Sir Alex∣ander Hay knighted. Secretary for the Scottish affaires. The 23 of Iune Thomas Garnet a Iesuite was executed at Tyburne,A Iesuite executed. hauing fauour offe∣red him, if he would haue taken the oth of alle∣giance aforesaid, which he refused to doe. This Summer at Astley in Warwickshire, by reason of the fall of the Church, there was taken
vp the corps of Thomas Gray,The corps of the lord Mar∣quesse. Dorset ta∣ken vp whole, ha∣uing been 78 yeares enterred. Marquesse Dor∣set: he was buried the tenth of October 1530 in the twenty two yeare of Henry the eight: and albeit he had laine 78 yeares in the earth, yet his eyes haire and flesh remained in a manner as if it had béene newly buried. Concerning which you may read the new Epitaph set ouer his se∣pulchre. Doctor Neyle, Lord Bi∣shop of Rochester.The ninth of October Doctor Neyle Deane of Westminster was consecrated Bishop of Ro∣chester at Lambeth. Shrieues.George Bolles, Richard Farrington, Shrieues. Sir Humphrey Weld Grocer, Maior.Maior. The Vis∣count of Cram∣burne ma∣ried.The first of December William Viscount Cramburne, sonne and heire to Robert Earle of Salisbury, Lord Treasurer of England, marri∣ed Catheren Howard, the third Daughter of Thomas Earle of Suffolke. Consorts of pirats within the Streights, and in the maine sea.For these fiue yeares last past, great and ma∣nifold roberies, spoyles, pyracies, murthers and depredations within the streights & elsewhere haue béene committed by seuerall companies of English pirates, as well vpon our owne nation as others, but especially vpon the Florentines and Venetians wherewith his highnesse being much grieued, published from time to time sun∣dry proclamations, denouncing the said offen∣ders to be rebels, and therewithall gaue order for their suppression and apprehension as trai∣tors and peace-breakers. But all this preuailed
not, for they still increased and persisted in their former villanies: with which offenders, there were some English Merchants, who very cun∣ningly vnderhand vsed cōmerce, trucke, and traffique for stolen goods, to the great cherishing and abetting of those malefactors, and dishonor to this nation; for redresse whereof, the King by proclamation the eighth of Ianuary, prohibited all English Merchants from any manner of medling or dealing with them, vpon great pe∣naltie, commanding the Iudge of the Admiral∣tie, to proceed seuerely in Iustice against all such offenders, and that from him there should be no appeale granted to any person touching the premises: all which notwithstanding the number of Pirats still increased, and did great damage vnto the English Merchants, and to all other nations. There were Hollanders and Esterlings that at this time and before, became fierce Pirats, and held consort with the Eng∣lish robbers, viz. Ward, Bishop,This Sir Francis Verney did turne vpon hope of aduāce∣ment, but hee be∣came ex∣treame poore and miserable. Sir Francis Ver∣ney, and others. Whereupon the King of Spaine sent certaine ships of warre, vnder com∣mand of Don Lewis Faxardo, who very poli∣tikely about the middle of Iuly, came vpon them at Tunis, and suddenly burned about 20 of their ships lying in harbor: at which time, though captaine Ward escaped in person by be∣ing then a shoare, yet his great strength & riches perished in the fire, with other his confederates. And the 22 of December,Pirats ex∣ecuted. there were execu∣ted at Waping 19 Pirats, some whereof had
béene in consort with the forenamed English pi∣rats. Strange shifting of the tides.Sunday the ninetéenth of February, it should haue béene dead low water at London bridge, but quite contrary to course, it was then hie water, and presently it ebbed almost halfe an houre, the quantitie of a foote, and then sudden∣ly it flowed againe almost two foote higher then it did before, and then ebbed againe, vntill it came néere the right course, so as the next floud began in a manner as it should, and kept his due course in all respects, as if there had béene no shifting nor alteration of tides. All this happe∣ned before twelue of the clocke that forenoone, the weather being indifferent calme. The yong Earle of Dorset maried, and the Earle of Hertfords grand∣child ma∣ried.The 25 of February, Richard Lord Buck∣hurst, maried the Lady Anne Clyfford, the onely child of George Earle of Cumberland. And the last of February died Robert Earle of Dorset, father to the forenamed Richard, L. Buckhurst. And the first of Iune next following, Edward Seymour, the sonne and heire of the Lord Beau∣champe, maried the Lady Anne Sackuyle, second daughter to the said Robert Earle of Dorset. An. reg. 7. 1609 A general truce in the Ne∣therlands for twelue yeares. In this month of March 1609. vpon full 3 yeares deliberate aduice, was concluded and pro∣claimed a generall and particular truce & ceassa∣tion from all maner of hostilitie by sea and land for twelue yeares, betwéene Philip the third of that name King of Spaine, and Albertus and Isabella Archdukes of Austria on the one part, and the generall Estates of Holland, Zealand,
and Frizeland on the other part. In this truce were included all the newter Townes, Forts, and Cities. This was done after either side had tried their vtmost fortunes, and felt the bitter sting and cruell miserie of almost fiftie yeares bloudy wars, to the great damage of all Chri∣stendome, and aduantage of the vnreconcileable common enemy the Turke. The last yeare, and this spring,The first generall planting of Mulbe∣ry trees in England. according to his Maiesties expresse order, vpon apparant reason and great likelihood of future good & vtili∣tie to the common subiects of this land, there were many thousands of young Mulbery trées brought hither out of France by Monsieur Fran∣cis Vertron, alias Forest of Verton in Pycardie Esquire, who had a Patent for the same for two yeares: which were likewise by order sent into diuers shires, and there planted for the féeding of Silkewormes to make silke,In Daw∣pheny & other parts of France, there was silke made a good while be∣fore, but not tho∣rowout the whole kingdome vntill of late yeres. like as it is made in France. The last yeare at Gréenwich he kept great store of English Silkewormes, the which the King with great pleasure came often to sée them worke; and of their silke the King caused a peece of Taffata to be made. It is but twenty yeares since the first generall making of silke in France. And the like generall planting of Mulbery trées there, who vntill then could not make Silke. All which notwithstanding for many yeares past héere in England haue béene diuers ingenious and industrious Eng∣lish gentlemen, who haue planted Mulberies, made many trials, taken great paines, and
béene at expences to bréede and féed their wormes and to make silke, whereof they brought some to good perfection. Amongst whom of most note is William Stallendge Esquier, who at this time and before,M. Nicho∣las Ieffe & many o∣thers had put it in practise long be∣fore. by his proper practise had bred great store of wormes to good perfection, and thereof made good silke in London, viz. 13 yeardes of Taffata, and diuers payres of Stockings of sū∣dry colours which he presented vnto his Maie∣sty, and vnto the Quéene and Prince, and vnto many others the other yeare: This Stallendge about thrée yeares past had a Pattent for seuen yeares to bring in Mulbery séeds: and this yere according to the kings direction, he and the fore∣named Forrest planted Mulbery trées in most shires of England, viz. M. Stallendge furnished the Westerne parts and M. Forest the Nor∣then part, the King planted Mulbery trées neere Saint Iames Parke. Britaine Burse builded.The beautifull building in the Strand neare Durham house was begunne the tenth of Iune last past, and was fully finished in Nouember following, at the proper charges of Robert Earl of Salisburie Lord high Treasurer of England,They were there entertai∣ned with pleasant ingenious speeches, gifts and deuises. and vpon Tuesday the tenth of Aprill this yeare 1609 many of the vpper shops were richly fur∣nished with wares, and the next day after that the King, Quéene and Prince, the Lady Eliza∣beth and the Duke of Yorke with many great Lords and chiefe Ladies came thither, and then the King gaue it a name; and called it Britaine Burse.
The 8 of May the King by his Proclamati∣on prohibited all forraine Nations that after August next they should not fish vpon any the coasts of England, Scotland or Ireland,Al forrain nations forbidden to fish vp∣on the coasts of England Scotland & Ireland without speciall li∣cence. nor the Isles adiacent without speciall licence from the Commissioners in that behalfe ordained, viz. to haue licence from the Commissioners in London for Fishing neare England and Ire∣land, and from the Commissioners in Eden∣brough to fish in the Scottish seas, and the Isles adiacent. The first, second and third of Iune,The King heareth the Bi∣shops and secular Iudges. the king in person royall heard the differences betwéene the ecclesiasticall and the temporall Iudges ar∣gued, touching prohibitions out of the Kings Bench, and Common Pleas. The 8.9. and 10.The King heareth the com∣plaints touching his nauie. of Iune his Maiesty also in proper person accompanied with the L. Trea∣surer, the Lord Priuy Seal, the Lord Admirall, the Lord Chamberlaine and others, heard the manifold complaints of the abuses of the offi∣cers of his Nauy royall. The 23 of Iune ye King, Quéen and Prince,A triall of fight be∣tween a Lyon, a Horse and a Bare. with diuers great Lords and many others came to the Tower to make triall of the Lions single valour, and to haue the Lions kill a great fierce Bare which had kild a child, but the Lions be∣ing tried by one and one at a time, and lastly by two together which were bred in that open yard where the Bare was put loose for combat, yet would none of them assaile him but sled from him, and sought to returne into their dens. Af∣ter
the first Lyon was put forth, then was there a stone horse put into the Bare, and Lyon, who when he had gased vpon them a little, he fell to grasing standing in the midst betwéene them both, and whereas at first there was but two mastifes let in, who boldly sought with the Ly∣on, there was now 6 dogges let in, who flue all vpon the horse, being most in their fight at their first entrance, and would soone haue woried the horse to death,The pa∣rents of the childe had as much as aw and reason could afford. but that sodainely euen as the King wisht there entered in 3 stout Bearwards, who wondrous valiantly rescued the horse and brought away the dogges, whilest the Lyon and Bare stood staring vpon them. And the fift of Iuly this Bare according to the Kings expresse commaundement was bayted to death with dogs vpon a Stage, and the mother of the mur∣thered child had twenty pound giuen her out of the mony, giuen by the people to see the death of the Bare. About two yeares past, viz. at Christmas, 1607.Kingly pai¦ments be∣yond pre∣sident. the King borrowed of Francis Iones, and Nicholas Salter and their partners being Far∣mers of the Custome house, one hundred and twenty thousand pound for one whole yeare, which said summe his Maiesty very gratiously and carefull repayed at Christmas 1608. with full royall consideration for the same. In the moneth of March the last yeare 1608. the King borrowed of certaine other Citizens the sum of thréescore and thrée thousand pound for fiftéene months: and this Midsomer day
1609 the King not onely repayed them all the said sum,There was neuer the like royall payment made by any King to the cō∣mon subiects. but allowed them likewise their full interest for the same, viz. seauen thousand and fiue hundred pround as a royall recompence: the King sent them word that hee had money ready for them, and that if they would they should receiue their money before their day, but they refused it. Of late yeares certaine ingenious and indu∣strious persons deuised and found out the ma∣king of Allome within the Kings Dominions,The first making of Allome in England. viz. in Deuonshire, and Ireland, and lastly at Gysborrow, and other places in Yorkeshire, where the sayd Allom by this time was brought to full perfection by the Lord Sheffield, and Sir Thomas Challoner, Sir Dauid Fowllis, Sir Iohn Bowrchier Knights, and William Turner, Nicholas Cryspe, Elias Cryspe, Abraham Cham∣berlaine Citizens of London, to the great vse & profit of the common wealth, whereupon the first of Iuly the King by his Proclamation pro∣hibited the bringing in of any Allome from be∣yond the seas into any part of his Maiesties do∣minions vpon pain of confiscation. The King likewise ordained fit places for Storehouses of Allome, for the ready vse therof to such as would buy the same, the King also gaue very gratious respect & princely remuneration vnto all those, who of late had taken paines & béene at expen∣ces in the practising and atchieuing to bring this royall commodity vnto due perfection, and then tooke the traffique thereof vnto himselfe.
This yeare the King had ayde of his Sub∣iects throughout the Kingdome of England for knighting his sonne Prince Henry according to the Law of this land,An anci∣ent duty. in the leuying whereof the Subiects were very fauourably dealt withall, for whereas by the ancient law of this land the subiects ought to haue paid twelue pence in the pound of the yearely value of their lands, his Maiesty very gratiously ordained seuerall Commissioners in the seuerall shires, who ac∣cording to the purpose of their commissions did so moderately demeane themselues as no man was compelled to pay any more then he would willingly giue, being a very auncient duty due vnto the King, and was now in a manner quite forgotten. Let al that are pardo∣ned note this for example.Robert Allyley being arraigned at Newgate for fellony, stood mute and refused the ordinary tryall, whereupon as the manner is, the hang∣man came vnto him to binde his hands, but Al∣lyley resisted, and with his Fist smote him on the face in the presence of the Iudges, who pre∣sently remembred that this prisoner but the last Sessions before, was there conuicted of fellony, and for the same had obtained the Kings speci∣all pardon, which pardons in generall are vnto all persons, but onely vpon their good behauiour vnto the King and his subiects,His hand was nailed at the Gy∣bet end before his face. and thereupon the Court instantly gaue Iudgement, that for the blow he gaue, his hand should first be cut off: And then his body to be hanged for that fact for the which he had his pardon, according to
which sentence he was presently executed vpon a Gybbet at the Sessions gate. In December in the 34 yeare of Quéene Eli∣beth,The ori∣ginall and foundation of the East India Compa∣ny. there were letters pattents graunted for fiftéene yeares to the East India Merchants trading to the East Indies, and in May last 1609. The Kings Maiestie vpon mature delibe∣ration in fauour of the said Company, finding the same to be very commodious traffique and Nauigation, and as propitious and honourable for this Kingdome renued and enlarged the foresaid letters pattents and Charter to conti∣nue for euer, enabling them thereby to be a body corporate and politique. The first gouernour of this Company named and ordained both in the first and last pattent was Sir Thomas Smith Knight, who is also Gouernour of the Musco∣uy Company, and president and treasurer of the Company and counsell for Virginea. This yeare the said East-India Company builded a most stately ship at Detford of the burthen of twelue hundreth tunne, being the greatest and goodliest ship that euer was builded in this king∣dome by any Merchants. At this time they al∣so builded a Pinace of two hundreth and fifty tunne to attend her. And vpon Saturday the 30 of December, his Maiestie and Prince Hen∣ry, with the Lord Admirall, the Lord Chamber∣laine, the Earle of Worcester, and many other Lords went to sée these ships launched, and were all entertained with a banquet in the chiefe Cabin of the great ship, and the rest were
banquetted at a long Table in the halfe decke▪ these rich and plentifull banquets were all ser∣ued in fine Chyna Dishes which were fréely permitted to be taken and carried away by al persons. The King gaue the Gouernor a very faire chaine of gold with a Iewell wherein was the Kings picture: highly commending his en∣deauour, care and industry for the good of the common wealth, maintenance of traffique and Nauigation, for the which also his Maiest with very gratious respect commended and thanked the assistants of that companie, wh likewise kissed his Highnesse hand, the King called the great ship the Trade Encrease, and the other the Pepper Corne. Shrieues.Sebastian Haruie, William Cokayne sheriffes. Maior.Sir Thomas Cambell Iremonger Maior. Translati∣on, and consecra∣tion of Bishops.The sixt of Nouember the famous Doctor Lancelot Androwes Lord Almner, Bishop of Chichester was transferred vnto the Bishop∣ricke of Ely. And the 3 of December George Abbot Doctor of diuinity, Deane of Winche∣ster, was consecrated Lord Bishop of Couen∣try and Lychfield. And Samuel Harsenet Doctor of Diuinity was consecrated Lord Bishop of Chichester. And 12 of February, the forenamed Doctor Abbot was transferred to the Bishop∣ricke of London and was enstalled in Paules, by his deputy Doctor Pasfielde. The sixe of Ianuary at the Court of White∣hall
in the presence of the King and Quéene and the Ambassadors of Spaine and Venice, and of al the Péeres and great Ladies of the land, and of many thousand of others, there the Prince performed his first feats of armes, viz.Prince Henry his first feats of Armes. at Bar∣yers against all commers, being assisted onely with sixe other, viz. the Duke of Lenox, the Earle of Arundel, the Earle of Southampton, the Lord Hay, sir Thomas Somerset, and sir Ri∣chard Preston, who shortly after was created Lord Dingwell: against these challengers came 56 braue defendants, consisting of Earles, Ba∣ons, Knights and Esquiers euery challenger fought with eight seuerall defendants two seuerall combats at two seuerall weapons, viz. at push of pyke and with single sword, the Prince performed this challenge with won∣drous skill and courage to the great ioy and admiration of all the beholders, the Prince not being full sixtéene yeares of age vntill the 19 of February: these feates of Armes with sun∣dry statelie showes and ingenious deuises be∣gan before tenne a clocke at night, and continu∣ed vntill thrée a clocke next morning being Sonday, and that day the Prince feasted all the Combatants at Saint Iames house, and then gaue thrée rich prises vnto thrée of the best de∣seruers defendants, viz. vnto the Earle of Mountgomery, M. Thomas Darcy, sonne and heire to the Lord Darcy of Chich, and vnto six Robert Gourdon. In the yeare 1584. was discouered ye Coun∣try
which is now called Virginea,The first discouery and plan∣tation of Virginea. and was so called by Quéene Elizabeth, and she assigned the same vnto sir Walter Rawleigh, as being the chiefe discouerer thereof. And in the yeare 1587. there were sent thither aboue 100 soules, viz. men, women, and children, since which time vn∣till the third yeare of his Maiesties raigne, the yearely sending thither for plantation ceased, and then vpon more exact discoueries there were sundrie yearely supplies sent thither of men, women and children with all things ne∣cessary vnder conduct of captaine Newport, and also in the Month of may there were sent thi∣ther nine ships with fiue hundred men, women and children with all necessary prouision vnder commaund of Sir Thomas Gates Lieutenant generall, Sir George Somers Admirall of Vir∣ginea, and captaine Newport Vice Admirall, with other expert captaines and resolute gen∣tlemen. And likewise at the end of this pre∣sent yeare 1609. there was sent an other sup∣ply of thrée shippes with an hundred and fifty men, being for the most part Artificers vnder commaund of the right Honourable Thomas Lord La Ware, who by the frée election of the Treasurer and Counsell of Virginea, and with the full consent of the generality of that com∣pany was constituted and authorized during his naturall life to be Lord Gouernour and captaine generall of all the English Colonies planted, or to be planted in Virginea, accor∣ding to the tenor of his Maiesties Letters Pat∣tents
granted this present yeare vnto the said company. The Lord La Warre had his Pattent sealed by that Company the twenty eight day of Fe∣bruary this yeare 1609.The Lord La Warre goeth to Virginea. he went accompanied with Knights and Gentlemen of qualitie: And in Iune next there was one ship with 20 men, and a yeares competent prouision for the whole Colony sent after him. The ninth of February the Parliament be∣gan at Westminster,The Par∣liament adiorned. and continued vntill the twenty third of Iuly, and was then prorogued vntill the 16 of October following, and then the Lords and Commons sate againe vntill the sixt of December, and then it was adiourned vnto the ninth of February. The Kings Maiesty in his princely proui∣dence for the present and future good of his Kingdomes,The plan∣tation of the North of Ireland by the Ci∣tizens of London. and chiefely for preuention of all rebellion in the Kingdome of Ireland, and in his especiall fauour, and kingly respect vnto the City of London, did in Iuly last make a liberall offer vnto the Lord Maior and citizens of Lon∣don for the present possession and plantation of Englishmen in the Prouince of Vlster; And when the Lord Maior and Citizens had well aduised themselues therein, then in August they sent foure discréet expert persons, being accom∣panied and directed by Sir Thomas Philips as the Lords of the Councell had appointed, to sur∣uay that Prouince, and to obserue the profits with the estate and condition thereof, and to re∣port
what ruines were to be repayred, and what cities, castles and townes were presently to be builded, and when these 4 suruayors were re∣turned, they ascertained the Lord Maior & Ci∣tizens, aswell of the true estate and validity thereof, as of the seuerall commodities, honor & dignity yt would therby ensue, & then they hum∣bly accorded vnto the Kings most gratious and bounteous offer; then the Lord Maior & Citi∣zens vpon mature deliberation leuied 20000. li. to be employed in these Irish affaires, & by ver∣tue of their act of common Councell they con∣stituted 24 Committies consisting of 6 Alder∣men and 18 Commoners, the two chiefe wherof were called the gouernor & deputy, all which are to be new chosen euery yeare, hauing power & authority giuen them to order & dispose of all matters for plantation, traffique, rule & gouern∣ment in that North part of Ireland, whereupon the 14 of February they made publication ther∣of, signifying vnto all handy crafts men their present entertainment & employment in this ex∣pedition, & that they should haue their full wa∣ges with their dwelling houses and other good meanes for the honest maintenance of them∣selues & their families: vpon knowledge wher∣of there came about 300 seuerall persons, who were presently fitted and furnished with all things necessary, & with all conueniency were sent to Vlster: and so this expedition procéeded prosperously; William Cokaine Alderman was the first gouernor.
Thursday the 3 of May, the French Quéene,An. reg. 3. 1610 The king of France murdered. with all solemnity was crowned in Paris, ha∣uing béene ten yeares before maried to the king: and the next day after the King was murthered in his coach as he rode through Paris by a base villain that stabd him into the body with a long knife twice, that he died instantly, and his body was carried to the Loouer: presently vpon the Kings death the Quéene was made Regent du∣ring her sons minority, viz. Lewis the 13. The 20 of May being Sonday, our King & Quéene, the Prince, the Duke of Yorke, the Lady Eliza∣beth, and all the Lords and Ladies in the Court mourned in blacke for the death of this French King Henry the 4. and about the end of Iune, was he buried in Paris with as great royalty, as euer was any king of France. Vpon the murther of this French king the Lords & Com∣mons of the Parliament of England, humbly besought the King our soueraigne Lord to haue a more especiall care then formerly had béene for the preseruation of his royall person, & also to take spéedy order for the auoiding imminet dan∣ger, and kéeping his Subiects in their due obe∣dience: and forthwith the Commons of the Parliament for manifestation of their allegi∣ance, loue and duety, they voluntarily of their owne accord tooke the oath of allegiance, and af∣ter them the Lords of the vpper house did so likewise, who also ministred the same oath vn∣to all their seruants and followers, and such as refused to take the oath were put from
their Lords seruices, and the Bishops in their Conuocation house ordained that euery Bishop in their seuerall visitations should minister the same oath vnto all their Clergy, which they per∣formed accordingly: this oath was also mini∣stred vnto others as followeth, according to the tenor of a speciall statute made this Session of Parliament in that behalfe. Prince Henry created Prince of Wales.The appointed time now drew neere for Prince Henry to be created Prince of Wales: and vpon thursday the last of May the Lord Maior and Aldermen being accompanied with 54 seuerall companies of citizens of London in their seuerall Barges bearing Armes, distin∣guished by their proper Ensignes banners and streamers in braue and warlike man∣ner, and therewithall plenteously furnished with sundry sorts of excellent musicke, and had also to entertaine the Prince diuers ingenious and pleasant trophies vpon the water, all which in very comely order went to Chelsea, the Lord Maior as Admirall going formost, where from nine a clocke in the morning vntill past three in the afternoone, they attended the comming of the Prince, who could not come sooner by reason of the low ebbe, at which tsme the Prince came from Richmond being very honourably accom∣panied and attended: And from Chelsea the Lord Maior and citizens conducted his High∣nesse vnto the court at White-hall: as they re∣turned from Chelsea the citizens ledde the way, and the Lord Maior followed them, going al∣waies
next before the Princes Barge: To sée this ioyfull fight, the people for 7 miles space swarmed on both sides the riuer, & the Thames was couered with boates, barges, and lighters full fraught with men, women and children. And vpon Sonday the 3 of Iune the King made 25 knights of the Bath whose names fol∣low: And the next day the King created and crowned the Prince his eldest Sonne Henry, Prince of Wales in the Great White Cham∣ber at Westminster, being performed with all magnificence and solemnity, and with the full consent of the Lords spirituall and temporall, and commons of the Parliament, being all there present, the Lord Maior and Aldermen of Lon∣don were also present at this Creation: the Princes titles were proclaimed, viz. Henry Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornewall and Rothesey, and Earle of Chester. In honour of this Creation there was the next night at the Court a most rich and royall maske of Ladies, viz. the Quéene, the Lady Elizabeth, daughter to our Soueraign, the Lady Arabella, the Coun∣tesse of Arondel, the Countes of Darby, the Countes of Essex, the Countes of Dorset, the Countes of Mountgomery, the Viscounts of Haddington, the Lady Elizabeth Gray, the La∣dy Elizabeth Guilford, the Lady Katherine Pe∣ter, the Lady Winter, and the Lady Winsor: and vpon Wednesday in the afternoon in the Tilt∣yard there were diuers Earles, Barons and others being in rich and glorious armour, and
hauing most costly caparisons wondrous curi∣ously imbrodered with pearle, gold and siluer; the like rich abiliments for horses were neuer séene before, presented their seuerall ingenious Trophies before the King, Quéene and Prince, and then ran at Tilt, where there was a world of people assembled to behold their trophies; and that night there were other triumphes vpon the water with ships of warre and Gallies figh∣ting one against an other, and against a great Castle builded vpon the water: and after these battailes, then for an houres space there were many strange and variable fire workes in the castle, and in all the ships and gallies. The Knights of the Bath. Knights of the Bath.The Earle of Oxford. The Lord Gourdon. The Lord Clifford. The Lord Fitzwalter. The Lord Fitzwarren. The Lord Hay. The Lord Erskine. The Lord Winsor. The Lord Wentworth. Sir Charles Somerset. Sir Edward Somerset. Sir Francis Stewart. Sir Ferdinando Dudley. Sir Henry Cary. Sir Oliuer Saint Iohn. Sir Gilbert Gerrard. Sir Charles Stanhope.
Sir Edward Bruce. Sir William Stewart. Sir Robert Sydney. Sir Ferdinando Tuchet. Sir Peregrine Bartye. Sir Henry Rich. Sir Edward Sheffield. Sir William Cauendish. The 4 of Iune Proclamation was made,A procla∣mation touching Iesuits and Recusants. commanding all Roman Priests, Iesuits, and Seminaries to depart this Kingdome by the 4 day of Iuly next, and not to returne vpon paine of the seuerity of the law: also by this pro∣clamation, the King straightly commaunds all Recusants to returne home to their dwellings, and not to remaine in London, nor to come within ten miles of the Court without especiall licence, but to depart from London and the Court by the last day of this moneth, and to re∣maine confined according to the tenor of the statute in that behalfe prouided. Presently after that the oth of allegiance was ministred vnto all officers, atturneyes & Clerks,The oath of allegi∣ance mi∣nistred. belonging to any of the Courts of Westminster hall, and the Exchequer, and vnto all Aduocats and Proctors of the spirituall Courts. This oth was also ministred vnto all Lawyers and Stu∣dents in the Innes of Court and Chancerie, and vnto all Studients and Schollers in both the Vniuersities. The 25 of Iuly 1610.The Lord Clifford maried. the Lord Henry Clifford, sonne to Frances Earle of Cumberland
maried the Lady Francis Cecill daughter to Ro∣bert Earle of Salisbury Lord high Treasurer of England. This yeare the King builded a most stately ship for war,The King buildeth the great∣est and goodliest ship of war that euer was built in Englād the Kéele whereof was an hundred and 14 foot long, and the crosse beame was forty and foure foot long: she will beare 64 péeces of great Ordnance, and is of the burthen of 1400 tunne: This royall ship is double built, and is most sumptuously adorned both within and without with all manner of curious caruing, painting and rich gilding, being in all respects the greatest and goodliest shippe that euer was builded in England: and this glorious ship the King gaue vnto his sonne Henry Prince of Wales: and the 24 of September the King, the Quéene, the Prince of Wales, the Duke of Yorke, and the Lady Elizabeth with many great Lords went to Wollwich to sée it lanched, but because of the narrownesse of the Docke, it could not then be launched, whereupon the Prince came the next morning by thrée a clocke, and then at the launching thereof the Prince named it after his owne dignity, and called it the Prince, Master Phynyes Pet. was Warden and chiefe worke master in building this ship. The Lord Wotton sent to take the oth of the French King.The King sent the Lord Wotton Ambassa∣dor into France to take the oath of the young King, and of the Quéene Regent his mother, for performance of a league newly made be∣twéene the two Kingdomes: he arriued at Cal∣lis the 28 of August, and came to Paris the 7 of
September, and the King was sworne the 12 of the same moneth. And the Ambassador re∣turned into England, the 7 of October. And the French King, viz. Lewis the 13. was crow∣ned the sixth of October at Reynes in Cham∣paigne. Sunday the 21 of October,Three Bi∣shops con∣secrated. by Commission from the King to the Lord Bishop of London, the Lord Bishop of Elye, the Lord Bishop of Worcester, and to the Lord Bishop of Roche∣ster, they did consecrate in the Chappell of the Lord Bishop of London, Master Iohn Spottys∣wod Archbishop of Glasco, Master Gawen Hamelton Bishop of Galloway, and M. An∣drew Lambe Bishop of Breachyn: which con∣secration was performed mutatis mutandis, ac∣cording to the forme of the Church of England. Richard Pyot, Francis Ihones, Shreeues.Shrieues. Sir William Crauen Merchantaylor, Maior.Maior. The Triumphes, Trophies, and pleasant de∣uices at this time, in honour of the Lord Maior and Citie of London, were extraordinarie great, being in a manner twice so much as hath béene vsuall within the Citie, and so likewise were the stately shewes and ingenious deuices vpon the water, at the charges of the Company of Mar∣chantaylors. Notwithstanding the Citie of Londons for∣merThe Citie of Londō buildeth new gra∣naries and store hou∣ses. plentifull prouision of sundry Granaries and other Storehouses for the generall seruice
thereof, and for preuention of sudden famine, yet such is the late vnspeakeable increase of peo∣ple within and about the City, as well of stran∣gers as Natiues, so as the Magistrates in their prouidence, for preuention of famine, and for prouision for the poore, very carefully about two yeares past beganne to build a Bridewell twelue new faire Granaries, being sufficient to kéepe sixe thousand quarters of Corne, and two store houses for sea-coale for the poore, which will keepe foure thousand loade of coales. These necessary houses were not fi∣nished vntill this time. Master Alderman Le∣man vsed great paines and diligence in the con∣triuing and accomplishing of this memorable worke. The prince of Anhalt commeth to see the King.This last Summer there were warres in Cleueland, and the vnited protestant Princes, with their seuerall forces aided the Marquesse of Brandenberg in his claime to that Dukedome, and the Dukedome of Gulich: in which wars, and at the taking the Citie of Gulich, Christi∣anus Prince of Anhalt, was chiefe Generall of all the vnited forces;Sir Ed∣ward Ce∣cill, Lord Generall of all the English and Sots forces in Cleuelād and Gu∣lich, and sir Edward Cecyll, otherwise called Colonell Cecyll, was then Lord Generall of the English and Scottish Army. This Prince Christanus, arriued of late at Do∣uer, and came to sée the King, who entertained and feasted him and all his traine very roially. He tooke great pleasure to view the Citie of London: he beheld the pleasant triumphs vpon the water, and within the City, which were then extra∣ordinary
in honor of the Lord Maior and Ci∣tizens: and that day, this Prince with all his German traine, were feasted in the Guild hall, where he manifested his princely former admi∣ration touching the greatnesse, scituation, state, and wealth of the City; and then he also admi∣red the goodly vniforme order & rich habit of the citizens, and said, that there was no State nor citie in the world, that did elect their Magi∣strates with such magnificence, except the citie of Venice, vnto which the city of London com∣meth very neere, &c. The 7 of December Iohn Roberts,A Monke and a Se∣minary executed. a Benedict Monke, somtime prouinciall of the Benedictans in England, and Thomas Somers a Seminary, were condemned at Newgate, & executed at Ti∣burn, they hauing bin before sundry times takē and banished, & yet presumed to returne againe, and here to practise against the King and State. George Palyn, Citizen and Girdler of Lon∣don, at this time gaue ad pios vsus, 3600. pound,M. Palyns bounty. that is to say, twelue hundreth pound vnto the two Vniuersities, and nine hundreth pound for an Almes-house, and the rest he bequeathed vn∣to other godly and charitable purposes, in which legacies he bestowed the better part of all his wealth. This month of December 1610.The Prince of Wales set∣leth his houshold. Henry Prince of Wales kept his Court at Saint Iames néere Charing Crosse, & setled his house, and ordained his Officers, as well the Offi∣cers of his Highnesse Reuenewes, as those
of his houshold, the names of the chiefe whereof follow. Of his Highnesse Reuenewes. Sir Edward Philips Chancellor. Master Adam Newton, Secretary. Sir George Moore, Receiuer Generall. Sir Willi. Fleetwood, Suruaier generall. Sir Augustine Nichols Sergeant. M. Thomas Stephens, Atturney. M. Richard Cunnock, Auditor. Of his Highnesse Houshold. Sir Thomas Challoner, Chamberlaine. Sir Charles Cornewal∣leys, Treasurer. Sir Iohn Hollis, Comp∣troller. Sir Dauid Fowllis, Cofferer. Sir Dauid Murrey. Gentleman of the Bed-chamber. The Par∣liament dissolued by Procla∣mation, dated the 31 of De∣cember.Whereas the Kings most Excellent Maie∣stie hath continued this Parliament together, longer then hath beene vsuall, or might well haue stood either with his important affaires of State, or with the publike businesse of three whole Termes spent in the two last Sessions, or with the occasions of the Countrey, where the seruice and Hospitality of many Persons of quality hath beene missing, and diuers Shires, Cities and Burrough Townes haue beene bur∣dened, with allowances made to the Knights,
and Burgesses whom they imployed, besides the particular expence of the nobility, and others attending that seruice; And all this in expecta∣tion of a good conclusion, of some of those weigh∣tie causes, which haue béene therein deliberated, not onely for the supply of the necessities of his Maiesties estate, but for the ease and frée∣dome of his subiects, in many things proposed by his Maiestie in Parliament, farre differing & surpassing the fauors and graces of former times, both in nature and value: His Maiestie hath now resolued (for preuenting of further trouble, of all those that would prepare them∣selues, to be here against the time limited by the last prorogation) to declare by these presents, that they shall not néed, to giue their attendance at the day appointed, for any seruice to be done, as members of this Parliament, because his Maiestie (for many good considerations knowne to himselfe) hath now determined to dissolue this Parliament, by his Commission vnder the great Seale of England. Vpon New yéeres night,The Prince of Wales, his maske at White∣hall. the Prince of Wales being accompanied with twelue others, viz. two Earles, thrée Barons, fiue Knights, & two Esquires, they performed a very stately maske, in which was an excellent Sceane, inge∣nious spéeches, and rare songs, and with great variety of most delicate musique. The French King sent Monsieur de la Ver∣dyne,A speciall Ambas∣sador frō the Frēch King. one of the Marshals of France, Gouernor of Maine, accompanied and attended with sixe∣score
persons all in mourning habit. He and his whole traine came to Lambeth the 16 of Ianu∣ary, and were lodged in the Archbishops palace, which the King caused to be very roially fur∣nished, and during their abode, they were also entertained at the Kings charge. The Ambassa∣dor had audience vpon Sunday the 20 of Ianu∣ary; and the next Sunday the King tooke his oath, for performance of a league lately made betwéene the two Kingdomes. M. Teas∣dale his bounty.Thomas Teasdale of Glymton in Oxford∣shire-Gentleman, at this time gaue fiue thou∣sand pound to purchase land, for perpetual maintenance of seuen Fellowes and six Schol∣lers, to bee placed in Bailyoll Colledge in Ox∣ford, and to be chosen thither from time to time out of the Free-schoole of Abingdon in Back∣shire. He also gaue lands for perpetuall mainte∣nance for an Vsher in that Schoole, besides ma∣ny other charitable legacies. He deceased the 13 of Iune 1610. Dunbar deceased. Viscont Fenton a Priuie Counsel∣lor.The 30 of Ianuary 1610. died the Earle of Dunbar, and the 18 of Aprill next following, viz. 1611 his funerall was very honorably per∣formed at Westminster. The 31 of Ianuary 1610 the Lord Viscont Fenton captaine of the Guard, was sworne a Priuy Counsellor. Sir Mar∣maduke Dorrell buildeth a Parrish Church.About this time sir Marmaduke Dorell knight then Master of the Kings houshold, but was af∣terward cofferer of the kings houshold, builde a very faire new Parish Church in the Town of Fulmer in Buckingham-shire neere Vxbridge,
this church was consecrated by Doctor Barlow Lord Bishop of Lincolne, and within fiue yeres after this time, most of the Churches within and about London with their steeples, were either newly enlarged or repaired, or beautified, as also about 3 yeares after, there were diuers Chap∣pels new builded and consecrat, as a Chappell builded by Baron Altham at Oxhey, & a Chap∣pell builded in the Strand by sir Iulius Caesar Knight Master of the Roles, as also diuers Church-yards ordained and consecrated, ye last whereof was that at White-chappel néere Mile-end-gréene, and at this time Bow-stéeple in Cheap-side was well repaired and the faire Dial set vp. The 11 of February 1610.Sir Henry Montegue made Ser∣geant. sir Henry Monte∣gue Knight recorder of London, was made Ser∣geant at Law, and presently after he was made the Kings Sergeant, & so remained Recorder of London vntill the 18 of Nouember 1610. and then was made L. Chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench,An. reg. 9. 1611 Viscon Rochester created. & the next day road to Westminster-hall with great state being very honorably accōpai∣ned & attended. Vpon our Lady-day, being thē Easter-day, the King created Sir Robert Car Knight, L. Viscont of Rochester, at White-hall. The 9 of Aprill 1611.Doctor Abbot L. Archbi∣shop of Canter∣bury. the most reuerend Fa∣ther in God, George Abbot Doctor of Deuini∣ty Lord Bishop of London, was transferred vn∣to the Archbishoprick of Canterbury, and vpon Sonday the 23 of Iune he was sworne a Priuy Counseller at Gréenewich.
Sir Tho∣mas Dale and sir Thomas Gates sent with sup∣plies to Virginia.About the middle of March last Sir Tho∣mas Dale Knight Marshall of Virginia was sent thither with thrée ships and three hundreth men, and all things necessary for the Colony, and also twelue Kine twenty Goates, besides Coneies, Pigeons and Pullen, and toward the end of May following, Sir Thomas Gates Knight, Lieutenant Generall of Virginia was sent with thrée ships and thrée Caruells, and two hundreth and fourescore men, and twenty women, and two hundreth kine, and as many swine, with other necessaries. And the next spring were sent thither more supplies, besides a particular supply for the English in the Ber∣modes. Sir Tho∣mas O∣uerbury.The 20 of Aprill 1611 Sir Thomas Ouer∣bury was committed to the Tower, and died there the 15 of September next following. Thursday the 9 of May this yeare 1611. the King in person came in the forenoone,The King in person commeth into the Star-chā∣ber to see the triall of his Pixe. and sur∣uaied Westminster-hal, the Court of Exchequer and all the Offices, the King being accompanied and attended, by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord Priuie Seale, the Lord Cham∣berlaine, with six other Earls & sir Iulius Caesar Knight Chancelor of the Exchequer, and went into the Star-chamber, being thither come of purpose to sée his Moneys of Gold and Siluer, and caused them to be taken out of the Pixe, which were then brought from the Tower to be tried, as well for their weight as finenesse, where Edmond Doublday Esquire, Warden of
the Mint, with the rest of the Officers of the Mint, with their seuerall keyes opened the Pix, and powred foorth the gold and siluer before his Maiestie to be tried and assaied by their seue∣rall standards,Procla∣mation against the trans∣portation of gold & siluer and the quoin aduanced. which was more then was done by any King this hundreth yeares, the King then also gaue them a Iury of sixtéene Gold∣smiths of the best skill, and note to make farther tryall and satisfaction, and presently after this his Maiestie made a strict Proclamation for pre∣seruation of his moneys within his dominions, which were most subtilly transported in great aboundance by Hollanders and others, so as his Maiesty in his wisdome and kingly care was constrained to aduance his quoines, and to make an encrease of the price and valuation read my large Booke. The 13 of May being Monday in Whitson weeke,The Duke of Yorke the Earle of Arun∣dell and the Vis∣cont Ro∣chester made knights of the Gar∣ter. at Windsor were enstalled knights of the Garter, Prince Charles Duke of Yorke, sonne to our soueraigne Lord the King, and Thomas Earle of Arundell, and Robert Viscont Rochester. The ninth of Iune Doctor Buckeredge was consecrated Lord Bishop of Rochester,Doctor Bucke∣ridge B. of Roche∣ster. did Doctor Melburne Bishop of Saint Dauies. The 23 of Iune arriued Prince Otto, sonne and heire to Mawrice,The yong Land∣graue of Hesson ar∣riueth in England. Langraue of Hesson of 17 yeares of age, being very Princely accom∣panied and attended, the king honoured two of his Attendants with knight-hood, this young Prince went vnto both the Vniuersities, and
saw diuers of the Kings pallaces, and returned the 3 of August. The 6 of Iune the King by Proclamation straightly commanded the oath of Alleageance to be ministred vnto all sorts of people,The oath of Allea∣geance ministred. and a true certificate to be made thereof vnto the great Lords of the Counsell. Proclama∣tiō against al encrease of buil∣dings with in Londō and the Suburbs and 20 miles ther∣of.The 8 of August the King by proclamation very straightly commanded, that there should be no more encrease of buildings within London and ye Suburbs, and twenty miles thereof, & to build in vniforme of bricke and stone, for the preseruation of timber, wherof there was plain appearance of extreame want, except by pro∣uidence preuented, as also that the sudden in∣creasing of people in London and Westminster was the decay and depopulating of many Townes and Hamlets in diuers shires, for the more spéedy and assured redresse whereof and other such like enormities, the King made an other proclamation the 10 of September fol∣lowing. Doctor King Lord Bishop of London.The 18 of September 1611 Doctor King Deane of Christ-church in Oxford, was conse∣crated Lord Bishop of London. France & Spaine match to∣gither.At this time was concluded a double match betwéene the yong French King and the King of Spaines daughter, and the Prince of Spaine and the French Kings sister· The Earle of Pem∣brooke a Priuie Counsel∣ler.Wensday the 29 of September, the Earle of Pembrooke was sworne a Priuie Counseller.
Edward Barkeham, George Smithes Shrieues.Shrieues. Sir Iames Pemberton Knight Gold-smith,Maior. Maior. Wensday the 18 of March 1611.Two He∣retiques burned. Barthel∣mew Legat an obstinate Arian Heretique was burned in Smithfield. And the eleuenth of Aprill following viz. 1612. Edward Wight∣man. an other peruerse Heretique, hauing refused more fauour then hee could either de∣sire or deserue, was burned at Lichfield, this Heretique would faine haue made the peo∣ple beléeue, that hee himselfe was the Holy Ghost and immortall, with sundry other most vile opinions, not fit to be mentioned amongst Christians. The 22 of Aprill the Viscont Rochester was sworne a Priuie Counseller.An. reg. 10 1612 Viscont Rochester a Priuie Counsel∣lor. The 29 of May 1612. Richard Newport and William Scot Seminaries, were executed at Tiburne.Two Se∣minaries executed. The 25 of Iune Robert Carliel & Iames Edwin were executed for murthering Iohn Turner a Fencer, and the 27 of Iune the Lord San∣quire was arraigned at the Kings Bench barre,The Lord Sanquire executed. for conspyring and hireing the said two persons to kill the said Turner, the Lord confessed the indictment, and was executed vpon a Gibet the 29 of Iune at Westminster. The 25 of Iune 1612. began a great Lottery in London,Lotteries in Londō. the greatest Lot or Prize was
a thousand pound in plate, and three yeares af∣ter that there was an other greater Lottery drawne at the same place viz. at the West end of Saint Paules Church. The 26 of Iune died Roger Earle of Rut∣land at Cambridge,Roger Earle of Rutland deceast. and was buried at Bottys∣ford, his brother Sir Francis Maners succeeded him in the Earledome. At this time the corps of Queene Mary late Queene of Scotland,The King buildeth a royall Toombe for his mother, & translateth her corps from Pe∣terborow to West∣minster. was translated from Pe∣terborough to Westminster, being thither at∣tended by the Lord Bishop the Couentry and Lichfield. And vpon Thursday of 8 of Octo∣ber, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Priuie Seale, the Earle of Worcester with other Noble men and Gentlemen, and the Lord Bishop of Rochester and the Deane of Westminster met the Corps at Clarkenwell about sixe a clocke in the Eue∣ning, and from thence with plenty of Torch∣lights, the body of the sayd Queen was brought into the Chappell Royall, at Westminster, and was there placed in a vaute, vpon the South∣side whereof the King had new made a Royall Toombe for her, where she now resteth. Great windes & shipwrack.In the monethes of October, Nouember and December there happened great windes, vio∣lent stormes and tempests, which caused much shipwracke vpon the Ocean, in hauens and ri∣uers, and did great damage vpon the Land, and the next spring there fell extroardinary raine euen vntill Saint Iames-tyde, and yet vpon
she humble and hearty praiers of the people in all Churches, it pleased Almighty God to send a more seasonable and plentifull haruest then in many yeares before. The last yeare in Sommer here arriued sir Robert Sherley knight an Englishman,An Am∣bassador from the King of Persia, to the King of Great Brittaine. from the King of Persia. And by him sent Ambassa∣dor to the King of Great Brittan, and was very honourably receiued and entertained, he retur∣ned in Ianuary this yeare 1612. The Kings Maiesty by his letters pattents, dated the seuenth of Iune,Hicks-hall builded. in the seuenth yeare of his raigne, did enfeoffe 15 knights and Esquires of the County of Middlesex, of a peece of ground, lying in Saint Iohns street in Mid∣dlesex, to be for euer imployed for a Sessions house, and for the keeping of a prison or house of correction for that county, vpon which peece of ground Sir Baptist Hicks knight, one of the Iustices of that county, at his owne proper charge builded a faire Session house of Bricke and Stone, and vpon Wensday the 13 of Ia∣nuary this yeare 1612. the house being then newly finished, there were assembled sixe and twenty Iustices of that countie, where the founder feasted them all, and when they had wel considered what name that house should beare, then with one consent they all agreed it should be called Hicks-hall, after the name of the Foun∣der, and then the Founder gaue it freely to them and their Successors for euer. Vntill this time the Iustices of Middlesex
held their County Court or méetings, in a rude common Inne called the Castle, néere Smith∣field-bars, anoyde with Carriers and many o∣ther sorts of people. Sir Bap∣tist Hicks his far∣ther boū∣tie.The said Sir Baptist Hicks hath also builded a very faire Hospitall of frée stone at Camden in Gloucester-shire for sixe poore men and six wo∣men, allowing them competent mainetenance for euer, he also repaired the Parrish Church and gaue them a Bell. Lent strictly kept.This yeare vpon sondry apparant reasons of present ensuing famine, the Fast of Lent was straightly commanded to bée strickly kept, and that all persons should vtterly abstaine from killing and eating of all manner of But∣chers flesh, which course tooke good effect as you read at large. Shrieues.Edw. Rotherham, Allexander Prescot, Shrieues. Maior.Sir Ioh. Swynarton knight Merchātaillor, Maior. Friday the 16 of October 1612. at 11 a clock at night, arriued at Graues-end the most illu∣strious young Prince Frederick the fifth of that name Count Palatine of the Reyne &c.The Pals∣graue a∣ueth in England. being very Princely accompanied and attended, he was receiued by Sir Lewis Lewkenor Knight, Master of the Ceremonies, whom the King had sent thither before to attend the comming of the Prince, vpon knowledge of his ariuall the King sent spéedily the Duke of Lenox with other Earles and Barons to signifie his hearty
welcome, and the next Sonday they accompa∣nied the Palsgraue by Barge from Graues-end to White-hall, where Prince Charles Duke of Yorke receiued and entertained him at his first landing, and brought him vp into the great Banqueting-house, where he was likewise entertained by the King Queene, Henry Prince of Wales, and the Lady Eliza∣beth. The 29 of October the Palsgraue dined at the Guild-hall, and was accompanied with the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Duke of Lenox, being the great Feast day of the Lord Maior, after dinner the Lord Maior in the be∣halfe of the City and himselfe, in signe of loue and hearty welcome, presented the Palsgraue with a Bason and Eure, and two faire Liue∣rie pots curiously wrought and richly gilded, and in euery of them was engrauen Ciuitas London. Friday the sixt of October died the most Noble and hopefull Prince Henry Prince of Wals,Henry Prince of Wales de∣ceased. hée was Royally buried in the Chap∣pell Royall at Westminster the seuenth of De∣cember. Spon Saint Thomas day the Palsgraue and Graue Mawrice were elected Knights of the Garter,The Pals∣graue and Graue Mawice made Knights of the Gar∣ter, and vpon Sonday the 7 of February the Palsgraue in person was enstalled at Windsor, and Graue Mawrice was enstalled by his Deputy and kinsman Count Lodowicke of Nassaw,
The Lady Elizabeth married vnto the Palsgraue.The 14 of February being Shroue Sunday the Lady Elizabeth was married vnto the Palsgraue: In honour whereof there were sundry warlike Tryumphs and Trophies vp∣on the Thames thrée daies before the daie of marriage, and vpon the wedding day there was Tilting and other Royall entertainements of Time, and that night there was a Maske of Lords and Ladies, and two nights after that there were two seuerall Maskes performed by the Gentlemen of the foure Innes of Court, all which were set out and adorned with more sundry propperties, speeches and ingenious deuices, then euer was any before in this King∣dome,A present from Lon∣don. and the Lord Maior and Aldermen of London in the behalfe of the citie and them∣selues, presented the Bride with a very faire chaine of Orientall pearle. Prince Charles bishopped. An. reg. 11 1613Vpon Easter day, the King the Palsgraue and the Lady Elizabeth receiued the Sacra∣ment in the Chappell of White-hall, and the next day Prince Charles was confirmed or Bishopped in the same Chappell, by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, in the presence of the King and Quéene, the Prince hauing beene formerly conferred withall by the Lord Arch∣bishoppe, and the Lord Bishop of Bathe and Wells, touching the principles of Religion, vnto whom hee manifested such princely vn∣derstanding and forwardnesse, and there with∣all vpon the sodaine gaue such ready answeres and reasons of his Faith, as draue them and all
the rest that heard him into great admiration, the Prince being then but twelue yeares of age the 19 of February last. Satterday the tenth of Aprill 1613.The Pals∣graue and the Lady Elizabeth set for∣ward for Heydel∣berg. the Palsgraue and the Lady Elizabeth set forward on their iourney for Heydelberge, being accom∣panied with the King and Quéene, and Prince Charles, and went by barge from White-hall to Gréenewich, and vpon Twesday they all in like manner went by Coach to Rochester, where the next morning the Palsgraue and the Lady Eli∣zabeth tooke their leaue of the King, Quéene and Prince, and then rode to Canterbury, and from thence to Margate, where the Lord Ad∣mirall of England with nine ships and pinaces attended their comming and receiued them and their traine, and with them there went to con∣duct them the Duke of Lenox, the Earle of Arundell, the Viscont Lisle, and the Lord Har∣rington, all these were imbarked the 23 of A∣prill, but through contrary windes it was the 25 of Aprill before they arriued at Flushing, and from thence passed through the vnited Pro∣uinces, and through the Dukedome of Cleaue∣land Gulych, and through the Bishopricks of Collen and Tayer, and through part of Hes∣sia, in all which places they were most kindly entertained, and presented with many prince∣ly presents, and being arriued at Heydelberge, they were likewise as ioyfully receiued and welcomed by the Princes Electors and others with great Tryumphs and royall entertaine∣ments.
The Palsgraue during his abode in England demeand himselfe so Nobly, that he won the hearts of the whole Nation, and at his departure hee exprest his Princely bounty in guifts and rewards. A Ianus borne, shipwrack, great flames & fiers.The 17 of Aprill 1613. at Alington in Lan∣cashie was borne a maiden child, hauing foure Legges, foure Armes, two Bellies ioynde to one backe, one head with two faces, the one before and the other behinde, and this yeare likewise was great Ship-wracke, by violent tempests, there happened also sundrie Inun∣dations, and strange accidents, and much dam∣mage done by fire in diuers places,The Globe burnt. and vpon Saint Peters day the Globe on the banckside was burned. The Milli∣tay exer∣cis of Armes in the Artil∣ly Gar∣den again pt in practise.The practise of Armes and Millitary disci∣pline in the Artillery Garden by the Citizens of London, formerly mentioned in the yeare 1586. being for the space of almost foure and twentie yeares quite neglected and in a manner forgotten, beganne this yeare 1613. to be practised in farre more excellent man∣ner then formerlie, and shortly after vp∣on the example of this warlike exercise of the Citizens of London, then the young Gentlemen of the Innes of Court and Mid∣dlesex and others, beganne the like practise of Armes, in a place called the Couent Gar∣den, and after that they made themselues a more conuenient place in a field betwéene Saint Iames, and Saint Gyles.
The 24 of October,Sir Peek∣sall Bro∣cas doth penance at Paules Crosse. sir Pecksall Brocas knight did penance at Paules Crosse, for standing con∣uicted before the high Commissioners for secret and notorious Adulteries. The 26 of October ariued Olexsey Euano∣wich Iszazen,Sir Iohn Merick sent Lord Ambassa∣dor to Russia. from the yong Emperour of Rus∣sia Michaell Euanowich Vryoue, hée returned the next spring, and then the King sent Sir Iohn Merricke Knight, Lord Ambassador to the sayd Emperour, who according to his Commission, with great paines and long tra∣uaile, made a firme Peace and League betwéene the King of Sweaden and the Emperour of Russia. Thomas Benet, Henry Iay, Shrieues.Shrieues. Sir Thomas Middleton Knight Grocer, Maior.Maior. The 4 of Nouember 1613.Viscont Rochester made Earl of Somer∣set. the Viscont Ro∣chester was created Earle of Somerset, and Baron of Branspeth, and the same day in the afternoone Sir Edward Cooke Knight,L. Cooke a Priuie Counsel∣lor. Lord chiefe Iustice of England was sworne a Priuie Counsellor. Sonday the 26 of Decembert Robert Earle of Somerset maried the Lady Francis Ho∣ward, daughter to Thomas Earle of Suffolke.Earle of Somerset maried. Sonday the 2 of Ianuary 1613.Prince Henry Frederick borne at Heydel∣berg. betweene the houres of twelue and one in the morning, was Prince Henry Fredericke borne at Heydel∣berge in Germanie, the first borne sonne of the most high borne Princesse the Lady
Elizabeth the eldest daughter of the most High and Mighty Prince Iames King of Great Brit∣taine, and wife to the most Noble Prince Fre∣dericke the first Count Palatine, chiefe of the Princes Electors,An. reg. 12 1614 he was christened the sixth of March. Sir Ralph Winwood made Se∣cretary, & Sir Tho∣mas Lake a Priuie Counsel∣lor.Thursday the 29 of March 1614. Sir Ralphe Winwood Knight, Master of the Requests was sworne principall Secretary of Estate, and Sir Thomas Lake Knight, Clerke of the Pri∣uie Signet was sworne a Priuie Counsel∣lor. The 15 of Iune died Henry Earle of North∣amton, and was buried in the chappell of Do∣uer castle,Henry Earle of Northam∣ton de∣ceast. he founded thrée Hospitalls, one whereof was at Gréenewich, which he ordained should be for euer gouerned by the company of Mercers of London. Christia∣nus King of Den∣marke, his second comming into Eng∣land.In the moneth of Iuly this yeare 1614. the King of Denmarke with thrée shippes arriued at Yarmouth, accompanied and attended by his Lord Chancellor, and Lord Admirall and diuers other of quallity and a competent Number of his Guard and others. Friday the 22 of Iuly hee came to the Quéenes Court at Somerset house in the Strand, the King of great Brittaine being then in Bedfordshire ryding progresse, where hauing spéedie knowledge of his brothers a ryuall set forward instantly for London, and vpon the next Sunday both the Kings, the Quéene and and Prince Charles met at Somerset house,
where the Bishop of London preached before them. And the first of August the King of Den∣marke being accompanied with King Iames and Prince Charles, went by Barge to Woolwich, and to Graues-end, where they dined, and after dinner went aboord the King of Denmarkes shippe, and there the King of Great Brittaine tooke leaue of his brother, and returned that night to Theobalds, Prince Charles accompa∣nied his Vncle the next day to Rochester, and and hauing viewed the Nauy Royall, they re∣turned to the King of Denmarkes Ship, and the next daie Prince Charles returned to Lon∣don, and the King with a faire winde set saile for Denmarke, hauing euery way exprest his Royall bounty as formerly. The thirtéenth of Iuly,The Earle of Suffolk Lord Treasurer The Earle of Somer∣set Lord Chamber∣laine. Thomas Earle of Suffolke was made Lord high Treasurer of England, and at this time Robert Earle of So∣merset was made Lord Chamberlaine. This Michellmas Tearme there was a call of Seargeants at Law, viz. the eleuenth of Nouember.A call of Sergeants. At this time was finished and builded the new faire Counsell Chamber for the Lord Maior and Aldermen of London,A new Counsell Chamber for the L. Maior of London. by reason the former Chamber was too little, Sir Thomas Middleton Knight being then Lord Maior. In September there was a generall muster of horse and foote throughout the Land,A general muster & trayning. and therewithall trayning of souldiers, but chiefly
in the City of London by the citizens themselues, many whereof by their former voluntary exercise of Armes and Millitary discipline, was now so ready and expert that they taught others. And whereas at this time there was by the Lord Maior and citizens, twenty select captaines chosen to traine and gouerne th trained bands of London, viz. sixe thousand there were found in the said former company viz. of the Artillerie garden, sufficient men  be their Lieutenants and all other officers  the apt and ready trayning of others, fr whom vpon good obseruation all the shires  England tooke example: the captaines and gentlemen of the Artillerie garden, demeand them∣selues so wel, exercising all points of warre▪ that it pleased Prince Charles to goe in person to the Artillery garden to sée their wéekely exercise of armes, and to goe into Hoxton field to sée their great muster and trayning of the sixe thousand citizens, which wéekely practise now vsed in the Artillery garden, they were determined to re∣mooue from thence, and to hold their vsual Marshall méetings and practise of armes in the great third field from Mooregate viz. next the sixe Windmills, which field, Master Leat with great paines hath béene diuers yeares a prepa∣ring to that purpose. The Thames cleered of Piles, Stops and Weyres.At this time the riuer of Thames was clée∣red of stops, pyles and weyres by the Water Bayly of London, as he was appointed by the Lord Maior and Court of Aldermen.
Master Hugh Middleton,Master Middletō bringeth a riuer to London. Citizen and Goldsmith of London, borne in Denbigh-shire hauing spent fiue yeares time with the aduise and direction of the best and most skillfull Ar∣tizens, imployed bestowed great summes of mo∣ney, forced to vse seuen hundred workemen at one time, and endured infinit Callumny and detraction, he brought a delicate Riuer of swéet water from two plentious springs, viz. the one whereof is called Chawldwell néere Ware, and the other Amwell in Herefordshire, which two springs being vnited, runne ioyntly togi∣ther to the North-side of London, which Ri∣uer with the Trenches to conuay it, and the great Cesterne to receiue it with great difficul∣tie was brought vnto desired effect in Som∣mer, 1613. but the Currant was restrained from running into the Ceasterne vntill Mi∣chaelmas day in the yeare 1613. And that day there came to behold it the Lord Maior if London, and Sir Thomas Middle∣ton Knight, Lord Maior Elect for the yeare en∣suing, brother to this Maior Hugh Mid∣dleton Master of this memorable worke, with many Aldermen, and a great number of graue Citizens and others, who were entertai∣ned with excellent Musique, and the royall sound of drums and trumpets, & with spéeches and other pleasant entertainements, and at the lifting vp of the Scluce to let the Riuer runne into the Ceasterne there was a peale of Cham∣bers, since which time with all possible
expedition this water is conuaied from this Ceasterne by pipes of Elme into all high stré and chiefe lanes of the city and the suburbe thereof, the generall and particular benefit their of is vnualuable. Shrieues.Peter Proby, Martin Lumley. Shrieues. Maior.Sir Thomas Hayes Knight Draper, Maior. Two Hos∣pitalls founded.At this time was founded the Great Hospitall at the Charter-house néere London, for fourescore men, and forty children, and the new built Hospitall at Dulwich in Surrey, read my large booke. Great frosts, snow, and great flouds.The 17 of Ianuary 1614. it began to fréeze in ordinary manner, and the 23 of Ianuary it beganne to snow, and continued fréezing, and snowing many daies, and vpon Sonday the twelfth of February it beganne to snow most extreamely, and continued vntill the foure∣teenth of Februarie at noone, and then it aba∣ted, and from that time, for many daies after it continued fréezing and snowing much or little, vntill the sixth or seuenth of March, by meanes whereof much cattell perished as Calues and Lambes, Déere and Coneys &c. by reason the earth lay long couered with déepe snow, to the great hurt of all manner of cattell, and many were forced to vse new deuices to fadder, this snow brought extreame daunger to all Trauaillers, after this snow thawed there followed Inundations, great and violent which
did great spoiles and dammages as you may read in my large booke. Tuesday the seuenth of March 1614.The King is enter∣tained at Cam∣bridge. the King was royally receiued into Cambridge, where he staied vntill Satterday following, in which space the Vniuersitie entertained his Maiestie with learned disputations in Diuini∣tie, Philosophy, &c. and with Comodies in Lat∣tin and English, with great feasting of the King his Nobility and traine, the King in most gra∣tious manner came to them againe in May next following, what is more to be said touch∣ing his Maiesties being at Cambridge, I could neuer learne, notwithstanding my letters and mediation to the Vice Chancellor, therefore I cannot promise any more in my large booke. The 25 of March 1615.An. reg. 13 1815 Procla∣mation a∣gainst transpor∣tation of children, & of gold and siluer. proclamation was made to restraine the sending of children ouer beyond the seas, to make them Roman Priests, Iesuits or Seminaries, and there was an other Proclamation made to stay and pre∣uent all further transportation of gold or sil∣uer out of this land, vpon seuerall penalties, as well to the Counsellor as Transporters. Sonday the 23 of Aprill 1615.Sir George Villers Knighted. George Vil∣lers Esquire, was sworne gentleman of the Kings Bed-chamber, and the next day he was Knighted. The 24 of Aprill there were 18 Iesuits and Seminaries taken out of Newgate,Iesuits & Semina∣ries sent to Wis∣bidge. and sixe out of the Gatehouse at Westminster, and were all 24 sent to Wishydge.
Two Knights of the Gar∣ter.The 23 of May were enstalled Knights of the Garter, the Lord Viscont Fenton captaine of the Gard, and the Lord Knowles Master of the Court of Wards. The Lord Hay made a Baron.The 29 of Iune, Iames Lord Hay, was crea∣ted Baron of Sawley in Yorkeshire. The next day being Friday, Sir Robe Dormer Knight and Baronet,Sir Robert Dor∣mer made Baron. was created Ba∣ron Dormer of Wing. The 19 of Iuly Doctor Milburne Deane of Rochester,Doctor Milburne Bishop. was consecrated Bishop of Saint Dauies. Procla∣mation a∣gainst en∣crease of building about London.At this time proclamation was made againe, not onely to stay, all further encrease of buil∣dings, which were daylie erected in and about London, contrary to sundrie former Edicts, and thereupon this Proclamation rattified and confirmed all the former Procla∣mations, and streightly charged all Commis∣sioners in that behalfe, to looke and search in∣to the depth of all such offenders, and offen∣ces, and to punnish them accordingly. This Proclamation was dated the 16 of Iuly 1615. And yet for all this, there was wonderous new encrease of buildings round about London, chiefly on the North-side of the Couen-garden vpon a field called Long Acar neere Saint Giles in the field &c. Bishop of Winche∣ster a Pri∣uie Coun∣sellor.The 3 of August, Doctor Bilson Bishop of Winchester was sworne a Priuie Counsel∣lour. This yeare 1615. was builded a House of
Correction for the County of Middlesex nere Clearken-well in a large garden plot,A house of correc∣tion buil∣ded for the Coun∣tie of Middle∣sex. pur∣chased by the Iustices of that countie for that purpose the purchase and building whereof cost aboue fiue and twentie hundreth pounds, part of which money was the free guift of the Iustices of the county, and the rest was leuied by the Inhabitants. The Citie of London at the request of the Counsell, gaue fiue hundreth pounds in rea∣die money to make a stocke for the said house of correction, but it was imployed in the build∣ing and furnishing of that house. And then the Iustices ordained two Go∣uernours and a Matrone, to order and go∣uerne the Vagrants committed to that house, and they to haue a Sallarie of two hundreth pound a yeare allowed them for their paines, In regarde of which Sallarie, they doe receiue the Vagrants, and keepe them at worke with∣out farther charge to the countie, vntill they be discharged thence by order of the Iustices of peace. This Sommer also was the West Smith∣fielde of London paued all ouer,Smith∣field pa∣ued all ouer. and strong∣lie Rayled in on all sides, and likewise the new raised mount or middle of the Field was strongly Railed abount for the better saffetie of passengers, and securetie of all that should walke therein from the danger of Coa∣thes, Carts, Horses, Oxen and all other Cat∣tell, of all which that field is seldome emptie,
and the last yeare the new Pallace yard before Westminster-hall was likewise paued, the pauing of these two places, was formeth held as strange and difficult to bée so fully performed, as well for that it was generally supposed there could not bée sufficient quanti of stones found to repaire the daylie decay  London stréetes, and to paue new them stréetes, as it was of late yeares to sée most of the high stréetes of London to bee paued all along by their shops sides with broad frée stone, which manner of smooth pauement beganne first by the Gold-smithes and Mercers toward the East end of Cheape-side about fiue yeares past, and since by degrées many other stréetes did the like, though very slowly, but the Statio∣ners in Paules Church-yard in the yeare 1616 bordered their side in vniforme order all in one Sommer. The high-cawses in London taken downe & made le∣uell.And about eight yeares past the sondry high Cawses which lay in the middest of diuers his stréetes, and great thorough-faires were taken downe, and the stréetes made sweeter fairer, and more passable, as the Strand, where the first reformation beganne, in Holborne, in long Southwarke, the great high-way by the Mi∣nors to Algate, from Algate to White-chappell, which was the last Cawsey that was taken downe: there was an other great cawsey from Bishops-gate to Shoredich-church, there were diuers others as in Saint Iohns-stréete, Barbi∣can, Red-crosse-stréete, White-crosse-stréete,
and in other places, the which are all remooued and new paued, and no signe remaines of any of the former offences or anoyance to passen∣gers or inhabitants, which remooue of those sun∣dry broad long & high cawses were euer former∣ly held impossible to be remooued, and the stréets to be made so swéet and passable as now they are. The 27 of September 1615.The Lady Arbella deceast. died the La∣die Arbella in the Tower, she was buried in the Chappell Royall at Westminster. William Gore, Iohn Gore. Shrieues. They were brehren borne in London,Shrieues. and both free of the Company of Merchantayl∣lers. Sir Iohn Iolles Knight Draper Maior.Maior. He builded a Frée-schoole, and eight faire sliues houses at Stratford-bow for eight poore families, towards the maintenance of all which he gaue fifty thrée pounds thirtéene shillings and foure pence a yeare for euer. And during the time of his Mayralty,Sir Iohn Iolles his bounty. he dil∣ligently administred Iustice, and very bounte∣ous and chéerefull, he with certaine Aldermen, names follow, visited and suruaied the bounds and limits of the Riuer of Thames, and held Courts and Iuries in sundry places, in this progresse, he was as honourable accompanied and attended, as was befitting so honourable a Maistrate of so famous a Citie as London,
the like visitation had not beene in about four∣score yeares before. Monday the 23 of October 1615. Richard Weston yeoman,Weston executed. was indicted and condemned in the Guild-hall of London for poysoning  Thomas Ouerbury Knight, and was executed at Tiburne the next Wensday. Thursday the ninth of Nouember 1615 Anne Turner widow,Mistresse Turner executed. was indicted and con∣demned at Westminster, for being accessarie be∣fore the murther of Sir Thomas Ouerbury, she was executed at Tiburne the twelfth of No∣uember. The Lieu∣tenant of the Tower executed.Thursday the 16 of Nouember 1615. Sir Ieruas Elwese Knight Lieutenant of the To∣wer, was indicted and condemned in the Guild∣hall, for being accessarie before the murther of Sir Thomas Ouerbury, and was executed vpon the Tower hill the 20 of Nouember. Franck∣line exe∣cuted.Monday the 27 of Nouember 1615. Iames Franklin Gentleman, was indicted and con∣demned at Westminster, for being accessarie al∣so before the murther of the sayd Sir Thomas Ouerbury, and was executed at Saint Tho∣mas Awaterings vpon Satterday the ninth of December. The next yeare viz. the 24 of May, Frances Countesse of Somerset was brought to West∣minster-hall, and the next day Robert Earle of Somerset was brought thither likewise, and had their seuerall tryalls by their Péeres, touch∣ing the businesse lastly mentioned, and from
thence they returned backe againe to the Tower. The seuenteenth of Nouember 1615.The se∣cond Lot∣tery. began she drawing of the second great Lottery for Virginia. At the end of this yeare 1615.Captaine Beniamin Ioseph goeth to the East Indies. the East In∣dia Merchants sent out sixe braue ships to the East Indies, vnder command of Beniamine Ioseph, an excellent Nauigator. The third of December 1515.D. Abbot B. of Sal∣lisbury. Robert Ab∣bot Doctor of Diuinity, and brother to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, was conse∣crated Lord Bishop of Sallisbury. The thrée and twentith of December,The Earle of Pemb. made L. Chamber∣laine. the Earle of Pembrooke was made Lord Chamber∣laine. The third of Ianuarie,The Earle of Worce∣ster L. Pri∣uy Seale. the Earle of Wor∣cester was made Lord Priuie Seale. Thursday the fourth of Ianuary,Sir Georg Villers Maister of the horse. Sir George Villers was made Master of the Horse. The third of Aprill 1616.Sir Iohn Digby made a Prime Counsel∣lor. Sir Iohn Digby Knight, was sworne a Priuie Counsellour, and was made Vice-Chamberlaine to the King. At this time Master William Iones Mer∣chant,1616 An reg. 14 Master William Iones his Bounty. and frée of the Company of Haberda∣shers of London, gaue nine thousand pounds to build twenty Almes houses at Monmouth in Wales, for twenty poore men and women with competente, maintinence for them for euer.
He builded there also a faire Frée schoole, the Master thereof to haue a hundreth Marke yere∣ly for euer, and the Vsher a hundreth Nobles yearely for euer. And at Newland he haue likewise fiue thou∣sand pounds for the maintenance of a Prea∣cher, and for the reliefe of the poore and others for euer. In London hee gaue sixtéene hundreth pounds, to allow a learned Preacher a hund∣reth pounds a yeare for euer. He gaue also fouretéene hundreth and forty pounds to purchase a yearely reliefe for euer of nine poore men of the Company of Haber∣dashers. He haue to the foure Hospitalls of London fiue hundreth pounds. He gaue a thousand pounds to be giuen to poore Preachers throughout the Land for a present guift. All these his guifts and bounty, he ordained should be for euer at the dispose of the Compa∣ny of Haberdashers, the full summe of money to the aforesaid vses is eightéene thousand pounds fiue hundreth and forty, besides his bounty in Hambro and Stode, &c. Sea-coale and Pit-coale make glasse and melt Met∣tels. At this time was brought to perfection the making of all manner of Glasse, viz. Venice Glasse, and all other sorts of Glasses, by the burning onely of Sea-coale, and also the mel∣ting of Iron and all other Mettles onely with Sea-coale, and also the burning of Brick with
Sea-coale, whereof I will say more in my large Booke. The ninth of Iune 1616.Sir Fran∣ces Bacon a Priuie Counsel∣lor. Sir Francis Ba∣con Knight, was sworne a Priuie Counsel∣lour. Thursday the twentith of Iune, the King in person being accompanied with Prince Charles and the great Lords of the Counsell,The King maketh an oration in the Star∣chamber. went into the Starre-chamber, and there made an excel∣lent Oration vnto the Iudges and others. Monday the first of Iuly 1616.A Semi∣nary hanged and a wo∣man bur∣ned. one Max∣field a Seminary was executed at Ti∣burne, and the same fore-noone a woman was burned in Smithfield for killing her hus∣band. Wensday the third of Iuly Sir Iohn Iolles Knight,The Lord Maior in person surueieth the boūds of the Ri∣uer of Thames and re∣formeth, all maner of anoy∣ances. Lord Maior of London accompanied with Alderman Prescot, Alderman Iones, Al∣derman Rotherham, Alderman Lumley, Master William Gore one of the Shréeues of London, Master Iones common Sergeant, Master Smart Sword bearer, Master Sparrey Water Bayliffe, with diuers other chiefe officers and gentlemen, went to Suruay the bounds, and limits of the Riuer of Thames Eastward, and to cleanse the Riuer of annoyances, and to re∣forme the abuse of vnlawfull fishing and spoile of Fry &c. And to that purpose kept Court at Graues-end, and gaue a Iurie to make dilli∣gent enquiry of all abuses and annoyances, from thence he & his whole traine rode to Ro∣chester, where the Maior and Aldermen of that
City entertained him and all his traine verie kindely, and the next morning those three Bar∣ges that brought them to Graues-end, being come about, carried his Lordship and the rest from Rochester,Master Rock. to Lée, and Master Rocke, The Maior of Rochester in his owne Barge con∣ducted the Lord Maior as farre as his liberties extended, and passing by the Kings Castles and Nauy Royall, they were saluted with many volleis of great shot. And being come to Lée, the Lord Maior that after-noone held a Court and gaue a Iury for Essex as he had done before in Kent, and the next day returned to London, hauing demeand himselfe very Nobly and performed all things very honourably, and giuen very kinde enter∣tainement to such Gentlemen of the seuerall Counties, as came either to see him or obserue the carriage of the businesse, because the like vi∣sitation to this purpose had not beene in the memorie of the oldest man then liuing. And the 16 of Iuly the Lord Maior with eight Aldermen kept like Courts at Putney for Surrey, and at Fullham for Middlesex, and the sixteenth of September, the Iury for Middlesex made their presentments before the Lord Maior in Westminster-hall. And the 18 of September, the Iury of Kent made their presentments before the Lord Maior at Detford in the fore-noone, & the Iury of Essex gaue in their Presentments vnto the L. Maior at Barking in the after-noone. And the 25 of
September, the Lord Maior kept Court againe in Westminster-hall in the forenoone, and in Southwarke in the after-noone, to take Pre∣sentments and giue order for reformation. Sonday the 7 of Iuly Doctor Thomas Mor∣ton, Deane of Winchester,Doctor Morton Bishop of Chester. was consecrated Bi∣shop of Chester. The same day were enstalled Knights of the Garter at Windsor, Francis Earle of Rutland,Knights of the Garter made. Sir George Villers Knight Master of the horse, and the Lord Viscont Lisle. At White-hall the ninth of Iuly 1616.Two ba∣rons crea∣ted. were created Barons, viz. Sir Iohn Hollis Knight was created Baron of Hawghton, and Sir Iohn Roper Knght was created Baron Tynch∣ham of Tyncham in Kent. Tuesday the 16 of Iuly 1616. the Earle of Arondell was sworne a Priuie Counsellor.The Earle of Aron∣dell sworn a Priuie Counsel∣lor. The 20 of Iuly the Lord Carew was sworne a Priuie Counsellor.The Lord Carew a Priuie Counsel∣lor. At Woodstocke vpon Tuesday the 27 of Au∣gust 1616. Sir George Villers Knight of the Garter and Master of the Horse, was created Viscont Villers, and Baron of Whaddon.Viscont Villers created. By vertue of a speciall Commission from his Maiesty, and from the Citie of London, bearing date the fifteenth of May this yeare 1616. Peter Proby Alderman of London,The Citie of Londō sendeth Alderman Proby into Ireland to reforme abuses, & to ratifie good lawes and constituti∣ons in the Prouince of Vlster viz. Lon∣dons plan∣tation. and Gouernour for the new plantation of the Prouince of Vl∣ster in Ireland, accompanied with Master Ma∣thias Springham Merchantailor, and Master Clement Mosse Solyciter for London with
others, did there establish such Lawes and con∣stitutions for the City of London Derie, and the Borough of Colerame, as should thence∣forth be obserued and kept, according to the Te∣nor of the Kings Charter granted to the City of London in that behalfe. The sayd Alderman Proby by vertue of the Kings Commission, did there also Minister oath vnto all officers and o∣thers, for the well gouernment and making of true accompts. He caried ouer thither with him two rich swords, the one whereof he deliuered to Sir Iohn Vawghan Knight Maior of Lon∣on Dery, and the other to Trystram Beryfford Esquire, Maior of Coleraine for that time be∣ing, and to be borne before them and their suc∣cessors for euer. There was also sent vnto the Maior of London Dery, a great gilded Man being sent him from the Gouernors and Assi∣stants for that plantation. Alderman Proby with his company went from London the eight and twenty of May last, and returned to London the 28 of August 1616. what is more to be said touching this businesse, I must referre you to my larger booke. The Bi∣shop of Flie a Pri∣uy Coun∣sellor.Sonday being Michaelmas day, Doctor An∣drowes Bishop of Ely was sworne a Priuy Counsellor at Hampton Court. The fourth of October Doctor Mountague was translated from Bathe and Wells to Win∣chester, and forthwith he expelled all Inmates out of Winchester house on the Banke-side, re∣duced diuers parts thereof from fowle noysom∣nesse
vnto swéetnesse and comlinesse, he repay∣red the whole house throughout, and builded some part new, and enclosed a great part of the wharfe, and made a new faire paire of staires into the Thames, he spent almost thrée thou∣sand pound in the repaire and beautifying this ancient house, which for a long time had béene suffred to run to ruin. Allan Cotton, Cutbert Hacket, Shrieues.Shrieues. Sir Iohn Leman Knight Fishmonger a batcheler Maior.Maior. In his Maioralty the old ruinous Gate called Aldersgate was quite taken downe,Alders∣gate new builded. and fairely new builded from the foundation. The riuer of Thames cleared of shelues in all parts, and the Hauen of Quéene Hyth cleansed, and like∣wise the making of the great wharse on the South-side of the riuer by the Willowes, and also the new strict order for the passage of Cars and Carts in the stréets, for the preseruation of all passengers. Thursday the last of October 1616. viz.Prince Charles created Prince of Wales. Al∣hollond Eue, Prince Charls came in great state by Barge from Barne Elmes to White-hall, accompanied & attended by diuers great Lords, and others of honorable rancke and quallity be∣sides his owne traine, and was most ioyful∣ly met at Chelsey by the Lord Maior, Alder∣men and Citizens of London, each Company in a seuerall Barge, and distinguished by their seuerall Armes in their rich Banners
and stately Streamers, besides the Royal sound of Drum and Trumpet, and great variety of excellent Musique, besides all which and the infinit number of people vpon the shore and in Boates and Barges to behold this ioyfull daie, there was also at the Cities charge in honour of his Highnesse creation more particular plea∣sant Trophies and Ingenious deuices met him vpon the water then euer was at any former creation of any Prince of Wales. And vpon Monday the fourth of Nouem∣ber, at White-hall, where the Kings Maiesty inuested & crowned Prince Charles Prince of Wales,The Earle of Aron∣dell was then Earle Marshall. at this solemne creation were present most of the Nobility of the Land. The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury and diuers other Bishops and reuerend Prelas, all the Iudges of the Law, sir Edward Cooke onely excepted; there were present also the Lord Maior and Aldermen of London, in their scarlet Robes as were the Iudges. 26 Knights of the Bath made.In honour of this ioyfull creation, there were made fiue and twenty Knights of the Bath, who performed all their Ceremonies in the vpper Parliament house, and the next Son∣day withall Magnifisence being lustily moun∣ted, they rode to White-hall, and were there Knighted by his Maiesty. Knights of the Bath.Iames Lord Maltreuers. Algernon Lord Percy. Iames Lord Wryothesley.
Edward Lord Clynton. Edward Lord Beauchamp. Lord Barkley. Lord Mordant. Sir Alexander Erskin. Sir Henry Howard. Sir Edward Sackuill. Sir William Howard. Sir Edward Howard. Sir Montague Barty. Sir William Stourton. Sir Henry Parker. Sir Dudley North. Sir Spencer Compton. Sir William Spencer. Sir William Seymor. Sir Rowland Saint Iohn. Sir Iohn Candish. Sir Thomas Neuill. Sir Iohn Roper. Sir Iohn North. Sir Henry Carey. In honour of this ioyfull creation, there were solemne Tryumphs performed at Low∣don in the County of Salop, the fourth of No∣uember, and published by Master Daniell Powel Gentleman. Also in honour of this creation, there were forty young gentlemen selected out of the foure Iunes of Court who fought at Barriers, viz. the one halfe against the other.
Barons created.Thursday the seuenth of Nouember Thomas Elsmer Lord Chancellor of England was crea∣ted Viscont Brackley. And William Lord Knowles was created Viscont Wallingford, and Sir Philip Stanhope Knight, was created Baron of Shelford, and vpon the next Satter∣day the Lord Maior feasted the Knights of the Bath. The Lord Chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench put from his place.Satterday the 16 of Nouember 1616. Sir Edward Cooke Knight was discharged from his Office, viz. from being Lord Chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench. Monday the 18 of Nouember Sir Henry Montague Knight, the Kings Sergeant at Law was sworne Lord chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench.Sir Henry Montague Lord chief Iustice of the Kings Bench. This Sommer, and haruest was so dry, that passengers were anoyde with dust in the high∣waies the 20 of Nouember.A dry Sommer. Sonday the 8 of December 1616. Arthur Lake Doctor of Diuinity was consecrated Bi∣shop of Bathe and Wells.Two Bi∣shops con∣secrated. Lewis Bayly Doctor of Diuinity, was con∣secrated Bishop of Bangor. The Arch∣bishop of Spalato ariueth in England.Monday the 16 of December 1616. Marcus Anthonius de Domynis, Archbishop of Spalato in the Territory of Venice, was very honorably entertained and receiued at Lambeth by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury with whom he remained, and writ a briefe declaration of his Reasons for leauing that Prelacy, and forsaking his Natiue Country, which Booke
was presently published in eight Languages, and disperst through Europe: and in Sommer following he printed in London the first foure of his ten bookes, intituled of the Common∣weale of the Church. Monday the two and twentith of December,Sir Tho∣mas Ed∣monds a Priuie Counsel∣lor. Sir Thomas Edmonds Knight, Ambassador Le∣ger in France was sworne a Priuie Counsellor, and made Comptroller of the Kings houshold, and the Lord Wotton was made Treasurer of the Kings houshold. Sonday the fifth of Ianuary the Lord Vis∣cont Villers was created Earle of Buckingham at White-hall.Earle of Bucking∣ham crea∣ted. Twesday the fourth of February 1616.Earle of Bucking∣ham a Pri∣uy Coun∣sellor. the Earle of Buckingham, was sworne a Priuie Counsellor. Twesday the 13 of February, the King in person sate in the Star-chamber,The King sitteth in the Star-chamber. and made an excellent Oration to the Lords, and to the Iudges, vnto whom hee gaue a charge and di∣rection how they should proceed in the Cir∣cuits. Shroue Twesday the 4 of March,Disorde∣red youths many dis∣ordred persons of sondry kindes, amongst whom were very many young boyes and laddes that assembled themselues in Lincolnes Inne field, Finsbury field, in Ratliffe and Step∣ney field, where in ryotous manner they did beate downe the walls and windowes of ma∣ny victualling houses, and of all other houses, which they suspected to bee bawdie houses,
And that after-noone they spoyl'd a new Play∣house and did likewise more hurt in diuers o∣ther places, in pulling downe walles and win∣dowes, and spoyling of house-hold-stuffe, and were so headstrong, that they dispightfully vsed and resisted the Shrieffes of London and the Constables and Iustices of Middlesex. Where∣upon the Lords of the Counsell by the Kings appointment, ordained diuers of the Chiefe Iustices of Middlesex to be Prouost Marshals, and to execute Marshall Law if the like occati∣on should happen. Shroue-twesday the fourth of March this yeare 1616. the Queene feasted the King at her Palace in the Strand,Denmark house. formerly called Somer∣set-house, and then the King commanded it should no more be so called, but that it should from henceforth be called Denmarke-house, which said Denmarke-house the Queene had many waies repaired, beautified, new builded and enlarged, and brought to it a pipe of con∣duit water from Hyde-parke. Sir Fran∣cis Bacon Lord Chancel∣lor.The seuenth of March, the Great Seale of England was deliuered to Sir Francis Bacon Knight the Kings Atturney, and was then made Lord Kéeper, and the next day toward Euening died the Lord Elismer late Lord Chancellor, and the fourth of Ianuary following, Sir Francis Bacon Lord Keeper was made Lord Chaun∣celor. Sir Henry Yeluerton the Kings Atturney.When Sir Francis Bacon was made Lord Kéeper, then was sir Henry Yeluerton Knight
the Kings Soliciter made the Kings Atturney, and Master Thomas Couentry Esquire Recor∣der of London was made the Kings Soliciter, and was Knighted the 16 of March. Friday the fouretéenth of March 1616.The King rydeth in∣to Scot∣land. the King being accompanied with the Queene and Prince Charles, and many of the Chiefe Nobi∣lity and others, went from White-hall to Theo∣balds, and from thence the King with his ap∣pointed traine set forward toward Edenbo∣rough, the next Monday being Saint Patricks day. And vpon his Maiesties returne to London,The King returneth from Scotland. viz. the 15 of September next following, the King came from Windsor to London, and was met at Hyde-parke by the Lord Maior and Al∣dermen, and aboue foure hundreth of the chiefe Citizens with chaines of gold, and well moun∣ted, the Lord Maior presented the King with a purse, and in it fiue hundreth péeces of gold cal∣led the Vnity, and there the King Knighted sir Anthony Ben Recorder of London. The 20 of March 1616.The Lord Hay a Pri∣uy Coun∣sellor. the Lord Hay was sworne a Priuie Counsellor at Hynching-brooke. Sonday the 23 of March 1616.Lord No∣ell crea∣ted. at Burley on the hill in Rutland-shire, sir Edward Noell Knight and Baronet, was created Lord Noell of Rydlington. At this time neere Wapping,A new Chappell of ease builded. in the Parish of White-chappell, was new builded a very faire large Chappell and a Church-yard to it,
which were consecrated the 7 of Iuly 1617. by the Lord Bishop of London. Vpon Michaelmas day Doctor Montague Lord Bishop of Winchester was sworne a Pri∣uie Counsellor at Hampton Court,The Bi∣shop of Winche∣ster a Pri∣uie Coun∣sellor. and that day at that place Sir Iohn Villers maried Fran∣ces the daughter of Sir Edward Cooke Knight. Shrieues.William Hallyday, Robert Iohnson, Shrieues. Maior.Sir George Bolles Knight Grocer, Maior. Ambassa∣dors from Russia.Twesday the fourth of Nouember, here ari∣ued Stephen Euanowich Lieutenant of Rasco, and Marke Euanozin Posdieof, of one of the thrée Chancellors of Russia, from the late mentioned Michaell Pheodorowich Emperour of Russia, they had audience the next Sonday, and vpon Now yeares day the King feasted them and their chiefe followers and attendants at White∣hall, being fifty in number, their whole Traine was 75. The L. Hay ma∣ried.Thursday the 6 of Nouember, the Lord Hay married the Lady Luce, daughter to the Earle of Northumberland. The L. Archbi∣shop of Spalato preacheth in Lon∣don.Sonday the last of Nouember 1617. the Lord Archbishop of Spalato, preached at the Mar∣cers Chappell in the Italian tongue, there were present the L. Archbishop of Canterbury, the L. Chancellor, the Earles of Arondell & Pembroke Lord Zowch, the Lord Compton, and many others of great note, he preached there againe
vpon Sonday the ninetéenth of Aprill 1618. Sonday the foureteenth of December, at beth were two Bishops consecrated, viz.Two Bi∣shops Consecra∣ted.  Felton Master of Pembroke-hall was consecrated Lord Bishop or Bristow, and Doc∣tor Montaigne Deane of Westminster, was consecrated Lord Bishop of Lincolne, at this Consecration were present and assistant at the imposition of hands with the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Archbishop of Spala∣to, the Bishops of London, Ely Rochester and Lichfield. Monday the foure and twenty of December 1617.The se∣cond son of the La∣dy Eliza∣beth born at Heydel∣berg. was borne Charles Lodowick at Hey∣delberg about foure a clocke in the morning, and was christened in March following, Prince Charles was out of his Godfathers. At this time the Appothecaries of London obtained a corporation for themselues and their successors for euer,The Ap∣potheca∣ries London made a particular Company. and by Letters pattented were made a Body Pollitique and Corporate, and that all such as vse and professe the Apt, and Mistery of Appothecaries within London and the Suburbs thereof, and within seuen miles compasse thereof, shall be ordred and go∣uerned by the Master, Wardens and socitie of the Art and Misterie of the Appothecaries, Ed∣mond Philips was the Master, Stephen Hyg∣gines, and Thomas Fanes were the first War∣dens. New yeares day being Thursday 1617.
George Earle of Buckingham was created Marquesse of Buckingham at White-hall.Marques of Buck∣ingham created. Thursday the eight of Ianuary 1617. Sir Robert Manton Knight was sworne the Kings Secretary.Sir Robert Manton Secretary. This yeares fleet to the East Indies.At the end of February this yeare 1617. the Company of the East India Merchants sent nine braue goodly ships well appointed to the East Iudies. And Sir Thomas Dale Knight went Generall, this was the first fléet of the se∣cond ioynt stock. At the beginning of this month of Aprill 1618.An. reg. 16 1618 the Lord De la Ware with about eight score persons, viz. men & women, went ye second time to Virginea to make good the plantation the Lord De la Ware at his first being in Virgi∣nia through extreamity of sicknesse was con∣strained to returne for England about sixe yeares past,The Lord De La Warre his second going to Virginia. and could not recouer his perfect health vntill the last yeare, in which he buil∣ded a very faire shippe, and went now in it him∣selfe,Captaine Spilman. and after him went Captaine Henry Spil∣man with thirty persons, this Captaine Spil∣man had béene formerly tenne yeares in Virgi∣nia, knew most of the Kings of that Country, and spake their Languages very vnderstan∣dingly. The Pal∣lace of Pa∣ris burnedThe seuenth of March this yeare 1617. about one a clocke at midnight, there was séene in the ayre ouer the Pallas of Paris in France, a flame of fire (as it were a Starre of a Cubit
long, and a foot broad, which fired the Palas, and with extreame terror and violence burnt it downe, and therewithall burned the ancient Records of France, and the Pictures and Statuaes of the Kings of France, this fire not∣withstanding the redinesse of water, and twenty thousands of willing persons endeauoring to quench it, yet it continued about twenty houres, in which space it also burned a prison, with great dammage to other houses and Tradesmen, great Pillers and Arches of stone burned with great flames as if they had béene made of Timber and commixt with Brimston,Chagford in Deuon∣shire. and the first wéeke of this moneth of March, happened in the Towne of Chagford in De∣uonshire, at a Court of Stanery, a wall fell downe and after that part of the house, and fiue Master Nicholas Eueligh then Steward of that Court, and two of his seruants. And Master Richard Cottell of the Middle Temple Esquire,Sol and Mars were in coninu∣ction at that time. and seuen other) there were also about thirty persons sore hurt, within few daies of these two accidents aboue said, the Towne∣house of Delph in Holland by negligence was set a fire and quite burned downe. Martine Fotherby Doctor of Diuinity,Doctor Fotherby Bishop of Salisbury. and Chaplaine to the Kings Maiesty, one of the Canons of Christ-church in Canterbury, borne at Grimsby in Lincolneshire, he was Kins∣man, Pupile and Chaplaine to the good Arch∣bishop White-gift, and was Consecrated Bi∣shop
of Salisburie vpon Sonday the nine∣téenth of Aprill 1618. by the most Reuerend Father in God Doctor Abbot, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Sir Dud∣ley Digs sent Am∣bassador to the Em∣peror of Russia.This moneth of May, 1618. the fore∣named Russia Ambassadour with his Traine returned, and Sir Dudley Digges Knight was sent Ambassador to the Emperour of Russia from his Maiesty. William Parker Citizen and Merchantail∣lor of London,The vp∣per part of Paules new glas∣sed and re∣paired. died about two yeares past, and amongst other things which hee gaue to Pius and Publique vses, he gaue a thousand pound towards the new building of Aldersgate, which was imployed therein according to the Tenor of his Will, he gaue also fiue hundreth pounds towards the new glasing of the decayed windowes in the vpper part of Paules Church in London, and the same to be done in rich col∣loured glasse with Effygies and holy stories as it had béene formerly glased and adorned, the first window whereof being new made was pre∣pared and appointed to be set vp on the North∣side of the Quire in the moneth of Iune, this yeare 1618. and much of the old glasse re∣payred the decaies of diuers bro∣ken windowes. Dura enim est Historiographorum conditio, si vera dicant, homines prouocant; si falsa scripturis com∣mendant, Dominus, qui vera dicta ab adulteris se∣questrat, non acceptat, saith Matthew of Paris.
Of the Vniuersities in Eng∣land, and Colledges of the same, with the Founders and principal Bene∣factors. I Haue before time reioyced (saith Erasmus Roterdam) that England was so well furnished with so many men of excellent learning, but now I begin to enuie her felicity, for that he so flourisheth with all kind of literature, that by taking the com∣mendation thereof from the other regions, she doth as it were maruailously obscure them. And yet notwithstanding, this commendation is not as now first due to England, in the which (it is well knowne) haue béene of long time men of great learning. The Vniuersities proue this to be true, which both for their antiquitie and wor∣thinesse, contend with the most antient and worthy Vniuersities in the world. Peter Colledge was erected of to antient
Hostels,Peter Col¦ledge. sometime belonging vnto the Bre∣thren of the sect called De poenitentia Iesu Chri∣sti) by Hugh Balsam, sometime Subprior of Ely. 1256. This Hugh was afterward the tenth Bi∣shop of Ely, and finished this Colledge in Anno 1248. Clare-hal.Clare Hall was first builded by Richard Ba∣dow, then Chancellor of the Students there, and the same was called Vniuersity Hall. 1326. It was since that inlarged by Gwalther Thansteed Master of the same hall, who with consent of the said Richard Badow resigned the foundation thereof to Elizabeth Lady of Clare, third daughter of Gilbert, and sister and one of the heires of the last Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester, who was first married to Iohn Bourgh, Earle of Vlster in Ireland, after to Theobald of Verdon, and thirdly to Sir Roger Damary, and had issue by them all: she I say named it Clare Hall. Pembroke hall.Pembroke Hall ws founded by Mary of Va∣lentia, daughter to Guydo Earle of Saint Paul in France, wife to Adomate de Valentia Earle of Pembroke. She obtained of King Edward the third, whose cosen she was, to found this Colledge in her owne ground, with purchasing two or thrée tnements thereby, and named it Aula de Valece Marie, An. 1343. Corpus Christi Colledge.Corpus Christi Colledge was first begun to be builded by the Aldermen and brethren of Corpus Clristi Guild.
This Colledge was brought so far forth; she rather by the helpe of Saint Maries Guild and fraternitie, newly adioyned to the other Guild. In the yeare 1353. they did elect Henry Earle of Darby and Lancaster, who should ob∣taine them fauour for the purchasing of Mort∣maine, for such lands and tenements as after many did sell thim. This Earle of Darby in the 28 yeare of Edward the third was created the first Duke of Lancaster, and then they elected him their Alderman, who recognised their sta∣tutes, not by the Dukes seale, but by the seale of the Alderman of that Guild. Trinity hall was first an Hostell,Trinitie Hall. purchased by Iohn Cranden, sometime Prior of Ely, who pro∣cured it for his brethren, the Monkes of that house, to be students there in the time of Ed∣ward the third, which hostell was afterward purchased by William Bateman Bishop of Nor∣wich, who builded this Colledge of Trinity hall vpon the said ground, being the first foun∣der thereof; he deceased in the yeare of Christ 1354. Gunuile and Caius Colledge was first foun∣ded by Edmund Gunuile,Gunuile and Caius Colledge. sometime Parson of Terington in Norffolke, he gaue it to name Gunuile Hall as appeareth by his statute 1354. At his decease, leauing a good masse of mony, commended the further finishing of the same Hall to William Bateman Bishop of Norwich, who with the assent of the Aldermen and Bre∣thren
of the Guiles of Corpus Christi and our Lady, changed with them the said house, with their house called the Stonehall, where now Gunuile and Caius colledge standeth. Iohn Caius Doctor in Physick, sometime fel∣low and late Master of the same colledge, hath inlarged the house, and now made a second foun∣dation, with giuing certain manors and lands to the same, 1557. Kings Colledge was first founded by King Henry the sixth,Kings Colledge. in Anno 1441. The same King altered the forme of his first foundation, Anno 1443. Edward the fourth in displeasure of the first foundation, withdrew from the colledge so much land as the first founder had giuen them: but afterward he restored them to the inheri∣tance of fiue hundred marks. After him, Henry the seuenth finished that notable chappell, begun by Henry the sixth, to the glasing stalls, and pa∣uing with marble, which was done by King Henry the eighth. Queenes Colledge.Queenes Colledge was begun by Lady Mar∣garet, wife to King Henry the sixth, 1446. She procured Mortmaine 100. l. by yeare, Anno 1448. At the intercession of Andrew Ducket, sometime Principall of Barnard hostell (which hostell he gaue to the said colledge.) He was Parson of Saint Botolphs in Cambridge, who by his owne mony and helpe of others, purcha∣sed certaine tenements, and builded his colledge, being the first President of the same, who gaue
as well by his life, as by his Testament, diuers ummes and parcels of land, and also procured ertaine gifts of the Duke of Clarence, of Cecily Dutchesse of Yorke, of Richard Duke of Glo∣ester, of Anne Dutchesse of the same, of Edward Earle of Salisbury, Maude Countesse of Ox∣ord, and Marmaduke Lumnee Bishop of Lin∣olne, with diuers other. Elizabeth wife to ing Edward the fourth, finished that which Queene Margaret had begunne in the yeare 465. Katharine Hall was founded by Robert Woodlarke, Doctor of Diuinity,Katherine Hall. and Prouost of the Kings colledge, and Chancellor to the Vniuersity, as is testified by the charter of King Henry the sixth, bearing date the 37 of his raign, which was the yeare of Christ, 1459. Iesus Colledge was founded by Iohn Alcock,Iesus Colledge. the 29 Bishop of Ely, who did conuert the Mo∣nastery of S. Radigond (the Abbesse liuing a dis∣solute life, the Monastery then destitute of go∣uernment, the edifices then fallen into ruine, and n conclusion, the Nunnes departing thence, leauing it desolate) into a colledge of chaplens and schollers, the yeare 1496. This Alcocke borne at Beuerley, founded a Frée-schoole at Kingston vpon Hul, and a schoole n the south-side the Parish church of the Tri∣nity, wherein his parents were buried. The rents of Iesus Colledge haue béen more amplified by Sir Robert Read Knight, Doctor Elestone, Doctor Roiston, and Doctor Fuller.
Christs Colledge.Christs Colledge was founded by King Hen∣ry the sixth, who named it Gods House,  was sometime a great hostell so called, first foded by W. Bingham, Parson of Saint Sakery London, and other. King Henry the seue granted his Charter to Lady Margaret his ther, Countesse of Richmond and Darby, to crease the students there, translating at her  position, so that from thenceforth it should  called Christs Colledge. S. Iohns Colledge.S. Iohns Colledge being first an hostell of re∣ligious Canons, was erected by Nigellus the scond Bishop of Ely, Treasurer to King Hen the first, the yeare of Christ, 1134. Those Canons liued by the name of the Hos∣pitall and Brethren of Saint Iohn, vntill the yeare of Christ 1510. though at that time so  decaied, that there was but a Prior and two Brethren, and by the dilapidations of their goods moueable, and vnmoueable, they abuse their reuenues and within the space of ten yeres last past, from the summe of one hundred and forty pounds, to thirtie pounds, &c. Wheupon Henry the eight, Richard Bishop of Win∣chester, Iohn Bishop of Rochester, Charles So∣merset Lord of Herbert, Thomas Louel, Henry Marne, and Iohn Saint Iohn, Knights, Henry Horne, and Hugh Ashron Clerks, Executor  the Testament of Lady Margaret, Countess  Richmond and Darby, grandmother to Kin Henry the eighth, and mother to King Henry the seuenth, vpon the suppression of the said
Priorie, she being preuented by death, leauing behinde her sufficient goods, and committing the  to those her said friends and executore, they erected the said Colledge, 1511. Magdalene Colledge was first an hostell or hall,Magdalen Colledge. inhabited by diuers Monkes of sundrie Monasteries; Edward Duke of Buckingham translated the same to a Colledge, naming it Buckingham Colledge, who builded vp the Hal in the yeare of Christ, 1519. After him Thomas Audley of Walden some∣time Chancellor of England, tooke vpon him to be founder of the said colledge, and going about to establish the same, was preuented by death, so that what he had begun, he left vnperfect, and altogether vnfinished. Christopher Wray Lord chiefe Iustice of England repaired and beauti∣fied it. Trinity Colledge was founded by King Hen∣ry the eighth, in the yeare of Christ, 1546.Trinity Colledge. The colledge was builded in the plot where sometime Edward the third builded his house called the Kings Hall, in the yeare of Christ 1337. There was ioyned vnto this Hall, a colledge called Michael House, with an hostell called Phiswicke hostell, and after the building there (being made of thrée) King Henry the eight na∣med it Trinity Colledge. Quéene Mary augmen∣ted it with 338 pounds lands the yeare. Michael House was founded by Haruie de Stanton, Priest,Michael house. Chancellor of the Exchequer to
Edward the second, of whom he obtained  to erect the said colledge, in the yeare of our Sa¦uiour Christ 1324. Emma∣nuel Col∣ledge.Emmanuell Colledge founded by sir Walter Mildmay, in Anno 1584. Sussex Sydney Colledge founded.Sussex Sydney Colledge, was founded in the yeare 1598. by the right Honorable the La Francis Sydney, sometime Countesse of Sussex. And thus much in briefe, concerning the Vni∣uersity of Cambridge with the Colledges and Halls in the sa.
The Vniuersity of Oxford was instituted by King Alfred a Saxon, after the birth of Christ 873. yeares: and hath Colledges. VNiuersitie Colledge,Vniuersi∣tie Col∣ledge. or Saint Marie Church (as some haue written) founded in the time of King Alfred, by Sir Wil∣liam Archdeacon of Duresme, in the yeare 873. But more likely by Wil∣liam Bishop of Duresme, in the 12 yeare of Wil∣liam Conqueror, in Anno 1081. Baliol Colledge was founded in the time of Henry the third, by Iohn Baliol,Baliol Colledge. father to Iohn Baliol King of Scotland, in the yeare of Christ, 1263. Merton Colledge was founded in the raigne of Henry the 3.Merton Colledge. by Walter Merton some∣time Canon of Pauls, and also of Salisbury, at a
Towne in Surrey by Nonsuch, called , Anno 1264. And after, in Edward the first time, being Bishop of Rochester, he translated i to Oxford, and deceased. Excester Colledge.Excester colledge was founded in the time of Edward the second, by Walter Stapleton Bishop of Excester, 1156. And augmented in the time of our Soue∣raigne Lady Quéene Elizabeth, by Sir William Peter knight, in the yeare of Christ, 1566. Orial Col∣ledge.Oriall Colledge was founded in the time of Edward the second, by Sir Adam Browne, Al∣moner of the said King, and for the said King, the yeare of Christ, 1323. Queenes Colledge:Queenes Colledge was founded in the time of Edward the third, by Robert Englishfield in his owne ground, and by him called the Quéens Hall. Hée was chaplaine to the Lady Philip, wife to the same Edward, the yeare of Christ, 1340. New Col∣ledge.New Colledge was founded in the time of King Edward the second, by William Wickham Bishop of Winchester, the yeare of Christ 1379. Edmond Grindall Archbishop of Can∣turbury, was a benefactor of twenty pounds the yeare, beside bookes and places. William Wick∣ham also founded a colledge in the citie of Win∣chester, by the like name of New Colledge in Anno 1389. Lincolne Colledge.Lincolne Colledge was founded in the time of King Henry the fifth, by Richard Fleming Bi∣shop of Lincolne, 1440.
And augmented in Richard the thirde time Thomas Rotheram Bishop of Lincolne in the  1479. All Soules Colledge,All Soules Colledge. was founded in the time King Henry the sixth, by Henry Archbishop of Canturbury, in the yeare 1437. King Henry the  gaue it to soure Priors alians, to wit, Al∣erbury in Salope, Runmey in Kent, Langua∣th in Southwales, Wedon Pinkney in Northamptonshire: and therefore is he in the ord called the founder of that colledge. Chichley also founded Bernard Colledge in Oxford, since suppressed by Henry the 8. and now re-edified by Sir Thomas White, and by him called Saint Iohns Colledge. More, he foun∣ded a colledge at Higham ferris, with Almes∣ouses there. Diuinity Schoole was founded in the raigne of Henry the sixth,Diuinitie Schoole. by Humfrey Duke of Gloce∣ster, 1447. He gaue 129 bookes to the Library there. Magdalen Colledge was founded in the time of King Henry the sixth,Magdalen Colledge. by William Wamflet Bishop of Winchester, 1459. He builded a good part of Eaton Colledge, begun by King Henry the sixth. He builded a frée-schoole at Wamflet in Lincolneshire. Brasen-nose Colledge was founded in the raigne of King Henry the seuenth,Brasen∣nose Col∣ledge. by William mith Bishop of Lincolne. He deceased in the yeare 1513. Corpus Christi Colledge was founded in theCorpus Christi Colledge.
raigne of King Henry the seuenth, by Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester in the yeare 1516. Christ Church was founded in the time of Henry the 8.Christ, Church. by Thomas Wolsey Cardinall and Archbishop of Yorke, in the yeare of Christ 1539. And finished by the same King Henry the eight in the yeare 1549. Canter∣bury Col∣ledge.Canterbury Colledge in Oxford founded by Simon Islip Archbishop of Canterbury in the yeare of our Lord 1353. And lately suppressed in the 31 yeare of King Henry the eight, was ioyned to Christs-church in Oxford. Trinity Colledge sometime Durham Colledge.Trinity colledge was founded and so named in the time of Quéen Mary, by S. Thomas Pope Knight in Anno 1556. which colledge was first founded in the time of King Edward the third by Thomas Hatfield Bishop of Durham, and by him named Durham colledge for eight Monks, and seuen clarks, admitted by the Prior of Dur∣ham, there to study, Anno 1370. Robert Wal∣worth Prior of Durham indowed it with 3 ∣nates of land, &c. in Readington and Clarton,  the adnowsion of ye church of Readington, which colledge at the suppression by King Henry the eight, might dispend land as the same was the valued by the Visitors 115 pounds, foure shil∣lings foure pence. Saint Iohns Colledge was founded and is named, in the time of Quéene Mary by Sir Thomas White Merchantailor, Anno 1557.
which Colledge sometime called Bernards Col∣ledge,S. Iohns Colledge sometime Bernard Colledge. being amongst other suppressed in the time of King Henry the eight, and greatly ruina∣ted, the same Sir Thomas White purchased, and after bestowed large summes of money in buil∣ding thereof, and did lay the same Colledge in very good land neare to the Vniuersity of Ox∣ford, to the yearely value of 500 pounds which he purchased with his money, and hath left or∣der to make it dispend sixe hundred pounds the yeare. Also the same sir Thomas White, founded a hall for students, by him called Saint Iohns Hall, sometime Glocester Colledge, founded by Iohn Glifford for Monkes: which Colledge be∣ing suppressed, he redeemed from spoyle and wast with his money, placing there a Princi∣pall and Schollers to the number of an hundred persons or more made great reparations of the house, and adioyned it to his sayd Colledge of Saint Iohn. Wadham colledge was founded in the yeare 1613.Wadham Colledge founded. by Nicholas Wadham of the county of Sommerset Esquire, and Dorothy his wife, sister to the right honorable, Iohn Lord Peter of Writle. Oxford hath Halls. Brodegate Hall. Heart Hall.Walter Stapleton William Wanstock Magdalene Hall. Alborne Hall. Saint Mary Hall.
White Hall. New Inne. Edmond Hall. In the Vniuersities of England (saith Eras∣mas Roterodam) there be certaine colledges, in the which there is so much Religion, so strait Discipline, and such integrity of life, that if you did sée it, you would neglect in comparison of them, all Monkish rules and ceremonies. All ye cities in England, many market towns and some villages, haue frée Grammer schooles erected in them, for the further increase of lear∣ning and vertue. Vertuous men haue, to the perpetuall regi∣string of their good names, done these good déeds: learned men haue not béene all the doers: Some therefore for the supply in other, of that which wanted in themselues, haue done wisely, all to this purpose (that vertue and learning vnited and knit together, might in this curage make a learned vertuous world) haue done godly. It were much (there are so many) in a small roome to comprehend them, but the chiefe and worthy patterns of the rest are: Eaton Schoole. Henry the 6. 1443 Westminster. Queene Elizabeth.   Winchester. W. Wickham Bishop of Winchester. 1387 Paules Schoole in London. Iohn Collet. 1510 Saint Antonies in London by Iohn Tate: Merchantailors schoole in London, by the Mer∣chantailors. 1560
How a man may iourney from any notable towne in Eng∣land to the City of London, or from London to any nota∣ble Towne in the Realme. The way from Walsingham to London. FRom Walsingham to Picknam. xii. mile From Picknam to Brandō fery. x. mile From Brandon fery to New∣market. x. mile From Newmarket to Braban. x. mile From Braban to Barkeway. x. mile From Barkeway to Puckrich. vii. mile From Puckrich to Ware. v. mile From Ware to Waltham. viii. mile From Waltham to London. xii. mile
From Barwicke to Yorke, and also to London. FRom Barwicke to Belford. xii. mile From Belford to Anwick. xii. mile From Anwicke to Morpit. xii. mile From Morpit to Newcastle. xii. mile From Newcastle to Durham. xii. mile From Durham to Darington. xiii. mile From Darington to Northalerton. xiiii. mile From Northalerton to Topcliffe. vii. mile From Topliffe to Yorke. xvi. mile From Yorke to Tadcaster. xvi. mile From Tadcaster to Wentbridge. xii mile From Wentbridge to Doncaster. viii. mile From Doncaster to Tutford. xviii. mile From Tutford to Newarke. x. mile From Newarke to Grantham. x. mile From Grantham to Stamford. xvi. mile From Stamford to Stilton. xii. mile From Stilton to Huntington. ix. mile From Huntington to Roysten. xv. mile From Royston to Ware. xii. mile From Ware to Waltham. viii. mile From Waltham to London. xii. mile From Carlile to Doncaster, and so to London. FRom Carlile to Hasket yate. viii. mile From Hasket yate to Pirath. viii. mile
From Pirath hardby to Apelbie. x. mile From Apelby to Burghley. vi. mile From Burghley to the Spittle. viii. mile From the Spittle to the Bowes. viii. mile From the Bowes to Grethaw bridge. iiii. mile From Grethaw Bridge to Catrike Bridge. x. mile From Catrike bridge to Limon. vi. mile From Limon to Borowbridge. xii. mile From Boroughbridge to Wetherby. viii. mile From Wetherby to Aberforth. v. mile From Aberforth to Ferrybridge. vii. mile From Ferrybridge to Doncaster. x. mile From Doncaster to London as afore. From Carnaruan to Chester, and so to London. FRom Carnaruan to Conway. xxiii. mile From Conway to Denbigh. xii. mile From Denbigh to Flint. xii. mile From Flint to Chester. x. mile From Chester to Wich. xiiii. mile From Wich to Stone. xv. mile From Stone to Lichfield. xvi. mile From Lichfield to Colsill. xii. mile From Colsill to Couentry. viii. mile And so from Couentrie to London as hereafter followeth. From Cokermouth to Lancaster and so to London. FRrom Cokermouth to Kiswicke. v. mile From Kiswicke to Grocener. viii. mile
From Grocener to Kendale. xiiii. mile From Kendale to Burton. vii. mile From Burton to Lancaster. viii. mile From Lancaster to Preston. xx. mile From Preston to Wigam. xiiii. mile From Wigam to Warington. xx. mile From Warington to Newcastle. xx. mile From Newcastle to Lichfield. xx. mile From Lichfield to Couentry. xx. mile From Couentry to Daintrie. xiiii. mile From Daintrie to Tocester. x. mile From Tocester to Stonystratford. vi. mile From Stonystratford to Brickhill. vii. mile From Brickhill to Dunstable. vii. mile From Dunstable to S. Albones. x. mile From S. Albones to Barnet. x. mile From Barnet to London. x. mile From Yarmouth to Colchester, and so to London. FRom Yarmouth to Becclis. viii. mile From Becclis to Blybour. vii. mile From Blybour to Snapbridge. viii. mile From Snapbridge to Woodbridge. viii. mile From Woodbridge to Ipswich. v. mile From Ipswich to Colchester. xii. mile From Colchester to Eastford. viii. mile From Eastford to Chelmsford. x. mile From Chelmsford to Brentwood. x. mile From Brentwood to London. xv. mile
From Douer to London. FRom Douer to Canterbury. xii. mile From Canterbury to Sittingborne. xii. mile From Sittingborne to Rochester. viii. mile From Rochester to Grauesend. v. mile From Grauesend to Datford. vi. mile From Datford to London. xii. mile From S. Burien in Cornewall to London. FRom S. Burien to the Mount. xx. mile From the Mount to Thury. xii. mile From Thury to Bodman. xx. mile From Bodman to Launstone. xx. mile From Launstone to Occumpton. xv. mile From Occumpton to Crokehornewell. x. mile From Crokehornewell to Excester. x. mile From Excester to Honiton. xii. mile From Honiton to Charde. x. mile From Charde to Crokehorne. vii. mile From Crokehorne to Shirborne. x. mile From Shirborne to Shaftsbury. x. mile From Shaftsbury to Salisbury. xviii. mile From Salisbury to Andeuor. xv. mile From Andeuor to Basingstocke. viii. mile From Basingstocke to Hartlorow. viii. mile From Hartlorow to Bagshot. viii. mile From Bagshot to Stanes. viii. mile From Stanes to London. xv. mile
From Bristow to London. FRom Bristow to Maxfield. x. mile From Maxfield to Chapnam. x. mile From Chapnam to Marleborough. xv. mile From Marleborough to Hungerford. viii. mile From Hungerford to Newburie. vii. mile From Newburie to Reading. xv. mile From Reading to Maydenhead. x. mile From Maydenhead to Colbrooke. viii. mile From Colbrooke to London. xv. mile From S. Dauids to London. FRom Saint Dauid to Axford. xx. mile From Axford to Carmarden. x. mile From Carmarden to Newton. x. mile From Newton to Langburie. x. mile From Langbury to Brecknocke. xvi. mile From Brecknocke to Hay. x. mile From Hay to Harford. xiiii. mile From Harford to Roso. ix. mile From Roso to Glocester. xii. mile From Glocester to Cicester. xv. mile From Cicester to Farington. xvi. mile From Farington to Abington. vii. mile From Abington to Dorchester. vii. mile From Dorchester to Henley. xii. mile From Henley to Maydenhead. vii. mile From Maydenhead to Colebrooke. vii. mile From Colebrooke to London. xv. mile FINIS.
The principall Fayres of Eng∣land and Wales, orderly set foorth; with the Moneth, Day, and Place, where they bee kept. Fayres in Ianuary. THe iii day at Llanibither. The xii day at Salisbury. The vii. day at Llanginnie: the xxv. day (Conuersion of S. Paul) at Grauesend, at Bristoll, at Churching∣ford, at Northalerton in Yorkeshire euery Wednesday from Christmas till Iune: the xxxi. day at Llandyssell. Fayres in February. THe first day (Bridget) at Bromley: the ii day at Maidstone, at Bath, at Linne, at Bickles∣worth, at Budworth, at Reading, at Faring∣don, at the Vizes in Wiltshire, at Godlemew, at Whiteland. The iii. at Boxgroue, at Brim∣ley.See the Records in the Roles. The sixt at Stafford for thrée daies, for all kinde of Merchandize, without Arrests.
The viii. at Tragarron: the ix. at Llandaffe. The xiiii. at Owndle in Northamptonshire at Feuersham in Kent: the xxiii. at Vppingham in Rutlanshire, at Higham-ferries, at Baldocke, at Walden, at Twkesbury, at Froome, at Henly vpon Thames. Faires in March. THe first day at Llangadog, at Madrim, and at Llangeuelah. The viii day at Tregarron: The xii day at Stamford, at Sudbury, at Woo∣borne, at Wrexham, at Bodnam, at Spaford: ye xiii. at Wye, at Mountbowin in Cornewall: the xvii. at Pattrington: The xviii. at Stur∣bridge. The xx. at Durham, at Alesbury. The xxiiii. at Llanerchimeth. The xxv. at North∣hampton, at Malden, at Cardigan, at Malpas, at Saint Albones, at Huntingdon, at New∣castle, at Ashwell in Hartfordshire, at great Cartwalden in Essex, at Saint Iones in Wor∣cestershire, at Woodstocke. The xxxi. day at Malmesbury. Faires in Aprill. THe ii. day at North-fléete, at Rochford, at Hitchin. The iii. day at Léeke in Stafford∣shire. The v. at Wallingford. The vii. at Dar∣by. The ix. at Billingsworth. The xxii. at Stab∣ford, the xxiii. at Northampton, at Chichester, at Tamworth, at Ipswich, at Charing, at Amp∣till,
at Hinningham, at Saint Pembs, at Bury, at Wilton, at Wortham, at Brewton, at Castle Combes, at Bewdley, at Lonquer, at Rilibo∣rough, at Bishops-Hatfield, at Gilford, at Nut∣lay in Sussex, at Engfield in Sussex, at Brig∣stocke, at Sabrigworth in Hartfordshire. The xxv. at Cosbrooke, at Buckingham, at Inings in Buckinghamshire, at Darby, at Winch∣combe in Gloucestershire, at Calne in Wilt∣shire, at Cliffe by Lewis in Sussex, at Dunmow in Essex, at Vttoxeter. The xxvi. at Tenderden in Kent, at Clete. Faires in May. THe first day at Leicester, at Warwicke, at Oswestrée, at Kinuax, at Worseworth, at Brick-hill, at Congerton, at Reading, at Stow the old, at Pombridge, at Chensford, at Perin, at Andouer, at Maidstone, Llatrissent, at Vske, at Grighonell, at Rippon, at Wedore, at Blackborne, at Flockingham, at Laighton, at Phillipsnorton, at Stokerley, at Lerfield, at Ocestrie, at Linfield, at Stanstead. The ii. at Pwltheley. The iii. at Noneaton in Warwick∣shire, at Ratsdale in Lancashire, at Waltham Abby, at Elstow a village by Bedford, at Bra∣myard, at Hinningham, at Chersay, at Chip∣nam, at Cowbridge at Abergauenny, at Moun∣ton, at Denbigh, at Mirthir, at Tiduile. The v. at Marchenleth. The vi. Almesbury, at Hoy, at Knighton. The vii. at Beuerley, at Newton in
Lancashire, at Oxford, at Stratford vpon A∣uon, at Hanslop, at Bath, at Hatesbury: the ix. at Maidstone: the x. at Ashburn in the Peake: the xi. at Dunstable: the xii. and xiii. at Greys Thorrocke in Essex: the xv. at Welshpoole: the xvi. at Llangarranogge: the xix. at Odchill, at Rochester, at Wllow, at Manfield: the xxv. at Blackborne: the xxvi. at Lenham: xxix, at Cambroke. Fayres in Iune. THe iii. day at Ailesbury. The ninth at Maid∣stone. The 10. at Marfield, at Newborough in Lancashire, at Okingham, at Holt, at Wel∣lington, at Llanwist, at Newcastle in Emli, at Kingwilgaio. The 13 at New-towne in Ke∣dewen. The 14 at Bangerk: the 15 at the Vizes at Pershore, seuen miles from Wocester. The 16. at Newport in Keames, at Bealth. The 18. at Higham-ferries, at Tow-greene, at Had∣stocke, at Llanuilling: the 19. at Bridgenorth: the 21. at Ystradmeyricke: the 22. at Shrewes∣bury, at Saint Albons: the 23. at Barnet, at Castle Ebichen, at Dolgelly. The 24 at West∣chester, at Colchester, at Wakefield, at Hor∣sham, at Wenlocke, at Croydon, at Bedford, at Bramsgroue, at Barnewell, at Glocester, at Lincolne, at Peterborow, at Windsor, at Ha∣lifaxe, at Lancaster, at Ashburne, at Bishops castle, at Tunbridge, at Leicester, at Boughton∣gréene, at Kerkhame in Aundernesse, at Hart∣ford,
at Kingstone in Warwickshire, at Rea∣ding, at Ludlow, at Romford, at Pemsey, at Shaftsburie, at Bricknock, at Preston, at Yorke, at Bosworth, at Aukenburge, at Westō, at Ashburne in the Peake, at Hurst, at Cram∣brocke in Kent, at Warmester in Wiltshire, at Farnam, at Harstone in Norfolke, at Bedle, at Stracstocke, at Beuerley. The 26. at Nor∣thop: the 27. at Folkstone, at Burton vpon Trent, at Llandogaine: the 28. at Royston, at Hescorne, at Pombes, at Matchenleth: the 29. at Munstrill in Leicestershire, at Woluer∣hampton, at Sarstrange, at Lower Knots-ford, at Woodhurst, at Wem, at Mansfield, Sou∣tham, at Tring, at Bolton, at Bilballenec, at Peterborough, at Yorke, at Onay, at Bunting∣ton, at Vpton in VVorcestershire, at VVitney in Oxfordshire, at Holdworth, at Grayes, at Thurrocke in Essex, at Hornedon, at Sudbury in Suffolke, at Lemster, at Gorgange in Lan∣cashire, at Peterfield, at Ashwell, at VVest∣minster, at Sinnocke in Kent, at Stockworth in Lincolneshire, at Marleborow, at Bromley in Lancashire, at Buckingham, at Barkham∣stead, at Tring, at Bemington, at Hodsdon, at Stafford, at Mount-sorrell, at Llanbeder, at Pont-stephen, at Cardiffe, at Llamergaine, at Bala: the 30. at Maxfield in Cheshire.
Fayres in Iuly. THe ii. day at Congerton, at Wborne, at Huntington, at Ashton vnder line in Lan∣cashire, at Smeath in Kent, at Rickmansworth in Hartfordshire, at Swanley. The iii. at Huerson. The v. at Burton vpon Trent. The vi. at Llanidlae, at Lanibither. The vii. day at Can∣terbury, at Albrighton, at Vppingham, at Chippingnorton, at Vlzes, at Burntwood, at Cap∣pell-frith, at Richmond, at Tenburie, at Hauer∣fordwest, at Treshenimicha, at Emlin, at Castle∣maine, at Denbigh, at Sweaton, at Shelford. The xi. at Patacy, at Lidde. The. xv. at Pinch∣backe, at Gréenestead in Sussex. The xvii. at Léeke, at Winchcombe, at Saint Kenelmes, at Llanuilling. The xx. at Awserton, at Bowli, at Vxbridge, at Catesby at Saint Margarets, at Odiham, at Chimmocke, at Bolton in the Moore, at Barkeway, at Ickleton in Cam∣bridgeshire, at Betley, at Tenbie, at Neath, at Llanymthinery, at Woodstocke. The xxii. at Stonystratford, at Kimolton, at Bicklesworth, at Bridgenorth, at Barnards castle in the North, at Yarne in Yorkeshire, at Broughton in Fornace, at Clytherall in Lancashire, at Kes∣wicke in Cumberland, at Batlefield by Shrewesbury, at Northwich in Cheshire, at Stockbury, at Kingstone, at Marleborough, at Turbury, at Witherall, at Colchester, at Calne, at Coolaige, at Yadland, at Maudlin-hill by
Winchester, at Newarke vpon Trent, at Ro∣king in Kent, at Maudlin-hill by Heydowne in Yorkeshire, at Ridwallie, at Withgrig, at Pon∣terley. The xxiii. at Chestone, at Carnarnon. The xxv. at Saint Iames by London, at Saint Iames by Northampton, at Bristole, at Dar∣by, at Dudly, at Chichester, at Stone, at Shi∣snal, at Stamford, at Louth, at Lyuerpoole, at Thrapsto, at Barcamstead, at Buntingford, at Doncaster, at Baldocke, at Walden, at Tilbu∣rie, at Ipswich, at Rauenglasse, at Erith, at Bromley, at Ashwell, at Hatfield, at Breadoke, at Reading, at Chilholme, at Douer, at Malmes∣bury, at Aldergame, at Broomesgroue, at Cam∣den, at Wigmore, at Chickham, at Trobridge, at Rosse, at Machenbleth at Landengeiram, at Capell-Iago, at Stackpoole, at Bisetour at Lin∣field, at Kirtham the Isle, at Wetherby in Yorkeshire, at Themblegréene, at Skipton in Crauen. The xxvi. at Tiptry at Bewdley, at Raiadargwy. The xxvii. at Chappelfrith, at Richmond in the North, at Warington, at Horsham, at Canterbury, at Malpasse, at Ash∣ford. Fayres in August. THe i. day at Shrewesburie, at Loughbo∣rough in Leicestershire, at Yorke, at New∣castle vpon Trent, at Selby, at Newton in Lan∣cashire, at Dunstable, at Bedford, at Saint Néeds, at Yelland in Yorkeshire, at Northam∣church,
at Selborne, at Exceter, at Thackead, at Rumney, at Mailing, at Feuersham all th in Kent: at Wisbitch, at Horseney in Holdenesse, at Hay, at Bathe, at Karmarthen,  Kargwilly, at Llantrissent, at Chepstow,  Llaurwen, at Flint: the 4. at Linton, at Rnor: the ninth, at Aberlew: the tenth, at M∣ton Mowbra, at Chorlay, at Rugby, at Chidl, at Owndle, at Sedole in Yorkeshire, at Wey∣don, at Frodisham in Cheshire, at Banbury, at New Brainford, at Wilton, at Waltham Abbey, at Alchurch, at Farneham, at Wor∣ster in Wiltshire, at Hungerford, at Hawck∣hurst, at Blackamore, at Mearworth, at Lud∣low, at Saint Lawrence by Bodwin, at Win∣stow, Toucestour, at Kellom, at Sherborne in Yorkeshire, at Doncaster, at Croyley, at ∣garron, at Haliegh, at Diffringoly wich, at Newborough, at Kenwilgaio, at Harley: at Marras. The xv. day at Hinckley in Lei∣cestershire, at Saint Albones, at Belton, at Huntington, at Preston in Aundernesse, at Wakefield, at Carlile, at Gisborough, at Good∣hurst, at Cambridge, at Dunmow in Essex, at Stroud by Rochester in Kent, at Northamp∣ton, at Luton, at Dryfield in Yorkeshire, at Elsemere, at Tutbury, at Hinkley, at Marlebo∣rough, at Whitland, at Kardigan, at Rosse, at Swansey, at Eglwysuait, at Yminith, at New∣in, at Newport in Munmouthshire. The xvi, at Rayaydargwy: the 24. at London, at Nantwich at Riddermuster, at Pagets Bromley, at Hare∣wood,
at Croyley in Lancashire, at Northaler∣ton, at Tuddington, at Faringdon, at Twks∣bury, at Sudbury, at Norwich, at Douer, at Ox∣ford, at Chorley, at Beggars bush beside Rye, at Bromley, at Alborough in Holdernesse, at Watford in Hartfordshire, at Aberconwey, at Mummouth, at Mountgomery. The xxviii at Ashford, at Sturbridge in Worcestershire, at Talisarnegréene, at Welshpoole. The xxix. at Watford, at Coby in Lincolneshire, at Kar∣marthen, at Brecknocke, at Kaerwis. The Sunday after Saint Bartholomew at Sand∣bich. Faires in September. THe first day S. Giles, at Chappel-filuy, at Neath. The iiii. at Oakham. The vii. at VVare, at VVoodburihill. The viii. at Soth∣warke nigh London, at Sturbridge, at VVake∣field, at VValtham on the VVoulds, at Gisbo∣rough both the Lady dayes, at Brewood, at Drayton, at Blackborne, at Northampton, at Atherston, at Vlcester, at Gliborne, at VVorse∣worth, at Chaulon in Cheshire, at Partney, at Burie in Lancashire, at Huntington, at VVol∣epit, at VVestneme, at Chattom, at Smeath, at Raculuor, at Snide, at Malden, at Rocking∣ham, at Hartford, at Drifield, at Llandis∣sell, at Kardigan, at VVhitland, at Cardiffe, at Tenby, at Bewmorris. The xiii. at Pwlhe∣ly, at Newtowne in Redwin. The xiiii. at
Newport: at Chesterfield: at Richmond: at Rippon in the North: at Stratford vpon Anon, at arseley: at Hetsburie: at Smalding, at Waltham Abby, at Penhad, at Wotton vn∣der hedge, at Barseley, at Hidome in Holder∣nesse, at Denbigh, at Newborough, at Rosse: at Munton: at Abergauenni. The .xv. at Raiadargwy. The xvii. at Cliffe, a Llanidlasse. The xx. at Llanuellie, at Kothin. The xxi. at Nottingham, at Strafford: at Shrewesburie, at Peterborough, at Kingston in Warwick∣shire: at Holden in Holdernesse, at Mayden∣brackley: at Daintry in Northamptonshire: at Baldock, at Bedford at Saint Edmonds∣burie, at Woodstocke, at Lentham, at Eastrid at Milnall, at Clanone, at Braintrie, at Wen∣douer, at Douer, at Witherall, at Katherine∣hill by Gilford, at Malden in Essex, at Croy∣don, at Vizes, at Marleborough, at Canterbury, at Abergwilly, at Knighton. The xxiii. at Pa∣cridge in Staffordshire a great Horse faire, at Malton a great faire of horses and of cattle all the wéeke long in Yorkeshire: at Llanuillin The xxviii. at Dolgeth, at Kaermarthen. The xxix. at Leicester, at Westchester, at Lancaster, at Blackborne, at Ashorne, at Tuddingtin, at Saint Iues, at Saint Albones, at Vbridge, at Highamferries, at Brunningham, at Selby, at Killingworth, at Ludlow, at Balmestocke, at Newbery, at Michael Deane, at Canterburie, at Sittingborne, at Woodham ferry in Essex, at Kingstand, at Ckemouth, at Basingstoke, at
Maldon an Horsefaire, at Way-hill by Ando∣uer, at Bookeham, at Headly, at Buckland, at Bishop stratford, at Shelford in Bedfordshire, at Hull, at Merthir, at Llanuihangell, at Abercon∣wy, at Llocher, at Machenleth, at Llnidlasse, at Wemer vii daies, at Hay. Faires in October. THe Monday after Saint Michael, at False∣ley. The iii. at Boulton in the Moores. The iiii. at Saint Michael. The vi. at Saint Fayths besides Norwich, at Hauent in Hamp∣shire, at Maidstone in Kent. The viii. at Here∣ford, at Bishops-stratford, at Chichester, at Swansey, at Llambedder▪ at Pont-stephen. The ix. at Harborough in Leicestershire, at Gainsborough, at Blith in Nottinghamshire, at Ashborne in the Peake, at Sabridgeworth in Hartfordshire, at Hodnet, at Deuizes. The ix and tenth dayes at Greys Thorrocke in Es∣sex: the xii. at Boulton in Furnace, at Llan∣goneth. The xiii. at Edmondstow in Notting∣hamshire, at Tamworth, at Drayton, at Cru∣ston, at Stapforth, at Grauesend, at Hitchin, at Royston, at Windsore, at Marshfield, at Colchester in Essex, at Staunton, at Charing, at Aberfrow, at Newport in Monmouthshire, at Leighton-bussard. The xviii. at Welingbo∣rough, at Burton vpon Trent, at Bridgenorth, at Tisdale in Darbishire, at Wyham, at Bar∣net, at Banburie, at Middlewich, at Bishops∣hatfield,
at Ely, at Brickhill, at Newcastle, at Faringdon, at Charing, at Henley in Arden, at Marlow, at Vphauen, at Tunbridge, at As∣well, at Yorke, at Thirst, at Wrickley, at Holt, at Charleton, at Lawhadden, at Kidwelly, at Iske, at Radnor. The xix. at Saint Frideswides by Oxford. The xxi. at Couentrie, at Newmarket, at Stokesley, at Cicester, at Lentham, at Saffron-walden, at Hereford, at Llanibither. The xxiii. at Whitchurch, at Lo∣wer Knotisford, at Ratsdale, at Bicklesworth, at Preston. The xxx. at Beuerly: the xxviii. at Warwicke, at Ashby de la Zouch, at Lamster, at Preston in Andernes, at Stanford, at Hart∣ford, at Oxford, at Biddenden, at Waxmester in Wiltshire, at Willon, at Aberconwey, at Llanedy. The xxix. at Talisarnegréene. The xiii. at Stokesley, at Wakefield, at Ruthin, a Pwshely, at Abermarles. Faires in Nouember. THe i. day at Bricklesworth, at Ludlow, at Kellome, at Castlemaine, at mountgmme∣ry. The ii. at Loughborow, at Léeke, at Mar∣field, at Blechingley, at Mayfield in Sussex, at Bishops castle, at Elsemere, at Kingstone vpon Thames, at Yorke in Petergate. The iii. at Kaermarthen. The v. at Welsh-poole. The vi. at Newport pond in Essex, called Cole faire; at Wellington, at Pembridge, at Salforth▪ at Les∣sorth, at Stanley, at Trigney in Cornewall, at
Andiuer, at Wetshod, at Hartford, at Mailing in Kent, at Bedford, at Marron in Holdernesse, at Brecknock. The x. at Lenton by Notting∣ham vii daies, at Rugbie, at Wem, at Shifnall, at Llambither, at Aberwingrin: the xi. at Marle∣borow, at Douer, at Fockingham, at Newcastle in Emlin, at Yorke, at Botingam in Yorkshire, at Shaftesbury, at Tlathara Maies at Aberken∣uen, at Monmouth, at Tream, at Withgrig. On Monday after Saint Martin, at Engles∣row in Kemes, at Carnaruan. The xiii. at S. Edmondsburie, at Gilford in Surrey. The xv. at Llanithinery, at Machenleth. The xvii. at Harlow, at Hide, at Northampton, at Spal∣docke, at Lincolne. The xix. at Horsha in Kent. The xx. at S. Edmondsbury in Suffolke, at Health at Hide, at Ingerston. The xxii. at Peni∣bont, at Sawthey. The xxii. at Sandwitch, at Ludlow, at Frome, at Tuddington, at Kates∣crosse by Prittlwell in Essex, at Bwelth, at Bangor, at Carline. The xxv. at Highamferries. The xxviii. at Ashborne in the Peake. The 29. at Lawrest. The 30. at Boston a Mart, at Cub∣lay in Darbishire, at Kimolton, at Bedford in Yorkeshire, at Warington, at Gargraue, at Wakefield, at Baldocke, at Peterfield, at Co∣longborough, at Amptill, at Cobham, at May∣denhead, at Rochester, at Gréenestéed in Sussex, at Ocestry, at Bewdley, at Mayden-brackley, at Narbert, at Pecorées in Gower, at Gargréene, at Preston, at Harleight, at Bradford.
Faires in December. THe v. day at Pluckley, at Dolgeth, at New∣ton. The vi. at S. Needes, at Northwich in Cheshire, at Arundle, at Spalding, at Exceter, at Cased, at Hendingham, Seuenoeke in Kent, at Woodstocke, at Grantham, at Hethin, at Horne∣say. The vii. at Sandhurst: the viii. at Leicester, at Northampton, at Malpasse in Cheshire, at Clitherall in Lancashire, at Kinnax, at Heir∣some, at Whitland, at Kardigan, at Bewmarris at Llanunen: the xxi. at Hornebie in Lancashire. The 22. at Llandilauaw: the 29. at Canterbu∣ry, Salisbury, Royston. A Note of the moueable Faires here in England. THe three Mondaies next after Twelft day, at Hincklay in Leicestershire: the Twesday next following Twelft day, at Melton Mow∣bray, an Horsefaire at Salisburie. The Thursday after Twelft day at Banbu∣rie, at Litterworth in Leicestershire: and euery thursday after for 3 wéeks. The Ashwednesday, at Lichfield, at Tamworth, at Dunstable, at Fa∣kinghame, at Royston, at Eaton by Windsor, at Exceter, at Cicetour, at Candaine in Gloce∣stershire, at Tunbridge in Kent: the first Mon∣day in Lent at Abington, at Winchester, at Chi∣chester, at Cherlay in Surrey. The first Twes∣day in Lent at Bedford: the first Thursday in
Lent at Banbury. On Mid-lent sunday at Standford, at Odsham, at Saffron Walden: the Friday, and saterday before Care-sunday at Hartford. The Monday before our Lady day in Lent at Kendall, at Wisbitch, at Denbigh in Wales: the fift sunday in Lent being Care∣sunday at Hartford, at Grantham at Salisbury, at Sudbury, at Helxsome in Sussex. On Palme sunday euen at Pumfract, and euery fourtnight vntill Trinity-sunday, and that is three weekes betwixt: and euery fourtnight after till S. An∣drewsmas at Leicester, at Alesbury, at Skipton vpon Crauen, at Fockingham, at Wisbich. On Palmeunday at Worcester, at Billingsworth, at Kendall in Lancashire. On Maunday-thurs∣day at Kettering, at Sudmyster in Essex. On good Friday at Millonie. On Munday in Easter wéeke at Gainsborough a Mart, at Onay in Buckinghamshire, at Drifield in Yorkeshire: On Twesday in Easter weeke at Longner, at Couentry, at Hitchin. And a fourtnight faire begins the Twesday in Easter wéeke, and con∣tinueth euery Twesday fortnight vntill Christ∣mas, being great faires of cattle: the Tuesday and Wednesday at Brailes, at Sandbatoth, at Rochford, at Northslect. On the Wednesday in Easter wéeke at Wel∣lingborough, euery Wednesday betweene Ea∣ster and Michaelmas, a faire of cattle at Beuer∣ley. On Friday in Easter wéeke at Skipton in Crauen. On Low-sunday at Bicklesworth in Buckinghamshire. The Monday after Low-sunday
at Enlome. The third Sunday after Easter at Lowth in Lincolnshire. Rogation wéeke, all the wéeke is for retay∣ling at Beuerley, at Inglefield in Lancashire, at Rech. Holy Thursday, or Ascention day, at Lit∣terworth, at Hallaton in Leicestershire, at Rip∣pon, at Brunningham, at Wigham, at Bishop Stratford, at Newcastle, at Middlewich, at Burton vpon Trent at Chapplefrith, at Stap∣port in Cheshire, at Yarne, at the Vizes, at Brastead in Kent, at Sudmaster in Essex, at Darkin, at Grantham, at Beuerley. The Sun∣day after Ascention day at Tharstead, at Bur∣ington in Yorkeshire. On Whitson euen at Skipton in Crauen, at Wisbitch. On Whitsonday at Ratisdale, at Leutham, at Kerby Steuen in Westmerland, at Ryhill, at Cribby. On Whitson-monday at Darrington in the North, at Burton, at Mid∣lome, at Harsl-gréene in Lancashire, at Oundle in Northamptonshire, at Whitchurch, at Bi∣clesworth, at Saint Iues, at Sléeforth in Lin∣colneshire, at Cokermouth in the North, at Salforth, at Exceter, at Easdome, at Apleby, at Rygate, at Sitingbridge at Bradford, at Amer∣son, at Dryfield in Yorkeshire, at Yorke, at Agmonham, at Stokechéere. On Whitson-tuesday at Melton Mowbray, at Longuer in Staffordshire, at Ashby, at de la zouch in Leice∣stershire, at Higher Knotsford in Cheshire at Oringstoke, at Laighton Buzzard, at Farring∣don in Barkshire, at Perith in Cornewall, at
Long-guilford, at Canterburie, at Rothford in Essex, at Lewis in Sussex, at Chipping at Daintry in Northamptonshire. On Wednes∣day in Whitson wéeke at Léeke in Stafford∣shire, at Sandborow, at Royston, at Newarks vpon Trent. On Thursday in Whitson wéeke at Kingstone vpon Thames, at Cockfield. On Friday in Whitson wéeke at Darby, at Cock∣fall. On Trinity euen at Skipton in Crauon, at Punfract, at Rowell in Northamptonshire for sixe daies. On Trinity Sunday at South∣cane in Yorkeshire, at Kendall, at Hounslow, at Stokesley, at Saint Mary Awke, at Tun∣bridge. On Trinity Monday at VVatford, at Spilby, at Ray in Essex. On Corpus Christi day at Couentry, at Stamford, at Banbury, at Stopport, at Prescoate, at Saint Néedes, at Hallaton, at Newberie, at Saint Annes, at Hemptstead, at Bishop Stratford, at Rosse. The Sunday next after Trinity-Sunday at Belton. On the Eue and on the Feast or day of Apostles Peter & Paul, at Greys Thorreck in Essex. On Relique Sunday, which is the sun∣day fortnight after Midsommer, at Fodringay. The sunday after the third of Iuly at Hauer∣hull. The sunday after Saint Bartholomew, at Sandbitch in Cheshire. The Twesday after Michaelmas at Salisburie. The Thurs∣day after Michaelmas at Banburie. FINIS.
A Table of These Particular Notes following, GAllen. page 15 The first Emperiall crowne of gold. page 17 The originall of the Patriarchy of Constantino∣ple. pag. 17 The death of Saint Ierome. pag. 17 Saint Patrique. pag. 18 Rome spoyled by the Gothes. pag. 18 The death of Saint Augustine. pag. 18 A strange pestilence. pag. 23 The life and death of the false Prophet Mahomet. pag. 24 Clocks and Dials appointed. pag. 26 The tyranny of Iustinian the Emperor. pag. 28 France spoiled by the Saracens. pag. 31 Germany conuerted. pag. 30 Saxonie conuerted. pag. 31 The Originall of Flanders. pag. 31 Solemne musicke in Churches. pag. 31 The Bishopricks of Hambro and Bream foun∣ded. pag. 32 The originall of Normandy. pag. 33 The Danes and Norweys conuerted. pag. 35
The translation of the Empire. p. 36 The Gamoth inuented. p. 37 The end of the race of Charlemaigne, and the be∣ginning of Hugh Capet. p. 38 Lubeck founded. p. 40 Frost fiue months together in England. p. 44 Goodwynsands. p. 49 The conquest of Ierusalem by Godfrey of Bol∣loigne. p. 50 The Story of Lybussa and Velasca, with her Ar∣my of Ladies. p. 56 Iohannes de Temporibus. p. 60 Gratianus. p. 62 London Bridge built of timber. p. 64 Yorke burned. p. 67 Paris streetes and London streetes paued. p. 68 A fish like a man. p. 69 The Iewes commit great outrages. p. 71 The first Kingdome of Tartars. p. 78 London Bridge built of stone. p. 79 Three thousand persons spoiled vpon London Bridge. p. 81 Winchellea destroied by a strange inundation. p. 94 The Shepheards of England and France go a pil∣grimage. p. 95 The twelue Peeres of France ordained. All the youth of London sworne. p. 96 The Saracens attempt to spoile Christendome, with other things of note. p. 97 Strange tempest: the first great rot of sheepe. p. 102
The originall of the Knights Templers▪ Knights of Rhodes and Malta. p. 104 Iustices punished, fifteene thousand Iewes bani∣shed. p. 109 Sea-coale forbidden to be burned nere London. p. 113 The French King burneth infected persons. p. 116 The Iewes in Germany burned. ibid. A terrible mortality with other things of note. p. 118, 119. and 100.126 The most honourable order of Knights of the Garter. p. 129 The misfortune of fiue great Princes. p. 131 A serpent in England with two heads. p. 133 The staple of wooll remoued. p. 143 A wondrous mortality in England of great note. p. 136 The famous Poets, Francis Petrarch and Iohn Boccace. p. 139 Tamberlayne taketh Baiazeth, & rescueth Con∣stantinople. p. 149 The first Duke of Millaine, with other things of note. p. 154 The first impost of salt in France. p. 161 The King of Englands Seale vsed in Paris, with other things of note. p. 163 Francis Sforce made Duke of Millaine. p. 167 The King of England crowned in Paris. p. 169 George Scanderbeg. p. 174 The originall of Printing. p. 178 An admirable sudden pestilence in Paris. Rome taken and sacked by the Duke of Bur∣bon,
vide in Anno 1526. The first Duke of Florence. p. 219 The last Duke of Millaine. p. 222 Barbarosso King of Argier. p. 232 The house of Ferneze made Dukes of Parma. p. 250 The last fall of base mony in England. p. 282 The Archbishop of Collen expulsed for marying a wife. p. 341 The Prince of Orenge slaine. p. 340 Antwerpe besieged. p. 348 Captaines of the Artillery Garden. p. 359 The Patriarch of Greece selleth his dignity. pag. 371 The Duke of Guyse slaine, and the French King slaine, being the last of the house of Valois, the house of Nauarre succeedeth him, the mi∣serie of Paris during the siege, and a briefe touch of some of the chiefe ancient Kings of France. p. 379 The Ciuill Law reduced into order. p. 398 The originall and State of Venice. p. 464 FINIS.
