25910A 99855432 20926
THE HYMNES AND SONGS OF THE CHVRCH; Diuided into two parts. The first part comprehends the Canonicall Hymnes, and such parcels of Holy Scripture, as may properly be sung, with some other ancient Songs and Creeds. The second part consists of Spirituall Songs, appropriated to the seuerall Times and Occasions obserueable in the Church of England. Translated and Composed, BY G. W. LONDON Printed by the Assignes of GEORGE WITHER. Cum Priuilegio Regis Regali.
TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Prince, IAMES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britaine, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c: Grace, Mercy and Peace, through Iesus Christ our Lord. THese Hymnes (Dread Soueraign) hauing diuers waies receiued life from your MAIESTIE, (as well as that approbation which the Church alloweth) are now imprinted ac∣cording to your Royall Priuiledge, to come abroad vnder your Gracious Prote∣ction. And what I deliuered vnto your Princely view at seuerall times, I here pre∣sent again, incorporated into one Volume. The first Part wherof, comprehends those Canonicall Hymnes, which were written, and left for our instruction, by the Holy Ghost. And those are not onely plainely and briefly expressed in Lyrick verse: but
by their short Prefaces, properly applied also to the Churches particular occasions in these times. Insomuch, that (howeuer some neglect them as impertinent) it is thereby apparant, that they appertaine no lesse to vs, then vnto those, in whose times they were first composed. And (if the con∣iecture of many good and learned men de∣ceiue them not) the later Part, containing Spirituall Songs, appropriated to the seue∣rall times and occasions obseruable in the Church of England (together with briefe Arguments, declaring the purpose of those Obseruations) shall become a meanes both of encreasing Knowledge, and Christian Conformitie within your Dominions: Which, no doubt, your MAIESTIE wisely foresawe, when you pleased to graunt and command, that these Hymnes should be annexed to all Psalme-bookes in English Meeter. And I hope, you shall thereby encrease both the honour of God, and of your MAIESTIE. For, these Hymnes, and the knowledge which they offer, could no other way, with such certainety, and so little inconuenience, be conueied to the
common people, as by that meanes which your MAIESTIE hath graciously prouided. And now (maugre their malice, who la∣bour to disparage & suppresse these Helps to Deuotion) they shall, I trust, haue free scope to worke that effect which is desi∣red; and to which end, I was encouraged to translate and compose them. For, how meanly soeuer some men may thinke of this Endeauour; I trust the successe shall make it appeare, that the Spirit of God was the first moouer of the worke. Wher∣in, as I haue endeuored to make my Expressions such as may not bee con∣temptible to men of best vnderstandings: So I haue also labored to sute them to the nature of the Subiect, and the common Peoples capacities, without regard of catching the vaine blasts of Opinion. The same also hath beene the ayme of Master Orlando Gibbons (your MAIESTIES seruant, and one of the Gentlemen of your Honourable Chappell) in fitting them with tunes. For, he hath chosen to make his musicke agreeable to the matter, and
what the common apprehension can best admit; rather then to the curious Fancies of the Time: Which path both of vs could more easily haue troden. Not ca∣ring therfore, what any of those shall cen∣sure, who are more apt to controule, then to consider; I commit this to Gods bles∣sing and Your fauourable Protection: Humbly beseeching your MAIESTIE, to accept of these our Endeuours; and praying God to sanctifie both vs and this Worke to his glory: Wishing also (most vnfainedly) euerlasting consolations to your MAIESTIE, for those temporall Comforts you haue vouchsafed me, and that felicity here, which may aduance your happinesse in the life to come. Amen. Your MAIESTIES most Loyall Subiect, GEORGE WITHER.
THE FIRST PART OF The HYMNES and SONGS of the CHVRCH, containing those which are transla∣ted out of the Canonicall Scripture, together with such other Hymnes and Creeds, as haue anci∣ently beene sung in the Church of ENGLAND. The Preface. PLainely false is their Supposition, who conciue that the Hymnes, Songs and Elegies of the Old Testament are impertment to these later Ages of the Church. For, neither the Actions, nor writings of the Auncient Israelites, which are recorded by the Holy Spirit, were permitted to be done, or written for their owne sakes, so much as that they might be profitable to warne and instruct vs of the latter Times; accor∣ding to Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 10. And indeed, so much is not onely testified by that Apostle in the place afore recited, and throughout the Epistle to the Hebrewes; but the very names of those Persons and Places, mentioned in these Hymnes and Songs, doe manifest it, and farre better ex∣presse the nature of that which they mystically point out, then of what they are litterally applied vnto; as those who will looke into their proper significations shall apparently discouer. That therefore these parcels of Holy-Scripture (which are for the most part Meter in their Original tongue) may be the better remembred, to the glory of God; and the
oftner repeated, to those ends for which they were written. They are here disposed into Lyrick-Verse; and doe make the First part of this Booke: Which Booke is called, The Hymnes and Songs of the Church; not for that I would haue it thought part of the Churches Liturgie; but be∣cause they are made in the person of all the Faithfull, and do (for the most part) treat of those things which concerne the whole Catholike Church. The first Song of Moses. Exod. 13. THis Song was composed and sung, to prayse the LORD, for the Israelites miraculous pasage through the Red-Sea, & for their deliuery from those Egyptians, who were there drowned. It may (and should also) be sung in the Christian Congregations, or by their parti∣cular members, both with respect to the Historicall and Mysticall sences thereof. Historically, in commemora∣tion of that particular Deliuerance, which God had so long agoe, and so wondrously vouchsafed to his perse∣cuted and afflicted Church. Mystically, in acknowledge∣ment of our own powerfull Deliuerance from the bon∣dage of those spiriuall Aduersaries, whereof those were the Types. For, Pharaoh (signifying vengeance) typified Our great Enemie, who with his host of Temptations, Aflictions, &c. pursueth vs in our passage to the spiritu∣all Canaan. The Red-Sea represented our Baptisme, 1 Cor. 10.2. By the Dukes and Princes of Eom (men∣tioned in this Song) are prefigured those Powers and Friends of the kingdome of Darknesse, which are, or shall be, molested at the newes of our Regeneration.
And therefore, this Hymne may very properly be vsed after the Administration of Baptisme. The first Song. NOw shall the praises of the LORD  be sung; For, hee a most renowned Triumph  wonne: Both Horse and Man into the Sea  he flung: And them together there hath ouer∣throwne.  The LORD is He, whose strength
doth make me strong; And he is my saluation,  and my Song: My GOD, for whom I will  a house prepare; My Fathers GOD, whose  prayse I will declare. 2 Well knoes the LORD, to war what doth pertaine; The LORD-Almighty is his glorious Name: e Pharaohs Charrets, and his armed Traine, Amid the Sea or'ewhelming, ouercame: Those of his Army, that were most renoun'd, e hath together in the Red-sea drown'd; The Deepes, a couering ouer them were throwne, And to the bottome sunke they like a stone. 3 LORD, by thy powre thy Right hand famous growes:
Thy Right hand, LORD, thy Foe destroyed hath: Thy Glory thy Opposers ouerthrowes; And stubble-like, consumes them in thy wrath. A blast but from thy nostrils forth did goe, And vp together did the waters flow; Yea, rowled vp on heapes; the liquid Flood Amid the Sea, as if congealed, stood. 4 I will pursue them (their Pursuer cri'd) I will or'etake them, and the spoile enioy: My lust vpon them shalbe satisfi'd: With sword vnsheath'd my hand shall them destroy. Then from thy breath a gale of winde was sent; The billowes of the Sea quite or'e them went: And they the mighty waters suncke into, Eu'n as a weighty peece of Lead will do. 5 LORD, who like thee among the GODS is there! In holinesse so glorious who may be! Whose prayses so exceeding dreadfull are! In doing wonders, who can equall thee! Thy glorious Right hand thou on high didst reare, And in the earth they quickly swallow'd were. But thou in mercy on-ward hast conuad Thy People, whose redemption thou hast paid. 6 Them by thy strength thou hast bin pleasd to beare Unto a holy Dwelling place of thine: The Nations at report thereof shall feare; And grieue shall they that dwell in Palestine. On Edoms Princes shall amazement fall: The mighty men of Moab tremble shall; And such as in the land of Cana'n dwell Shall pine away, of this when they heare tell. 7 They shalbe ceazed with a dreadfull feare: Stoe-quiet thy Right hand shall make them be▪
Till passed ouer, LORD, thy People are; Till those passe ouer, that were bought by thee. For, thou shalt make thē to thy Hill repaire, And plant them there (oh LORD) where thou art heire: Eu'n there, where thou thy Dwelling hast prepar'd; That Holy place which thine owne hands haue rear'd. 8 The LORD shall euer and for euer raigne. (His Soueraignty shall neuer haue an end) For, when as Pharoh did into the Maine With Charrets and with horsemen downe descend, The LORD did backe againe the Sea recall, And with those waters ouerwhelm'd them all. But, through the very inmost of the same, The seed of Israel safe and dry-shod came. The second Song of Moses. Deut. 23. THis Song was giuen by God himselfe, to be taught the Iewes, that it might remaine as a witnesse against them when they should forget his benefits. For, it ap∣peares, the diuine wisedome knew, that when the Law would be lost, or forgotten, a Song might be remembred to posteritie. In this Hymne (Heauen and Earth being clled to witnesse) the Prphet makes first a narration of the Iewes peruersnes, and then deliuereth prophetically three principall things; wherein diuers other particu∣lars are considerable. The first is a Praediction of the Iewes Idolatry, with the punishments of it. The second is their htred to Christ, with their Abiection. And the last, is of the calling of the Gentiles. We therefore, that haue by fith and experience seene the successe of what is herein foretold, ought to sing it often, in remem∣brance of Gods Iustice and Mercy. And (seeing we are all apt enough to become as forgetfull of our Redeemers
fauour as they) we should by the repetition hereof, seeke so to stirre vp our considerations, that (as Saint Paul counselleth) we might the better meditate the good∣nesse and seueritie of God, &c. For, if he hath not spared the naturall branches, Let vs take heed, as the same A∣postle aduiseth. Rom. 11.24. Song. 2. Sing this as the first Song. TO what I speake an eare yee Heauens lend, And heare, thou Earth, what words I vtter wil. Like drops of Raine, my Speeches shall descend, And as the Dew, my Doctrine shall distill: Like to the smaller Raine on tender flowres; And as vpon the grasse the greater showres. For, I the LORDS great Name will publish now; That so our GOD may praysed be of you. 2 He is that Rocke, whose workes perfection are: For, all his wayes with iudgement guided be. A GOD of truth, from all wrong-doing cleere: A truely iust, and righteous-one is he; Though they themselues defil'd vnlike his sons. And are a crooked race of froward-ones. Oh mad and foolish Nation! why dost thou Thy selfe vnto the LORD so thanklesse show? 3 Thy Father and Redeemer is not he? Hath he not made, and now confirm'd thee fast? Oh call to mind the dayes that older be, And weigh the yeares of many ages past. For, if thou aske thy Father, he will tell, Thy Elders also, can informe thee well, How, he (the high'st) did Adams sonnes diuide, And shares for eu'ry Family prouide;
4 And how the Nations Bounds he did prepare, In number with the Sonnes of Israel. For, in his People had the LORD his share, And Iacob for his part alotted fell: Whom finding in a place possest of none, (A Desert va, vntilled and vnknowne) He taught them there; he led them farre and nigh, And kept them as the Apple of his eye. 5 Eu'n as an Eagle, to prouoke her young. About her nest doth houer here and there, Spread forth her wings to traine her birds along, And sometime on her back her yonglings beare: Right so, the LORD conducted them alone, When for his aid Strange god with him was none. Them on the High-lands of the earth he set, Where they the plenties of the field might eat. 6 For them he made the Rocke with Hony flow: He drayned oyle from stones, and them did feed With milke of Shepe, with butter of the Cow, With Goats, fat Lambs, & Rams of Bashan breed. The finest of the wheat he made their food; And of the Grape they drunke the purest blood▪ But, herewithall vnthankfull Israel So fat became, he kicked with his heel. 7 Growne at, and ith their grossenesse couerd or'e. Their God, their Maker, they did soone forsake: Their Rock of health regarded was no more: But with Strange gods him iealous they did make▪ To moue his wrath, they hatefull things deuiz'd: To Diuels in his stead they sacrifiz'd: To Gods vnknowne, that new inuented wee, And such▪ as their Fore-fathers did not feare.
8 They minded not the Rocke who them begate, But quite forgot the God, that orm'd them hath: Which when the LR perceiu'd, it made him ate His Sonnes & Daughters, mouing him to wrath. To marke their end, said he, Ile hide my face: For, they are faithlesse Sonnes, of froward race: My wrath, with what is not a GOD, they moue, And my displeasure with their follies proue. 9 And I, by those that are no People, yet Their rathfull ielousie will moue for this; And by a foolish Nation make them fret. For, in my wrath a fire inflamed is; And down to Hell the earth consume it shall, Eu'n to the Mountains bottoms, fruit and all▪ In heapes vpon them mischiefes will I throw; And shoot mine arrowes till I haue no moe. 10 With hunger parched and consumd with heat, I will enforce them to a bitter end: The teeth of Beasts vpon them will I set, And will the poys'nous dust-fed Serpent send. The sword without, and feare within, shall say Mads, yongmen, babes, and him whose haire is gray▪ Yea, I had vowd to spread thē here & there, Men might forget, that such a people were. 11 But this the Foe compe'ld me to delay; Lest tha their aduersaries (prouder growne) Should when they heard it) thus presume to say; This, not the LORD, but our high hand hath done. For, in this People no discretion is; Nor can their dulnesse reach to iudge of this. Oh had they wisedome this to comprehend! That so they might bethinke them of their end.
12 How should one make a thousand run away, Or two men put ten thousand to the foile; Except their Rocke had sold them for a pray, And that the LORD had clos'd them vp the while? For, though our Foes thēselues the Iudges were, Their God they cannot with our GOD compare: But, they haue vines like those that Sodom yeelds, And such as are within Gomorrha fields. 13 They beare the Grapes of gall vpon their vine: Extreamely bitter are their clusters all: Yea, made of Dragons venom is their wine, And of the cruell Aspes, infectious gall. And can this (euer) be forgot of me! Or not be sealed where my treasures be? Sure, mine is vengeance; and I will repay: Their feet shall slide at their appointed day. 14 Their time of Ruine neere at hand is come: Those things that shall befall them hast will make. For, then the LORD shall giue his People doome, And on his Seruants kind compassion take: When he perceiues their strength bereft & gone, And that in prison they are left alone; Where ae their Gods become? he then shall say; Their Rocke on whom affiance they did lay? 15 Who ate the fartest of their Sacrifice? Who of their Drinke-oblations dranke the wine? Let those vnto their succour now arise, And vnder their protection them enshrine. Behold, consider now, that I am He, And that there is no other God with me: I kill and make aliue: I wound, I cure; And there is none can from my hand assure.
16 For, vp to heau'n on high my hand I reare. And (as I ue for euer) this I say; When I my shining sword to whet prepare, And shall my hand to acting vengeance lay, I will not case till I my foes requite, And am aueng d on all that beare me spite: But, in their blood, hich I shall make to flow, Will steepe mine arrowes, till they drunken grow. 17 My sword shall eat the flesh and blood of those Who shalbe either slaine or brought in thral, When I begin this vengeance on my Foes. Sing therefore, wih his Pople, Nations all. For, he his Seruants blood with blood will pay, And due auengement on his Foes will lay. But, to his Land compassion he will show; And on his People mercy shall bestow. The Song of Deborah and Barak. Iudges. 5. THis Hymne was composed to glorifie God for the great ouerthrow giuen to Sisera: who comming armed with many hundred Chares of Iron against the poore oppressed Israelites (when they had not a sword or speare among forty thouand of them) was neuer∣thelesse miraculously discomfited: to shew the vnbelee∣uing people, that the LORD onely is the God of bt∣tles; and, that he is both able, an doth often, deliuer his CHVRCH without the ordinary meanes. By the repetition hereof, we prayse God, in commemorating one of the great Deliuerance heretofore vouchsafed to his Church. And in these times of feare and wauering, we may also by this memorable example of God's pro∣uidence,
strengthen our faith, which is many times weakned by the outward power, prosperitie, or vaine boastings of the Churches Aduersaries: Who shall (doubtlesse) be at last shamefully ruined (according to the Propheticall imprecation concluding this Song) notwithstanding their many likelihoods of preuailing. Yea, the, perhaps, shall that destruction come on them, to Gods greater Glory, when our estate seemes to be most desperate. Song. 3. SIng praises Isr'el to the LORD, that thee  auenged so: When to the fight with free accord,  The people forth did go. You Kings giue care;  you Princes heare, while to the LORD I raise
my voice aloud, and sing to GOD, (the LORD  of Isr'el) praise. 2 When thou departedst, LORD, from Seir, When thou leftst Edom feld, Earth shooke, the heauens dropped there, The clouds did water yeeld. LORD, at thy sight A trembling fright Upon the Mountaines fell: Eun at thy looke Mount-Sinai shooke, LORD GOD of Israel. 3 Not long agoe in Shamghar's dayes, Old Anath's valiant Sonne; And late, in Iael's time; the wayes Frequented were of none: The passengers Were wanderers In crooked paths vnknowne: And none durst dwell Through Israel, But in a walled Towne.
4 Untill I Deborah arose (Who rose a mother there) In Isr'el when new Gods they chose, That fild their gates with warre. And they had there Nor shield nor speare In their possession, then; To arme for fight) One Israelite, Mong forty thousand men. 5 To those that Isr'els Captaines are My heart doth much incline; To those, I meane, that willing were: Oh LORD the prayse be thine. Sing ye for this, Whose vse it is To ride on Asses gray; All ye that yet In Middin sit, Or trauell by the way. 6 The place where they their water drew, From Archers now is cleare. The  vprightnesse they shall shew, And is iust dealing there. The Hamlets all, Through Isr'el shall His righteousnesse record: And downe vnto The Gates shall goe Th People of the LORD. 7 Arise oh Deborah arise: Rie, rie, and sing a Song.
Abinoam's sonne, oh Barak rise: Thy Captiues lead along. Their Prince all, By him made thrall To the Suruiuor be. To triumph on The Mighty one, The LOR vouchsafed me. 8 A root, from out of Ephraim Gain'st Amalek arose: And (of the people) next to him The Beniamites were those. From Machir (where Good Leaders are) Came well experienc't men: And they came downe From Zabulon That handle well the Pen. 9 Along with Deborah did goe The Lords of Isachar; With Isachar, eu'n Barak too, Was one among them there. He foorth was sent, And marching went On foot the lower-way. For Reuben (where Diuisions were Right thought-full hearts had they. 10 The bleaing of the flockes to heare. Oh wherefore didst thou stay r For Reuben (where diuisions were) Right thought-full hearts had they▪ But, why did they
Of Gilead stay On Iordans other side? And wherefore than, Didst thou oh Dan, Within thy Tents abide? 11 Among his harbours, lurking by The seaside, Asher lay. But, Zabulun and Nephthali Kept not themselues away. They people are, Who fearelesse dare Their liues to death expose; And did not yeeld The hilly-field, Though Kings did them oppose. 12 With them the Cananitish Kings At Tana'ch fought that day, Close by Megiddo's water-springs; Yet bore no Prize away. For loe, the Starres Fought in their Spheares: Gainst Sisera fought they. And some (by force) The water-course Of Kishon, swept away. 13 Eu'n Kishon Riuer, which was long A famous Torrent knowne. Oh thou my soule! oh thou, the strong, Hast brauely trodden downe. Their Horse (whose pace So lofty was) Their hoofes with prancing wound; Those of the Strong,
That kickt and flung, And fiercely beat the ground. 14 A heauy curse on Meroz lay: Curst be her dwellers all. The Angell of the LORD doth say, That Citie curse you shall. And, therefore, this Accursing is: They came not to the fight, To helpe the LORD, (To helpe the LORD) Against the Men of Might. 15 But, blest be Iael, Heber's spouse The Kenite; blest be she, More then all women are, of those That vse in Tents to be. To him did she Giue milke, when he Did water onely wish; And butter set For him to eat, Upon a lordly dish. 16 She, in her left hand tooke a naile. And rais'd vp in the Right A workemans hammer; wherewithall She Sisera did smite. His head she tooke When she had strooke His pierced Temples through. He fell withall: And in the fall, He at her feet did bow.
17 He at her feet did bow his head; Fell downe, and life forlooke. Meane whil his longing Mother did From out her window looke: Thus, cying at The Lattice grate, Why stayes his Chariot so From hasting home? Oh! wherefore come His Chariot wheeles so slow? 18 As thus she spake, her Ladies wise To her an answere gaue. Yea, to herselfe, her selfe replies; Sure, sped (saith she) they haue: And all this while They part the spoyle; A Damsell, one or twaie, Each homeward beares, And Sisera shares A party-colour'd Pray. 19 Of needle-worke, both sides of it In diuers colours, are: Eu'n such as doth his necke befit That vseth Spoyles to weare. So LORD still so, Thy foes or'e throwe: But, who in thee delight, Oh! le them be Sunne-like, when he Ascendeth in his might.
The Song of Hannah. 1. Sam. 2.1. HAnnah the wife of Elkanah, being baren (and therefore vpbraided nd vexed by Peinnah her hubands other wife) prayed vnto the Lord for a Sonne. And hauing obtained him, glorified God in this Song, for deliuering her from the contempt of her aduera∣ry. By Hannah (which signifieth Grace or Gratious) was the Church of Christ epresented: And by Peninnah (sig∣nifying despised or forsaken) was figured the Iewish Sy∣nagogue. This Song therefore, is to be vnderstood as a mysticall Prophesie of that Abiection of the Iewes and calling of the Gentiles, which was fulfilled vpon the birth of Iesus Christ, our true Samuel: at whose concep∣tion the blessed Virgine Mary, in her Magnificat, ac∣knowledged the verifying of many particulars foretold in this Song; euen almost in the same words. In me∣moriall therefore of these Mysteries, we ought to sing this Hymne: to comfort vs also, against the pride and arrogancie of those, who, by reason of their multitudes, shall scorne, and vpbraid the true Church, as mother on∣ly of a few poore and obscure children. And we may vse it likewise to prayse God for that fruitfulnesse which he hath giuen to our Holy mother; who hath lately had many children aduanced to be Kings, and to sit on the most eminent thrones of Glory in the earth, according to this Propheticall Song. Song. 4. NOw in the LORD my heart doth pleasure take:
My hone is in the LORD aduanced high.  And to my Foes an answere I will make;  Because in his saluation ioy'd am I.  Like him, there is not any holy-One:  And other LORD beside him, there is none: 2 Nor like our God another God is there. So proudly vaunt not then, as heretofore; But, let your tongues from henceforth now for∣beare▪
All vaine presuming words, for euermore. For why? the LORD is God who all things knows, And doth each purpose to his end dispose. 3 Now broken is their bow, that once were stout: And girt with vigor they that stumbled are. The Full, themselues for bread haue hired out: Which now they need not do, that hungry were. The Barren-wombe, doth seuen children owne: And she, that once had many, weake is growne. 4 The LORD doth slay; and he reuiues the slaine. He to the graue doth bring; and backe he beares. The LORD makes poore; and rich he makes againe. He throweth downe: and vp on high he reares. He from the dust, and from the dunghill brings The Begger, and the poore, to sit with Kings. 5 He reares them to inherit Glories throne. For why? the LORD'S the Earth's vpholders are: The world hath he erected therevpon. He to the footing of his Saints hath care. But, dumb in darknesse, Sinners shall remaine: For in their strength, shall men be strong in vain. 6 The LORD will to destruction bring them all, (Eu'n eu'ry one) that shall with him contend. From out of heau'n he thunder on them shall, And iudge the world vnto the farthest end. With strength & power, his King he will supply, And raise the Horne of his Anointed, high. The Lamentation of Dauid, ouer Saul, and Ionathan his sonne, 2. Sam. 1.1. IN this funeall Elegie Dauid bewaileth the Death of Saul and Ionathan: from whence these obseruati∣ons
may be collected. First, that the slaughter of a va∣liant Prince is an outward blemish, and iust cause of sor∣row in the State. Secōdly that the insulting of an aduer∣sary is not the least affliction. Thirdly, that the Moun∣taines of Gilboa are accursed to this day: For, by Gilb (which is interpreted slippery or inconstant) is mystically vnderstood that irresolution or despaire, by which men fall into the power of their spirituall aduersary. Fourth∣ly, we hence may learne to commemorate those things which re rae-worthy euen in our enemie. Lastly it sheweth vs that wise and good men may tender oe friend more affectionately then another; and that it misbeseemes them not to bewaile their death. This is to be ung historically for our instruction in the particu∣lars afore mentioned. And may be obserued as a pat∣terne for our funerall Poemes. Song. 5. THy beauty, Israel, is gone; slaine in the Places  high is he: The Mighty now are ouerthrowne.  Oh, thus how commeth it to be!
Let not this newes their streets throughout, In Gath, or Askalon, be told For feare Philistia's daughters flout: Lest vaunt th'vncircumcized should. 2 On you, hereafter, let no dewe You Mountaines of Gilboa, fall. Let there be neither showers on you, Nor fields that breed an offring shall. For, there with shame, away was throwne The Target of the strong (alas) The shield of Saul, eu'n as of one That neu'r with oyle anoynted was. 3 Nor from their blood that slaughter'd lay, Nor from the fart of strong-men slaine; Came Ionathan his bow away, Nor drew forth Saul his sword in vaine▪ In life time, they were louely faire; In death they vndiuided are. More swift then Eagles of the ayre, And stronger they, then Lyons were. 4 Weepe Isrel's daughters, weepe for Saul, Who you with skarlet hath arayd; Who clothed you with Pleasures all, And on your garments gold hath layd. How comes it, he that mighty was, The foyle in battell doth sustaine! Thou Ionathan, oh thou (alas) Upon thy Places-high wert slaine. 5 And, much distressed is my heart, My brother Ionathan, for thee, My very deare-delight thou wert, And wondrous was thy loue to me.
So wondrous, it surpassed farre The loue of women (eu'ry way.) Oh, how the Mighty fallen are! How warlike Instruments, decay! Dauids Thankesgiuing. 1. Chro. 29.10. KIng Dauid hauing by perswasions and his own liberall example, stirred vp the people to a bou∣tifull Beneuolence toward the building of Gods house▪ praysed him for that willing and cheereful free-offrin▪ And in this Thanksgiuing, we obserue this method. Fir▪ he acknowledgeth Gods Blessednesse, Greatnesse, Pow, Glory, Victory, Maiestie, Bountie, with the like: and co∣fesseth in generall that Honour, Riches, Strength, wi all other good things are at the Almighties disposing. Secondly, he therefore prayseth the Lord; and acknow∣ledgeth also, that his, and the peoples willingnesse  giue, came not of themselues; but was Gods ow proper gift (as well as that which they had giuen.) La∣ly, He prayeth for the continuance of Gods blessin both vpon their purposes and endeauours: and, th their Beneuolence may be disposed to that End for whic it was giuen. This Song, may be very properly vsed, whensoeuer among vs, there hath beene any free an liberall contributions to good and pious Ends. An to fit the same the better to such purposes; the Person▪ and some few circumstances, are a little changed  this Translation. Song. 6. Sing this as the fifth Song. OH LORD our euerlasting GOD, Blisse, Greatnesse, Power, & Praise is thine.
With thee, haue Conquests their abode, And glorious Maiestie diuine. All things that earth and heau'n afford, Thou at thine owne disposing hast. To thee belongs the Kingdome, LORD, And thou, for head, or'e all art plact. 2 Thou wealth, and Honour dost command, To thee, made subiect all things be: Both strength and power, are in thine hand, To be dispos'd as pleaseth thee. And now, to thee our God therefore; A Song of thankfulnesse we frame. (That what we owe, we may restore) And glorifie, thy glorious Name. 3 But, what, or who are we (alas) That we in giuing are so free! Thine own before, our Offring'was, And all we haue, we haue from thee. For, we are Ghuests, and Strangers here, As were our Fathers in thy sight: Our dayes but shadow-like appeare, And suddenly they take their flight. 4 This offring, LORD our GOD, which thus We for thy Name sake haue bestowne, Deriued was, from thee, to vs; And that we giue, is all thine owne. Oh GOD, thou proou'st the heart, we know, And dost affect vprightnesse there. With gladnesse, therefore, we bestow What we haue freely offerd here. 5 Still thus (Oh LORD our GOD) incline Their meanings, who thy people be.
And euer, let the hearts of thine Be thus prepared vnto Thee. Yea, giue vs perfit hearts, we pray, That we thy pecepts erre not from. And grant, our Contribution may An honour to thy Name become. The Prayer of Nehemiah. Nehem. 1.5. NEhemiah, determining (as the story sheweth) to moue Artaxerxes for the repaire of the Citie and house of the Lord, first made this prayer. Wherein ha∣uing acknowledged the Maiestie, Iustice, and Mercy of God, he confesseth the haynousnese of his and his peo∣ples sinnes; desireth forgiuenesse; entreateth for the peoples deliuerance from captiuitie; and requesteth h may find fauour in the sight of the King his Master. Now, we who by regeneration are the sonnes of Isra∣el (and such as in a spirituall sence, may be said also, to be dispersed among the heathen, as often s we are car∣ried captiue by the heathenish conupiscences and va∣nities of the word) euen we may in a litterall sence make vse of this excellent forme of confession, before our seuerall Petitions. And doubtlese a faithfull v∣sing o these the Holy Ghosts owe words (with remem∣brance of the hppie successe they hertofore had) will much strengthen and encrease the hope, confidence, and comfort of him that prayeth. Who changing the two last lines onely, may appropriate it to any necssity. For example, if it be to be sung before labour, conclud it thus; And be thou pleas'd, O LORD▪ to blesse; Our La∣bours with a good successe If before a iourney, thus; And LORD all dangers keepe vs fom; Both gog foorth, and comming home. If before a battel thus; And
be thou pleased, in the fight, To make vs victors by thy might. If in the time of famine, thus; And, LORD vouchsafe thou, in this need, Our soules and bodies both to feed. If before a Sermon, &c. thus; And grant, that we, LORD, in thy feare, May to our profit speake and heare. And the like, as occasion requires. Song. 7. Sing this as the 9. Song. LORD GOD of Heau'n, who onely art The mighty God, and full of feare; Who neuer promise▪ breaker wert, But euer shewing mercy there Where men affection beare to thee, And of thy Lawes obseruers be. 2 Giue eare, and ope thine eyes, I pray, That heard thy seruans suit may be, Made in thy presence night and day, For Israels Seed, that serueth thee: For Israels seed, who (I confesse) Against thee grieuously transgresse. 3 I, and my Fathers house did sinne, Corrupted all our actions bee: And disrespectiue we haue bin Of Statutes, Iudgements, and Decree; Of those, which to retaine so fast, Thy seruant Moses charg'd thou hast. 4 Oh yet, remember thou, I pray, These words, which thou didst heretofore Unto thy seruant Moses say. If ere (saidst thou) they vexe me more, I will disperse them eu'ry where, Among the Nations here and there.
5 But, if to me they shall conuert, To doe those things my Law containe; Though spread to Heau'ns extreamest part, I would collect them thence againe, And bring them there to make repose, Where I to place my Name haue chose. 6 Now, these thy People are (of right) Thy seruants, who to thee belong; Whom thou hast purchas'd by thy Might, And by thine Arme exceeding strong: Oh! let thine eare, Lord, I thee pray, Attentiue be to what I say. 7 The prayer of thy seruant heare; Oh, heare thy seruants when they pray, (Who willing are thy Name to feare) Thy seruant prosper thou to day: And be thou pleas'd to grant that he May fauour'd in thy presence be. The Song of King Lemuel. Prou 31.10. THis Song is Alphabeticall in the originall. It contai∣neth an admirable description of a good Wife: And these three things are here principally considerable; the aduantage her Husband receiueth by her; the commen∣dable vertues she hath in her selfe; And the reward th followes her. Her Husbands aduantages are these: A quiet heartfree from iealousie or distrust of her; a ric estate without oppressing others; and place of hono in the Common-wealth. Her vertues are, Industry, Pr∣uidence, Chearefulnesse, Courage, and Vnweariednesse in pro∣uiding for, & disposing of her temporall affaires: More∣ouer
continuall loue to her Husband; liberality to the poore; gouernment of her tongue; and heedfulnesse to those courses her houshold takes. Her reward is this: Her Husband is confident in her; she shall haue com∣fort of her labours; her posterity shall blesse her; her Husband shall praise her aboue other women: she shall be honoured in life, and haue ioy at her death. It is in∣deed, an excellent Marriage-Song, fit to be vsed at the solemnizing of those Rites. For it ministreth instructi∣on becomming that occasion. Yea perhaps, the Mu∣sicke of it would stirre vp good affections also (where vnpleasing discords are now heard) if it were often sung in priuate Families. Song. VIII. Sing this as the sixt Song. WHo findes a Woman good and wise, A gemme more worth then Pearls hath got; Her Husbands heart on her relies: To liue by spoyle he needeth not. His comfort all his life is she. No wrong she willingly will doe: For Wooll and Flax her searches be: And cheerefull hands she puts thereto. 2 The Merchant-ship resembling right, Her food she from a farre doth fet. E're day she wakes, that giue she might Her maids their taske, her houshold meat. A field she viewes, and that she buyes; Her hand doth plant a vineyard there, Her loynes with courage vp she tyes; Her Armes with vigor strengthned are.
3 If in her worke she profit feele, By night her Candle goes not out: She puts her finger to the wheele, Her hand the spindle twirles about. To such as poore and needy are, Her hand (yea, both hands) reacheth she: The Winter none of hers doth feare, For, double cloath d her houshold be. 4 She Mantles maketh, wrought by hand▪ And silke and purple clothing gets: Among the Rulers of the Land (Knowne in the Gate) her Husband sits. For sale, fine Linnen weaueth she, And irdles to th Marchant seds: Renowne and strength her clothings be, And ioy her later time, attends. 5 She speakes discreetly when she talkes; The law of Grace her tongue hath learnd: She heeds the way her houshold walkes, And feedeth not on bread vn-eatnd. Her Children ris, and blest her call: Her Husband thus applaudeth her; Oh! thou hast farre surpast them all, Though many Daughters thriuing are. 6 Deceitfull Fauour quickly weares, And Beauty suddenly decayes: But, if the LORD she truly fears That Woman well deserueth praise. The fruit her handy worke obtaines, Without repining grant her that; And yeeld her what her labour gaines, To doe her honour in the Gate,
THE SONG OF SONGS. The Preface. SVch is the mercy of God, that hee taketh aduantage euen of our naturall affections, to beget in our soules an ap∣prehension of his loue, and of the mysteries which tend to our true happinesse; so, fitting his diuine expressions to the se∣uerall inclinations of men, that meanes might be prouided to winne some of all. For, otherwhile hee doth it by comparing the same to the glories of a temporall Kingdome, to winne such as are most desirous of honours. Sometime hee illu∣strates it by Treasures, Gold, and pretious Stones, &c. the better to allure such as are tempted with things of that nature. And diuers other wayes also, as appeares through∣out the Booke of God. But in this Song of Salomon (wherein is mystically expressed the mutuall affction be∣twixt Christ and his Church, with the chiefe passages ther∣of throughout all Ages from Abel to the last Iudgement; at which time their blessed marriage shall be fully consūmated) he doth most mouingy impart vnto vs, the raushing content∣ments of the diuine-Loue; by comparing it to that delight which is conceaued in the strongest, the commonest, the most pleasing, the most naturall and the most commendable of our Affections. And doubtles, it powerfully preuaileth to the en∣flaming of their spirituall Loue, who seeke rightly to vnder∣stand and apply the mysteries & expressions herein contained. Let no man therefore presume to sing, or repeat, in a carnall sense, what is here spiritually intended; vpon paine of Gods
heauie indignation. Nor let the wisedome of flesh and bloud vainely neglect Gods fauour, in offring this for the comfort of such as will rightly apply the same; because some Atheists and Sensuall men, shall perhaps turne this grace of God into watonesse, to their owne condemnation. The first Canticle. IN this Canticle, is first expressed that longing which the whole Catholicke Church had for the embraces of her Redeemer, (from the time of Abel, till his first comming) with her acknowledgement of his rauishing Excellencies; her desire to be drawne after him; and her confession of that ioyful happinesse which will arise from his fauours. Secondly, the particular Church of the Gentiles is brought in, intreating an vndespised vn∣on with the Synagogue of the Iewes, both confessing and excusing her blemishes. Thirdly, the whole Catholike-Church is againe introduced, as desiring to be fed and guided by her beloued Shepheard. Fourthly, her Peti∣tion is most graciously answered, and she directed to follow the steps of the holy Patriarkes and Prophets. Fi∣nally, Christ setteth forth the power and rich graces of his Spouse, with what other ornaments hee will prepare for her. This Canticle w may sing to the stirring vp of our spirituall Loue; hauing first seriously meditated thse things: to wit; That desire we ought to haue in our soules to be ioyned to Christ; the excellencie of his perfections; the backwardnesse of our humane Nature to entertaine his loue; the deformity and dammage we sustaine till wee be receiued into the communion of Saints; the readinesse of Christ to receiue and direct vs; the pleasure he will take in our loue; and the prouision he will make for the further beautifying of our soules.
Song. 9. COme kisse me with those lips of thine; For,  better are thy Loues then wine. And, as the  powred Oyntments be, Such is the sauour of  thy Name: And, for the sweetnesse of the same,  The Virgins are in loue with thee. 2 Begin but thou to draw me on, And thn, we after Thee will run.
Oh, King, thy Chambers bring me to: So, we in thee delight shall finde, And more then ine thy Loue will minde; And loue thee as the Righteous doe. 3 And Daughters of Ierusalem, I pray you doe not me contemne, Because that blacke I now appeare. For, I as louely am (I know) As Kedar Tents (appeare in show) Or Solomon his Curtaines are. 4 Though blacke I am, regard it not: It is but Sunne-burne I haue got; Whereof my Mothers Sonnes were cause: Their Uineyard keeper me they made, (Through enuy which to me they had) So, mine owne Uine neglected was. 5 Thou, whom my soule doth best affect, Uo thy pastures me direct, Where thou at Noone art stretcht along: For, why should I be stragling spide Like her that loues to turne aside, Thy fellowshepheards flockes among? 6 Oh fairest of all Woman kinde! (If him thou know not where to finde) Goe where the paths of Cattell are: Their tract of foot-steps stray not from, Till to the Shepheard Tents thou come, And feed thy tender Kidlings there. 7 My Loue, thou art of greater force, Then Pharaoh's troupes of Charet-hore. Thy cheekes and necke, made louely be
With rowes of stone, and many a chaine: And, we gold-borders will ordaine, Beset with siluer studs▪ for thee. The second Canticle. THis Song seemeth to set forth the mysterie of Christ his Incarnation, whereby the Churches first Petition (mentioned in the former Canticle) is accomplished. And herein, these particulars appeare to be mystically expressed. His Birth and repose betweene the two Testa∣ments, with his sweet and sanctifying operations. Se∣condly, the Churches acknowledgment of her Redeemers beauty, innocency, and delightfulnesse; with how plea∣sant and incorruptible an habitation, is prepared for those Louers; and what excellent priuiledges she hath by his fauour. Thirdly, Christ and his Church doe (as two Louers) interchangeably preferre one another before all others, by way of comparison. Fourthly, the Spouses spirituall loue-sicke passions are expressed. And lastly (shee hauing declared how shee is enclosed in his em∣braces) there is warning giuen that their sweet vnion be not disturbed. This Canticle may be properly sung vpon the Feast of Christs Natiity, or at any other time; wee hauing first prepared our selues by a fruitfull meditating the particular mysteries of the Song. Song. 10. Sing this as the ninth Song. WHile that the King was at repast, My Spikenard his perfumings cast; And twixt my breasts repos'd my Deare: My Loue, who is as sweet to me As Myrrh or Camphire bundes be, Which at Engaddi Uineyards are.
2 Loe, thou art faire; loe, thou my Loue Art faire, and eyed like the Doue: Thou faire, and pleasant art my Deare. And loe, our Bed with flowers is strow'd: Our House is beamd with Cedar-wood; And of the Firre our Rafters are. 3 I am the Rose that Sharon yeelds, The Rose and Lilly of the fields, And flower of all the Dales below. My Loue among the Daughters showes, As when a sweet and beauteous Rose Amid her bush of thornes doth grow. 4 Among the Sonnes, such is my Deare, As doth an Apple-tree appeare, Within a shrubby Forrest plac't. I sate me downn beneath his shade, (Whereto a great desire I had) And sweet his fruit was to my tast. 5 Me, to his banquet-house he bare, Eu'n where his wine-prouisions are: And there his Loue my banner was. With Flagons me from fainting stay: With Apples comfort me, I pray; For I am sicke of Loue (alas.) 6 My head with his left hand he stayd: His right-hand ouer me he layd. And by the Harts and Roes (said he) You Daughters of Ierusalem Stirre not (for you I charge by them) Nor wake my Loue till pleas'd she be.
The third Canticle. BY contemplating this Canticle, we may be mystical∣ly informed of Christs calling his Church in the Apo∣stles, and of her estate in the beginning of Christianity, when he went from place to place (as a Hynde ouer the Mountaines) to further the worke of our Redemption; wooing his Disciples (and in them his Church) to follow him, by shewing his Diuinity a little and a little (as it were) through the Grate, and from behinde the Wall of his Humanity. Moreouer, the spring-like season of the Gospell, after the cloudy and winter-like time vnder the Law, is here set forth. And then the Church ha∣uing petitioned that the Curtaines of the Ceremoniall Law might be so drawne away, as that she may both heare and see her Beloued in his vnuailed perfections; she requesteth also, that the sly enimies of his Vineyard may be destroyed. She reioyceth likewise in their mu∣tuall loues; and prayeth him that whilst the day of Grace lasteth, she may on all occasions enioy his spee∣dy Consolations. Lastly, the Church confesseth how blindly she sought Christ during the Night of the Law; how diligently (and through what afflictions) she sear∣ched after him; how at length she found him; where also, & with what affections she entertayned him: And so concludes, as in the former Canticle. It ought there∣fore to be sung with Reuerence, and consideration of the Mysteries therein contained. Song. XI. Sing this as the fift Song. I Heare my Loue: and him I see Come leaping by the Mountaines there.
Loe, o're the Hillockes trippeth He; And Roe, or Stag-like, doth appeare. Le, from behind the wall he pries: Now, at the window-grate is he. Now speakes my Deare, and saies, arise My Loue, my Faire, and come with me. 2 Loe, Winter's past, and come the Spring, The Raine is gone, the Weather cleare: The season wooes the Birds to sing: And on the Earth the flowers appeare. The Turtle croweth in our Field: Young Figs the Figge-tree downe doth weigh: The blossom'd Uines a sauour yeeld, Rise Loue, my Faire, and come away. 3 My Doue, that art obscured, where The Rockes darke staires doe thee infold: Thy voice, (thy sweet voice) let me heare, And Thee (that louely sight) behold. Those Foxes cubs the Uines that marre, Goe take vs, whilst the Grapes be young: My Loues am I; and mines my Deare, Who feeds the illy flowers among. 4 While breake of Day, when shades depart, Returne my Well-beloued One; Eu'n as a Roe, or lusty Hart, That doth on Bether Mountaines runne. For him, that to my soule is deare, Within my bed, by night I sought: I sought; but him I found not there▪ Thus therefore, with my selfe I thought: 5 I le rise, and round the Citty wend, Through Lanes, and open waies I'le goe,
That I my soules-delight may finde. So there I sought, and mist him too. The Citty-watch, me lighted on; Them askt I for my soules-delight: And somewhat past them being gone, My soules-beloued found I straight. 6 Whom there in my embrace I caught: And him forsooke I not, till he Into my Mothers house I brought, Her Chamber who conceiued me. You Daughters of Ieusalem, Surre not (by field-bred Harts and Roes; For you I doe adiute by them) Nor wake my Loue till she dispose. The fourth Canticle. HEre, the Royall Prophet first singeth Christ his go∣ing forth to preach the Gospel; metaphorically ex∣pressing it (and as it were) by way of dmirao, at the excellent manner thereof. Next he mentioneth his Couch (or resting place) meaning either the Church, or else that Bed of his Humanitie which the Holy Fathers and Pastors of the Church (as her valiant Champions) defended by the Sword of Gods Word, against Infidels, Heretickes, and all the Powers and Terrours of the Kingdome of Darkenesse Then he mystically descri∣beth that Palace, Throne, or abiding place of Christ, toge∣ther with the Glorie of it, as well in regard of the pre∣cious matter of each seuerall part, as in respect of the forme and eautie of the whole Fabrike. And lastly, he exhortth  the Faithfull (vnder the name of the Daughters of Syon) to contemplate seriously, the excel∣lent Glorie of Christ, when (by his Incarnation) the
Deitie was espoused to the Humanitie. In singing this we are to meditate in what securitie and glorious con∣tentment we shall enioy the embraces of our Redeemer; seeing his Bed and place for entertainement of the Daughters of Ierusalem (that is the Soules of the Faithfull) is so excellently built and furnished, as this Allegorie implyeth. Song. 12. Sing this as the fift Song. WHat's he that from the Desert, there, Doth like those smoaky pillers come, Which from the Incense, and the Myrhe, And, all the Merchant-spices fume? His bed (which loe is Solomons) Threescore stout men about it stand: They are of Israels valiant Ones; And all of them with Swords in hand. 2 All those are men expert in fight: And each one on his thigh doth weare A Sword; that terrors of the night May be forbid from comming there. King Solomon a goodly place With trees of Libanon did reare: Each Piller of it Siluer was; And Gold, the bases of them were. 3 With purple couer'd he the same: And all the pauement (thoroughout.) Oh Daughters of Ierusalem, For you, which Charity is wrought. Come Syon daughter, come away:
And crowned with his Diadem King Solomon behold you may. That crowne, his Mother set on him, When he a married man was made, And in his heart contentment had. The fift Canticle. THat louelinesse which is found in the most beauti∣full body, endowed with the riches of the mind, and adorned with the goods of Fortune (being of all ob∣iects the most powerfull ouer humane affections.) The Holy Ghost in this Song of Songs, hath thereby mystically expressed the Churches estate in her seuerall Ages: That so it might the better worke into our soules an appre∣hension both of those excellent perfections Christ hath bestowed on his Church; and the better informe vs also of that vnspeakeable affection which he beareth vnto her. And it seemeth (the Metaphors in this Allegory be∣ing expounded) that the state of the Church in her seue∣ral members is here described; with her Louers affection shewed towards her, about the time of the Gospels en∣trance; euen when our blessed Sauiour was abiding on the earth. But the explanation of each seuerall Meta∣phor will be too large for this place▪ Nor will euery Ca∣pacity reach vnto the particular application of them. It may suffice therefore, ifsuch do (by an implicite Faith) sing these Mysteries with a general application of them to Christ and his Church; beleeuing themselues members of that Spouse; And that Iesus Christ is he, who in this Song professeth an intire affection, not onely to the whole Mysticall body of the faithfull, but euen to euery member of it in particular.
Song. 13. OH my Loue, how comely now, and how  beautifull art thou! Thou of Doue-like eyes a∣paire,  shining hast within thy haire: And thy loc  like Kidlings be, which from Gilead hill we see. 2 Like those Ewes thy Teeth doe show, Which in rowes from washing goe; When among them there is none Twinlesse, nor a barren-one. And thy Lippes are of a red; Like the Rosie-colour'd thread. 3 Speach becomming thee thou hast.
Underneath thy Tresses plac't Are thy Temples (matchlesse faire) Which o're-shadow'd with thy haire: Like Pomgranats doe appeare, When they cut asunder are. 4 To that Fort, thy Necke's compar'd, Which with Bulwarkes Dauid rear'd. Where a thousand sheilds are hung; All the Targets of the Strong. Breasts, thou hast like twinned Roes, Feeding where the Lilly growes. 5 While day breake, and shades are gone, To the Mountaines I will rune: To that hill whence Myrrh doth come, And to that of Libanum. Thou my Loue, all beauty art, Spotlesse-faire in eu'ry part. 6 Come my Spouse from Libanum: Come with me from Libanum. From Amana turne thy sight, Shenir's top, and Hermons height; From the dennes of Lyons fell, And the hils, where Leopards dwell. 7 Thou, my Sister, thou art shee, Of my hart that robbeth me, Thou my Spose▪ oh thou art shee Of my hart that robbeth me, With one of thine eyes aspect, And with one locke of thy necke. 8 Sister▪ and espoused-peere, Those thy Breasts how faire they are!
Better be those Dugs of thine Then the mot deliious wine: And, thine oyntment odours are Sweeter then all spices farre. 9 Loue, thy Lip drop sweetnesse, so As the Combs of hony do. Thou hast vnderneath thy Tongue, Hony mixt with milke among. And thy Robes doe sent, as well As the Frankincense doth smell. 10 Thou, my Sister and espous'd, Art a Garden, fast enclosd; Walled-Spring, a Fountaine seal'd; And the plants thy Orchard yeeld, Are of the Pomegranat-tree, With those fruits that pleasant be. 11 Camphire, there, with Nard doth growe, Nard, commixt with Crocus too, Calamus, and Cynamom, With all trees of Libanum; Sweetest Alos and Myrrhe, And all spice that pretious are. 12 All the Gardens eu'ry where, Take their first beginning there. There, the precious Fountaine lyes, Whence all liuing-waters rise: Eu'n all those Streames that come Running downe from Libanum.
The sixt Canticle. IN this Canticle is mystically set forth the death and pasion of Iesus Christ; rom whence all the Sacra∣mens and spirituall graces bestowed on the Church tooke their beginning First; Christ desireth that by the blowing of those two contrary winds, the Charita∣ble will of God, ad the malitiou will of his Aduer∣saries, the worke of our redemption might be wrought. To which purpose the Church also addeth her request. Secondly, Christ sheweth, that hee hath accomplished his own, with the Churches desire therein: and (expres∣sing the fulfilling of his Bitter-sweet-passion) inuiteth all the faithfull to come and take benefite thereof. Thirdly, here is wondrous moouingly intimated, both our Redeemers watchfulnesse to secure vs (euen while hee slept in the graue) and those Loue-passages of his, wherwith he came to wooe vs in his humane nature (as it were a louer knocking and calling at his Beloueds window) in the darke-night of his Passion, and vnhee∣ded Afflictions. Lastly, here is described the Churches readinesse to open to her Beloued; with that loue dis∣temperatue which appeared in her, when the women and the Disciples misled him in the graue; and when, through feare of the high Priests, they were for a time dispoiled of their Robe and vaile of Faith. This Can∣ticle may properly be sung in commemoration of our Redeemers suffrings; And of his Spouses feare and sor∣row before his Resurrection.
Song. 14. ARise thou North-wine from the North,  And from the South, thou South-winde blowe,  Upon my Garden breathe yee forth, That so my  Spices (there that growe,) From thence abun∣dantly  may flowe. And to thy Garden come my
Deare, To eate thy fruites of pleasure there. 2 My Sister and espoused-peere, Unto my Garden I am come; My Spice I gather'd, with my Myrrhe, I ate my hony in the Combe, And drunke my wine with milke among. Come Friends and best-belou'd of me; Come eate, and drinke, and merry be. 3 I slept, but yet my heart did wake. It is my Loue I knocking heare. It was his voice: and thus he spake; Come open vnto me my Deare, My Loue, my Doue, my spotlesse-peere. For, with the deaw my head is dight: My lockes with droppings of the night. 4 Loe, I haue now vndressed me; Why should I clothe me as before? And since my feet cleane washed be, Why should I soyle them any more? Then through the creuice of the dore Appear'd the hand of my Belou'd; And towards him, my art was moou'd. 5 I rose vnto my Loue to ope, And from my hands distilled Myrrhe: Pure Myrrhe did from my fingers drop, Upon the handles of the Barre. But then departed was my Deare.
When by his voice I knew 'twas he, My heart was like to faint in me. 6 I sought; but seene he could not be. I cald but heard no answere sound. The Citty-watchmen met with me, As they were walking of the Round, And gaue me stripes that made a wound: Yea, they that watch and ward the wall, Eu'n, they haue tooke away my vaile. The seauenth Canticle. HEre is allegorically expressed the Maiesty, power, & excellency of Christ; & is the effect of that which was Euangelically ung of him after his Resurrction, & As∣censiō. First, the Bride is introduced aduring the faith Israelites, that when they haue attained the knowledge of Christ her Spouse, they should professe and teach him to the rest of their Members. Secondly, those who lon to finde him, desire againe of the Church, to know the excellencies of that Beloued of hers: and (by doubling the question) seeme to imply a two-fold Excellen∣cy. Thirdly, the Church speedily answeres thoe tha enquire after her Spouse; and (by describing his excel∣lency in his ten principall Members) mystically notifeth his ten-fold spirituall perfection: whereupon to in∣sist, were not heere conuenient. Lastly, the faithf craue the Churches direction to helpe her finde him ou▪ and receaue her gracious answere to that purpose. Song. 15. Sing this as the 13. Song. OH! f him you happen on, Who is my Beloued-One,
Daughters of Ierusalem; I adiure you, seriously, To informe him, how that I Sicke am growne of loue, for him. 2 Fairest of all women, tell How thy Louer doth excell, More then other Louers doe. Thy Beloued, what is he More then other Louers be, That thou dost adiure vs so? 3 He, in whom I so delight, Is the purest red and white: Of tenne thousands chiefe is he. Like fine gold, his head doth show, Whereon curled Lockes doe grow; And a Rauen-blacke they be. 4 Like the milky Doues that bide By the Riuers, He is Ey'd: Full, and fitly set they are. Cheekes like spicy-beds hath he; Or like flowres that fairest be. Lips, like Lillies, dropping Myrrhe. 5 Hands, like rings of gold, beset With the pretious Chrysolet. Belly'd, like white Iuorie Wrought about with Saphir's rich. Legs like Marble-Pillers, which Set on golden Bases be. 6 Fac'd like Libanus is He. Goodly, as the Cedar-tree;
Sweetnesse breathing out of him. He is louely, eu'ry where. This my Friend is, this my Deare, Daughters of Ierusalem. 7 Oh thou Fairest (eu'ry way) Of all women! whither may Thy Beloued turned be? Tell vs whither he is gone, Who is thy Beloued-one, That we seeke him may with Thee? 8 To his Garden went my Deare, To the beds of spices there; Where he Feeds, and Lillies gets. I, my Loues am, and (alone) Mine, is my Beloued-one, Who among the Lyllies eates. The eight Canticle. HErein is contained a continuation of the Praises of the Bride, and of that ardent affection expressed by her Bloued in the fifth Canticle: yet, it is no vnnecessa∣ry repetition. For, it seemeth to haue respect to the Churches estate, and the passages betweene her and Christ in another Age; euen when the Gentiles began to be called and vnited vnto the Church of the Iewes, ac∣cording to what is desired in the first Canticle. And threfore, shee is here compared to Tyrzah and Ieru∣salem for louelinesse. Her glorious encrease, her singu∣ler puritie, her extraordinary applause, the splendor of her Maiestie, and the powrefulnesse of her Authoritie is here also described. Moreouer, the feares and hin∣drances sustained in her first persecutions are here My∣stically
showne. And, Lastly, they who through feare or obstinacy are separated from her, are called to re∣turne, in regard of her apparant power. This, we may sing to remember vs of those graces God hath bestow∣ed on his Church. To comfort our soules also, with that dearenese which Christ expreseth towards her, of whom we are members. And on diuerse other occasi∣ons, according as he that vseth it, hath capacitie to vn∣derstand and apply the same. Song. 16. Sing this as the 13. Song. BEautifull art thou my Deare: Thou as louely art, as are Tirzah or Ierusalem (As the beautiful'st of them) And as much thou mak'st afraid, As arm'd Troupes with flaggs displaid. 2 Turne away those eyes of thine▪ Doe not fixe them so, on mine: For, there beame forth (from thy sight,) Sweets, that ouercome me quite: And, thy Lockes, like kidlings be, Which fom Gilead hill we see. 3 Like those Ewes thy Teeth doe show Which in rowes from washing goe, When among them there is none Twinlesse nor a barren-one. And (within thy lockes) thy Browes Like the cut-Pomegranat showes. 4 There are with her sixtie Queenes; There are eighty Concubines:
And, the Dam'sels, they possesse, Are in number number-lesse: But, my Doue is all alone, And an vndefiled-one. 5 Shee's her Mothers only Deare; And, her ioy that her did beare. When the Daughters her surueyd, That she blessed was, they said: Shee was praysed of the Queenes, And among the Concubines. 6 Who is shee (when forth shee goes) That so like the Morning showes? Beautifull, as is the Moone, Purely bright as is the Sunne; And appearing full of dread, Like an Host with ensignes spread? 7 To the Nut-yard downe went I; (And the Uales encrease to spie) To behold the Uine-buds come, And to see Pomegranats bloome: But, the Princes Charrets did Uexe me so, I nought could heed. 8 Turne, oh turne, thou Shulamite, Turne, oh turne thee to our sight. What I pray is that, which you In the hulamite would view, But that (to appearance) shee Shewes like Troupes that armed be?
The ninth Canticle. SOlomon in the first part of this Canticle, commending the Churches vniuersall beauty in her seuerall parts, is vnderstood to haue respect to that time after the Con∣uersion from Paganisme, wherein she was endowed and made louely by the varietie of those Offices, States, & Degrees, into which her members were for orders sake distinguished; as well as by the addition of those ther Graces formally receiued. Which States and Degrees are here Mystically vnderstood by the parts of a beauti∣full Woman: (as doth excellently appeare, the Allegory being particularly expounded.) The second part of this Hymne expreseth the mutuall interchange of affections betweene the Bridegroome and his Bride; and those sweet contentments they enioy in each others Loues. Lastly, here is set forth both the Churches desire to bee freed from those persecutions, which hinder her open, and full fruition of her beloued; and mention is here made also, of those publike and vndisturbed embraces, which they shall at length enioy. The first part hereof we ought so to sing, that it may remember vs to shunne their blindnesse who discerne not the beauty of Order and Degrees in the Church. The second part puts vs in minde, that she is the treasuree both of those graces which cause contentment within our selues, and make vs acceptable to God. By the last part we may appre∣hend the comfort that will follow, when we desire that the open profession of Christ may be granted, meerely for the loue of him.
Song. 17. Sing this as the ninth Song. THou Daughter of the Royall Line, How comely are those Feet of thine, When their beseeming Shooes they weare▪ The curious knitting of thy Thighes, Is like the costly Gemies of prize, Which wrought by skilfull workmen are. 2 Thy Nauell, is a Goblet round, Where Liquor euermore is found. Thy faire and fruitfull Belly showes As doth a goodly heape of Wheat With Lillies round about beset; And thy two Brests like twinned Roes. 3 Thy Necke, like some white Towre doth rise. Like Heshbon Fish-pooles, are thine Eyes▪ Which neere the Gate Bath-rabbim lye. Thy Nose (which thee doth wel-become) Is like the Towre of Libanum, That, on Damascus hath an eye. 4 Thy Head like Scarlet doth appeare: The Hayre▪ thereof, like purple are: And in those Threads the King is bound. Oh Loue! how wondrous farre art Thou! How perfect doe thy pleasures show! And, how thy Ioyes in them abound! 5 Thou Statur'd art in Palme-tree-wise. Thy Breasts like Clusters doe arise. I said, into this Palme I'le goe;
My hold shall on her branches be: And those thy Breasts shall be to me Like clusters that on Uines doe growe. 6 Thy Nostrils sauour shall aswell As newly-gathered fruits doe smell. Thy Speech shall also relish so, As purest wine, tht for my Deale Is itting drine, and able were, To cause an old mans lippes to goe. 7 I, my Beloued's am; And, he Hath his affection set on me: Come well-beloued, come away, Into the Fields, let's walke along; And there the Villages among, Eu'n in the Country we will stay. 8 We to the Vines betimes will goe, And see if they doe spring or no; Or, if the tender Grapes appeare: We will, moreouer goe, and see, If the Pomegranats blossom'd be: And I my Loue will giue thee here. 9 Sweet smels the Mandrakes doe afford: And we within our Gates, are stor'd, Of all things that delightfull be. Yea, whether new or olde they are, Prepared they be for my Deare: And I haue layd them vp for thee. 10 Would, as my Brother, thou might'st be, That suckt my Mothers breast with me: Oh would it were no otherwise! In publike then I thee would meet.
And giue thee kisses in the street; And none there is should thee despise. 11 Then I my selfe would for thee come, And bring thee to my Mothers home: Thou likewise shouldst instruct me there. And wine that is commixt with Spice, (Sweet wine of the Pomgranat iuyce) I would for thee to drinke prepare. 12 My Head with his left-hand he stayd; His right-hand ouer me he laid, And (being so imbrac'd by him) Said he, I charge you, not disease Nor wake my Loue vntill she please, You Daughters of Ierusalem. The tenth Canticle. IN this last part of Solomons Song, he first singeth that sweet peace, and extraordinary prosperity vouchsa∣fed vnto the Church after her great persecutions: and expresseth it by putting the question who she was that came out of the wildernesse leaning on her Belo∣ued. Secondly, hee introduceth Christ putting the hu∣mane Nature in remembrance, from what estate he had raised it; and requiring the dearest of our affections in regard of the ardency, vnquncablenesse, and inesti∣mble value of his loue. Thirdly, huing remembred the Church of the affection due to him, Christ teacheth her the charitable care she ought to hue of others; and tht she being brought into his fauour and protection, should seeke the preferment of her younger Sister also; euen the people who haue not yet the breasts of Gods
two Testaments to nourish their soules. Fourthly, the Churches true Solomon or Peace-maker (meaning Iesus Christ) hauing a Vineyard in Baal-hammon (that is) where∣soeuer there are pple; Herein is declared, th reward of such as are profitably employed in that Vineyard. And lastly, the confirmation of Christs marriage vpon the Hils of Spice (meaning Heauen) is hastned. In singing this Canticle, wee ought to meditate what estate God hath raised vs from; what loue hee hath vouchsafed; what our charity should be to others; what we should minde concerning this life; and what desire we should haue to the comforts of the world to come. Song. 18. WHo's this, that leaning on her Friend,  Doth from the Wildernesse ascend? Minde how  I raised thee, Eu'n where thy Mother thee con∣ceiu'd,
where she that brought the forth con∣ceiu'd,  beneath an Apple-tree. 2 Me in thy heart engrauen beare, And Seale-like on thy handwrist weare: For Loue is strong as Death. Fierce as the Graue is Iealousie: The coales thereof doe burning lye; And furious flames it hath. 3 Much Water, cannot coole Loues flame: No floods haue power to quench the same. For Loue so high is prizd; That, who to buy it would assay, Though all his wealth he gaue away, it would be all despis'd. 4 We haue A Sister scarcely growne, For she is such a little one, That yet no Breasts hath shee. What thing shall we now vndertake, To doe for this our Sisters sake, If spoken for shee be? 5 If, that a wall she doe appeare, We Turet vpon her will reare,
And Pallaces of Plate: And then with boords of Cedar-tee Enclose, and fence her in, will we, If that she be a Gate. 6 A wall already built I am: And now my Breasts vpon the same Doe Turret-like arise. Since when, as one that findeth rest, (And, is of setled peace possest) I seemed in his eyes. 7 A Vineyard hath King Solomon, This Uineyard is at Baal-hamon, Which he to Keepers put: And eu'ry one that therein wrought, A thousand siluer-pieces brought, And gaue him for the fruite. 8 My Vineyard which belongs to me, Eu'n I my selfe doe ouersee. To thee, oh Solomon, A thousand-fold doth appertaine: And, those that keep the same, shall gaine Two hundred-fold for one. 9 Thou, whose abode the Gardens are, (Thy Fellowes vnto thee giue eare) Cause me to heare thy voice: And let my Loue as swiftly goe, As doth a Hart or nimble Roe, Upon the Hils of Spice.
The first Song of Esay. Esa. 5. IN this Song the Prophet, singing of Christ and hi Vineyard, first sheweth, that notwithstanding his labo bestowed in fencing and manuring thereof, it brough forth sowre grapes. Secondly, he summoneth thei Consciences whom he couertly vprayded, to be Iuges of Gods great loue and their vnprofitablene Thirdly, he showes, both how he intends to de with his Vineyard, and who they are whom he pointe out in this Parable. Now, seeing it hath befallen t Iewes according to this Propheticall Hymne, we are  make a two-fold vse, in singing it. First, thereby  memorize the Mercy and Iustice of God; both wh are manifested in this Song: his Mercy in forewning, his Iustice in punishing euen his owne peop Secondly, we are so to mediate thereon, that we  be warned to consider what fauours God hath vouc∣safed vs, and what fruits we ought to bring forth; le he leaue vs also, to be spoyled of our Aduersaries. For in this Parable the holy Spirit speaketh vnto eue Congregation who abuseth his fauours. And doublesse, all such (as it hath fallen out in Antioch, Laodi and many other particular Churches) shall be depriu of Gods protection, of the dewes of his holy spir and of the sweete showres of his word, to be left  thornes and bryers, the fruite of their owne natura Corruptions. Song. 19. Sing this as the 14. Song. A Song of him, whom I loue best, And of his Vineyard, sing I will.
A Vineyard, once my Loue possest, Well-seated on a fruitfull hill: He kept it close-immured still: The earth, from stones he did refine; And set it with the choisest vine. 2 He in the midst a Fort did reare; I win-presse therein also wrought: But, when he lookt it Grapes should beare, Those Grapes were wilde-ones that it brought. Ierusalem, come speake thy thought; And you of Iudah Iudges be, Betwixt my vineyard here, and me. 3 Vnto my Uineyard what could more Performed be, then I haue done? Yet, looking it should Grapes haue bore, Saue wilde-ones, it afforded none: But goe to, (let it now alone) Resolu'd I am to shew you too, What with my vineyard I will do▪ 4 The Hedge I will remooue from thence, That what so will, deuoure it may: I do one will breake the Walled-fence, And through it make a troden way. Yea, all of it I wast will lay. To digge or dresse it, none shall care: But, thornes and bryers it shall beare. 5 The Clouds I also will compell, That there no raine descend for this. For loe, the house of Israel The Lord of Armies Vineyard is: And, Iudah is that Plant of his;
That Pleasant one, who forth hath brought Oppression, when he Iudgement sought. He, seeking Iustice; found therein, In lieu thereof, a Cryingsinne. The 2. Song of Esay. Esa. 12. ISaiah hauing a little before prophecied of the In∣nation of Iesus Christ, and the excellencie of his king∣dome, doth in this Hymne praise him for his Mercy; and foreowes the Church also, what her Song should be in that day of her Redemption. The principall co∣tens hereof are these: A Confession of Gods mercy; A prediction concerning the Sacrament of Baptisme, and an exhortation to a ioyfull Thanksgiuing. This Song the Church should still sing to the honour of Ies Christ for our Redemption. Yea, in regard the Proph (foreseeing the good Cause we should haue to make vse thereof) hath prophecied it should be the Church Hymne, it seemeth not vnproper to be vsed on those dayes which are solemnized in memoriall of our Saui∣ours Natiuitie; Or whensoeuer we shall be mooue to praise God in memorizing the graius Comfo promised vs by his Prophets, and fulfilled by his owne comming. And to fit the same th better to that ppose, I haue changed the Person, and the Time, in th Translation. Song. 20. LOrd▪ I will sg to Thee, for thou displeased
wast: And yet with-drewest thy wrath from  me, And sent me comfort hast. Thou art my health, on whom A fearelesse Trust, I lay. For thou oh Lord, thou art become My Strength, my Song, my Stay. 2 And with reioycing now, Sweet waters we conuay Forth of those Springs, whence Life doth flowe: And, thus, we therefore say, Oh, sing vnto the Lord: His Name and workes proclaime: Yea, to the People, beare record, That glorious is his Name. 3 Unto the Lord, oh sing; For, wonders he hath done: And many a renowned thing, Which through the earth is knowne▪ Oh sing aloud, all yee, On Sion hill that dwell! For, lo, thy Holy-one in thee, Is great, oh Israel.
The third Song of Esay. Esay 26. ESay composed this Song to comfort the Israelites in their catiuity: to strengthen their patience in Af∣fliction: and settle their confidence on the promises of God. First, it remembreth them that Gods protection being euery where as auaileable as a defenced Citty, they ought alwayes to relye on the firme peace which that affordeth. Secondly, he sheweth that the pride of Sinne shall be ouerthrowne; and that the faithfull ae resolued to fle vnto their Redeemer, and await his pleasure in their chastisments. Thirdly, he singeth the vtter desolation of Tyrants; the encrease of the Church; her afflictions; her deliuerance; & the resurrection from death through Christ. Lastly, the Faithfull are exhorted to attend pa∣tiently on the Lord their Sauiour, who will come short∣ly to iudgement, and take account for the blood of his Saints. This Song is made in the person of the Church, and may be sung, to comfort and confirme vs in all our chastisements and persecutions: by bringing to our consideration, the short time of our endurance, and the certainty of our Redeemers comming. It may be vsed also to praise God both for his Iustice and Mercy. Song. 21. Sing this as the 3. Song. A Citie now we haue obtain'd, Where strong Defences are: And, God Saluation hath ordain'd▪ For Wals, and Bulwarkes there. The Gates thereof, wide open Yee, That such as iustly doe,
(And those that Truth's obseruers be) May enter thereinto. 2 There, thou in peace wilt keep them sure Whose thoughts well grounded be; In peace, hat euer shall endure, Because they trusted Thee. For euer, therefore, on the Lord, Without distrust, depend. For, in the Lord, th'eternall Lord, Is strength that hath no end. 3 He makes the loftie Citie yeeld, And her proud Dwellers bow: He lays it leuell with the feld, Eun with the dust below. Their feet that are in want and care, Their feet thereon shall tread: Their way is right that righteous are, And thou their path dost heed. 4 Upon thy course of Iudgements, we Oh LORD, attending were: And to record thy Name and Thee, Our soules desirous are. On Thee, our minds with strong desire Are fixed in the night: And after thee our hearts enquire Before the morning light. 5 For, when thy righteous Iudgements are Upon the earth discern'd; By those that doe inhabite there, Uprightnesse shall be learn'd. Yet, Sinners for no terrour will Iust dealing vnderstand:
But in their sinnes continue still. Amid the Holy-Land. 6 To seeke the glory of the LORD, They vn-regardfull be. And thy aduanced-hand, Oh LORD, They will not daigne to see. But they shall see, and see with shame, That beare thy People spight: Yea, from thy Foes shall come a flame, Which will deuoure them quite. 7 Then, LORD, for vs thou wilt procure, That we in peace may be; Because that eu'ry worke of our, Is wrought for vs, by Thee. And LRD our GOD▪ though we are brought To other Lords in thrall; Of thee alone shall be our thought, Upon thy Name to call. 8 They are deceast, and neuer shall Renewed life obtaine: They dye, and shall not rise at all. To tyrannize againe. For thou didst visit them therefore, And wide disperst them hast; That so their Fame for euermore, May wholly bee defac't. 9 But Lord, encreast thy People are, Encreast they are by thee; And thou art glorifid as farre, As earths wide limits bee. For Lord, in their distresses, when Thy rod on them was laid;
They vnto thee did hasten then, And without ceasing praid. 10 As one with child is paind, when as Her throwes of bearing bee; And cries in pangus (before thy face) Oh LORD, so fared wee. Wee haue conceiu'd, and for a birth Of winde haue pained binn. The world's vnsafe, and still on earth, They thriue that dwell therein. 11 Thy Dead shall liue and rise againe, With my dead-Body shall. Oh you, that in the dust remaine, Awake and sing you, all! For, as the deaw doth hearbs renew, That buried seem'd before: So, earth shall through thy heauenly deaw Her Dead aliue restore. 12 My People to thy Chambers fare: Shut close the doore to thee; And stay a while (a moment there) Till past the Fury bee. For lo, the Lord doth now arise; Hee commeth from his place, To punish their impieties, Who now the world possesse. 13 The earth that blood discouer shall, Which is in her conceal'd: And bring to light those murthers all, Which yet are vnreueal'd.
The Praier of Hezekiah. Esay 37.15. IN this Praier, Hezekiah hauing first acknowledged Gods Maiestie nd almighty powe, desires him, both to heare & consider his Aduersaries blasphemie. Then (to manifest the necessity of his present assistance) vr∣geth the power his foe had obtained ouer such as serued not the true God. And as it seemeth, impotunes de∣liuerance, not so much in regard of his owne safety, as that the Blasphemer, and all the world might know the difference betweene the Lords power, and the arro∣gant bragges of men. This Song may bee vsed when∣soeuer the Turke, or any other great Aduersary (preuai∣ling against false Worshippers) shall thereupon growe insolent, and threaten Gods Church also: as if in de∣spight of him, he had formerly preuailed by his owne strength. For the name of Senherib may be mystical∣ly applyed to any such enemy. We may vse this Hymne also, against those secret Blasphemies, which the Deuill whispers vnto our soules; or, when by temptations hee seekes to driu vs to despaire, by laying before vs how many others he hath destroied, who seemed to haue beene in as good assurance as wee. For, he is indeede, that mysticall Assyrian Prince, who hath ouerthrowne whoe Countries & Nations, with their Gods, in whom they trusted. Such as are these, Temporall power, Riches, Superstitious worship, Carnall wisdome, Idols, &c. which being but the works of men (and yet trusted in as Gods) hee hath power to destroy them. Song. 22. O Lord of Hoasts and God of Israel! Thou,
who betweene the Cherubins dost dwell; Of  all the world thou onely art the King, And  heau'n and earth, vnto their form didst bring. 2 LORD bow thine eare; to heare attentiue be. Lift vp thine eyes, and daigne oh LORD, to set What words Sennacherib hath cast abroad; And his proud Message to the liuing GOD. 3 LORD, true it is, that Lands and Kingdomes all, Are to the King of Ashur brought in thrall: Yea, he their Gods, into the fire hath throwne: For, Gods they were not; but of wood & stone. 4 Mans worke they were, & men destroi'd them haue. Us therefore from his power vouchsafe to saue That all the Kingdomes of the world may see That thou art GOD, that onely thou art hee.
Hezekiah's Thankesgiuing. Esa. 38.10. HEzekiah hauing beene sicke and recouered, made this Song of Thankesgiuing; And setteth forth the mercy of God, by considering these particulars. The time of his Age; the feares of his soule; the rooting out of his posteritie; the violence of his disease; and the forgiuenesse of his sinnes, added to the restoring of his health. Then (seeming to haue entred into a seri∣ous consideration of all this) hee confesseth who are most bound to praise God; and voweth this Deliue∣rance to euerlasting memorie. This Song may be vsed after deliuerance from temporall sicknesse. But in the principall sense, it is a speciall Thankesgiuing for that cure which Iesus Christ wrought vpon the humane na∣ture, being in danger of euerlasting perdition. For Hezekiah which signifieth helped of the Lord, typfieth Mankinde labouring vnder the sicknesse of sinne and death. Isaiah who brought the medicine that cur'd him, (and is interpreted) the saluation of the Lord, figu∣red our blessed Redeemer, by whom the humane nate is restored; and whose sending into the world was my∣stically shewed by the Miracle of the Sunnes retrograda∣tion. To praise God for that mysterie therefore (the Circumstances being well considered) this Hymne see∣meth very proper. And doubtlesse for this cause it was partly preserued for these our times, and ought often and heartily to be sung to that purpose. Song. 23. Sing this as the fourth Song. WHen I suppos'd my time was at an end, Thus, to my selfe, I did my selfe bemo
Now to the Gates of hell I must descend; For all the remnant of my yeares are gone. The Lord▪ said I) where now the liuing be, Nor man on earth, shall I for euer see. 2 As when a Sheapheard hath remou'd his Tent, Or as a weauers shuttle slips away; Right so, my Dwelling, & my Yeares, were spent: And so, my sicknesse did my Life decay. Each day, ere night, my death expected I; And eu'ry night, ere morning, thought to dye. 3 For, He so Lyon-like my bones did breake, That I scarce thought to liue another day. A noyse I did like Cranes or Swallowe make: And as the Turtle, I lamenting lay. Then with vplifted eye-lids, thus I spake; Oh Lord, on me oppressed, mercy take. 4 What shall I say? he did his promise giue; And as he promist he performed it. And therefore, I will neuer whilst I liue, Those bitter passions of my soule forget: Yea, those that liue, & those vnborne, shall know What life and rest thou didst on me bestow. 4 My former Pleasures, Sorrowes were become: But, in that loue, which to my soule thou hast, The Graue, that all deuours, thou kepst me from; And didst my errors all behind the cast. For, nor the Graue, nor Death can honor Thee; Nor hope they for thy Truth that buried be. 5 Oh! he that liues; that liues as I doe now: Eu'n he it is that shall thy praise declare. Thy Truth the Father to his Seed shall showe.
And how, thou me, oh Lord, hast daing'd to spare. Yea Lord, for this, I will throughout my dayes Make musicke in thy house; vnto thy praise. The Lamentations of Ieremie. As vsefull as any part of the old Testament, for these pre∣sent times (igh fallen asleep in security) are these Ele∣giacall Odes: For, they bring many things to our considera∣tion. , what wee may and should lament for. Secondly, how carefull wee ought to bee of the Common-wealths prosperitie; because, if that goe to ruine, the particular Church therein cherished, must needes bee afflicted also; and Gods worship hinred. Thirdly, they teach vs, that the ouerthrow of Kingdomes and Empires, followes the abuse and nglect of Religion; and that (Sinne being the onely cause thereof) wee ought to endure our chastisements with∣out murmuring against God. Fourthly, they warne vs, not to abuse Gods mercifull long-suffering. Fiftly, they per∣swae vs to commiserate and pray for the Church, and our brethren in calamitie; and not to despise them in their humiliations. Sixtly, they learne vs not to iudge the truth of Professions, by those afflictions God laies vpon particular Churches, seeing the Iewish Religion was the Truth; and those Idolaters, who led them into Captiuity. Se∣uenthly, they shew vs, that neither the Antiquity, Strength, Fame, or formall Sanctitie of any place (onor Gods former respect thereunto) shall priuiledge it from destruction, if it continue in abusing his Grace. And lastly, they (as it were limiting our sorrowes) mind vs to cast our es on the mer∣cies of God: and to make such vse of his chastisements, as may turne our Lamentations into Songs of Ioy.
Lament. 1. THis Elegie, first bewaileth in generall tearmes, that calamitie and destruction of Iudah and Ierusalem, which is aftewards more particularly mentioned. Se∣condly, it makes a confession of their manifold sinnes committed; and is full of many pasionate aud penitentiall complaints, Iustifying the Lord in his Iudgements, and confessing the vanitie of humane Consolations. Lastly, it containeth a short prayer for Gods mercy, and a diuine prediction of those Iudge∣ments which will fall on them, by whom his people haue beene afflicted. This Elegy may be sung, whenso∣euer any generall Calamitie falleth on the Common∣wealth in which we liue; we hauing first considered and applyed the particular Circumstances, as there shall be cause. We may sing it also Hystorically, to memorize the Iustice of God, and the miserable desolations of Iu∣da and Ierusalem, recorded for our example. Song. 24. HOw sad and solitary now (alas,) Is that  well-peopled Citie come to be! Which once
so great among the Nations was, And oh how  widdow-like appeareth she! She rule of all the  Prouinces hath had, And now her selfe is  tributary made. 2 All night shee maketh such excessiue mone, That downe her cheekes a flood of teares doth flow And yet, among her Louers there is none, That consolation doth on her bestow. For they that once her Louer did appeare, Now turned foes, and faithlesse to her are. 3 Now Iudah in captiuity complaines, That (others) heretofore so much opprest.
For her false seruice, shee her selfe remaines Among those Heathens, where shee findes no rest. And apprehended in a Straite, is shee, By those that persecuters of her bee. 4 The very waies of Sion doe lament. The Gates thereof their lonelinesse deplore: Because that no man commeth to frequent Her solemne Festiualls as heretofore. Her Priests doe sigh; her tender Virgins bee Uncomfortable left, and so is Shee. 5 Her Aduersaries are become her Chiefes: On high exalted, those that hate her are: And God hath brought vpon her all those griefes, Because so many her transgressions were. Her Children driuen from her by the Foe, Before him, into loathed thraldome goe. 6 From Sions-Daughter (once without compare) Now all her matchlesse louelinesse is gone. And like those chased Harts her Princes fare, Who seeke for pasture and can finde out none. So (of their strength depriu'd, and fainting nigh) Before their aber foes, they feebly flye. 7 Ierusalem now thinkes vpon her crymes; And calls to minde (amid her present woes) The pleasure shee enioy'd in former times, Till first shee was surprized by her foes: And how (when they perceiued her forlorne) They at her holy Sabbaths made a scorne. 8 Ierusalems transgressions many were; And therefore is it shee disdained lies:
Those, who in former time haue honour'd her; Her basenesse now behold, and her despise: Yea, shee her selfe doth sit bewailing this; And of her selfe her selfe ashamed is. 9 Her owne vncleannesse in her Skirt shee bore; Not then beleeuing what her end would bee. This great destruction falls on her therefore: And none to helpe or comfort her hath shee. Oh, heede thou Lord, and pittie thou my woes, For I am triumph't-ouer by my foes. 10 Her Foe hath touch'd with his polluted hand, Her things that Sacred were, before her face: And, they whose entrance thou didst countermand, Intruded haue into her Holy-place: Those; that were not so much approu'd by thee, As, of thy Congregation held to be. 11 Her People, doe with sighes, and sorrowes, get That little bread which for eleefe they haue. And, giue away their precious things for meat, So to procure wherewith their life to saue. Oh Lord consider this; and ponder Thou, How vile, and how detected I am now. 12 No pitty, in you Passengers is there? Your eyes oh somewhat hitherward encline; And marke, if euer any griefe there were Or sorrow that did equall this of mine: This, which the Lord on me inflicted hath, Upon the day of his incensed wrath. 13 He from aboue, a Flame hath hurled downe; That kindles in my bones preuailing fire.
A Net, he ouer both my feet hath throwne; By which, I am compelled to retyre. And he hath made me a orsaken-one, To sit, and weepe out all the day alone. 14 The heauy yoke of my Transgressions, now, His hand hath wreathed, and vpon me laid; Beneath the same my tyred necke doth bow: And all my strength is totally decay'd. For, me to those, the LORD hath giuen o're, Whose hands will hold me fast for euermore. 15 The LORD hath trampled vnderneath their feet, Eu'n all the mighty, in the midst of me. A great Assembly he hath caus'd to meet, That all my ablest men might slaughtred be. And Iudah's Uirgin-daughter treads vpon, As in a wine-presse Grapes are trodden on. 16 For this (alas) thus weepe I; and mine eyes, Mine eyes drop water thus; because that He, On whose assistance, my sad soule relies, In my distresse is farre away from me. Eu'n while, (because of my preuailing Foe,) My Children are compel'd from me to goe. 17 In vaine hath Syon stretched forth her hand; For, none vnto her succour draweth nigh: Because, the LORD hath giuen in command, That Iacobs Foes should round about her lye. And poore Ierusalem among them there; Like some defled woman doth appeare. 18 The LORD is iustified, nay-the-lesse, Because I did not his commands obay.
All Nations therefore, heare my heauinesse, And heed it (for your warning) you I pray. For, into thraldome (through my follies) be My Virgins, and my Young-men, borne from me. 19 Upon my Louers I haue cryed out, But, they my groundlesse hopes deceiued all. I for my reu'rend Priests enquir'd about; I, also, did vpon mine Elders call: But in the City, vp the ghost they gaue, As they were seeking meat their liues to saue. 20 Oh LORD, take pitty now on my distresse: For loe my soule distemper'd is in me. My heart is ouercome with heauinesse; Because I haue so much offended thee. Thy Sword abroad my ruine doth become. And Death doth also threaten me at home. 21 And of my sad complaints my Foes haue heard: But to afford me comfort there is none. My troubles haue at full to them appear'd; Yet they are ioyfull that thou so hast done. But, thou wilt bring the Time set downe by Thee; And then in sorrow they shall equall mee. 22 Then, shal those foule Offences they haue wrought, Before thy presence be remembred all: And whatso'ere my Sinnes on me haue brought, (For their Transgressions) vpon them shall fall. For, so my sighings multiplied be; That therewithall, my heart is faint in me.
Lament. 2. IN this Elegie, the Prophet vseth a very patheticall exor∣dium, the better to awaken the peoples consideration; and to make them the more sensible of their horrible calamity. Which he first illustrateth in generall termes, by comparing their estate to the miserable condition of one fallen from the glory of heauen, to the lowest earth: and in mentioning, their being depriued of that glori∣ous Temporall and Ecclesiasticall Gouernment, which they formerly enioyed. Afterwards, he descends to par∣ticulars; as the destruction of their Pallaces, Forts, Tem∣ple, Walls, and Gates: the prophaning of their Saboths, Feasts, Rites, &c. the suspending of their Lawes, Priests, Prophets: The slaughter of young-men, and Virgins, olde-men, and Children, with the famine and reproches they sustained, &c. All which acknowledging to be the iust Iudgements of God, hee aduiseth them not to harken to the delusions of their false Prophets, but to returne vnto the LORD by teares and hearty repentance. For the vse and application, see what hath beene said, before the former Elegie. Song. 25. Sing this as the 24. Song. HOw darke, & how be-clowded (in his wrath) The LORD hath caused Syon to appeare! How Isr'els beauty he obscured hath! As if throwne downe from Heau'n to Earth he were. Oh! why is his displeasure growne so hot? And why hath he his Footstoole so forgot?
2 The LORD all Syons dwellings hath laid wast; And, in so doing, he no sparing made: For in his anger to the ground he cast, The strongest Holds that Iudah's-Daughter had. Them, & their Kingdome, he to ground doth send; And all the Princes of it doth suspend. 3 When at the highest his displeasure was, From Isel all his horne of strength he broke. And from before his aduersaries face, His Right-hand (that restrained him) he tooke. Yea, he in Iacob kindled such a flame, As, round about, hath quite consum'd the same. 4 His Bow he as an aduersary bent, And by his Right-hand he did plainely shew, He drew it with an enemies intent: For all that were the fairest Markes he slew. In Syons Tabernacle this was done; Eu'n there the fire of his displeasure shone. 5 The LORD himselfe is he that was the foe, By him is Isrel thus to ruine gone. His Palaces, he ouerturned so: And he, his Holds of strength hath ouerthrowne: Eu'n he it is, from whom it doth arise, That Isrels Daughter thus lamenting lies. 6 His Tabernacle Garden-like that was, The LORD with violence hath tooke away. He hath destroyed his Assembling-place: And there nor Feasts nor Sabbaths now haue they: No, not in Syon. For in his fierce wrath, He both their King and Priests reiected hath.
7 The LORD his holy Altar doth forgoe; His Sanctuary he hath quite despiz'd. Yea, by his meere assistance hath our Foe, The Bulwarkes of our Palaces surpriz'd. And in the LORDS owne House, rude Noyses are As loud, as heretofore his Praises were. 8 The LORD his thought did purposely encline, The wals of Syon should be ouerthrowne. To that intent he stretched forth his ine, And drew not backe his hand till they were downe. And so, the Turrets with the bruised Wall, Did both together to destruction fall. 9 Her Gates in heapes of earth obscured are; The Barres of them in pieces broke hath he: Her King, and those that once her Princes were, Now borne away among the Gentiles be. The Law is lost, and they no Prophet haue, That from the LORD a vision doth receiue. 10 In silence, seated on the lowly ground, The Senators of Syons-Daughter are: With Ashes, they their careful heads haue crown'd, And mourning Sackcloth girded on them weare. Yea, on the earth in a distressed-wise, Ierusalems young Uirgins fixe their eyes. 11 And, for because my People suffer this, Mine eyes with much lamenting dimmed grow: Each part within me out of quiet is. And on the ground my Liuer forth I throw; When as mine Eyes with so sad Obiects meet; As Babes halfe dead, & sprawling in the street.
12 For, to their Mothers called they for meat. Oh where shall we haue meat and drinke! they cry. And in the Citie, while they food entreat, They swoune, like them that deadly-wounded lie. And some of them, their soules did breath away, As in the Mothers bosome, staru'd they lay. 13 Ierusalem! for thee what can I say? Or vnto what maist thou resembled be? Oh! whereunto that comfort thee I may, Thou Syon-Daughter, shall I liken thee? For, as the Seas, so great thy Breaches are: And to repaire them then; Ah, who is there! 14 Thou, by thy Prophets hast deluded bin: And foolish Uisions they for thee haue sought. For, they reueiled not, to thee thy Sinne, To turne away the thraldome it hath brought. But, lying Prophecies they sought for thee; Which of thy sad exile, the causes be. 15 And those, thou Daughter of Ierusalem That on occasions passe along this way, With clapping hands, and hissings, thee contemn: And, nodding at Thee, thus in scorne they say: Is this the Citie, men did once behight The flowre of Beauty, and the worlds Delight? 16 Thy Aduersaries, (euery one of them) Their mouthes haue op'ned at thee, to thy shame. They hisse, and gnash at Thee, Ierusalem; We; we (say they) haue quite destroy'd the sam: This, is that day hath long expected beene; Now commeth it, and we the same haue seene.
17 But, this the Lord decreed, and brought to passe, He, to make good that word which once he spake, (And that which long agoe determin'd was) Hath hurled downe, and did no pitty take. He; thus hath made thee scorned of thy Foe; And, rais'd the Horne of them that hate thee so. 18 Oh wall of Syons-Daughter, cry amaine, Eu'n to the Lord set forth a hearty Cry: Downe like a Riuer, cause thy teares to raine, And, let them neither day nor night be dry. Seeke neither sleepe, thy body to suffice; Nor slumber, for the Apples of thine eyes. 19 At night and when the watch is new begun; Then rise, and to the Lord Almighty Cry. Before him, let thy Heart like water runne; And lift thou vp to him thy hands, on high. Eu'n for those hunger-starued Babes of thine, That in the Corners of the streets doe pine. 20 And thou oh Lord; Oh be thou pleas'd to see, And thinke on whom, thy Iudgements thou hast thrown. Shal women fed with their own issue be, And Children, that a span are scarcely growne? Shall thus, thy Priests & Prophets, Lord, be slaine, As in thy Sanctuary they remaine? 21 Nor youth, nor Age, is from the slaughter free; For, in the streets, lye Yong, and Old, and all. My Uirgines and my yong-men, murthered be; Eu'n both, beneath the sword, together fall. Thou, in thy day of wrath, such hauock mad'st; That in deuouring thou no pitty hadst.
22 Thou, round about hast call'd my feared Foes, As if that summon'd to some feast they were: Who in thy day of wrath, did round enclose, And shut me so, that none escaped are. Yea, those that hate me, them consumed haue, To whom, I nourishment, and breeding gaue. Lament. 3. HEre the Prophet Ieremy, hauing contemplated his owne afflictions with the destruction of Iudah and Ierusalem, seemeth by that materiall Obiect to haue rai∣sed his apprehension higher, and by the spirit of Pro∣phecy both to foresee the particular suffrings of Ies Christ, and to become sensible also of those great affli∣ctions which the Church Militant (his mysticall body) should be exercised withall. And in this most passionate Elegy, either in his own person bewaileth it, or else per∣sonates Iesus Christ, the head of that Mysticall body, ta∣king vpon himselfe those punishments; with that heay burthen of Gods wrath, and that vnspeakable sorrow which mankinde had otherwise beene ouerwhelmed withall. In briefe, this Elegy containes an expression of Gods heauy Anger for our sinne; the seuerity and bit∣ternesse of his Iudgements; the greatnesse of his mer∣cies; the hope and patience of the faithfull in all Af∣flictions; The vnwillingnesse of God to punish; The hearty repentance of his people; And a Propheticall imprecation concerning the enemies of the spirituall Ierusalem. This may be sung, to mooue and stirre vs vp with a feeling of our Redeemers passion: To re∣member vs of our miserable condition through sinne: To mooue vs to repentance: and to comfort and in∣struct vs amidd our afflictions.
Song. 26. Sing this as the 24. Song. I Am the Man who (scourged in thy wrath) Haue in all sorrowes throughly tyred beene: Into obscurity, he ed me hath; He brought me thither, where no light is seene: And so aduerse himselfe to me he showes, That all the day his hand doth me oppose. 2 My Flesh and Skinne with age, He tyred out. He bruiz'd my bones, as they had broken bin. He with a Wall enclosed me about. With cares and labours he hath shut me in. And me to such a place of darknesse led, As those are in, that befor euer dead. 3 He shut me where I found no passage out, And there my heauy Chaines vpon me laid. Moreouer, though I loudly cryed out, He tooke no heed at all for what I prayd: My Way with hewed stones he stopped hath▪ And left me wandring in a winding Path. 4 He was to me like some way-lying Beare. Or as a Lyon that doth lurke vnseene. My course he hindring, me in pieces teare, Till I quite ruin'd, and layd waste had beene. His Bowe he bended, and that being bent▪ I, was the marke at which his Arrow went. 5 His Arrowes from his Quiuer forth he caught, And through my very Rines he made them passe. Eu'n mine owne people set me then at naught; And, all the day; their sporting song I was.
From him, my fill of bitternesse I had; And, me, with Worm-wood likewise, drunke he mad▪ 6 With stones, my teeth he all to peeces brake; He, Dust and Ashes ouer me hath strowne; All rest, he from my weary soule did take, As if, contentment I had neuer none▪ And then, I cryed; Oh! I am vndone; All my dependance on the Lord is gone. 7 Oh minde thou my afflictions, and my care; My miseries, my worm-wood, and my gall: For, they still fresh in my remembrance are, And downe in me my humbled soule doth fall. I, this forget not; And when this I minde, Some helpe againe, I doe begin to finde. 8 It is thy mercy Lord, that we now be; For, had thy pitty fail'd, not one had liu'd. The Faithfulnesse is great, that is in Thee, And eu'ry morning it is new reuiu'd. And Lord such claime my soule vnto thee lay▪ That shee will euer trust in thee, she sayes. 9 For, thou art kinde to those that waite thy will; And, to their soules that after thee attend. Good therefore is it, that in quiet still, We hope that safety, which thou Lord wilt send. And happy he, that timely doth enure, His youthfull necke the burthen to endure. 10 He downe will sit alone, and nothing say; But, since 'tis cast vpon him, beare it out. (Yea, though his mouth vpon the dust they lay) And while there may be hope, will not mis-dou▪
His Cheeke to him that smiteth, offers He; And is content, though he reuiled be. 11 For, sure is he (what euer doth befall) The LORD will not forsake for euermore: But that he hauing punisht, pitty shall, Because he many mercies hath in store. For, God in plaguing, take no pleasure can; Nor willingly afflicteth any man. 12 The LORD delighteth not to trample downe, Those men that here on earth enthralled are: Or that a Righteous man should be o'rethrowne, When he before the Highest doth appeare. Nor is the LORD well-pleased in the sight, When he beholds the Wrong, subuert the Right. 13 Let no man mutter then, as if he thought Some things were done in spight of GODS decree: For, all things at his word to passe are brought That either for our good, or euill be. Why then liues man, such murmurs to begin? Oh! let him rather murmure at his Sinne. 14 Our owne lewd courses, let vs search and trie, We may to thee againe, oh LORD, conuart. To GOD, that dwelleth in the Heau'ns on high, Let vs (oh let vs) lift both hand and heart. For, we haue sinned; we rebellious were: And therefore was it, that thou didst not spare. 15 For this (with wrath o're-shaddow'd) thou hast chas't, And slaughter made of vs, without remorse. Thy selfe obscured with a clowd thou hast; That so our Prayers might haue no recourse.
And loe, among the Heathen-People, we As out-casts, and off-cowrings reckon'd be. 16 Our Aduersaries all (and eu'ry where) Themselues with open mouth against vs set; On vs, is fane a terrour, and a snare, Where ruine hath with desolation met: And for the Daughter of my Peoples cares, Mine eyes doth cast forth Rivulets of teares. 17 Mine eyes perpetually were ouerflowne: And yet there is no ceasing of my Teares. For, if the LOD in mercy looke not downe, That from the Heau'ns he may behold my cares; They will not stint. But for my Peoples sake, Mine eyes will weep vntil my heart doth break. 18 As when a Bird is chased too and fro, My foes pursued me, when cause was none. Into the Dungeon they my life did throw, And there they rowled ouer me a stone. The waters likewise, ouerlow'd me quite: And then, me thought, I perished out-right. 19 Yet, on thy Name oh LORD, I cal'ed there, (Eu'n when in that low Dungeon I did lye) Whence thou wert pleased my complaint to heare, Not sleighting me, when I did sighing cry. That very day I called, thou drew'st neere, And said'st vnto me, that I should not feare. 20 Thou LORD, my Soule maintainest in her right. My Life by thee alone, redeemed was. Thou hast oh LORD, obserued my despight. Uouchsafe thy Iudgement also, in my cause.
For, all the grudge they beare me, thou hast seen. And all their plots  haue against me been. 21 Thou heard'st what landers they against me laid, And all those mischiefes they deuiz'd for me. Thou notest what their Lips of me haue said; Eu'n what their daily closest whisperings be: And how, when ere they rise, or downe do lye, Their Song, and Subiect of their mirth am I. 22 But LORD, thou shalt reward and pay them all, That meed, their Actions merit to receiue▪ Thy heauy maiediction ceaze them shall: Eu'n this, sad hearts they shall for euer haue. And by thy wrath pursude they shall be driuen, Till they are chased out, from vnder Heauen. Lament. 4. AS in the two first Elegies, the Prophet here begins by way of exclamation, and most passionately sets forth the cause of his complayning, by a threefold ex∣plication. First, by expressing the Dignity, Sex, & Age of the persons miserably perishing in this calamity: as, Princes, Priests, Men, Women, and Children. Second∣ly, by paralelling their estate with that of bruite Crea∣tures; and their punishment with Sodoms. Thirdly, by shewing the horrible effects which followed this Cala∣mity; as the Nobility being driuen to cloath themselues from the dunghill, and Women to feed on their owne Children, &c. After this, he sheweth what are the cau∣ses of all that misery which hee bewaileth. Secondly, declareth the vanity of relying on temporall consolati∣ons. Thirdly, setteth forth the power and fiercenesse of the Churches Aduersaries. Fourthly, prophecieth that
euen Christ was to suffer the fury of their malice, befo Gods wrath could be apsed. And lastly, assured that the Church shall be at length deliuered, and  enemies rewarded according to their wickednesse. T Song may be sung to set before our eyes, the seuerity  Gods wrath against sinne, to winne vs to repentan and to comfort vs vpon our conuersions. Song. 27. Sing this as the 5. Song. HOw dimme the Gold doth now appeare! (That Gold, which once so brightly shone) About the Citie, here and there, The Sanctuary-Stones art throwne. The Sonnes of Syon, late compar'd, To Gold, (the richest in esteeme) Like Potsheards, are without regard, And base as earthen vessels seeme. 2 The Monsters of the Sea haue care The breasts vnto their young to giue: But crueller my people are; And Estridge-like in Deserts liue. With thirst the Sucklings tongues are dry; And to their parched roofes they cleae. For bread young Children also cry; But none at all they can receaue. 3 Those that were vs'd to dainty fare, Now in the streets halfe starued lye. And they that once did Scarlet weare, Now dunghill rags about them tye. Yea, greater plagues my Peoples crime, Hath brought on them, then Sodoms were.
For, that was sunke in little time, And no prolonged death was there. 4 Her Nazarites, whose whitenesse was More pure then either milke or snow; Whose ruddinesse did Rubies passe; Whose veines did like the Saphir show: Now blacker then the Cole are growne; And in the streets vnknowne are they: Their flesh is clung vnto the bone, And like a sticke is dry'd away. 5 Such therefore as the sword hath slaine, Are farre in better Case then those; Who death for want of food sustaine, Whilst in the fruitfull field it growes. For when my people were distrest, Eu'n women (that should pittie take) With their owne hands their Children drest, That so their hnger they might sake. 6 The LORD accomplisht hath his wrath; His fierce displeasure forth is powrd; A fire on Sion set he hath, Which eu'n her ground-worke hath deuour'd; When there was neither earthly King; Nor, through the whole world, one of all Thought any Foe to passe could bring, That thus Ierusalem should fall. 7 But this hath happened for the guilt Of those that haue her Prophets bin, And those her wicked Priests, that spilt The blood of Innocents therein. Along the streets they sumbling went; (The blindnesse of these men was such.)
And, so with bloud they were be-sprent, That no man would their Garments touch, 8 Depart, depart; (twas therefore sed) From these pollutions get ye farre. So, wandring to the Heathen, fled, And said, there was no biding there. And them the LORD hath now in wrath Exilde, and made despied liue: Yea, sent their Priests and Elders hath, Where none doth honour to them giue. 9 And, as for vs, our eyes decay'd, With watching vaine Releefes, we haue: Cause, we expect a Nations ayde, That is vnable vs to saue. For, at our heeles so close they be, We dare not in the streetes appeare. Our end we therefore, comming see, And know our rooting-out is neare. 10 Our Persecutors follow on, As swift as Aegles of the Skie. They o're the Mountaines make vs runne; And in the Deserts, for vs lye. Yea, they haue Christ (our life) betray'd, And caus'd him in their pits to fall. (Eu'n him) beneath whose shade, we sa▪ We liue among the eathen shall. 11 O Edom, in the land of Huz, (Though yet o're vs triumph thou may) Thou shalt receaue this Cup from vs; Be drunke, and hurle thy cloaths away. For, when thy punishments for sinnes, Accomplished oh Syon be;
To visit Edom he beginnes; And publike make her shame, will be. Lament. 5. IN this Elegie, the Prophet prayeth vnto the Lord to remember and consider his peoples afflictions, ac∣knowledging before him their miseries, and presen∣ting them vnto him, as destressed Orphanes, wid∣dowes, and Captiues (by such humiliation) o winne his compassion. Hee mooueth him also, by repetition of the miserable ruine they werefallen into: by the noble Possessions and Digniies they had lost; by the base Condition of those vnder whose tyranny they were brought: And by the generalitie of their Calamitie, from which no sx, age, nor degree, escaped. Then (ingenuously confessing their sin to be the iust Cause of all this) glorifieth God, and concludeth this Petiti∣onary Ode, with desiring that he would both giue them grace to repent, and restore them to that peace which they formerly enioyed. This Elegiacall Song, we may sing vnto God in the behalfe of many particular Chur∣ches, euen in these Times; especially if we consider that mysticall bondage which the Diuell hath brought them into; and apply these Complaints to those spiri∣tuall Calamities, which haue befallen them for their sinnes. Song. 28. Sing this as the fifth Song. OH mind thou LORD, our sad distresse▪ Behold, and thinke on our reproach. Our houses, Strangers do possesse;
And on our heritage encroach. Our Mothers for their Husbands grieue, And of our Fathers robd are we; Yea, money we compel'd to giue For our owne wood and water, be. 2 In persecution we remaine, Where endlesse labour tyre vs doth; And, we to serue for bread are faine, To Aegypt and to Ashur both. Our Fathers errd, and being gone, The burthen of their sinne we beare: Eu'n Slaues the rule o're vs haue wone; And none to set vs free is there. 3 For bread our liues we hazard in The perils, which the Deserts threat; And like an Ouen is our skinne, Both soild and parcht for want of meat. In Sion Wiues defiled were; Deflowred were the Virgins young, (Through Iudah's Cities euery where) And Princes by their hands were hung. 4 Her Elders disrespected stood: Her Young-men, they for  rinding tooke▪ Her Children fell beneath the wood, And Maistrates the Gates forsooke. Their Musicke, young-men haue forborne: Reioycing in their hearts is none: To mourning doth our dauncing turne; And from our head the Crowne is gone. 5 Alas that euer we did sinne! For, therefore feeles our heart these cares: For that our eyes haue dimmed beene;
And thus the Hill of Syon fares. Such desolation there is seene, That now the Foxes play thereon: But thou for euer LORD hast beene; And without ending is thy Chrone▪ 6 Oh, why are we forgotten thus? So long time wherefore absent art? Conuert thy selfe, oh LORD, to vs; And we to thee shall soone conuart. Renue, oh LORD, those Ages past, In which thy fauour we haue seene. For, we extreamely are debas't, And bitter hath thine anger beene. The Prayer of Daniel. Dan. 9.4. THe Prophet Daniel, in this Prayer beseecheth God to be mercifull vnto his people in Captiuity; And these foure things are principally considerable therein. First, an acknowledgement of Gods Power, Iustice, and Mercy, with a confession, that from the highest to the lowest they had broken his Commandements, and were therfore iustly punished. Secondly, it is confessed that as their punishment is that which they deserued; so it is also the same that was foretold should come vpon thē. Thirdly, he beseecheth that God for his owne mercies sake, and the sake of his Messias, would (neuertheles) e merciful vnto them; aswell in rgrd he had heretofore gotten glory by deliuering them; as in respect they were his owne elected people, and were already become a reproch vnto their Neighbours This may be sung whensoeuer any of those iudgements are powred out on the Common-wealth, which the Prophets haue threat∣ned for sinne; or in our particular afflictions, we hauing first applyed it by our Meditations.
Song. 29. Sing this as the 22. Song. LORD GOD Almighty, great, & full of feare, Who alwaies art from breach of promise free, And neuer falling to haue mercy there, Where they obserue thy lawes and honour Thee: We haue transgressed, and amisse haue done; We disobedient and rebellious were. For, from thy Precepts we astray are gone; And we departed from thy Iudgements are. 2 We did thy Seruants Prophecies withstand, Who to our Dukes, our Kings, and Fathers came; When they to all the People of the Land, Proclaimed forth their message in thy Name. In thee oh LORD, all righteousnesse appeares, But publike shame to vs doth appertaine; Eu'n as with them of Iudah now it fares, And those that in Ierusalem remaine: 3 Yea, as to Isr'el now it doth befall; Throughout those Lands in which they scatt'red be, For that their great Transgression, wherewithall They haue transgressed, and offended Thee. To Vs, our Kings, our Dukes, and Fathers, doth Disgrace pertaine (oh LORD) for angring Thee: Yet, mercy, LORD our GOD, and pardon both, To Thee belong, though we rebellious be. 4 We, did (indeed) peruersly disobey Thy voyce (oh LORD our GOD) & would not heart, To keepe those Lawes thou didst before vs lay, By those thy Seruants, who thy Prophets were.
Eu'n all that of the race of Isra'el be, Against thy Law, haue grieuously mis-done: And that they might not listen vnto thee, They backward from thy voyce oh LORD, are gone. 5 On them therefore, that Curse, & Oath descended, Which in the Law of Moses written was; (The Seruant of that God whom we offended) And now his speeches he hath brought to passe. On vs, and on our Iudges, he doth bring That Plague, wherewith he threatned vs & them. For, vnder Heau'n was neuer such a thing, As now is faine vpon Ierusalem. 6 As Moses written-Law doth beare record, Now all this mischiefe vpon them is brought. And yet we prayed not before the LORD, That leauing Sin, we might his Truth be taught. For which respect, the LORD in wait hath laid, That he, on vs inflict this Mischiefe, might. And sith his holy Word we disobeyd. In all his doings he remaines vpright. 7 But now, oh LORD our GOD, who from the Land Of cruell Aegypt, brought thy People hast; And by the power of thy Almighty hand, Atchieu'd a Name, which to this day doth last: Though we haue sinned in committing ill, Yet LORD by that pure Righteousnesse in thee, From thy Ierusalem, thy Holy-hill, Oh! let thy wrathfull anger turned be. 8 For, through the guilt of our displeasing sinne, And for our Fathers faults; Ierusalem, (Thy chosen people) hath despised bin: And are the scorne of all that neighbour them.
Now therefore to thy Seruants pray'r incline: Heare thou his suite, oh GOD, and let thy face, (Eu'n for the LORDS deare sake) vouchsafe to shine Upon thy (now forsaken) Holy place. 9 Thine eares encline thou (oh my God) and heare: Lift vp thine eyes, and vs, oh looke vpon; Us, who forsaken with thy Citie are; That Citie, where thy Name is called on. For, we vpon our selues presume not thus. Before thy presence our request to make▪ For ought that righteous can be found in vs; But for thy great and tender Mercies sake. 10 LORD heare (forgiue oh LORD) & weigh the same▪ Oh LORD performe it, and no more deferre, For thine owne sake, my GOD; For by thy Name, Thy Citie and thy People called are. The Prayer of Ionah. Ionah 2. IOnah flying from God, and being preserued in a Fi∣shes belly, when he was cast into the Sea; made this prayer to praise God for deliuering him in so great an extreamitie. And the principall things remarkeable therein are these. First, the place where he prayed. Se∣condly, th terrible danger that enclosed him. Thirdly, the despaire he was nigh falling into. Fourthly, Gods mercy, with the Prophets timely application thereof, & the comfort it infused into him. Fiftly, the occasio drawing men into such perills. Sixtly, the vowe made vpon his deliuerance, and the reason of that vowe. This buriall of Ionas in the Fishes belly, and his deliuerance from thence, was a type of the buriall and Resurrection of our blessed Sauiour, Matth. 12.4. This Prayer there∣fore
we ought, not only to sing hystorically, to memo∣rize this wondrous worke of God; but to praise him al∣so for the Resurrection of Christ, and raising mankinde from that fearefull and bottomlesse gulfe of perdition, wherein it lay swallowed vp, without possibility of redee∣ming it selfe. Song. 30. Sing this as the 24 Song. IN my distresse to thee I cride, oh LORD; And thou wert pleased my complaint to heare: Out from the bowels of the Graue I roar'd; And to my voyce thou didst incline thine care: For, I amid the raging Sea was cast; And to the bottome there thou plungd me hast. 2 The Flouds did round about me Circles make: Thy waues and Billowes ouer-flow'd me quite; And then vnto my selfe (alas) I said, I am for euermore depriu'd thy sight: Yet once againe thou pleased art, that I Should to thy holy Temple lift mine eye. 3 Eu'n to my Soule the waters clos'd me had: O're-swallow'd by the Deepes I fast was pent: About my head the weeds a wreath had made: Unto the Mountaines bottomes downe I went; And so, that forth againe I could not get, The Earth an euerlasting Barre had set. 4 Then thou, oh LORD my GOD; then thou wert he, That from corruption didst my Life defend. For, when my Soule was like to faint in me, Thou thither didst into my thought descend. And LORD, my prayer thence to thee I sent, Which vpward to thy holy Temple went.
5 Those who beleeue in vaine and foolish lyes, Despisers of their owne good safety be. But, I will offer vp the Sacrifice Of singing praises, with my voyce, to thee. And I will that performe, which vow'd I haue: For, vnto thee belongs it, LORD, to saue. The Prayer of Habakuk. Habak. 3. IN this Petitionay and Propheticall Hymne, the Deli∣uerer of mankind, is first prayed for. Secondly, the glorious Maiesty of his comming is described by excel∣lent Allegories, and by Allusions to former deliueran∣ces, vouchsafed to the Iewes. Thirdly, here is foretold, the ouerthrowe of Antichrist; who shall be destroyed by the Brightnes of our Sauiours comming. Fourthly, here is set forth the state of the latter times. Fiftly, he expres∣seth the ioy, confidence, and safety of the Elect of God, euen amid those terrors that shall awayt vpon their R∣deemers cōming. This Song is to be sung hystorically, in commemoration of the Churches deliuerance by the first comming of Iesus Christ. And prophetically, to comfort vs concerning that perfect Deliuery, asured at his se∣cond comming. For, though the Prophet had some re∣spect to the Iewes temporall deliuerance, that hee might comfort the Church in those Times. Yet the Holy-Ghost had principall regard to the spirituall deliuerance of his spirituall Kingdome, the holy Catholicke-Church. And to her, & her enemies doe the Names (of the Churches enemies) here mentioned, very properly agree. Nay, Cushan, signifying darke, blacke, or cloudy; And Midian which is interpreted, Condemnation, or Iudgement; bet∣ter suite vnto the Nature of those spirituall Aduersaries,
whom they pefigured, then to those People who were literally so called. For, none are so fitly tearmed Peo∣ple of Darknesse, or of Condemnation, as the members of Antichrist, and the spirituall Babilon. Song. 31. LORD, thy answere I did heare, And I  grew therewith afear'd. When the Times at  fullest are, Let thy Worke be then declar'd.  When the Time, LORD, full doth grow, Then
in Anger, Mercy show. 2 God Almightie, he came downe; Downe he came from Theman-ward: And the matchlesse Holy-one, From Mount Paran forth appear'd, Heau'n ore-spreading with his Rayes, And Earth filling with his praise. 3 Sunne-like was his glorious Light: From his Side there did appeare Beaming Rayes that shined bright; And his Pow'r he shrowded there: Plagues before his face he sent: At his Feete hot Coales there went▪ 4 Where he stood he measure tooke Of the Earth, and viewd it well: Nations vanisht at his looke; Auncient Hils to powder fell: Mountaines old cast lower were: For, his waies eternall are. 5 Cushan Tents I saw diseas'd, And the Midian Curtaines quake. Haue the Flouds, Lord, thee displeas'd? Did the Flouds thee angry make? Was it else the Sea that hath Thus prouoked thee to wrath? 6 For, thou rod'st thy Horses there,
And thy sauing-Charrets through: Thou didst make thy ow appeare; And thou didst performe thy Uowe: Yea, thine Oath and Promise past (To the Tribes) fulfilled hast. 7 Through the Earth thou riftes didst make. And the Riuers there did flow: Mountaines, seeing thee, did shake; And away the Flouds did goe. From the Deepe a voyce was heard; And his hands on high he rear'd. 8 Both the Sunne and Moone made stay, And remoou'd not in their Spheares: By thine Arrowes light went they, By thy brightly shining Speares: Thou in wrath the Land didst crush, And in rage the Nations thresh. 9 For thy Peoples safe releefe, With thy Christ for ayd wentst thou: Thou hast also pierc't the Chiefe Of the sinfull Houshold through; And displayd them, till made bare From the Foot to Necke they were. 10 Thou, with Iauelines of their owne, Didst their Armies Leader strike. For, against me they came downe, To deuoure me, wherle-winde like. And they ioy in nothing more, Then vnseene to spoile the Poore. 11 Through the Sea thou madst a way, And didst ride thy Horses there,
Where great heapes of water lay. I, the newes thereof did heare: And the voyce my bowels shooke; Yea, my lips a qui'ring tooke. 12 Rottennesse my bones possest: Trembling feare possessed me, I that troublous day might rest. For, when his approches be Onward to the People made, His strong Troups will them inuade. 13 Bloomelesse shall the Fig-tree bee: And the Vine no fruit shall yeeld: Fade shall, then, the Oliue tree: Meat shall none be, in the Field. Neither in the Fold, or Sall, Flocke or Heard continue shall. 14 Yet, the LORD my ioy shall be: And, in him I will delight: In my GOD that saueth me; GOD the LORD, my only might, Who, my feete so guides, that I Hinde-like, pace my Places-high. THE HYMNES OF THE New-Testament. THese fiue that next follow, are the Hymnes of the New-Testament. Betweene which, and the Songs of the Old Testament, there is great difference. For, the Songs of the Old Testament were either thanksgiuings for tem∣porall
benefits, typifying and signifying future Benefits tou∣ching our Redemption: Or else, Hymnes prophetically fore∣shewing those Mysteries which were to be accomplished at the comming of Christ. But, these Euangelicall Songs were composed, not for temporall, but for spirituall things, promi∣sed and figured by those temporall Benefits, mentioned in the Old Testament, and perfectly fulfilled in the New. Therefore, these Euangelicall Hymnes are more excellent then such as are meerely Propheticall; In regard, the Pos∣session is to be preferred before the Hope; and the End, before the Meanes of obtaining it. Magnificat. Luk. 1.46. THE blessed Virgin Mary being saluted by the An∣gel Gabriel, & hauing by the holy-Ghost conceiued our Redeemer Iesus Christ in her wombe; was made fruitfull also, in her Soule, by the ouershaddowing of that Holy Spirit: and thereupon, brought sorth this E∣uangelicall and Propheticall Hymne. Wherein, three things are principally obserueable. First, she praiseth God for his particular mercies and fauour towards her. Secondly, she glorifies God for the generall benefit of our Redemption. Thirdly, she Magnifies God for the particular grace vouchsafed vnto the seed of Israel, according to what was promised to Abraham. This is the first Euangelicall Song. And was indited by the holy Ghost, not only to bee the Blessed Virgines Thanksgiuing; but to be sung by the whole Catholike Church (whom she typically personated) to praise God for our Redemption and Exaltation. And therefore, it is worthily inserted into the Liturgie, that it may be perpetually, and reuerently sung.
Song. 32. Sing this as the 3. Song. THat magnifi'de the LORD may be, My Soule now vndertakes; And in the God that saueth me, My Spirit merry-makes. For, he vouchsafed hath to view His Handmaides poore degree. And loe, All Ages that ensue, Shall blessed reckon me. 2 Great things for me Th'Almightie does, And holy is his Name: From Age to Age he mercy showes On such as feare the same. He, by his Arme declar'd his might: And this to passe hath brought, That now the Proud are put to flight, By what their hearts haue thought. 3 The Mighty plucking from their Seat; The Poore he placed there: And for the hungrie takes the meate From such, as wealhy are. But, minding Mercy, he hath show'd His seruant Isr'el grace: As he to our Forefathers vow'd; To Abraham, and his Race. Benedictus Luk. 1.68. ZAchary the Priest, being (vpon the birth of  Son) inspired with the knowledge of our
Incarnation; sung the second Euangelicall Hymne: In which, two things are especially considerable. First, he blesseth God, because through the comming of Christ, all the promises made vnto the Patriarkes and Prophets were fulfilled, for the saluation of his people. Secondly, he declareth the Office and dutie of his owne sonne, who was sent before to prepare the way of the Lord. This Song, the Church hath worthily inserted into the Liturgie also, and we ought therefore to sing it reue∣rently in memoriall of our Sauiours incarnation; and to praise God for the fulfilling of his promises, and that Euangelicall preparation, which he vouchsafed, by sen∣ding his Forerunner. Song. 33. Sing this as the 3. Song. BLest be the GOD of Israel: For, he has People bought, And in his seruant Dauid's house Hath great saluation wrought; As by his Prophets, he foretold, Since Time began to be; That from our Foes we might be safe, And from our Haters free. 2 That he might show our Fathers grace And beare in minde the same, Which by an Oath he vow'd vnto Our Father Abraham; That from our Aduersaries freed, We serue him fearelesse might, In righteousnesse, and holinesse, Our fe-time in his sight.
3 And (of the highest) thee, oh Child! The rophet I declare, Before the LORD his face to goe; His comming to prepare; To teach his People, how they shall That safety come to know, Which by remission of their sinnes, He doth on them bestowe. 4 For it is through the tender Loue Of GOD alone, where by That Day-spring hath to visit vs, Descended from on high; To light them who in darkenesse sit, (And in Deaths shade abide) And in the blessed way of Peae Their wandring feet to guide. T Song of Angels. Luk. 2.13. THis is the third Euangelicall Song mentioned in the New Testament; and it was sung by a quire of Angels (at the birth of our blessed Sauiour Iesus Christ) whose reocing shall be mde compleat by the redemption of mnkinde. In this Song they first glorifie God; and then proclaime that happy ea and econciliation which his Sons Natiuity should bring vnto the world, Reioycing therein, and in that vnspeakeable good-wi and deare-Communion which was thereby established be∣tweene the Go head, the Manhood, and Them. We there∣fore ought to ioyne with them in this Song, and sing it often, to praise God, and quicken Faith and Charitie in our selues.
Song. 34. THus Angels sung, and thus sing we; To GOD  on high all glory be: Let him on Earth his  Peace bestowe, And vnto men his fauour show. Nunc Dimittis. Luk. .29. THe fourth Euangelicall Hymne is this of Simeon; who being in expectation of the comming of the Messias (which according to Daniels 70. weekes was in those dayes to bee accomplished) it was reuealed vnto him, that he should noye till he had seene Christ: And, accordingly he comming into the Temple by the spirits instigation (when he was presented there as the Law commanded) both beheld, and embraced his Redeemer. In this Song therefore he glorifieth God, for the fulfil∣ling
of his promise made vnto him; And ioyfully con∣fesseth Iesus Christ before all the People. In repeating this Hymne, we ought also to confesse our Redeemer. For Simeon was, as it were, the Churches speaker; and hath for vs expressed that thankfull Ioy, wherewithall wee should be filled, when God enlightensvs with the knowledge and spirituall vision of our Sauiour. Song. 35. Sing this as the . Song. GRant now in peace, (that by thy leaue) I may depart, oh LORD: For, thy Saluation seene I haue, According to thy word. That which prepared was by Thee, Before all Peoples sight, Thy Israels renowne to be, And to the Gentiles light. The Song of Moses and the Lambe. Reuel. 15.3. THe fifth and last Song recorded in the New Testa∣ment is this, called by S. Iohn, The Song of Moses and the Lambe; being indeede the effect of that triumph Song, which the Saints, and blessed Martyrs shal sing vnto the honour of that Lambe of God, which taketh away the sinnes of the world, when they haue gotten the vi∣ctory ouer Antichrist. This Hye the members of the true Church may sing to Gods gy, and the encrease of their owne comfort, when they perceiue the power of the Almighty any way manifested vpon that Aduersa∣rie. It may be repeated also, amid our greatest persecu∣tion,
to strengthen our Faith, and remember vs, that whatsoeuer we suffer, there will come a day, wherein we shall haue cause to make vse of this Hymne with a per∣fect reioycing. Song. 36. Sing this as the 13. Song. OH thou LORD, thou GOD of might; (Who do'st all things worke aright) Whatsoe're is done by thee, Great, and wondrous proues to be: 2 True thy waies are, and direct, Holy King of Saints elect. And (oh therefore) who is there, That of thee retaines no feare? 3 Who is there that shall deny, Thy great Name to glorifie▪ For thou, LORD, and thou alone: Art the perfect Holy-one: 4 In thy presence Nations all hall to adoration fall. For thy Iudgement now appeare Unto all men what they are. Here end the Hymnes of the New Testament.
The X Commandements Exod. 20. ALthough the Decalogue be not originally in verse, yet among vs it hath beene heretofore vsually sung: Because therefore it may be a meanes to present these Precepts somewhat the oftner to remembrance, make them the more frequently repeated, and stirre vp those who sing and heare them, to the better perfor∣mance of their duties; They are here also inserted, and fitted to be sung. Song. 37. Sing this as the 4. Song. THe great Almighty spake; And thus said he; I am the LORD thy GOD; And I alone From cruell Aeypts thraldome set thee free: And other GDS but Me thou shalt haue none. Haue mercy LORD, and so our hearts encline, That we may keepe this blessed Law of thine. Thou shalt not make an Image, to adore, Of ought on earth aboue it, or below: A Carued Worke thou shalt not w before; Nor any worship on the same estowe. For, I thy GOD, a Iealous GOD am knowne; And on their Seed the Fathers sinnes correct; Untill the third, and fourth Descent be gone: But them I alwaies loue, that me affect. Haue mercy LORD, and so our hearts encline, That we may keepe this blessed Law of thine.
The Name of GOD thou neuer shalt abuse, By Swearing, or repeating it in vaine: For, him that doth his Name prophanely vse, The LORD will as a guiltie-one arraigne. Haue mercy LORD, and so our hearts encline, That we may keee this blessed Law of thine. To keepe the Sabbath holy, beare in minde. Sixe dayes thine owne affaires apply thou to: The Seau'nth is GODS owne day for rest assign'd, And thou no kinde of worke therein shalt doe. Thou, nor thy Childe, thy Seruants, nor th Beast; Nor he that Guest-wise with thee doth abide: For, after sixe dayes labour GOD did rest: And therefore he that day hath sanctifi'de. Haue mercy LORD, and so our hearts encline, That we may keepe this blessed Law of thine. See, that vnto thy Parents thou doe giue Such honour, as the Childe by dutie owes, That thou a long and blessed life maist liue Within the Land, the LORD thy GOD bestowes. Haue mercy LORD, and so our hearts encline, That we may keepe this blessed Law of thine. Thou shalt be wary, that thou no man slay: Thou shalt from all Adultery be cleare: Thou shalt not Steale anothers good away: Nor witnesse-false against thy Neighbour beare. Haue mercie LORD, and so our hearts encline, That we may keepe this blessed Law of thine.
With what is thine remaining well apaid: Thou shalt not couer what thy Neighbours is, His House, nor Wife, his Seruant, Man, nor Maid, His Oxe, nor Asse, nor any thing of his. Thy mercy Lord, thy mercy let vs haue, And in our hearts these Lawes of thine engraue. The Lords Prayer. Mat. 6.7. THe Lords Prayer hath beene aunciently, and vsually sung also; and to that purpose was heretofore both translated and paraphras'd in verse; which way of ex∣pression (howsoeuer some weake Iudgements haue condemned it) doth no whit disparage or mis-beseeme a Prayer. For, Dauid made many prayers in verse And, indeede, measured words were first deuised and vsed to expresse the praises of God, and petitions made to him. Yea, those are the ancient and proper subiects of Poesie, as appeares throughout the Sacred writ, & in the first humane Antiquities. Verse, thefore, dishonors not diuine Subiects; but those men doe prophane and dishonour Verse, who abuse it on vaine and meere pro∣phane expressions. The scope and vse of this prayer is so frequently treated of, that I thinke I shall not need to insist thereon in this place. Song. 38. Sing this as the 3. Song. OUr Father which in heauen art; We sanctifie thy Name: Thy Kingdome come: Thy will be done In heau'n and earth the same:
Giue vs this day our Daily bread: And vs Forgiue thou so; As we on them that vs offend, Forgiuenesse doe bestow: Into Temptation lead vs not; But vs from euill free. For, thine the Kingdome, powre, and praise, Is, and shall euer be. The Apostles Creede. THe effect and vse of this Creed is so generally taught, that this Preface need not be enlarged: And as touching the singing and versifying of it, that which is said in the Preface to the Lords Prayer may serue for both. Song. 39. IN God the Father I beleeue; Who made all Creatures by his word; And true beleefe I likewise haue In Iesus Christ, his Sonne, our LORD: Who by the Holy Ghost conceiu'd, Was of the Uirgine Mary borne: Who meekely Pilat's wrongs recei'ud, And crucified was with scorne. 2 Who Di'de, and in the Graue hath laine: Who did the lowest Pit descend: Who on the third day rose againe, And vp to Heauen did ascend. Who at his Fathers right-hand there, Now throaned sits; and thence shall come, To take his seat of Iudgement here▪ And giue both quicke, and dead their doome.
3 I in the Holy Ghost beleeue, The holy Church-Catholike too, (And that the Saints Communion haue,) Undoubtedly beleeue I doe. I well assured am likewise, A pardon for my snnes to gaine; And that my Flesh from death shall rise, And euerlasting life obtaine. A Funerall Song. THe first Stanza of this Song is taken out of S. Iohn Gospell Cap. 11. Ver. 25.26. The second Stanza, Iob 19.25, 26, 27. The third Stanza, 1 Tim. 6.7. and Iob 1.21. The last Stanza, Reu. 14.13. And in the or∣der of Buriall appointed by the Church of England, it is appointed to be sung or read, as the Minister pleaseth: That therefore it may be the more conueniently vsed either way, according to the Churches appointment, it is here turned into Lyricke Verse. It was ordained to comfort the Liuing, by putting them in minde of the Resurrection, and of the happinesse of those, who dye in the faith of Christ Iesus. Song. 40. Sing this as the 9. Song. I Am the Life (the LORD thus saith) The Resurrection is through me; And whoso'ere in me hath faith, Shall liue, yea though now dead he be And he for euer shall not dye, That liuing doth on me relye.
2 That my Redeemer liues I ween, And that at last I rais'd shall be From earth, and, couer'd with my skinne In this my flesh, my GOD shall see. Yea, with these eyes, and these alone, Eu'n I my GOD shall looke vpon. 3 Into the world we naked come, And naked backe againe we goe: The LORD our wealth receiue we from, And he doth take it from vs too: The LORD both wils, and workes the same; And blessed therefore be his Name. 4 From Heau'n there came a voyce to me, And this it wil'd me to record; The Dead from henceforth blessed be, The Dead that dyeth in the LORD: The Spirit thus doth likewise say; For, from their Workes at rest are they. The Song of the three Children. THis Song hath been anciently vsed in the Liturgie of the Church, as profitable to the stirring vp of Duotion, and for the praise of God. For, it ear∣nestly calleth vpon all creatures, to set forth the glory of their Creator, euen Angels, Spirits, and reasonable Creatures, with those also that are vnreasonable, and vnsensible. And this speaking to things without Life, is not to ntimate that they are capable of such like exhor∣tations; but rather, that vpon consideration of the o∣bedience which Beasts, and insensible Creatures conti∣nue
towards God, according to the law imposed at their Creation; men might be prouoked to remember the ho∣nour and praise, which they ought to ascribe vnto their Almighty Creator, as well as all his other Creatures. Song. 41. Sing this as the 9. Song. OH all you Creatures of the LORD; You Angels of the God most high; You Heau'ns, with what you doe afford; And Waters all aboue the skie: Blesse ye the LORD, him praise, adore, And magnifie him euermore. 2 Of God you euerlasting Powres, Sunne, Moone, and Starres, so bright that show; You soking Deawes, you dropping Showres; And all you Winds of God that blow: Blesse ye the LORD, him praise, adore, And magnifie him euermore. 3 Thou Fire, and what doth heat containe; Cold Winter, and thou Summer faire; You blustering Stormes of Haile, and Raine; And thou the Frost-congealing-Ayre: Blesse ye the LORD, him praise, adore, And magnifie him euermore. 4 Oh praise him both you Ice and Snow; You Nights and Dayes, doe you the same, With what or Darke or Light doth show; You Cloudes, and eu'ry shining Flame: Blesse ye the LORD, him praise, adore, And magnifie him euermore.
5 Thou Earth, you Mountaines, and you Hills, And whatsoeuer thereon growes; You Fountaines, Riuers, Springs, and Rills; You Seas, and all that ebbes, or flowes: Blesse ye the LORD, him praise, adore, And magnifie him euermore. 6 You Whales, and all the Water yeelds; You of the Feather'd airy-breed; You Beasts and Cattell of the fields; And you that are of humane seed: Blesse ye the LORD, him praise, adore, And magnifie him euermore. 7 Let Israel the LORD confesse; So let his Priests, that in him trust; Him let his Seruants also blesse; Yea, Soules and Spirits of the Iust: Blesse ye the LORD, him praise, adore, And magnifie him euermore. 8 You blessed Saints, his praises tell▪ And you that are of humble heart, With Ananias, Misael; And Azarias (bearing part) Blesse you the LORD, him praise adore, And magnifie him euermore. The Song of S. Ambrose, or Te Deum. THis Song, commonly called Te Deum, or the Song of S. Ambrose, was repeated at the baptizing of S. Augustine: And (as it is recorded) was composed at that very time by those two Reuerend Fathers, answe∣ring
one another, as it were by immediate inspiration. It is one of the most auncient Hymnes of the Chri∣stian Church, excellently praising and confessing the blessed Trinitie: and thereore is daily and worthily made vse of in our Liturgie, and reckoned among the Sacred Hymnes. Song. 42. Sing this as the 44. Song. WE praise Thee GOD, we knowledge Thee, To be the LORD, for euermore: And the eternall Father we, Throughout the earth, doe thee adore: All Angels, with all powers within The compasse of the heauens high; Both Cherubin, and Seraphin, To Thee perpetually do cry. 2 Oh holy, holy, holy-one; Thou LORD, and GOD of Sabbath art; Whose praise, and Maiesty alone Fils heauen and earth, in eu'ry part: The glorious Troupe Apostolike; The Prophets worthy Company; The Matyrs army-royall eke Are those, whom thou art praised by. 3 Thou through the holy Churh art knowne, The Father of vnbounded powre: Thy worthy, true, and only Sonne: The Holy Ghost the Comfortour: Of Glory thou, oh Christ, art King; The Father's Sonne, for euermore; Who men from endlesse Death to bring, The Virgins wombe didst not abhorre.
4 When Conquerour of Death thou wert, Heau'n to the Faithfull openedst thou; And in the Fathers glory art At Gods right-hand enthroned now: Whence we beleeue, that thou shalt come, To iudge vs in the day of wrath. Oh, therefore helpe thy Seruants, whom Thy precious blood Redeemed hath. 5 Them with those Saints doe Thou record, That gaine eternall glory may▪ Thine Heritage, and People LORD, Saue, blesse, guide, and advance for aye: By vs thou dayly prais'd hast beene; And we will praise Thee without end. Oh, keepe vs, LORD, this day from sinne▪ And let thy mercy vs defend. 6 Thy mercy, LORD, let vs receiue, As we our trust repose in thee: Oh LORD, in thee I trusted haue; Confounded neuer let me be. Athanasius Creede, or Quicun{que} vult. THis Creed was composed by Athanasius (after the wicked heresie of Arrius had spread it selfe through the world) that so the faith of the Catholicke Church, con∣cerning the Mystery of the blessed Trinity, might be the better vnderstood, and professed, to the ouerthrow and preuenting of Arrianisme, or the like heresies. And to the same purpose it is appointed to be said or sung vpon certaine dayes of the yeare in the Church of England.
Song. 43. Sing this as the 3. Song. THose that will saued be must hold, The true Catholike Faith, And keepe it wholly, if they would Escape eternall death. Which Faith a Trinity adores In One; and One in Three: So, as the Substance being one, Distinct the Persons be. 2 One Person of the Father is, Another of the Sonne; Another of the Holy-Ghost, And yet their Godhead one: Alike in glory; and in their Eternity as much: For, as the Father, both the Sonne, And Holy-Ghost is such. 3 The Father vncreate, and so The Sonne, and Spirit be: The Father he is Infinite; The other two as He. The Father an Eternall is, Eternall is the Sonne: So is the Holy-Ghost; yet, these Eternally but One. 4 Nor say we there are Infinites, Or vncreated Three. For, there can but one Infinite, Or vncreated be.
So Father, Sonne, and Holy-Ghost, All three Almighties are; And yet not three Almighties tho, But onely One is there. 5 The Father likewise GOD and LORD; And GOD and LORD the Sonne; And GOD and LORD the Holy Ghost, Yet GOD and LORD but One. For though each Person by himselfe, We GOD and LORD confesse: Yet Christian Faith forbids that we Three GODS or LORDS professe. 6 The Father nor begot, nor made; Begot, (not made) the Sonne; Made, nor begot, the Holy-Ghost, But a Proceeding-One. One Father, not three Fathers then; One onely Sonne, not three; One Holy-Ghost we doe confesse, And that no moe they be. 7 And lesse, or greater then the rest, This Trinity hath none; But they both Coeternall be, And equall eu'ry one. He therefore that will saued be, (As we haue said before) Must One in Three, and Three in One, Beleeue, and still adore. 8 That Iesus Christ incarnate was, He must beleeue with this And how that both the Sonne of GOD, And GOD and Man  is▪
GOD, of his Fathers substance pure, Begot ere Time was made: Man of his Mothers substance borne, When Time his fulnesse had. 9 Both perfect God, and perfect Man, In Soule, and flesh, as we: The athers equall being God: Is Man, beneath is e. Though God & Man; yet but one Christ: And o dispose it so, The Godhead was not turnd to flesh, But Manhood tooke thereto. 10 The Substance vn-confusd; He one In Person doth subsist: As Soule and Body make one Man; So God, and Man is Christ: Who suffred, and went downe to Hell, That we might saued be; The third day he arose againe, And Heaun ascended he. 11 At God the Fathers right-hand, there He ; and at the Doome, He to adiudge both quicke and dead, From thence againe shall come. Then all men with their flesh shall rise, And he account require. Well-doers into blisse shall goe, The Bad to endlesse Fre. Veni Creator. THs is a very acint Hymne composed in Latine , and cmmoly called Veni Crator; because
those are the first words of it. By the Cannons of our Church it is commanded to be said or sung at the Con∣secration of Bishops, and at the Ordination of Ministers, &c. It is therefore here translated sillle for sillable, & in the same kind of measure which it hath in the Latine. Song. 44. COme Holy-Ghost, the Maker, come; Take in  the soules of thine thy place; Thou whom our  hearts had being from, Oh, fill them with thy  heauenly grace. Thou art that Comfort from
aboue, The Highest doth by gift impart; Thou▪  spring of Life, a fire of Loue, And the annoin∣ting  Spirit art: 2 Thou in thy Gifts art manifold, GODS right-hand finger thou art, LORD The Fathers promise made of old; Our tongues enriching by the Word. Oh! giue our blinded Senses Light; Shed Loue into each heart of our, And grant the odies feeble-plight, May be enabled, by thy powre. 3 Farre from vs driue away the Foe, And let a speedy Peace ensue: Our Leader also be, that so We eury danger may eschew. Let vs be taught the blessed Creed Of ather, and of Sonne, by Thee:
And how from both thou dost proceed, That our beleefe it still may be. To Thee, the Father, and the Sonne; (Whom past, and present Times adore) The One in Three, and Three in One, All glory be for euermore. Here ends the first part of the Hymnes, and Songs of the Church.
THE SECOND PART of the HYMNES and Songs of the CHVRCH, appro∣priated to the seuerall Times and Occasions, most obseruable in the Church of ENGLAND. EVery thing hath his season, saith the Preacher, Eccl. 3. And Saint Paul aduiseth, that all things should be done Honestly, in Order, and to Edification. 1. Cor. 14 Which Counsell the Church religeously eding (and hw by obseruation of Times, and other circumstances, the memories and capacities of weake people were the better assi∣sted;) It was prouided, that there sould be Anuall Com∣memorations of the principall Mysteries of our redempti∣on: And certaine particular dayes wee decated to that purpose; as nigh as might be gessed (for the most part) pon those very seesons of the yeare, in which the seuerall M∣steries were accomplished. And, ineede, this is not that heathnsh or Idolatrous heeding of Time, reprehended in Isaah 47. Nor such a Iewish or superstitious obseuation of Dayes, and Mouthes, and Times, an Yeares, as is re∣prooued by S Paul. Gal. 4. Nor a lciation fr idlenesse, contrary to the fourth Commandement: But a Christian and warrantable Obseruation, profitably ordained, that things might be done in order, that the vnderstanding might be the better edfied: that the memory might be the oftner refresh∣ed; and that the Deuotion might be the more stirred vp. It is true▪ that we ought to watch euery howre: But if
the Church had not by her authority appointed set dayes and houes to keepe vs awke in, some of vs, would hly wath one hower. And therefore, those who haue zeale according to knowledge, doe not only religiously obserue he Churches appointed Times; but doe by her example voluntarily also appoint vnto themselues certaine dayes, an howers of the day for Christian exercises. Neither can any mn suppose this commendable obseruation of Feass, (neither burthensome by multitude, nor superstitious by inittion) to b an a∣bridgement of Christian liberty, who, as he ought to doe, be∣leeueth, that the Seruice of God is perfect freedome. We perswade not, that one day is more holy then anothr in his owne nature: But admonish that those bee reueretly and Christianly obserued, whih are vpon so good ground, and with prudent moderation dedicated to the worship of God. For, it cannot be denied, that euen those who are but coldly aff∣cted to the Churches ordinances in this kinde, doe neuerthe∣lesse ofte apprehend the mysterie of Christs Natiuity and Passion, vpon the dayes of commemorating them, much moe feelingly thn at other times; and that they forget also some other mysteries altogether, vntill they are remembred of them by the distinction, and obseruation of times vsed in the Church These things considered; an because there be many, w through ignorance rather then obstinay, haue neglected the Churches ordinance in this poynt, here are added (to those Songs of the Church, which were either taken out of the Canonicall Scripture, or anciently in vse) certaine other spirituall Songs & Hymnes appropriated to those Dayes & Occasions which are most obseruable throughout the yeare. And before each seuerall Hymne is prefixed a breefe Preface also to declare their vse, & the purpose of each Commemo∣ration. That such, who haue heretofore through ignorance contemned the Churches discipline therein, might behaue themselues more reuerently hereafter, and learne not to speake euill of those things they vnderstand not.
Aduent Sunday. THe Aduent is that for Christmas, which Iohn Baptist was to Christ (uen a fore-runner for Preparation:) And it is called the Aduent (which signifieth Comming) because the Church did vsually from that time vntill the Natiuity commemorate the seueral commings of Christ, and instruct the people concerning them. Which Com∣mings are these▪ and the like: His Conception, by which he came into the Virgins wombe: His Natiuity, by which he came (as it were) further into the world: His com∣ming to Preach in his own Person: His comming by his Ministers: His comming to Ierusalem: The comming of the Holy Ghost: His spirituall cōming which he vouch∣safeth into the heart of euery Regenerate Christian: And finally, that last comming of his, which shall be vn∣to Iudgement, &c. All which Commings are compre∣hended in these three; his comming to men, into men, and against men; to men, by his Incarnation; into men, by Grace; against men, to Iudgement. Song. 45. Sing this as the 9. Song. WHen Iesus Christ incarnate was, To be our Brother then came He: When into vs he comes by grace, Then his beloued Spouse are we: When he from Heau'n descends agen, To be our Iudge returnes he then. 2 And then despaire will those confound, Tha his first commings nought regard; And those, who till the Trumpet sound▪ Consume their Leasures vnprepard:
Curst be those pleasures cry they may, Which droue the thought of this away. 3 The Iewes abiected yet remaine, That his first Aduent heeded not; And those fiue Virgins knockt in vaine, Who to prouide them oyle forgot: But safe and blessed those men are, Who for his commings doe prepare. 4 O let vs therefore watch and pray, His times of visiting to know, And liue so furnisht, that we may With him vnto his wedding goe: Yea, though at midnight he should call, Let vs be ready, Lampes, and all. 5 And so prouide before that Feast, Which Christ his comming next doth minde, That He to come, and be a Guest Within our hearts, may pleasure finde; And we bid welcome with good cheare That Comming, which so many feare. 6 Oh come, LORD Iesu, come away; (Yea, though the world it shall deterre) Oh let thy Kingdome come we pray, Whose comming most too much deferre: And grant vs thereof such foresight, It come not like a Theefe by night. Christmas day. THis Day is worthily dedicated to be obserued, in re∣membrance of the blessed Natiuity of our Redee∣mer Iesus Christ: At which time it pleased the Almighty Father, to send his onely be gotten Sonne into the world
for our sakes; and by an vnspeakeable vnion to ioyne in one person God and Man, without confusion of Natures, or possibility of separation. To expresse therefore our thankefulnesse, and the ioy wee ought to haue in this loue of GOD; there hath beene anciently, and is yet continued in England (aboue other Countries) a neigh∣bourly and plentiull hospitality in inuiting, an (with∣out inuitation) receiuing vnto our well furnisht Tables our Tennants, Neighbours, Friends, and Strangers; to the honour of our Nation, and encrease of amity and free-hearted kindnesse among vs. But, most of all, to the refreshing of the bowels of the Poore, being the most Christian vse of such Fstiuals▪ Which charitable and good English ustome hath of late beene seasona∣bly re-aduanced by his Maiesties gracious care, in com∣manding our Nobility and Gentry to repaie (especially at such times) to their Country Mansions. Song. 46. A Son the Night before this blessed Morne,  A troupe of Angels vnto Shepheards told,
Where in a Stable hee was poorely borne,  Whom nor the earth, nor Heau'n of heau'ns can  hold. Through Bethlem rung this newes at  their returne; Yea, Angels sung, that GOD  WITH VS was borne: And they made
mirth, because we should not mourne. CHORVS. His loue therefore, oh! let vs all confesse; and to  the Sonnes of men his workes expresse. 2 This fauour Christ vouchsafed for our sake: To buy vs Throanes He in a Manger lay; Our weaknesse tooke, tha we his strength might take, And was disrob'd that he might vs aray: Our flesh he wore, Our sinne to weare away: Our curse he bore, That we escape it may; And wep for vs, that we might sing for aye. His loue therefore, oh! let vs all confesse; And to the Sonnes of men his workes expresse.
Song. 47. Another for Christmas day. Sing this as the 46. Song. A Song of ioy vnto the LORD we sing, And publish forth the fauours he hath showne: We sing his praise, from whom all ioy doth spring, And tell abroad the wonders he hath done; For such were neuer since the world begun. His loue therefore, oh! let vs all confese; And to the sonnes of men his workes expresse. 2 As on this Day the Sonne of God was borne: The blessed Word was then incarnate made; The LORD, to be a seruant held no scorne; The Godhead was with humane nature clad; And flesh a throne aboue all Angels had. His loue therefore, &c. 3 Our sinne and sorrows on himselfe e tooke, On vs his blisse and goodnesse to bestow: To visite Earth, he Heau'n a while forsooke: And to aduaunce vs high, descended low; But with the sinnefull Angels dealt not so. His loue therefore, &c. 4 A Mayd conceiu'd, whom Man had neuer knowne: The Fleece was moistned where no raine had been: A Virgine she remaines that had a Sonne: The Bush did flame that still remained greene; And this befell, when GOD with vs was seene. His loue therefore, &c.
5 For sinfull men all this to passe was brought, As, long before, the Prophets had forespoke: So, he that first our shame and ruine wrought, Once bruzd our heele, but now his Head is broke: And he hath made vs whole, who gaue that stroke. His loue therefore, &c. 6 The Lambe hath playd deuouring wolues among. The Morning starre of Iacob doth appeare. From Iess roote our tree of life is sprung, And all Gods words (in him) fulfilled are: Yet, we are slacke his prayles to declare. His loue therefore, &c. Circumcision, or Newyeares-Day. THe Church solemnizeth this Day, commonly called Newyeares-Day, in memoriall of our Sauiours Cir∣cumcision; that remembring, how when he was but eight dyes old he began to smart and shed his blood for vs, we might praise him for the same: & that with due thankfulnesse considering how easie a Sacrament hee hath left vs (in sleed of that bloody-one, which the Law inioyned) wee might be prouoked to bring forth the fruites of Regeneration. Song. 48. Sing this as the 44 Song. THis Day thy flesh, oh Christ, did bleed, Markt by the Circumcision-knife; ecause the Law for mans misdeed, Requir'd that earnest of thy life.
Those drops diuin'de that showre of bloud, Which in thine Agonie began: And that great showre foreshewd the floud, Which from thy side the next day ran. 2 Then, through that milder Sacrament, Succeeding this, thy grace inspire; Yea, let thy smart make vs repent, And circumcized hearts desire. For, he that either is baptiz'd, Or circumciz'd in flesh alone, Is but as an vncircumciz'd, Or as an vnbaptized-one. 3 The yeare anew we now begin, And outward guifts receiu'd haue we; Renue vs also LORD within, And make vs new-yeares-gifts for thee: Yea, let vs with the passed yeare, Our old affections cast away; That we new-creatures may appeare, And to redeeme the Time assay. Twelfe-day, or the Epiphanie. TWelfeday, otherwise called the Epiphany, or the day of Manifestation, is celebrated by the Church to the praise of God; and in memoriall of that blessed and admirable discouery of our Sauiours birth, which was vouchsafed vnto the Gentiles shortly after it came to passe. For as the Shepheards of the Iewes were warned thereof, and directed to the place by an Angell from Heauen. So the Magi of the Gentiles receiued the same particular notice of it by a Starre in the East, that
both Iewes and Gentiles might be left inexcusable, if they came not to his worship. This day is obserued also in commemoration of our Sauiours Baptisme, and of his first miracle in Canaan, by which he was likewise manife∣sted to be the Sonne of God. Song. 49. Sing this as the 9. Song. THat so thy blessed birth, oh Christ, Might through the world be spread about, Thy Starre appeared in the East, Whereby the Gentiles found thee out; And offring thee Myrrhe▪ Incense, Gold, Thy three-fold Office did vnfold. 2 Sweet Iesus, let that Starre of thine, Thy Grace, which guides to finde out thee, Within our hearts for euer shine, That thou of vs found out mayst be: And thou shalt be our King therefore, Our Priest, and Prophet euermore. 3 Teares that from true repentance drop, Instead of Myrrhe present will wee: For Incense we will offer vp Our Prayers, and Praises vnto Thee; And bring for old each pious-deed, Which doth from sauing-faith proceed. 4 And as those Wise-men neuer went, To visite Herod any more: So, finding thee, we will repent Our courses followd heretofore; And, that we homeward may retire, The Way by Thee we will enquire.
The Purification of S. Marie the Virgin. ACcording to the time appointed in the Law of Moses, the blessed Virgin S. Marie reckoned the days of Purification, which were to be obserued after the birth of a male Childe; And then, as the Law com∣manded, presented both her Sonne, and her appointed Offring in the Temple. Partly therefore in commemora∣tion of that her true obedience to the Law; and partly to memorize that presentation of our Redeemer (which was performed by his blessed Mother at her Purification) this Anniuersary is worthily obserued. Song. 50. Sing this as the 9. Song. NO doubt but she that had the grace, Thee in her wombe, oh Christ, to beare, And did all woman-kinde surpasse, Was hallow'd by thy being there; And where the fruite so holy was, The Birth could no pollution cause. 2 Yet in obedience to thy Law, Her purifying-Rites were done, That we might learne to stand in awe, How from thine ordinance we runne: For, if we disobedient be, Unpuried Soules haue we. 3 Oh keepe vs, LORD, from thinking vaine, What by thy word thou shalt command,
Let vs be sparing to complaine, On what we doe not vnderstand; And guide thy Church, that she may still, Command according to thy will. 4 Uouchsafe, that with one ioynt-consent, We may thy praises euer sing; Preserue thy seamelesse-Robe vnrent, For which so many, Lots doe fling; And grant that being purifide From sinne, we may in loue abide. 5 Moreouer, as thy Mother went, (That holy and thrice-blessed Mayd) Thee in thy Temple to present, With perfect humane flesh arrayd: So, let vs offerd vp to Thee, Replenisht with thy spirit be. 6 Yea, let thy Church our Mother deare, (Within whose wombe new-borne we be) Before thee at her time appeare, To giue her Children vp to Thee; And take for purified things Her, and that offring which she brings. The first day of Lent. THe obseruation of Lent is a profitable institution of the Church, not abridging the Christian liberty of meats, but intended for a means to helpe to set the spirit at liberty from the flesh. And therefore this Fast consisteth not altogether in a formall forbearance of this or that food, but in a true mortification of the body: For abstinence from flesh onely (wherein also we ought
to be obedient to the higher Powers,) more tendeth to the encrease of plenty and well-ordering things in the Common-wealth, then to a spirituall Discipline. Because it is apparant wee may ouer-pamper our selues as well with what is permitted as with what is forbidden; this commendable obseruation (which euery man ought to obserue so farre forth as he shall be able, and his spirituall necessity requires) was appointed; partly to commemorate our Sauiours mira∣culous fsting, whereby he satisfied for the gluttony of our first Parents; and (at this season) partly to coole our wanton bloud, which at this time of the yeare is aptest to be eflamed with euill concupiscences; and partly also▪ to prepare vs the better both to meditate the passi∣on of our Sauiour, which is alwaies commemorated a∣bout the end of Lent, and to fit vs to receiue the blessed Sacrament of his Last Supper, to our greater comfort. Song. 51. Sing this as the .44 Song. THy wondrous Fastin to record, And our rebellious flesh to tame, A holy Fast to thee, oh LORD, We haue intended in thy Name: Oh sanctifie it, we thee pray, That we may thereby honour Thee; And so dispose vs, that it may To our aduantage alo be. 2 Let vs not grudgingly abstaine, Nor secretly the gluttons play; Nor openly for glory vaine, Thy Churches ordinance obay: But let vs fast, as thou hast taught,
Thy Rule obseruing in each part, With such intentions as we ought, And with true singlenesse of heart. 3 So thou shalt our Deuotions blesse, And make this holy Discipline; A meanes that longing to suppresse, Which keeps our Will so crosse to thine: And though our stricktest fastings faile To purchase of themselues thy grace; Yet, they to make for our auaile, (By thy deseruings) shall haue place. 4 True Fasting helpfull oft hath beene, The wanton flesh to mortifie; But takes not off the guilt of sinne, Nor can we merit ought thereby: It is thine Abstinence, or none, Which merit fauour for vs must; For, when our glorioust workes are done, We perish, if in them we trust. The Annuntiation of Marie. THe Church hath dedicated this Day, to memorize the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgine S. Marie, who was about this time of the yeare saluted by the An∣gell Gabriel; and we ought to sanctifie it with praising God for that vnexpressable Mysterie of our Sauiours Conception, which was the happy newes the holy Angell brought vnto his Mother. Nothing in the world is more worthy to be spoken of then this Fauor, and yet nothing more vnspeakeable.
Song. 52. Sing this as the 44. Song. OUr hearts, oh blessed GOD, encline, Thy true affection to embrace; And that humility of thi, Which for our sakes vouchsafed was, Thy Goodnesse teach vs to put on, As with our Nature thou wert clad; And so to minde what thou hast done, That we may praise thee, and be glad. 2 For, thou not only held'st it meet, To send an Angell from aboue, An humble Mayd on earth to greet, And bring the Message of thy Loue: But laying (as it were) aside, Those Glories none can comprehend, (Nor any mortall eyes abide) Into her wombe thou didst descend. 3 Bestow thou also thy respect On our despis'de and lowe degree; And LORD, oh, doe not vs neglect, Though worthy of contempt we be: But through thy Messengers prepare, And hallow so our hearts we pray, That thou conceaued being there, The fruits of faith bring forth we may. Palme-Sunday. PAlme-Sunday is so called, by reason it was vpon that day, in which Iesus riding to Ierusalem (according
to the Prophets) the people strewed the way for him with their Garments, and the branches of the Palme-tree. And, indeed, it was in a manner the day of proclaiming him King, as the Friday following was the day of his Coronation. Worthily therefore is it commemorated: And many excellent mysteries are thereby brought to remembrance, which, but for this Anniuersary, most would forget, and many, perhaps, neuer come to know. Song. 53. Sing this as the 3. Song. WHen Iesus to Ierusalem, (And there to suffer) rode, The people all the way for him With Palme and Garments strowde: And though he did fl meekely ide, And poorely on an Asse, Hosanna to the King they cride, As he along did passe. 2 His glory, and his royall right, Eu'n by a powre diuine) As if in wordly pompes despight, Through pouerty did shine; And though the greater sort did frowne, He exercizd his powre, Till he himselfe did lay it downe, At his appointed howre. 3 Possession of his House he got, The Marchants thence expel'd; And, though the Priests were madde thereat, His Lectures there he held. Oh! how should any be so dull,
To doubt who this might bee? When they did things so wonderfull, And workes so mighty see. 4 LORD, when to vs thou drawest nigh, Instruct vs thee to know; And to receiue thee ioyfully, How meane so ere in show: Yea, though the rich and worldly-wise, When we thy praises sing, Both Thee, and vs, therefore despise, Be thou approu'd our King. Thursday before Easter. AS vpon this Day our blessed Sauiour, eating the Passeouer with his Disciples, instituted the blessed Sacrament of his Last Supper. Afterward he washed their feet; prayed for them, and for the faithfull generation; instructed them; confuted them; warned them of what should come to passe, both concerning themselues, and his owne death and resurrection; promised to send them a Comforter, and expressed many other excellent things for the confirmation of their faith. Then departing to a Garden, he praying, fell into his most bitter Agony, which hauing ouercome, hee was that night betrayed, and forsaken of all his Disciples. In commemoration of which passages the Church holds this yearely Assembly, that our pious affections towards our Redeemer may be stirred vp, to his glory, and our comfort. Song. 54. Sing this as the 9. Song. A Holy Sacrament this Day To vs thou didst, oh LORD, bequeath;
That by the same preserue we may, A blest memoriall of thy Death; Whereof, oh, let vs so partake, We may with Thee one body make. 2 Thy Holy-Supper being done, (The last which thou vouchsafedst here) By Thee the feet of eu'ry one Of thy Disciples washed were; To which Humility of thine, Our hauty mindes doe thou encline. 3 The rest of that Day thou didst vse, To pray, to comfort, and aduise: None might (when thou wert gone) abuse Thy Friends, or make of them a prize; Yet, when thy pleasure thou hadst said, By one of thine thou wert betrayd. 4 And loe, that night they all did flye, Who sate so kindely by thy side; Eu'n he, that for thy loue would dye, With oathes, and curses, thee denide; Which to thy soule more nigh did goe, Then all the wrongs thy Foes could doe. 5 Sweet Iesus teach vs to conceiue, How neere vnto thy heart it strooke, When thy Beloued thee did leaue, And thou didst backe vpon him looke; We may hereafter nigh thee keepe, And for our past denials weepe. 6 Yea, let each passage of this Day. Within our hearts be grauen so, That minde them we for euer may
And still thy promise trust vnto: So our affections shall to thee, In life, and death vnchanged be. Friday before Easter. THis Day we commemorate the vnsufferable Passion of Iesus Christ, our blessed Redeemer; who was at this season of the yeare despightfully crucified by Pilate, and the Iewes. Euery day we ought seriously to thinke vpon it by our selues: But this day we ought to meet about it in the publike Assemblies, that wee might prouoke each other to compunction of heart; to renue the memorie of it; and to moue those that haue not yet taken notice thereof, to come along with vs to heare the story of his vnmatchlesse sorrow, who for the loue of vs tooke vpon himselfe those punishments which our wickednesse de∣serned. Song. 55. Sing this as the 24 Song. YOu that like heedlesse Strangers passe along, As if nought here concerned you to day; Draw nigh, and heare the saddest Passion song, That euer you did meet with in your way: So sad a Storie ne're was told before, Nor shall there be she like for euermore. 2 The greatest King that euer wore a Crowne, More then the basest Vassaile was abus'de; The truest Louer that was euer knowne, By them he lou'd was most vnkindly vs'de:
And e that liu'd from all transgressions cleare, Was plagu'd for all the sinnes that euer were. 3 Eu'n They, in pitty of whose fall he wept, Wought for his ruine, whilst he sought their good; And watchet for him, when they should haue slept, That they might quench their malice in his blood: Yet (whē their bonds frō him he could haue thrown) To saue their liues he daignd to lose his owne. 4 Those, in whose harts compassion should haue been, Insulted ore his poore afflicted soule; And those that nothing ill in him had seen, (As guilty) him accus d of treason soule: Nay, him (that neuer had one idle thought) They for blaspheming vnto Iudgement brought. 5 Where, some to aske him vaine demands begin; And some to make a sport with him deuise: Some at his answeres and behauiour grin; And some doe spit their filth into his eyes: Some giue him blowes, some mocke, & some re∣uile; And he (good heart) sits quiet all the while. 6 Oh, that, where such a throng of men should be, No heart was found so gentle to relent! And that so good and meeke a Lambe as He, Should be so vsde, and yet no teare be spent! Sure, when once malice ls the heart of man, Nor stone, nor steele can be so hardned than. 7 For, after this, his clothes from him they stript, And then, as if some Slaue this LORD had beene, With cruell rods and scourges him they whipt, Till wounds were ouer all his body seene:
In purple clad, and crowned too with thorne, They set him forth, and honor'd him in scorne. 8 And, when they saw him in so sad a plight, As might haue made a flintie heart to bleed, They not a whit recanted at the sight; But in their hellish fury did proceede: Away with him; Away with him they said; And Crucifie him, Crucifie him, Cryde. 9 A Crosse of wood, that huge, and heauy was, Upon his bloudy shoulders next they lay; Which onward to his Execution-place He carryd, till he fainted in the way: And, when he thither weake and tyred came; To giue him rest they nayld him to the same. 10 Oh! could we but the thousand part relate, Of those Afflictions, which they made him beare, Our hearts with passion would dissolue thereat, And we should sit and weepe for euer here; Nor should we glad againe hereafter be, But that we hope in glory him to see. 11 For, while vpon the Crosse he payned hung, And was with soule tormentings also greeu'd; (Farre more, then can be told by any tongue, Or in the hearts of mortals be conceau'd) Those, for whose sake he vnderwent such paine, Reioyc'd thereat, and held him in disdaine. 12 One offerd to him vineger, and gall: A second did his pious workes deride: To dicing for his Robes did others fall; And many mockt him when to GOD he cry'd.
Yet, he as they his paine still more procur'd, Still lou'd, and for their good the more endur'd. 13 But, though his matchlesse Loue immortall were, It was a mortall Body he had on, That could no more then mortall Bodies beare; Their malice therefore did preuaile thereon: And loe, their vtmost furie hauing tri'de, This Lambe of God gaue vp the ghost, & dy'de. 14 Whose Death, though cruell vnrelenting Man Could view, without bewailing, or affright; The Sunne grew darke, the Earth to quake began, The Temple-vaile did rend asunder quite: Yea, hardest Rockes there wih in peeces brake, And graues did open, and the Dead awake. 15 Oh therefore, let vs all that present be, This Innocent with moued soules embrace; For, this was our Redeemer, this was he, Who thus for our vnkindnesse vsed was: Eu'n He, the cursed Iewes and Pilate slew, Is he alone, of whom all this is true. 16 Our sinnes of spight were part of those that day, Whose cruell whips & thornes did make him smart; Our Lusts were those that tyr'de him in the way; Our want of loue was that which pierc't his heart: And still when we forget, or sleight his paine, We crucifie and torture him againe. Easter day. THis Day is solemnized in memoriall of our Sauiours blessed Resurrection frō the dead; vpon which (as the
mēbers with their head) the Church began her triumph ouer Sinne, Death, and the Diuell: And hath therefore appointed, that to record this mysterie, and to stirre vp thankfull reioycings in our hearts, there should be an annuall Commemoration thereof; That wee might in charitable Feasts and Christian glee, expresse the ioy of our hearts to the glory of God, to the comfort of our brethren, to the encrease of charity one towards ano∣ther, and to the confirmation of a true ioy in our selues. Song. 56. Sing this as the 44. Song. THis is the Day the LORD hath made, And therein ioyfull we will be; For, from the blacke infernall shade, In triumph backe return'de is He: The snares of Satan, and of Death, He hath victoriously vndone, And fast in chaines he bound them hath, His triumph to attend vpon. 2 The Graue, which all men did detest, And held a dungeon full of feare, Is now become a Bed of rest, And no such terrors find we there. For, Iesus Christ hath tooke away The horror of that loathed Pit; Eu'n euer since that glorious day, In which himselfe came out of it. 3 His Mockings, and his bitter smarts, He to our praise and ease doth turne, And all things to our ioy conuarts, Which he with heauy heart hath borne:
His broken flesh is now our food, His blood he shed, is euer since, That drinke, which doth our soules most good, And that which shall our foulnesse clense. 4 Those wonds so deepe, and torne so wide, As in a Rocke our shelters are▪ And that they pierced through his side, Is made a Doue-hole for his Deare; Yea, now we know, as was foretolde, His flesh did no corruption le; And that Hell wanted strength to hold So strong, and one so blest as He. 5 Oh let vs praise his Name therefore, (Who thus the vpperhand hath woune) For, we had else, for euermore, Beene lost, and vtterly vndon: Whereas this Fauour dot allow, That we with boldnesse thus may sing; Oh Hell, where is thy conquest now? And thou (oh Death) where is thy sting? Ascension day. AFter Iesus Christ was risen from the dead, and had many times shewed himselfe vnto his Disciples, he was lifted from among them, and they beheld him s∣cending vp into heauen, till a cloud tooke him out of their sight: In memory of which Ascension, and to praise God for so exalting the humane Nature to his owne glo∣ry, and our aduntage; the Church worthily celebrated this Day, and hath commended the obseruation thereof to her Children.
Song. 57. Sing this as the 3. Song. TO GOD, with heart and cheerefull voyce, A Triumph-Song we sing; And with true thankefull hearts reioyce, In our Almighty King; Yea, to his glory we record, (Who were but dust and clay) What honour he did vs afford, On his Ascending day. 2 The Humane Nature, which of late, Beneath the Angels was; Now raised from that meaner state, Aboue them hath a place. And at mans feet all Creatures bowe, Which through the whole world be; For, at GODS right-hand throaned now, In glory sitteth He. 3 Our LORD, and Brother, who hath on Such flesh, as this we weare; Before vs vnto heauen is gone, To get vs places there: Captiuity was captiud then, And he doth from aboue Send ghostly presents downe to men, For tokens of his loue. 4 Each Dore and euerlasting Gate, To him hath lifted bin; And in a glorious wise thereat, Our King is entred in.
Whom if to follow we regard, With ease we safely may; For he hath all the meanes prepar'd, And made an open way. 5 Then follow, follow on a pace, And let vs not forgoe Our Captaine, till we winne the place, That hee hath scalde vnto: And for his honour, let our voyce A shoute so hearty make, The Heauns may at our mirth reioyce, And Earth, and Hell may shake. Pentecost, or Whitsunday. AFter our Sauiour was ascended, the fiftieth day of his Resurrection, and iust at the Iewes Feast of Pen∣tecost, the Holy Ghost (our promised Comforter) was sent downe vpon the Disciples assembled in Ierusalem, appea∣ring in a visible forme, & miraculously filling them with all manner of spirituall gifts, and knowledge, tending to the diuine worke they had in hand: Whereby, they being formerly weake, and simple men, were immedi∣ately enabled to resist all the powers of the kingdome of Darknesse, and to lay those strong foundations, vpon which the Catholike Church now standeth, both to the Glory of GOD, and our safety. In remembrance there∣fore of that great miraculous mysterie this Day is so∣lemnized. Song. 58. Sing this as the 3. Song. EXceeding faithfull in thy word, And iust in all thy wayes,
We doe acknowledge thee, oh LORD, And therefore giue thee praise: For, as thy promise thou didst passe, (Before thou went'st away) Sent downe thy Holy-Spirit was, At his appoynted day. 2 While thy Disciples in thy Name, Together did retire, The Holy Ghost vpon them came, In Clouen tongues of fire, That in their calling they might bee Confirmed from aboue, As thou wert, when hee came on thee, Descending like a Doue. 3 Whereby those men that simple were, And fearefull till that howre. Had knowledge at an instant there, And boldnesse arm'd with powre, Receiuing gifts so manifold, That (since the world begun) A wonder seldome hath beene told, That could exceede this one. 4 Now also, blessed Spirit, come; Unto our Soules appeare. And of thy Graces showre thou some On this Assembly here: To vs thy Doue-like meekenesse nd, That humble wee may bee, And on thy siluer wings ascend, Our Sauiour Christ to see. 5 Oh, let thy Clouen tongues, wee pray. So rest on vs agen,
That both thy truth confesse we may, And teach it other men. Moreouer, let thy heauenly ire (Enflamed from aboue) Burne vp in vs each vaine desire, And warme our hearts with loue. 6 Uouchsafe thou likewise to bestow On vs thy sacred Peace, We stronger may in vnion grow, And in debates decrease: Which ace though many yet contemne, Reformed let them be, That we may (LORD) haue part in them, And they haue part in thee. Trinitie Sunday. AFter Arrius, and other heretkes had broched their damnable fancies, whereby the faith of ma∣ny concerning the mysterie of the blessed Trinity was saken, diuers good men laboured in the rooting out of those pstilent opinions: And it was agreed vpon by the Church, that some particular Sunday in the yeare should be dedicated to the memory of the holy Trinitie, and called Trinitie-Sunday, that the Name might giue the people ccasion to enquire after the Mysterie And moreouer, (that the Pastor of each seuerall Congrega∣tion might be yearely remembred to treat thereof, as ne∣cessity required) certaine portions of the holy Scrip∣ture, proper to that end, were appointed to be read pub∣likely that Day. In some Countries they obserued this Institution on the Sunday next before the Aduent; and in other places the Sunday following Whitsunday, as in the Church of England.
Song. 59. Sing this as the 9. Song. THose, oh, thrise holy Three in one, Who eke thy Nature to explaine, By rules to humane Reason knowne, Shall finde their labour all in vaine; And in a shell they may intend, The Sea, as well, to comprehend. 2 What therefore no man can conceaue, Let vs not curious be to know; But, when thou bidst vs to beleeue, Let vs obey, Let Reason goe: Faith's obiects true, and surer bee, Then those that Reasons eyes doe see. 3 Yet, as by looking on the Sunne, (Though to his substance we are blinde) And by the course we see him runne, Some Notions we of him may finde: So, what thy Brightnesse doth conceale, Thy word, and workes in part reueale. 4 Most glorious Essence, we confesse In Thee (whom by our faith we view) Three Persons, neither moe nor lesse, Whose workings them distinctly shew: And sure we are, those persons Three Make but one GOD, and thou art Hee. 5 The Sunne a Motion hath we know, Which Motion doth beget vs Light; The Heat proceedeth from those two, And each doth proper acts delight:
The Motion drawes out Time a line, The Heate doth warme, the Light doth shine. 6 Yet, though this Motion▪ Light, and Heae, Distinctly by themselues we take; Each in the other hath his seat, And but one Sunne we see they make: For whatoere the One will doe, He workes it with the other two. 7 So, in the God-head there is knit A wondrous threefold True-loue-knot, And perfect Vnion fastens it, Though flesh and blood perceaue it not; And what each Person doth alone, By all the Trinity is done. 8 Their Worke they ioyntly doe pursue, Though they their Offices diuide; And each one by himselfe hath due His proper Attributes beside: But one in Substance they are still, In Vertue one, and one in Will. 9 Eternall all the Persons be, And yet ternall theres but One; So likewise Infinite all three, Yet Infinite but One alone: And neither Person aught doth misse, That of the God-heads essence is, 10 In Vnity and Trinity, Thus, oh Creator, we adore Thy euer-praised Deity,
And thee confesse for euermore, One Father, one begotten Sonne, One Holy-Ghost, in God-head one. Sunday in generall. SVnday is our naturall appellation, the Sabbath the Hebrew terme, and the Lords day the Christian Name, whereby we entitle Gods Seauenth day; and (if wilfull affectation be auoyded) either Name is allow∣able. It is a portion of Time sanctified by God, immedi∣ately after the Worlds creation, and by the diuine Law dedicated to be perpetually obserued to the honour of our Creator: And though some things accidentally per∣tinent to the obseruation thereof, haue beee changed; yet that which is essentiall thereunto is for euer im∣mutable Our Sauiour hath by his Resurrection hal∣lowed for vs that which we now obseue instead of the Iewish Sabbath; which being the day whereon he rested in the Graue, the obseruation thereof, and of all other Iewish Ceremonies was buried with him: because they were to continue but till the accomplishment of those things whereof they were Types. This is that day where∣in our Redeemer began (as it were) his Eternall rest, after hee had finished the worke of our Reparation and con∣quered death, the last that was to be destroyed. This Day we ought therefore to sanctifie, according to Gods first institution: Not Iewishly, that is, by a strict or meere outward abstaining from the seruile workes of the body onely, according to the letter: But Chri∣stianly; to wit, in spirit and truth, both inwardly, and outwardly, so recreating our bodies and soules, that wee may with a sanctified pleasure, (and as
much as may be without wearinesse) spend that day to the glory of God, according to his commād, & the Chur∣ches direction; euen to the vse of bodily labours & exer∣cises, whensoeuer (without respect to sensuall, or coue∣tous ends) a rectified conscience shall perswade vs, that the honor of God, the charity we owe to our Neighbours, or an vnfained necessity requires them to be done. Song. 60. Sing this as the 44. Song. SIx dayes, oh LORD, the world to make, And set all Creatures in aray, Was all the leaure thou would'st take, And then didst rest the seauenth day: That day thou thereore hallowed hast, And rihtly, by a law diuine (Which till the end of time shall last) The seauenth part of Time is thine. 2 Then, teach vs willingly to giue The tribute of our dayes to Thee; By whom we new boh moue, and liue, And haue attaind to what we be. For, of that Rest, which by thy Word Thou hast beene pleased to enioyne, The profit all is ours▪ oh LR, And but the praise alone is thine. 3 Oh, therefore let vs not consent, To rob thee of thy Sabbath day; Nor rest with carnall Rest content, But sanctifie it all w may▪ Yea, grant that we from sinnefull strife, And all those workes thou do'st detest,
May keepe a Sabbath all our life, And enter thy Eternall rest. S. Andrewes day. THe holy Church celebrateth this day to glorifie God for that fauour which hee vouchsfed vnto her by the calling and ministry of blessed Andrew his Apostle; and, that by the remembrance of his readinesse to fol∣lo, and preach Christ, both the honourable and Christi∣an memorial, due to an Apostle, might be preserued, and we stirred vp alo to the imitation of his forwardnesse in our seuerall callings, aduancing Gods honour and Go∣spell: In which generall sence euery the meanest Chri∣stian hath a kinde of Apostleship, to build vp (not only in himselfe, but in others also) the Temple of the liuing God, and to encrease and establish the kingdome of Christ. Song. 61. Sing this as the 44. Song. AS blessed Andrew on a day, By fishing did his liuing earne, Christ cam, and called him away, That he to fish for men might learne; And no delay thereat he made, Nor questions fram'd of his intent, But quite forsaking all he had, Along with him, that calld, he went. 2 Oh, that we could so ready be, To follow Christ when he doth call!
And that we could forsake, as he, Those Nts, that we are snar'd withall: Or would this Fisherman of men, (Who set by all he had so light) By his obedience shewed then, (And his example) winne vs might. 3 But Precepts and Examples faile, Till thou thy grace, LORD, adde thereto; Oh grant it, and we shall preuaile, In whatso'ere thou bidd'st vs do: Yea, we shal then that blisse conceiue, Which in thy seruice we may finde; And for thy sake be glad to leaue Our Nets, and all we haue behinde. S. Thomas day. THis Day was set apart by the Church, that it might be sanctified to the praise of God for his holy Apo∣stle S. Thomas, by whose preaching the Christian ge∣neration was multiplyed: and that we might strengthen the beliefe we haue of our Sauiours vndeniable Resurre∣ction, by taking an yearely occasion to refresh our me∣mories with that part of the Euangelicall stoie, which mentioneth both this Apostles doubting, and the con∣firmation of his faith by a sensible demonstration. Song. 62. Sing this as the 9. Song. WHen Christ was risen from the dead, And Thomas of the same was told,
He would not credit it, he sed, Though he himselfe should him behold, Till he his wounded hands had eyde, And thust his fingers in his side. 2 Which triall he did vndertake, And Christ his frailty did permit, By his distrusting sure to make Such others, as might doubt of it: So we had right, and he no wrong; For by his weaknesse both are strong. 3 Oh blessed GOD, how wise thou art! And how confoundest thou thy Foes! Who their temptations dost conuart, To worke those ends which they oppose: When Sathan seekes our faith to shake, The firmer he the same doth make. 4 Thus whatso'ere he tempts vs to, His disaduantage let it be; Yea, make those very sinnes we do, The meanes to bring vs nearer thee: Yet let vs not to ill consent, Though colour'd with a good intent. S. Stephens day. STephen was one of the seauen Deacons, mentioned Acts 6. and the first Martyr of Iesus Christ; whose Truth hauing powerfully maintained by dispute, he constantly sealed it with his blood. The Church there∣fore hath appointed this Anniuersarie in remembrance thereof, that so God might perpetually be glorified for
the same; and the story of his Martyrdome the oftne mentioned, to the encouragement and direction of other men in their Trials. Song. 63. Sing this as the 4 Song. LORD, with what zeale did thy first Martyr breath Thy blessed Truth, to such as him withstood! With what stout mind embraced he his death! A holy witnesse sealing with his bloud! The praise is thine, that him so strong did'st make, And blest is he, that dyed for thy sake. 2 Unquenched loue in him appear'd to be, When for his murth'rous Foes he did entreat: A piercing eye made bright by faith had he; For he beheld thee in thy Glory set; And so vnmou'd his paience he did keepe, He dide, as if he had but faine aseepe. 3 Our luke-warme harts with his hot Zeale enflame, So Constant, and so Louing▪ let vs be; So let vs liuing glorifie thy Name; So let vs dying ie our eyes on Thee: And hen the leepe of Death shall vs oretake, With him to life eternall vs awake. S. Iohn the Euangelist. THis Day is celebrated by the Church, to praise God for his blessed Euangelist, and beloued Disciple Saint Iohn, who hath beene an admirable instrument of his
glorie, and the Churches instruction; For, the Myste∣ry of the sacred Trinity, and the Diuinity of Christ, is by him most plainely exprest in his writings, among many other great Mysteries and excellent Doctrines concer∣ning our Redemption; for which wee are bound parti∣cularly to honour God, and worthily stirred vp there∣vnto by this annuall Commemoration. Song. 64. Sing this as the 44. Song. TEach vs by his example, LORD, For whom we honour thee to Day, And grant his witnesse of thy Word, Thy Church enlighten euer may: And, as belou'd, oh Christ, he was, And therefore leaned on thy breast; So let vs also in thy grace, And on thy sacred bosome rest. 2 Into vs breath that Life diuine, Whose Testimony he intends; About vs cause thy Light to shine, That which no Daknesse comprehends: And let that euer-blessed Word, Which all things did create of nought, Anew create vs now, oh LORD, Whose ruine sinne hath almost wrought. 3 Thy holy Faith we doe professe, Us to thy Fellowship receaue; Our Sinnes e hartily confesse, Thy Pardon therefore let vs haue: And, as to vs thy Seruant giues, Occasion thus to honour Thee▪
So also let our words and liues, As lights and guides, to others be. Innocents Day. KIng Herod vnderstanding tht a king of the Iewes was borne in Bethlem-Iuda; (& fearing that by him he might be dispossessed) he murthered all the yong in∣fants of that Circuit, in hope among them to haue slaine Iesus Christ: But he was ent into Egypt by Gods speciall apointment, and so the Tyants fury prooued vaine. In honor therefore of the Almighties prouidence, the Church celebrateth this Day; To put vs in minde also, how vainely the Diuell and his members rage against Gods decree; and, that the cruell slaughter of those poore Infants may neuer be forgotten; Which, in a large sense, may be called a Martydome; As in the ge∣nerality of the cause (being for Christ) & in the passion of the body▪ though not in the intention of the minde: And so in proper sence doth S. Stephen hold still the place of the first Captaine of that Band. Song. 65. Sing this as the 44. Song. 1 THat rage whereof the Psalme doth say, Why are the Gntiles growne so mad? Appeard in part vpon that day, When Herod slaine the Infants had; Yet (as it saith they stormd in vaine; (Though many Innocents they slew) For, Christ they purposd to haue slaine, Who all their Counsels ouerthrew.
2 Thus still vouchsafe thou to resraine All Tyrants, LORD, pursuing Thee; Thus, let our vast desires be slaine; That thou maist liuing in vs be: So, whilst we shall enioy our breath, We of thy loue our Songs will frame; And with those Innocents, our death Shall also glorifie thy Name. 3 In Type those Many dide for One; That One for many moe was slaine: And what they felt in Act alone, He did in will, and Act sustaine. LORD grant, that what thou hast decreed. In Will, and Act, we may fulfill; And, though we reach not to the Deede, From vs, oh GOD, accept the Will. The conuersion of S. Paul. SAint Paul, as appeares, Acts 9. hauing beene a great persecutor of the Christian faith before his conuer∣sion, was extraordinarily called to embrace the same profession; euen as he proceeded in a Iourney purpose∣ly vndertaken to suppresse the Truth: And so, of a Woolfe became afterward a Pastor, & the most labori∣ous Preacher of Iesus Christ: Which mercy of GOD that we may still remember it to the praise of his name, and our owne comfort, the Church hath appointed an yeare∣ly Commemoration thereof.
Song. 66. Sing this as the 44. Song. A Blest Conuesion, and a strange, Was that, when Saul a Paul became; And, LORD, for making such a change, We praise and glorifie thy Name: For whilst he went from place to place, To persecute thy Truth and Thee; (And running to perdition was) By powerfull grace cal'd backe was hee. 2 When from thy Truth we goe astray. (Or wrong it through our blinded zeale) Oh come, and stop vs in the way, And then thy Will to vs reuale; That Brightnesse shew vs from aboue, Which proues the sensuall eye-sight blinde; And from our eyes those Scales remoue, That hinder vs thy way to finde. 3 And as thy blessed seruant Paul, When he a Conuert once became, Exceeded thy Apostle all, In painefull preaching of thy Name: So grant that those who haue in Sinne Exceeded others heretofore, The start of them in Faith may winne, Loue, serue, and honour thee the more. S. Matthias. MAtthias was the Disciple which was chosen in the rooe of Iudas Iscariot; And his anniuersary is
commanded to be obserued, that it might giue vs con∣tinuall occasion to praise God for his Iustice and Fauor: For his Iustice shewed in discoueing, and not sparing Iudas the traytou, abusing his Apostleship. For his Fa∣uour, declared in elecing Matthias a faithfull Pastor of the Church. Moreouer, the remembrance of diuers o∣ther Mysteries are renued by the obseruation of this Day. And by taking occasion to reade publikely the Storie of Iudas his Apostacie, men are that day put in minde, to consider what Iudgements hang ouer thir heads, who shall abuse the diuine callings, &c. Song. 67. WHen one among the Twelue there was,  That did thy Grace abuse; Thou leftst him,  LORD, and in his place, did'st iust Matthias chuse: So, if a Traytour doe remaine Within thy Church to day;
To grant him true repentance daigne; Or cast him out, we pray. 2 Though horned like the Lambe he show, Or Sheepe-like clad he be, Let vs his Dragon language know, And Wooluish nature see; Yea, cause the Lo to fall on those, The charge of thine to take, That shall their Actions well dispose, And conscience of them make. 3 Let vs moreouer minde his fall, Whose roome Matthias got; So to beleeue, and feare withall, That we forsake thee not: For, Titles, be they ne're so high, Or great, or sacred Place, Can no mans Person sanctifie, Without thy speciall grace. Saint Markes Day. SAint Marke, being one of the foure blessed Euange∣lists, by whose pen the Gospell of Iesus Christ was recorded; this day is purposely appointed, to praise God for those glad tydings he brought, and that wee might honour him also with such a Christian Memori∣all, as becommeth the Ambassadour of so great a King as our Redeemer: Which ciuill honour, due to the Saints of God, it is hoped none will deny them; nor conceiue such Institutions superstitious, or to haue beene purpo∣sed to an Idolatrous end.
Song. 68. Sing this as the 44. Song. FOr those blest Pen-men of thy Word, Who haue thy holy Gospel writ, We praise and honour Thee, oh LORD, And our beleefe we build on it: Those happy Tydings which it brings, With ioyfull hearts we doe embrace, And prize, aboue all othr things, That precious Token of thy grace. 2 To purchase what we hope thereby, Our vtmost wealth we will bestow; Yea, we our pleasures will denie, And let our liues, and honours goe: And, whomsoe're it commeth from, No other Gospel we will heare; No, though an Angel downe should come From heau'n, we would not giue him eare. 3 Our Resolutions, LORD, ar such, But in performance eake are we; And the Deceauers craft is much; Our Second therefore, thou must be: So we assuredly shall know, When any Doctrines we receaue, If they agreeing be, or no, To those, which we professed haue. S. Philip and Iacob. THis Day is celebrated to the honour of God, and the Christian memoriall of the two blessed Apostles,
Philip and Iacob: At which time the Church taketh oc∣casion to offer to our remembrance such Mysteries, as Christ deliuered vnto them, that wee might the oftner consider them, receiue futher instruction concerning them, and praise God, both for such his fauours, and for those instruments of his glory. Song. 69. Sing this as the 3. Song. TO thy Apostles thou hast taught, What they, oh Christ, should do; And those things which belieue they ought, Of thee they learned to: And that which thou to them hast showne, Hath beene disposed thus; They vnto others made it knowne, And those haue tolde it vs. 2 With them we doe confesse and say, (What shall not be denide) Thou art the Truth, the Life, the Way, And we in thee will bide: By thee the Father we haue knowne, Whom thou descendedst from; And vnto him, by thee alone, We haue our hope to come, 3 For, thou to Philip didst impart, (Which our beleefe shall be) That thou within the Father art, And, that he is in Thee; And saydst, what euer in thy Name We should with faith require,
Thou wouldst giue eare vnto the same, And grant vs our desire. 4 Of thee, oh LORD, we therefore craue, (Which thou wilt daigne, we know) The good Beleefe which now we haue, We neuer may forgoe; And that thy sacred Truth, which we Thy Word haue learned from, From Age to Age deriu'd may be, Untill thy Kingdome come. S. Barnabas day. THis Day is solemnized in commemoration of Saint Barnabas, a faithfull Disciple of Iesus Christ; and to honour God for the benefit vouchsafed to the Church by his Ministry: For he was a good man, full of the Holy Ghost, and of faith, as S. Luke testifieth, Acts 11.24. He was also by the Holy Ghosts immediate appointment (to∣gether with Paul) separated for the Ministry of the Gos∣pell, and confirmed in the Apostleship by the laying on of hands. Acts 13.2. Song. 70. Sing this as the 44. Song. THy gifts and graces manifold, To many men thou, LORD, hast lent; Both now, and in the dayes of olde, To teach them faith, and to repent: Thy Prophets thou didst first ordaine, And they as Legats did appeare;
Then cam'st thy selfe, and in thy Traine, Apostles for attendants were. 2 For Legir, when thou wentst away, The Holy-Ghost thou didst appoint; And here, Successions, till this day, Remaine of those he did annoynt; Yea, thou hast likewise so ordaind, That to make good what those haue taught▪ An Army-Royall was maintain'd Of Martyrs, who thy Battailes fought. 3 For those, and Him for whom we thus Are met, to praise thy Name to day, We giue thee thankes, as they for vs, That should come after them, did pray; And by this duty we declare, Our Faith assures, that they and we, (In Times diuided though we are) Haue one Communion still with Thee. S. Iohn Baptist. IOhn, called the Baptist, was he (as Christ himselfe testi∣fieth) who was promised to be sent before him to pre∣pare his way, Luke 7.27. and by his Preaching and Bap∣tisme the People were accordingly prepared to receiue him that was to follow. He ws the true expected Elias, and slaine by Herod, for reprouing the Incest which the said Herod committed in taking his Brothers wife: That we might praise God therefore for this Fore-runner of our Sauiour (and by his example remember to prouide for his entertainement) the Church hath set apart this Day.
Song. 71. Sing this as the 9. Song. BEcause the world might not pretend, It knew not of thy Comming-day, Thou didst, oh Christ, before thee send A Cryer, to prepare thy way: Thy Kingdome was the Blisse he brought▪ Repentance was the Way he taught. 2 And, that his Voice might not alone Informe vs what we should belieue, His Life declar'd what must be done, If Thee we purpose to receiue: His Lie our patterne therefore make, That we the Course he tooke, may take. 3 Let vs not gad to Pleasures Court, With fruitlesse Toyes to feed the mind; Nor to that Wildernesse resort, Where Reeds are shaken with the wind: But treade the Path he trod before, That both a Prophet was, and more. 4 Clad in repentant Cloath of Haire, Let vs, oh Christ, (to seeke out Thee) To those forsaken-Walkes repaire, Which of so few frequented be; And true Repentance so intend, That we our courses may amend. 5 Let vs hereafter feed vpon The Hony of thy Word diuine; Let vs the Worlds entisement shun,
Her Drugs, and her bewitching Wine; And on our loynes (so loose that are) The Leather-belt of Temp'rance weare. 6 Thus from thy Cryer let vs learne, For thee, sweet Iesus, to prepare, And others of their sinnes to warne, How-euer for the same we fare: So thou to Vs, and we to Thee Shall when thou commest welcome be. S. Peters day. WE obserue this Day to the honor of God, and to the pious memory of his blessed Apostle S. Peter, that we may be thereby put in minde to be thankfull for those continuing fauours receiued by his ministry; That Pastors also may make him their patterne in discharging the charge Christ committeth vnto them; That by consi∣dering his weaknesse wee may all learne not to presume on our owne strength; And that by his christian exam∣ple we may be taught to bewaile our escapes with bitter teares of true Repentance. Song. 72. Sing this as the 3. Song. HOw watchfull neede we to become, And how deuoutly pray, That thee, oh LORD, we fall not from, Upon our Tryall-day? For, if thy great Apostle said, He would not thee denie,
Whom he that very Night denayd, On what shall we relie? 2 For of our selues we cannot leaue One pleasure for thy sake; No, not one vertuous thought conceiue, Till vs thou able make: Nay, we not onely Thee denie, When persecutions be; But, or forget, or from Thee lie, When peace attends on Thee. 3 Oh! let those Prayers vs auaile, Thou didst for Peter daigne, That when our Foe shall vs assaile▪ His labour may be vaine; Yea, cast on vs those powerfull eyes, That mou'd him to lament, We may bemoane with bitter cries Our Follies, and repent. 4 And grant, that such as Him succeed, For Pastors of thy fold, Thy Sheepe, and Lambes may guide and feede, As thou appoint'st they should, By his example speaking what They ought in truth to say, And in their liues confirming that They teach them to obay. S. Iames his day. THis Day we praise God for his blessed Apostle Saint Iames, the sonne of Zebedeus, who was one of those two that desired of Christ they might sit at his right-hand,
and at his left, in his kingdome, as the Gospell for the Dy declareth: And by occasion of that ignorant petition (proceeding from their carnall weakenese) Christ taught both them, and the rest of the Apostles, and all other Christians also, what Greatnesse best be∣commeth his Followers; and that we are to taste the Cup of his Passion, befoe we can be glorified with him: So this holy Apostle did; For he was slaine by Herod, as it is declared in the Epistle appointed for the Day. Song. 73. Sing this as the 44. Song. HE that his Father had forsooke, And followed Christ at his commands, By humane frailty ouertooke, For Place and vaine preferment stands. Till by his Master he was taught, Of what he rather should haue care; How vndiscreetly he had sought, And what his Seruants honours are. 2 Whereby we finde how much adoe, The best men haue this world to leaue; How, when they wealth & Friends forgoe, Ambitious ames to them will cleaue: And sure this Angell-sinne aspires, In such men chiefly to reside, That haue exilde those bruite desires, Which in the vulgar sort abide. 3 To thee oh GOD, we therefore pray, Th humbl minde in vs may dwell; Ad chame that Fiend of Pride away, Which would thy Graces quite expell:
But, of all other thse men keepe, From this delusion of the oe, Who are the Shepheards of thy sheepe, And should each good example show. 4 For, such as still pursuing be That Greanesse, which the world respects, Their seruile basenesse neither see, Nor feele thy Spirits rare effects: And doubtlesse, they, who most of all Descend to serue both Thee, and thine, Are those, who in thy Kingdome shall In Seat of greatest glory shine. S. Bartholomew. THis Day is consecrated to the honour of God, and the pious memorie of his blessed Apostle S. Bartho∣lomew, that (as appeareth in the Epistle appoynted for the Day) we might take occasion to praise our Redeemer, for those many wonders which were wrought by his A∣postles, to the great encrease of the Christian Faith, and open confusion of the Churches Aduersaries. Song. 74. Sing this as the 9. Song. EXceeding gracious fauours, LORD, To thy Apostles hast thou howne; And many wonders by thy Word, And in thy Name▪ by them were done: The Blind did see, the Dumbe could talke, The Deafe did heare, the Lame did walke:
2 They all diseases tooke away, The dead to life they did restore; Foule Spirits dispossessed they, And Preach'd the Gospell to the poore: The Church grew strong, thy Faith grew plaine, Their Foes grew madde, and madde in vaine. 3 Oh! let their workes for euer be An honour to thy glorious Name; And by thy powre vouchsafe that we, (Whom sinne makes deafe, blinde, dumbe, & lame) May heare thy word▪ and see thy Light, And speake thy Truth, and walke aright. 4 Each deadly sicknesse of the soule, Let thy Apostles doctrines cure: Let them expell those Spirits foule, Which makes vs loathsome and impure, That we the life of Faith may gaine, Who long time dead in sinne haue laine. S. Mathew. S. Mathew, otherwise called Leui, was a Publican, that is, a Custome-Gatherer: From which couse of life (being hatefull in those Countries) he was called to the Apostleship, and became also one of the foure Euangelists. To his religious memorie therefore, and to honou God▪ for the fauour vouchsafed (both to him and vs) by his Ministrie, this Day is obserued by the Churches Authoritie.
Song. 75. Sing this as the 44. Song. WHy should vnchristian censures passe On men, or that which they professe? A Publican Saint Mathew was, Yet GODS beloued ne're-the-lesse, And was elected one of Christs Apostles, and Euangelists: 2 For, GOD doth not a whit respect Profession, Person, or degree; But maketh choice of his elect, From euery sort of men that be, That none might of his loue despaire, But all men vnto him repaire. 3 For those, oh let vs therefore pray, Who seeme vncalled to remaine; Not shunning them, as cast away, GODS fauour neuer to obtaine: For some a while neglected are, To stirre in vs more louing care. 4 And for our selues, let vs desire, That we our Auarice may shunne, When GOD our seruice shall require, As this Euangelist hath done, And spend the remnant of our dayes, In setting forth our Makers praise.
S. Michael, and all Angels. THis Day we gloifie God for the victory S. Michael, nd his Angels obtained ouer the Dragon, and his Angels: Whereby the Church is freed from being pre∣uailed against by the furious attempts, or malitious ac∣cusations of the Deuill. This Commemoration is appoin∣ted also, to minde vs thankfully to acknowledge Gods mercy towards vs, in the daily ministry of his Angels, who are said to pitch their Tents about his Children, and to defend them from the temtations and mischie∣uous practises of euill Spirits, watching euery moment for aduantage to destroy them: Which, if wee oftner considered, and how there be armies of Angels and De∣uils, night and day fighting for vs, and round about vs, we would become more carefull how wee grieued those good Spirits, (who attend vs for our safety) to the re∣ioycing of them that seeke our destruction. By S. Mi∣chael, who was Prince of the good Angels (and termed by S Iude an Arch-Angell) some vnderstand Iesus Christ: For hee is indeed the principall Messenger, or Angell of our saluation, and the chiefe of the Princes, as holy Da∣niel called him; yea, to him alone this Name Michael (which signifieth, who is like God) doth most properly appertaine, seeing he onely is the perfect image of his Father. Song. 76. Sing this as the 44. Song. TO praise, oh GOD, and honour thee, For all thy glorious Triumphs wonne,
Assembled here this Day are we, And to declare thy Fauours done: Thou took'st that great Arch-Angels part, With whom in Heau'n the Dragon fought, And that good Armies Friend thou wert, That cast Him, and his Angels out: 2 Whereby we now in safety are, Our dangers all secured from; For to encrease thy glory here, Thy Kingdome with great power is come: And we need stand in dread no more, Of that enraged Fiends despight, Who, in thy presence heretofore, Accused vs both day and night. 3 In honour of thy blessed Name, This Hymne of thanks wee therefore sing; And to thine euerlasting fame, Through Heaun thine endlesse praise shall ring: We praise thee for thy proper might, And, LORD, for all those Angels to, Who in thy Battels came to fight, Or haue beene sent thy will to do. 4 For, many of that glorious Troope, To bring vs Messages from Thee, From Heau'n vouchsafed haue to stoope, And clad in humane shape to be; Yea, we beleeue they watch and ward, About our persons euermore, From euill Spirit vs to guard; And we returne thee praise therefore.
S. Luke. THis Day we memorize the benefit the Church recei∣ued by the blessed Euangelist S. Luke, a Physitian both for soule and body, and the first Ecclesiasticall Historiographer: For he was Authour, not onely of that Gospell which beareth his Name; but also of that Booke called the Acts of the Apostles, and an Eye-witnesse of most part of that which hee hath written, remai∣ning a constant companion of S. Paul in his tribulati∣ons. Worthily therefore ought we to honour him with a Christian memoriall, and praise God for the grace vouchsafed vs by his meanes. Song. 77. Sing this as the 44. Song. IF those Physitians honour'd be, That doe the bodies health procure; Then worthy double praise is He, Who can both soule and body cure. In life time both wayes Luke exceld, And those Receipts hath also left, Which many soule-sicke Patients heald, Since from the world he was bereft. 2 And to his honour this beside, A blessed Witnesse hath declar'd, That constant he did still abide, When others from the Truth were scar'd: For which the glory, LORD, be thine; For of thy grace those gifts had he,
And thou his Actions did'st encline, Our profit, and his good to be. 3 By his example therefore, LORD, Uphold vs, that we fall not from The true profession of thy Word, Nor by this world be ouercome; And let his wholesome doctrine heale That leprous sicknesse of the soule, Which more and more would on her steale, And make her languish and growe foule. Simon and Iude, Apostles. THis Day is dedicated to the praise of God, and the pious memory of the two blessed Apostles of Iesus Christ, Simon called Zelotes, or the Cananite, and Iude the brother of Iames. And in this solemnity we are among other things, principally put in mind of that loue which Christ commandeth to be continued among vs, and of that heed we ought to haue vnto our abiding in that state of grace, whereunto God hath called vs, as ap∣peareth in the Epistle and Gospell appointed for the day. Song. 78. Sing this as the 3. Song. NO outward marke we haue to know, Who thine, oh Christ, may be, Untill a Christian Loue doth show, Who appertaines to Thee: For, knowledge may be reach'd vnto And formall Iustice gain'd▪
But, till each other loue we do, Both Faith and Workes are faign'd. 2 Lou is the summe of those commands, Which thou with thine dost leaue; And for a marke on them it stands, Which neuer can deceaue: For when our knowledge Folly turnes, When Showes no show retaine, And Zeale it selfe to nothing burnes; Then Loue shall still remaine. 3 By this were thy Apostles knit, And ioyned so in one, Their True-loue-knot could neuer yet Be broken, nor vndone. Oh let vs, LRD, receiued be Into that sacred knot, And One become with them and thee, That sinne vndoe vs not. 4 Yea, lest when we thy grace possesse, We fall againe away, Or turne it into wantonnesse, Assist thou vs, we pray: And, that we may the better finde, What heed there should be learn'd, Let vs the fall of Angels minde, As blessed Iude hath warn'd. All-Saints day. THis Day the Church hath appointed, that, to the praise of God, and our comfort, we should comme∣morate that excellent Mystery of the Communion of
Saints, (which is one of the twelue Articles of Christian beleefe:) And that (considering how admirably the di∣uine wisedome hath knit all his elect into one body for their more perfect enioying, both of his loue, and the loue of one another) wee might hee receiue a taste of the pleasure we shall haue in the full fruition of that fe∣licity, and be stirred vp also to such mutuall loue and v∣nity as ought to be betwixt vs in this life. This is the last Saints day in the Ecclesiastck Circuite of the yeare, generally obseruable by the auncient ordinance of the Church; And it seemeth to haue a mystery in it; shewing, that when the Circle of tyme is come about, we shall in one euerlasting holy-day honor that blessed Communi∣on and mysticall Body, which shall be made perfect, when all those (whom we haue memorized apart) are vnited into One; that is, when the Father, the Sonne, the Holy Ghost, the Angels, and all the holy Elect of God shall be incorporated together into a ioyfull, vnspeakable, and inseparable Vnion in the Kingdome of Heauen; which the Almighty hasten, Amen. Song. 79. Sing this as the 9. Song. NO Blisse can so contenting proue▪ As vniuersall Loue to gaine, Could we with full requiting Loue, All mens affections entertaine: But such a Loue, the heart of man, Nor well-containe, nor merit can. 2 For though to all we might be deare, (Which cannot in this life befall) We discontented should appeare, Because we had not hearts for all:
That we might all men loue, as we Beloued would of all men be. 3 For Loue in louing ioyes as much, As Loe for louing to obtaine; Yea, oue vnfaign'd is likewise such, It cannot part it selfe in twaine: The Riuals friendship soone is gone, And Loue diuided loueth none. 4 Which causeth that with Passions pain'd, So many men on earth we see; And had not GOD a meanes ordain'd, This discontent in Heaun would be: For all the Saints would iealous proue, Of GOS, and of each others Loue. 5 But he whose, wisedome hath contriu'd His Glory, with their full Contents, Hath from himselfe to them deriu'd This Fauour (which that strife preuents) One Body all his Saints e makes, And for his Spouse this one he takes. 6 So, each one of them shall obtaine Full Loue from All, returning to Full Loue to All of them againe, As members of one Body doe: None ealous, but all striuing how Most Loue to others to allow. 7 For, as the Soule is All in All, And All through euery Member to; Loue in that Body Mysticall Is as the Soule, and ils it so;
Uniting them to GOD as neare, As to each other they are deare. 8 Yea, what they want to entertaine Such ouerflowing Loue as his, He will supply, and likewise daigne What for his full Delight they misse, That he may all his Loue employ, And they returne his fill of Ioy. 9 The seed of this Content was sowne, When GOD the spatious world did frame, And euer since the same hath growne, To be an honour to his Name; And when his Saints are sealed all, This Mysterie vnseale he shall. 10 Meanewhile (as we in Landskip viewe Fields, Riuers, Cities, Woods, & Seas, And (though but little they can shew) Doe therewithall our fancies please;) Let Contemplation Maps contriue, To shew vs where we shall arriue. 11 And though our hearts too shallow bee, That blest Communion to conceaue, Of which we shall in Heau'n be free, Let vs on Earth together cleaue: For those, who keepe in vnion here, Shall know by faith what will be there. 12 Where all those Angels we admir'd, With euery Saint since time begun, (Whose sight and loue we haue desir'd) Shall be with vs conioyn'd in One;
And We and They and They and We, To GOD himselfe espoused be. 13 Oh happie wedding▪ where the Guests, The Bride and Bridegroome shall be one; Where Songs, Embaces, Triumphes, Feasts, And Ioyes of Loue are neuer done: But thrice accurst are those that misse Their Garment when this Wedding is. 14 Sweet Iesus, seal'd, and clad therefore, For that great meeting let vs be, (Where People, Tongues, and kinreds, more Then can be tolde, attend on Thee) To make those shoutes of Ioy and praise, Which to thine honour they shall raise. Rogation weeke. THis is called Rogation week, being so tearmed by Atiquity  Rogando, from the publike Supplications. or then the Ltany which is full of humble Petitions and eteaies, was with solemne Procession vsually re∣peated; becaue there be about that seson, most occasi∣ons of puike Prayer, in regrd Princes goe then forth to battile; the Fuites and hope of plenty are in ther ; the Aye is most subiect to contagions & Infections; and there is most labouring and trauai∣lg, both by Land, and Sea also, from that time of the yeare forad. Which laudble custome (though it be lately much decayed, and in some Countries abused from the right end, and mingled with superstitious Ce∣emonies) is in many places orderly retained, accor∣ding as the Church of England approueth it: And wee
yearely make vse also of those Processions, to keepe know∣ledge of the tue Bounds of our seuerall Parishes, for a∣uoyding of strife. And those Perambulations were yearely appointed likewise, that, viewing Gods yearely blessing vpon the rasse, the Cone, nd other fruites of the Earth, we might be the more prouoked to praise him. Song. 80. Sing this as the 44. Song. IT was thy pleasure, LORD, to say, That whatsoeuer in thy Name We pray'd for, as we ought to pray, Thou would'st vouchsafe to grant the same. Oh, therefore we beseech thee now, To these our Prayers, which we make, Thy gracious eare in fauour bowe, And grant them for thy mercies sake. 2 Let not the Seasons of this yeare, (As they their Courses doe obserue) Engender those Contagions here, Which our transgressions doe deserue: Let not the Summer wormes impaire Those bloomings of the Earth we see; Nor Blastins, or distemper'd Aye Destroy those Fruites that hopefull be. 3 Domesticke Brawles expell thou farre, And be thou pleasd our Coast to guard, The dreadfull ounds of in-brought Warre, Within our Confines be not heard: Continue also here thy word, And make vs thankefull (we thee pray)
The Pestilence, Dearth, and the Sword Haue beene so long with-held away. 4 And, as we heedfully obserue The certaine limits of our Grounds, And outward quiet to preserue, About them walke our yearely Rounds: So let vs also haue a care, Our soules possessions, LORD, to know, That no encroachments on vs there, Be gained by our subtill oe. 5 What pleasant Groues, what goodly Fields! How fruitfull ils, and Dales haue we! How sweet an Ayre our Climate yeelds! How oard with Flockes, and Heards are we! How Milke▪ and Honey doth o reflowe! How cleare and wholesome are our Springs! How safe from rauenous Beasts we goe! And oh, how free from Poysnous things! 6 For these, and for our Grasse, our Corne; For all that springs from Blade, or Bogh; For all those blessings that adorne Or Wood or Field this Kingdome through: For all of these, thy praise we sing, And humbly (LORD) entreat thee too, That Fruite to thee we forth may bring, As vnto Us thy Creatures doe. 7 So, in the sweet refreshing shade Of thy Protection sitting downe, Those gracious Fauours we haue had, Relate we will to thy renowne; Yea, other men, when we are gone,
Shall for thy mercies honour Thee, And famous make what thou hast done, To such as after them shall be. S. George his Day. THis may be called the Court Holy-Day; for with vs it is solemnized vpon command, in the Court-royall of the Maiesty of Great Britaine onely, or in the Families of those Knights of the Order, who are constrained to be absent from the solemnity there held, which is vsually on the day anciently dedicated to George the Martyr. Neuerthelesse, we beleeue not that it was he whom they anciently chose to be the Patron of the fore-named Or∣der: For the relation of him who deliuered the Lady frō the Dragon is onely a Christian Allegory, inuented to set forth the better the Churches deliuerance. Iesus Christ is the true S. George, and our English utelary Saint; Euen he that commeth armed vpon the White Horse, Reu. 19.11 The Dragon hee ouerthrowes is the Beast mentioned in the sme Chapter, and called (a little before) the Dragon with seauen heads and ten hornes: The Lady he deliuers is that woman whom the Dragon persecutes, Reu. 12. And to the honour of him I conceiue the most honourable Order of S. George to be continued, and this Day conse∣crted. Nor is there any irreuerence in imposing this Name on our Redeemer; for George signifieth a Husband∣man, which is a Name or Attribute that euen Christ ap∣plyed to his Father, Iohn 15.2. My Father (saith hee) , is the George, or the Husbandman. And indeed, very properly may this Nation call GOD their George or Husbandman: For hee hath (as it were) moed this Island with the Sea, walled it with naturall Bulwarkes, built Towers in it, plan∣ted
his truth here, weeded, dressed, and replenished it like a Garden; and, in a word, euery way done the part of a good Husbandman thereon. Howsoeuer there∣fore the first occasion of this Dayes great solemnity seeme but meane (as the beginnings of many noble in∣uentions were) yet I conceaue that Institution to haue beene ordained to weighty and Christian purposes: E∣uen to oblige the Peeres of this Kingdome by the new and strict bands of an honourable Order, to imitate their Patrons care ouer his Vineyard, to remember them, that they are the Band-Royall, to whom the Guard thereof is committed, to stirre vp in them vertuous emulations, and to shew them how to make vse of their temporall dignities to the glorie of God. For, beside many other reend Officers, there belongs a Prelate also to these Solenities: And me thinkes, we should not imagine, that the Founder of it (being a Christian Prince, assisted by a wise and religious Counsel) would haue so propha∣ned the most excellent dignity of the Church, as to make it waite on Ceremonies ordained for ostentation, or some other vaine ends. More discreetly they deale who apprehend the contrary, and are not in danger of this sentence; Euill to him that euill thinketh. Song. 81. Sing this as the 3. Song. ALl praise and glorie that we may, Ascribe we, LORD, to Thee, From whom the triumphs of this Day, And all our glories be: For of it elfe, nor East, nor West, Doth Honour ebbe or flowe; But as to Thee it seemeth best, Preferments to bestowe:
2 Thou art, oh Christ, that valiant Knight, Whose Order we professe, And that Saint George, who oft doth fight For England in distresse: The Dragon thou o'rethrew'st is He, That would thy Church deuoure, And that faire Lady (ORD) is she, Thou sauest from his power. 3 Thou like a Husbandman prepar'd Our Fields, yea sowne them hast; And, Knight-like with a warlike guard, From spoile enclos'd them fast. Oh daigne, that those, who in a Band More strict then heretofore, Are for this Vineyard bound to stand, May watch it now the more: 4 Yea grant, since they elected are, New Orders to put on, And sacred Hirogliphickes weare Of thy great Conquest wonne, That those (when they forget) may tell, Why those of them are worne, And inwardly informe as well, As outwardly adorne; 5 That so their Christian-Knighthood may No PaganOrder seeme; Nor they their Meetings passe away, As things of vaine esteeme; And, that we may our triumphs all To thy renowne apply, Who art that Saint, on whom we call, When we Saint George doe cry.
For publike Deliuerances. GOd hath vouchsafed vnto this Kingdome many pub∣like deliuerances, which ought neuer to be forgot∣ten; but rather should be celebrated by Vs, as the daies Purim by the Israelites, Hester 9.26. Especially that of the fift of Nouember; for the celebration whereof there is a Statute enacted: And it is hoped we shall neuer neg∣lect, or be ashamed to praise God for that Deliuery, ac∣cording to prouision made to that purpose. For that, & the like occasions therefore this Hymne is composed. Song. 82. Sing this as the 9. Song. WIth Isr'el we may truely say, If on our side GOD had not beene, Our Foes had made of vs their pray, And we this Light had neuer seene: The Pit was digg'd, the snare was aid, And we with ease had beene betrai'd. 2 But they that hate vs vndertooke A Plot they could not bring to passe; For, he that all doth ouerlooke, Preuented what intended was: We found the Pit, & scap'd the Gin, And saw their Makers caught therein. 3 The meanes of helpe was not our owne, But from the LORD alone it came; (A fauour vndeserued showne) And therefore let vs praise his Name:
Oh, praise his Name; for it was He, That broke the Net, and set vs free. 4 Unto his honour let vs sing, And Stories of his Mercy tell; With praises let our Temples ring, And on our Lips thankesgiuing dwell: Yea, let vs not his loue forget, While Sunne, or Moone doth rise or set. 5 Let vs redeeme againe the Times, Let vs begin to liue anew, And not reuiue those hainous crimes, That dangers past so neere vs drew; Lest he that did his hand reuoke, Returne it with a double stroke. 6 A true Repentance takes delight To minde GODS Fauours heretofore; So, when his mercies men recite, It makes a true Repentance more: And where those vertues doe encrease, They are the certaine signes of Peace. 7 But where encreasing Sinnes we see, And to such dulnesse men are growne, That sleighted those Protections bee, Which GOD in former time hath showne, It shall betoken to that and Some Desolation neere at hand. 8 Our hearts, oh, neuer harden so, Nor let thine Anger so returne; But with desire thy will to do, For our offences let vs mourne:
And mind to praise (eu'n teares among) Thy Mercies in a ioyfull Song. For the Communion. WEe haue a custome among vs, that, during the time of administring the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there is some Psalme or Hymne sung, the better to keepe the thoughts of the Communicants from wandring after vaine obiects: This Song therefore (expressing a true thankfulnesse, together with what ought to be our faith concerning that Mysterie, in such manner as the vulgar capacity may be capable thereof) is offered vp to their deuotion, who shall please to re∣ceiue it. Song. 83. Sing this as the 3. Song. THat fauour, LORD, which of thy grace We doe receiue to day, Is greater then our merit was, And more then praise we may: For, of all things that can be told, That which least comfort hath Is more, then e're deserue we could, Except it were thy wrath: 2 Yet we, not onely haue obtain'd This worlds best gifts of thee; But thou thy flesh hast also daign'd, Our Food of Life to be: For which, since we no mends can make, (And thou requir'st no more)
The Cup of sauing health we take, And praise thy Name therefore. 3 Oh teach vs rightly to receiue, What thou dost here bestow; And learne vs truely to conceiue, What we are bound to know, That such as cannot wade the deepe Of thy vnfathom'd Word, May by thy grace safe courses keepe Along the shallow Ford. 4 This Mysterie, we must confesse, Our reach doth farre exceede, And some of our weake Faiths are lesse Then graines of Mustard-eed: Oh therefore, LORD, encrease it so, We fruite may beare to Thee, And that implicite faith may grow, Explicite faith to be. 5 With hands we see not, as with Eyes: Eyes thinke not as the Heart; But each retaines what doth suffize, To act his proper part: And in the Bodie while it bides, The meanest Member shares That blisse, which to the best betides, And as the same it fares: 6 So, if in vnion vnto thee United we remaine, The Faith of those that stronger be, The weaker shall sustaine: Our Christian Loue shall that supply, Which we in knowledge misse,
And humble thoughts shall mount vs hie, Eu'n to eternall blisse. 7 Oh pardon all those hainous crimes, Whereof we guilty are; To serue thee more in future times, Our hearts doe thou prepare; And make thou gracious in thy sight, Both vs, and this we do, That thou therein mayst take delight, And we haue loue thereto. 8 No new Oblation we deuise, For sinnes prefer'd to be; Propitiatory sacrifice Was made at full by Thee: The Sacrifice of Thankes is that, And all that thou dost craue, And we our slues are part of what We sacrificed haue. 9 We doe no grosse Realities Of Flesh in this conceaue; Or, that their proper qualities The read or Wine doe leaue: Yet, in this holy Eucharist, We (by a meanes diuine) Know we are fed with thee, oh Christ, Receiuing Bread and Wine. 10 And though the outward Elements For signes acknowledg'd be, We cannot say thy Sacraments, Things onely signall be: Because, who e're thereof partakes, In those this powre it hath;
It either them thy Members makes, Or slaues of Sinne and Death. 11 Nor vnto those doe we encline, (But from them are estrang'd) Who yeeld the forme of Bread and Wine, Yet thinke the Substance chang'd: For we beleeue each Element Is what it seemes indeed, Although that in thy Sacrament, Therewith on thee we feed. 12 Thy Real-presence we auowe, And know it so diuine, That carnall Reason knowes not how, That presence to define: For, when thy Flesh we feed on thus, (Though strange it doe appeare) Both we in thee and thou in vs, Eu'n at one instant are. 13 No maruaile many troubled were, This Secret to vnfold; For Mysteries Faiths obects are, Not things at pleasure told. And he that would by Reason sound, What Faiths deepe reach conceaues▪ May both himselfe and them confound, To whom his Rules he leaues. 14 Let vs therefore our Faith erect, On what thy Word doth say, And hold their knowledge in suspect, That new Foundations lay: For, such full many a grieuous Rend Within thy Church haue left;
And by thy peacefull Sacrament, The world of Peace bereft: 15 Yea, what thy pledge and seale of Loue, Was first ordain'd to be Doth great and hateful Quarrels moue, Where wrangling spirits be: And many men haue lost their blood, (Who did thy Name professe) Because they hardly vnderstood What others would expresse. 16 Oh, let vs not hereafter so, About meere words contend, The while our crafty common Foe, Procures on vs his end: But if in Essence we agree, Let all with Loue assay, A helpe vnto: he weake to bee, And for each other pray. 17 Loue is that blessed Cymment, LORD, Which must vs re-vnite; In bitter speeches, fre and sword, It neuer tooke delight: The Weapons those of Malice are, And they themselus beguile, Who dreame, that such ordained were Thy Church to reconcile. 18 Loue brought vs hither and that Loue Persads vs to implore, That thou all Christians hearts would'st moue, To seeke it more and more; And that Selfe will no more bewitch Our minds with foule debate;
Nor fill vs with that malice, which Disturbes a quiet state: 19 But this especially we craue, That perfect Peace may be Mong those that disagreed haue, In show of loue to thee; That they with vs, and we with them, May Christian Peace retaine, And both in new Ierusalem With thee for euer raigne. 20 No longer let ambitous Ends, Blinde Zeale, or cankred Spight, Those Churche keep from being friends, Whom Loue should fast vnite: But let thy glory shine among Those Candlestickes, we pray, We may behold what hath so long Exild thy Peace away: 21 That those, who (heeding not thy word) Expect an earthly Powre, And vainly thinke, some temp'rall Sword Shall Antichrist deuoure; That those may know, thy weapons are No such, as they doe faigne, And that it is no carnall warre, Which we must entertaine. 22 Confessors, Martyrs, Preachers strike The Blowes, that gaine this Field: Thanks, Prayre, Instructions, and the like, Those weapons are they weild: Long-suffering, Patience, Prudent-care, Must be the Court-of-Guard;
And Faith and Innocencie are Instead of Walles prepard. 23 For these (no question) may as well Great Babel ouerthrow, As Ierichoes large Bulwarkes fell, When men did Rams-hornes blowe: Which could wee credit, wee should cease All bloody plots to lay, And to suppose, Gods holy peace Should come the Deuils way. 24 LORD, let that flesh, and bloud of thine, Which fed vs hath to day, Our hearts to thy True-loue encline, And driue ill thoughts away: Let vs remember what thou hast For our meere loue endurde▪ Eu'n, when of vs despis'de thou wast, And we thy death procur'de: 25 And with each other, for thy sake, So truely let vs beare, Our patience may vs dearer make, When reconcil'd we are: So, when our courses finisht be, We shall ascend aboue Sunne, Moone, and Starres, to liue with Thee, That art the God of Loue. Ember weeke. THe Ember weekes are foure Fasts, anciently solemni∣zed at the foure principall Seasons of the yeare, and by an Instituion appointed to bee obserued for diuers
good purposes. First, to humble our selues by Fasting and Prayer, that God might, vpon our humiliation, be mooued to grant vs the blessings belonging to those seasons. Secondly, that it might please God to strengthen our Constitutions, against the distemperatures occasio∣ned by the seuerall humors predominate at those Times, to the endangering of our bodily healths. Thirdly, that we might be remembred to dedicate a part of euery sea∣son to Gods glory. And lastly, that there might be a pub∣like Fasting and Prayers made for those (according to the Apostes vse) who by the laying on of hands were to bee confirmed in the Ministery of the Gospell: For the Sunday next after hese Fasts is the time ordinarily ap∣pointed for the ordination of such as are called to those Offices. Song. 84. Sing this as the 9. Song. THou dost from eu'ry season, LORD, To profit vs, aduantage take, And at their fittest Times afford Thy Blessings for thy mercy sake: At Winter, Summer, Fall, or Spring, We furnish'd are of eu'ry thing. 2 A part therefore from each of these, With one consent reseru'd haue we, In Prayer and Fasting to appease That wrath our sinnes haue moou'd in thee, And that thou mayst not for our crimes, Destroy the blessings of the Times. 3 Oh grant, that our Deuotions may With true sincerenesse be perform'd, And that our liues, not for a day, But may for euer be reform'd:
Lest we remaine as fast in sinne, As if we neu'r had fasting byn. 4 Our Constitution temper so, Those Humors, which this season raine, May not haue powre to ouerthrowe That health, which yet we doe retaine: Else, through that weaknesse which it brings, LORD, make vs strong in better things. 5 And, since thy holy Church appoints These times, thy Workemen forth to send, And those for Pastors now anoynts, Who on thy olde are to attend; Blesse thou, where they who (should ordaine) With Praye and Fasting hands haue laine. 6 Oh, blesse them, euer-blessed LORD, Whom for thy worke the Church doth chuse; Instruct them by thy sacred Word, And with thy spirit them infuse, That liue, and teach aright they may, And we their teaching well obay, These that follow are thankesgiuings for publike benefites. For seasonable weather. IT is our duty to giue God thanks, & praise him, both publikely, and priuately for all his mercies; especially, for such as tend to the generall good. And therefore the Church hath in her Lithurgie ordained set formes of
Thankesgiuing for such ends: In imitation whereof these following Hymnes are composed, that we might the oft∣ner, and with more delight exercise this duty, which is most properly done in Song: And therby also the formes of Thankesgiuing are much the more easily learned of the common people, to be sung of them amid their la∣bours. This, that next followes, is a thankesgiuing for seasonable weather; y meanes whereof we enioying the blessings of the earth, ought at all times to praise God for the same. Song. 85. Sing this as the 3. Song. LORD, should the Sunne, the Clowds, the Wind, The Ayre, and Seasons be To vs so froward, and vnkinde, As we are false to Thee; All fruites would quite a way be burn'd, Or lye in water drown'd, Or blasted be, or ouerturn'd, Or chilled on the ground. 2 But, from our duty though we swarue, Thou still dost mercy show, And daigne thy Creatures to preserue, That men might thankfull grow; Yea, though from day to day we sinne, And thy displeasure gaine, No sooner we to cry beginne, But pitty we obtaine. 3 The weather now thou changed hast, That put vs late to feare, And when our hopes were almost past, Then comfort did appeare.
The Heau'n the Earths Complaints hath heard; They reconciled be, And thou such weather hast prepar'd, As we desir'd of thee: 4 For which with lifted hands and eyes, To thee we doe repay The due, and willing sacrifize Of giuing thanks to day; Because, such Offrings we should not To render thee be slowe; Nor let that mercie be forgot, Which thou art pleas'd to showe. For Plenty. PLenty is the cure of Famine, and a blessing which, aboue all other, we labour and trauaile for; yet, when we haue obtained the same, it makes vs many times so wanton insteed of being thankfull, that wee forget not onely Gods mercy in that, but abuse all other benefits. To put vs therefore in minde of our duty, and to ex∣presse the better a continuall thankefulnesse to the Al∣mighty, this Hymne is composed. Song. 86. Sing this as the 3. Song. HOw oft, and in how many crimes, Thee Iealous haue we made? And, blessed GOD, how many times Haue we forgiuenesse had? If we with teares to bed at night For our transgressions goe,
To vs thou dost, by morning-light, Some comfort daigne to show. 2 This pleasant Land, which for our sinne Was lately barren made, Her fruitfulnesse doth new begin, And we are therefore glad: We for those Creatures thankfull be, Which thou bestowest, LORD, And for that Plenty honour Thee, Which thou dost now afford. 3 Oh, let vs therewith in excesse Not wallow like to Swine; Nor into gracelesse wantonnesse Conuert this grace of thine; But so reuiue our feebled powres, And so refresh the poore, That thou mayst crowne this Land of ours, With plenties euermore. For Peace. PEace is the Nurse of Plenty, and the meanes of so many other blessings, both publike and priuate, that God can neuer be sufficiently praised for it; yet insteed of glorifying him, men most commonly abuse it to the dishonour of God, and their ruine. This Hymne there∣fore is composed, that it may giue occasion to vs more often to meditate Gods mercy, & to glorifie his Name, who aboue all other Nations haue tasted the sweetnesse of this benefit.
Song. 87. Sing this as the 3. Song. SO cause vs, LORD, to thinke vpon Those blessings we possesse, That what is for our safety done, We truely may confesse: For we, whose Fields, in time forepast, Most bloody warre did staine, (Whil'st Fire and Sword doth others wast) In safety now remaine. 2 No armed troupes the Ploughman feares; No shot our Wals o'returne▪ No Temple shakes about our eares; No Village here doth burne; No Father heares his pretty Child In vaine for succour cry; Nor Husband sees his Wife defil'd, Whilst he halfe dead doth lye. 3 Deare GOD, vouchsafe to pitty those, In this distresse that be, They, to protect them from their Foes, May haue a Friend of Thee: For, by thy Friendship we obtaine These gladsome peacefull dayes, And (somewhat to returne againe) We thus doe sing thy praise. 4 We praise thee for that inward Peace, And for that outward Rest, Wherewith vnto our Ioyes encrease, This Kingdome thou hast blest:
Oh, neuer take the same away, But let it still endure; And grant (oh LORD) it make vs may More thankefull, not Secure. For Victory. OVr God is the Lord of Hosts, and the God of Battles: whensoeuer therefore wee haue gotten the vpper hand ouer our enemies, wee ought not to glory in our owne strength, Policy, or Valour, but to ascribe the glory of it to him only, and returne him publike thankes for making vs victorious ouer our enemies: And this Hymne serueth to helpe their deuotion, who are willing to performe that duty. Song. 88. Sing this as the 44. Song. WE loue thee, LORD, we praise thy Name, Who, by thy great Almighty arme, Hast kept vs from the spoile, and shame Of those, that sought our causelesse harme: Thou art our Life, or Triumph-Song, The Ioy and Comfort of our heart; To thee all praises doe belong, And thou the LORD of Armies art. 2 We must confesse it is thy powre, That made vs Masters of the Field; Thou art our Blwarke and our Towre, Our ocke of refuge, and our Shield: Thou taught'st our hands and Armes to fight; With vigour thou did'st gird vs round; Thou mad'st our Foes to take their flight, And thou did'st bate them to the ground.
3 With fury came our armed Foes, To bloud and slaughter fiercely bent, And perils round did vs inclose, By whatsoeuer way we went, That hadst not thou our Captaine beene, (To leade vs on, and off againe) We on the place had dead beene seene, Or mask'd in blood and wounds had laine. 4 This Song we therefore sing to Thee, And pray, that thou for euermore Would'st our Protector daigne to be, As at this time▪ and heretofore; That thy continuall fauour showne, May cause vs more to Thee encline, And make it through the world be knowne, That such as are our Foes, are thine. For deliuerance from a publike Sicknesse. THe Pestilence, and other publike sicknesses are those Arrowes of the Almighty wherewith hee punisheth publike transgressions: This Hymne therefore is to praise him, when he shal vnslack the Bow which was bent against vs; and the longer he with-holds his hand, the more constantly ought wee to continue our publike Thanksgiuings; for when we forget to perseuere in prai∣sing God for his mercies past, we vsually reuiue those sinnes that will renue his Iudgements.
Song. 89. Sing this as the 9. Song. WHen thou would'st, LORD, afflict a Land, Or scourge thy People that offend, To put in praise thy command, Thy Creatures all on thee attend; And thou, to execute thy Word, Hast Famine, Sicknesse, Fire, and Sword. 2 And here among vs, for our sinne, A sore Disease hath lately raign'd, Whose fury so vnstayd hath bin, It could by nothing be restrain'd; But ouerthrew both weake & strong, And tooke away both old and young. 3 To thee our cries we therefore sent, Thy wonted Pitty, LORD, to proue; Our wicked wayes we did repent, Thy Visitation to remoue; And thou thine Angell didst command, To stay his wrath-inflicting hand. 4 For which thy loue, in thankfull wise, Both hearts and hands to thee we raise, And in the stead of former cries, Doe sing thee now a Song of Praise; By whom the fauour yet we haue, To scape the neuer-filled Graue. For the Kings day. THe first day of KINGS Raigne, hath beene anci∣ently obserued in most Kingdomes: And with vs
that custome is worthily retained; partly, for ciuill ends; and partly, that the people might assemble together, to praise God for the benefit the Common-wealth receiueth by the Prince; To pray for his preseruation also, and to desire a blessing vpon him and his Gouernment: To which purpose this Song is composed. Song. 90. Sing this as the 3. Song. WHen (LORD) we call to minde those things, That should be sought of Thee, Remembring that the hearts of Kings At thy disposing be, And how of all those blessings, which Are outwardly possest, To make a Kingdome safe and rich, Good Princes are the best; 2 We thus are mou'd to sing thy praise, For Him thou daigned hast, And humbly beg, that all our dayes Thy care of vs may last. Oh, blesse our King, and let him raigne, In peacefull safety long, The Faith's Defender to remaine, And sheild the Truth from wrong. 3 With awfull Loue, and louing Dread, Let vs obserue him, LORD, And, as the Members with their Head, In Christian peace accord: And fill him with such royall care, To cherish vs for this; As if his heart did feele we are Some liuing parts of his.
4 Let neither Party struggle from That duty should be showne, Lest each to other plagues become, And both be ouerthrowne: For, o're a disobedient Land Thou dost a Tyrant set; And those, that Tyrant-like command, Haue still with Rebels met. 5 Oh, neuer let so sad a doome Upon these Kingdomes fall; And to assure it may not come▪ Our sinnes forgiue vs all: Yea, let the Parties innocent Some dammage rather share, Then, by vnchristian discontent, A double curse to beare. 6 Make vs (that placed are belowe, Our callings to apply) Not ouer-curious be to know, What he intends on high: But, teach him iustly to command, Us rightly to obay; So, both shall safe together stand, And doubts shall flie away. 7 When hearts of Kings we pry into, Our owne we doe beguile, And what we ought our selues to doe, We leaue vndone the while: Whereas, if each man would attend The way he hath to liue, And all the rest to thee commend, Then all should better thriue.
8 Oh, make vs, LORD, disposed thus, And our dread Soueraigne saue; Blesse vs in him, and him in vs, We both may blessings haue; That many yeares for him we may This Song deuoutly sing, And marke it for a happy day, When he became our King. Here endeth the Hymnes, and Songs of the Church.
A Table of the Hymnes and Songs, contayned both in the first and second part of this Booke; the first number declaring the Song, the second the Page. Hymnes found in the Bookes of Moses, and in the other Bookes of holy Scripture, called Hagiographa. Song. Page. 1 THe first Song of Moses. 3 2 The second Song of Moses. 7 3 The Song of Deborah, &c. 11 4 The Song of Hannah. 19 5 The Lamentation of Dauid. 21 6 Dauids thankesgiuing. 24 7 Nehemiahs Prayer. 27 8 The Song of Lemuel. 29 The Song of Salomon, diuided into tenne Cantiles. 9 The first Canticle. 33 10 The second Canticle. 35 11 The third Canticle. 37 12 The fourth Canticle. 40 13 The fift Canticle. 42 14 The sixt Canticle. 46 15 The seauenth Canticle. 48
16 The eight Canticle. 51 17 The ninth Canticle. 54 18 The tenth Canticle. 57 The Hymnes found in the Bookes of the Pro∣phets, with the Lamentations of Ieremie. 19 The first Song of Esay. 60 20 The second Song of Esay. 62 21 The third Song of Esay. 64 22 The Prayer of Hezekiah. 69 23 Hezekiahs thankesgiuing. 78 24 The first Lamentation of Ieremy. 73 25 The second Lamentation. 79 26 The third Lamentation. 85 27 The fourth Lamentation. 98 28 The fift Lamentation. 93 29 The Prayer of Daniel. 96 30 The Prayer of Ionah. 99 31 The Prayer of Habakuk. 101 The Hymnes of the New Testament. 32 The Song of our Lady, or Magnificat. 106 33 The Song of Zacharie, or Benedictus. 107 34 The Song of Angels. 109 35 The Song of Simeon. 110 36 The Song of the Lambe. 111 The rest that make vp the first Part are these. 37 The tenne Commmandements. 112 38 The Lords Prayer. 114
39 The Apostles Creed. 115 40 A Funerall Song. 116 41 The Song of the three Children. 118 42 The Song of S. Ambrose. 120 43 The Creed of Athanasius. 122 44 Come Holy Ghost, or Veni Creator. 125 The second Part of the HYMNES and Songs of the Church. Spirituall Songs, appropriated to those Times, in which are commemorated the principall Mysteries of Christian RELIGION. Song. Page. 45 The Song for Aduent. 130 46 For Christmas. 132 47 Another for Christmas. 135 48 For the Circumcision. 136 49 For Twelfe-day. 138 50 For the Purification. 139 51 The first day of Len. 141 52 The Annuntiation. 143 53 Palme-Sunday. 144 54 Thursday before Easter. 145 55 Good-Friday. 147 56 Easter day. 151 57 Ascension day. 153 58 Whitsunday. 154 59 Trinity Sunday. 157 60 Sunday. 160 Spirituall Songs appropriated to the Saints dayes, most obseruable throughout the yeare. 61 For S. Andrewes day. 161
62 For S. Thomas day. 162 63 S. Steuens day. 163 64 S. Iohn the Euangelist. 165 65 Innocents day. 166 66 The Conuersion of S. Paul. 168 67 S▪ Matthias day. 169 68 S. Markes day. 171 69 S. Philip and Iacobs day. 172 70 S. Barnabas day. 173 71 S. Iohn Baptists day. 175 72 S. Peters day. 176 73 S. Iames day. 178 74 S. Bartholomewes day. 179 75 S. Mathewes day. 181 76 S. Michaels day. 182 77 S. Lukes day. 184 78 Simon and Iudes day. 185 79 All Saints day. 186 Spirituall Songs fitted for other Solemnities, and to praise God for publike Benefits. 80 For Rogation weeke. 190 81 S. George his day. 194 82 For publike Deliuerances. 196 83 For the Communion. 198 84 For Ember weekes. 204 85 For seasonable weather. 206 86 For Plenty. 208 87 For Peace. 209 88 For Victory. 211 89 For Deliuerance from publike Sicknesse. 212 90 For the King. 213
The Authors Hymne. GReat Almighty, GOD of Heauen, Honour, praise, and glory be Now, and still hereafter giuen, For thy blessings daigned me: Who hast granted and prepared, More then can be well declared. By thy mercy thou didst raise me, From below the pits of clay; Thou hast taught my lips to praise thee, Where thy loue confesse I may: And those blessed hopes dost leaue me, Whereof no man can bereaue me. By thy grace, those passions, troubles, And those wants that me opprest; Haue appeard as water-bubbles, Or as dreames, and things in ieast: For (thy leisure still attending) I with pleasure saw their ending. Those afflictions, and those terrors, Which to others grim appeare, Did but shew me where my errors, And my imperfections were: But distrustfull could not make me Of thy loue; nor fright, nor shake me. When in publike to defame me, A designe was brought to passe, On their heads that meant to shame me, Their owne malice turned was; And that day, most grace was showne me, Which they thought should haue vndone me. Therefore, as thy blessed Psalmist, When he saw, his warres had end, (And his dayes were at the calmest)
Psalmes and Hymnes of praises pend: So, my rest by thee enioyed, To thy praise I haue employed. Yea, remembring what I vowed, When enclos'd from all but thee, I thy presence was allowed, While the world neglected me: This, my Muse hath tooke vpon her, That she might aduance thine honour. LORD, accept my poore endeauour, And assist thy seruant so, In good Studies to perseuer, That more fruitfull he may grow: And become thereby the meeker; Not his owne vaine Glory seeker. Grant my frailties and my folly, (And those daily Sinnes I doe;) May not make this Worke vnholy, Nor a blemish bring thereto: But, let all my faults committed, With compassion be remitted. Those base hopes that would possesse m; And, those thoughts of vaine repute, Which doe now and then oppresse me, Doe not, LORD, to me impute: And, though part they will not from me, Let them neuer ouercome me. Till this present, from obsceannesse, Thou, oh LORD, hast kept my Pen, And my Uerse abhorr'd vncleannesse, Though it vaine were, now, and then: My loose thoughts it ne're enflamed: But, I thereby them haue tamed. Still with-hold me from delighting That, which thine may mis-beseeme;
And from eu'ry kinde of Writing, Whereby this may loose esteeme, That I may with Faith and Reason, Eu'ry future Uolume season. Oh, preserue me from committing Aught thats hainously amisse; From all speeches him vnfitting, That hath beene employd on this: Yea, as much as may be daigned, Keepe my very Thoughts vnstained. That these Helpes vnto Deuotion, May no scandall haue at all, LORD, I make to thee this motion, For their sakes that vse them shall: Of the world I am not fearefull, Nor of mine owne glory carefull. Whil'st thy fauours thou dost daigne me, I despise the worlds respect, And most comforts entertaine me, When I suffer most neglect: Yea, I then am best rewarded, When I seeme the least regarded. For (oh) when I minde my Sauiour, And how many a spightfull tongue, Sland'red his most pure behauiour, And his pious't workes did wrong: I contented am, and care not, Though my life, Detraction spare not▪ Therefore, when that I shall blamed, Or with cause, or causlesse be; So thy Truth be not defamed, Fall what can befall on me: Let my fame of none be friended, So thy Saints be not offended. That is most my feare (oh Father)
Thy assistance therefore send; And, oh let me perish, rather Then thy little ones offend: Let my life some honour doe thee, Or by death returne me to thee. For, thy praise I wish, and loue it; And (oh) let my end be shame, If for mine owne sake, I couet Either life, or death, or fame: So it may be to thy glory, Let Detraction write my storie. But to thee which way aualing, Can my shame or honour be? Truth shall euer be preuailing, Whatsoe're is thought of me: Thou nought loosest through my folly, Nor gain'st ought by the most holy. And I know, that whosoeuer Hath thy glory in esteeme, Will accept this good endeauour, Whatsoe're the Workeman seeme, Let (oh therefore) be fulfilled, That which thou (oh LORD) hast willed. And when I with Israels Singer, To these Songs of Faith, shall learne, Thy ten-stringed Law to finger, And that Musicke to discerne: Lift me to that Angell-quire, Whereunto thy Saints aspire. FINIS.
To the Reader. THat such as haue skill and are delighted with mu∣sicke, may haue the more varietie, to stirre vp the soone cloyed affections, these Hymnes are fitted with many new tunes; neuerthelesse all (but some few of them) may be sung to such tunes as haue beene hereto∣fore in vse; For the benefit therefore of those who haue no experience in Musicke, I haue here set downe which Songs they be; and to what old tunes they may be sung. To the tune of the 1.2.3. and of an hundred other Psalmes may be sung. Song the 3.21.32.33.35.38.43.53.57.58.67.69.72.78.81.83.85.86.87.90. To the tune of the 51.100.125. Psalmes and the ten Commandements, &c. may be sung Song the 5.6.8.11.12.27.28.34.42.44.48.51.52.56.60.61.64.65.66.68 70.73.76.77.80.88. To the tune of the 112.127. Psalmes & the Lords Prayer, &c. may be sung, Song the 7.40.41.45.49.50.54.59 62.71.74.75.79.82.84.89. To the tune of the 113. Psalme may be sung. Song the 9.10.17. To the tune of the 25. Psalme may bee sung, Song the 20. To the tune of the 124. Psalme may be sung, Song the 47. FINIS.
Errata. PAge 2, in the Title of the Song, reade Exod. 15. p. 6. in the Title of the Song, reade Deut. 32. pa. 40. li. 26 reade the pauement of it, li. 43. reade with Charity, pa. 42. in the direction, for Thy, reade Vnderneath, pa 67. li. 18. for aliue reade to life, pa. 110. li. 17. reade to the Gentiles, pa. 138. in the direction, for And reade The, pa. 145. li. 17. for confuted reade comforted.
