4327 S107369 99843071 7779
TO HIS HONORA∣BLE FRENDE Sr. HENRY SKIPWITH Knight, and Baronet, The Author hereof sendeth this his worke as a Testimo∣ny and Memoriall of the LOVE and HONOVR which he beareth to his WORTHINES.
A IVSTIFICATION OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND. Demonstrating it to be a true Church of GOD, affording all sufficient meanes to SALVATION. OR, A Countercharme against the Romish enchant∣ments, that labour to bewitch the people, with opinion of necessity to be subiect to the Pope of ROME. Wherein is briefly shewed the Pith and Marrow of the principall bookes written by both sides, touching this matter: with Marginall reference to the Chapters and Sections, where the points are handled more at large to the great ease and satisfaction of the READER. By ANTHONY CADE, Bachelour of DIVINITY. GALAT. 3.1. O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth? LONDON, Printed for GEORGE LATHVM, dwelling at the Bishops head in Pauls Church-yard, Anno 1630.
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, IOHN, LORD Bishop of LINCOLNE, my very good Lord and Patron. RIght Reuerend Father: I humbly craue your Pati∣ence, to take notice of the Causes, and Manner of my writing; and your Patronage to countenance it.The occasions of my wri∣ting. 1 Particular. I euer ac∣counted it a great blessing of God, and it is still the ioy of my heart to record, that in my stronger yeeres I was thought worthy to be employed in the tray∣ning vp of some Nobles, and many other yong Gentlemen of the best sort (whose names here to insert might happily be censured ambition in me) in the Learned Tongues, Mathemaci∣call Arts, Musicke, and other both Diuine and Humane Learning; and that Many of them haue since risen to great places and dignities in our Church and Common wealth. And it was afterwards my great griefe, to heare, that any of them, or of their Parents (by mee
much honored) should be seduced or drawn to embrace the present Religion of the Papacy, and to separate frō our so excellently-reformed Church. The falling away of persons of so Noble birth and place, & after such education, likely also to be means by their examples and reputation, to draw others to the like defecti∣on, made a deepe impression of sorrow in my soule, and wrought a desire to seeke their reco∣uery.1 More gene∣rall. I saw also a generall inclination of many sorts of people to returne againe to the Old Religion (as they called it) vpon a strong per∣swasion, that the Protestants Religion was new, and but of yesterday: although we daily cry downe all nouelties in Religion, and pro∣fesse to embrace nothing which is not of the ancient faith,Iude verse 3. once (or first) deliuered to the Saints. These considerations excited and vrged me, by that bond of loue and duty, wherewith I feele my selfe bound, both to my late dearely beloued yong Nobles and Gentlemen in parti∣cular, and to our whole Church and State in generall,The purposes and ends of my writing. to addresse my selfe to writing, to re∣collect and perfit that, which I had long pro∣fessed, obserued and taught: both to put those former in mind of such grounds of sound Reli∣gion, which in their youth (both by pulicke
Sabboth-dayes Sermons, and by priuate Schoole-Catechizings on Frydayes, and by o∣ther Conferences) they had learned of me; and to confirme those grounds with Inuincible Reasons and Allegations: And also to im∣proue my Talents (such as they are) to the best seruice of the whole Church, our Graci∣ous Soueraigne, the State in generall, and eue∣ry particular soule, for their eternall and tem∣porall happinesse; by instructing the Ignorant, confirming the right beleeuers and good Subiects, reducing the errant, staying the weake and waue∣ring, or confounding the obstinate: and thereby (so much as in me lyeth) working a happy peace, loue, vnity, and vnanimity amongst all. To which purpose,An obiectio answered. though many haue written most learnedly and excellently already: yet I thought good to follow S. Augustines aduise,Augustin. libro 1 De Trinitate cap. 3. Vile es plures à pluribus fieri (libros) di∣verso stylo, non diuersa fide, eti∣am de quaestioni∣bus sdem, vt ad plurimos re ipsa perueniat, ad alios sic, ad alios autem sic. who wisheth, where heresies are busie, that all men which haue any faculty of writing, should write; though they write not onely of the same things, but the same reasons in other wordes, ei∣ther that hereticks may see multitudes against them; or that of many bookes written, some at lest may come to their hands, as it happily fell out in the time of the Arrians. And for the manner of my writing,The manner of my writing. I ende∣uoured
to fit it the best way to the Persons to whom I intended it; and to these times. I saw, that bookes of all sorts are infinitely multipli∣ed in the world: and that neither men of great place, nor many others, haue time afforded from their necessary affaires to read many bookes, or any large discourse. I thought it therefore (though the most painfull, yet) the most profitable course, diligently to collect, and faithfully to relate, with all possible breuity and perspicuity, the substance of that which former learned Authors, Fathers, and Histories haue de∣liuered: what the Romish Doctors haue proba∣bly obiected, and Protestants (especially English) haue substantially answered, (so much as con∣cerneth my purpose and the points which I handle) that the Reader might haue in one view and volume, the Pith and Substance of the best bookes written on both sides, touching these matters, as an Epitome of them all. And withall pointing to the bookes, chapters and sections,By marginall notes for the most part. or pages of them all, as an Index, re∣ferring the vnsatisfied where he may read of eue∣ry point more at large. I find (to omit all others) the late most learned Lipsius in humane know∣ledge,Iusti. Lipsij Poli∣tica. See his Prefaces. hath taken this course, without any dis∣grace to himselfe, but rather with the great com∣mendation
of his diligence and learning: wri∣ting to the Emperour, Kings and Princes (which haue no leisure to read great bookes) briefe A∣phorismes methodically deliuered by him, but e∣uermore in the most learned Authors owne words, and quoting their bookes. Vt quae optima sunt, aut per me cognoscatis, aut mecum recognosca∣tis, saith he to those great Estates, That either by me yee may know these excellent things, or with me call them againe to minde. And herein (saith he) Verè dicere possum, omnia esse nostra, & ni∣hil. All things (in the booke) are mine, and no∣thing. Because the matter was the Authors (whō he cites) the whole inuention and order was his owne. And Bellarmine in diuine Controuersies, is esteemed to haue done the greatest seruice to the Church of Rome, by collecting the substance of the learned large writers of Controuersies into one body, cōfuting (as he could) what was against, and confirming what was for that Church. I haue followed these great wits, though longo interuallo, a great Way behind them, in the manner, not in the matter of their writing. I know it vnfit for me (yea, vnfit for a Christian, and I hate it in my heart) to bean Author or Inuenter of new opinions of Religon. We must learne of S. Iude,Iude v. 3. onely ear∣nestly to contend for the faith which was once (that
is first) deliuered to the Saints. Therefore the Mate∣rials of my building I create not, but fetch them from the Garden of Eden, (the holy Scriptures) and the large Forests and rich Quarries of others: but the choice of all the Timber and Stone, the squaring, ioyning, forme and frame of the worke is mine; which I haue set together without any impairing of the strength or beauty (I hope) of any peece. Such graue and holy Authors words (as vndeniable witnesses) add waight and authority to my discourse, more then from my selfe it could haue, and it will be a great ease to the Readers (as Iudges) to haue the whole pleadings abridged, and laid in one  (or short view) before them; with the witnesses names annexed to euery Ar∣ticle, whom they may more fully examine vpon euery occasion. This I haue aymed at, how neere I haue come vnto the marke, I must leaue to o∣thers to Iudge. The first part of this worke I now publish, which concerneth the generall ex∣ceptions against our Reformed Church (which I hope I fully cleare and satisfie in this small. Vo∣lumne.) The second part, which handleth the particular doctrines controuerted, I am compelled to put off to another time. Those my labours, I am bold (or rather indeed I am bound) to dedi∣cate vnto your Honour.
1 As to my most bountifull Patron, furnish∣ing me with increase of meanes, both to liue in better sort without want (and thereby without contempt) and especially to furnish me with ma∣ny vsefulll bookes of all kindes and sides: in per∣using, examining, and extracting the quintessence whereof, is my daily labour, and my greatest worldly contentment. The honour and fruits whereof, are due debts vnto your bounty. 2 As to our Reuerend Bishop, and generall Father of the Clergy in this your Diocesse of Lin∣colne: appointed according to the order of christs Apostles deliuered in Scripture,As app∣reth by the subscritions of the second Epistle to Ti∣mothy, in the O∣riginall Greeke, . To Timo∣theus, ordained the first Bi∣shop of the Church of the Ephesians. And the like to Ti∣tus, ordained the first Bi∣shop of the Cretians And by the Text, Tit. 1.5. & cap. 2. & cap. 3.1, 2, 8, 9, 10, &c. To gouerne part of Gods Church; not onely for theOrdination. Tit. 1.5. 1 tim. 4.14. & 5.21, 2. & 2 tim. 2.2. Ordina∣tion of Ministers () in euery Congregati∣on, but also forIurisdiction 1 Tim. 1.3. & 4.11. & 5. per tot. & 6.3, 4, 5, 20. & 2 tim. 2.14. tit. 1.10, 11, 13. & 3.10. &c. Iurisdiction or power or ouer∣fight, that they teach found doctrine, and liue without scandall. 3 As to a most eminent and excellent buil∣der of Gods Spirituall house, by your diuine wis∣dome, learning, preaching, and writing. 4 And yet further, To the most Noble and famous builder of Gods externall and visible houses: by yourThe beauti∣full Chappell at Lincolne Colledge in Oxford: a mag∣nificent Libra∣ry at S. Iohns Colledge in Cambridge (the mother and rse-place of of his lear∣ning) another at Westminster, (his Dignity) built and fur∣nished by his cost, (as also another at Lin∣coln, his Bisho∣pricke) with store of excel∣lent bookes. Founding also ew Fellowes and other Stu∣dents with yeerely main∣tenance for e∣uer in Cam∣bridge, with many other workes of Pie∣ty, and abun∣dant charity, Oxford, West∣minster, Lincoln, Leicester, and other places. materiall buildings, enriching, beautifying, and amplifying Churches and Col∣ledges, with Chappels, Libraries, Fellowships and Schollerships in both the Vniuersities, and else
where, and furnishing them with the most excel∣lent and necessary bookes that can bee gotten. Which (With other your most pious and Noble works) draw the hearts and tongues of all men which I can heare mention your name) to glori∣fie God for you, and you for glorifying God and our Church and Nation, with such worthy Mo∣numents of your Piety, Cost and Labours. In re∣gard of all these, I could not hold, my hart would breake, if I did not in some sort vent the fulnesse thereof, and honor your Bounty, your Father∣hood, your spirituall Graces, and your materiall magnificall Beneficence, by the best meanes I can, with this dedication of my poore labours. And (let me adde that which all men will easily conceiue) 5 To receiue honour from you, by prescribing your much honoured name before my labors And finally, as in these many respects I am bold and bound So 6 I doe most willingly and humbly offer my labours to your Father∣hood, to be viewed, Iudged, approued, or censu∣red by your graue Wisedome, Learning, Piety, and Authority. For the continuance and en∣crease whereof, and of all your temporall and eternall happinesse, I shall dayly pray: as becom∣meth, Your Lordships much bounden, ANTHONY CADE.
To the Reader. DEare Christian Reader whatsoeuer, or of what Religion soeuer thou art, if there be any of these three things truly rooted in thy heart, either the care of Gods Glory, or the saluation of thy soule, or the loue of thy Country, with the peace, strength, happinesse, and flourishing estate thereof (as I hope all these three are conioyned in thee) by them, all of them, or any of them, I humbly and heartily entreat thee, to reade, not with prejudice, but with an honest and good heart, with indifferency, patience, aduisednesse, and with continuall waighing; considering, and examining, the things which I haue with great labour and diligence gathered, and heere set before thee.Rom 9.1. &c. I doe protest before God (as Saint Paul did for the Hebrewes) that I haue great heauinesse and continuall sorrow in my heart, for my deare bre∣thren, English people, that are seduced and with∣drawen from the sincerity of the Gospell: and my hearts desire and praier to God is (and my endeuours both by example of life, and holy doctrine,Rom. 10.1. &c. continually tend that way) that they might be saued (eternally, and in this world liue comfortably and happily.) For I beare them record (the greatest number of them) that they haue a zeale of God, but not according to know∣ledge.
And it may bee, many of their seducers are themselues first seduced by the cunning of their grea∣test Rabbines, who yet (the most of them) know full well, (and very often confesse in their writings, as I shall manifestly shew in handling the chiefe points con∣trouerted betwixt vs) that Protestants hold the truth, and themselues haue swarned from pure Antiquity. In tender commiseration therefore, and yerning bowels of compassion vnto the seduced, I haue vnder∣taken this great labour, with neglect of my selfe, my health, and state, to doe good to their soules, and good to my Country, by vniting them (so far as in me lyeth) firmely to be the true Church of Christ, and the body of this State. And I haue caried my selfe with that sincerity and singlenesse of heart, that I may safely pro∣test againe with S. Paul, I speake the truth in Christ, I lie not,Rom. 9.1. &c. my conscience bearing me witnesse in the holy Ghost I renounce the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking (nor writing) in craftinesse,2 Cor. 4.2. &. 2.17. & 1.12. nor handling the word of God (or diuine things) decitfully: but by manifestation of the truth, commending my selfe to euery mans conscience in the sight (and feare) of God. I am no Innouator, inventer, or fauourer of new things in Religion. I search for the old, and out of all kinde of Authors deduct allegations, authorities, consequences and reasons against the new. I cut off ex∣trauagant, needlesse, and endlesse questions, priuate opinions both of these and former ages: and compre∣hend the necessary points of Religion agreed vpon by the Scriptures, Fathers, and moderne diuines with∣in their owne true limits: I set downe the most sub∣stantiall points agreed vpon betwixt the Romans and vs: and shew withall their vnnecessary additions and corruptions. I search how corruptions came into the
Church (as they will doe into all societies of Men in continuance of time) I shew how they were discouered, opposed, and reformation wished and sought for in all former ages: and by what power, policies, and cun∣ning they preuailed after Sathan was loosed. I finde and shew the out-cries of historians, and other learned men, Emperours, Princes, Clergy, and people, yea of their owne writers against them, all before Luthers time. And all this while, I shew the continuance of all necessary sauing doctrine in many other famous Churches beside the Church of Rome: yea and within that Church also a sufficient visible number of many hundred thousands farre and wide spread in Countries and Nations, and continewing till Luthers time, which refused the gouernment, errors, and cor∣ruptions of the Papacy, and taught the same substance of doctrine which Protestants now teach. Yea, the better part of the Church of Rome it selfe (ex∣cepting onely the Papacy, and the faction that main∣tained it) held with great liberty the same most neces∣sary points of Faith which we doe, vntill by the Councell of Trent (which was not a free end generall Councell, but guided wholly by the Papall faction) that liberty was taken away, and the errors of the Papacy were imposed generally vpon all, vnder paine of Anathema, or depriuation of saluation. Vpon due search of these and many other things (which heere I deliuer vnto thee) in the Scriptures, Fathers, Histories, and all kinde of Authors of either Religion, I haue by the grace of God attained to that perfect knowledge and assurance of the Verity Anti∣quity, and Sufficiency of the Protestants doctrine to good life in this world, and eternall saluation in the world to come, that any mortall man can desire to
haue: and am as willing (if God haue so decreed i expedient, and the times desire it) to suffer for it, as the holy Martyrs were for this same Religion in the Primitiue Church; not writing any thing in substance which I will not willingly seale with my blood. This is it (deare Christian Reader) which I present vnto thy view in this worke, being a Summe or Abridge∣ment of many great volumnes written on both sides, vpon these points, and thus briefly deliuered for thy greater case in reading and perfecter iudging of Truth and Errour, Sincerity and Corruption, Anti∣quity and Nouelty. To answer all the Romish bookes (lately come a∣broad in great numbers) punctually following their owne method, had beene an endlesse labour both to Writers and Readers: and therefore (for my part) I thought better to gather their principall motiues and reasons out of the chiefest of their bookes, and se∣parating them into seuerall Chapters, to giue them their full answer in their proper places; so answering many bookes in one. Among the store of all other Allegations, I haue most willingly and commonly re∣ferred the Reader to the late Writers of our owne Na∣tion; and that especially for these Reasons: First, for the excellency of our Authors, surpassing others, both in multiplicity of reading, profundity of Iudgement, and sincerity of affection, in deliuering the truth. As we finde in our learned Bishops, Iewel, Abbots, Bilson, Morton, Vsher, Downham, Hall, White, Andrew, &c. And our Doctors, Fulke, Ray∣nolds, Whitakers, Field, Favour, White, Pri∣deaux, &c. And other Diuines, Master Foxe, Perkins, Hooker, and many other: whose worthy labours, I doe heartily commend to the diligent rea∣ding
of our English men. The Romish affected, ve∣ry well know, that those English which haue fled from vs, and written on their side, haue in shew of wit and learning gone beyond, not onely all former, but all o∣ther of this Age: So that Bellarmine takes most out of them in the points whereof they haue written: as Sanders, Allen, Stapleton, &c. And therefore let no man contemne their owne Countreymens wits and learning: but acknowledge their worth, and make high account of their learned labours. Secondly, to shew that I bring no new thing of my selfe, but what is fully confirmed by our most appro∣ued writers: and that I also thankfully remember and honour them, Per quos profecerim. Thirdly, to shew the vnity of the Writers of our Church from the beginning of the Reformation to this time, contrary to the Romish slanders, which charge vs with continuall varying from our selues. Fourthly, to shew to our English men especially, where they may read in our learned English Writers more fully, of the points which I deliuer briefly; for their better instruction and satisfaction. Fiftly, because my selfe am aged, and not fit, by rea∣son of the encreasing weakenesse of my body and me∣mory, hereafter (if any flourishing busie wits list to oppose) to manage this cause, without much disparage∣ment to it, and to my selfe: I thought good to alleadge many worthy Diuines now liuing, that they might take vpon them the defence of their owne writings by me alleadged, or impose it vpon others more able in body then my selfe. Further, I confesse, that it much troubled me, that I could not make my booke shorter, without either ma∣king it too obscure, and vn-intelligible: or else cutting
off much matter fit to giue the fuller satisfaction. For by this length of it, (I doubt) it will become tedious to many, to reade it thorow, and cary away the matter in their memory. But I haue helped this Inconuenience as much as I could, (1) by distinguishing the whole matter into Chapters, euery Chapter being (as it were) a seuerall Treatise by it selfe, which may be read a∣lone; without reference to the rest, And (2) by divi∣ding the Chapters (if they be long) into Sections, (and sometimes also the Sections into Subsections) and Pa∣ragraphes (marked thus §) setting downe the summes of the Chapters and Sectons, in the beginning, and be∣fore them: for the quicker finding or refinding of the matters therein contained; and the easier view and carrying away of the whole forme of the discourse. The Stile in Treatises of this nature is not requi∣red to be Rhetoricall to please the eare, or as Sweet-meates to delight the Taste; but Scholasticall, Logi∣call, or Theological, that is, intelligible and significant to informe the vnderstanding, and conuict the consci∣ence. Which if it performe, It is all that I affect, or thou maiest in reason expect in such a worke. And now I leaue it to thy diligent reading and serious con∣sideration, wishing thee often to commend both the Writer and Readers to God in thy prayers; Thine for Christ Iesus, ANTHONY CADE.
A Table of the chiefe heads and matters, according to the seuerall Chapters, Sections, and Pages. The first Booke. The first Chapter. The first ordinary, and great obiection, of the Ro∣mish Churches Antiquity, and our English Churches Nouelty: Paragraph. § 1 ALleadged, odiously against the Prote∣stants, and gloriously for the Ro∣mans. Page. 1 Paragraph. § 2 Sincerely answered, as vaine: for that the Protestants firmely retaine the true ancient sauing faith. Page. 2 Paragraph. § 3 And onely weed out the errours and corruptions crept into the Church as superseminated tares in Gods field. Page. 3 Paragraph. § 4 As Hezekias and other good Princes did, very religi∣ously in their times. Page. 4 Paragraph. § 5 So that the English Church differs no otherwise from the Romish, then as a field well weeded and gouerned, from a field still ouergrowen with weeds: or as Naaman cleansed, from the same Naaman formerly leprous. Page. 4 Paragraph. § 6 And the Protestants are not separated from the good sound things found in the Roman Church: but from the Papacy, which is not to be accounted the Church, but a domineering faction, or disease in the Church. Page. 5 Paragraph. § 7 The ancient Martyrs suffered not for the Doctrines of this Papacy, but for the Doctrines which the Protestants bold. Page. 6
(Hereunto the Reader may adde, that which is written chap. 3. §. 8. pag. 27. that This newnesse of Religion is retorted vpon the Romish Church, which now holds many points new, neuer held by any Church in former times, some of them not in 600 yeeres, some not in 1000, some not in 12 hundred yeeres and more after Christ.) CHAP. 2. Of errors creeping into the Church. Paragraph. § 1 Any particular Church may in time receiue errors and corruptions. Page. 9 Paragraph. § 2 As did those of the Old Testament. Page. 10 Paragraph. § 3 And of the New Testament. Page. 11 Paragraph. § 4 For which we find many reasons in the Scriptures. Page. 12 Paragraph. § 5 The Roman Church is not excepted. Page. 14 Paragraph. § 6 Yea, the Roman Church is warned in Scripture to take heed lest is be cut off for its corruptions. Page. 14 Paragraph. § 7 And it hath been corrupted, De facto. Page. 15 Paragraph. § 8 Yea, Rome is confessed (by the very Romish Doctors) to be meant by the damnable mysticall Babylon. Page. 16 Paragraph. § 9 And that Rome must be the sent of Antichrist: and that towards the end of the world. Page. 17 Paragraph. § 10 And Rome is that City that must bee tainted with foule impieties, as well foregoing, as following Anti∣christ. All which their owne Romish Doctors con∣firme. Page. 19 CHAP. 3 Of the time when corruptions came into the Ro∣mish Church. Paragraph. § 1 A designation of the time when corruptions began in the Roman Church required. Page. 20 Paragraph. § 2 Often required heretofore, and often answered. Page. 20, 21 Paragraph. § 3 Many corruptions crept in secretly and insensibly: as in humane societies, diseases in the body, tares and weedes in the fields. Page. 21
Paragraph. § 4 The Romanists acknowledge many changes, whereof they cannot shew the beginnings. Page. 23, 24 Paragraph. § 5 Such things are best discerned, by their difference from the first pure doctrine. Page. 25, 26 Paragraph. § 6 The Romans cannot find the beginnings of our Do∣ctrines on this side the Scriptures. Page. 26 Paragraph. § 7 We can, & do, shew the beginnings of many of theirs. Page. 27 Paragraph. § 8 No Church in the world held the now-Romish Do∣ctrines, but onely that Church it selfe in those latter times. Page. 27 CHAP. 4. Of Corruptions in the Church of Rome, long before Luthers time, seene, written against, and Reformati∣on wished for them. Page. 30 Paragraph. § 1 An historicall narration, of the first age of the Church golden. Page. 31 Paragraph. § 2 But afterwards peeped vp some seeds of corruption, misliked of many in the East, South and West Churches. Page. 32 Paragraph. § 3 A foule matter, of three popes alleadging a Counter∣feit Canon of the Councell of Nice, for their iurisdicti∣on, which the whole Church of Africa withstood. Page. 34 Paragraph. § 4 Gregory the great wrote sharpely against the Titles which now the popes vse. Page. 35 Paragraph. § 5 Bishops of the East Church, and of France, Germa∣ny, and Britany, opposed the pope about Jmages. Coun∣cels against Councels. Page. 36 Paragraph. § 6 Many thought Antichrist was then borne. Constan∣tines donation, & the decretall Epistles then first seen. Page. 37 Paragraph. § 7 A deluge of wickednesse in the ninth and tenth Ages, as Bellarmine, Baronius, Genebrard, &c. record. Page. 38 Paragraph. § 8 After a thousand yeares, greater innudations of euils. The wicked pope Silvester 2 and Benedict 9. a childe of about 10 yeeres old. Then Cardinals arose. Page. 40 Paragraph. § 9 The Sultan subdueth many countries in the East; the Clergie are most wicked in the West. Letters from Hell
to the Clergy. Anti-popes, and Anti-Caesars. Rebelli∣on made Piety. Hildebrands Dictates, foundations of a new earthly-Church-Kingdome. Page. 42 Paragraph. § 10 The testimony of Fryer Onuphrius, that Hilde∣brand (that is Gregory 7.) was the first raiser of the popes princedome, about eleuen hundred yeeres after Christ. Many historians speake of his diuellishnesse. Page. 45 Paragraph. § 11 Campians historians reiected by his owne fellowes. Page. 47 Paragraph. § 12 Graue Diuines against Romish corruptions, Ber∣nard, Sarisburiensis, Grosthead, Occam, Cesenas, Clemangis, Gerson, Cameracensis, Valla, &c. Page. 49 Paragraph. § 13 These and many others, wrote not onely against Cor∣ruptions of manners, but of doctrine also. Schoolmens philosophicall diuinity, corrupted pure doctrine. Do∣ctrine framed to maintaine wealth and greatnesse. Page. 53 Paragraph. § 14 Particular doctrines, wherein learned men differed from the popes faction. Page. 55 Paragraph. § 15 Oxford alone afforded many learned men opposing Romish corruptions. Page. 58 Paragraph. § 16 Reformation was sought for, and promised by some popes, as very needfull; but could not finally be attained. The Scriptures disgraced: Traditions vphold Romish doctrine. Page. 65 CHAP. 5. A note of the chiefe points of Christian doctrine, wherein the Protestants and Romanists fully agree, shewing also the Romish additions, whereunto the Protestants cannot agree, as being not ancient, not true, or not needfull, but very corrupt. Page. 70 Paragraph. § 1 Of one God in substance, and three persons: 2 Canoni∣call Scriptures. Page. 70, 71 Paragraph. § 3 Of the originall Hebrew, and Greeke authenticke. 4 Of the word written, being the sure ground of faith 5 Of Traditions. 6 The three Creedes. Page. 74, 76 Paragraph. § 7 Of Gods worship in Spirit and Truth. Page. 77 Paragraph. § 8 Of prayer in a knowen tongue, 9 And to God alone. 77 10 Of Christ our Mediator. 11 Of Saints praying
for vs. 12 Of honour due to Saints departed. Page. 78 Paragraph. 13 Of Iustification by Christs merits. Page. 79 Paragraph. 14 Of mans inherent righteousnes & sanctification. Page. 79 Paragraph. 15 Of contrition, confession, satisfaction, and vivifica∣tion, &c. Page. 79 Paragraph. 16 Of such good workes as God hath prescribed. Page. 81 Paragraph. 17 Of freewill. Page. 81 Paragraph. 18 That workes done by grace, please God, and are re∣warded of him. Page. 82 Paragraph. 19 Of two Sacraments, seales and conduits of iustifying grace. Page. 82 Paragraph. 20 That to the well prepared Receiuers, God giues as well the iustifying and sanctifying grace, as the outward elements. Page. 82 Paragraph. 21 That the worthy Communicant really partaketh Christs Body and Blood. Page. 82 Paragraph. 22 Of heauen for the blessed, hell for the damned. Page. 83 Paragraph. 23 Of Christs satisfaction for our sinnes. Page. 83 Paragraph. 24 That we ought to pray for al the members of Christs militant Church vpon earth. Page. 83 Paragraph. § 2 The Protestants doctrine in generall iustified by two Cardinals, Contarene and Campeggio, and our Litur∣gy by Pope Pius 4. Page. 83 Paragraph. § 3 But the Popes reach further at an earthy Church king∣dome prooued. Page. 85 Paragraph. § 4 And they challenge a supremacy ouer all Christians and Churches in the world. Page. 89 Paragraph. § 5 More specially ouer the Clergy, exempting them from being subiects to Princes, either for bodily punishments or goods. Page. 90 Paragraph. § 6 Yea, a supremacy ouer all Christian Princes and their states, to depose, dispose, and transpose them: and to ab∣solue subiects from their Allegeance, to rebell, &c. hence comes treasons, &c. Page. 92 Paragraph. § 7 To dissolue bonds, oathes and leagues. Page. 95 Paragraph. § 8 To giue dispensations, to contract matrimony in degrees by Gods lawes forbidden & to dissolue lawful matrim. Page. 96
Paragraph. § 9 And other dispensations and exemptions from lawes. Page. 99 CHAP. 6. Paragraph. Of policies to maintaine the Popes Princedome and wealth. Page. 102 Paragraph. § 1 Depriuing men of the light of the Scriptures. Page. 102 Paragraph. § 2 And of ordinary orderly preachings, in stead whereof the Pope set vp ambulatory preachers (Monkes and Fri∣ers) to preach what was good for his state, without con∣troule of Church-Ministers, Officers, or Bishops. Page. 103 Paragraph. § 3 Schoolemens too-much subtilty and philosophy filled mens heads, darkned and corrupted wholesome Theology. Page. 109 Paragraph. § 4 Jesuites and their originall (after Luthers time) noted, their Seminaries, emissions, faculties, insinuations, and most politicke imployments. Page. 110 Paragraph. § 5 Cardinals (a most powerfull and politicke inuention.) Page. 114 Paragraph. § 6 Prouision for men and women of all sorts, high and low, by Monasteries, to susteine and satisfie all humours. Page. 118 Paragraph. § 7 Auricular confession, discouering many secrets, and finding humours fit for all imployments, &c. Page. 120 Paragraph. § 8 Her policies to get wealth. Page. 121 Paragraph. § 9 Purgatory a rich thing. Page. 122 Paragraph. § 10 So are indulgences or pardons. Page. 122 Paragraph. § 11 And Iubiles. Page. 123 Paragraph. § 12 Corruptions of Doctrine, touching merits and Iustifi∣cation, &c. Page. 125 Paragraph. § 13 Things hallowed by the pope. Page. 126 Paragraph. § 14 Extraordinary exactions, most grieuous to Nations, most rich to the pope. Page. 126
The second Booke. Chap. 1. THe first Chapter is a discourse of the visibility of the Church, and fully answereth that common question of the Romists, where was the Prote∣stants Church before Luthers time? This Chapter is large, and for better satisfaction and perspicuity, is diui∣ded into foure sections. The first section sheweth how visible the true Church ought to be. Page. 136 The second, sheweth, that the Protestants Church hath euer∣more been so visible as the true Church ought to be. For it was the same in all necessary doctrine, first with the Primitiue Church, and afterwards also with the Greeke and Easterne Churches. 149 The third section sheweth, the Waldenses were of the same Religion which the Protestants maintaine; and deliue∣reth a sufficient historicall discourse of the Waldenses. 155 The fourth section sheweth, that our Church and the Church of Rome was all one in substance till Luthers time. For euen till then the Church of Rome continued to bee the true Church of God, excepting the Popacy, and the main∣tainers thereof, which was rather a sore or a faction in the Church, then any true or sound part thereof. 195 Chap. 1. These principall Sections are also subdiuided into Subsections, and those into smaller Paragraphes, noted thus. §. Sect. 1. subsect. 1. So the first Section (which sheweth, How visible the true Church ought to be) hath two Subsections. The first Subsection. Paragraph. § 1 Sheweth an obiected description of the excellency of the
Church, and a necessity of the perpetuall succession and vi∣sibility thereof. Page. 136 Paragraph. § 2 That for a thousand yeares and more, our Church was all one with the Roman, notwithstanding some growing corrutions. Page. 138 Paragraph. § 3 After that coruptions grew intollerable in the Roman Church, yet many msliked them, and held the truth. Page. 138 Paragraph. § 4 The whole Catholicke Church can neuer be visible to men at once, but parts of it may and must. Page. 139 Paragraph. § 5 The promises of purity and eternall life doe not belong to all the Called, but to the Few chosen; whose true faith to men is invisible, though their persons and profession be visible. Page. 140 Paragraph. § 6 And so much Bellarmine and many other Romanists yeeld. Page. 141 Subsect. 2 The second subsection. 143 Paragraph. § 1 Some promises of God concerne the outward spreading of the Church, and some the inward Graces. Page. 143 Paragraph. § 2 The outward spreading, and glorious visibility, is not at all times alike. Page. 144 Paragraph. § 3 So Saint Ambrose, and Saint Austen teach, by compa∣ring the Church to the Moone. Page. 145 Paragraph. § 4 Many Fathers and Romish Doctors say, that in the time of Antichrist, the Church will be obscure, and hard∣ly visible. Page. 145 Paragraph. § 5 Which (say Valentinianus, and many Fathers) was fulfilled in the Arrians time. Page. 146 Paragraph. § 6 The Iesuite Valentinianus grants as much invisbili∣ty of the Church, as the Protestants desire. Page. 147 Paragraph. § 7 Obseruations out of his grant. Page. 148 Chap. 1. Sect. 2. subsect. 1 The second section (shewing, that the Protestant Church hath euermore been so visible, as the Church of Christ ought to be) hath two subsections.
Paragraph. The first subsection (concerning the first times.) Page. 149 Paragraph. § 1 Sheweth that the Protestants labour sincerely to teach the same doctrine which the Scriptures and the Fathers taught. Page. 149 Paragraph. § 2 As appeares by Irenaeus, Tertullian, and the Creeds. Page. 150 Paragraph. § 3 But the Romists cannot alleadge the Fathers for their new doctrines; much lesse the Scriptures. Page. 151 Paragraph. Subsect. 2. The second subsection (concerning the latter times.) Page. 152 Paragraph. § 1 Propounding (1) the Easterne and Greeke Churches: (2) Waldenses, &c. and (3) the Roman Church it selfe, misliking and groaning vnder the tyranny of the Papacy, and desiring reformation. Page. 152 Paragraph. § 2 The Greeke Church condemned by the Romish, as here∣ticall. Page. 153 Paragraph. § 3 Is cleared by Scotus, Lombard, Aquinas, and others. Page. 153 Chap. 1. Sect 3. The third section (shewing that the Waldenses were of the Protestant Religion) hath foure subsections. The first of their doctrine pag. 155. The second, of their great numbers, and visibility, pag. 166. The third of their large spreading into all Countries, pag. 177, the fourth of their continuance vntill Luthers time and after. pag 181. Subsect. 1. The first Subsection. Paragraph. § 1 Of the Waldenses. Page. 155 Paragraph. § 2 Their diuers names, but all of one Religion. Page. 155 Paragraph. § 3 To wit, of the Protestant Religion, as say Aeneas Syl∣uius, Du Brauius, Poplinerius, Cocleus, Gretse∣rus, Eckius, &c. Page. 156 Paragraph. § 4 Many bad opinins, badly and falsly imputed to thm. Page. 158
Paragraph. § 5 Nine Articles different from the Protestants, ascri∣bed vnto them by Parsons the Iesuite, but cleared by au∣thenticke Authors. Page. 160 The second subsection. Paragraph. § 1 Of the great number of the Waldenses. Page. 166 Paragraph. § 2 Their disputations with the Romish Doctors. Page. 168 Paragraph. § 3 Mighty warres against them, as against the Popes most potent enemies. The popes euery way laboured to subdue them, by continuall cursings, warres, and Inquisitions by Fryars new sprung vp, about 12 hundred yeeres after Christ: threescore thousand put to the sword at once. Page. 169 Paragraph. § 4 Carcasson, a great and strong City, taken by composi∣tion, and made the head City of the warre: and the fa∣mous Simon Montfort made Generall. Page. 171 Paragraph. § 5 6 and 7 New Armies against the Waldenses gathe∣red out of all Christendome, by the popes Croysadoes, par∣doning sinnes, and giuing saluation to all that would fight against them (as before § 3. pag. 170.) Tolous taken. The King of Aragon (in ayde of the Waldenses) inter∣cepted by ambush, and slaine. Page. 172 Paragraph. § 8 Tolous recouered by the Waldenses. Simon slaine. The King of France continueth the Warres, sends his owne sonne (crossed) with a great Army: and diuers other Armies after: but to little purpose. For the Wal∣denses (otherwise called the Albigenses) prospered, and recouered Carcasson (fourteene yeeres after the losse of of it) and spred exceedingly in many Countries. Page. 174 Paragraph. § 9 The Earle of Tolous submits to the Pope: but fin∣ding himselfe deceiued betwixt the pope and his Legate, he fortifies Auignon. The King of France besieged it, sware neuer to depart, till he had taken it, but finally (af∣ter great losses) died mad. The Legate vnable by force, gets it by fraud and periury. Page. 175 Paragraph. § 10 Tolous ouerthrowes the French Armies. The Pope and French King offers him peace. The great warres
cease. Councels are held to root out the Albigenses. Page. 176 Paragraph. § 11 Ignorance (not onely of Scriptures, but) of Histories makes men loue the Pope. Page. 177 Subsect. 3. The third subsection. Paragraph. Sheweth how the Waldenses were spread into all Coun∣tries: namely, (for example) Spaine, England, Scot∣land, Jtaly, Germany, Bohemia, Saxony, Pomerania, Po∣lonia, Livnia, Lituania, Digonicia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Dalmatia, Constantinople, Sclauonia, Sarmatia, Phila∣delphia. In all parts of France: In Italy also they had Churches, in Lombardy, Millan, Romagnia, Vi∣cence, Florence, val Spoletine, &c. Page. 177 Subsect. 4. The fourth subsection. Paragraph. § 1 The Waldenses continued aboue 400 yeeres, vntill Luthers time and after. Page. 181 Paragraph. § 2 Jn England by meanes of Wicliffe. Page. 182 Paragraph. § 3 Wicliffes Doctrine, and many followers. Oxford Diuines. Page. 182 Paragraph. § 4 5 6 and 7. The story of Iohn Hus, Ierom of Prage, and Bohemian affaires. Page. 189 Paragraph. § 8 and 9 The continuance of the Waldenses after Lu∣thers time. Luther wrote a Preface to one of their bookes commending it. Letters passed betwixt them and Oe∣colampadius, Bucer, Calvine, &c. Page. 192 Chap. 1. Sect. 4. The fourth Section. Paragraph. § 1 Shewing, that the Church of Rome, (excepting the Papacy, and the maintainers thereof) continued to be the true Church of God, and the same with ours, vntill Lu∣thers time: proued by many Protestant Diuines, Lu∣ther, Caluin, Beza, Morney, Melanchthon Bucer, Ma∣ster Deering, Master Richard Hooker, Bishop Vsher, Bishop Carlton, Bishop White, Doctor Field, &c. Page. 195 Paragraph. § 2 Their reasons. Paragraph. § 3 But now the state of that Church is much altered, since
the new light in Luthers time, fully discouering and pub∣lishing the corruptions thereof, and since their obstinate defending their corruptions, and imposing them as Defi∣de. Page. 200 Paragraph. § 4 Especially since the great alteration and addition of faith made by the Councell of Trent. Page. 202 CHAP. 2. Paragraph. Answering the vaine alleadging of some words and cu∣stomes: and the corrupt alleadging of the Fathers words against the Protestants. Page. 205 Paragraph. § 1 Obiection. Non (alleadged in the former Chapter) agreed with the Protestants in all things: Ergo, are not of their Church or Religion. Page. 206 Paragraph. § 2 Answered. It is no consequent. For so also, euery one of them differed from the present Romish Religion, and yet the Romish account them theirs. Protestants haue iustly abstained from some words and phrazes of some Fathers. Page. 206 Paragraph. § 3 And also haue left off some ceremonies & customs. Page. 209 Paragraph. § 4 As the Church of Rome hath left many (here menti∣oned) knowne to be ancient, and thought to be Apostoli∣call. Page. 210 Paragraph. § 5 Which confutes the vanity of W.G. his booke; & shewes his owne alleadged authors by his owne argument, to bee none of his Church and Religion. Page. 214 Paragraph. § 6 By the same argument, many Fathers (for example, Athanasius, Ierom, Gelasius, Gregory, Chrysostome, Augustine) are plentifully proued to be against the pre∣sent Church and Religion of Rome. Page. 216 Paragraph. § 7 Foure seuerall wayes (at the least) the Romish make shew of the Fathers to be for them: very deceitfully. The first, by alleadging counterfeit bookes, falsly bearing the Fathers names. Many examples hereof. Page. 223 Paragraph. § 8 The second, by corrupting the bookes which the Fa∣thers wrote, putting words in, or out, and altering the text (and so printing them new) making them speake now contrary to their meaning. Examples hereof. Page. 228
Paragraph. § 9 The third by blinding or perverting the sense of the Fathers sentences, by glozes and interpretations. In∣stances. Page. 232 Paragraph. § 10 The fourth by citing the Fathers to proue that which is not in question. Examples thereof. Page. 234 CHAP. 3. Paragraph. Of the differences of Fathers and Protestants, and of their contentions. Page. 236 Paragraph. § 1 Many Fathers are confessed (by all sides) to haue held some erronious opinions, which none are bound to receiue: and yet in the substance of Religion, were good Catholick Christians, and our Predecessors. Page. 236 Paragraph. § 2 Many differences also are noted among Romish Do∣ctors, which yet hinder them not from being all accoun∣ted Catholicks. Page. 243 Paragraph. § 3 The differences among Protestants are nothing so great or many, as those afore noted of the Fathers, and of the Romish; the especiall one, about the manner how Christ is present in the blessed Sacrament, is much lesse then it seemeth. Page. 248 Paragraph. § 4 The popes vnwillingnesse to reforme manifest abuses by the way of generall Councels, was the cause of all diffe∣rences in Reformed Churches: when each seuerall state was compelled to reforme a part, without sufficient gene∣rall consultations with other Nations. Page. 250 Paragraph. § 5 The Protestants contentions for Gods cause, (as they take it) are nothing so hote or troublesome, is the conten∣tions of many ancient holy Fathers, haue beene about smaller matters. View the examples. Page. 253 CHAP. 4. Paragraph. Of the rule to iudge the soundnesse and purity of all Christians, and Churches by. Page. 261 This Chapter hath foure sections Page. 261 Paragraph. The first section: of the rule vsed in the Primitiue Church. Page. 261
Paragraph. The second; of the Rule enlarged and approued in this Age. Page. 268 Paragraph. The third; of obiections arising from the former discourses, and their answeres. Page. 280 Paragraph. The fourth; of the necessity of preaching still to them that hold this rule. Page. 288 The first section. Paragraph. § 1 The rule in generall. Page. 261 Paragraph. § 2 Opened by distinctions of the foundation of Religion. Page. 262 Paragraph. § 3 A necessity of a short rule drawne out of the Scrip∣tures. Page. 262 Paragraph. § 4 This rule is described by S. Paul. Page. 263 Paragraph. § 5 The practise of it by the Apostles, who deliuered the most necessary fundamentall points to the Iewes, and then baptized them. Page. 265 Paragraph. § 6 The like practise vsed by the following Primitiue Church to their Catechumeni before Baptisme. Page. 266 The second section. Paragraph. § 1 The rule enlarged, and approued in this Age. Page. 268 Paragraph. § 2 By Azorius out of the Schoole-Diuines, in 14 Arti∣cles. Page. 269 Paragraph. § 3 Some obseruations and censures of those 14 Articles. Page. 272 Paragraph. § 4 The rule set downe by Bellarmine, more briefely. Page. 273 Paragraph. § 5 By Doctor Field farre more sufficiently in 6 Articles, with his iudgement of the deductions therefrom, euident or obscure. Page. 274 Paragraph. § 6 Bishop Vshers distinction of superstructions vpon the foundation. Page. 277 Paragraph. § 7 Consequents of this doctrine. Page. 278 The third section. Paragraph. § 1 Obiection. If holding the foundation will serue, then wee may easily obtaine saluation in the Church of Rome. Page. 280 Paragraph. § 2 Answer. The Church of Rome holds many things, which by consequent destroyes the foundation, by (the
most moderate) Master Hookers iudgement. Page. 281 Paragraph. § 3 Obiection. This crosseth what was said before: That many before Luthers time, might be saued in the Roman Church. Answ. No, for they liued in those errours of ignorance, not obstinacy, and not knowing any dangerous consequence of them. Page. 282 Paragraph. § 4 Such men by particular repentance of sinnes knowne, and generall repentance of vnknowne, might by Gods mercy be saued. Page. 284 Paragraph. § 5 Obseruations hereof. Page. 285 Paragraph. § 6 Other learned Protestants ioyne in opinion with Ma∣ster Hooker. Page. 286 The fourth section. Paragraph. § 1 There is a necessity, or great profit of preaching, euen to them that are well grounded in all necessary principles. Page. 288 Paragraph. § 2 As Israel needed all helpes after the giuing of the Law: and all were too little. Page. 289 Paragraph. § 3 The profits of preaching in generall. Page. 290 Paragraph. § 4 Some particulars, for continuall spirituall food, cordiall medicine and comfort, memory, armour, &c. Page. 290 Paragraph. § 5 The continuall need thereof was found in all Churches, planted euen by the Apostles, and in their times. Page. 292 CHAP. 4. Paragraph. Of the succession of the Protestants Bishops and Mini∣sters, from the Apostles. Page. 296 Paragraph. Section 1. The necessity thereof, vrged, without which there can be no Church. Page. 296 Paragraph. 2 This succession is clamourously denyed to Protestants. Page. 299 Paragraph. 3 But manifestly proued, and the slanders confuted. Page. 300 Paragraph. 4 Particularly in Cranmer, our first Archbishop. Page. 302 Paragraph. 5 In other Bishops of King Henry 8 his time. Page. 304 Paragraph. 6 And of King Edward 6. and of Queene Maries time. Page. 306 Paragraph. 7 And of Queene Elizabeths time. Page. 306
Paragraph. 8 The false reports whereof doe alienate many from the Reformed Religion. Page. 309 Paragraph. 9 A proofe of the sufficient ordination of Ministers in forraigne Reformed Churches. Page. 310 Paragraph. 10 Which is further confirmed by the doctrine and practise of the Romish. Page. 312 CHAP. 6. Paragraph. Of the Popes supremacy, challenged ouer the whole Church. page 1 Paragraph. § 1 The necessity thereof vrged, as the maine pillar of Re∣ligion. Page. 1 Paragraph. § 2 The matter and method of the Answer propounded. Page. 4 Paragraph. § 3 The ancient Church yeelded to Rome (as the greatest and most honourable City of the world, and seat of the Empire) to haue the dignity of one of the fiue Patri∣arcks. Page. 5 Paragraph. § 4 And among the Patriarkes, sometime the first or chie∣fest place. Page. 6 Paragraph. § 5 Which dignity the ambition and couetousnesse of follow∣ing popes haue much impaired. Page. 8 Paragraph. § 6 And haue challenged that dignity (which was ancient∣ly yeelded vnto their predecessors for their sanctity, and for politicke reasons) and much more also, by authority of  the Scriptures. But Bellarmine gathering the pith of all learned writers, can finde no strengh in them by any Scriptures to maine the Papacy: as in their chiefest places, Matth. 16.18. Page. 11 Paragraph. § 7 And Iohn 21.15 &c. Page. 16 Paragraph. § 8 Obserue the Romish strange extractions out of the words, Feed my Sheep. Page. 18 Paragraph. § 9 And other learned-foolish allegations of other Scrip∣tures. Page. 20 Paragraph. § 10 The Scripture against the supremacy of Peter. Page. 23 Paragraph. § 11 And the fathers are vrged for it vainely, beyond their meaning. Page. 24 Paragraph. § 12 The Fathers are manifestly against it. Page. 29
Paragraph. § 13 Saint-Peters prerogatiues were personall, and descen∣ded  not to his successors. Page. 32 Paragraph. § 14 The conclusion: collecting the parts of this Chapter briefly, and Iustifying the Protestants. Page. 35 CHAP. 7. Of the Popes infallible Iudgement in guiding the Church by true Doctrine. Paragraph. § 1 Jt cannot be prooued by Scriptures, or Fathers, or by the Analogie to the chiefe Priests of the Old Testa∣ment. Page. 40 Paragraph. § 2 Neither is such infallibility now necessary in any man. Page. 44 Paragraph. § 3 But if in any man, most improbably in the Popes, wher∣of some haue been children, and many most wicked men, and monsters of men. Page. 45 Paragraph. § 4 And many Popes haue erred (De facto) in iudgment. Page. 50 Paragraph. § 5 Which all the Romists distinctions, and euasions can∣not auoyd. Page. 51 Paragraph. § 6 The manifold and manifest iudgement of Antiquity ouerthrowes this supposed infallibility. Page. 56 Paragraph. For I. The ancients euer accounted the Popes fallible. Page. 56 Paragraph. II. They neuer in their writings mentioned their infalli∣bility. Page. 56 Paragraph. III. But reiected often both their Jurisdiction and Iudg∣ment. Page. 57 Paragraph. IIII. If infallible iudgement in the pope had beene esta∣blished and beleeued, the Fathers studies and commenta∣ries vpon the Scriptures had been needlesse. Page. 58 Paragraph. V. And Councels had beene called to no purpose. Page. 58 CHAP. 8. Of the good which the Popes supremacy might doe to the Church and States by vniting Christian Princes among themselues, and against the Turke. Paragraph. § 1 This is vrged. Page. 60 Paragraph. § 2 But answered, that policies agreeable to Gods word, and the Primitiue Church onely are sufficient, and bles∣sed by God. Page. 61
Paragraph. § 3 But this policy (binding men to vnity vnder some one head) might be set vp by any sect, to maintaine any er∣rors or wickednesse. Page. 62 Paragraph. § 4 And experience hath proued it very vnprofitable, and vntollerable, to all Churches and states (sauing to the Popes owne state, wealth, and greatnesse.) Page. 63 Paragraph. § 5 As is shewed by the miserable troubles in Christen∣dome, wrought by Hildebrand; who first set vp the Popes Princedome (as Onuphrius saith) about eleuen hundred yeeres after Christ. Page. 64 Paragraph. § 6 And by the voyages against the Turke, which finally proued profitable to the Pope, not to Christian Princes. Page. 68 Paragraph. § 7 As appeareth by the Stories of Pope Gregory 9. and the Emperour Fredericke 2. Page. 69 Paragraph. § 8 And many other most wicked Popes, Page. 74 Paragraph. § 9 The Emperour Phocas erred much in gouernment, in making the Pope so great, so farre from him. For Popes shortly after proued Masters of mis-rule, ejecting the Emperours out of Italy. Page. 76 Paragraph. § 10 Their turbulent proceeding to dethrone Princes. Page. 78 Paragraph. § 11 Their troubles wrought in England, in King Henry the first his time, by Anselm Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry: In King Henrie the 2 his time, by Becker: In King Iohns time, by Pope Innocent. Page. 80 Paragraph. § 12 In these later times, of Queene Elizabeth by the Bull of Pope Pius Quintus, deposing her: and by erecting at Rome and Rhemes, Seminaries, that is Schooles to breed Traitors, and draw her subiects to disobedience, treasons, and rebellions. Page. 89 Paragraph. A briefe enumeration of some treasons in Queene Eliza∣beths time. The Rebellion in the North. Page 91 And other petty conspiracies Page 92 Sanders. Page 93 Of Ormonds brethren. Page 92 Of Stukely. Page 93 Someruile. Page 94
Motiues to the Ladies of Ho∣nour. Page 94 Mendoza. Page 94 Doctor Parry. Page 95 Sauage. Page 96 Aubespineus. Page 96 The Spanish Armado. Page 97 Squire. Page 99 In the time of King Iames, Watson Clark & others. Page 102 Throgmorton. Page 94 Creighton the Iesuite. Page 95 Percy. Page 96 Ballard. Page 96 Stanly and Yorke. Page 97 Lopez. Page 99 Tyrone. Page 100 The Powder Treason. Page 102 Paragraph. § 13 Some obseruations out of these. A good Christian ab∣horreth these Treasons, and therefore cannot like of that doctrine that teacheth them. Page. 106 Paragraph. § 14 Therefore euery good man is forced (by reason) to re∣nounce to be an absolute Papist: and therefore cannot thinke the doctrines grounded onely vpon the Popes au∣thority without Scripture to be necessary: and conse∣quently must acknowledge that it is not necessary to bee a Roman-Catholicke. Page. 108 Paragraph. The conclusion, with a briefe Recapitulation of the whole precedent conference. Page. 110
Friendly Reader, before thou readest these bookes, amend with thy pen, these grosser faults which (most of them) pervert the sense. PAge 1. In the first line of the Text, for notice read motiue. p. 18. l. 29. r. vnder the persecuting Emp. p. 33. 4. then they gaue to other holy Bishops. p. 45. 26. Of all the Bishops. ib lin. 27. first that (trusting p. 76. mag. l. . x. Boniface 8. liued anno 1300 p. 81. 6. and reciting. ib. lin 8 plgrimages. p. 85. 11. is insufficient to set vp. p. 86. 14. there be not more care. p 89. 17. but were built. p. 98. 1. for the Pope ment. p. 104. 14. and make of Christs miltant Church a Church trumphant vpon earth. p. 109. lin. vlt. maried. p. 112. 25. hath worne a girdle. p 16. 26. to the last times. p. 152. 28. we propose p. 208. 17. per sacramentum memoriae celebratur p. 244. 34. for Stoiks read Scotsts. p. 246. 31. fort is no indignity p. 264. 30. root, author. p. 126. 9. must be diminished. p. 138. . latent invisible Church. p. 139. 25. it is not visible. p. 274. 34. full of ighte. 304 marg. ad lin. 22. ordinator hareticus verè. In the second Alphabet. CC. p. 33. lin. 4. put cut not. p. 46. marg. lin. 26. Baronius anno 963. n. 17. p. 54. marg. l 25. Anno a Christs nat. 1033, a Christs pass 1000. Other faults there are scarce veniall which deserue correction. Page 7. lin. 27. read warres and dissentions. p. 13. 13. Simon Magnus among them. p. 14. 9. for sath, read truth. p. 20. 8. from the first pure d. p. 31. 8. Church king∣dome ib. lin. 14. Cameracensis, ib. l. vlt. large authors. p. 37. 2. Infallibitily. p. 38. 13. decretal. ib. l. 18. infamis. ib. l. 19. choked. ib. l. 25. saith, this. p. 40. 17. the ancient vitility. p. 42. 14. Calosyria ib. l. 23. schism 1. ib. l. 30. in marg. Greg. 7 & libro. p. 43. 12. Releherspergensis. p. 6. l. 12. and 18. Trithemius. ib. l. 30. Schafnaburgensis. p. 48 9. saith your Bish. linea antepenult. Valentianus. p. 50. 18. into his mouth. p. 51. l. vlt. foule and manifest. p. 52. lin. anteen. Patricius. p. 51. 14. Diuinity. p. 55. marg. See these allead∣ged in my third booke. p. 57. 14. this ccumgestation. p. 60 8. Gualter Mapes. p. 61. 24. Iohn Bathor. p. 63. 15. Sod dominatur p. 64 2. Lorell p 80. 26. an beauti∣fying all. p 87. 16. abjuration p. 90 for [Chap. 5.] put [§ 5.] p. 91. 2. robbers. ib. l. . acknowledged. p 93 4. to the Ppe. To giue p. 96. put ut marg. Annal. Eliza∣bethae. Camden Apparat. pag. 2. and place it pag. 97. against Pope Iulus the 2. &c. p. 99. 1. searching. p. 101. 19. frustrated. p. 115. 27. put out [this dignity is not new, (sait Bellarmine, b.) for it 500 yeeres old: ut surely that is new that came not in till after twise 500 yeeres, and more] and place those words ater the note— aftr the words Sect. 3. p. 128. 29 furnished. p. 140. marg. Ecclesie promtte. p. 143. and of∣ten elsewhere is printed Valentinianus for Valentianus. p. 147. 25. ha h God vttterly forsaken. p. 153. 35 read 370 yeeres after Christ p. 155. 21. Eckius. p. 161. 21. other vices. p. 196. 8. yet we doe not thinke p. 210. 2. & oft the formost deuouring p 211. 32. Athanasius p. 220. 34 whereon. p. 26. 11. suppositions p. 234. 12. a whole booke p. 243. 25. members all of p. 2 17. 11. being voided. ib lin. 16. not the Churches opi∣nion p 209. marg. ad. li. 18 read 2 Cor. 5.. & 6. 3. Eph. 4. 12. col. 4. 17.  tim. 1. 12. 2 tim. 4. 5. p. 103. 35. pontificatus nostri decimo. p. 308 25. in the more p 311. marg.  Armachanus lib. 11. in q. Armeniorum c. p. 7. Numbers of pages are sometimes misprinted; and Sections, which may be amended by this generall I able. In the second Alaphabet. pag. 65. adde to the marginall notes, Avenein. Anal. ior. lib. 5 See Tortura Torti pag. 264. p 71. lin. penul wasted it with fire. Other smaller spt in letters or points, I note not; they will trouble the Reader lesse in ading, then amending. The most are amended.
The Preface, or Jntroduction, containing 1 a briefe descrip∣tion of the parties conferring in this Dialogue. 2 The purpose and profit of the conference touched: 3 The manner of it intended, in all humility and meekenesse of spirit: 4 the matter, solidity of Arguments and alle∣gations out of the best Authors of both sides. Roman-Catholicke. 1 ALthough in mine owne iudgement, I am sufficiently resolued of the ve∣rity and sanctity of the Roman-Ca∣tholicke-Religion; and am loath to be either vnsettled or disquieted a∣gaine by any further conference: yet to giue satisfaction to my tryed honest and good friends,Such should be the quali∣ties of a good Minister as may win the loue of the Aduersarie. who vrge me once againe to conferre with a graue learned Minister hereby; I am content to goe to the man. And the rather, because (besides his lear∣ning) I know him to be very honest, iust, louing, and of a meeke spirit; And here he comes. Saue ye Sir. Protestant Minister. Master Candidus, I haue much longed to meet you. The Lord now giue a blessing to our meeting. I haue heard, with no small griefe of heart, by some of your good friends, that you are fallen into mislike of our Church of England, and into liking of the present Religion of Rome. Now in tender care of your saluation, I desire to confer with you thereabout, to try if by Gods gracious blessing I may be a meanes to resolue and settle you in the truth. Rom. Sir, I would haue you to thinke, that I haue a great care of my saluation, and in simplicity of my heart, and tendernesse of conscience, and not for any other by respect, I haue sought the true way to saluation, and doubt not but I haue found it. And therein I am so well settled, that you may spare your labour. Prot. I doubt not, but in the simplicity of your heart, and desire of the truth, you haue laboured in this
waighty matter. For I haue obserued you alwayes to be of an honest disposition, sober, temperate, aduised & of discreet conuersation: for which faire carriage of life you haue gained the surname of Candidus.Good natures mis-led are much to bee pittied. And I haue also found you zealous of Gods honour. So farre as your knowledge did lead you. The more it grieueth me, that so honest a nature should be abused & mis-led  by bad Teachers. But I pray you consider that Saint Paul himselfe was blamelesse in life, deuout and zealous in his Religion, when it was erronious (as you are now) and thought his courses maruellous godly, and much tending to Gods glory. He was instructed by Gama∣liel,Act. 2.3. Phil. 3.6. a learned Doctor, according to the perfect manner of the Law of the Fathers (as was then thought) & was zealous towards God, and touching the righteousnesse of the Law, blamelesse: and of very zeale persecuted the true Church of God: and thought he was bound in conscience to doe many things contrary to the name of Iesus.A & s 26.9. So that men may thinke, they are in the holy way of truth, and may be deuout and zealous there∣in, and yet be farre wrong. As we hold those of the Ro∣mish Religion to be at this day, who persecute the Re∣formed Churches of Christ which professe to hold the doctrine of the holy Scripture entire, without admit∣ting any other grounds of Religion. Remember what our blessed Sauiour foretold,Iohn 16.2. John 16.2. Ʋenit hora, vt omnis qui interficit vos, arbitretur obsequium se praestare Deo. The time commeth that whosoeuer killeth you, will thinke he doth God seruice. This was fulfilled in part, quickly. As in Acts 13.50. The Iewes stirred vp deuout and honourable-women,Acts 13.50. and the chiefe men of the City, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas and expelled them out of their coasts. So that people that are deuout and zealous in their Religi∣on yet may be in the wrong: and had need well to ex∣amine their groundes. Rom These examples may as well be applied to the Protestants, as to the Catholiks.
Prot. You apply them to the Protestants: wee to your new Catholiks. Let the vnpartiall world Iudge, who are the persecutors, and who are the persecuted. But hereby you may see, mortall men must not be too hasti∣ly resolued, but first thorowly examine the truth of their groundes, wherevpon they build their Faith. Lest they run amisse, as Saul did, though taught by Ga∣maliel; and as the deuout honorable-women, and chiefe men of the City did, being stirred vp by the Iewes. Rom. But when a man is well resolued vpon good grounds: why should hee disquiet himselfe, and call his Faith into question againe? Prot. The question is whether his grounds be good or no. Saint Paul before his conuersion, and these honourable-women thought as well of their grounds, as you doe of yours: and yet were deceiued in them. But beside this, there is another reason, why you should thorowly know the strength of your grounds, to wit for the winning, satisfying, & confirming of others. To which end S. Peter saith (1 Pet. 3.15.) Be alwayes ready to giue satisfaction to euery one that asketh you a rea¦son of the hope that is in you with meeknes and feare. So then both for your own fuller resolutiō in the truth, and for the satisfaction of me or any other, I pray you let vs seriously conferre of these waighty matters. Rom. With all my heart. So it be done in that manner  which Saint Peter there prescribeth: with meeknesse, feare, and a good conscience. For rough, rude, biting, and railing speaches, argue rather a blinded heart, or a proud, scornfull, and vnmortified man, then one endued with Gods grace, loue and patience, such as is fit to winne others with all long suffring and do∣ctrine. 2 Tim. 2.24.25. and 4.2. 1 Tim. 5.1.2. and 3.3. Prot. Sir wee pray with vnderstanding in our English Letany, from all blindnesse of heart, from pride, vainglory, and hipocrisie, from enuy, hatred, and malice, and all vncharitablenes: good Lord deliuer vs.
Rom. It is a good prayer. I would it were well liked and practised of you all. Prot. You shall finde me not onely patient, but exceeding pitifull, and full of commiseration to you, and to all other well-minded men that are seduced, that be Errones onely, and not Turbones (as Lipsius distinguisheth them) not wilfull but ready to yeeld to sound reason,Iustus Lipsius. Politic. and to the truth when it manifestly ap∣peares: such as be vere Candidi, as I hope you bee. But against those wicked seducers, that wilfully per∣sist to blindfould themselues and you by Pious fraudes (as they call them) and keepe you on their side for by-respects, contrary to the truth laied open to their eies; you must giue me leaue to vse iust indignation, As we see the Prophets, our Sauiour and his Apostles did. Rom. Whomsoeuer you shall proue to be such I will ioyne with you in your lust indignation, and abhorre them. I account no fraud pious: nor lawfull to doe euill that good may come of. But by forgery and deceit to mis-lead simple soules from the truth in Reli∣gion, I account most detestable. Prot. If it please you then to alleadge your best and most solid reasons whereby you are moued to forsake our Church and embrace the now Roman Religion: I will be willing to answer you, Rom. I will doe it not of mine owne head, but out of the best and learnedest Authors of our side. Prot. And I will endeuour to answere out of the learnedest and most iudicious Authors of the Prote∣stants, and most especially out of our latest, pithiest, and substantiallest English writers, referring you to the bookes themselues, with notes of their Chapters, Sections, and Pages for your more thorow satisfaction and setling of your Iudgement: with like allegations also of your owne best Authors, when they doe (as they doe often) yeeld vs the truth.
A IVSTIFICATION OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND. Demonstrating it to be a true Church of GOD, affording all sufficient meanes to SALVATION. CHAP. 1. The alleadged, 1 antiquity of the Romish Church, and new∣nesse of the Protestants Church; 2 is shewed to be vaine for that the Protestants retain the ancient sauing faith, and 3 onely weede out the super-seminated Tares: 4 as Hezekias and other good Princes did in their times. So that 5 these two Churches differ onely as fields well wee∣ded, and ouergrowne with weeds. And 6 Protestants are not separated from the good things found in the Ro∣man Church, but from the Papacy which is a dominee∣ring faction in the Church: 7 For the Doctrines where∣of, the ancient Martyrs suffered not, but for the Do∣ctrines which Protestants hold. §. 1. Roman Catholicke. IT is a sufficient notice to mislike and forsake the Protestants Church, be∣cause it is new, neuer seene nor heard of in the world, in any Age or Coun∣trey, before Luthers time: for wee know the true Church of Christ is
ancient,Bellar. de notis Eccls l. b. 4. c. 5. Geg. de Ʋalen∣ta Analysis fidei l. 6. c. 12. Costerus Enchi∣rid. cap. 2. §. con∣vertat Campian. rato 4, 5, 6, 7. Doct Hil. reas. 1. And all Ro∣man Writers triumph in this Argu∣ment. See B. White ag. Fisher p. 115. Cal. inst. l. 4. c. 2. §. 2. continued from our Sauiours owne time: and such is the Church of Rome, founded vpon the chiefe Apostles. S. Peter and S. Paul, manifestly traced through∣out all Ages, with an honourable and certaine successi∣on of Bishops, the successors of S. Peter: All Tyrants, Traitors, Pagans, Hereticks in vaine wrastling, raging, & barking against it: confirmed by all worthy Counsels, the generall graue Senates of Gods highest Officers and Ministers vpon earth: enriched with the Sermons and writings of all the sage, learned, and holy Doctors and Fathers: made famous by all those millions of Saints with their holinesse, Martyrs with their suffrings, Con∣fessors with their constancy: the building of Chur∣ches, Monasteries, Colledges, Vniuersities; and by all excellent meanes made conspicuous and honourable to the whole world. Is it likely? is it possible? that this Church, so ancent, so honourable, so holy, and glorious, should all this while be false, hereticall, and now to bee forsaken and reiected? and a new particular Church lately moulded and erected by Luther, Melancton, Cal∣uin, Beza, and a few other obscure vpstarts, should bee the only true Church to be imbraced? or that the most gracious God would hide his sauing truth from the world, fifteene hundred yeeres, to the distruction and damnation of so many millions of soules: and now at last reueale it to a few in a corner? No Sir, giue mee leaue herein to take the name of Antiquus, to liue and dye in the old Religion, and to refuse your new. §. 2. Protestant. This is indeed the generall enchant∣ment, whereby those that compasse Sea and Land to make Romish Proselytes, doe bewitch the vnwary: and were it true, it were able to draw all the world to be∣come Roman-Catholicks. But I pray you marke my counter-charme, shewing the vntruth and weaknesse of your assertion.
We of the Church of England doe professe and pro∣test, that we are of thatAll our lear∣ned Bishops, Docors, and Preachers, beat vpon this point. B. Iewel. Arch. Abbot. B. Abbot B. Bilson. B. An∣drewes. B. Carl∣ton. B. Barlow. B. Morton. B. Ʋsher. B. Dow∣nan. B. White. B. Hall. D. ulk. D. Whitacres. D. Field. D. White B. Bot. D. ut∣clis. D. Favour. Mr. Perkins. and inume∣rable others. true ancient Church of Christ, which you describe:ee Feld. Church. lib. 3. cap. 6. &c. that we hold entirely and sound∣ly, all that sauing Doctrine which the blessed Sonne of God, brought into the world, and his Apostles taught, & wrote in the holy Scriptures, and which the ancient holy Fathers of the Primitiue Church, held with great vnity and vniuersality for many ages. §. 3. This is shewd, chap. 5. sect. . & Booke 2. chap. 2. §. 6. & chap. 4. sect. 2.And we reiect nothing, but the corruptions, errours, and abuses, that haue crept into the Church in later times, and from small beginnings haue growne at last to be great and vntollerable: those onely we haue refu∣sed: and haue reformed our particular Churches in di∣uers Kingdomes and Nations, as neare as we could, to the fashion of the first true, pure, and vncorrupt Chur∣ches: retaining all the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, which we found to be Catholicke, or agreeable to the faith of the whole Church in all times and pla∣ces.See D. White against Fisher. pag. 68. But Doctrines not Catholicke, being neither Primitiue, belonging to the ancient Church, nor gene∣rally receiued by the whole Church, either at this day, nor in any other age, nor grounded vpon the Scrip∣tures, we haue no reason to receiue, as points necessary to saluation. And the points tending to superstiton corruption, or deprauation of Gods honour, Christs merits, our owne saluation, the disturbance of the peace, or safety of Kingdomes, States, or Common∣wealthes, we worthily abrogate, as intollerable and vnchristian. And in these respects, as you assume the ti∣tle of Antiquus so doe I of Antiquissimus. And let you know, thatSee D. Mor∣tons Appeal. lib. 4. cap. 16. sect. 4. §. 10. our Church is no new Church, deuised by Luther, and other learned men, and receiued by Prin∣ces, affecting mutations: neither euer was it their pur∣pose to doe any such thing, but faithfully and religious∣ly to purge out new corruptions, and to continue and
maintaine the substance and whole essence of the old Church of God, and all the sound Catholick Doctrines thereof, comming along thorow so many ages from the first planting of the Church to their times. §. 4. Read 2 Kings 1.4 5.6. and chap. 22. & 23.No otherwise then the most religious Kings, Heze∣kiah, and Iosiah, and other godly Rulers did in their do∣minions, (being moued by their learned Priests, and by their knowledge of Gods Law) who remoued the high places, and brake the Images, and cut downe the Groues: spoyled the vessels made for Baal and for the Groues, and for the hoste of heauen: and put downe the Idolatrous Priests, and the brazen Serpent also (though at first it was made by Gods owne appoint∣ment, erected to good purpose, and was a figure of Christ) because it was now growen to be an instru∣ment, and occasion of Idolatry: but they preserued still the old Religion and seruice of God entire and whole, and that much more pure then they found it. This when they did, can any man haue the forehead to say, They erected a new Church, when they onely purged and retained the old? or shall we be reuiled and blamed for imitating Hezekias, Josias, and Iehoshaphat, and in that, for which they were much praised and ho∣noured in the Scriptures? §. 5. Obserue then here, first the vanity and deceit of your Romish teachers, that (against their owne know∣ledge) bewitch the simple people with this conceit, that our Church (forsooth) is a new Church, begun in Luthers time, little aboue an hundred yeeres agone, and was neuer seene nor heard of in the world before. Whereas indeed there is no other difference betwixt the Roman Church and ours, then betwixt a corrupt Church (still maintaining her owne corruptions for worldly respects) and a Church well reformed accor∣ding to the Scriptures, and the purest Primitiue
Churches: or betwixt the corrupt Idolatrous Church before Hezekiahs time,2 King. 18. and the same Church refor∣med in and after his time. I may compare the whole Church of CHRIST in all her ages to Naaman the Syrian,2 King. 5. who was honourable for bringing safety to his Nation. He was first pure and sound, and did many honourable acts, and thereby represented the Primitiue Church, pure and cleane, without spot or disease appearing: howbeit there might be some secret seedes of diseases vnpercei∣ued, which in continuance of time grew into a visible leprosie. In his middle time he became leprous, disea∣sed and deformed, fowly infected in himselfe, and in∣fecting others, and thereby represented the later Church of Rome. Afterwards by the Prophets directi∣on, he was washed and cleansed from his leprosie, and his flesh restored to become pure and perfect, like the flesh of a yong childe, and thereby represented our Re∣formed Churches. And as Naaman in all these three estates, was the same person, and not a new, diuerse, or seuerall man (for Elisha made not a new man but clen∣sed the old of diseases, and restored him to his first soundnesse) so our Church is not a new Church, but the old Church reformed from errours and cor∣ruptions, and restored to her ancient purity and sound∣nesse. Let the Church of Rome still glory in her lepro∣sie and brag of the antiquity of some of her diseases: we thanke God for our Churches clensing, and the new restoring of it to the Primitiue purity. §. 6. Secondly, obserue, that we haue not departed frō the sound parts of the Church of Rome it self, (for the lepro∣sie thereof was not vniuersall, nor spred ouer all: there were many euen in the corruptest ages of that Church, which taught the same sauing doctrine that we doe,See Chap. fol∣lowing. and misliked and wrote against the errours and abuses
that wee refuse) but our departure or separation, is onely from the Papacy or Court of Rome, (which much oppressed the best members of the Church of Rome, and instead of Christs heauenly Kingdome, set vp and maintained an earthly, ouertopping and abusing all other Christian Kingdomes) or our departure is, from that domineering faction in the Church, which (like an ill disease, and botch in the body) intolerably oppres∣sed the Church, by imposing vpon it errours in do∣ctrine, and tyranny in gouernment. But to the sound members of that Church, both of ancient and moderne times, we are still conioyned and vnited, and herein, their and our Church continued alwayes sufficiently visible. §. 7. Thirdly, obserue (as a consequent of the former) that our Church is so farre from being new, that it is most ancient: the very same Church that our Sauiour Christ and his blessed Apostles first founded. We suc∣ceed them both in succession of persons, as well as the Church men of Rome, and in succession of doctrine much better: So that we iustly challenge our Sauiour Christ and his Apostles to be ours: all the learned holy Fathers to be ours: the ancient Councels, the blessed Saints, Martyrs and Confessors to bee ours. For they taught, professed, liued and dyed in, and for those points of sauing Religion, which we soundly hold, and for none other. The Martyrs dyed for the profession of their faith and seruice to the true God, for beleeuing in Iesus Christ crucified (whom their persecutors scorne∣fully called, the crucified God) and for their hope to bee saued by his merits and passion: for their trust, comfort, and constancy in the Holy Ghost, and wor∣shipping the holy, blessed, glorious, and indiuiduall Tri∣nity: and for cleauing truly and constantly to the holy Scriptures and the doctrines grounded thereupon
onely, as the true rule of their faith: and (on the other side) for refusing to sacrifice, offer incense, or doe wor∣ship to Idols and Heathen gods. They suffered not death for standing in defence of Image-worship, or for holding the doctrine of Purgatory so like to the Hea∣then Poets, Homer and Virgil: or for praying for the dead or to the dead: or for accusing the holy Scriptures of insufficiency and ambiguity, and forbidding Christi∣an people to reade them vnder great penalties, for feare of Heresie. For, such points would haue pleased their Heathen persecutors well enough. Neither suffered they for crossing Christs instituti∣on, in denying the Communion cup to Gods people: or for worshipping a God made of a piece of bread; or for maintaining the Popes gainfull Indulgences, and Pardons, or for defence of their exorcised Holy-water, or other ceremonies: which would haue been matter of scorne and laughter, rather then of persecution from the Heathen. Neither dyed they for defending the Popes now-claimed Supremacy ouer all the Clergy, people, and Princes of the Christian world, direct, or indirect: which in those times, and many ages after, was neuer thought of nor claimed: and vpon the first claime thereof, was most odious and hatefull to the best Chri∣stians, and threw the world on heapes by grieuous warres and dissolutions: nor for other points which the Church of Rome now maintaineth different from vs, and which we refuse. And therefore the great flourish which you make of the antiquity of your Church, (in∣cluding all the points, which at this day you doe with all policy and violence maintaine) vtterly failes you, and indeed makes against you. For they are not the ancient doctrines of the Church, but later or newer in∣uentions and corruptions, so that in respect of them your Religion is new and not ours; you are the Inno∣uators, and not we.
B. Vsher De Ec∣cles. successione pag. 66.The very same nouelty which you impute to the Protestants, Wiclife long agoe imputed to your Fryars: crying out as in an agony, Good Lord, what moued Christ (being most omnipotent, most wise, most louing) to hide this faith of the Fryars for a thousand yeeres, and neuer taught his Apostles, and so many Saints the true faith,See hereafter chap. 6. sect. 2. §. 4.5, 6. but taught it these Hypocrites now first, which neuer came into the Church, vntill the impure spirit of Satan was loosed. Antiquus. Sir, I would it were so for my countries sake, that wee might enioy such a happily reformed Church as you speake of, with true comfort to our consciences, and hearty obedience to our Princes Lawes, and all loue and happinesse of the Kingdome and of our States. But all you haue yet said are but words, you must giue me leaue to suspend my beleefe thereof, vntill you make good proofe of what you af∣firme. Antiquissimus. The Poet said well, Non est beatus, esse qui se non putat. No man is happy, be he neuer so well, if he thinke himselfe not so. English men may be happy, Bona si sua norint, If they will but know their owne happiesse. In deed, what both you and I haue said yet, are but generall words. Wee must first say, and afterwards proue. You haue set downe your as∣sertion, I mine. Mine I am ready substantially to proue, euen out of your owne Authors, and Bookes which you cannot disallow which (I am well assured, hauing read your strongest Bookes) you can neuer doe for yours.
CHAP. 2. Of corruptions in the Church. Sheweth, 1 that particular Churches may erre: as did 2 those of the Old Testament: and 3 of the New: for which 4 we find many reasons in the Scriptures. 5 The Roman Church is not excepted: but 6 warned thereof: and 7 it hath been corrupted, de facto. Yea 8 Rome is the mysticall Babylon: and 9 the seat of Antichrist: and 10 taynted with foule impieties, as well foregoing as following Antichrist. Antiquus. BY your Imputation of errours and abu∣ses, to the most Illustrious Church of Rome,Rom. 1. (so much glorified by S. Pauls writing vnto it, so much honoured by the antient Fathers, so renowned in all after ages,) you seeme to hold that all the Churches in the world may erre and be corrupt. Antiquissimus. We doe not hold that the whole Church of God may erre at any time in points funda∣mentall, which constitute the essence of the Church, and are absolutely necessary to saluation. For then the Church should cease to be in the world. Antiquus. Good. Antiquissimus.See D. Field. Church. lib. 4. cap. 4, 5. But particular Churches may both erre and fall away (as some of the Churches haue done, which flourished in the Apostles times, and to which they wrote Epistles: the Hebrew Church, the Corinthi∣an, Ephesian, &c.) Antiquus. You speake contrarieties, and absurdities, for the whole Church consists of particulars: and if all particulars may erre and fall away; then the whole may. Antiquissimus. It is no more contrariety, or absur∣dity, then to say all particular men may be diseased and dye away; but whole mankind cannot dye away till
the end of the world, although whole mankind consi∣steth of particulars For they may be diseased and dye by succession,See Bellar. De Pont. Rom. lib. 4. cap 4. initio. not all at once others by succession com∣ming in their roomes: and so of Churches; No man saith, all particular Churches may fundamentally erre and faile at once, (for then indeed, the whole Church should cease to be in the world) but euery one in their seuerall times may faile, when others may hold the truth.Rom. 11.17. & As some branches of the Oliue tree may bee cut off, while others grow, and while others be grafted in: and those that are grafted in, may (for want of good∣nesse) bee cut off also in their times, and the first or others grafted in.Ioh. 15. But the good husband of the Church will not suffer the whole Oliue or Vine to bee without fruitfull branches, by cutting off all at once, but when he pruneth off some, will cherish and dresse the rest.Rom. 11.25. Thus the blindnesse of the Iewes for a time, procured the fulnesse of the Gentiles:Verse 22. who may peece-meale be cut off,Verse 23. if they continue not in goodnesse: and the Iewes may be grafted in againe. Antiquus. Similitudes may well illustrate, but can∣not conuince the iudgement: you must bring demon∣strations if you will haue me yeeld. Exod 32. Num. 16. Iud. 2.11, 19. &. 3, 7. & 4.1. & 6.1. & 8.33. & 10.6. &c. 1 Kings 11. & 12.28. &. 15.13. & 18.21. Gen. 35.2. Exod. 32.20. Iosua 24.15. 1 Sam. 7.4. 2 Kings 18.4. & 22.8. & 23. 2 Chro. 17.6.§. 2. Antiquissimus. I will by Gods grace doe it briefly. First, that grosse errors and abuses may creepe into Gods true Church, is manifest, De facto, in the Church of the Old Testament. The Bookes of Moses, Judges, Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, are full of the peoples fal∣ling to Idolatry, and corrupting the Law of God. And there are many worthy reformations of those corrup∣tions described, wrought by Iacob, Moses, Iosua, Samuel Hezekiah, Iosia, Iehosaphat, and others. And as these corruptions were frequent, so some∣times very generall. While Jeroboams people practised Idolatry in Israel, (1 King. 12.28. &c.) Rehoboams peo∣ple
in the other Kingdome forsooke the Law of the Lord, 2 Chron. 12.1. So that all the face of GODS Church (which was then onely in those two King∣domes) became mightily depraued and Idolatrous Aholah and Aholibah, that is, Samaria and Jerusalem, (Ezech. 23.1, 4.) did both falsifie their faith to God, and plaid the harlots with strange gods, yet the whole Church failed not: For as in Eliahs time, (when hee thought himselfe alone, 1 Kings 19.10.) God had 7000 true seruants in secret, (though their names be not re∣corded) ibid. vers. 18. So doubtlesse it was in other most depraued times. §. 3. Antiquus. Though this were so,See Field. Church. lib. 3. cap. 10. & lib. 4. cap. 4. yet the Churches of the New Testament, had Prophesies of greater puri∣ty, Psal. 45.13. and by our Sauiours power and care, may bee kept without spot or wrinckle, Ephes. 5.26, 27. Antiquissimus. Such things are spoken of the best parts of the Church vpon earth (washed by Christs blood, and made beautifull by his righteousnesse, and by their owne practise of holinesse) but those are meer∣ly discernable by Gods eye. But those places of Scrip∣ture, specially respect that part of the Church which is triumphant in Heauen, and there presented by our Sa∣uiour. Ephes. 5.27. But the generall face of visible Churches vpon earth haue bin ordinarily stayned with spots and blemishes; the Church of Corinth, with sects and schismes, and o∣ther deprauations, yea, with doubting, or denying that great Article of faith (the life of Christianity) the Re∣surrection of the dead. Galatia erred in the great point of Iustification, a∣gainst which errour, Saint Paul opposed his Epistle written to them. In the Church of Pergamus, some held the doctrine
of Balaam, and of the Nicolaitans, teaching to eate things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication, Reu. 2.14. The like was in the Church of Thyatira, Reuel. 2.20, &c. And if there were no possibility or likelihood of er∣rours and heresies in the Churches of the New Testa∣ment: What needed those warnings and admoniti∣ons? Keepe your selues from Idols, 1 Iohn 5.21. Beware of false prophets in sheepes cloathing, Mat. 7.15. . Charge men that they teach no other doctrine, 1 Tim. 1.3. Stop the mouthes of the gain-sayers that sub∣uert whole houses, Tit. 1.11. And to what end were Visitations, Counsels, and all Offices and Gouernment in the Church, but for main∣taining of true doctrine, preuenting and rooting out of errours and abuses? §. 4. Matth. 18.7. 1 Cor. 11.19.Remember, that our Sauiour said, There must be of∣fences in the world: and Saint Paul, There must be here∣sies. Yea, it is necessary that there be; both for the good of the faithfull, the good of the faith, and the punish∣ment of the faithlesse. To which ends God suffers these two causes to concurre and worke, to wit, the Deuils malice, and Mans corruption; because God can worke good out of their euill. The Diuels malice and policy, neuer ceaseth still to pursue the seed of the Woman, and to bite the heele, seeking both by persecutions and heresies, to supplant Gods Church, to plant and increase his owne King∣dome. He attempted our head, Matth. 4.3. and so will doe his members, Luke 22.31. 2 Cor. 12.7. Ephes. 6.11, 12. 1 Pet. 5.8. 2 Cor. 11.14. Mans corruption and blindnesse is also easie to bee drawne by others, and easily drawne by his own affec∣tions out of the right way; as Micah (Iudges 17.)
to worship God by a siluer Image, thinking (blindly) that euery worke with a good intention, would please God, and draw blessings from him. Salomon by loue to his wiues was drawen to Idola∣try. Our Eues are weake to be seduced,1 Kings 11.4. strong to se∣duce vs. Ieroboam by ambitious policy,1 Kings 12.26. Acts 19.24.28 set vp Idolatry to keep his people at home. Demetrius and the Ephesians, for couetousnesse, mag∣nified the Idol of Diana, and cryed downe the Gospel, Acts 19. Simon Magus through pride bewitched the people,Acts 8.9.10. that he might seeme some great man, Simon Magus a∣mong them. These and such other affections and actions God permits to oppose, corrupt, or blind the truth. First, for the good o the faithfull, that their diligence in searching, their wisdome in discerning, their constancy in holding the truth, their loue to winne the aduersa∣ries, their patience to endure opposition, disgrace, per∣secution, yea, Death and Martyrdome for the truth, and their many other vertues, may shine to Gods glory, o∣thers example, and their owne crowne, Reu. 3.11 Secondly, for the good of the faith, Vt fides habendo tentationem, haberet etiam probationem, saith Tertullian, that our faith being sifted, winnowed, tried, examined, may be more approued, and appeare more solid, sound, pure, like the gold that is purified in the fire. Thirdly, for the punishment of the fathles;Rom. 1.21.22.23. &c. 2 Thes. 2.11. for it is iust with God, that such as hold the truth in vnrighte∣ousnesse, should be punished with losse of the truth, and left to their owne errours and damnable corruptions, euen to the efficacy of delusion, to beleeue lies. §. 5. Antiquus. Be it so, that all other Churches may erre;
yet the Roman Church, which the chiefe Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul planted, and where Saint Peter (the Vniuersall Pastor of the whole Church) li∣ued and dyed, leauing his successors to gouerne the whole Church to the end of the world: hath this dou∣ble priuiledge (aboue all other Churches) both to conti∣nue to the end, and to be free from errour. Antiquissimus. A prety imagination, but voyde of faith; For if the Church of Rome be not as subiect to errours and deprauations, yea, and to Apostacy, as o∣ther Churches: what needed that Admonition of Saint Paul to the Romans (Rom. 11.20) Bee not high∣minded, but feare. For if God spared not the naturall branches (the Hebrewes) Take heed lest he also spare not thee. This was a Caueat for Gentiles, and consequent∣ly to the Romans (which were Gentiles among them.) The Romans are not excepted or priuiledged: Nay, they are principally intended; for to them that Epistle was written, (cap. 1. vers. 7. To all that be at Rome, Be∣loued of God, called to bee Saints.) To them Saint Paul saith, Be not high-minded, (affecting superiority ouer all Gods Church, as if Rome were the root, and all other the branches) but feare (yea feare both errour and apo∣stacy. For you may fall from goodnesse, and be cut off) for verse 10. thou bearest not the root, but the root thee (be content to be a branch of the Oliue tree, as o∣ther Churches are: they depend not on thee, no more then thou on them, but all of you alike vpon the root. Thou art not the Mother, be content to be a Daughter, a Sister to the rest: Suppose, one of the eldest sisters li∣uing, yet the elder may be sicke, and neare to death, when the yonger are more sound and perfect.) Marke the 22 verse; Behold the goodnesse and seuerity of God; on them which fell, seuerity; but towards thee, good∣nesse; i thou continue in his goodnesse, otherwise thou also shalt be also cut off. Note, if there were no possi∣bility of the Roman Churches falling from the good∣nesse,
which then it had, this admonition directed to them, were idle; but vpon supposition of such falling (as other Churches haue done) he denounceth absolute∣ly a cutting off. Antiquus. Such suppositions doe enforce good Ca∣ueats and warnings to make that Church watchfull: as by Gods grace it hath beene, so that no such errours and heresies haue come into it. §. 6. Antiquissimus. Yes, euen in S. Pauls time, Abuses began in the Roman Church, as well as in the Corinthi∣an, Galatian. and others. Whereof S. Paul giues another Caueat, chap. 16. verse 17, 18. I beseech you Brethren, (saith he) Marke them which cause diuisions and offences, contrary to the doctrine which yee haue learned, and auoyde them. For they which are such, serue not our Lord Iesus Christ, but their owne belly: and by good words and faire speeches, deceiue the hearts of the simple. And verse 19 though he praise them, yet he addeth, But J would haue you wise vnto that which is good, and simple or harmelesse concerning euill; and he prayeth God to esta∣blish them, verse 25. Antiquus. All this yet prooues not, that euer any such errours preuailed in the Church of Rome, to the defacing or corrupting the soundnesse thereof. §. 7. Antiquissimus. But the Ancient Fathers, and the Histories of the Church doe proue it:Hieronymus con∣tra Luciferianos Basil. epist. 69. As namely in the Arrian heresie, whereby the Church of Rome (together with the rest of the world) was maruellously, both de∣faced, and corrupted, & that both in the members, and in the head. Whereof S. Jerom wrote, that the whole world groned, and wondered that it was become Ar∣rian: And S. Basil, that men abandoned the houses of Prayer (which then were made schooles of Impiety)
and were faine to pray to the Lord in Desarts. And S. Hilary admonished in many words, that the Church at that time, was not to be sought (Jn tectis & exterio∣ri pompa, sed potius in carceribus & speluncis,) in Houses or Temples, and outward pompe but rather in Prisons and Caues.Bellar De Pont. Rom. lib. 4. cp. 9. initio. Bellarm. in that Booke reckons 40. Popes, accu∣sed of errours and heresies: whom he la∣bours to ex∣cuse, but con∣fesseth most of them guilty in one degree or other. And when Liberius, Bishop of Rome, him∣selfe was drawne to subscribe to the Arrian heresie, yeelded to the condemnation of Athanasius, and com∣municated with Valens and Ʋrsarius, whom he knew to be Hereticks: As Bellarmine confesseth. Antiquus. This was a heauy time, and a heauy thing it is to heare it; yet in good time the Church of Rome recouered. §. 8. Antiquissimus. But the Scripture mentioneth ano∣ther defection of Rome, which will neuer be recouered. For your Roman Doctors cannot auoyd it, but Babylon in the 17 and 18 of the Reuelation, signifieth Rome, chap. 17.9. The seuen heads are seuen mountaines on which the woman sitteth: and verse 18. The woman which thou sawest, is the great City which raigneth ouer the Kings of the earth. These two properties of the City, situate vp∣on seuen hils, and also raigning ouer the Kings of the earth, doe manifestly describe the City of Rome and none other, as it was in S. Johns time, when the Reuela∣tion was giuen Your owne Iesuite Ribera, Doctor of Diuinity, and Professor in the Vniuersity of Salmantica, in his Commentaries vpon the Apocalyps, chap. 14. verse 8 Num. 25. & sequentib. shewes plainely, that Babylon can signifie nothing else but the City of Rome: he cites many testimonies of the Fathers for it. Hee cites also Sixtus Senensis, and Bellarmine to bee of the same opinion, and many other late Writers: and con∣cludes with these words [Ʋt alios hujus aetatis scripto∣res omittam: hoc dicam, Ambrosius, qui prius negaverat,
tandem, in cap. 17. veritate conuictus Babylonem Romam significare confessus est. Huic conveniunt aptissime omnia, quae de Babylone dicuntur in hoc libro (Apocalypscos)] and this he shewes at large in many particulars. The like hath Viegas, another Iesuite,Viega in Apoc. 17. com. 1. sect. 4. pag. 772. Rhemist. annot. on Apoc. 17.9. scoffe at vs. so Bellar. de Rom. Pont. lib. 3. cap. 2. & Parsons 3. conuersions part. 2. cap. 5. v. Bi∣shop. Reformed. Cath. Doctor also of Diuinity, and Reader in two Vniuersities of Portugall, Conimbrica and Ebora. And your Rhemish (though they scoffe at the Prote∣stants, for interpreting Babylon to be Rome, in Reuel. 17.5. yet presently after, they are forced themselues to) confesse that Babylon signifies the City of Rome: but they shift all from the Pope, to the persecuting Empe∣rours, and apply the propheticall discourse to the times of S. Iohn the Writer, principally, as a type of the place (wheresoeuer it be) where Antichrist shall sit to∣wards the end of the world. But Ribera and Viegas, proue plainly, that S. Johns description agreeth to Rome, towards the end of the world, when Rome shall be the feat of Antichrist, and shall be finally, fully, and ir∣recouerably destroyed, according to the plaine words of Reuel. 18. verse 2, 8, 21, &c. Ribera (pag. 454.) saith, [Roma, nisi pristinam illam impietatem (of Idolatry and persecutions vnder the Emperours) novis sceleribus, & immanibus peccatis aequatura esset, maneret vsque ad finem seculi extremum. Etenim non propter priora tantum pec∣cata cam conflagraturam esse magno incendio, vt ante dixi∣mus, sed etiam propter illa, quae extremis illis temporibus commissura est, ex huius Apocalypsis verbis adeo perspicuè cognoscimus, vt ne stultissimus-quidem negare possit.] Rome (saith Ribera) should doubtlesse continue to the end of the world, if it did not match the old Impiety (of the Emperours) with new impieties and grieuous sinnes. For we plainly learne, that it shall be destroyed with that great consuming fire, not for the former sins onely (as we said before) but for those sinnes which it shall commit in the last times: yea, wee learne it so
plainly out of the words of this Reuelation, that surely the veriest foole cannot deny it. §. 9. Antiquus. Indeed these learned Roman Doctors are plaine and powerfull, in prouing this Mysticall Baby∣lon, described in the Reuelation, can signifie no place but Rome, and that it must be the seat of Antichrist to∣wards the later end of the world. But the same Do∣ctors say also, that Antichrist and the Pope are two di∣uerse things; yea, contrary one to the other: as also, that the Church of Rome and City of Rome are diuerse things: and further, that Antichrist is not yet come, neither shall he come vntill three yeares and a halfe before the last day:Reuel. 11.3. & 12.6, 14. & 13.5. as they gather out of the prophe∣sie of Daniel, and the Reuelation, by the 1260 dayes, which make 42 moneths, and a time, times, and halfe a time. Hieronym. in Daniel. 9.Antiquissimus. S. Ierom vnderstood those prophesies of the destruction of Ierusalem, to which they maruel∣lously agree: and, to the raigne of Antichrist, it is ve∣ry vnlikely they should agree.See B. Dow∣nam de Anti∣christo. part. 2. ad Demonstrat. 13 §. 5. &c. & K. Iames his Praemonition. pag. 60. & seqq. But your men haue reason to keepe off this deadly blow from themselues and their head. Note their shifts; first, they would by no meanes suffer Babylon to signifie Rome: but the text is so punctuall and plaine, pointing out a City, a City built on seuen hils, a City that bare rule ouer the Kings of the earth; that at last they grant, it can be no other but Rome. But (see a second shift) not Christian Rome, but Heathen Rome, vnto the persecuting Emperours, long since gone. Now when they are driuen from this also, because the Text descrbes Rome as it must be nere the end of the world; (note their third shift.) It must be Rome onely, three yeares and an halfe before the last day.
§. 10. Well, howsoeuer, yet you see it granted by you own men, Rome must be the seat of Antichrist. Who, if hee be not come already, (from which Controuersie, I will now spare you) yet you cannot imagine but there must be preparations for his comming and entertainment. I will not say with your owne S. Gregory;Greg. lib. 4. epist. 38. Rex super∣biae prope est, & (quod dici nefas est) Sacerdotum ei est prae∣paratus exercitus: The King of pride is at hand, and an army of Priests is prepared for him. Be it what it will, there must be corruption both of life and doctrine, to make way for his entertainment, as your Ribera said before, there must be new impieties and grieuous sins of Rome, matching the old of the Emperours, that must fore-runne the plagues of Antichrist, and Romes destru∣ction. Take heed they haue not farre proceeded alrea∣dy. I haue demonstrated vnto you already; first, that any particular Church may in time gather corruption, erre, yea and fall away: Secondly, that the Church of Rome is not excepted, nor priuiledged from that cala∣mity: but contrarily, thirdly, that many threatnings, warnings and prophesies therof are found in the Scrip∣tures: and fourthly, further, that Rome must bee the seat of Antichrist; and fiftly, that towards the end of the world (which cannot be farre off;) and lastly, that there must bee many corruptions and impieties that shall deserue and make preparation for his comming. All which ought to abate your high conceit of the pre∣sent Church of Rome; and worke in you a more reue∣rend esteeme of our Church, which hath reformed the abuses which we found in the Church of Rome.
CHAP. 3. Of the time when corruptions came into the Roman Church. 1 A designation of the time when the corruptions first came into the Church, required. 2 often, and often aswered. 3 many crept in secretly and insensibly: 4 as them∣selues acknowledge, 5 best knowne by their difference from their first pure doctrine. 6. The Romans cannot find the beginnings of our doctrines on this side the Scrip∣tures: 7 We can, and doe, many of theirs. 8 No Church in the world held the now Romish doctrines, but onely the Romish Church it selfe in these later times. §. 1. Antiquus. SInce you impute so many errours and abuses to the Church of Rome, which you pretend to haue reformed: Tell me when those corruptions came into that Church, which (you con∣fesse) was once, and a long time the true, sincere, and famous Church of God. For no such foule matters, so grosse and intolle∣rable can enter into such a famous Church, without be∣ing noted in Histories,Bellar. de notis ecclesiae lib. 4. cap. 5. and opposed by godly learned men. Shew me therefore when these corruptions came in and changed the Roman faith, in what Age, vnder what Pope, by what men and meanes, and with what relctation, or opposition of the godly learned. For if no such time can be shewed, I shall neuer beleeue there were any such thing. §. 2. Antiquissimus. This is another point of your en∣ch ntment indeed. Your Masters politikely, stand vp∣on generals to discredit our reformation, which in par∣ticulars
they cannot disproue. Among which gene∣rals, this is (as it seemes) their great Goliah, brought in∣to the field so oft, to terrifie all our troops at once. To omit your forraigne Iesuites,Bellar. De Eu∣char. lib. 3. cap. 8 Bellarmine,Costerus epist. ad. Apolog. Costerus,Greg. de Va∣lent. lib. 6. cap. 12. Gregorius de Ʋalentia, &c. your English are enow. The Author of, The briefe discourse of Faith, (which is answered by D. Iohn White, and Mr. Anthony Wootton) bringeth it in, in his 50 Section, asCamp. rati∣one 7. Campian (their great Champion) had done before him: which being foyled by our men in their answeres, yet is brought in againe by A. D. his Reply, in his 57 Chapter, and foy∣led againe by D. White: Defence pag. 519, &c. Lately brought in againe by a Iesuite in Ireland, in his Chal∣lenge, and ouerthrowne by D. Vsher, B. of Meath, in the beginning of his Answer.D. Kellison Sur∣uay lib. 2. c. p. 163. 1. And still is brought in againe and againe, without measure or end, as if it had neuer been answered before. And most lately by M. Fisher the Iesuite, at least foure seuerall times in his lit∣tle booke written to our late Gracious King James, of famous memory: which B. Francis White, hath fully answered in euery of the placesD. White. pag. 116. & 131 & 143. & 255, &c.. Out of all whose answers and Doctor Fauours Booke, entituled, Anti∣quity triumphing ouer NoueltyD. Favour. pag. cap. 17.; and many others; I will giue you some short satisfaction, wishing you at your leasure to reade the Authors themselues at large. §. 3. Your argument presupposeth that errours and abu∣ses, came into the Church full, strong, and at once:See also D. Field. Church. lib. 3. cap. & B. Morton Appeal. lib. 4. cap. 16. So that their very entrance must needes be apparant, vi∣sible, obseruable, and therefore strongly opposed by lear∣ned and good men, and described in Histories: where∣as indeed the most of them crept in secretly, & insensi∣bly, and were not observed of a long time. Saint Paul calleth the great desertion and Apostacy, The Mystery of Iniquity2 Thes. 2.7.: Which the ordinary glosse thereupon,
saith, is Iniquitas, Sed mystica, id est, pietatis nomine palli∣ata; an iniquity indeed, but mysticall, that is, cloaked vnder the name of piety. A mystery worketh not o∣penly, but secretly: not at once, but by little and little, and then getteth greatest aduantage, when it is least obserued and suspected. It is first a Mystery, and creepeth in secretly, before it be a History, obserued and described. In Common-wealthes it is ordinary for things of obscure and vnsensible beginnings, to worke sensible and notorious changes in the end, so that the wisest shall not so easily finde out the first entrance, as the sim∣plest may see and feele the grosse and dangerous euents in the end. As Plutarch obserueth in the life of Caesar: and in the life of Coriolanus, he tels how the corruption of the people by bribes and banquetting, entred into the old Roman Common-wealth. This Pestilence (saith he) crept in by little and little, and did secretly win ground, stil continuing a long time in Rome, before it was openly discouered, For no man can tell who was the first that bought mens voyces with money, nor that corrupted the sentence of the Iudges: but he knoweth that this tooke away all authority (and de∣stroyed the Common-wealth.) So it is also with dis∣eases in mans body: they come not to the height and extremity at first, and at once: but ill humours and matter of diseases, breed secretly, and insensibly, and af∣terwards by degrees, become more full and strong, and seldome are well discerned, till they manifestly impaire the health and actions of the body. Now when a dis∣ease is growne apparantly dangerous and deadly, shall neither the Physitian nor the grieued Patient beleeue that there is any disease at all, because they know cer∣tainly there was once health, and they cannot set downe the time when the humours began first to corrupt, nor by what accesses and increasings it pro∣ceeded to that desperate danger?2 Kings 5. So Naaman, because
he was once cleane and could not tell the very time, meanes, and degrees of the comming of his leprosie, might be proued to be cleane still, and needed nei∣ther the Prophet nor the washing. Our Sauiour sheweth,Matth. 13. that in the field where good feed was sowen, the enemy secretly sowed tares: but they were not discerned to be tares, till they were growne vp to some height; and peraduenture fauou∣red, watered, and defended by the Husbandmen, and thought to be good Corne for a time, till they shewed themselues more fully. Shall we be so idle to say, they were not tares, because we know good wheat was sow∣en there, but when any tares were sowen we know not? The Master of the field acknowledgeth thē by their pre∣sent view to be tares, and saith that the enemy had sowen them secretly: but your argument would per∣swade the contrary. You Protestants grant (say your Doctors) that the seed first sowen in this field (in the Church of Rome) was good, and there sowen by the Master himselfe: now, if these which you call tares, be no good Graine, but weedes sprung vp from some other seed, tell vs the mans name that sowed it, and the time when it was sowen. If you be not able to shew this, surely your eyes deceiue you; either they are not tares (as you call them) or they are not of any enemies, but of your owne Masters sowing. §. 4. Antiquus. Your similitudes are apt and perswa∣siue, but no similitude is demonstratiue. Can ye shew me some examples of things in this kind, confessed to be changed, the beginnings of whose examples, were not perceiued, or obserued, or opposed? Antiquissimus. I can, and will; and you may read them more at large, in D Vshers answer to the Iesuite in Jreland. Your owne Catholicks confesse that the Primitiue
Church,See also D. Field. Church lib. 3. cap. 14. who reckneth many more. for many yeares deliuered the holy Eucharist to the people in both kindes, according to Christs Or∣dinance, and the Apostles practise: that custome is now quite changed, and the cup disused and forbidden to the people. This change they grant, but when, and how it be∣gan, and vnder what Pope, they know not.Valent. de lgit. vsu. Eu∣char. cap. 10 See more in B. Morton. Ap∣peal. lib. 4. cap. 6. Gregory of Valentia (your great learned Iesuite) saith: It began first in some particular Churches, and in time grew to be a generall custome in the Latin Church, not much before the Counsell of Constance, in which, at last (to wit, about two hundred yeares agone) this custome was made a Law. But of the time when it first began to get footing in some Churches, he saith, Minime con∣stat; It is not knowne. D. FisherRossensis. assert. lutheran. confut. art. 18. B. of Rochester, and Cardinall Caietan,Caietan. opusc. tomo 1. tract. 15 de indulgent. cap. 1. grant, that of Indulgences no certainty can be had, what their originall was, or by whom they were first brought in. But of the great increase and bringing in∣finite wealth out of all Nations to the Pope, and the abusing of simple soules thereby, we haue knowledge more then enough. D. Fisher addeth (ibid.) that of Purgatory, in the ancient Fathers there is no mention at all, or very rare: that the Latins did not all at once, but by little and lit∣tle receiue it: that the Grecians beleeue it not to this day: and that Purgatory being so long vnknowen, it is not to be maruelled that in the first times of the Church there was no vse of Indulgences, for they had their beginning after that men had a while been scared with the torments of Purgatory. The originall of their priuate Masses (wherein the Priest receiueth the Sacrament alone, and none of the people communicate with him, but all are lookers on) D Harding,Hard. answere to the first ar∣ticle of Iewels challenge fol. 26. v. Ant∣werp. dit. anno 1565. fetcheth from no other ground, then lacke of deuotion on the peoples part. Tell vs in what Popes dayes the people fell from, their deuotion and then we
may hap tell you in what Popes dayes your priuate Masse began. You see then (1) what little reason your men haue to require of vs the precise time of the beginning of such changes, seeing themselues grant, that in many things themselues cannot doe it. (2) That some of them may come in pedetentim (as B. Fisher saith of Pur∣gatory) by little and little, and by very slow steps, not so caste to be discerned, as you would make simmple men beleeue: (3) Thar it is an idle imagination to thinke that all such changes must be made by some Bishop, or any one certaine Author: whereas it is confessed, that some may come in by the silent consent of many, and grow after into a generall custome, the beginning whereof is past mans memory: (as the abstaining from the Cup) and some may arise of the ndiscreet deuoti∣on of the multitude (as those of Purgatory and Indul∣gences) and some from the want of deuotion in the people (as the priuate Masses) and some also must bee attributed to the very change of time it selfe: as pub∣like prayers in an vnknowne tongue in Italy, France, and Spaine: for there a long time the Latin was com∣monly vnderstood of all: but when afterwards their speeches degenerated into those vulgar tongues that are now vsed there, then the language, not of the ser∣uice, but of the people, was altered. So that (saith E∣rasmusEras. in decla∣rationib. ad cen∣suras Parisiens. tit. 12. sect. 41.) the vulgar tongue was not taken from the people; but the people departed from it. Now then, shew you vnder what Pope their language degenera∣ted, and we will shew you when publike prayers there began, in tongue not vnderstood. §. 5. I may well then conclude, (with that learned D. Ʋsher,) that if we can shew the present Doctrines of Rome, (refused by vs) disagree from the Primit ue, it is enough to shew there hath been a change & dege∣neration,
though we cannot point out the time, when euery point began to be changed TertullianTertul. praeser. aduersus Haeret. cap. 32 saith sufficiently; The very doctrine it selfe being compared with the Apostolicke, by the diuersity and contrariety thereof, will pronounce that it had for Author, neither any Apostle, nor any Apostolicall man. JfMat. 19.8. from the begin∣ning it was not so, and now it is so there is a change.1 Cor. 11.28 All drinke of that Cup, now all must not: all then prayed in knowen tongues with vnderstanding, and all publicke seruice done to edification,1 Cor. 14. See B. White against Fisher pag. 128. this is altered, though when the alteration began, we neither know, nor need take paines to search. §. 6. The Romanists say, Our Doctrine is new: can they shew it to be later then the Apostles times? wee hold the Hebrew Canon of the Old Testament, that is, so many bookes Canonicall, as the Hebrewes, and with them the Fathers accounted Canonicall, and no more: If this be an errour, let them shew who began it, and when: as we can shew when and by what meanes ma∣ny Apocryphall writings were added to the Canon. We hold the Hebrew of the old, the Greeke of the New Testament to be most Authenticall, and all translations to be corrected by them. Who began this heresie, and when? they preferre the vulgar Latin before them, contrary to equity and antiquity. We commend the holy Scriptures to all Gods people, of all Nations, in all languages: we hold that God forbiddeth the worship∣ping of Images: That a man is iustified by faith with∣out the workes of the Law; and yet that good workes are necessary fruits of faith, without which, faith is dead: we administer the whole Communion in both kindes, to all Gods people: let them shew the time when these heresies or abuses began: or else either cease to call vs heretickes for them, or grant that here∣sies may creepe in, they know not when nor how.
§. 7. All this, notwithstanding,D. Favour. An∣tiquity, trium∣phing ouer nouelty. cap. 17 pag. 433. we are able to shew by approued Histories, the age and time, when many of the fowlest corruptions became notorious in the Church and how they were opposed. Doctor Favour sheweth some; as the Supremacy of the Pope; Tran∣substantiation; The Worshipping of Angels, (an old heresie, a new piety,) The substance and parts of the Masse; The Diuine worship of the Virgin Mary, aboue a creature; The worship of the Crosse; Single life of the Clergy; Abstinence from certaine meates, and on cer∣taine dayes; Seuen Sacraments; Images and their wor∣ship; Indulgences or Pardons Communicating without the Cup; Auricular Confession, and diuers other things. Bishop Vsher answering the Jrish Iesuites Challenge, sheweth the same very fully in many points. So do most of our other learned Authors; and most plentifully in a continued historicall Narration, that learned French Noble man, Philip Morney,Morney. Myste∣rium Iniquitat. Praefat. Lord of Plessis, in his Mysterium Iniquitatis. But of particular points. I shall speake more fitly in their proper place, if you desire it. §. 8. And now for a conclusion of this point, and for full answer to your challenge of antiquity; I demaund where was there any Church in the world, for 600. yeares after Christ, which worshipped Images as the Roman Church doth now? where was any Church for a thousand yeares, that called the little hone their Lord, thought it to be God, and adored it as God? or for 12 hundred yeares, that kept their God in a boxe, and carried it about in procession to be worshipped, and appointed peculiar office or seruice vnto it? and without receiuing it, offered it vp before the people, as a propitiatory sacrifice for the quicke and the dead?
or that bereaued the people of the Cup in the holy Communion, and made it heresie to teach otherwise? or that receiued Transubstantiation for an Article of faith? or that accused the Scriptures of Insufficiency and ambiguity, and held the reading thereof dangerous to the faithfull, forbidding it by publike decree, vnder great punishment. Where was there any Church for 600 yeares, that beleeued the Pope of Rome to be the vniuersall Bishop, and that all power of Orders and Iu∣risdiction for all Churches in the world is to be deriued and receiued from him? where for a thousand yeeres any Church acknowledged the Pope to be an earthly Prince, or aboue all Christian Princes, girt with both swords? and had power to vnbind subiects from their oathes of Alleageance to their Princes, to depose Prin∣ces, and place others in their roomes? or in 12 hun∣dred yeares, that held the Pope to be aboue the vniuer∣sall Church, and aboue the generall Councels, and that hee onely had authority to call Councels, to ratifie, of nullifie whatsoeuer pleased him in them? or that he could dispose of the state of soules, by the manner or measure of his Indulgences or Pardons, shutting Purga∣tory, and opening Heauen to those he liked, or would pay for it: making Saints whom he pleased, to be prayed vnto and worshipped, and whom he pleased, sending downe to Hell or Purgatory?Concil. Trident. Sess. or that he could dispence with the Lawes of God, binding where God had loosed, or loosing where God had bound, as in Ma∣trimoniall causes and degrees, in diners kinds of oathes and such like. Or where was any face of a Church vntill within these few yeares so glorious with a Princely Senate of Cardi∣nalls, equals, if not superiors to Kings, making an earth∣ly Kingdome of the Church, with the transcendent greatnesse of the triple crowned Pope?Fryars began, Anno 1220. Iesuites 1530. those swarmes of late Fryars, and later Iesuites, and Seminary Priests? which some make to be the Locusts, (Reuel. 9, 3,) dark∣ning
the Sunne and the ayre. Luther in conference with Vergerius the Popes Nuncio among other things, told him plainly; None could call his Doctrine new,Hist. concil. Trent. lib. 1. pag. 76. but he that beleeued that Christ, the Apostles, and the holy Fathers liued as now the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops doe. To conclude: In these and such like thngs, the Church of Rome hath no antiquity neither succeeds the Apostles and the Primitiue Church, otherwise then darknesse suceeeds the light, sicknesse succeeds health, and as Antichrist must succeed Christ in the Temple of God, and may sit in Christs (or S. Peters) seat, as God, or aboue God. Antiquus. It is easier to shew dislke then disproofe of these things. But when you say, The most of the cor∣ruptions (as you call them) crept in secretly and insen∣sibly, you seeme to grant that some of them came in o∣penly and were obserued. Antiquissimus. Yea, and strongly opposed too, as our learned Authors do plentifully shew: and I shall (by Gods blessing) shew afterwards, when we come to the particulars; but for the present, let this generall an∣swer satisfie your generall doubt. Antiquus. Satisfie me in another generall questi∣on also. If there were such corruptions in the Roman Church as you pretend: how chance they were suffe∣red to continue and grow, and neuer spoken or written against nor reformation sought for till Luthers time? but that glorious Church enioyed perpetuall vnity, peace, and quietnesse, till he disturbed it? yea , and all Historians, Fathers, Councels, learned men, and Prin∣ces ceased nor continually to praise and glorifie the vni∣ty sanctity, and excellency of that Church, as Mr. Cam∣pian alleadgeth in most of his reasons. Antiquissimus.See B. White a∣gainst Fisher, pag 107, 108, 109. You are very much deceiued (with your vainly boasting Champion) there was in euery Age much speaking and writing against the abuses of
that Church; both by the whole Easterne or Greeke Church, which long agone forsooke the vnity of the Roman Church, being neither able to reforme the cor∣ruptions thereof, nor to endure them: and by many Fathers of the Westerne Church that did oppose them: and Historians that detected and detested them: and many thousands in these Westerne parts, that would not liue vnder the obedience of the Pope and his Cler∣gie, nor admit their Doctrines: Besides, many other learned men also liuing in the Community of the Church of Rome, which yet wrote against many abuses thereof, wishing and desiring reformation. Antiquus. If this be so, I haue been wonderfully a∣bused, being made beleeue the iust contrary. Antiquissimus. Then I perceiue it is necessary to handle this point thorowly: both to satisfie you with sufficiency, and to cloy them with superfluity, who told you that nothing could be brought against them. CHAP. 4. Corruptions in the Church of Rome, seene, written against, and reformation wished for them. An historicall Narration, 1 of the first age of the Church golden: but 2 afterwards peeped vp some seedes of cor∣ruption, misliked of many in the East, South, and West Churches. 3 A foule matter of three Popes alledging a counterfet Canon of Nice for their Iurisdiction, which the whole Church of Africa withstood. 4 Gregory the Great wrote sharpely against the Titles which now the Popes vse. 5 B.B. of the East, France, Germany, and Britany, opposed the Pope about Images; Councels a∣gainst Councels. 6 Many thought Antichrist now borne. Constantines Donation, and the decretall Epi∣stles now first seene. 7 A deluge of wickednesse in the ninth and tenth Ages, as Bellarmine, Baronius, Gene∣brard,
&c. record. 8 After a thousand yeares, greater inundations of euils. Siluester 2. Benedict 9. a childe of ten yeares old, then Cardinals arose. 9 The Sultan subdueth many Christian Countries in the East: the Clergy most wicked in the West. Letters from Hell to them. Anti-Popes and Anti-Caesars, Rebellion made piety. Hildibrands Dictates, foundations of a new earth∣ly Church, Kingdome. 10 The Testimony of Onu∣phrius, that Gregory 7 was the first raiser of the Popes Princedome. Many Historians speake of his diuellish∣nesse. 11 Campians Historians reiected by his owne fellowes. 12 Graue Diuines against Romish corrup∣tions: Bernard, Sarisburiensis, Grosthead, Occam, Cesenas, Clemangis, Gerson, Caremacensis, Valla, &c 13 These and many others, wrote against the cor∣ruptions of Doctrine. Schoolemens philosophicall Diui∣nity. Doctrine framed to maintaine wealth and great∣nesse. 14 Particular Doctrines wherein learned men differed from the Popes faction. 15 Oxford alone af∣forded many learned men opposing Romish corruptions. 16 Reformation was sought for, and promised by the Pope; but could not be obtained. §. 1. TO shew how corruptions crept into the Church of Rome, were seene and written against, as they were discoue∣red from time to time: I must become altogether historicall, and not Write mine owne words, but other mens, and as the times be many, and matters various, so will my Narration be long, although I will endeuour all possi∣ble breuity, that may not hinder perspicuity. And first I will gue you (as it were) a Table, of what our leaned and laborious Bishop Vsher hath written (compendi∣ously also) out of many braue Authors, to this point:
but in this Table I will insert other briefe memorials remarkeable out of other Authors. Perer in Apoc. c. 6. disp. 6. See B. Vsher de ecclesiarum suc∣cessione & statu. cap. 1. v. Casabon Proleg. Hegsip∣pus apud Euseb. lib. 3. hist. cap. 32. vel, in alijs editi∣onibus cap. 29. & Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 16. Lactant. lib. 5. institutio∣num cap. 2. Eu∣seb. hist. lib. 8. cap. 1. Hiero∣nym. in vita Malchi. Cyril Hierosol. cateches. 15. Man tuan in vita Blasij. lib. 2.The first hundred yeares of the Church was a gol∣den Age (saith your Pererius) but when the Apostles, and they that heard them were gone, errours and abu∣ses began to take root, through Heretikes, Philoso∣phers, and Diuines giuen ouer to too much daintinesse and ambition, and degenerating by the corruptions which peace and plenty bred amongst them: as Hege∣sippus relateth: and as Lactantius, Eusebius, S. Jerom, Cy∣rill, and your Mantuan complaine. So that Gregorius Magnus (about 600 yeares after Christ) compared the Church to a decayed and putrifying ship; and A gebar∣dus, Bishop of Lyons, after him, saith, If the ship of the Church waxed rottē then, alas, alas, what doth it now? §. 2. It is recorded, that euen some good Bishops of Rome,Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 23. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 21. holy men and Martyrs, liuing in the second hun∣dred yeares after our Sauiour, out of a desire to aduance their Sea, went somewhat too farre to impose ceremo∣nies vpon other Churches: as Anicetus, for the celebra∣tion of Easter, who yet was quickly quieted by the good counsell of Polycarp, who made a iourney to Rome to that end, and was greatly honoured by Anicetus. Euseb. ibid. B. Morton Appeal. lib. 4. c. 7.Not long after, Ʋictor grew somewhat too violent about the same matter, and excommunicated the Easterne Churches for their difference from the Westerne in the celebration of Easter, but he was sharp∣ly reproued by Polycrates,See B. Carlton Iurisdiction. cap. 4. §. 19, 20, 21. &c. Bishop of Ephesus, and the other Bishops of the East, and also by Jrenaeus, Bishop of Lyons in France, and the other Bishops there; where∣by it may appeare that the B. of Rome began euen then to vsurpe or challenge a Iurisdiction which neither the Bishops of the East or West did acknowledge. They
all honoured the Bishops of Rome, as Bishops of the chiefe City, the seat of the Empire, and for their holi∣nesse and vertue; and gaue them great and honourable Titles; but yet not greater then we gaue to holy Bi∣shops. Saint Basil writes to S. Ambrose, saying,Basil. epist. 55. that he holds the sterne of that great and famous Ship, the Church of God, and that God had placed him in the primary and chiefe seat of the Apostles.Inter epistola Cypriani. See more in B. Calton. ibid. §. 22. Cyprian. lib. 1. epist. 3. pag. 12. & pag. 22. in alijs editioni∣bus epist. 55. See Cyprians epi∣stles. Bellar. de Pont. Rom. lib. 4. cap. 7.S. Ierom wri∣ting to S. Augustine in some Epistles, stiles him Papa, (a Title now appropriate to the Bishop of Rome) and and the Bishop of Rome, often entitles Cyprian Papa, in Epistles sent to him. This holy Martyr Cyprian, wrote sharply to Corneli∣us Bishop of Rome, against his vniust intermedling with delinquents of Africa, which being censured, or excommunicated by their owne Bishops, fled to Rome to procure fauour and protection. Cyprian saith, That a part of the Flocke is appointed to each Pastor, which each in seuerall must rule and guide, &c. Yea, Cyprian, and with him the whole Nation of Africa, refused and resisted the Popes Iudgement and gouernment for this point. And Cyprian proceeded to write very contu∣meliously of him (as Bellarmine granteth) calling the Pope superbum imperitum, caecae ac prauae mentis; Proud, misiudging, of a blind and corrupt minde. And not onely the holy Martyr Cyprian, with his African Bi∣shops, but Saint Basil the Great,Basil. epist. 10. Baronius anno 372. § 32. Vsher. ib. cap. 1. pag. 23. found great fault with these beginnings of corruptions, getting foot-hold in the Latin Church. He called it . Occidentale supercilium, The Westerne pride: and saith elsewhere, Odi fastum illius ecclesiae. I hate the pride and presump∣tion of that Church.D Field. church. lib. 5. pag. 240. cap 39. Gerson. part. 4. serm. de pace & vnitate Graeco∣rum consid. 6. And indeed this beginning of corruptions grew so great in the end, that it occasioned the lamentable sepa∣ration of the Easterne or Greek Church, from the com∣munion with the Latin Church: The other 4 Patriarks, diuiding themselues from the B. of Rome, and at their
parting vsing these or the like words:See B. Carlton. Iurisd. cap. 5. Thy greatnesse we know thy couetousnesse we cannot satisfie, thy en∣croaching we can no longer abide: liue to thy selfe. §. 3. Concil. Carthag. 6 cap. 3. See this whole story fully dis¦cust, and all shifts answe∣red in B. Mor∣tons Appeal. l b. 4 cap. 8. per totum.For these seeds grew from time to time, In the time of Pope Zozimus, (who sate at Rome 417.) began a foul matter; he receiued Plaintifes out of Africa. and al∣leadged for his warrant, a Canon of the Councell of Nice. But the Bishops of Africa. gathered together in a Councell at Carthage, could not find that Canon in their copies ot the Ncene Councell, nor euer heard of it before, though some of them were of the best learned Diuines then liuing in the world: so that they were much troubled and offended at it, and tooke notice of the Roman-growing ambition. They write therfore to Zozimus, denying for the present, both the Canon and the Popes request, vntill they had searched further. And their letter was deliuered to Boniface,Concil. African. Cap. 01. successor to Zozimus (who dyed in the interim) and is extant in the Tomes of the Councels. Meane season, the Fathers of the Councell of Carthage procured two authentick co∣pies of the Nicene Canons, one from Cyrillus, Bishop of Auxandria, the other from Atticus, Bishop of Con∣stantinople: wherein no such thing was found as Zozi∣mus had alleadged. So that when Boniface vrged this matter againe, they sent their Decree, That the true Canons of the Nicene Councels should be obserued, but this Canon they reiected, as forged, and supposititions. But Boniface was also dead before their Letters came to Rome, and Celestinus his successor receiued them. This Celestine vrged the Canon againe, sending Com∣missioners into Africke to maintaine the cause; But the African Bishops would not yeeld,Concil. African. cap. 105. but wrote their absolute denyall (after much debating) both of the Canon as forged and of the Popes request as vnfit and vnusuall; admonishing him, Ne fumosum typhum sae∣culi
in ecclesiam Christi induceret, &c. That he and his successors would not bring into the Church the smoaky pride of the world, &c. And they made a Decree that no appeales should be made to Rome, or to any other place from Africke. The like Decree had been made in S. Cyprians time,Concil. Afric. cap. 92. Cyprian. ep. 55. by all the Bishops of Africa, that where any fault was committed, there the cause should be heard to preuent appeales to other places, or claimes of other Bishops. And this Canon of the African Councell,Concil Mileuitan cap. 22. was also re∣peated and confirmed in the Mileuitan Councel, where S. Augustine was present. For the sixt Carthagenian, the seuenth Carthagenian, the African, and Milevitan Councels were held all about this time by the same men. And in all this businesse S. Augustine had an espe∣ciall hand. So that here we haue S. Cyprian, S. Augu∣stine, and all the Bishops and Church of Africa, misli∣king, resisting, and making Decrees or Canons against the corruptions and vsurpations growing in the Church of Rome. Yea,Hardings an∣swer to Jewels challenge. pag. 290. and if we may beleeue Mr. Har∣ding and his Authors; These Saints, Martyrs, and Bi∣shops withstood, stood out, and liued and dyed out of the Communion of the Church of Rome, an hundred yeares together, rather then they would admit the cor∣ruptions and vsurpations of that Church; although these corruptions were then but in the beginning, and farre from the height which now they are come vnto. §. 4. And indeed, before they came to that height, their owne Bishop, Gregory the first, cryed out of that ambi∣tion in the Bishop of Constantinople, which the Bishops of Rome shortly after assumed. For Iohn, Bishop of Con∣stantinople, with new pride and presumption stroue to be called, The chiefe vniuersall Bishop, or Occumeni∣all Patriarke, which GregoryGreg. Regist. lib. 4. ep. 32. no∣vum nomen, sceleflum, nomen singularitatis. condemned as a new and wicked name, a name of singularity, which none of
the Bishops of Rom had euer assumed; and whosoeuer had it,Epist. 34. was the forerunner of Antichrist,ep. 38, 39. & 34. the Vniuersall plague of the Church, and corrupter of the faith, with many other like tearmes.Lib. 7. ep. 30. & 69. &c. The same Gregory com∣plained grieuously of those times: andLib. 8. ep. 36. prophesied, that they that came after should see worse times, in comparison whereof they would thinke the former times happy. And in one place he said,Lib. 4. ep. 38. All things that are foretold shall come to passe: The King of pride is at hand, and (which is most grieuous) an hoste of Priests is prepared for him. This prophesie of Gregory liuing 600 yeares after Christ, was in short time after fulfilled in his successors.Paulus Diaco∣nus in Phoca. Hic (Phocas) rogante Papa Bonifacio, statuit sedem Romanae ecclesiae, vt esset caput omnium ecclesiarum. For Boniface the third obtained of Phocas the Empe∣rour, that the seat of the Roman Church should be head of all Churches; and the Bishop thereof calledBaronius anno 106. n. 2. Solum Romanum Ponti∣ficem esse dicen∣dum vniversale, non autem Epis∣copum Constanti∣nopolitanum. See also Bblio∣thecarius in Boniface 3. Platina in Boniface 3 and Sabellicus 8.6. against all whom Bel∣larmine striues in vaine. In Apologia pro Torto. See B. Andrewes. Ad M. Torti librum Re∣sponsio pag. 329. & seq. and Ad Cardinalis Bellarmini Apologium Responsio pag. 277. & seq. and B. Morton Appeal. lib. 4. cap. 11. Vni∣uersall Bishop, and not the Bishop of Constantinople: which title in aftertimes gaue a good colour to the Bi∣shops of Rome, for their claimed-dominion ouer all Christian Churches. Vsher. c. 1. §. 18.So that within the first six hundred yeares, doubt∣lesse the seeds of much euill were sowen, and Antichrist conceiued, though not yet borne; for in all those six hundred yeares, no man could truly be called Papist, ei∣ther for holding this vsurpation, or any other of those 27 Articles which Bishop Jewel learnedly defends a∣gainst Mr. Harding. §. 5. Vsher. ib cap. 2. § 4 &c.In the succeding times The Bishops of France, Ger∣many, and Britany, opposed the Bishop of Rome in the matter of Images, as the African Bishops before had
done in the matter of Apeales. For in anno 754; A Synod of 338 Bishops at Constantinople, had abrogated all Images, sauing that one Image of Bread and Wine, which our Sauiour ordained in the B. Sacrament, to represent his Body and Blood. But the Pope, in the yeare 587,As our English Histories re∣port. by another Synod (called the second Councell of Nice) established the worshipping of Images. Which Councell, and Image-worship, our English Church execrated, and our Al∣cuinus wrote a Booke against it, which he carried in the name of our Bishops and Princes to the K. of France. The same second Councell of Nice was condemned also by the Bishops of Germany and France, in a Councell held at Frankfort vpon Mene, in the yeare 794. As also by Charles the Great, and Lodouicus Pius his sonne. And in this Lodouicus his time was another Synod held at Pa∣ris, anno 821. which condemned the same second of Nice, with the Image worship, and argued the Pope of errour therein. Now to say, these Councels that were against the Popes Iudgement, were condemned by the Pope, is to no purpose: for thus it appeareth still, that the Prin∣ces and Bishops of Brittany, France and Germany, re∣iected at once, both the worship of Images, and the de∣terminations of a corrupt Councell, and also the Popes infallibity of Iudgement, and his authority ouer them; as the Easterne, and the Southerne African Bishops had done before. Baronius further addeth,Baronius anno 794. nu. 36.39. & seq. that many learned and fa∣mous men liuing then in the world, and in the Ages following, greatly grudged at, and sharpely wrote a∣gainst that second Councell of Nice, and the Image-worship by it and by the Popes, confirmed: many of whose names he recites and cites their words. §. 6. In these times many Authors write, that the worlds
opinion was, that Antichrist was borne: yet that he was yet but an Infant, not able to subdue the Nations vntill a thousand yeares after Christs planting the Church; for till that time Satan was not let loose, Reuel, 20.7,Esay 1.21. Reuel. 17.2 & 18.23. 8. The faithfull City began to be an Har∣lot, and great Babylon prostituted it selfe; but could not yet inebriate the Inhabitants of the Earth with her Cups of Fornication, till that time came. But these preparations must goe before: as did also the publi∣shing to the world of Constantines Donation, long since, made (as it was pretented) but now first knowen to the world; for the Popes larger temporall Dominion; and also the comming abroad of the Decretable Epi∣stles of ancient Popes, long since also said to be written, but neuer before knowen to the world, for the Popes greater spirituall Dominion: both which are condem∣ned as meere counterfeits by many learned men, yea, by many of their owne side. §. 7. Sigonius l 6. de regno Italiae. Wer∣ner. ascil temp. aetat. 6. circa an∣num 894 et 74 Bellar. de Rom. Pont. l 4. c 12. verbis vlt. nullū saeculum indocti∣us aut infaelicius Baronius tomo 10. anno 900. §. 1. Saeculum sui asperitate ac boni sterilitate ferreū, mali{que} ex∣undant defor∣mitate plumbe∣um, {que} nopia scriptorum, obscurum. Abominatio desolationis in Templo—mirum quod non secuta mox fuerit desolatio templi.But the succeeding Ages exceeded in all kind of wic∣kednesse, both by the iniquity of Princes, and madnesse of people as Sigonius, Wernerus, and all others record. So openly wicked; that Baronius and Bellarmine can neither hide nor deny it. Bellarmine saith, No Age was more vnlearned, nor more if vnlucky. Baronius saith, They Were Iron Ages, for barrennesse of goodnesse, Leaden Ages for abundance of euill, Ages of darknesse for scarcity of Writers, which he tels in the beginning of the story, lest a weake man seeing (in the story) the abomination of desolation sitting in the Temple, should be offended, and not rather wonder, that there followed not immediately the desolation of the Tem∣ple.
And Baronius, anno 912. §. 8. laments thus. O what a face was then of the Roman Church! how filthy! when the most rich, and withall the most sordid Whores domineered at Rome! by whose pleasure Bi∣shops Seas were changed, Bishops placed: and (which is horrible to be heard or spoken) their Sweet-hearts (false Bishops) were intruded into Peters seat; which are for no other ends recorded in the Catalogue of Ro∣man Bishops, but onely to fill vp the times. And a little after. Then plainly (as appeareth) Christ was in a deep sleepe in the ship, when by these strong winds blowing, the ship was neere couered with waues. He slept (I say) when seeming not to see these things, he suffered them, and arose not to auenge them. And (which see∣med yet worse) there wanted Disciples with their cryes to awake him, all sleeping. What Priests doe you thinke were then chosen by these Monsters, what Deacons, Cardinals? seeing nothing is more naturall then for like to beget their like? This and much more Baronius to the like effect.Gerber. epist. 40. at the end of that Age. Vsh. ib. §. 33. Platina in Be∣nedicto, 4 Sa∣bell. in Ennead. 9. l. 1. & l. 2. Genebrard. chronolg. l 4, in Decimi saeculi initio. Wernerus fasci∣culo temporum aet. 6. circa an∣num 944. Vsh. ibid. §. 34. Gerbertus in few words spake much of those times Romanorum mores Mundus perhorrescit The Romans manners the world thorow∣ly abhorreth. Platina and Sabellicus haue the like complaints of the state of the Church, and Popes so vntollerably de∣generate. And Genebrand saith, that in about 150 yeares, there were about fifty Popes, which wholly swarued from the vertue of their Predecessors (a virtute maiorum prorsus deficerunt Apotactici Apostaticiue potiùs, quam Apostolici) rather masters of mis-rule, or Apostataes, then Apostolicke. Wernerus a Carthusian Monke, saith of this age. Sanctitatem Papam dimisisse, & ad Jmpora∣tores accessisse. That holinesse forsooke the Pope and came to the Emperours. Of the profane life of the Clergy; King Edgare made a wise religious speech to the English Bishops, which
Alred Abbot of Rhieuall published in writing.Abrod Rhieval. in Genealogi Dauidis Regis Scotiae, MS. I must say (saith hee) that which good men lament, and wicked laugh at: they melt away in gluttony and drun∣kennesse, in chambering and wantonnesse; that now the houses of Clerkes are accounted the Brothels of Whores, and Synods of Iesters; their Dicing, their Singing and dancing, their sitting vp till midnight with clamour and horror. Thus, thus yee waste the Patrimony or Kings, the almes of Princes, and which is more, the price of his most precious bloud. Did our Fathers exhaust their treasures to this end?Vsher. ibid. § 33 Polydor. lib 6. Hist. Angl. Al. fric. serm. ad sa∣cerdotes MS. colleg. Benedict. Cantabrig. Joan. Stella Sacerdos in vita Bnedicti 4 Papae 122. in∣quit. Acciderat illi aetati, quod omnis virtus, tam in capite quā in membris, ex hominum igan∣via consumpta fuerit. I haue Constantines, you haue Peters sword in our hands. Let vs ioyne hands, and swords, that the leprous may be cast out of our Tents, and the Lords Sanctuary may be purged. Doe it carefully, that wee may not repent of what we haue done, and what we haue giuen, finding that it is consumed, not in the seruice of God, but in the luxury of wicked man, with vnbridled liberty. The couetous rauin and tyranny both of Monkes and Priests, most scandalous, beyond all lay men, at those times is described and lamented, by Polydore Ver∣gil, Aelfricus, Joannes Stella, and others. §. 8. Vsh. ibid. cap. 3. §. 1. &c.After the great secular yeare of Christ (1000 after his Incarnation) the Christian faith much decayed from the ancient vnity: and inundation of all wickednesse ouerflowed the world, by the descriptions and lamen∣tations of Wernerus, Glaber Rodulphus, Lupus Episcopus, Guilelmus Archiepiscopus Tyrensis, &c. and wonder∣full prodigies and terrours appeared from aboue, and below were plagues, famines, earthquakes, &c. (spoken of by Sigonius, Hector Boethius. Hepidamus, Rupertus, Wernerus, Glaber, Sabellicus, Sigebert, Nangiacus, Vincen∣tius, Bellevacensus, Antonius Florenticus, Archiepisco∣pus, Joannes Nanclerus) as proclaymers of Antichrists
comming; for many beleeued that Antichrist was then borne, (as Baronius recordeth, 1001. §. 1. & 4.§. 5.) by the testimony of Abbo Floriacensis, of the time pre∣sently after the thousandth yeere of Christ; which o∣pinion had continued from the times of Hippolitus, Cy∣rill, and Chrysostome. In the thousandth yeare after Christs birth,Vsh. ib. cap. 4. Benno in vi Hilhbrandi & Platina in vita jus. Siluester the second was Bishop of Rome, and sate 4 yeares he was before named Gerbertus. He entred by the Diuels aide, (saith the Cardinall Benno) and by the deuils de∣ceit was quickly destroyed. And anno 1033. (which was the thousandth after Christs death,) Benedict the ninth, a childe of ten or twelue yeares old was made Pope, by money, not by merit, and sate 12 yeares. Hee was also cunning in Magicke and diuelish in Arts, and wrought much mischiefe to the Church and Common wealth, (saith Benuo) he was homo ignavus & nullius pre∣tij (saith Platina and Stella) Probrosus & infamius (saith Ʋolateran) Nefarius (saith Baronius:) and he was cho∣sen by the Deuils in the woods (saith Benno) In his time Cardinals began to be in some estimation:Baron. anno 1061. §. 9.16. And in Nicolas the seconds time, anno 1059. they had the first voyces in chusing Popes. Now they doe all, they are created by these words,August. tri∣umph. de potestat. eccles. quaest. 8. art. 4. Ballar. Apolog. conta Iacobum Regem cap. 4. pag. 34, 35. adedit. Romae. 1610. Estote fratres nostri, & prin∣cipes mundi The Pope creates them, and they create the Pope. Bellarmine saith. This dignity is not new, since it hath beene 500 yeares. But surely that is new, which came into the Church after Satans loosing. In which respect Wiclife saith, Cardinals were the inuen∣tion of the Deuill. For (in stead of lots directe by the Lord in the election of Matthias, Acts 1.) Now whom∣soeuer the Cardinals chuse, be he fit or vnfit,Wicf. art. 40. in concil. Constan. sess. 8. & in spe∣culo milit. eccle. cap. 10. Camera. Cardi∣nal. lib. de Refor Eccle. he is straight Beatissimus Pater, & Immediatus Christi vica∣rius. Wicliffe was indeed condemned in the Councill of Constance, yet many in that Councell held with his o∣pinion saith Cameracensis: that such choise of the Pope by Cardinals was vnprofitable and hurtfull to the
Church, and was vsed without resonable cause, burden∣some to the Church and fit to be abolished. Howsoe∣uer they are dignified with most glorious and transcen∣dent titles,Clemang de cor∣rupto Eccle. statu. §. 26. whose office was at first (saith Cleman∣gis) to carry out the dead and bury them. §. 9. When a thousand yeeres was expired after the de∣struction of Jerusalem, still greater miscries fell vpon Christendome. Romanus Diogenes. Emperour of the East, was assayled by Warre, and taken Prisoner by the Sultan of the Persians and Assyrians, troden vpon in despight of the Christian religion and returning home, had his eyes put out by his owne Nobles and reiected. The Sultan subdueth many Countries, great Antiochia; Celosyra, both the Calicias, Isaurio, Pamphilia, Lycia, Pi∣sidia, Lycaonia, Cappadocia, Galatia, both the Pontuses, Bythinia,Matt. Paris hist. anno Dom. 1072. and part of the lesser Asia, &c. And in the West, the negligence and wickednesse of the Cler∣gy, was so outragious, that some published letters as sent from Hell by Satan and all his infernall powers, gi∣uing thankes to the Ecclesiasticall orders that they fai∣led in nothing to do him pleasure, but sent or suffered so many soules to descend to Hell, as neuer any Ages had done before.Anton. in Chro. tit. 16. cap. 1. § 21. Segebert. chron. an. 1088 The Shismes of Anti-Popes and Anti-Cesars, encreased this euill: the Crownes and the Cro∣siers dissenting, one excommunicating another, and one contemning anothers censure, and treading down both authority and equity vnder their feet. And then began that Nouity (not to call it heresie) that to euill Princes subiection was not due; and though men had sworne fidelity to them,Onuphr. Vita Greg. 7, ex libro 4. de vara crea∣tion Rom. Pon∣tif. yet they ought them no fidelity: and that whosoeuer rose against the King was not periu∣red, but he that obeyed the King, was to be accounted excommunicate This saith Sigebert, was a Nouity, if not heresie. But Onuphrius saith, that hence did arise perniciosissima seditio & haeresis omnium pestilentissima.
And Auentinus saith. Then false prophets, false apostles,Aventin. Annal. Boer. l. 5. false priests came out and deceiued the people with counterfeit Religion, and seeking to establish thier own power and dominion quenched Christian charity and simplicity, and then all good, open, iust, ingenuous, and plaine people thought the kingdome of Antichrist be∣gan, for they saw that was come to passe, which Christ so many yeares before had foretold. Thus writes A∣ventine, of the times of Gregory the seuenth, formerly called Hildebrand. Waltramus, Bishop of Naumburg, and Lambertus Schasuaburgensis, and Gerhohus Be cherspergensis say, Now was Satan let loose out of prison.Sir Iohn Hay∣woo of Supre∣macy, pag. 68. Mahiavel. dis∣pat. de rep. l. 1. c. 12. & Hospn. de Orig. Monach. l. 6. c. 66. For Piety and Religion now did not onely decline by degrees, but ran headlong to a ruinous downefall, and there was no where lesse piety, then in those that dwelt nearest to Rome, as Machiavel obserued. This Hildebrand, called afterwards Gregory the se∣uenth, liued in this tenth Age, beginning his Papacy, Anno 1076. The Canons or Dictates of this Hillebrand,Onuphr. in vita Gregorij 7 col. 248. B. Vsher. ib. cap. 5. §. 17. Greg. 7. Kegest. lib. 2 post. epist. 55. tom. 3. Con∣ edit. Binij, part. 2. pag. 1196. (which he deuised or executed beyond all his Predecessors, saith Onuphrius) were many and strange: whereof these are the chiefest. 1 That the Bishop of Rome onely is by right called vniuersall. 2 That he may ordaine Clerkes in euery Church where he will. 3 That the greater causes of euery Church ought to be referred to that Sea. 4 That he alone can depose Bishops, or reconcile them. 5 That his Legat is aboue all other Bishops, though he be of inferiour degree, and that he may giue the sentence of deposition against them. 6 That he alone may for the necessity of times, make new lawes.
7 That he alone may vse the Imperiall Ensignes. 8 That his feet alone all Princes must kisse. 9 That he may absolue subiects from their fidelity to wicked Princes. 10 That he alone may depose Princes and Empe∣rours. 11 That his sentence way not be retracted by any man; and he alone may retract all mens. 12 That he ought not to be judged of any man. 13 That he is not to be accounted Catholicke, that concordeth not with the Roman Church. 14 That the Church of Rome did neuer erre, nei∣ther euer can erre. 15 That the Bishop of Rome, if he be Canonically or∣dained, is by the merits of S. Peter vndoubtedly made holy. 16 That no Councell without his command ought to be called generall.Onuphr. ib. col. 250. Sir Iohn Hy ard Su∣premacy, pag. 57 Avenn. Annal. Boiorum lib. 7. ribuit hanc sententiam Eber∣hardo Salisburi∣ensi Episcopo: Hildebrandus primus specie re∣ligionis Anti∣christi imperij fundamenta je∣cit. Hoc bellum nesandum pri∣mus auspicatus est, quod per suc∣cessor hucusque continuatur. And A entine helfe in the fit booke, writes thus. 17 That no Chapter or Booke in the Bible shall be accounted Canonicall without his authority. 18 That no man dare to condemne him that ap∣pealeth to the Apostolicke Sea, &c. Vpon these foundations (saith Onuphirius) he laid his steps and stayres, and made his way to effect all that in his mind he had conceiued. This man was the first that enterprized to be elected and consecrated Pope without consent of the Empe∣rour: and set forth a Decree to excommunicate all that affirmed the consent or knowledge of the Emperour to be necessary to the election of Popes. He (saith Auen∣tine) was the first, that vnder colour of Religion built vp the Popes Empire (primus Jmperrium pontificium con∣didit) which his successors for 400 and 50 yeares toge∣ther, maugre the world maugre the Emperours (invito mudo, invitis Imperatoribus) haue so drawne out, that they haue brought into seruitude high and low, put them vnder their yoke, and terrified all with their
thunder.—that the Roman Emperour is now nothing but onely a name without a body, without glory. §. 10. Onuphrius speakes enough also (though he was a great fauourer and amplifier of the Popes dignity.Onuphn vita Gregor. 7. col. 271, 272.) Thus he writes. Him alone (that is Hildebrand) may all the Latin Churches, but especially the Roman, thanke for freedome from the Emperours hand, and for the large endowment or wealth, riches, and (profanaditi∣one) worldly iurisdiction; and for being preferred and set ouer Kings, Emperours, and all Christian Princes: and shortly to speake in a word, by him it attained to that great and high estate whereby the Church of Rome is become the Mistris of all Christians: whereas be∣fore, as a poore handmaid, (tanguam vilis ancilla) it was held vnder, not onely by the Emperours, but by euery Prince that was aided by the Emperour: from him (Hildebrand) flowed the right (jus) of that great, and almost infinite power of the Roman Bishop, so feareful and venerable in all Ages. For although before, the Ro∣man Bishops were honoured as the heads of Christian Religion, Christs Vicars, and Peters successors: yet their authority stretched no further then to the pro∣pounding or maintaining of poins of faith: but their persons were subiect to the Emperous; all was done by the Emperours appointment; by them the Popes were created; of them the Popes of Rome durst not iudge, or determine any thing. All the Bishops of Rome, Gregory the seuenth was the first (trusting to the Armes of the Normans, and the wealth of Maud the Countesse, a powerfull woman in Italy: and inflamed by the German Princes discords, wasting themselues by ciull warres:) beyond the custome of his Ancestors, contemning the authority and power of the Emperor, when he had obtained the Popedome, dared not onely to excommunicate, but further to depriue of his King∣dome
and Empire, the Emperour himselfe, by whom if he was not elected, yet he was confirmed in his Pope∣dome: Res ante easecula inaudita; A thing neuer heard of before that Age. For, the Fables which are repor∣ted of Arcadius, Anastasius, and Leo Iconomachus (nihil moror) I recke not of. Whereupon Otto Frisingensis, a Writer of those times,Lego & relego. saith thus; I reade ouer and o∣uer the Acts of the Roman Kings and Bishops, but I ne∣uer find any of them before this Henry, excommunica∣ted by the Bishop of Rome, or depriued of his King∣dome,B. Vsher. grauiss. quaest. cap. 5. §. 8, 9, &c. &c. Thus writes Onuphrius. The like with Otto, writes Gotfridus Ʋiterbiensis, Joannes Trithenius: and others alleadged (with these) by our Bishop Ʋsher. Of Hildebrand, not onely Cardinall Benno (who li∣ued in his time and wrote his life) but many others do write very prodigiousand diuellish things: as Paulus Bernriedensis, Ioannes Trithenus, Ioh. Aventinus, Ma∣rianus Scotus, Otto Frisingensis, Conradus Liechtenavius, Abbas Ʋrspergensis, Carolus Sigonius, and Onuphrius, that he was a Magician, a Necromancer, and by helpe of the Diuell got the Popedome, and that he was so jud∣ged by thirty Bishops gathered together out of Italy, Frace, and Germany, in Synodo Brixinae Noricae, anno 1080. Although the late Iesuite and Cardinall Baroni∣us would excuse him. He propagated the doctrine of Deuils, forbidding marriage to the Clergy, and com∣manding abstinence from meates, (I Tim. 4.1, 3.) about which many troubles and euils arose in the Church;In the Histo∣ries of anno. 1074. as Sigebertus Gemblacensis, and Lambertus Schasuaburgen∣sis (beside many other) report at large, and with much detestation. See the story of this Hildi∣brand hereaf∣ter.This Hildebrand laid the foundation of Papisme, or the Popes greatnesse, and was exceedingly opposed by the Bishops of Germany and France, and the greatest number of Jtalians condemning his wicked doctrine and courses: as did also the common people, calling
the Pope Antichrist, that trode vnder foot, all Lawes,Vsher ib. §. 18.2. &c. Avent. lib. 5. Annal. aedit. ngolst. anno 54. pag. 573. 574. humane and diuine: and vnder the title of Christ, d d the businesse of Antichrist, absoluing men, not from sinne, but from the Lawes of God; filling the world with warres, seditions, rauishments, periuries, mur∣ders, fire, and robberies, corrupting Histories to couer and maintaine his ambition; yea adulterating the ho∣ly Scriptures with false interpretations to serue his lusts. This inexpiable wickednesse, this mischiefe, ne∣uer before heard of in the world, ought to be cut off by the Emperours sword; the Wolfe raging in the Sheeps skinne ought to be taken out of the world, &c. This and much more (as Aventine reporteth,) Plerique tum priuatim, publice clamitant. At that time therefore the greatest part of the world, Princes, Bishops, and people cryed out for refor∣mation of intollerable corruptions crept into the Church. §. 11. Antiquus. You and your Authors reckon vp ob∣scure Historians; but the most approued writers of Church-Histories, are wholly for vs, such as our Mar∣tyr Campian reckoneth vp in his seuenth Reason, Euse∣bius, Damasus, Hieronymus, Ruffinus, Orosius, Socrates, Sozomenus, Theodoretus, Cassiodorus, Gregorius, Turonen∣sis, Ʋsuordus Regino, Marianus, Sigeberius, Zonaras, Ce∣drenus. Nicephorus; These are wholly in the praise of our Church. Antiquissimus. I answer you manifoldly; First, I haue cited many of these speaking against the manifold corruptions of your Church in their owne times. Se∣condly, the more ancient of these which Campian rec∣kons, could not speake against the corruptions which were not brought into the Church, vntill after their times. Thirdly the latest of these might well be par∣ties with you, as maintained by you, to like the things
vsuall in their times, and yet many of them could not hold, but grauely reproued the nouell corruptions of their times.See B. Mortons Apologia Cathol. part. 2. l. 2, c. 9. And lastly, I say Campian wrote vntruely and vnsoundly, making a glorious flourish, that all these Historians were wholly for your praises, when as yet your owne Writers do ordinarily reiect them, as wri∣ting against you. As for example. Eusebius, in reiecting and refelling of whose History Gelasius, hath vsed great wisedome, saith our Bishop CanusCanus loc. theol. lib. 11. cap. 6. pag 659.. And your Cardinall Bellarmine saith. To Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius and Luther, I answer, Omnes mani∣festi haeretici sunt. They are all manifest HereticksBla de Chri∣sto l. 1. cap 9. pag. 104.. Hieronymus, He is not the rule of the Church (a bold and a bald scoffe) in iudging of the Canonicall Scrip∣tures, saith your CanusCanus loc. com. lib. 2. p. 7. §. secundum quo∣que.. Ruffinus, He knew not the traditions of the Fathers, saith CanusCanus ibid. §. nam ad pri∣mum.. Damasus, Sophrnoius, Simeon Metaphrastes (when they crosse the now Romish tenets) they little moue me, saith BellarmineBellar. de Rom. pontif. lib. 2 cap. 5. §. ne{que} mul∣tum me movet.. Marianus Scotus, secum ipse & cum veritate pugnat. saith BellarmineBellar. ibid. §. quocirca sasci∣culum temporum & passionale merito contem∣nimus.: he plainly crosseth himselfe and the truth; and therefore we iustly contemne his Fascicu∣lus temporum, and his Passionale. Sigebert he was a follower or fauourer of Henry the fourth, and therefore tooke things wrong, saith Bellar∣mineBellar. ib. lib. 4. cap. 13. §. Re∣spondeo Sigeber∣tum.. Sigebert, and Marianus Scotus, we know well enough, they are corrupt Authors saith BellarmineBellar. ib. lib. 3. cap. 24. § quod autem.. Socrates, He was a Nouatian Hereticke, his testimo∣ny in dogmaticall points is of no moment, saith Bellar∣mineBellar. de cul∣tu Sanctorum lib. 3. cap. 10. § adde vltimò.. Sozomenus, multa mentitur, he lies in many things, saith your Iesuite ValentinianusValent. de cae∣libatu cap. 6. § primo quia So∣zomenus.: also, Socrates, and Sozomenus are not worthy of credit (In the story of Paphnutius) Valent ib.Valent. ib..
And Sozomens History is Reprobata a Gregorio, quia multa mentitur, saith BellarmineBellar. lib. 1. de clericis. cap. 20. § at quod concil.. Thus the Historians of greatest note which your Campian alledgeth, are by Campians Fellowes and Ma∣sters, reiected, refelled or refuted, condemned for Here∣tickes, scoffed at, not regarded, counted lyers, mistaken and erronious, corrupted, Hereticks, vnworthy of cre∣dit, &c. Antiquus. Indeed I cannot but wonder at it, that they should be thus in generall applauded, and in par∣ticulars reiected? Antiquissimus. And so the world both in generall and particular deluded. For, obserue here by the way. First, If these Histories be true, which haue recorded many grieuous corruptions crept into your Church, with the worlds wonder and detestation of them: how haue you been deluded and perswaded of the vnity, sincerity and glory of that Church, neuer spoken a∣gainst by any, before Luthers time? but that all Wri∣ters and Histories spake in high commendation there∣of? which you see, they doe not. Secondly, If the Histories be false or doubtfull: how can you appeale to them for a true description of the succession, propagation, doctrine, traditions, or cu∣stomes of the Church, to shew the sincerity and truth thereof? which you more vrge, and more leane vpon then vpon the Scriptures. §. 12. Antiquus. Well then to let these histories passe,See these things more at large in B. v∣sher. ib. cap. 7. §. 5. shew me some learned Iudicious Diuines, that haue written against the errours and corruptions, by you ascribed to the Church of Rome. Antiquissimus. Take good Saint Bernard for one (who liued about the yere, 1130.Bernard in Can∣tio. ser. 33.) wo be vnto this ge∣neration (saith he) for the leauen of the Pharisees, which
is hypocrisie: if yet that may be called hypocrisie, which for the abundance cannot, and for the Impu∣dence desires not, to be hid. —Omnes amici, & omnes inimici, omnes necessarij, & omnes adversarij: omnes do∣mestici, & nulli pacifici: omnes proximi, & omnes quae sua sunt, quaerunt Ministri Christi sunt, & seruiunt Anti∣christo. All friends, and yet all are enemies: all necessa∣ries, and yet all aduersaries: all of an houshold, yet none peaceable: all neighbours, yet euery one seekes his owne: the Ministers of Christ, but they serue An∣tichrist. And afterwards. Superest vt de medio fiat dae∣monium meridianum, &c. It remaineth, that the Meri∣dian Deuill (the bold deuill that walkes at noone, or at mid-day in the open light) come to deceiue the residue that still are in Christ, persisting in their simplicity. For he hath supped vp the riuers of wise men, and torrents of powerfull men:Iob 40.23. and hath hope that Jordan will run in his mouth that is, The humble and simple that are in the Church. For he is Antechrist, which counterfet∣teth himselfe to be not onely the day,2 Thess. 2.4, 8. but the midday: and extols himselfe aboue all that is worshipped as God: whom the Lord Iesus will slay with the breath of his mouth, and destroy in the appearing of his com∣ming. Bern. in Psal. 90. vel. 91. ser. 6.This conclusion also he repeats, writing vpon the Psalme Qui habitat. Superest, vt reueletur homo peccati, &c. It remaineth, that the Man of sinne be reuealed, the sonne of perdition, Daemonium non modo diurnum, sed & meridianum: quod non solum transfiguratur in An∣gelum lucis, sed extollitur super omne quod dictur Deus, aut quod colitur. &c. Bern. serm. 1. in convers. Pauli. And elsewhere Saint Bernard makes his complaint to God: O God, thy neere friends come neere to stand against thee. The whole Vniuesity of Christian people from the least to the greatest, seeme to haue con∣spired against thee. From the sole of the feet to the crowne of the head, there is no soundnesse. Iniquity is
gone out from the elder Iudges thy Vicars,Of Bernard, see more in D. eld Appen∣dix to the fift booke of the Church, part. 1. pag. 88, 89. which seem to rule thy people: and now we cannot say, such people, such Priest; for the people are not so as the Priest. Alas, alas, O Lord God, those are the first & chiefe in persecution, who seeme to loue and beare the first and chiefe place in thy Church, &c. Johannes Sarisburiensis told Hadrian the fourth,Joh Sarisbur. in Policratic. lib. 6. cap. 24. plainly, what the world thought of him and his Pre∣lats: that the Roman Church shewed her selfe not a mother, but a step mother to all other Churches. For in it sit the Scribes and Pharises, laying importable bur∣dens vpon mens shoulders, which themselues will not touch with one finger.— They hurt very oft, and here∣in they follow the Deuils, which then are thought to doe good, when they cease to doe harme, except a very few, who performe the name and office of Pastors. Sed & ipse Romanus Pontifex, omnibus grauis & fere intole∣rabilis est: that is, euen the Bishop of Rome himselfe is grieuous to all, and almost intollerable.Aliacus de Re∣formatione Ec∣clesiae. Caesarius Hei∣sterbach. hist. lib. 2. cap. 29. These times were euill, the succeeding much worse. Of which Pe∣trus de Aliaco, Cardinall of Cambray, said, It was a prouerbe in his time. Ad hunc statum venit Romana ec∣clesia, vt non esset digna regi nisi per reprobos. The Church of Rome was come to that state, that it was not wor∣thy to be gouerned, but onely by Reprobates. Robert Grosthead,Matth. Paris. in Henric. 3. See this Histo∣ry abridged in D. Field church. appendix part. 1. pag. 97. & B. Carlton. Iurisd. cap. 8. §. 111. a very learned and holy Bishop of Lincolne, liuing anno 1140. wrote sharpely to the Pope (for the euils he did specially in England) that he was opposite to Christ, a murderer of soules, and an Here∣ticke in these his courses, &c. Vpon receit of which letters the Pope was exceedingly moued, threatning to cast downe this Bishop into the pit of all confusion, but was pcfied by the more moderate Cardinals, telling him of this Bishops holinesse, learning, reputation: and since there must be a departure from their Church, the medling with such an excellent man might occasion it; the things which he proued being full and manifest.
Archb. Abbo. contra Hill, rea∣son 1. §. 28.William Ockam an Englishman, a great Schooleman, liuing anno 1320. for his large reproofe of the Pa∣pacy in many points in his bookes, he was excommu∣nicated by the pope, and dyed willingly vnder that sen∣tence.Catalog testium. verit. lib 18. D. Field. ch l. 3. c. 11. He cryed out of peruerting Scriptures, Fathers, and Canons of the Church with shamelesse and Har∣lots foreheads; and that many that should be pillars of the Church did cast themselues headlong into the pit of Heresies See B. Carlton. Iurisdiction, cap. 1. §. 11.Michael Cesenas, liued anno 1320. he was generall of the Order of the Minorites, he wrote against three constitutions of Pope Iohn 22. and was by Iohn de∣priued and disabled from taking any other dignity: but Cesena appealed from the Pope (as from the head of faction in the Church) to the Roman Catholicke, and Apostolicke Church, and was fauoured therein by Oc∣kam, and many famous learned men, and by the two Vniuersities of Oxford and Paris. Nicholas Clemangis, Archidiaconus Baiocensis, liuing anno 1417. in his booke De corupto Ecclesiae statu, writes very sharpely against the Popes ambition and coue∣tousnesse, preying vpon all Churches, and bringing them into miserable slauery: and against the stately Cardinals, and other vices of the Clergy. Gerson lib. de concil o vnius obedientiae, and in many other bookes.John Gerson, Chancellor of Paris, anno 1429. writes the like, wishing that all things should be reformed and brought backe to their ancient state, in or neere the A∣postles times. Of Gersons doctrine, see D. Field Appendix, to the fifth booke of the Church, part. 2. p. 73. & seq. Petrus de Aliaco Cardinalis Cameracensis, liuing about the same time, wrote to the Councell of Constance, a booke wher∣in he reprooueth many notable abuses of the Romanists, and giueth aduice how to redresse them. Arch. Abbot ibid. §. 13.Laurentius Valla, a Patricias of Rome, and Canon of Saint Iohns of Lateran, liuing about the same time. wrote against the forged Donation of Constantine, and
many abuses of the Pope: and was by the Pope driuen into exile. I might here speake of Leonardus Aretinus, Anto∣nius Cornelius Lynnichanus, and diuers other writers re∣prouing the same things. §. 13. Antiquus. Let them alone; for these whom you haue alledged, speake not of any false doctrines of the Church of Rome, but onely against the wicked liues of the Professors. Antiquissimus. Yes, against both: and especially, be∣cause they laboured by false doctrine to iustifie their doings, and therefore they write not onely against the Pope, but against the Papacy, the very office that chal∣lenged a right to doe such things as the Pope and his Clergy did. The two Cardinals Cameracensis and Cusanus,Camer. in his booke to the Councell of Constance. Cusanus Con∣cord. Cathol. lib. 2. whol∣ly condemned the Papacy (as we do) denying the Popes vniuersality of Iurisdiction, vncontroulable power, in∣fallible iudgement, and right to meddle with Princes states; making him nothing but the first Bishop in or∣der and honour, amongst the Bishops of the Christian Church. And this claimed power of the Pope, dissolving the whole frame of Ecclesiasticall Hierarchy, and forme of gouernment settled by Christ, was thought no lesse hurtfull then the bringing in of heresie and false do∣ctrine, by all that wrote against it: and therefore they impute vnto it, Heresim pestilentissimam, and all such things as belong onely to Antichrist and his follow∣ers. And indeed the desire of worldly wealth and honour drew on many corruptions of doctrine. For when the ouer-politicke Popes found but few learned idicious men able to maintaine the truth, and few potent cou∣ragious Princes able to maintaine their right against
them: then they fell to make their owne greatnesse, wealth, and honour the very rule to square out the Ca∣nons of Faith and Gouernment, and then set Clerks on worke to deuise arguments to maintaine them The Church at that time abounding with rewards to quic∣ken their wits, and spurre on their diligence. From this root proceeded (doubtlesse) the forged Donation of Constantine, and the Decrees and decretall Epistles of ancient Bishops, then newly brought to the knowledge of the world, and neuer before seene, and in these more learned Ages rejected by their owne Doctors: and from this root, sprung a new generation of Schoolemen, moulding a new Doctrine mixed of Philosophy and divnity, to amuse and amaze the world, and keepe it in blindnesse: and much corruption of Scriptures, which now must haue no other sense then their Philosophy, and the Rules of their Gouernment will giue it. This desire of wealth and greatnesse, brought in Image-wor∣ship, which the holy Scriptures so plainly and plenti∣fully condemne. For when it might easily haue been abolished,See the Histo¦ries of those times. as but then creeping in: and that Leo Jsaurus Emperour, seeing the Sarazens take offence at Christi∣ans, to abhorre and massacre them for their Images in Churches, which offence Leo tooke away and burned the Images: Pope Gregory the second, that ought to haue Ioyned therein; opposed him, and tooke the hint to make the Emperour odious to all Italy, as an enemy to Religion, to the Saints and to their Memories. And while the Emperour was weakned by the Sarazens in the East, the Pope made this an occasion to make the West to reuolt from him: and quickly depriued him of Italy: to the great iniury of the Emperor scandall to the world, and hurt to Christendome. And then Image worship must be defended that had been the meanes of so much wealth to the Pope, with opposing Councell to Councell, Princes and learned men one against another, to the great trouble of Christendome.
The worshipping of Images therefore did the Pope good seruice: and so it doth still; for it drawes mul∣titudes of deuout people to Rome, and other places, with their offerings and other spendings to enrich them. §. 14. But to leaue these things, and come to particular doctrines held then by many, otherwise then they be now by the Romans. The Fathers held those bookes for Canonicall Scrip∣tures which we now doe,D. Field of the Church lib. 4. cap. 23. & Ap∣pendix. part. 1. pag. 100. See all their allegations in D. Field. lib. 4. cap. 23. and separated those from the Canon which we doe separate. Namely, Melito Bishop of Sardis, Origen, Athanasius, Hilarius, Nazianzen Cy∣ril of Jerusalem, Epiphanius, Ruffinus, Hierom, Gregory, and Damascene. So did also many other learned men, liuing in the corrupt state of the Church vnder the Pa∣pacy: as, Hugo de Sancto victore, Richardo de Sancto victo∣re, Petrus Cluviacensis, Lyranus, Dionysius Carthusianus, Hugo Cardinalis, Thomas Aquinas, Richardus Armacha∣nus, Picus Mirandula, Ockam, Caietan, and Dredo. In this point they were all Protestants, and desired the re∣formation that we haue made. That man after the Fall,Field Appendix ad lib. 5. part. 1. pag. 101. vntill he be restored by grace can doe nothing spiritually good, or that is not sinne: nor can any way dispose himselfe to a true conuersion vnto God, without preuenting grace, was the doctrine of S Augustine, Prosper; and more lately of Thomas Bradwardin: Gregorius Ariminensis, Cardinall Conta∣ren, and Bonaventure, cited by Cassander Consult. art. 8. Iustification by Christs imputed righteousnesse (not by our inherent) was taught by S. Bernard. Epist. 190.Bernard. Geson lib. 4. de consulatione theologiae. See these al∣leadged in my second Booke, in the chapter of Iustificati∣on. Assignata est homini Iustitia aliena, quia caruit sua. To man is assigned the righteousnesse of another, because he had none of his owne. And serm 61 Jn cantica. And Gerson, and Cardinall Contarenus, and the Diuines of Co∣len in their Enchiridion, and Antididagma, and Albertus Pighius.
That man cannot merit any thing properly at Gods hand,See D. Field. Church. appen∣dix ad lib. 4. cap. 11. Scotus, Ariminensis, Waldensis are plaine. So Pope Arian on the 4 of the Sentences cited by Cassan∣der, Consult. art. 6. and Clicthoveus cited there also. And Bernard. serm. 1. in festo omnium sanctorum, and oft elsewhere, he saith our good workes are via regni, non causa regnandi, the way to heauen, but not the cause meriting heauen. See these Au∣thors words cited at large in Bishop V∣shers booke. D. Field Church. appendix part. 1. pag. 103. &c.And Cardinall Contarenus, epist. ad Cardinalem Far∣nesium. To which adde out of Bishop Vshers answer to the Jrish Iesuite. pag. 500. & seq. A great number more of ancient Fathers and later writers. That Christs merits are to be apprehended by a liuely faith, which faith is a motion of the spirit, when men truely repenting of their former life, are raised and lifted vp to God, and doe truly apprehend the mer∣cies of God promised in Christ, and doe indeed feele in themselues an assurance that they haue receiued remis∣sion of their sinnes, and reconciliation by Gods good∣nsse, and by the merit of Christ, and doe cry Abba Fa∣ther. Cited by Cas∣sander. consult. a, 4.This is expresly deliuered in the booke exhibited by Charles the fift Emperour, to the Diuines of both sides: and the Diuines agreed vnto it. And in the Enchiridion (cited by Cassander, ibid.) well approoued by all the learned Diuines of Jtaly and France: and by Cardinall Contarenus in his Tract of Iustification: and by the Diuines of Colen in their An∣tididagma, De duplici fiducia, and by Saint Bernard, serm. 1. de Annuntiatione dominica. The Communion in both kindes is deliuered to the people in all Churches of the world vnto this day, sa∣uing in the Roman Church: and in the Roman Church it so continued, for more then a thousand yeares, in the solemne, ordinary, and publike dispensation of that Sa∣crament:Cassander con∣sult art. 22. As Cassander sheweth, and Beatus Rhena∣nus. And it hath been called for, with great earnest∣nesse,
by many Nations and Churches,Rhenanus vpon Tertullian de corona militis. both before and in the Councell of Trent: and is still stiffely denyed by the Pope and his Prelates. Against priuate Communions (called priuate Masses) where none of the people present receiue, but the priests onely: Cassander writes, and Micrologus,Cassander prae∣fat. ord. Romani Microl. de officio Missae cap. 19. Clicthveus on the Canon of the Masse, cited by Cassander. ibidem. and Clicthoveus, among many others. Circumgestation (saith Cassander) is contrary to the manner of the Ancients,Cassander con∣sult. art. 22. Feild. quo supra. for they admitted none to the fight of the Sacrament, but the partakers, and therefore the rest were bidden depart. Crautzius prai∣seth Cusanus, who being the popes Legat in Germany, tooke away his Circumgestation vnlesse it were with∣in the Octaues of Corpus Christi day: The Sacrament be∣ing instituted for vse, and not for ostentation. Touching the honour of Saints, Gerson and Conta∣renus,Gerson de Di∣rectione cordis. consider 16. & sequent. Contarenus in confut. artic. Lutheri. and many others reprehend sundry superstitious obseruations, and wish they were wisely abolished. Whether the Saints in heauen doe particularly know our estate, and heare our cryes and grones, not onely Saint Augustine,August. de cura pro mortuis. Glossa in Esay 63 Hugo Erudit. Theolog. de sa∣cram. fidei lib. 2. part. 16. cap. 11. and the Author of the Interli∣neall glosse; But Hugo de Sancto victore tels vs it is al∣together vncertaine, and cannot be knowne. So that though in generality they pray for vs (or rather for all the Church on earth,) yet we may not safely and with faith pray to them. That in the primitiue Church, publike prayers were celebrated in the vulgar tongue; Lyra confesseth,Lyra in 1. Cor. 14 Caietan in re∣spons. ad Arti∣culos Parisiense, and Caietan professeth that he thinketh it would bee more for edification, if they were so now. And he con∣firmeth his opinion out of Saint Paul. Saint Bernard wrote diuers things concerning the
now-Romish Doctrine, touching speciall faith, imper∣fection and impurity of inherent righteousnesse, me∣rits power of freewill, the conception of the blessed Virgin, and the keeping of the feast of her conception.See D. Field. Appendix to the fift booke of the Church. part. 1. pag. 89. Bernard. serm. 5. de verb. Esaiae. All our righteousnesse (saith he) is as the polluted rags of a menstruous woman.Serm. 1. de An∣nunciat. We must beleeue par∣ticularly that all our sinnes are remitted vs.Tract. de gra∣tia & lib. arb. in fine. Our workes are via regni, not causa regnandi, they are the way that leadeth to the kingdome, but no cause why we raigne.Epist. 175. ad Canonicos. Lugd. The blessed Virgin was conceiued in sin; and the feast of her conception ought not to be kept. So that what errours and abuses we haue amended in our reformed Churches; those the learned men of former Ages, haue espied, and haue written against them: and we haue made no other Reformation then they heartily desired. For conclusion of this point; see what a number of famous men, writing and preaching against the cor∣ruptions of Rome, One Vniuersity afforded: and thereby gesse what the world did. §. 15. Gabriel Powel de Antichristo. Edit. Lond. 1605. reckons these Oxford men amongst many others in his Preface. 1 King Alfred, Founder of Oxford Vniuersity: would not haue his people ignorant of Scriptures, or bard the reading thereof. Anno 880 Capgrav. cataloge. Sanct Angliae. Polydor. Ʋirg. hist. Ang. lib. 5. Baleus. 2 Joannes Patricius Erigena, a Brittan, first Reader in Oxford, ordained by the King; wrote a booke of the Eucharist, agreeable to Bertrams, and condemned after by the Pope, in Vercellensi Synodo. And he Martyred for it, anno 884. Philip. in Chron. lib. 4. sub Henr. 4, Baleus cent. 2. cap 24. 3 Some Diuines at Oxford were burnt in the face and banished, for saying the Church of Rome was the Whore of Babylon, Monkery a stinking carrion: their
vowes, toyes, and nurses of Sodome, Purgatories, Masses dedications of Temples, worship of Saints, &c. inuen∣tions of the Deuill, anno 960. Matth. Paris. lib. 4. Guido Perpin. de haeresib. Baleus cent. 2. 4 Arnulph or Arnold, an English preacher, a Monke of Oxford, for preaching bitterly against Prelats and Priests wicked liues and corruptions, cruelly but∣chered, anno 1126. (but saith Platina, greatly com∣mended by the Roman Nobility for a true seruant of Christ) Bale cent. 2. cap. 70. 5 Joannes Sarisburiensis, anglus Oxoniensis theologus, Episcopus Carnotensis, beloued of the Popes Engenius 3. and Hadrian. 4. wrote against the abuses of Clergy and Bishops, in Objurgatorie Cleri, & in Polycratico, he saith, The Scribes and Pharises sit in the Roman Church, lay∣ing importable burdens on mens shoulders. The Pope is grieuous to all, and almost intollerable. [Ita debac∣chantur ejus legati ac si ad ecclesiam flagellandam egressus sit Satan a face domini.] and he that dissents from their doctrine is iudged an Hereticke or a Schismaticke, &c. 1140. Sarisburien. Polycr. lib. 5. cap. 16. & lib. 6. cap. 24. 6 Gualo, Professor of Mathematicks in Oxford, much praised of Sarish. in Polycrat. wrote inuectiues against Priests, of the Monkish profession, their luxu∣ries, pompes, and impostures, anno 1170. Bale cent. 3. cap. 15. 7 Gilbert Foliot, Doctor of Diuinity in Oxford, Bi∣shop first of Hereford, and after of London, perswaded King Henry 2 (after the example of Jehoshaphat and other Kings) to keepe the Clergy in subiection: and oft resisted and blamed Tho. Becket to his face, 1170. Bale ib. cap. 7. 8 Syluester Gyrald, Archdeacon Meneuensis belo∣ued of Hen. 2 and Iohn King of England, wrote a booke of the Monks (Cistertians) naughtinesse, &c. 1200. e∣land catalogo virorum illustrium. Bale cent 3 cap. 59. 9 Alexander, a Diuine of Oxford, sent by King
John, to defend his authority against the Pope, which he did by reasons and Scriptures: and wrote against the Popes power, and temporall Dominion. He was banished by Langton, Bishop of Canterbury; and dyed in exile, he liued, anno 1207. when King Iohn banished 64. Monkes of Canterbury for contumary breaking his commandement. Bale cent 3 cap. 57. 10 Gualter Maxes, Archdeacon of Oxford, a famous man, hauing been at Rome, and seene the ambition of the Pope, he set it out while he liued with most vehe∣ment satyricall criminations. He wrote a booke called, The Reuelation of the Romish Goliah: and diuers o∣thers of the enormity of the Clergy: lamentation ouer Bishops, and against the Pope, the Roman Court, the euils of Monkes, &c. he flourished, anno 1210. Siluester Gyrald, in spec. eccles. lib. 3. c. 1. & 14 Bale cent. 3 cap. 61. 11 Robertus Capito, Robert Grosthead, Doctor of Diuinity in Oxford, Bishop of Lincolne; wrote against Prelats idlenesse: and thundered against the Ro∣mish Court: he modestly, but yet publikely reproued the couetousnesse, pride, and manifold tyranny of Pope Innocent 4. He was excommunicated to the pit of hell, and cited to come to their bloudy Court, but he appea∣led from the Popes tyranny to the eternall tribunall of Iesus Christ, and shortly after dyed, anno 1253. The Priests that taught mens commandements and not Gods, he called Antichrists, Satans priests, theeues, mur∣derers of soules, spirits of darknesse: and their exemp∣tions by the Pope, he said were the nets of the Diuell: Matth. Paris cals him Magnus Ecclesiae Doctor; skil∣full in the Hebrew, Greeke and Latin: Triuetus cals him A man of excellent wisedome, most pure life, and in∣comparable patterne of all vertues, 1253. Bale. cent. 4. cap. 18. 12 Sevaldus, Sebald, Archbishop of Yorke, wrastled constantly against the tyranny of the Romish Court. He thought the Pope was permitted of God for the great
hurt of many. He wrote to the Pope in great griefe, to abstaine from his accustomed tyranny, and to fol∣low the humility of his holy Predecessors: and after Pe∣ters examples to feed, not to clip, flea, bowel, deuour, & consume Christs sheepe: but the Pope contemned his admonition: he dyed 1258. Matth. Paris in Hen. 3. anno 1258. Bale. cent. 4. cap. 23. 13 William Stengham Doctor, wrote for the suffici∣ency of the New Testament, onely for saluation against the Evangelium eternum. He flourished anno 1260. Bale cent. 4 c. 17. 14 Roger Bacon, Fellow of Merton Colledge in Oxford, a great Philosopher and Diuine (without Ne∣cromancy, saith Bale) spake so much against the Anti∣christian errours of his time, that Pope Nicholas the 4. condemned his doctrine, and imprisoned him. Anto∣nius in Chron. he flourished, an. 1270. Bale. cent. 4. cap. 55. 15 Ioannes Dominicus Scotus, an English man, of Mer∣ton Colledge; a great Schoolman, and called Doctor subtilis: he taught against the abuse of the Keyes: and that Transubstantiation could not be proued, neither by Scriptures, or true Reasons, as Bellarmine confesseth, he flourished, 1290. Scotus 4 cent. dist 18. 16 John Baronthorp, Doctor and publicke Reader of Diuinity in Oxford, called Doctor resolutus. He taught that the Pope was to be vnder the Emperour, and Kings. He reuiled the deceits and impostures of Anti∣christ, flourished, 1320. as appeares in his booke, De Christi dominio: Jac. Papiens. l. de H. 8. diuortio Bale c. 5. 17 Nicolaus Lyranus, an English man, of the Iewes linage, a Diuine of Oxford, amongst other things, hee wrote a Booke, De visione Dei, against the Pope, anno 1326. Iean. Wolphius, tomo 1. lect. memorab. in anno 1326. 18 William Ockam Fellow of Merton Colledge in Oxford, called Doctor singularis; and after Doctor in∣vincibilis, wrote against Pope Ioh. 23 and against Pope
Clement, charging him with heresie, and calling him Antichrist, hater of Christian pouerty, and enemy to the Common-wealth he taught that the Pope had no power in Ciuill dominion, flourished 1330. Occam. oper. 90. dierum cap 93. Wolphius lect. memorab. tom. 1. 19 Thomas Bradwardine, of Merton Colledge, Archbishop of Canterbury, wrote for Gods grace a∣gainst free will, three bookes: flourished, 1340. Catal. test. ver. tom. 2. 20 Nicolaus Orum, Doctor in Oxford, preached at Rome before pope Ʋrbā 5. & the Cardinals, painting out and condemning the Papacy, and foretelling destructi∣on to hang ouer the Pope and Clergies head. He wrote the Epistle from Lucifer to the Clergy, thanking them for sending so many soules to hell He placed his daugh∣ters to them as to their proper husbands. Pride, Aua∣rice, Fraud, Luxury, and specially, Simony: See the whole Epistle in Powel de Antichristo, in calce libri. he flourished 1351. Catalogus test. ver. tom. 2. 21 Richard Role, de Hampole, Doctor in Oxford, in∣veighed against the vnchastity, auarice, and filthinesse of priests, and their Idolatry, anno 1340. Wolphius tom. 1 lect. memorab. 22 Giles Hay, a Diuine in Oxford, wrote a sharpe booke, Contra Flagellatores, which is to be seene in Ba∣liol Colledge in Oxford, about the same time. Bale ap∣pend. ad cent. scrip. Britan. 23 Richardus Radulphi, Richard Fitz-ralph, an Irish man, Chancellour of Oxford, Archbishop of Armagh, (Archiepiscopus Armachanus Hibernia Prima) wrote against begging Friers, and dedicated his booke to pope Innocent 4. and in his publike Lectures displayed their follies, frauds, luxuries, wantonnesse, pride, pomps and other fryerly vertues: and held it vnchristian to be a wilfull begger, condemned, Deut. 15. Wiclif. and Wal∣den, say he was set on by the Bishops and prelates of England: flourished 1355. Wiclif. in Trialogo. Walden in fascicul. zizanorum Wiclif.
24 Richard Killington, Doctor in Oxford, Deane of Saint Pauls in London, defended the said Richards Do∣ctrine: and wrote many learned bookes against the Monkes and Fryers. 1360. Bale cent. 4. cap 96. 25 Iohn Wiclife, Doctor in Oxford, wrote great Vo∣lumes against Romish corruptions. 1360. of Wiclife, read more, Booke 2. chap. 1. sect. 3. subsect. 4 §. 2. &c. 26 Robert Langland, a Diuine of Oxford, wrote a∣gainst Papists corruptions in English, especially the vi∣sion of Pierce Plowman, which is extant about Anno 1369. 27 Sir Iohn Mandevil, Doctor of physicke in Ox∣ford, Knight after his trauels, said in our times, it was more true then in ancient, Virtus cessat, ecclesia calcatur, clerus errat, damon regnat, Sodoma dominatur, 1370. Bale cent. 6. cap. 46. 28 William Wickam, Bishop of Winchester, building two Colledges one at Oxford, one at Winchester, so ha∣ted Sects and Monkes, that he ordained by statute vn∣der paine of expulsion present, none of the Fellowes should enter the Religion of a Monke. And though hee did many good workes, yet he professed he trusted to Iesus Christs merits alone for saluation, 1379. Out of the statutes of Wickams Colledge in Oxford. rubrick. 38. and his life written by Tho. Martin. lib. 3. cap. 2. 29 Philip Repington of Merton Colledge, after∣wards Bishop of Lincolne, boldly declaimed against the liues and vopure doctrine of the Romish Clergy, the Roman Pharaoh, mens traditions, Fryars beggings, Masses, Pilgrimages, Auricular confession, and other things; at Oxford the Vice-Chancellor, Robert Rigges, and the Proctors ioyning with him, anno 1382. Bale cent. 6. cap. 90. 30 Geffrey Chawter Knight, Student in Oxford,Chawcer in his Plowmans Tale & passim. wrote many things very wittily, reprouing, and scof∣fing at the idlenesse foolery, and knauery of the Monks and other Clergy, at their ignorance, counterfet Re¦liques,
pilgrimages, and Ceremonies: yea the pope himselfe he sticked not to call an idle Lawrell, a Mar∣shall of Hell, a proud, enuious, couetous Lucifer, and Antichrist, he flourished, anno 1402. 31 Alexander Carpenter, an Oxford man of Baliol Colledge, wrote a booke entituled, Destructorium vitio∣rum: wherein he reproued the carelesse and godlesse liues of Prelats and priests, calling them Traitors to Christ deceiuers, theeues, lyers, raueners, oppressors, lo∣uers of pleasures, fleshly hypocrites, cursed tyrants, and execrable Antichrists 1429. Ex destructorio vitiorum part 6. cap. 30. & alibi saepius. 32 Iohn Felton, Fellow of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, taught the Gospell purely, and much against the popes pride and tyranny. 1440. Leland in Catalogo virorum illustrium. Bale cent. 8. cap. 3. 33 Reginold Paine or Peacocke, of Oriel Colledge in Oxford, made B. first of Asaph, then of Cicester, taught at Pauls Crosse, many things against the Church-abuses of the time: and that the vse of the Sacraments (such as was then vsed) was worse then the vse of the law of Nature: that Bishops sinned in buying their admissi∣on of the pope of Rome, that no man was bound to be∣leeue, or to be subiect to the Church of Romes deter∣mination, that the begging of Friers was idle and im∣pious, that it was not necessary to saluation to beleeue that Christs body was materially in the Sacrament. And many other things against the vnsoundnesse of the Papacy: Yea, madnesse contra Papatus insaniam. At last he was condemned of heresie by the slaues of the popish Bishops, 1457. Bale cent. 8. cap. 19. ex Thomae Gascoigni Dictionario Theologico. 34 Iohn Capgraue, Doctor of Diunity in Oxford, complained much of the impious tyranny of the pre∣lates, and priests hirelings, exposing their sheepe to the Wolues, seeking their wooll and milke, but not their soules, &c. 1460. Bale cent. 8. cap. 1.
35 Henry Parker, Fellow of All-Soules Colledge in Oxford, preached at Pauls Crosse, against the pride, brauery, and ambition of Prelates, so flat contrary to Christs pouerty and humility. And at the peoples en∣treaty, he wrote and published his Doctrine to the great shame of the Prelates. For which, he endured long imprisonment and want, 1470. Leland in Cata∣logo virorum illustrium. Bale cent. 8 cap. 29. These few (for a taste) I giue you, excerpted out of a great number, which that one famous Vniuersity of Oxford afforded. Whereof you may reade more plen∣tifully in Master Powels Preface alledged. To search and alleadge the Records of that other famous Vniuer∣sity of Cambridge, and the rest of England, would not be fruitlesse, but (I hope) to you needlesse. Antiquus. This is full enough, so many learned men, Preachers, Doctors, Bishops, and Worthies of all sorts, out of one Vniuersity, with the danger of their state, honour, liberty, and life, setting themselues pub∣likely against the corruptions crept into the Church, must needs argue the corruptions to be great, publike, and necessary to be reformed; and I am fully satisfied that it was so. But happily this Reformation might haue beene performed, without such a breach, rent, schisme, and scandall, as you Protestants haue made by your departing from that ancient famous Church of Rome. §. 16. Antiquissimus. Oh sir, you must know that this Reformation was sought for, euen at the Popes hands, with great humility and earnestnesse, both by Luther himselfe at the first, and also by many other learned
men,This appea∣reth by  Commenca¦ries. History of he Coun∣cell of r. Onuph. S∣rius. Thuaus, and oth r Hi∣stories of those times. States, and Prnces; yea, by the Emperour him∣selfe with much instance. And Pope Arian the sixt was well inclined thereunto, confessing ingenuously, that the Church was mightily ouer-runne wth cor∣rup ions. For reformation whereof, diuers conferen∣ces were appointed in Germany, (as not onely our Slei∣dan, but your Surius and Thunnus report.) And Pope Clement the seuenth, promised Reformation to the Emperour Chrles the fift: and three Cardinals (Ca∣ie, Pole, and Contarene,) were deputed to giue ad∣uice for this Reformation After many delayes, a∣gaine,Anno 1537. Historie of the Councell of rent. Pope Paul the third, appointed foure Cardinals and fiue other Prelates to consider the demaunds of the Protestants, and to collect the abuses of the Church and Court of Rome, and to deuise Remedies to correct them. And of these abuses they gathered great num∣bers (which are set downe at large in the twelfth booke of Sledns Commentaries.) But all this came to no∣thing. For when vpon due examination, the Cardi∣nals found many things too nearely, touching the quicke, the Reformation thereof would vncurably wound the Sea of Rome, ouerthrow and vndoe the greatnesse of their wealth and worldly estate, and when they consulted deepely thereof with the Pope;See D. Wite against er. pag. 10, 17. there followed a conclusion, and a plot quite contrary. In re∣gard of the principall things, That nothing should bee reformed, but all should be iustified, since a thorow-re∣formation would spoyle them, and a halfe-reformation would not content the Protestants; and yet would giue the world occasion to thinke. They might erre in many things if they reformed some. Now therefore the proceeding must be changed. At first many of their Diuines opposing Luther, laboured to proue all their Doctrines, Ceremonies and Gouernment by the Scrip∣tures: now they find it cannot be. Therefore the Scriptures must be cryed downe, disgraced disabled, as ambiguous, and insufficient to teach and guide the
Church. And the Church (to wit, their owne onely Church of Rome) must be exalted aboue the Scrip∣tures. That Church must giue authority to the Scrip∣tures, yea, and sense also, so that no sense of the Scrip∣ture shall be receiued, but that which that Church al∣loweth. For that Church only cannot erre:See B. Andewe a Aploam resp pag. 259 and therfore they that admit the Scriptures to be the onely Iudges and Rules of Doctrine and Discipline, are bad Diuines, little better then Hereticks, & Enemies to the Church. From hence came those base speeches from their Doctors, Eckius.Hosius contra  lib. 3. pg. 148.  s∣gus. That the Scripture hath no authori∣ty but from the Church: Hosius, No more force then Aesops Fables, without authority from the Church: Pighius, the Scripture is of it selfe but a Nose of Waxe, which may be writhen euery way. Costerus compares it to a sheath,Costeranchir, d saa script. cap. 1. §. huius script. pa 44. B llar. de verbo Di lb. 4. cp. 9. in alce. Concil. Trid. sess. 4. Pighius controv, 3. pag 92 & Hi∣arch. epist nunc. Mulhus. disp. 2. de fide pa. 21. See D. White a∣gainst Vishr. pag 92. admitting any Dag∣ger, Wooden or Leaden. The Iesuite Salmeron saith, Tradition is the sure rule of Faith, by which the Scriptures are to be tryed. And Bellarmine saith the best way to try which be true tra∣ditions, which be false, is the authority of the Church of Rome. So that now (to speake in their Dialect, or meaning.) The Church of Rome is the Queene, and the Scripture her slaue. That Church hath now two ser∣uants, of equall authority, Scripture and Tradition: and therefore that Churches Councell of Trent saith, Scrip∣turas—& Traditiones, Ecclesiae—pari pietatis aspect ac re∣uerentiae suscipit, & veneratur. We receiue the Scrip∣tures and Traditions of the Church, with equall affe∣ction and reuerence. Nay, no great matter what the Scripture saith, for their Tradition must interpret it. If the Scripture say, Drinke yee all of this (Matth. 26 27) their Tradi∣tion saith, not all, but the Clergy onely: and not all the Clergy, but he that ministreth it onely. So what their Priests teach, must be receued and obeyed, whe∣ther
out of Scripture or Traition.Tolet. casuum conscientiae l b 4. cap. 3. p 53. Cardinall Tolet saith, The people may merit ar Gods hand in belee∣uing an Heresie, if their Teachers propound it, for their obedience is meritorious. And Stapleton, They must not regard quid, but quis, not what is the matter, but who is the man that deliuers it. If a Priest therefore teach it, (be it true, be it false) take it as Gods Ora∣cle. 2 Thess. 2.4.What can Antichrist doe more, whē he sits in the Tem∣ple of God, as God? exalts himselfe aboue God? but disgrace Gods Word, set vp his owne? make Gods Word speake what he list? both it and the sense of it shall receiue authority from him? His Lawes, his Iudgement, his Agents shall be receiued without exa∣mination. And the holy Word of God, which should be the rule of all true faith and good actions, shall lose his place of leading, and follow the Popes fancy? By these grounds, meanes, and shifts, all the seeking for reformation at the Popes and Romish Prelates hands was vtterly auoyded. And the Roman Church, (as now it stands) is the multitude of such onely as magnifie, admire, and adore, the plenitude of Pa∣pall power and infallibility of iudgement: and are so farre from Reformation of errours, and corruptions formerly cryed against, and by many of themselues con∣fessed; that they decree them now to be good, impose them now as De fide points of faith, and doctrines of the Church: yea, and persecute with curses, fire and sword, the discouerers, reprouers, and reformers thereof. So that there was no possibility left to good and godly Princes and States, and to true-hearted godly learned men, but either against their knowledge and conscience to liue slaues to the vnsupportable tyranny and corruptions of the Pope, or else to reforme these abuses euery one in their owne Countries: and if the
whole field of the Church could not be purged and dressed, yet euery one to weed out of their owne Lans and Furlongs, the Tares and filth that choked the good Corne. Thus I haue shewed you, that errours and corrupti∣ons had crept into the once pure and famous Church of Rome: and that they were noted and cryed out vp∣on by many Historians, Learned men Bishops Doctors Princes and People: and Reformation sought for, ma∣ny Ages before it could he performed: And that nei∣ther Luther, nor any other learned men, nor Princes euer intended to erect a new Church: but by refor∣ming of the Abuses crept in, to reduce the Church to her ancient purity. Whereupon the Protestant Chur∣ches are truly called, The Reformed Churches. Antiquus. Well sir, shew me now the true diffe∣rence betwixt your new reformed Churches, and the Church of Rome, as now it is. How farre they agree, and wherein they differ, in some principall points. Antiquissimus. I will, and the rather because some rayling Rabsaches of your side, impudently say and print, that [The Protestants haue no Faith, no Hope,A namelesse Author (be like ashamed to set to his name) beginning his booke with these words, The Protestants haue no Faith, &c. no Charitie, no Repentance, no Iustification no Church, no Al∣tar, no Sacrifice, no Priest, no Religion, no Christ,] I hope to make it apparant, that we hold all the points of Faith, necessary and sufficient to good life on earth, and saluation in heauen: and that you confesse wee hold them truely; because you hold the same: and we onely refuse your later, needlesse, and vnsound additions there unto.
CHAP. 5. The principall points of Doctrine, wherin the Romish and the Reformed Churches agree, and wherein they differ. Protestants refuse the popes earthly King∣dome, and maintaine Christs heauenly. 1 A note of the chief-points of Christian Doctrine, wher∣in the Protestants and Romanists fully agree, shewing al∣so the Romish additions therevnto. 2 The Protestants doctrine in generall, iustified by Cardinall Contarene, Cardinall Campeggio, and our Liturgy by Pope Pius 4. 3 But the Popes reach further, at an earthly Church-kingdome: and fourthly challenge a supremacy ouer all Christians and Churches in the world. 5 More speci∣ally ouer the Cleargy, exempting them from being sub∣iects to Princes. 6 Yea, ouer all Christian princes and their states: to depose, dispose, and transpose them: and to absolue subiects from their alleageance, to rebell, &c. 7 To dissolue Oathes, Bonds, and Leagues. 8 To giue dispensations to contract or dissolue Matrimony. 9 And other dispensations and exemptions from Lawes. §. 1. Antiquissimus. 1 WEe beleeueArticles of the yeare 1562 art. 1. one true God, inuisible, incorporeall, immortall, infinite in wisedome, power, & goodnesse; ma∣ker, preseruer, and gouernour of all things: and that in the vnity of this God-head, there be 3 persons of one substance, coequall in wisedome, goodnesse, power, eternity; the Father the Son, and the Holy Ghost: You beleeue the same: But your exalting and adoring the Blessed Virgin (whom we honour and reuerence so farre as we may any the most excellent creature) in such sort as you entitle her a GoddesseLsis oftn aler D am, a  si, in his  and  where the  and tice.,
Queene of HeauenSo Hortul. ai ae 117. b such wa te hresie o the Cll ds. Vpip an, er. 79. and of the worldo Hort ani∣me 154 b; and make the like prayers to her as you doe to GodYou call her sone Lod; her, Lady: him Sauiour, her saluatrix: him Mediator, her Mediatresse: him King, hr Quen: him God, her Goddesse: As appeares in many of your prayers as sa Rg, ter misericordiae, vita, dulcedo, salue. And consolatio desolatorm, via eantium, sas om in te sperantium. In Offiio B. Mariae Reformato, & iussu Fij 5. edito. And in the Ladies Psalter (wherin the words of honour and prayers are turned from God to hr, in places innumerable:) Psal. 50. misrere mei domina,— mundae ab ibus iniquitati∣bus mes, essnde gratiam tuam super me. Psal. 89. Domina resugium fata es nos in cunc nces∣sitatibus nostris, Psal. 2. protegat nos dextra tua, mater dei., euen with authority and command ouer her SonneAs their owne Cassander confesseth (consult, art. 21.) they make Christ raigning in heauen, yet subiect to his Moter. Monstra te esse Matrem. In Bevir. Rom. & officio B. Mariae reformat. And Matris ie impea Redemptori. Missal. Parisiens. Dreus to Whita∣ker, fol. 352. saith, This is not against Religion., and as a par∣taker of the gouernment of his KingdomeThey assigne Iustice to Christ, and Mercy to the Virgin: As Gabril Be (in expo∣sit. Cano. Missae lect. 80.) saith Confuimus primò ad b atissimam Ʋirginm caelorum reginam, cui Rex Regum, Pater caelestis, dimidium egni sui dedit, & post Pater caelstis, cum hbeat insti∣tiam & misericordiam, tanqam potioa regni sui bona; iustiti sib retenta, misericordiam Ma∣tri Virgini concessit. The like is written by many other of their learned men, (viri celebrs, saith Cassander, consult. art. 21.) The great learnd esuite Gregorius de Valentia often sets Christ after his mother thus, Glori deo, & B Virgn Mari Doinae nostiae, Item Iesu Christo. At the end of his Treatises, De satisfact De Jdo olat. De diffr. noae legis. De Indulgentijs, and others.: which wants not much of making a Quaternity of the most glorious indiuiduall and incōmunicable TrinitySee more of this in P. Malius Defence of our late learned King Iames his booke a∣gainst the answer of Cosstean art. 7. p. 165. & sq. And in B. Andrewes his aswer to Bellarmine, about the same K. Iames his booke, ad c 8. p 174. &c. And in B. Downam, De Antichristo. lib. 3. cap. 8. § 2, 3, 4. & lib. 5. cap 2. §. 2, 3, 4, 5. And in Bishop Morto. Apo∣log. Cath. tomo. 1. cap 68. pag. 202. and Protestants appeale lb. 2. cap. 12. sect. 10 and rela∣tion of Religion in the West pag. 3 Rainolds & art. cap. 8. divis. 2. pag. 474, 475. And it is abundantly noted in most of our Protestants Bookes.; This is a corrupt doctrine and practise crept into the Church we may not admit. 2 We beleeue the Canonicall Scriptures (recko∣ned vp in the sixt Article of the yeare 1562.) to be the vndoubted Word of God written by inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, guiding the mindes and pennes of the holy Writers, absolutely free from all errour. You confesse the sameConcil. Trident. sess. 4.. But you adde the Apocryphall bookes, and make them also CanonicallIbid. Si quis libros—aruch Ecclsiastici, Sa∣pientiae, Iuih, Tobiae, Duoru Maccaborum, Danielis integros libros cum omnibus suis pabs, prot in vulgata editione ha∣bentur, prosacris & Canon c non sucepent, Anathema sit., contrary to AniquityFor, to the Iewes were committed the Oracles of God (Canonicall Scriptures) to be kept, Rom. 3.2. but they nuer acknowledged the Apocryphall bookes, so saith Iosephus lib. 1. contra Appion. See Euseb hist. lib. 8. cap. 10. And Bellarmine hmselfe grants it. lib. 3. e eccle. milit cap. 0. inito. B. Andrewes answering Bellarmines Apology (concerning King Iames his Monitory Preface) cap. 7. pag. 15. giues vs ten very ancient Fathers, reckoning the Cnon of Scripture as we doe: 1 Melito Sardensis in Euseb. 4.26. 2 Origenes 3. 25. 7 in Iosa. 3 Athanasis in Synops. 4 Hilarius proog in Psal. 5 Epipha∣nius haere. 8. 6 Cyrills Catch, 7 Nazianzen de ver. & ge. scrip. lib. 8 Amphilochius ad Saleucum. 9 Hieronymus in prolog. Galto. 10 Rffius in expos. Symboli. D. Field reckons more lb. 4. cap. 23 see more cap 4. sect. 14. The Laodicean Councell excludes the Apocrypha, the Carthaginian Councell re∣ceiues them; & both these were confirmed in the sixt generall Councell; how hangs this togethr? thus: The Lodicean spake of the Canon of faith, the Carthagenian of the Canon of good manners: to both which the sixt Councell subscribed in that sense, and we to it. See thi Whole Controuersie thorowly handled by B. Morton, Apologiae Catholicae part. 2. lib. 1. sex primis captibus. Also in his Protestants Appeale, lib. 4. cap. 18. and by D. Whites Disp. de sacra scripura quaest. 1. And by D. Field of the Church Booke. 4. chapt. 23, 24.. 3 We beleeue the orignall Hebrew of the Old Te∣stament, and the Gree of the New to be authenticall and of vndoubted authority, your side hath heretofore held the contrary, deprauing the Hebrew and Greeke now extant, as intolerably corrupted by Iewes and He∣retickes: yet now your besthu Bellar∣mine de vero dei lib. 2. cap. 2. in sine Situs Senenss Bibloth. lib. 3. pa. 153. & lib. 8. pag. 630 Ribera comn Hoscam. cap. 9. na. 20. Acosta 2. lib. de Christo Reuelat. cap. 16. And of the Greeke of the new Sixtus Seens. Bibl. lib. 7 pag. 58. See D. Field. Church. lib. 4 cap. 28. 29. & B. Morton. Appal. lib. 4. cap. 18. Sect. 3. learned men come home to vs, and hold them pure from such corruptions, affir∣ming, that though some slips of Printers or Writers may be found in letters or words, yet they hurt not the sense, nor derogate from their authority. Thus you iustifie vs.
ButThis your Agorias (a choice man, to deliuer the Roman Catholick Tenets) shew∣eth Institutionum lib. 8. cap. 3. § 3. &. 4. where the Greeke or Hebrew now extant (saith he) differeth from the sense of the vulgar Latin, that Latin Edition shall be to vs the Canoninall Scripture, Post habito cntrario sensu Hebraicae vel Graec lectionis. And whereas many of their owne side (since the Councell of Trent) haue found diuers faults and errours in the Latin (as Vega, Sixts Senensis, Canus, Tayva, Lndanus, &c.) Yet Azorius excuseth the matter, saying, They are not errours against faith and good manners: but onely in some places (clariùs, sinificantiùs, proprius. & latinùs, red∣di potuerint: non tamen verius, aut simpliciter certiùs) things might more clearely, signi∣ficantly, properly, and in better Latin haue beene deliuered, but not more tely, or simply, more certainly. Thus saith Azorius, but our Bishop Morton sheweth them many great intolerable corruptions concerning Faith and Manners, and in mat∣ters in Controuersie, Apol Cathol. pat. 2. lib. 1. cap. 11, 12, 13. and in his Prot. Appeal. lib 4. cap. 18. § 3. As also many other Protestant Writers doe. But were in true that Azorius saith, his reason might authorize a translation to be profitable and com∣fortable to the people to reade (in any tongue which they vnderstand) but cannot make a Translation more authenticall then the originall, or not liable to be exa∣mined and corrected by the Originall. That were to preferre mens conceit before Gods most absolute truth, and is no better then impiety. See Rainolds and Hart confer. chap. 6. divis. 2. pag. 244. &c. D. Whitakers. D. Field. Church. Booke 4. chap 25, 26. specially 27. whereas you make your vulgar Latin authen∣ticall also, and of greater authority then the Greeke and Hebrew, where they differ from it: we must neeeds forsake you. 4 We make the written word of God,Artic. 6. 1562. the ground of our faith: and hold nothing necessary to be beleeued to saluation, but what is there either deliuered in ex∣presse words, or thence deducted by necessary conse∣quence. Your owne learned men confsse this course to be goodBellar. de Iustif. lib. 3 cap. 8. §. Prima ratio: non potest ali∣quid certum esse certitudine fiei, nisi aut imme∣diatè continetur in verbo dei, aut ex verbo dei per euidentem consequentiam deducatur. Fides enim non est, nisi verbi dei authoritate itatur. Neue de hoc principio vel Catholici, vel Haere∣tici ibitant. Faber Stapaensis, In his Preface to the Evangelists (which Preface now the Roman Doctors appoint to be left out in the new Prints, by their Indices Ex∣purgatorij) saith thus: The Scripture sufficeth and is the onely rule of eternall life, whatsoeuer agrees not to it, is not so necessary as superfluous. The Primiti∣ue Church knew no other rule but the Gospell, no other scope but Christ, no o∣ther worship then was due to the Indiuidull Trinity. I would to God the forme of beleeuing were fetched from the Primitiue Church. Thus saith Stapulensis.. By which rule (iustified by our Aduer∣saries)
we conclude that the holy Church of God need not receiue or beleeue any of those things following: to wit Purgatory, Inuocation of Saints departed, wor∣shipping of Images, Auricular confession, the Popes pardons, Transubstantiation the Masse to be truely and properly a propitiatory sacrifice, to be offered both for the quicke and the dead: the Sacrament without Communicants, and Communion vnder one kinde (without the Cup) to be sufficient for Lay people: re∣seruation of the Sacrament and eleuation thereof, to be worshipped: and circumgestation in Procession, for pompe and adoration: Matrimony, and extreme Vnction, to be properly Sacraments of the New Testa∣ment, and to conferre grace: single life necessary to be imposed vpon the Clergy: All which and more your Iesuite Azorius reckons for Traditions vnwrittenAzorius Insti∣tutionum lib 8. cap. 4. §. 3. & seq.. Also that the Church of Rome is head of all hurches, and that all Christians must fetch their Faith, their Or∣ders, and iurisdiction from it: that the Bishop there∣of cannot erre in matters of faith, or interpreting the Scriptures.See more of this point, Rai∣nold & Hart confer chap. 5. diuision 1. pag. 184 &c. And chap. 8. di∣vis. 1. pag. 462. &c. The Scriptures teach no such thing: and therefore we need not beleeue it. 5 We (being constant to the former rule, for the sufficiency of the Scriptures, in matters of faith and good life) further admit of some kind of Trad tions: to wit, first Doctrinall traditions agreeing with the Scrip∣tures, or thence truly deductedMany Fathers call the whole Word of God (which by some holy men guided by Gods Spirit was let downe in writing: and by them also & others deliuered to the people by liuely voyce) A tradition which the Church must preseru: and also the forme of wholesome words, (Creeds, Catechismes &c.) thence deducted. 2 Tim. 1.13. Rom. 6 17. See Rain. & Hart. c. 8. d. 1. p 466, 467. So the baptisme of Infants, if not cō∣manded in plaine words, yet plainly deducted from Scripture, Gen. 17.12, 13. Col. 2.11, 1, Act. 2.38, 39. Luke 18.16. Mar. 10.16. Mat. 19.14. & 18, 14. 1 Cor. 7.14. Mat. 28.19. The doctrine of the Trinity, the equality of three Diuine persons in one substance, and the distinction by incommunicable proprieties. Gen. 1.1, 26. Mat. 3.16. Iob. 1.32. Mat. 17 5 & 28.29 2. Cor. 13.13. 1 Ib. 5.7. Psal. 2.7. Heb. .3, 5. & 7.3. Col. 1.15. The pro∣ceeding of the holy Gost from the Father and the Son, as from one beginning, and one spiration, from all eternity, Ioh. 14.26. & 15.26. & 16.13, 14. Rom. 8.9.. Secondly, rituall
traditions, for order and decency, left to the disposition of the Church, being not of Diuine, but of positiue and humane right1 Cor. 14.40. & 11.2. Acts 15 0. So they be not childish or trifling: nor accounted parts of Gods worship: nor with opi∣nion of merit: nor burthensome for their mlti∣tudeOf the mul∣titude S. Au∣gustine com∣plained in his time. Epist. 119. ad anuar. c. 19. See D. Ram. & Hart c. 8. div. 4. p. 599. & seq.. The first of these no man allowes and commends more then we: and the second kind wee retaine and vse with reuerence, such as are profitable and comely in our times and countries without condemning other Churches differing from ours in such matters: as we find Saint Ambrose and Saint Augustine did. Aug. Epist. 188. But a third kind of Traditions obtruded for Articles of Religion, grounds of Faith, and part of Gods wor∣ship, neither contained expresly in Gods word, nor thence deducted by any sound inference: and yet re∣ceiued (by the Councell of Trent, Sess 4.) with the same authority and reuerence that the holy Scriptures are receiued: those we gainesay, as things derogating to the verity, sufficiency, and perfection of the Scriptures. And herein your Romish Writers deale fraudulenly a∣gainst vs, and deceiue the world; for they alleadge the Fathers speaking of the first kind of Traditions, as if they spake of all: whereas indeed they write very strongly and sharply against this third kind, which wee refuse. Bishop Ʋsher in his booke against the Jrish Ie∣suite, pag. 36. & seq. alleadgeth a whole Iury of ancient Fathers, testifying the sufficiency of the Scriptures, for matters of Faith: Tertullian, Origen, Hippolitus the Martyr, Athanasius, Ambrose, Hilary, Basil, Gregory Nis∣sen, Jerom, Augustine, Cyril, Theodoret. So that the Traditions which they vrge, we alow, and those that we deny they write sharpely against. The Fathers (say your Rom sh) are not of the Prote∣stants Church, because they vrge Traditions: but wee say more truely; The Fathers are not of the Romish
Church, because they teach, the Scripture is sufficient, and needs no Traditions to supply their defect, as the Romish teach. When Bellarmine and your other Doctors are pres∣sed with the authority of the Fathers, they are com∣pelled to yeel vnto vs the sufficiency of the Scriptures, (as I alleadged, artic. 4.) but (obserue their vnconstan∣cy) lest they should ouerthrow thereby the manifold doctrines held by their Church, that haue no ground in the Scriptures; they are faine to maintaine also vn∣written Traditions to bee the grounds of those Do∣ctrines. See more of this point in Mr. Perkins Reformed Ca∣tholicke, the 7 point. B. Morton. Apol. Cathol. part. 2. lib. 1. cap. 32. & seq. And Protestants Appeal. lib. 2. cap. 25. D. Field, of the Church Booke. B. Vsher in his answer to the Irish Iesuite. Rainolds and Hart con∣fer. chap. 5. diuision 1. pag. 190. 6 We receiue and beleeue also, the three Creeds, The Apostles, the Nicene, and that of AthanasiusThese are in our Bookes of publicke pray∣er, and booke of Articles of anno 1562 art. 8 and subscribed vnto by all Ministers.: and the foure generall Councels of the Primitiue Church: as good formes of true Christian Doctrine, deductions and explications of ScriptureAcknowlee∣ged by King Iames, in his Praemonitin to all Christi¦an Monars, p. 35. and by our Acts of Parliament.. You re∣ceiue the same also: but you adde a thirteenth article, decreed to be an article of Faith, thirteene hundred yeares after Christ, by a thirteenth Apostle, Pope Boni∣face the eightBoniface 8. li∣ued an. 13. his Decree runs thus: Su∣besse Romano Pontfici omni humanae creaturae declaramus, di∣cimus, desinimus & pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis. Thus Boniface 8 in extrauag. de majoritate & o∣bedientia. cap. vnam santa.. That it is necessary to saluation to be subiect to the Bishop of Rome, which is neither in the Scriptures, ancient Creeds, nor ancient Fathers, nor can be thence deducted. And you haue further also, dately added 12 new Ar∣ticles by the authority of Pope Pius 4. (anno 1564) rai∣sed out of the Councell of Trent, and added to the Ni∣cene Creed, to be receiued with oath, as the true Ca∣tholicke Faith, to bee beleeued by as many as shall be sauedIn ulla jura∣menti de prosess. fidei. These 12 new Articles you may see also in the E∣pistle Dedica∣tory to B. Iewels workes in eue∣ry Church. In Onuphrius (added to Platina) in vita Pij 4..
7 We beleeue that the true God is to be worship∣ped in Spirit and Truth, and according as himselfe hath prescribed: and you yeeld that therein we doe well: but you adde, that he may be analogically & relatiuely worshipped by Images, and by other Doctrines deui∣sed by Men, which are not commanded, but sharply re∣proued by the Scriptures, Exod. 20.4, 5. Deut. 4.15, 16. Mat. 15.9. Mar. 7 3, 4.7. Col. 2.18, 22, 23. God grant we may serue him as himselfe hath prescribed, and then we shall be sure to be happy enough. See D. Hall, Roma irreconciliabilis sect. 21. 8 We beleeue we ought to pray with feruency and sincerity of heart, with a purpose to forsake all sinne, and to serue God truely, and with faith and hope to be heard: you beleeue so also; but you adde, wee may pray in an vnknowne tongue, without vnderstan∣ding sense, or feeling what we say, with many repetiti∣ons, and by number (vpon Beads) without weight: and that such prayers are satsfactory for sin, and meritori∣ous of grace. You doe not say (I hope) we ough to pray in a tongue vnknowne: but we may doe it. So you condemne not our custome, (lest you condemne Saint Paul also, 1 Cor, 14.15. &c.) but onely excuse your owne. 9 We beleeue, we ought to pray vnto God, the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost: you yeeld it to be good; but you adde (not that we are commanded, but) that we may also pray vnto Angels and Saints de∣ceased. But surely the worship and inuocation of An∣gels is forbidden by the Councell of Laodicaea: much more of Saints. For they that vrged the worship of An∣gels, alledged, that for our better accesse vnto God, we we must vse the intercession of Angels (as Gods Cour∣tiers and Attendants) and this is your reason for your prayers vnto Saints. The Councell therefore that for∣biddeth the one, implieth the prohibition of the other. See more of this in Bishop Mortons Protestants Ap∣peal.
lib. 2. cap. 12. section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, &c, and com∣pendiously, sct. 13. 10 We beleeue that our Lord esus Christ is our Mediator, both of Redemption and intrcession. You grant this to be true; but you adde vnto him Angels and Saints, vpon whose intercession and merits, you also in part relye. See B. Morton, ib. lib. 2. cap. 12. special∣ly, sect. 10, 11, 12, 13. Perk. esor. Cath. points. 15.11 We beleeue that the glorified Saints beare most louing ffection to the Saints liuing on earth, and pray in generall for the Church Militant. You beleeue so to; but you adde that they heare mens prayers made vnto them, pray for particular men, and know their wants (which hearing and knowledge, we say, is pro∣per to God alone.) But your greatest Clerkes cannot determine how the Saints know our hearts and pray∣ers: whether by hearing or seeing, or presence euery where, or by Gods relating or reueling mens prayers and needs vnto them. All which wayes some of your Doctors hold as probable, or possible: and others de∣ny and and confute them as vntrue. Of this, see Bi∣shop Morton. Appeal lib. 2. cap. 12. sect. 5. and lib. 5. cap. 2 sect. 2. Perkins refor∣med Catho∣licke point. 14.12 We honour Gods Saints deceased, as the Pro∣phets, Apostles, Martyrs, and other holy sruants of God: both by reuerend memorials of them praises to God for them, and for his benfits to the Church by them, and by imitation of their vertues Their true Re∣liques (vertues, bookes, good works, and eamples) we respect with reuerence. And their bodily Reliques we despise not, but reuerently keepe them, if we may without offence. This you like well, but whereas you further worship the Saints, ther Images, or Reliques, with kneeling, Inuocation, dedication of Churches, and Festiuall dayes and Pilgrimages to their Shrines or Re∣liques, you step too farre into superstition and Idolatry. See B. Mortons Appeal. lib. 5 cap. 2. sect. 3 4, 5. and cap.
3. sect. Doctor Hall. Roma irreconciliabilis section 20. and 21. 13 We beleeue tat man is iustified by the merits and passion of our Sauiour Iesus Christ:Antic. 11. 1562. you beleeue so too; but you ade, that he must be further iustified by his owne merits or satisfactions. Of Iustification, and of Merits, see a large discourse afterwards. 14 We beleeue also, that as Christs most perfect righteousnesse is most necssary to be imputed vnto vs for our Iustfication: so our owne inherent righte∣ousnesse, wrought in vs by Gods Spirit, for sanctificati∣on of life, is necessary to saluation: and that he is no good Christian that shewes not his true conuersion by the fruits of a good life. You cannot mislike this. And yet you charge vs that we open a gate to all licentious∣nesse of life because we teach that we are not iustified by our owne good works (which are farre short of per∣fection) but by Christs righteousnesse imputed vnto vs, which alone is most perfect and able to satisfie Gods Iustice and his Law We vrge good workes as much as you, as absolute necessary effects of Iustifying grace, but not causes thereof: saying with S. Bernard, They are Ʋia regni, non causa regnandi, The way whereby we must walke to felicity, (or else we shall neuer come to it) but not the meritorious cause of felicity. 15 Yea, we vrge good workes more then you doe. We teach, that in true conuersion, a man must be woun∣ded in his conscience by the sense of hs sinnes, his con∣trition must be compungent and vhement, brusing, breaking renting the heart, and feeling the throwes (as a woman labouring of Child) bfore the new creature be brought forth, or Christ truely formed in him. It is not done without bitternesse of the soule, without stu∣dy, care, indignatio runge (2 Cor. 7 11.) But as some Infants are bne with lsse paine to the Mother, and some with more: so may the new man be regenerated
in some with more, in some with lesse anxiety of trauell. But surely grace is not infused into the heart of any sin∣ner except there be at least so great affliction of spirit for sinne foregoing that he cannot but feele it; other∣wise, he might make a confssion without contrition. Thus we vrge sinners to a true feeling and sorrow for their sinne. And for scandalous faults, we vrge open sinners to open acknowledgement, satisfaction of the Church, and to ndure the censures thereof: and all men to practise the actions of holy deuotion, the bet∣ter to humble and dispose themselues to be more capa∣ble of reconciliation with God: and to promise and vow amendment of life, and set down with themselues the best fitting courses for it.See D. Francis White Orthodoxe Faith. p. 16. We teach, though they must be iustified by Christs merits onely, applied and made theirs by faith: yet that faith must bee iustified to be true, sound, and liuely, by the fruits thereof. For whensoeuer God forgiueth sinne, he giueth grace also to resist and mortifie sinne.See Hookers Discourse of Iustification, §. 21. At the first instant, when we are conuerted and iustified, we receiue the spirit of Adoption, we are made members of Christ, and our bo∣dies temples of the Holy Ghost: euen then we receiue habituall righteousnesse, wherewith our soules are in∣wardly indued: and if wee liue, that habituall, will bring forth actuall righteousnesse vpon all occasions, mortifying sinne, and beatifying all the parts and acti∣ons of our life. All these are giuen together in the root, we receiue them all at once,1 Cor. 6.11. Gal. 6.15. col. 3.10. eph. 4.4.23. 2 Cor. 4.16. psal. 51.10, hebr. 9.14. 1 pet. 2.9. See Prkins Re∣for. Cath point. 21 The manifold vses of good workes. they are inseparable, and will shew their comforts inwardly in our hearts, and their fruits outwardly in our liues; which if a man doe not find in himselfe, he can haue no hope of saluation, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. 1 Iohn 3.8. & 1.6. Ezek. 18 13, 21, 22. Therefore we vrge mortification of sinne, denying our lusts and affections, and a holy resolution to serue God in all soundnesse purenesse, integrity, and sincerity of heart, and a true care to keepe all Gods Commande∣ments, not in act onely, but in heart too, without swar∣uing
at all vnder any colour, dispensation, interpretati∣on or whatsoeuer. We thinke, your extenuating of some sinnes, calling them veniall, and extolling mens satisfactions more then themselues need, that they may be applyed by indulgences to them that need, and the slight pennances imposed by your Priests, and reciting a few prayers that haue pardons annexed to them, or pilgrimes to some Saints Images or Reliques (be they true or false) and many other your humane deuices, are the very stranglers of true penance, mortification of sinne, and care of good life. 16 We exhort vnto, and vrge such good workes as God hath prescribed, commanded, and promised re∣wards vnto; both of holinesse towards God, subiection to our Magistrates, iustice to men, sobriety and clean∣nesse in our selues, and workes of mercy to them that need, &c. You doe not, you cannot mislike this: but whereas you adde other workes out of your owne braines, which God neuer commanded, (nay, which crosse Gods Commandements,A man may forsake pa∣rents to be∣come a Chri∣stian, Mat. 10.37. ergo to be∣come a Monk. So Bellarmine rasoneth lib. 2 de monachis cap. 36. contrary to the Coun∣cell of Gangren cap. 16. that children may forsake their duty to Parents for vowes of deuised Re∣ligion; subiects may rebell against their Princes, yea depose and murder them at the Popes appointment, and doe many such things:) those wee cannot but detest and abhorre. 17 We beleeue that howsoeuer man hath power in naturall, morall, ciuill,Artic. 10. 1562. M Perkins Re∣formed Cath. point. 1. and Augusin. confess. art. 18. Bllar. teacheth the same, De ra & lib. a. lib. 4 cap. 4 & seq. & lib. 5. cap. 14. & seq. & lib. 6. cap. 1. &c. and also outward Ecclesiasticall actions, to doe them, or not to doe them, except God restraine him: yet he hath no freewill, power, or abi∣lity to conuert himselfe truely to godlinesse, to beleeue, or to performe, or will any meere spirituall, inward, or holy actions, pleasing God, vntill God first by his grace, moue his heart to will, and giue him ability to per∣forme them, Phil. 2.13. Your best learned men beleeue and teach so also. But you haue many other idle questions, needlesse, yet hurtfull to the Church, which your Cassander
wisheth were abolished. Cassander consult: in arti∣culo 18. Of this point of Freewill, see a fuller discourse after∣wards, lib. 3. Of Freewill. Hebr. 13.6. psal. 19.11. pro 11.18. hebr. 6.10. mat. 10.41, 42. Bellarmine con∣fesseth this to be our do∣ctrine, lib. 5. de iustif. cap. 1. So Bellarmine de Iustif. lib. 5. cap. 17. § Iam. vero. and Rhe∣mists vpon 2 tim. 4.8. and vpon hebr. 6.10.18 We beleeue that the good works of a iustified person, are acceptable to the Lord, please him are re∣warded of him, and procure many excellent blessings from him. This you beleeue also, but whereas you adde, that that they doe properly and condignly merit eternall life, as an equall recompence and reward: you teach contrary to the Scriptures, and to the ancient Fathers, and to many of your owne men. Of this point also see hereafter, lib. 3. Of Merit. 19 We beleeue that our Lord hath instituted two Sacraments in his Church, as seales of his Couenant with his people, and Conduits of Iustifying grace; to wit, Baptisme, and his holy Supper. You beleeue the same but you adde fiue other, Matrimony, Penance, Ordination,We find two mentioned by the Fathers as properly called Sacra¦ments Aug. epist. 118. & lib. 3 de doctrina Christiana. cap. 8. Ambros. lib. de Sacraentis. Iustin. Martyr. A∣polog. 2. Tertul lib. 4. contra Marc. cap. 34. Cyril. Cateches. See Kemnit. examen. part 2. desa∣cram. But of things called Sacraments vnproperly they speake of more then seuen. But this is a nouelty, not knowen, or not obserued in the Church of more then a thousand yeares: and not imposed in the Church of Rome to be necessarily beleeued but very lately. See more of this in B. Mortons appeal, lib. 2. cap. 26. sect. 4, 5. Confirmation, and Extreme Vnction. Of which also we acknowledge the Institution and vse, onely we deny them the name and the nature of Sacra∣ments. Artic. 25. 1562. & art. 27, 28. Perk. resorm. Cath. point. 19.20 We beleeue that God hath so annexed grace vn∣to the Sacraments, that all well prepared receiuers doe participate the Iustifying and sanctify ng grace, as well as the outward Elements. You beleeue so too; but you adde, that Sacraments haue this grace, Ex opere operato. A tic. 29. 1562.1 We beleeue that in our Lors supper, the wor∣thy Communicant really partaketh Christs Body and
Blood. You beleeue the same, we onely differ in the manner how; we say spiritually with his soule: you say, with his mouth and stomacke, the substance of the Bread and Wine, being (you say) transubstantiated in∣to the body and blood of Christ. So that you also be∣leeue that impious Men and Atheists, yea, Cats, Dogs, and Mice, eating the bread, doe eat the very body of Christ. Our manner is enough for saluation, and agree∣able to antiquity: yours is a nouelty, and crosseth the analogy of faith. Of this point see a large discourse hereafter, lib. 3. cap. Of the Eucharist. 22 We beleeue there are two places prepared for soules departed out of this life, Heauen for the blessed,Perkins Refor∣med Catho∣licke. point. 17. of Purgatory. Hell for the damned. You beleeue so likewise, but you adde other places more, Purgatory, Limbus patrum, and Limbus pucrorum. Of this point see more hereafter, lib. 3. cap. Of Purgatory, &c. 23 We beleeue that Iesus Christ hath satisfied for our sinnes, and redeemed vs. You beleeue so also; but you adde, Christ hath satisfied onely for the eternall pu∣nishment, and for sinnes before Baptisme, but that we must satisfie for our following sins,August serm. 13. De verbis dom. Christus suscipi∣endo poenam, & non suscipiendo culpam & cul∣pam deleuit & poenam. See B Mortons Appeal lib. 1. cap 2 sect. 23. § 47. & lib. 2. cap. 15. sect. 8, 9, 10. and also for the tem∣porall punishment due to all our sins, either vpon earth or in Purgatory. This we account an errour against the foundation, making Christ but halfe a Sauiour: and against reason, for he that forgiues the fault, forgiues the punishment also, in S. Augustines opinion. 24 We beleeue that we ought to pray for all the members of Christs militant Church vpon earth: you beleeue so too; but you adde, wee ought also to pray for the soules suffering in Purgatory, which was a thing long time vnknowne to the Church of God. §. 2. These are the principall points of Religion, and the foundation of our church; & by your approbatiō of thē,
you grant them all to be true good ancient and Catho∣licke, which may appeare also by that which follow∣eth. Se hstory of the Councell of Trent. lib. 1. pag. 95.At a Diet in Rtisbon, (anno 1541.) where was pre∣sent, Iasper, Cardinall Contareni, the Popes Nuncio, Gra∣nuel deliuered a booke of 22 Articles to be considered of, by the Diuines of both sides (whereof the chiefe were chosen by the Emperour to dispute, namely Ecki∣us, Flugius, and Gropperus, Romists, Melancthon, Bucer, and Pstoria, Protestants) and vpon their debating, some things were approued, and some amended by common consent. They dissented onely in fiue things, and in seuenteene they all finally agreed. Ibib. pag. 54.55.Also when the Augustane confession (of the Prote∣stant Princes and Diuines) was read at Augspurge (an∣no 1530) the Popes Legate, Cardinall Campeggio, said plainly to the Emperour, that the difference (of that doctrine from the Roman) for the most part seemed verball; and that it imported not much whether one spake after one manner, or after another; and that for the present there was no cause to make any strict exa∣mination of the doctrine: onely meanes should be v∣sed that the Protestant should goe no further on. See Annals Eli∣zah ngl pag 63. and Relation of Religionin the West parts pag. x. 2. 159.And Pope Pius the fourth (anno 1560.) offered to Queene Elizabeth, to allow our whole Booke of Com∣mon Prayer if she would receiue it as from him, and by his authority. And so he might well doe, for the booke was with great iudgement purposely so framed out of the grounds of Religion, wherein both sides agree, that their very Catholickes might resort vnto it, without scruple or scandall, if Faction more then reason did not sway. The truth is, were it not for other causes, the Con∣trouersies of points of Religion might well be com∣pounded betwixt vs. For the learned of them know that our doctrine is sufficient to make vs true Christi-, ans, both for faith and good life: to make vs liue ho∣lily,
righteously, and soberly by Gods grace; to become good subiects to our Princes; good neighbors amongst men; good, diligent, and dutifull members of the Com∣mon-wealth; painfull, peaceable, and blessed people, and blessings to the Countrey where we liue: and to con∣duct vs thorow all necessary, gratious wayes and means ordained by God to eternall blessednesse. There is no defect in our doctrine to these ends: to promote Christs Kingdome both of grace and glory, §. 3. Onely they know (and we confesse) our Doctrine is insufficient to set vp an earthly Church-kingdome (in∣stead of Christs heauenly Kingdome) such as the Pope desireth, ouer-topping all other Christian Princes and Potentates, and maintained with all worldly wealth, pompe, and glory. Were it the purity of Religion which he desired, (described and receiued in the best Primitiue times of the Church) our Religion would a∣bundantly satisfie him: but this high transcendent su∣premacy of the Pope, farre beyond those Primitiue times, and the wealth of the world to maintaine him and his in their greatnesse,Acts 19.28, 25. is the great Diana of the Ro∣mans which they striue for. And these doctrinall con∣trouersies are but subordinate meanes, subtilly kept on foot to make the aduersaries of his supremacy more o∣dious. For by that craft their wealth is maintained.D. Francis White Orthodox faith. Epist. dedic. Ramolds & Hart confer. cap. 7. di∣nis. 6, & 7. pag. 367 & seq. Our Doctor Reinolds obserueth well, and proueth large∣ly, that this in these latter Ages hath been the Pope: maine aime and practise. And men of skill and iudge∣ment (who knew the popes thorowly and faithfully set forth their liues) haue opened this secret and my∣stery of State, (as it hath been managed, since it grew to maiesty) that they minde the propping vp of their owne Kingdome, while they pretend the worship of Christ: and that in the popes language, the Church doth signifie (not the company of the faithfull seruants
of God, but) the Papacy: that is, the dominion, and princehood of the pope in things both temporall and spirituall. K. Iames his Remonstrance to Peron. pag. 246.And our late learned and iudicious King Iames saith, The name of the Church serueth in this our corrupt Age, as a cloke to couer a thousand new inuentions: and no longer signifies the Assembly of the faithfull, or such as beleeue in Iesus Christ according to his Word, but a certaine glorious ostentation and temporall Mo∣narchy, whereof the pope (forsooth) is the supreame head.Ibid. pag. 259. And, S. Peters net is now changed into a casting net or a flew, to fish for all the wealth of most flourish∣ing kingdomes. 1 To this end, consider whether there be more care and policy to maintaine the popes greatnesse and reue∣nues then to make good Christians. For where good Christians are already (such as the Primitiue Christians were) thither the popes Emissaries come to make them the popes subiects, and sticke not at Treasons, Re∣bellions, inuasions, if they haue hope so to effect it. Relation of Religion in the West, pag. 156, 159.2 Consider, whether all other (thogh neuer so profane or wicked, Iewes, Stewes, Turkes, Infidels, Heretickes, or Atheists) open enemies of Christian Religion, be not suffered more quietly to liue in Italy, Rome, and vnder the popes nose, then Protestants, whose onely great crime is, They are against the popes vsurpations and corruptions Molius defence pag. 464.3 Consider, if all sinnes against God and his Word, be not more slightly punished, then offences against the Popes greatnesse? In cases of Murder, Treason, Incest, Blasphemy, &c. ordinary Bishops may bind and loose: but the cases of hindring men from going to Rome for pardons, of intrusion into any benefice or of∣fice Ecclesiasticail, of purloyning any Church goods, or offending the Sea-Apostolicke, &c. those are reserued to the pope onely. And the penitentiary taxe for falsi∣fying the letters Apostolicall, is more then three times
so much as the taxe for Incest with a mans Mother. 4 Consider,Bellar. de Iustif. lib. 2. cap. 1. in fine. if they winke not at our doctrine in their owne men, as Pighius, the Diuines of Colen, Du∣randus, and hundreds of others, as long as they professe subiection to the pope: in such Catholickes our opini∣ons are not heresie: but in vs the same opinions are persecuted with fire and sword. 5 Consider,Histor. concil. Trent. lib. 3. pag. 293. how kindly they offer to tolerate things otherwise very odious vnto them, if men will professe subiection to the pope; as (anno 1548.) Paul the third, sent the Bishops of Ʋerona and Ferentino his Nuncij, into Germany, (then almost lost from him) with faculties to grant vnto all persons (Kings, Princes, Ec∣clesiasticall and Regular) that would returne to his obe∣dience; absolution from all censures, dispensations for irregularities, or objuration, penance, oathes, perju∣ries: and to restore them to honour, fame, and dignity: and to license them to partake the Cup in the Commu∣nion, to eat flesh in Lent, and Fasting dayes, with many other immunities, so farre as might be done in time and place without scandall, &c. So Pius the fourth,Annals Eliz. Engl. pag. 63. Latin. pag. 49. (anno 1560.) offered to Queene Elizabeth, to allow our whole booke of Common Prayer, if she would receiue it as from him and by his authority. 6 Consider, whether this was not the maine cause of the popes quarrell and thunder against the German Em∣perours, and our English Kings, John, and Henry the 8. who held all the doctrinall points of the Romish Religi∣on; and onely impaired the popes highnesse, great∣nesse or reuenues. In Henry 8 time,Hist. conc. Trid. lib. 1. pag. 70. the Court of Rome maintained, that it could not be said, There was no change of Religion in England, the first and principall article being changed, which is the supremacy of the pope: and that seditions would arise, as well for this onely, as for all the rest, which the euent shewed to bee true. For though the King continued the Religion of the pope so fully by commands and punishments, that
pope Paul 3 commended him highly to the Emperour,Ibid, pag. 89, 90. ibid. pag. 87. as an illustrious example to bee imitated in that course: yet for abrogating the popes supremacy and reuenues in England, he thundred a Bull against him, denouncing him depriued of his kngdome, and his ad∣herents of whatsoeuer they possessed, and commanding his subiects to deny him obedience, and strangers to haue any commerce with that kingdome: and all to take armes against, and to persecute both himselfe and his followers, granting them their estates and goods for their prey, and their persons for their slaues. It is not therefore the points of true ancient Catho∣like Christian Doctrine that you so much contend for, to make good gracious Christians, inheritors of heauen∣ly felicity: but it is your wealth and greatnesse, or the setting vp and maintaining of your Visible Monarchy of the Church (as you Doctor Sanders calls it) where∣of Christ and his Apostles spake neuer a word, and whereof the Primitiue Church neuer dreamed. This, if our Religion would allow,Pius 4. Hist. conc. Trid. lib. 8. pag. 745. you would allow of our Religion. The rather-politicke-then-pious pope saide once: since he could not regaine the Protestants, it was necessary to keepe those in obedience which hee had,Bellar. de eccles. militant. lib. 3. c. 2. §. nostra au∣tem sententia. See Triplici nodo pag. 41, 42. Printed 1609. to make the diuision strong, and the parties irre∣conciliable. Conformable whereunto, now their Do∣ctrine is, that such as submit not to the popes suprema∣cy, doe renounce Christianity. For the Church, (saith Bellarmine) is the company of them that liue in subie∣ction to the pope, professing the same faith with him, though they haue no inward vertues but be indeed A∣theists, Hypocrites, or Heretickes. And in his Epistle to Blackwell, the Arch-priest in England, (anno 1607.) he cals the popes supremacy one of the principall heads of the Faith, and foundation of the Catholicke Religi∣on: and saith, They that disturbe or diminish that primacy, seeke to cut off the very head of the Faith, and to dissolue the state of the whole body, and of all the members.
§. 4. This primacy is practised in the popes challenged gouernment ouer the Church of the whole world. ForTurrecremata lib. 2. c. 27. Aug. Triumph. q. 19. art. 1. as Matrimony is contracted betwixt a prelate and his particular Church (by his election and consecration) so betwixt the pope and the Vniuersall Church. Thus if the pope be the generall bridegroome (sponsus) and Rome the generall bride (sponsa) then they two are the common parents of all Christians, so that none is to be accounted a Christian that hath not the pope for his father, and that Church for his mother.Capist. fol. 31. . So saith Capi∣stranus, fol. 56 a. A manifest errour, for 1 none of the Churches of the New Testament (Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, Colossus, Thessaly, Smirna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea, &c.) nor 2 other Primitiue Churches following for many hundred yeares, were a∣ny way dependant vpon Rome or her Bishop: but were built vpon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets (in generall) Iesus Christ himselfe being the chiefe cor∣ner stone: and by that meanes,Eph. 2.20. were no more strangers and forrainers: but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the houshold of God, Ephes. 2.19, 20. They did not acknowledge Rome their mother, but their sister: not the roote, but a particular branch of the Church: such a one as equally with the rest, did partake of the root and fatnesse of the Oliue tree, Rom. 11.17.Rom. 11.18, 20, 21, 22. And to the Roman Church was written directly this prophe∣ticall Caueat, Boast not against the branches: but if thou boast, thou bearest not the root, but the roote thee. Bee not high minded, but feare: for if God spared not the naturall branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee: if thou con∣tinue not in his goodnesse, thou shalt also be cut off. This shewes (1) that Rome is but a branch, not the root of the vniuersall Church: (2) that it may be cut off, and yet other Churches stand and flourish, being
vnited to the common root: and therefore are inde∣pendant vpon the Church of Rome.Baronius an. 45. n. 18. Bellar. de Rom. pont. lib. 2. c. 2. & lib. 3. cap. 13. And it is plaine that the mysticall Babylon ('mother of Abominations, drunken with the bloud of the Saints and Martyrs, Re∣uel. 17.5, 6,) is the very City of Rome, built vpon seuen mountaines (verse 9.) and raigning ouer the Kings of the earth,Ribera in Apoc. 14. n. 27. & seq. Viegas in Apoc. 27. comment. 1. sec. 3. Suarez lib. 5. c. 7. n. 11. Of this point, see the glori∣ous Panegyrick Oration of Innotencius 3. calling himselfe the Spouse of the Church, and magnifying the largenesse, dignity, wealth and dowry of his Bride: apud Vs∣serium De ecclesiarum successione & statu. cap. 9. initio pag. 255. See also B. Carlton. Consens contr. 2. de ecclesia cap. 1. pag. 156. and D. Field of the Church. lib. 5. cap. 41. pag. 267. where he answereth Bellarmines arg. libri. 2. de Rom. pont. cap. 31. Ex nominibus quae Romano Ponti∣fici tribui solent. (verse 18.) so plaine, that that the Iesuites cannot, doe not deny it, our Rhemists say it was Rome vnder Nero, &c. but later Iesuites, Ribera, and Ʋiegas, & Suarez confesse it must needs be Rome, towards the end of the world, wherein Antichrist shall sit, make ha∣uocke of the Church, and be finally destroyed. CHAP. 5. §. 5. II. As the Pope challengeth a superiority ouer all Christians so much more particularly ouer all the Cler∣gy; who must all deriue their, both Orders and Iuris∣diction from him, as from the vniuersall Pastor of the Church, in whom all power of Orders and Iurisdiction originally resideth: So that Bishops pay to the Pope great summes of money for their ceremonies at their entrance, and Priests also their first fruites and yearely tenths, with other payments to fill the Popes Cofers, by exhausting Christian Kingdomes: and all Bishops and Priests become the popes subiects, exempted from the Iurisdiction, Lawes and penalties of the Princes in whose Countries they liue, both their persons, goods, and lands: which is a double iniury to Christian Prin∣ces and Common-wealthes. First, that the Princes and State haue no dominion ouer the persons or bodies of the Clergy, or ouer Monkes, Fryars, Nunnes, or other
Regulars or Votaries; they cannot be punished by the Kings lawes, be they adulterers murderers, robers, trai∣tors, or tainted with other villanies, except the popes officers will degrade them & make thē seculars. Which was the Controuercy betwixt King Henry the second,Read this whole story in our Chroni∣cles, especially in Speeds. and Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, who would not yeeld the King any authority to punish Cler∣gy malefactors, as being none of his subiects. Second∣ly, that the Princes and State haue no aide, subsidies, or reuenues out of the goods or lands of Church-men or Abbies: whereas the goods or lands of such men may arise to a quarter or a third part of the whole Realme: yea, and they continually increase from Age to Age, by gifts, bequests, and purchases, and are neuer alienated; to the great impairing of publicke reuenues and publicke force. For which the Venetians and other Common-wealthes haue been compelled to make Lawes of re∣straint, lest they should in time be swallowed vp by the Clergy. This is against Diuinity, equity, and antiquity; Christ was not exempted from the Magistrates power: he ac∣knowledge Pilat to haue power to crucify him,Iohn 19.10, 11 & pow∣er to release him; euen lawfull power giuen him from aboue. He payed tribute to Caesar for himselfe and his. Saint Paul acknowledged Caesaer to be his lawfull iudge; And taught all men (both for conscience sake,Mat. 17. end. Act. 25.10. Rom. 13.1. &c. 1 Pet. 2.13. Bernard. epist. ad Episcopum Senonensem. Omnis anima, tum vestra, quis vos excipit? qui tentat excipere, tentat decipere. and in equity for the good we receiue from the Magi∣gstrates) to be subiect to the ciuill Magistrates that beare the sword. Saint Peter doth the like. Saint Ber∣nard writing to a Bishop, tels him he is not exempted from temporall subiection to Princes; he that excepts him deceiues him. Father Paul of Venice in his Considerations vpon the censure of Pope Paul 5. pag. 39. shewes how the Exemp∣tions of the Clergy, came in peece-meale by the priui∣ledges of Princes, and not jure diuino. Anno domini 315. Constantine the great, exempted
their persons from publicke and Court seruices. And Constant and Constance his sonnes added their ex∣emption from illiberall or sordid actions, and from Im∣positions. 308 Valens and Gracianus. 400 Arcadius and Ho∣norius. 420 Honorius and Theodosius 2. &c. put the tryall of the Clergy to the Bishop, if both parties were willing; otherwise to the secular Magistrate: which was confirmed by Gracian also, anno 460. and by Leo. 560 Iustinian put the Clergy in ciuill causes to the Bishop, and in criminall to the secular Iudge. 630 Heraclius exempted the Clergy both in ciuill and criminall causes, from the secular Magistrate; yet euer reseruing entire the Princes immediate Deputies and substitutes. But the popes in following Ages challenged these priuiledges as due to them by diuine right, and abused these Emperours bountifulnesse, to their great distur∣bance and dishonour. And in these last Ages wherein priests and Iesuites are so busie with State matters, to the great disquiet and danger of Princes, making Reli∣gion a Maske to couer and closely conuey treasons and rebellions: these exemptions and priuiledges are not tollerable. §. 6. III. The Popes authority staies not here, in the ge∣neral Fatherhood of the Church, or dominion ouer the Clergy, exempting from the secular powers. These are but staires to an higher ascent. In the first and best times of the Church, the gaining of soules to God, was the principall end, and wealth a poore inferiour meanes to maintaine them (selling their lands to relieue the poore Christians, Acts 2.45 and 4.34, &c.) Now (it seemes) greatnesse and wealth are the chiefe ends and a shew of Religion is a meanes to get them. Christs kingdome was not of this world, (Iohn 18.36.) The Popes is:
Doctor Sanders calls it,Sanderi libri de visibili mo∣narchia. The visible Monarchy of the Church, a Monarchy ouertopping all other, yea prac∣tising to depose, dispose transpose all other Christian Potentates, as shall seeme good to the Pope to giue Henries Empire to Rodulph, sending to him a Diadem with this Inscription, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diade∣ma Rodulpho: authorizing him (like Zimri) to kill his Master, and raigne in his stead. To giue England from King Iohn to Philip of France: our Henry the eigth, his Kingdome to whosoeuer could take it by force: Queene Elizabeths to the King of Spaine: to omit ma∣ny others. Pope Celestinus crowned Henry 6 and his Empresse,See Tortura Torti pag. 264. & 262. Baronius appro∣ued not Alex∣ander 3. act. an∣not 177. for he thought the story not true: But Celestins fact he com∣mends and defends. B. Andews in Tortura Torti. pag. 263. with both his feet; and cast off his with one. An Em∣perours Crowne is but the popes football. Gregory 7, made Henry 4. attend bare-footed foure dayes in Winter before his gates. Alexander 3, trode vpon Fredericke Barbarosaes necke, reciting the verse of the Psalme, 91.13. Thou shalt treade vpon the Lyon and Adder, The yong Lyon and the Dragon shalt thou trample vnder thy f et. These things the world cryed shame vpon, and Bellarmine blusheth at some of them, and laboureth to weaken the credit of the Reporters: but our Bishop Andrewes reckons aboue 20 Authors of diuers Nations reporting them. Christ would not diuide Inheritances amongst bre∣thren, as a thing that belonged not vnto him, Luke 12.14. The Pope (Christs pretended Vicar) will. He will giue all the East Indies to the Portugll and all the West to the Spaniard: and other Kingdomes at his pleasure: with as ample right as he challenged, that tempted Christ, Luke 4 6. As this is an vnsupportable mischiefe, so the meanes to effect it is as euill or wose. When people must be so strangely and strongly deluded, and inebriated with false opinions, as to drinke downe poyson instead of wholsome doctrine, to breake Gods absolute, manifst,
and holy lawes at the popes commandement: that if the pope take offence excommunicate the King, say he doth and can absolue them from their oath of alleage∣ance, and all obedience to their King the Lords annoin∣ted, and bid them take armes against him, and root him out: they ought rather to obey the pope then God. Holy Dauid, hauing Saul at aduantage (a wicked King, forsaken of God, and one that furiously sought Dauids death) yet would not touch him himselfe, nor suffer him to be hurt by any other, because he was still the Lords annointed, 1 Sam. 24.4 5, 6, 7. and 26.11, 12. Saint Paul and Saint Peter taught Christians subiection euen to heathen Emperours, persecutors of the Church (for such they were at that time) Rom. 13.1. &c. 1 Pet. 213. The pope is farre from Dauids, Pauls, Peters spirit. Our Saint Peter of Jerusalem commanded, Be subiect to the King as supreme, for so is the will of God, 1 Pet. 2.13, 15. but your Peter of Rome commands the contrary: Be not subiect to the King as supreme, for this is the will of Christs Vicar. Yea (saith our Saint Peter, ib, (verse 19, 20, 21.) Be subiect to your Masters, though they be euill and froward, and for conscience sake to God suffer wrongfully, as Christ did, for that is acceptable to God: but your Peter of Rome saith, Rbell against Princes whom J iudge euill and froward, and for conscience sake (doe against all conscience, religion and common hone∣sty) worke treasons, insurrections, massakers, for that is ac∣ceptable to God. What new, incredible, abhominable do∣ctrine is this, that rebellions, treasons, and massacres of Princes and people, differing from the pope in some points of Religion, are meritorious acts, and highly pleasing to God? That dethroning Princes, adiudging their Kingdomes to strangers, filling the world with periuries, rebellions, warres treasons, inuasions, dashing kingdomes against kingdomes, bringing in a Chaos of confusions, and the face of hell into the Christian world: that all these are workes of piety and religion?
and poore bewitched people must so beleeue, and so practise? Tantum Rellgio potuit suadêre malorum!ucretius. If this be religion, men had need write Apologies (books of excuse and defence) for Religion: which hath beene and should be the greatest blessing of the world, the power fullest meanes and strongest bond of loue, peace, comfort, and happinesse: lest it now be held the most turbulent suspicious, seditious engine to vndermine and ouerthrow, all loue, peace, comfort, happinesse, and become the greatest plague of the world. Of these things here briefly; of this point I shall speake more fully in fitter place. §. 7. IIII. A fourth great policy, whereby the Pope gay∣neth to himselfe sure friends and great meanes, is his assumed power to dissolue or dispence with oathes, bonds promises, or leagues. An vnsufferable sinne, but very profitable to him. For when Princes or great men are driuen in their estates to hard conditions or extremities, or desirous for their profit to take some great aduantage by breaking their oathes: they haue no other meanes to saue their honour and credit with the world, then to alledge the warranty of the popes holy authority: which authority they are tyed, after∣wards, most firmely to maintaine. Thus the politicke pope, and they whom he fauoureth, thriue in honour, wealth and strength, by blinding the world with this vniust vsurped practise, to the inestimable preiudice of the wronged party, and of all other whom the pope af∣fecteth not, whose waightiest actions, resolutions, leagues and contracts, are made nothing worth; or on∣ly are in force till the pope list to dissolue them.See B. Andrewes Ad Tortum Re∣sponsio. pag 55. He can bind and lose at h s peasure: as our Saint Peter by the Kees of heauen could binde and vnbinde sinnes: so your Peter of Rome, (b the Keyes of Hell, it seemes) can binde and vnbinde, lawes and oathes, be they neuer
so good, holy, and diuine: yea lawes and oathes as easi∣ly as sinnes against lawes and oathes. And thus the most solemne oathes for leagues and lawes taken vpon men, sub Deo ste sub Deo vindice, ordained to be the so∣ueraigne instruments of iustice and security amongst men,See exampes of these here∣after, cap. and the strongest bonds of conscience: are now made delusions of good men, instruments of deceit and mischiefe intollerable; snares to entrappe the well-meaning, to maintaine the deceitfull wrong-doer, and to vphold the popes own greatnesse, with most shme∣full blemishes of Christian Religion. Lawes, oathes, vowes, are soluble and salable at Rome: men are no more to be trusted with them, then without them; they that are on the popes side need not sticke at sinne, breach of vowes, or peruries: he can d slolue all, and cut asunder all the bonds and sinnes of humane peace, secu∣rity and society, lawes, oathes, vowes, leagues and ty∣alls whatsoeuer. §. 8. Hist. conc. Trent. lib. 1. pag. 10. & lib. 8. pag. 791.V. No lesse sinfull, and no lesse profitable to the pope are Matrimoniall dispensations and sentences of di∣uorce, as well granted as denyed. When great Princes are sheltered with the name of the Vicar of Christ, to contract some incestuous marriage, or dissolue one, to contract with another to vnite some Territory to their owne, or to drowne the titles of other pretenders, or make some other strait alliance: those Princes are now to defend that authority without which their actions would be condemned: yea, also their children and po∣sterity must be fast friends vnto the pope, lst they en∣danger their owne legitimation, their state and digni∣ty.Annals Elizab. Camden. Appara∣. pag. 2. For vniting of Territories, Charles the 8, King of France made great vse of the popes dispensing power. He had taken the daughter of Maximilian (King of Romans) for his future wife; but afterwards for de∣sire of the Duchy of Britany, he solicited to marry Anne
the heire of Britanie, though she was betrothed, yea, and already married to Maximilian by his Proxy, or Proctor Wolfgangus, Poleme of Austrich openly in the Church. A double iniury to Maximilian, to haue her taken from him whom he accounted his wife, and to haue his daughter sent home againe, who had been ma∣ny yeeres Queene of France. But this could the Pope doe. Philip Cominius reports it, lib. 7. cap 3. adding, whether these things agree with the lawes of holy Church, or no, let others iudge. Some Doctors of Di∣uinity said, yea, and many nay. But the issues of these Ladies were very vnfortunate, and many calamities proceeded from these marriages, as he there reports. Yet the pope dispensed with all this, partly to bind the French vnto him, and partly to bridle the Emperour, whom he would not haue grow too great, by addition of Britany to his State. Besides, he needed not much care for this present Emperour Maximilian, a poore prince, full of affaires, and of small credit. Yea Maxi∣milian himselfe afterwards affected the popedome, as Guicciardine reporteth. But come we to the affaires of our owne Nation. Pope Julius the 2. gaue a dispensation, that King Henry the 8. of England, might marry Katherine, the wife of his brother Arthur, deceased. A marriage plainly condemned by the Scriptures, Leu. 18.16. and 20.21. and Mat. 24.2, 4. and by many learned Vniver∣sities. Afterwards pope Clement the 7.Hist. concil. Trid. lib. 1. pag. 68. at Henries sute sent Cardinall Campeggio into England, framing a Briefe to dissolue the Kings said marriage with Katherine (to be published when some few proofes were passed, which he was sure would easily be made) and to giue liberty to the King to marry another: This, anno 1524. but anno 1529. The pope thinking it better to ioyne with the Emperour (who was sonne to Katherines si∣ster) sent another Nuncio to Campeggio, with order to burne the Breefe, and to proceed slowly in the cause.
For the popement to apply himselfe to his best ad∣uantages, but the King espying their iugling, finally ba∣nished the popes authority out of England. Annals ibid prae∣par. pag. A. 3. Latin Apparat. p. xij.But Queene, Mary, the daughter of Hnry, by the said marriage of Katherine, perswaded her selfe that all the right that she had to the Kingdome of England, was vpholden by no other meanes then by the power of the pope, whose dispensation made that marriage lawfull, and gaue sentence of her side, after her father had declared her illegitimate, and therefore she was bound to cleaue strongly to the Pope. Also Charles the 5, Emperour, procured a marriage betwixt Philip his sonne of Spaine, and Mary, Queene of England, by a dispensation of pope Iulius the 3. because they were allied in the third degree: and that Charles himselfe had contracted to marry her, being then vnder age for time to come. Ibid. pag. 5. sed atin. pag. 4.After her death, King Philip desirous to keepe Eng∣land, treated seriously of a marriage with Queen Eliza∣beth (his late wiues sister) with promise to obtaine a speciall dispensation from the pope. Which, the King of France (fearing it would be granted by the pope) la∣boured secretly to hinder, but the hindrance of the marriage was from Queene Elizabeth her selfe. Relation of Religion in the West. pag. 34. & 27. See the whole Tract. pag. 25. & seq.By such dispensations from the pope, marriages in the house of Austria haue been so neere, that they re∣maine still as brethren, all of one family, and as armes of the selfe-same body. Keeping their dominions vnited still together without distraction. Philip the second of Spaine, might call the Archduke Albert, both brother, cozen, nephew, and sonne; being vncle to himselfe, co∣zen-german to his father, husband to his sister, and fa∣ther to his wife. Such marriages (made lawfull onely by the pope, di∣spensing with the Law of God) must needs binde both the parties and issue thereof to be firme to the Papacy, and to maintaine that authority, by which themselues
stand maintained and honoured. So searched and pe∣netrant is that Sea of Rome to strengthen it selfe more by vnlawfull marriages of other men, then euer Prince yet could doe, by the most lawfull marriage of his owne. And thus the Pope, by some one act, ties vnto himselfe the fauour of many friends, and many genera∣tions. Yet may this be thought fit onely for blinded or ill-minded Princes; The well-sighted or well-minded, need no such cloake, nor will make vse of any such, for any otherwise vniustifiable courses. But if they through their owne ignorance, or their Ancestors vn∣iust proiects, haue been inuolued in such nets as their conscience now mislikes: they may (after our King Henries example) by Gods booke and the counsell of godly, wise, and learned men, alter their courses, abolish his authority that alters Gods Lawes, or deludes them: and establish their state by more sound meanes. Hu∣manum est errare, perseuerare diabolicum. §. 9. VI. Other dispensations,See Verdunt discourse, anno 1563. Mense. Febr. in hist. conc. Trid. lib. 7. pag. 676. See Tortura Torti. pag 57. for diuers things hurtfull to the Church, States, and People, but very profitable to the Pope and Court of Rome, are ordinary. About which one Iohannes Ʋerdun spake freely and iudicious∣ly in the Councell of Trent. Dispensations (saith he) are accounted dis-obligations from the Law, but Gods Law is perpetuall and remaineth inuiolable for euer. The Pope is not Lord, and the Church his seruant, to bestow fauours as a master vpon his seruants Hee is but a seruant (at the best) to him who is Spouse of the Church: neither can he by dispensing vnbinde any that is bound; but onely declare to him that is not bound, that he is exempted from the Law. Indeed, humane Lawes through the imperfection of the Law∣makers, and Cases not foreseene may admit dispensati∣ons in sundry occurrences; as exceptions from the ge∣nerall Law, where it may be iustly thought, the Law∣makers
would haue made exceptions if they had fore∣seene those Cases: but where God is the Law-giuer (from whom nothing is concealed, and by whom no accident is not fore-seene) the Law can haue no excep∣tion, but all his Law is equity it selfe, perpetuall and immutable. Hist. conc. Trid. lib. 4. pag. 321.The King of France (anno 1551.) in a Printed Mani∣fest, published to his subiects, that they were not to regard the Popes dispensations, which were not able to secure the conscience, and are nothing but a shadow cast before the eies of men, which cannot hide the truth from God. Euen in mens lawes, Dispensationes sunt legum vlnera, Dispensations are deepe wounds: In Gods Lawes deadly wounds, both to the lawes, and to the dispenser. for lawes often wounded, haue little life left in them; and he that wounds them hath little feeling of consci∣ence. Christ came not to dissolue the Law, but to fulfill it, (Matth. 5.17.) the Pope comes not to fulfill the lawes but to dissolue them. He vnbinds subiects oathes to Princes: yea, bindes subiects with oathes against Princes: both against Gods Law: binding where he should loose, loosing where he should binde, as Anti∣god, and Antichrist. He bindes his Catholickes for a time; while they want strength they shall not stirre getting strength, then they are loosed, then stirre, kill and massacre. Thus Gregory the 13. interprets the Bull of Pius the 5. And thus Princes of the old Christian faith, that they liue and reigne, are beholden to the Catholickes of the new stampe, not for their faith, but for their weake∣nesse.Hist. conc. Trent. lib. 8. pag. 815. And with other Lawes, Constitutions, Coun∣cels, and Ordinances, he playeth fast and loose as he list. Take for example that which is written in the end of the history of the Councell of Trent. When much deba∣ting had beene betweene the Pope and the Cardinals, whether his Holinesse should confirme the Councell or
no: because through the importunity of Princes, and some learned Diuines, many Decrees had passed for re∣format on of diuers things, whereby the dignity and profits of the Papacy and Court of Rome would bee much impaired: at last Cardinall Amulius told the pope, Since he could not possibly auoyd the calling and celebrating of the Councell, so much desired by the cla∣mour of the world, he must now either quickly con∣firme it to satisfie the world, or else Princes and States would vse other meanes by nationall Councells, or by another generall Councell to satisfie themselues. But now by confirming all, and giuing as much quicke ex∣ecution as was possible, the pope might stay and quiet the humour of the world for the present: and after∣wards by vnsensible and vnresistable degrees, by his dis∣pensations he might bring all to the same estate, where∣in it was before; without seeming to violate the de∣crees of the Councell, and this policy tooke effect; and so both frustrate the good reformation entended by the Decrees, and also gulled the world and all the Princes and Prelates paines, and turned all to the profit of the Pope, his Court, and Cardinalls. Whereby it plainly appeares, The popes faction aymeth not at the good of the Church, or Christian Common-wealthes, but one∣ly at their owne wealth and greatnesse, and hereby ap∣peares also the great power and iniquity of the Popes dispensations. Antiquus. Whatsoeuer they aime at: I am re∣solued that many of these things cannot be of God; they are certainly the faults of men, and abuses practi∣sed vnder colour of Religion I cannot, I will not defend them. But I doe much wonder, how, not be∣ing of God, they should be so generally receiued, belee∣ued to be of God, and so long continued, and not ra∣ther long since driuen out of the world by Princes and People.
Antiquissimus. Sir, if ye knew and considered the policies and power, which haue been vsed, to bring them in and maintaine them, your wonder would cease. Antiquus. I pray you make me acquainted with them. Antiquissimus. Some of the principall and most ob∣uious, I will: but my wit cannot sound the bottom∣lesse depth of the Mystery of Iniquity. Antiquus. A taste thereof shall content me. CHAP. 6. Of policies to maintaine the Popes Princedome and Wealth. 1 Depriuing men of the light of the Scriptures. And 2 of their ordinary preachings, and setting vp ambulate∣ry Monkes and Pryars, to preach without controule of Church Ministers and Officers. 3 Schoolemens too much subtilty and Philosophy, darkning and corrupting Diuinity. 4 Iesuites, their originall noted, their Semi∣naries, their Emissions, faculties, insinuations, and im∣ploiments. 5 Cardinals. 6 Prouision for men and wo∣men of all sorts, by Monasteries, &c. 7 Auricular con∣fession. 8 Other policies to gather wealth. 9 Purgato∣ry, a rich thing. 10 So are Indulgences or Pardons. 11 Jubilies. 12 Corruptions of doctrine, touching me∣rits and Justification, &c. 13 Things hallowed by the Pope. 14 Extraordinary exactions. §. 1. THe Popes principall meanes to make the people his owne, were 1 to keepe the Diuine Scriptures from them, by which else they might discerne his vn∣iustifiable policies.Psal. 119.105. and 19.7, 8. For Gods Word is the light and lanthorne of Christians,
which S. Paul would haue to dwell plentifully among them, Col. 3.16. and S. Peter would haue Babes in Christ to desire the sincere milke of the Word, that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. which is able to make them wise in the points of faith, 2 Tim. 3.15. and perfectly furnished vnto all good workes, verse 17.Chrysost. serm. 2. de Lazaro. S. Chryso∣stome (as doe many other Fathers also) exhorts all people (Lay-men especially, Tradesmen, Carpenters, &c.) to get them Bibles more carefully then any other tooles of their occupation: and the more they dealt in the world, and met with temptations, il examples, and occasions of sinne, so much more carefully to reade the Scriptures, for direction and armour against them. Christ himselfe commandeth, Search the Scriptures, (Joh. 5.39.) and saith, (Matth. 22.29.) Doe ye not erre not knowing the Scriptures? So that, herein They are Anti-Pauls and Peters, Anti-chrysostomes, and Anti-Christs, that teach and practise the contrary:Matth. 5 15. hiding the light of Gods Word vnder their Latin bushels, from the vnlatined people in Gods house; yea, and from the Latined too, vnder great penalties, except they be licen∣ced. Surely as this is a meanes to obscure the truth, and lead men as Captiues blind-fold whether they list2 Tim. 2.26.; so it is a signe, they loue not the truth, but are euill men and hate the light, lest their deeds should be reproued, Ioh. 3.20. §. 2. But it was not sufficient to take from men the true light, except there be added also a false light, to mis∣guide them; for mens mindes being naturally desirous of knowledge, and giuen to deuotion, must haue that hunger satisfied and quieted either by truth or ap∣pearance. Their second policy was therefore; 2 To put downe the ordinary Pastors and Preachers, or to take a course that they are discouraged, disabled, grow vnlearned and vnfit to preach: and set vp others. For
Saint Paul appointed Bishops to ordaine Presbyters, Tit. 1.5. in euery City and Towne, to wit such as dwell a∣mong the people, might best know the wants, sinnes, capacities of their owne people;See Tit. 5, 6, 7, &c. 1 Tim, 3.2, &c. and 5.22. Acts 20.17, 18. and apply their tea∣ching the best way to informe, reforme, and winne them: and such as being fixed in their places might best be called to account by the Bishop, either for life or doctrine. This was Gods excellent meanes to preserue sound doctrine and sincere holy liues of Ministers. But when the Popes ambition and couetousnesse grew so great, that they were not content with Christs heauenly Kingdome, but would super-adde vnto it an earthly kingdome, and make of Christs mili∣tant Church, and Church triumphant vpon earth, a vi∣sible Church Monarchy (as Doctor Sanders entitles it) ouer-topping all other Kingdomes of ciuill Princes, Kings and Emperours: and draw out of all Countries the Wealth and Treasure of the world to maintaine it: Then the Ministers and Preachers of Christs ordaining, would not serue their turne, but would rather oppose. And therefore it was the popes best policy to disgrace and disable them: and to finde out and set vp others fitter for their purpose, to preach in all places of the world, by the authority and priuiledge of the Popes onely, and wholly exempted from the Bishops iurisdi∣ctions, and from all controule of other Ministers or Of∣ficers whatsoeuer. So that these new Preachers meere∣ly depending vpon the pope, and maintained by him, might answerably maintaine him, vphold his authori∣ty and all his proceedings, with the disgrace and bea∣ting downe of all his or their aduersaries. §. 2. See Hist. concil. Trent. lib. 2. pag. 167. 169. 170. an. 1546. & lib. 4. pag. 322.This course was found to be very hurtfull to the Church, and was complained of by many learned men in the following Ages: and in the late Councell of Trent, Reformation thereof was very earnestly called
for by many Bishops, especially the Spanish; as a thing that vtterly abolished the Apostles Institution, and the holy Fathers practise, & took away the Bishops office, and was the cause why all things were out of order, and so had growne by degrees from bad to worse for three hundred yeeres. Neither was it possible to a∣mend them, wh le these ambulatory Monkes and Fry∣ars did so swarme in the world, with priuiledge to preach where and what they list, against the Bishops willes. Vpon such great and frequent complaints in Trent,Ibid. pag. 170. the pope and Cardinals at Rome, tooke the matter into their consideration: and they quickly saw, that if these exemptions and priuiledges of preaching Monkes and Fryers were taken away, the popes au∣thority would decay. For it was a cleare case, that after the six hundredth yeare, the primacy of the Apo∣stolicke Sea, had beene vpheld by the Benedictine Monkes exempted, and after by the Congregations of Clunie and Cistercium, and other Monasticall Assem∣blies, vntill the Mendicant Fryars arose, by whom it had beene maintained till that time. And there∣fore to take away those priuiledges, were directly to oppugne the Papacy, with a manifest depression of the Court of Rome. These motions therefore were by all possible meanes to be silenced. Note (by the way) something of the Monkes here named, and the Ages they liued in.§. 3. Tritem. de viris illustr. ord. Bene∣diclini lib. 1. cap. 2. &. 5. Tritemius writes that of the Benedictines there were before the Councell of Constance, 15000 Religious houses: and that out of this order, there had beene taken of Popes, eighteene; Cardinals, one hundred and eighty; Archbi∣shops, one thousand, one hundred sixty foure; Bishops, three thousand fiue hundred and twelue; by which you may gesse at the multitudes, power, estimation, and authority that this order had in the world.
Azor. instit mo∣ral. lib. 12. c. 21.Azorius saith, when this order grew slacke and swarued from their first rule; the Cluniacenses arose out of them, an. 913. And the Csternienses, anno 1198. And these were they that vpheld the Papacy so notably in those middle times of darkenesse, when all Learning, both Diuine and Humane (yea, and almost all good∣nesse) was decayed out of the world: and ignorant men were apt to beleeue any thing, and take it for currant and authenticall, which their seeming-holy Church∣men taught, being no way able to examine the truth thereof. §. 4. Legend Aur. Ia∣cobi de Voragine in vita Domini∣ci. c. Also in vita Dominici, addita Lipomano De historia Sancto∣rum. These things (they say) were made knowne to diuers deuout Monkes by Visions or Re∣uelations: whereof Iaco∣bus de Voragine Bishop of Ge∣nua, reciteth some. In legen∣da S. Dominici.But in succeeding times, when the worlds eyes were better opened, and the opposers of the Papacy (special∣ly, the Waldenses, or Albigenses) grew to greater num∣bers and strength: Innocent. 3. hit vpon better meanes against them: by the two orders of begging Fryers, newly deuised by S S. Dominick and Francis. There is a wicked and prophane story (which I thought, the learned of this Age had beene ashamed of, but that I find it new written againe by Costerus the Iesuite, in the Preface of his Institutions) how that Iesus Christ was in a great chafe that the Albigenses increased so fast and seemed to ouercome the world so that he said he would presently destroy the world. But the holy Virgin his Mother, prayed him to be patient a while, that she might first send two men into the world, S. Dominicke and S. Francis; and if they could ouercome them, all should be well: if not, then let him take his pleasure. They write also that Dominicus hauing deuised a new order against Heretickes, better then any former, came to pope Innocent 3. to haue it confirmed. The pope in some suspence, whether to grant or deny it, one night saw in his dream, the great church of Lateran shrinking in his ioynts, and ready to finke to the earth: whereat affrighted, he thought he saw Dominick presently come, and hold it vp with his shoulders. Vpon which vision he confirmed his new order. Thus writes Vincentius
in Speculo histor. Antoninus, Theodoricus, Bertrandus,Bonav. de vita Francisci cap. 3. in fine apud Li∣pomanum. Baptista Mantuanus. But Bonaventure saith. It was Saint Francis that held vp the Church. See Bishop Vsher, De successu Ecclesiae cap 9. § 9, 10. Howsoeuer, it is certaine they that wrote, and they that beleeued these stories, had a strong conceit that these two Orders were —magnae spes altera Romae, Strong successiue props to vphold the Maiesty of the Papacy And so they were, many wayes: 1 by their multi∣tude, for they quickly spread ouer the face of the earth (some say,Chawcer in the wife of Bathes tale. as thicke as the Locusts darkning the ayre, Reuel. 9 or) as Chawcer saith, as thicke as motes in the Sunne Beame. 2 By their credit and estimation among the people, for they were receiued and admired as most holy men, vowing pouerty, forswearing riches lands, or other worldly goods for Christs sake, contented with their Houses, Gardens, and Orchards, liuing on Almes, beg∣ged or brought to them, simply cloathed, with ropes for their girdles: and preaching very diligently in all places, specially quaint Tales, and Legends delighting the people. But the sense of their credit made them vntolerably audacious,See these things at large in Mat. Paris. pag 404. and 673. And in B. Vsher De Eccles. cap. 9. §. 14. & seq. in vilifying all ordinary Mini∣sters of the Gospell, creeping into, and vsurping their Offices; and magnifying themselues, as the onely men of Gods priuy Councell, full of inspirations and Reue∣lations: they onely knew how to distinguish (lepram à lepra) one sinne from another how to open hard and knotty questions, resolue all doubts, giue true penance and absolution, &c. And they kept bookes of the names of all theit Clients that chose them to be their Confessors and counsellours, and by such deuises drew infinite store of people, and much wealth after them, whereby they built very stately houses like Kings Pala∣ces; and professing pouerty, abounded with all wealth and superfluity; and so robbed the ordinary Ministers
of their maintenance, and brought them into such con∣tempt and pouerty, that they made grieuous com∣plaints thereof to the Emperour, Pope and Cardinals, in which complaints some Bishops ioyned with them. Yea, the famous Vniuersity of Paris complained to the Popes of their wrongs also, but all in vaine; for the pope fauoured the Fryers, and curbed the Vniuersities priuiledges. §. 5. See Vsherabi∣dem.During this contention at Paris, The Fryers forged a new Gospell (fitter, it seemes, for their purpose then Christs Gospell) and called it the Gospell of the Holy Ghost, and the euerlasting Gospell, Evangelium aeternum; labouring to make men beleeue it was more perfect, better, and worthier then the Gospell of Christ, as the Sunne was more perfect then the Mooue, and the ker∣nell of a Nut better then the shell; and that Christs Gospell should then cease, and this should come in the roome of it and continue for euer. And this Gospell continued 55 yeares without any open reprehension of the Church of Rome, and at length was set forth to be openly read and expounded in the Vniuersity of Paris, anno 1255. But it was opposed by some Parisian Doc∣tors, Gulielmus de Sancto amore, O do de Duaco, Nicho∣laus de Barro and Christianus Belluacensis, who wrote against it, and shewed the monstrous impieties and blasphemies of it. After much contention, finally the matter was brought before the pope, anno 1256. who (with aduice of his Cardinals) tooke order, that this Gospell and all the copies thereof, should be secretly burned, and not openly reprehended for disgracing their Orders: and also that the Parisians bookes writ∣ten against it, should be publikely burned. The popes Decree for this purpose, is inserted in Bishop Vshers booke, De successione Ecclesiarum, cap. 9. §. 28. Where also the whole story is set downe somewhat largely, collected out of many approued Historians there cited, ibid. §. 20. & seq.
By this story appeareth the little conscience these seeming holy Fryers made of the truth of their teach∣ing,§. 6. or of corrupting Gods Word or abrogating it, or of teaching any thing that might serue for their pur∣pose. And these were the worthy men, whom the Jnnocent pope made choyce of, to vphold (not Christs Church, but) the Papacy: authorizing them to preach where and what they list, without controule of any man, for the maintenance thereof. 3 And not onely to preach, but to exercise the au∣thority and power of a most cruell Inquisition,Hos prosterna∣mus, deleamus{que} said Dominic to Francis. in vita Deminici. yea made them the chiefe Inquisitors to search out and de∣liuer vp to death, all those that gaine-said and with∣stood without yeelding vnto the Doctrine and gouern∣ment of the Pope, although otherwise they liued ne∣uer so holily, iustly, and quietly; which bloody office they executed with all diligence and cruelty. §. 3. 4 About the same time also, and out of their Schoole, arose another Euill of vnprofitable and idle Sententiaries, Questionists, Summists, Quodlibetists, and such like:1 Tim. 6.4. fit men to corrupt the simplicity of the Gospell, and fill mens heads with darke, thorny, and brawling disputes, to languish about questions,2 Tim. 2, 23. and strife of words, and by too much subtilty, making plaine things obscure; losing the pith, marrow, and kernell of true Theology:1 Tim. 6.20. and bringing true sauing knowledge of good life to prophane and vaine ianglings, and op∣positions of science falsely so called. For now was Theology made conformable to their rules of Philoso∣phy, and must haue no other sense then their fore-con∣ceiued opinions allowed it: and all other senses must be shifted of by subtile distinctions.Viues in his notes vpon S. Augustine de civ, Dei. The Schoolemen (saith Lodovicus Viues) through ignorance of tongues, haue not onely marred and
smootheredLib. 3. cap. 31. all other Arts, butLib 3. cap. 13. &. lib. 19. c. 12. Diuinity too: and and haueLib. 11. c. 11. &. 14. Lib. 13. cap. 1. lib. 18. cap. 1. lib. 20. cap. 16. & lib. 21 cap. 7. As D. Rainolds hath collected them in the Preface to his Conference with Mr. Hart. But these places are now purged out by Index Expurg. in the later Prints. prophaned it with their curiosity, their va∣nity, their folly, their rashnesse in mouing and defining questions; As Aristotelians rather then Christians, and Heathen Philosophers, then Schollers of the holy Ghost. §. 4. When M. Luther had reproued the great abuse of Pardons,Concil. Trid sess. 21. c. 9. anno 1517. and that so iustly, that shortly af∣ter, the Fathers of the Trent Councell, vtterly abolish∣ed the pardoners, as vntollerably scandalous to Christi∣an people: and thereby iustified Luthers beginning and proceeding: Ignatius Loiola, a Spaniard, lately before a Courtier and a Souldier, and now disabled by a wound in one of his legges, thought vpon a better re∣medy against the enemies of the Popes soueraignty,Genebrard. lib. 4. chron. then had been deuised before, and in the yeare 1521. began a new order of Iesuites; he obserued as he tra∣uelled in many Countries and Vniuersities, such rules and orders as best fitted his purpose,Possevin. Bibl. select. lib. 1. cap. 38. and hauing ioyned ten other choice men to himselfe, came to Rome, anno 1540. to get his order confirmed by the Pope: and by meanes of Cardinall Contarenus,Massaeus Iesuita. lib 2. c. 1 . vit. Ignatij Loiola. offered the forme of his new order to the Pope, wherein he had to the three vowes of other orders, super added a fourth vow, that the Iesuites should willingly and readily goe into any Countrey of Christians or Infidels, whethersoeuer the Pope would send them, for the affaires of Religion. This the Pope greatly liked saying it would proue a notable helpe to the afflicted state of the Church.Ribadeneira. vit. Igat. lib. 2. c. 18. Thus writes Mssaeus the Iesuite: and another Iesuite Ri∣badineira saith, God by singular prouidence sent Jgnati∣us
to helpe his Church now when it was ready to fall. They say Satan sent Luther, and God sent the Iesuites to withstand him: We say the contrary. But let it be iudged by the purport of their Doctrine, who came from God nd who from the enemy. They that teach disloyalty and rebellion against Kings, and leade their people into Conspiracies and Treasons, against States and Kingdomes (to let all other points passe vntou∣ched, for the present) let them be branded for the Emissaries of Satan. This order then was first confirmed by Paul,Azor. Institut. moral. lib. 13. cap. 7. 3. 1540 and againe 1543. and by Julius 3. 1550. also by Pi∣us 5. 1565. and 1571. and lastly by Gregory 13. 1584. as Azorius the Iesuit writeth, and sets downe the Con∣firmation at large. But this order of Iesuites neuer came to the height till Gregory 13 his time, when Claudius de Aqua viva, was made their Generall.Possevin. Bibl. select. l. 1. c. 39. Then was a proiect laide to build Colledges and Seminaries to traine vp yong men, and make them fit instruments to maintaine the Papa∣cy and Romish Church. To that end sundry choice men were brought from diuers Countries Ioannes Azorius from Spaine, Iasper Gonzales from Portugall, Jacobus Ty∣rius from France, Petrus Buseus from Austria, Antonius Guisanus from vpper Germany, and Stephanus Tugius who remained at Rome. All these, of extraordinary learning and experience, hauing bin Gouernors of Colledges or Schooles, a long time in their seuerall Countries. These were appoin∣ted by the Pope and Aqua viua, to consult of the best manner of trayning vp yong men in the Seminaries. They had consultations, instructions and intelligences from other places, a whole yeare together; and doubt∣lesse concluded vpon the most politicke and likely course that humane wit could deuise, to subdue the the world to their owne purposes. Meane season there were entised or drawen out of diuers Nations (by
bookes published,ee B. Bilson ifference of subiection, and rebellion, part. 1. pag. 149. & seq. and other meanes) many of the best wits, such as wanted maintenance, or had missed pre∣ferments in the Vniuersities or other places, or were otherwise discontented, or desirous of nouelties, &c. they were drawne by magnificall promises of pre∣ferment, degrees, honours, imployment, and most ex∣quisite education in all manner of learning, to come to the most bountifull Pope, and receiue them. And, by this meanes shortly were furnished many Seminaries with Iesuite Gouernours, and Readers, and with plen∣ty of hearers or students, Seminarium Romanum, Ger∣manum, Anglicum, Graecum, and Maronitanum or of the Inhabitants of Montlibanus, to traine vp and make fit instruments in the shortest time to be sent againe in∣to their Countries to put in practise the things they had learned, and with all possible wit and diligence to recouer and restore the authority of the Roman Church where it was decayed: and in all other places also to preuent such blowes and wounds as the Papacy had already otherwhere receiued. To which purpose they had priuiledges (contrary to other orders) as times and occasions required to goe disguised not in Religi∣ous but Lay-mens habits, like Gentlemen, gallants or seruing-men.Dialogue be∣tweene a se∣cular Priest a Gentleman. pag. 90. (One of their secular Priests reports, that a Iesuite hath worne a Girdle, Hangers, and Rapi∣er worth ten pounds: a Ierkin worth as much: and made himselfe three sutes of apparell in a yeare: his horse, furniture, and apparell valued at an hundred pounds) the better to insinuate into all Companies vnsuspected, and creepe into their mindes with cun∣ning perswasions ere they were aware, and so goe for∣wards or fall off, as hopes or feares should meete them. And wheresoeuer they could finde or worke out enter∣tainment, they had priuiledges, Buls, and Faculties to heare Confessions, to pardon sinnes, to reconcile and re∣ceiue penitents into the bosome of the Church of Rome, to instruct them that Princes, not of the Catho∣licke
Romish faith, nor subiect to the pope, were no Princes: but had lost their authority, rule, gouerne∣ment, and dominion: their Officers, no Officers, their Lawes, no Lawes: their subiects were freed from obedience to them, further then for feare or want of strength they might obey: but when they had strength and power, they might and ought by all meanes to put such Princes downe, and set vp others, such as the pope should like of. That they should by no meanes come to the Prote∣stant Churches or prayers, but maintaine an irrecon∣ciliable hatred to all religious Acts and Doctrines of theirs, seemed they neuer so good: and as they should be able, vtterly to extirpe them as people worse then In∣fidels. And for their cunning and appearing sanctitie, they became Confessors and Counsellours to Kings and Queenes, and great personages: and thrust themselues into counsels and actions of state, gouernment, intelli∣gences: and had such connexions amongst themselues, as no kinde of men could goe beyond them in wit, lear∣ning, power, or policy. They nested themselues in pla∣ces of best aduantage of Princes Courts, chiefest Cities, greatest men: and where they could once place Se∣minaries or Colledges of their owne Society, they made account that Countrey was their owne. Their Colledges (as it is obserued) placed vpon the walles of Cities, afforded them passage into the City or abroad into the world at pleasure, to giue or receiue intel∣ligence as occasion serued. They ha their Generall at Rom, at the popes elbow, (as the aforesaide Claudius de Aqua viva) and vnder him Prouin∣cialles, and Arch-priests in euery Countrey, (as George Blackwell, Henry Garnet, and after him George Bircot in England) to giue order and directions to inferiour Iesuites, and there to
appoint them their limits and imployments, call them to accout; and send them when and whither they thought good. And so erected a new Iesu ticall gouernment, and clasped the Kingome (as farre as was posible) in their owne fists. See the full discouse hre of in Mto Galoblio Datcano anno. 1607. pag. 67.It was wll discoursed to the Plonian Nobility, as∣sembled for Reformation of the troubles in the Land, That the greatest enmies to that & other free estates, were the Iesuites, who had a Monarchicall policy, fit∣test to mooue and act, tyed to one head at Rome, and tyed to their superiours in straitest forme of Obedi∣ence; that the lower may not enquire into any (no not the absurdest) commands of the superiours; but must yeeld ready obedience without knowing any reason of the equity or danger thereof. Which blinde obedience hath brought forth many desperate audacious instruments and designes. So that the Ie∣suites faction is a most agile sharpe sword, whose blade is sheathed at pleasure in the bowels of euery Common-wealth, but the handle reacheth to Rome and Spaine. So that the very life, death, and for∣tunes, of all Kings, Magistrates, and Common∣wealthes, hangs vpon the horoscope of the Iesuites pleasures. If the Iesuites be as lucky starres in the ascendent and culminant, they may liue, continue, and flourish: if maleuolent, they perish, but that Deus dominabitur Astris. §. 5. See Rainold. & Hart. confe. cap. 1. din. 6. p. 382.The great estate and authority of Cardinals was an especiall meanes to aduance and vphold the Papacy, after that the parishes grew so populous, that there needed mor Priests and Deacons then one, in euery Parish and Ward in Rome, the principall was called the
Cardinall priest and Cardinall Deacon:Bellr. Apolog. cona praesat. m ortum Iaco∣b Regs cap. 4. pa. 34. 38, 39, Ibid. pag. 337. con. Latran. cap. 1. and this ho∣nourable name was in time also giuen to the chiefe Bi∣shops neere vnto Rome, they were also called Cardinall Bishops: as the Bishop of Alba, Tusculum, Preneste, Sabine, Portuesse, and Ostia. And vntill the yeare 1180. they all (Bishops, Priests, and Deacons) liued on thir owne charge, and discharged it in their owne persons, though also (as nearest) often imployed in the popes affaires. But by Alexander the third,Cerem. Eccle. Rom. lib. 1. &. 3. August. Trium∣phus d potest. eccl q est. 8. art. 4. Antonin. Sum. part. 3. tit. 21. cap. 1. §, 2. Ceremoniar. Rom eccl. s. lib. 1. sect. 8 cap. 3. Some fetch a prophesie of Cardinals from Samch Mther (1 Sam 2.8.) where h saith, Doini sut car∣dines terrae, & posunt super eos or∣bem (which is in English, The pillars of the earth are the Lords, & he hath let the world vpon them: but) which they vnderstand thus: The Cardinals are lords of the earth, &c. Cardines (id st) Cardinales, super qibus diu jm, qua debit quiscere, mouetur tra, saith our Bishop Andrewes. Ad Cardinalis ellamini Apo∣logiam Responsic. cap. 4. pag 97. Cardinls are such henges as the earth moueth vpon when it should be quiet. [This dignity is not nw (saith Bellamne ib.) for it is 5 yeeres old: but surely that is new that came n in till ater twise 500 yeeres and more.] This is alleadged and confuted by Azorius Instit. mo∣ral. part. 2. l. 4. c. 1. §. 3 queritur. B. Mon Appeal. l. 4. c. 19 sect. 3. they were made the onely Electors of the Pope, after that the Empe∣rour was first thrust out from the election, then the peo¦ple, and afterwards the Clergy. And in short time the Cardinals grew to be fellowes to Kings, guardians to Princes, and Protectors of Nations; but all to the popes best interest, they were created with these words, Esto∣te Fratres nostri, & principes mundi. Be ye our brethren, and princes of the world. Pope Pius 2. spake thus to his new created Cardinals, —Vos Senatores vrbis, & regum similes eritis veri mundi cardines, super quos mili∣tantis ostium Ecclesia voluendum ac regendum est. You Senators of the City, and like to Kings, shall be the true hooks or henges of the world, vpon wch the dore of the militant Church is to be turned and ruled. They were by Innocent the fourth digni∣fied with Purple. In the age when Transubstantiatiō was made an article of Faith, they were (not transubstantiated, but) transaccidentated, and made more glorious to the eyes of the world; about anno 1250. Thus their dig∣nity & authority was great, and as great was their main∣tenance and wealth. For to this dignity were chosen the greatest prelates of sundry
Diocesses and Prouinces, as of Yorke (for example) and Canterbury in England; Rhemes and Roane in France; Toledo in Spaine; Lisbon in Portugall; Mila, Raven∣na, Ʋenice, in Italy; In Germany, Colen, Trier, and Mens; in Bohemia, Praga; in Poland, Cracovia; in Hungary, Strigonium: and so forth, the chiefest Bishops in all Christendome, to be the ardinall Priests and Deacons of Rome. And although their dignitie was named of some parish or Deaconship of Rome, yet they held their Bishopricks still and many other added to them, vnder the name of perpetuall administration. As Tho. Wolsey, Archbishop of Yorke, had the title of priest of S. Cicilies parish in Rome, and perpetuall administrator of the Archbishopricke of Yorke;Stow. Speed, &c. and of the other Bishopricks which he inioyed by other trickes and titles our Chro∣nicles reckon Turney in France,Rainol. & Hart. cap. 7. div. 6. pag. 386. Onuphrius lib. de Rom. Pont. & Card. Lincolne, Winchester, Bathe, Worcester and Hereford in England: seuen Bi∣shoprickes, besides the Abbey of S. Albones. Cardinall Hippolitus, being Deacon of S. Lucies in Rome, & Arch∣priest of S. Peters, had three Archbishopricks some hun∣dreds of miles distant, Milan in Lombardy, Capua in Na∣ples, Strigonium in Hungary; besides three other Bishop∣ricks, one in Hungary, two in Jtaly, Agria, Mutina, and Ferrara. Though others had but 5 4, 3, 2, or but one. And if liuing failed to maintaine the Cardinals pompe, The popes vsed reseruations and prouisions of Benefi∣ces (besides Bishopricks and Abbyes) such as then were voyde,Walsingam. hist. Angl. in Edw 3. or should next fall void) in all Countreyes, vntill they amounted to a certaine rate (as of 2000 markes in England, for two new Cardinals in King Edward the thirds time:Onuph. in Rom. Pont. & Card. and the like for tenne others in other Countries at the same time, newly created by pope Cle∣ment the sixt) This exceeding great Dignity and Wealth, meeting together, allured many to desire these places. And the politicke popes vsed to chuse Cardinals of two sorts: some of Noble and potent families, to adde
strength by the aliance of Princes and great Nobles, and to get intelligence and Oares in their gouernment: o∣thers of great wit and learning, by that meanes also to enlarge and vphold the Papacy against learned Aduer∣saries. For euen Princes and Nobles second sonnes, or other kinsmen wanting maintenance to support their Nobility, were either of themselues desirous, or might easily be induced to accept of such places: and their parents and friends were glad to be so eased of the charge to maintaine them: and the whole families be∣came thereby assured friends to the Papacy, and good instruments to vphold and defend it. On the other side many learned men, that wanted both Nobility and maintenance, and thirsted after both, by hauing such braue places bestowed vpon them, tooke themselues to be bound, by all their wit, learning, and diligence to maintaine them. But it was not altogether safe to haue Cardinals in whom both these things, (Nobility of blood, and excel∣lency of learning) did meet, lest knowing a double wor∣thinesse in themselues, they should not be so much be∣holden to their places, as their places to them: nor so pliable or ready to doe their best in their defence, when they found themselues able to stand without them. These Cardinals of both sorts, by their kindred, wit, learning, policy, counsell, and diligence in managing the state, are great vpholders of the Papacy: and yet beyond all this, the pope makes a further vse of them: to wit, to shew a needlesnesse of any councels, either generall or particular. Since that graue Senate of Car∣dinals is full sufficient to manage all the state of the whole Church, without further trouble to the world. Bellarmine confesseth that the particular Roman Councels (exoleuerunt) are worne out of vse:Bellar. apologia ad praefationem monitoriam Ia∣cobi Regis. p. 39. & it seems (saith he) the Consistory of Cardinals succeeds in their
place;See B. An∣drewes answer to it, pag. 107. And the generall Councels, (as he calls them) which the Church hath had since the Cardinals came to the height which now they inioy, (three at Lateran, two at Lions, one at Vienna, one at Constans, one at Flo∣rns, and one at Trent) were not true generall Coun∣cels no better then the particulars of Rome (now vani∣shed) since all things were done there according to the appetite of one man, and may more fitly be called, The decrees of Popes, then the Canons of Councels; ex∣cept onely that of Constance, wherein matters were carried by the Deputies of Nations, the popes brought into better order, three popes at once abdicated, and where it was decreed that thenceforward there should be no more then 24 Cardinals: and that euermore within ten yeares a Councell should be called: Things not performed, neither will be; and therefore it is wonder, the Cardinall would mention this Councell. And why should he call the other, which he mentio∣neth, generall, when the right manner of calling them, and of ordering them, and safe comming to them, and freedome of voyces, were all taken away: If things be thus carried, what needes any Senate of the whole Church, when a Senate of present Cardinals, either can doe all, or must doe all? Therefore this inuention, state, and choyce of Cardinals, is a powerfull, politicke deuice to maintaine the Papacy, and keepe off the strongest opposition. §. 6. See relation of Religion in these Western parts. §. 13. &c.Monasteries also (as now they are vsed) are great vpholders of the Papacy; in binding many thousands fast vnto it, for their owne maintenance. For there is entertainement for all sorts of people, Men, Women, Nobler, baser, in the higher or lower places. They are Hauens, or finall Refuges to receiue men of disconten∣ted humours, or despairing passions, or vnfortunate, or
vnfit for other Trades, or disgraced or crossed in the world, or distasted with the world, or tyred out with enemies or wanting maintenance: there they may be discharged of toyles and cares, and prouided for with∣out charge to their parents or friends, to the great ease of parents, and better portions of their other brethren, who are all bound to the Abbeyes and Papacy for this benefit. And there are such diuersities of orders, and degrees of Monasteries, in strictnesse or slacknesse of their rules, that in one or other, euery humour may re∣ceiue contentment: the more deuout and melancho∣licke, in the more seuere and austere orders, the looser, in orders of greater liberty. All of them for present maintenance without care, and protection without feare; and for hope of rising to higher and higher pla∣ces (among such multitudes and diuersities:) must needs loue and defend to the vttermost of their pow∣ers, the authors of their welfare. And though they haue frequent fastings and pray∣ers, &c. yet with a little vse they can endure it well, as matters nothing comparable to the benefits they re∣ceiue: these are but physicke to keepe them aliue a∣gainst the diseases, which else their ease and fulnesse at other times would breed. And their delights are many, to content them and the rest of the world: in∣ward hope that all their outward courses highly please God, and they liue in a state of perfection, farre aboue the best of ordinary Christians, meriting heauen & ma∣ny blessings, both for themselues and others their bene∣factors: they haue their legends, and familiar relati∣ons of visions, miracles, apparitions, and reuelations, much pleasing the credulous superstitious and phanta∣sticall: they haue their sweet Musicke, glorious showes, beautifull Images, rich vestments, variable ce∣remonies, for the admiration of the simple Their Ci∣ties and great places abound in all varietie, both of things and times, and orders to content and delight the
seuerall humours of all; their baits to allure, their hookes to retaine all kinde of people. One day, all Maskes, Playes, and lollity: another day, all Processi∣ons, Fasting, and whipping themselues: vpon one doore an Excommunication, casting downe to Hell all trangressors; vpon another, a Iubile or Pardon from all transgressions: on one side of the street, a house of vailed Nunnes; on the other side an house of open Curtezans: and the Stewes allowed for a pension payed to the pope, as well as the Nunnes. Neuer was any state in the world so strangely com∣pacted of infinite varieties to please variety of humors: and so strongly combined to maintaine the Master∣piece. Neuer was any prince so able to preferre his seruants and followers (and that at other mens cost) as the pope: nor so able (quickly and easily) to take deepe reuenge of his enemies. His authority is so great, & so setled in base peoples hearts; his power so strong; and adherents so many, his agents so quicke to execute his will: that any sinne against him, is vnpardonable; and on the other side, any sinne, either against God, or Nature, or prince, or State, by intercession to him and respectiue attendance on his Officers, may be dispensed with, or pardoned, or passed by without distur∣bance. §. 7. See Relation of Religion in the West, §. 17. See B. White a∣gainst Fisher. pag. 186. &c.Auricular confession, pretended for repentance, re∣formation, direction, and comfort of sinners (and might with some cautions be profitably vsed to those purpo∣ses) yet, by the abuse, doth yeeld to the Romish, great benefit for the managing of affaires; since thereby they pry into the hearts, dispositions, consciences, and hu∣mours of all men, Nobles and inferiours, in euery Coun∣try: whereby the more wise and politicke sort (which are confessors to great men) may come to know ma∣ny secret carriages of businesses; and also, who are the
fittest instruments to be imployed, either in furthering or crossing their designes; and by enioyning penance, may make great vse of the dispositions, which by such confessions are discouered. Beside the gifts which they may wring from them vpon their death-beds, or other sicknesses. Of all which, I wish there were no exam∣ples or practises. §. 8. As we find the former policies make principally for the popes greatnesse, strength, and honour, setting him vp aboue all the world, Clergy and Laity: so wee find many others notably contriued to furnish him and his agents, with treasure answerable to so great a State. Beside his temporals giuen by great Princes, or won from them and others by power or policy: his com∣mings in are great from Abeyes, Bishopricks, and Bene∣fices, their Institutions, Inductions, Inuestitures, palles, first fruits, tenthes, subsidies, and other impositions vp∣on occasions, or at his pleasure. And by sutes to the Court of Rome, of Controuersies from all Countries, and by appeales, reseruations, exemptions,Relation of Religion in the West. §. 38. pag. 98, 99. dispensati∣ons, and other rich inuentions. Abbeyes (many of them) haue extrordinary faculties granted them, whereby they gather much money: but the pope vseth them as spunges to drinke what Iuice they can from the people, that afterwards he may wring them out one by one in∣to his owne Cesterne. When Religious houses and Bi∣shopricks waxe rich, his Holinesse lets them blood in their ouer-full veines. The masses of money were in∣finite, that from all Countries of Christendome came in this way; so that their temporals (which should haue been their principall) was then but an accessory additi∣on to their greatnesse, The people likwise payed their Peterpence,Vsher. de succes. eccle. cap. 7. §. 8, 9, 10. which in England was confirmed by W. Conqueror, and made an yearely tribute, although the same King denied to take the oath of fidelity to the pope.
§. 9. Purgatory is a most politicke deuice, as it is now held, to bring in great store of treasure to the popes co∣fers. The pope hath the keyes of that terrible burning prison, wherein soules must frye, which haue not on earth satisfied for their sinnes, vntill they haue payed the vttermost farthing; except the pope by Masses, Pardons Pilgrimages, Offerings, and such like, let them out. Which helpes are not to be affoorded without payment of money, testifying their repentance: But vpon good payments to his Holinesse and the Churches vses, men may redeeme their owne, or their friends soules from suffering there for any sinnes at certaine rates. A Merchandize as profitable for the Popes Church triumphant on earth, as vnprofitable for the patient in that fire. §. 10 Rossensis contra Lutherum art. 18. fol. 111. Quamdiu nulla fuerat de purga∣torio cura, nemo quae sivit indul∣gentias, &c. Indulgences were begun by Vrban 2. anno 1100. saith hist. concil. Trent. pag. 4.Vpon this opinion of Purgatory (as D. Fisher, Bi∣shop of Rochester saith) dependeth the vse of Pardons and Masses for the dead, and such like. These Pardons were sent abroad to all Countries, to gather vp money for the Popes vses, and set soules free from Purgatory: and the abuse of Pardoners was so great, that finally it caused M. Luther to oppose them, and from them to proceed to detect many other abuses of the Papacy. Pardons likewise were extended to them that went on pilgrimage to the Shrines, Images or Reliques of Saints, and there offered vp their money and deuotions. Which was an incredible inriching of those townes in euery Kingdome, where such Images and Reliques were, and to which the good pope had granted such In∣dulgences: and where the Inhabitants had spred abroad that strange miracles and cures were wrought, that towne or City was made for euer, it needed none other maintenance. But such blessings were neither purcha∣sed
gratis nor continued without gratifications to the pope. Such was at Walsingham in England,See Erasm. col∣loquium. Peregrinatio Religionis ergo. in our Grandfathers dayes, Thomas Beckets shrine, Ʋbi omnia auro ni ent (saith Erasmus) where all shone with gold, wealth, and magnificence, in the Temple and towne, to the great admiration of the beholders. And now, or lately, the Lady of Laureto in Italy, the Lady of Hales, the Lady of Aspricol in Germany, miraculous Ima∣ges, draw hearts of people, and heapes of gold, the grea∣test miracle they worke, and the greatest cure to cure the towne of pouerty. More specially, in later times the stations in Rome are vsed to this purpose; that is, vnto certaine Chur∣ches, Saints and Images in Rome, there are appropriated certaine Indulgences to be granted vpon the appoin∣ted Sundayes or Holidayes to all the visitors thereof, that come and offer vpon the said dayes. And of these stations and visiting dayes there are reckoned at least 89 in the yeare:Moulins De∣fence. pag. 161. Erasman Mat. 11. pag. 55. An∣no 1540. wherin pilgrimes and trauellers come from all Countries to Rome, to the great enriching of the Temples and the City. The like Indulgences are granted also to the Visitors of some other places vpon the like dayes. And this shewes vs a notable politicke and rich vse of the multitude of their Holydayes. For the more Festiuall dayes, the more going to the offe∣ring, the more frequent pardons. Those are the Mar∣ket dayes for that Trafficke: when other Tradesmen shut vp their shops, the priests open theirs. Poore mens hands are tyed with scrupulous Idlenesse, from getting their owne liuing vpon such Holydayes, and made wickedly deuout against their wills, to main∣taine the Incomes of deuout superstition. §. 11. And yet they haue gone further. Bonifiace 8.Rainold. & Hart. cap. 7. diuis. 5. pag. 338. et 390. (of whom it is said. He entred like a Foxe, raigned like a Lyon, and dyed like a Dogge) in the yeare, 1300. or∣dained
a Iubile to be euery hundredth yeare, with grant to all people that in those yeares should come to Rome, and visit the sepulchres of Peter and Paul, and o∣ther Monuments or Reliques; a full pardon of all their sinnes, and that they should goe directly to heauen without comming at all in Purgatory. These Iubilees were afterwards drawne to euery fiftieth yeare, and lastly to twenty fiue. And because some Countries lay farre from Rome, the popes would grant and proclaime that it should be sufficient to send their money, with∣out comming themselues. Polydor Ʋirgil, writing the History of England, saith, that in the yeare 1500 (a principall yeare of Iubile) Pope Alexander 6. sent to King Henry 7. (as into all other remote Nations) of∣fers of pardons vsuall at Iubiles, to all that for dangers, distances, weaknesse, &c. could not come to Rome, if they would giue bountifully towards the Wars wch he intended against the Turke. And that the King might more willingly further this gathering, the pope offered him part of the money. Whereupon great summes of money were gathered: but yet no wars with the Turke followed, Dij meliora. Thus writes Polydore Virgil. Hist. conc. Trent. lib. 1. pag. 4, 5.And within 20 yeares after (anno 1517.) pope Leo, partly to supply his owne Coffers, and partly to bestow more liberally on his friends, sent an Indulgence tho∣rowout all Christendome, granting to all that would giue money, freedome from the paines of Purgatory, li∣cence to eat egges and whitmeats on Fasting dayes, &c. and the mony which should be gathered in Saxony, and some other parts of Germany, he appointed to his sister Magdalene, wife to Franceschetto Cibo, bastard sonne of Jnnocent 8. by reason of which marriage, this Leo was created Cardinall at 14 yeares of age; which was the first beginning of the Ecclesiasticall greatnesse in the house of the Medici. She committed the preaching of the Indulgences and exacting of the money to such as promised to raise the most profit by them: and they
vsed most wicked and scandalous courses, to abuse the peoples credulousnesse, withdraw them from the true way of saluation, and draine them of their worldly maintenance. Which abuses M. Luther, and many other learned men could not endure with silence, and being once opened to the world, both Princes and peo∣ple opposed them. By these few Relations, you may guesse at other times what hath been done. And you may well think, that neuer any Prince could so easily and so quickly get together such masses of money out of his owne Coun∣tries, as the pope could doe out of all Countries of Christendome: and that he could neuer want as long as he could hold a penne in his hand. For by strange Al∣chymistry he can turne a little piece of Lead into a great masse of gold. §. 12. Obserue here by the way, that to maintaine the great profit that comes in by purgatory and pardons, the popes positions found a necessity to corrupt the true ancient Doctrine of Iustification; and to teach other∣wise then Saint Paul and the Fathers had done: to wit; that a man endued with Gods grace, is able to fulfill the whole Law: and consequently that hee may be iustified by his owne workes, and that his workes are truly meritorious of eternall life: yea, further, that he is able to do works of supererogation (that is, more then he needed to doe for his owne saluation) euen workes that may be imputed or ascribed vnto other men (that want) to merit their deliuery out of purga∣tory: and that these super-abundant merits (or works of supererogation) may by the pope (Christs Vicar or Vicegerent) be applyed, giuen (or sold) to whom he thinkes good. A quaint deuise! but without all this, purgatory, pardons, pilgrimages, Masses for the dead, &c. are to no purpose. If Saint Pauls doctrine
(of Iustification by Christs merits onely) stand; then haue we no merits; if no merits, no suprerogation: if no super-erogatory merits, then no pardons: if no pardons, surely either no purgatory, or no deliuerance by the pope from thence: and then a great deale of the popes income is cut off. But (horreso refrens) rather then that earthly treasure be diminished, the spi∣rituall and heauenly treasure and worth of Christs me∣rits be diminished: the sound Doctrine of Iustificati∣on corrupted: mans free-will, merit, supererogation, pardons, and other gainfull doctrines appendant there∣unto, deuised, magnified, and established. Saint Paul said,1 Tim. 6.6, 9, 10. Godlinesse is great gaine: these men make great gaine to be godlinesse. He saith, They that will be rich, fall into temptations, snares, foolish and hurtfull lusts— and that the loue of mony is the root of all euill, which while some haue coueted after, they haue erred from the faith— Alas, that they that hold the chiefest places in the Church, should be of that number. §. 13. I omit Crucifixes, Beads, Amulets, Graines, Medals, and other things of great vertue, sent from the pope to be hanged about peoples neckes, or otherwise worne about them,1 Cor. 3.12. as defensatiues against euill spirits and o∣ther dangers: which, though they may be thought to be but hay and stubble; yet when your Mida hath touched them, they are taken for pure gold, and of great vertue, farre fetched and deare bought. §. 14. To omit these and many other things, I will speake onely of extraordinary exactions, and in our Countrey onely,An. Dom. 1245. Regis 29. or especially. Matthw of Wstmistr, n his booke, called Flores Historiarum writing of King Hen∣ry the thirds tme, sath, that the Kng (vpon search through euery County of England) found the Romane
reunues to amount to threescore thousand markes by yeare equall to the Kings reuenues And yet the popes exactions were so great besides,Pag. 195. that our Nobles made complaints thereof both by words an writing, in the Counell of Lyons, shewing the ntollerable grieuanes & oppressions of the popes Officers, most impudently & violently done, & that by the popes Commisson & comand, with a non obstante, wch took away all lawes or rights, and authenticke writings. The pope for the present put off his answer, being busied with excom∣municating Federicke the Emperour. But afterwards, enraged with anger and disdaine at their complaints, he multiplied their oppressions without measure or end. So that a Parliament was called to take some course to saue the land from vtter spoyle and ruine of the pope:Pag. 206, 207. and all men reioyced to see the Kings cou∣rage and constancy, hoping now they should be power∣fully deliuered from the iniuries of the Court of Rome. And first, seuerall letters were sent to the pope and Cardinals, wrtten by the Bishops and by the King, and by the Abbots and Priors and by the Earle Richad and all the Nobles with him, all humbly petitioning to spare the exhausted Realme of England, and recall the grieuances (which in their letters they rehearsed) which letters were pennd in such pittifull sort, that they were able to soften an heart of yron (saith the sto∣ry.) But they receiued hard answers,Pag. 209, 210, 217. and drew more misery still vpon them. For the pope shortly after de∣maunded of euery Beneficed man in England, resident on his charge, a third part, and of non residents, an halfe of their goods for thee yeares; which prouoked all Christ and in England to hate and curse the pope. And diurs Noblemen of France, (to wit, the Duke of Bur∣gundy the E le of Britaine, the Earle of Saint Pul, and many other) conspired against im, and bgan a Sch sme which t pulished in writing (which is extent in he ory, and in M  erswading
all men to reforme, and liue after the fashion of the Primitiue Church. Anno 1247.But the State and Clergy of England, wrote againe to the pop and Cardinals, for ease from these exacti∣ons, giuing notice also of a dangerous Shisme else like to follw. This caused the pope somewhat to mitigate the exaction in England, and draw downe to luen thousand markes to be payed for his present necessi∣ties. Which summe our Bishops thought best to grant, to auoyde the Roman greater persecution. But out of this payment they left out all the Abbots of England,pag. 219. to be deeplier fleeced by the Court of Rome. At the same time also the pope got vp sixe thousand markes in Jreland: and in other Countries what could be raked vp. pag. 210After all this, new exactions came vpon the English, especially vpon the Abbots, and exempted persons.pag. 222. Of one Abbey of S. Albans, the popes Officer demaun∣ded foure hundred markes: which yet the pope was afterward induced to mitigate. Math. Paris in vlla Henrici ter∣tij. See also Speeds Chron. in Henry 3. nu. 52, 57, 60. anno 1234.In the same Kings raigne, Mathy Paris saith, that by the popes [mandata de prouidendo] for illiterate Itali∣an Clerkes, and [Gratiae expectativae] (to wit, in giuing Benefices, as they fell voyd, to Italians that neuer came at them, but had the yearely reuenues thereof in mony brought into Jtaly to them) there went out of the land yearely more treasure then the Kings reuenues amoun∣ted vnto. And because it was not possible that the English of themselues should be alwayes funished with money to be sent in such summes out of the land: the popes Merchants (as they called them) that is, men sent hither for that purpose, supplied them with money vpon vsury: and the Roman Farmers and Proctors (like greedy Harpies) scraped vp all into their hands to the great impouerishing and misery of the English. So that holy men, with heart-breakings, teares, and dead∣ly groanes (singultu cruentato, saith Paris) professed it
were better for them to die, then to see such miseries vpon their Nation, and vpon holy men: the Daughter of Sion becomming such an impudent Harlot. Against which, Robert Grosthead, Bishop of Lin∣colne, opposeth himselfe, writing to the Pope (his Epistle is extant in Mathy Paris) that his detesta∣ble, abhominable, soule-murdering actions, did euince him to be an Hereticke, worthy of death, yea, to be Antichrist, and to sit in the chaire of pestilence, next to Lucifer h mselfe: and that he had no power to ex∣communicate such as resisted these his actions. Paris telleth further, that King Henrie requiring the Prelates to binde themselues to the Popes Merchants for a great summe of money: they replyed,English Prelats counted it ra∣ther Martyr∣dome to dye against the Pope, then for him. that they would rather dye then suffer such oppression: holding it a more manifest Martyrdome to dye in such a cause, then was the death of Thomas Becket. See, you that loue the Pope so well, what a blessing you would bring vpon the Land, by restoring his au∣thority: which our forefathers counted a burden most vntollerable. Antiquus. Matthy Paris is noted to take too much delight in speaking euill of the Pope: and Matthy of Westminster receiued his Narrations from him; and both were too much affected to their owne Countrey. Antiquissimus. They were both of the Romish Re∣ligion, the one a Monke of Saint Albones, the other a Monke of Westminster Abbey: both delighted to speake the truth, and spake well of the Popes, wherethey saw cause: and related other Countries affaires with as vpright affections as their owne. Paris saith, that the iniustice, impiety, and dishonesty (beare with these words, they are his owne) of the
Court of Rome, made the Greeke Church then to fall a∣way, and to oppose it selfe against the Roman: and that shortly afterwards, the Church of Antioch ex∣communicated the Pope and his Church, for vsurping primacy ouer them: and being also defiled with Si∣mony, Vsury, Auarice, and other hainous offences. And we reade the same things plentifully deliuered in all forraigne Historians, Nauclere, Ʋrspergensis, Krant∣zius, Aventinus, Schasuaburgensis, Frisingensis, Trithe∣nius, &c. Vrspergensis in Chron. pag. 307.Abbas Vrspergensis, at his being at Rome, (seeing among other infinite meanes and mines of wealth) a great confluence of causes litigious about Bishops places, and all other Ecclesiasticall dignities, and Parish Churches, out of all Countries, running to the Court of Rome, there to be decided: Hee applaudes Rome with the Apostrophe. Reioyce, O Mother Rome, for vnto thee are opened the Cataracts of treasures in the earth! To thee runne the Riuers and mountaines of money in great plenty. Be Jouiall for the iniquity of the sonnes of men, &c.— thou hast that which thou alwayes thirstedst after: Sing thy song, that by the wickednesse of men, not by thine owne Religion, thou hast ouercome the world. Men are drawne to thee, not by their deuotion, or pure conscience; but by perpetrating manifold mischiefes, and for decision of their Controuersies, to thee most gaine∣full. Antiquus. Sir, suppose all you haue alleadged be true for the substance: will you condemne the wisdome po∣licy, and zeale of the Church, or any members thereof, for the vndiscreet managing of it by some particulars? Is not wisedome, policy, power, and zeale, necessary to maintaine good Doctrine, good gouernment, and to winne soules? and must not learned men and good gouernours bee maintained with wealth, befitting
their estate and dignity, to keepe them from con∣tempt and pouerty? are not all these things neces∣sary? Antiquissimus. Yes vndoubtedly, very necessary and commendable, but vnder colour of necessity, you may not allow policies contrary to true piety, and Gods Word, such as I alleadged, to wit, The barring of the Scriptures from Gods people, to keepe them in igno∣rance. The disanulling of the Apostles ordinance of placing preachers resident in Cities and Townes subiect to Bishops Iurisdictions, who may looke to their good life and sound doctrine; and instead of them, to allow and priuiledge ambulatory preachers to preach what they list, mauger all Bishops and their Officers. Yea, to instill into the peoples mindes false doctrines, treasonous and rebellious practises, to the disturbance and destruction of Kingdomes and Com∣mon-wealthes: who finde it best fishing in troubled waters, and fish not for mens soules, but for King∣domes, to subiugate all to the Dominion of Rme or Spaine: nor the gathering of wealth by wrongs or op∣pressions, to the vndoing of people, and making the Religion of GOD to stinke in their nostrils, as Helies wicked sonnes did, 1 Samuel Chapter 2. verse 27. Wherefore the sinne of the young men was very great before the Lord: for men abhorred the offering of the Lord. Antiquus. Well Sir, to let this passe, If you de∣scribe these polices truely, they are very potent: those of the society of Iesus are very learned, diligent, zealous, and constant, to endure all labours, paines
and perils, to winne men: their policies, and plots are so strongly layed, constantly followed, wisely ma∣naged, and powerfully backed with the Pope and Car∣dinals; yea, with Kings, Princes, and States, fauou∣ring them, or tyed to the Pope by some necessitudes: that they are vnresistable; and therefore you may doe well to yeeld to them in good time; for such wise∣dome, strength, and policy will preuaile. Antiquissimus. Thinke not so, Antiquus. This arme of flesh, be it neuer so strong, is too weake for the arme of the Lord. Note what is written in the Reuelation, cap. 17. verse 12, 13, 14. The ten hornes are ten Kings: these haue one minde, they giue their power and strength vnto the Beast; these shall make warre with the Lambe: but the Lambe shall ouercome them; for he is the Lord of lords, and King of kings. And they that are with him, are called and chosen, and faithfull. The power and policy of Babylon should not amate vs, but animate vs.Chap. 2. sect. 8. Reuel. 18.9. to the chap∣ters end. Tu contra audentiùs ito. For Babylon shal fall (Reuelations chapter 18. verse 2. &c.) and Rome is that Babylon (your men grant it, as I haue shewed) therefore Rome shall fall, and her fall shall be wofull, dolefull, and irrecouerable. The Kings and Merchants her friends shall bewayle her; the world shall stand amazed, and Gods people shall reioyce at her fall. She must fall fully and finally: and she hath begunne to fall already;See History of the Councell of Trent. pag. 4. euen when Pope Leo the tenth thought that state in greatest security, then came an vnexpected blow from one contemned man, Luther, which shooke her foundations: and since that time she hath shrunke continually, and setled lower. All the props of strength and policie haue not beene able to raise or hold her vp.
She hath all policies on her side; the Protestants haue none, but the plaine downe-right truth, and ordi∣nary teaching, as Christ hath prescribed: and yet that plaine truth hath preuailed against all her power and policies. FINIS.
A IVSTIFICATION OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND. THE SECOND BOOKE. CHAP. 1. The first Chapter is a full discourse of the visibility of the Church, and sheweth where the Church of the Prote∣stants was before Luthers time. This Chapter is large, to giue the fuller satisfaction, and for better perspicuity, is diuided into foure Sections. The first Section sheweth how visible the true Church ought to be. The second sheweth that the Protestants Church hath euer∣more been so visible, as the true Church of Christ ought to be: in the ancient Primitiue Church. Greeke and Easterne Church. The third section deliuereth a sufficient historical discourse of the Waldenses prouing the point. The fourth section sheweth that the Church of Rome (ex∣cepting the Papacy, and the maintainers thereof) con∣tinued to be the true Church of God vntill Luthrs me, and was all one in substance with ours. The first section is subdiuided into subsections: and they in∣to
to many smaller Paragraffes, noted thus §. The first subsection sheweth §. 1. An obiected description of the excelency of the Church, and a necessity of the perpetuall succession and visibility thereof. §. 2. That for a thousand yeares and more, our Church was all one with the Roman. §. 3. After that corruptions grew intollerable in the Roman Church, many yet misliked them, and held the truth. §. 4. The whole Catholicke Church can neuer be visible to men at once, but parts of it may and must. §. 5. The promises of purity and eternall life, do not belong to all the called, but to the few chosen: which to men are invisible, though their persons and pro∣fession be visible. §. 6. And this, Bellarmine and many other Romanists yeeld. §. 1. Antiquus. YOu shew no wisedome in disgracing thus the Church of Rome; for you must deriue your Church from it, or else you haue no succession from the Apostles, and consequently no Church at all, and therefore no pos∣sibility of saluation. You that so much glory in the Scriptures, doe you not marke how the Scriptures describe the Church? calling itEphe. 2.19. the City of our Lord,Ib. & Hebr. 3.2, 6. the house of God,Cantic. 4.12. a Garden en∣closed, a spring shut vp, a fountaine sealed,Psal. 80.8. our Lords vineyard, of his owne planting,1 Tim. 3.15. the pillar of truth,Psal. 27.13. the land of the liuing,Cantic 4.15. the fountaine of liuing waters,Eph. 6.25, &c. the Spouse of Christ, who gaue himselfe for it, who sanctifieth and clenseth it, and maketh it a glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle, that it may be holy and without blemish: and (to omit other titles)1 Pet. 3.20. com∣pares it to the Arke of Noe, out of which there is no saluation from the deluge of sinne. And to the end that by it all men may come to the
knowledge of the truth, and be saued, it must be visi∣ble, conspicuous, and mounted aloft as a City vpon a hillMat. 5.14., seene of all the world, shining to all the world, & so continuing to the end of the world, with continu∣all succession of holy gouernment, teaching, admini∣string the Sacraments without interruption. For, if it be hidden or inuisible any time, how can it teach the people, conuert Pagans, dispence Sacraments, glorifie God, lead men to saluation? Therefore the holy crip∣tures describe this Church to be most ample, conspicu∣ous, and not onely gracious but glorious.Psal. 45.9. This Queene is all glorious, in a vesture of gold, wrought about with diuers colours; to whom the daughter of Tyre, and all Nations bring gifts: signifying the mag∣nificence of the Church gathered of all the Gentiles.Esay 2.2, 3, 4, 18, 20. & cap. 49.5, 6, 7, 23. & 60.3, 4, &c. It is the holy mountaine of the Lord, to which all Nations shall come: and Kings and Queenes should come and doe homage vnto it.sal. 72.8 &c. Micah. 4.1. Dauid magnifies this Church, as extending from Sea to Sea, and from the Riuer to the worlds end: adding, that the Aethi∣opians should fall downe (before the great Messias) the Kings of Tharshish and of the Iles should bring pre∣sents, the Kings of Arabia & of Saba should offer gifts; yea, all kings should fall downe before him, and all Na∣tions should serue him. The Messias himselfe saith,Ioh. 12.31, 32. Now shall the prince of this world be cast out; and I, if I be lifted vp from the earth, will draw all men vn∣to me. Meaning, by his passion to draw all Nations of the world from heathenish Idolatry, to become mem∣bers of his holy Church. Now instead of this conspicuous & glorious Church, you Protestants obtrude vnto vs an obscure latent, invi∣sible Church, vnseen in the world for more then a thou∣sand yeares, or rather neuer seene before Luthers time. But if these prophesies of the Scriptures concerning the glory and amplitude of the Church, be true (as they are most true) then is the conspicuous Church of Rome,
the true Church, and your so long latent visible Church the false. §. 2.Antiquissimus The wisdome which we vse, is not grouned vpon vnsound policies, but vpon standing to the sound truth (which is great and will preuaile) the disgraces of the Romish Hierarchy, we either reade in your own Authors (who write them necessario potiùs quam libenter, as wrested from them by the truth, ra∣ther then of any itching humour to disgrace it) or wee obserue them with our owne eyes, so manifest that they cannot be hid, so bad that they cannot be excused. The propheticall promises to the Church which you alledge, wth all reuerence we doe acknowledge: and we confesse that within the first thousand yeares after Christ, (before atan was loosed, Reuel. 20.2 and 7 8.) the most of them wer fulfilled: and principally in the first age of tht period; when the Church was by the Apostles and their successors propagated to the Gen∣til, and plantd in all Nations: and while the Church of Rom tauht the same pure doctrine which we now doe and while your Church and ours, and all other particular Churches in the world, were one Catholike Church. And although some errours and abuses be∣gan to creepe into the Church of Rome within that time, and wee by many espyed and reprooued; yet were they not imputed to the whole Church of Rome, but to a faction breeding in it. Neither were they so great, t so largely spred, or so strongly defended, or of such regard, as to make any such breach or manifest se∣pr ton, as in the following ages ensued. So that in te fir thousand of yeares, the holy prophesies by you alleage make nothing more for your Church then ours, oting more against our Church then against yors: yours and ours being then both one Church. §. 3.Sconly, wee affirme that when the Church of Rome grew vntollerably corrupt by mens traditions and new inuions, especially in the Hierarchy there∣of:
there wanted not multitudes of good Christians, both separated from the community thereof, that fol∣lowed their better teachers, and professed still the pure ancient Doctrine: and other multitudes also liuing in community with the vnsound Romish gouernours, gro∣ning vnder their corruptions, and longing for reforma∣tion: which made a full sufficient visible Church, to whom the propheticall promises belonged, and in whom they were fulfilled, so much as was intended by them. Which that you may the better vnderstand,Handled in this section. consider first more thorowly the nature of the promises and state of the Church, as it must be in these later ages: and secondly the state of our Church, fully agreeing thereunto, and the state of yours, disagreeing. You that cannot endure to heare of any kind of in∣visibility of the Church,Handled in the second secti∣on. must of necessty admit of some kinde thereof, or else you involue all in confused obscurity. First if you take the Church for the whole Catho∣licke Church, that is, vniuersall both in time and place,§. 4. See Aug. in Psal. 92. continued throughout all Ages, and dispersed in all places (in which sense onely the Church is Catholicke and one) then it is a point of fath, and not of sight. For it is visible totally at any one time or place to any mor∣tall eyes. Some part thereof being in Europe, some in Asia, some in Africa, for place: some part in heauen triumphant, some on earth militant, some not yet in the world, for time. We beleeue therefore that there is one Catholicke Church (we see but a small part of it) that is, one vniuersall company of Christians, spread o∣uer the whole earth, and continuing from the Apostles times till the day of Iudgement, (part whereof is now in heauen, part on earth, and part yet to come) called to be professors of Gods worship, and partakers of his glory through Iesus Christ his sonne And though this whole company be neuer visible to men at once, yet
some parts thereof liuing vpon earth are alwayes visi∣ble to men, by their persons and profession: some at one time some at another: some in one Countrey some in another: as the Church of Jerusalem, and of Antioch, of Rome, Corinth, Galatia, &c. In the Apostles times: the seuen Churches of Asia in S. Iohns time: the Churches of England France, and other Nations in our time. §. 5.Secondly, if you take the Church for the company of Christians, liuing in any one particular Age, and there∣unto apply the propheticall promises: you must ad∣mit a threefold distinction, one of the parts of the Church another of the promises appliable to the seue∣rall parts, and a third of the times wherein they are to be fulfilled. For,D. VVhite Re∣ply to Fisher, pag. 52. most of the promises, though in generall termes made to the Church in common (to shew what the whole is in respect of Gods outward vocation, or what the office and duty of the whole Church is) yet doe appertaine formally and indeed onely to the better part of the common subiect. As your owne Doctors teachCornel. de a∣pide com. Esa. cap. 2. v. 4 Cum Deus aliquid Synagoga vel Ecclesiae per∣mittit, quamvis ampl & vni∣uersal bus vr∣bis,  tamen de bonis & proba tantum, qui sae∣s & amiciti∣am cum deo pro∣mittente & pa∣iscente, seruant, intelligendum.. The Scriptures giue vs a distinction of the Called and Chosen: saying, Many be called, but few chosen, Mat. 20.16. The Called are the Professors: and the Pro∣fssors (saith yourBellar. de Ec∣cles. militant lib. 3. cap. 2. §. nostra autem sententia. Bellarmine) are the members of the true Church, though they be (reprobi, scelesti, & impij) reprobates, wicked, and impious. For (saith he) to be a member of the Church, there is not necessarily requi∣red any inward vertues, but onely outward profession. But (I hope) you will not say, that to this company in grosse, these promises doe belong, of purity, vnspotted∣nesse eternall life: but onely to the better part thereof, that is the Chosen, that truely beleeue, and holily liue, according to Christs doctrine which company, (be∣cause who they are, is onely knowne to God the dis∣cerner of the hearts, and not to men who see onely their persons and profession but not their hearts,) may well
be called, in respect of men, The invisible Church, as vi∣sible to God onely. The Holy Ghost describing the true members of the Church, calls them, such as should be saued, Acts 2.47. The Lord added to the Church such as should be saued. And this is the ordinary doctrine ofAug. de Bapt. contra Donatisas lib. 6. cap. 3. A∣uari, raptores, faencratores, inui∣di, malevoli, ad sanctam ecclesi∣am dei, non per∣tinent, quamvis esse videantur: illa autem co∣lumba vnica, pudica, & casta, sponsa sine macula & ruga, hortus conclusus, sons signatus, paradisus cum fructu pomorum, &c. non intelligitur nisi de bonis, & sanctis, & iustis,—intimm & supereminentem spiritus sancti gratiam habentibus. S. Augustine, that true godly men, such as shall be saued, are the only heires of the promises: the couetous, rauenous, vsurers, enuious, malevolous, do not belong to the holy Church of God, though they seeme to be in it. That onely Doue, that chaste and pure Spouse, without spot or wrinkle, that garden inclosed, fountaine sealed, paradise of Pomegranats, &c. is not vnderstood but of the good, holy, and iust,— such as haue the inward and supereminent grace of the holy spirit. Thus Saint Augustine. AgaineAug. ib. lib. 7. cap. 51. he saith, All things considered, I thinke I shall not rashly say, that some are so in the house of God, that they are also the very house of God, which is said to be built vpon a Rocke, which is called his onely Doue, his faire Spouse without spot or wrinckle, &c.— for this is in the good, faithfull,The like De vnitate eccle. cap. vlt. & Epist. 48. & De Bapt. cort Donat. lib. 5. c. 27. & in prae∣satione in Psal. 47. & De doctr. Christiana. lib. 3. cap. 22. In the rules of Tycho∣nius De corpore Domini bipartito. and holy seruants of God, euery where dispersed, and yet conioyned in spirituall vnity, and in the same communion of the Sa∣craments, whether they know one another by face or not. And it is certaine that others are said so to be in the house, that they belong not (ad compagem domus) to the frame of the house, nor to the society of fruitfull & peacefull righteousnesse, but as the chaffe among the Corne, &c— of whom it is said, They departed from vs, but they were not of vs. In many other places Saint Austen hath the like. Insomuch as Bellarmine being ouerpressed with the Scriptures and Fathers, and especially Saint Augustine,§. 6.
cannot but yeeld, and saith, in plaine tearmes;Bellar. de eccle. milit. lib 3 cap. 2. §. notadum autem. that wicked men without any internall vertue, are no o∣therwise members of the Church, then our excrements and diseases are parts or members of our bodies, as our hayres, our nayles, and euill humours in our bodies, and elsewhere.Ib. cap. 9. §. Ad vltimum ao, malos non esse membra viva corporis Christi, & hoc significari illis scripturis (obiectis.) He saith that euill men are no other then dead members of Christs body; and hee citeth many learned Papists that say, (Malos non esse membra vera, nec simpliciter corporis ecclesiae, sed tantum secundum quid, & aequivocè.) That euill men are not true mem∣bers, nor simply of the body of the Church, but onely after a sort, and equiuocally. His Authors alleadged there, are Iohannes de Turrecremata, Alexander de A∣les, Hugo, B. Thomas, Petrus à Soto, Melchior Canus, & alij. I will conclude this point with Saint Augustine, who saith,Aug lib. 2. contra Creconi∣um cap. 21. Ac per hoc eti∣am nesciente ec∣clesia, propter malam pollutam∣que conscientiam danati a Chri∣sto, am in corpo∣re Christi non sunt, quod est ec∣clesi, uoniam non potest Chri∣stus habere mem∣bra damnata. Though the Church know them not, yet they that are condemned by Christ for their euill and defiled conscience, are not now in the body of Christ, which is the Church, because Christ cannot haue any damned members. To which place, and many other like, cited out of Saint Augustine, BellarmineBellar. ib. §. Argumntum octauum. answereth, That wicked men are not of the true inward part of the Church, but of the outward onely, as he had said before, not true members, nor simply of the Church, but equiuocally. By all this (I hope) you see our Doctrine and distin∣ctions agree with the truth taught by the Scriptures and Fathers, and your best learned men, to which euen Bellarmine himselfe (after much disputing and shifting) is compelled to yeeld. And though you are loth to al∣low vs the termes of visible and invisible (the one no∣ting the outward mixt number of professors, the other the purer part of the Church, to whom the promises belong, and who are onely knowne of God:) yet you are compelled to yeeld vs the matter meant by them. Antiquus. If you meane no other thing by those
termes, we yeeld you both the matter and the termes; But, Subsection. 2. §. 1. Some promises of God concerne the outward spre∣ding of the Church, some the inward graces. §. 2. The outward spreading and glorious visiblity, is not at all times alike. §. 3. So S. Ambrose, and S. Austen teach, by comparing the Church to the Moone. §. 4. Many Fathers and Romish Doctors say, that in the time of Antichrist, the Church will be obscure, and hardly visible. §. 5. Which (say Valentinianus, and many Fathers) was fulfilled in the Arrians time. §. 6. The Jesuite, Valentinianus grants as much invisibi∣lity of the Church, as Protestants desire. §. 7. Obseruations out of his grant. If you meane that the whole true Church may bee latent and invisible many yeares,§. 1 without being seene of the world by her Gouernment, Doctrine, and Sacra∣ments: we deny all possibility of such invisibility. Antiquissimus. We neuer held or taught any such thing.See B. Whe against Fishe. pag. 62. Now then since you yeeld vs those distinctions of the Church, and grant that the most or best of the promises, belong onely to the better part thereof, which is onely knowen vnto God, and not to all the profes∣sors that are visible to men: I goe forwards to distin∣guish of the promises: whereof some are of the out∣ward  amplitude, largenesse, & spreading of the Church to all Nations (whereas formerly it had beene shut vp in the land of Canaan onely) and of outward subiection of Kings and peoples to the profession of the truth. Some are of the inward purity, grace, and holinesse  of the Church, and of our Sauiours peculiar loue vnto
it, vniting it as his immaculate Spouse vnto himselfe, and making it partaker of his glory. The former are pliable to the visible Church, in the generality thereof. But it you apply the latter also to that whole visible company, you runne into inextrica∣ble errours. For they are appliable onely to the better and sounder part thereof, which is onely discerned and knowen vnto God, and in that respect invisible to men. This distinction you grant also in granting the former. I come therefore thirdly to The distinction of times; for the outward promi∣ses are not all at all times appliable to the outward vi∣sible Church:§. 2. or not at all times alike. For in some Ages the Church is more conspicuous then in other: yea, the false Church more conspicuous then the true. If you thinke the Church must be alwayes gloriously visible to the end of the world without interruption, you are deceiued. Consider one part of the Scripture with another. Esay 2.2. Mat. 7.14.You looke vpon Esayes mountaine, to which all must flow: but you see not Christs strait gate and narrow way which few doe find. Esay. 49.23.You note, how at sometimes Kings and Queenes shall be nursing Fathers to the Church; but you note not that at another time,Reuel. 17.2. The Kings of the earth shall commit fornication with the Whore of Babylon: and the Inhabitants of the earth be made drunke with the wine of her fornication. Psal. 45.9.You thinke of a Queene all glorious in a vesture of gold, wrought about with diuers colours, to whom all Nations bring gifts (the Church spreading her glory to the Gentiles:Reuel. 12.1, 6.) but you forget the woman flying into the Wildernesse to hide her selfe from the rage of the Dragon: (which woman signifies the persecuted Church, by your Rhemish confession.) Marke 16.15.You remember well that the faith of Christ must be spread ouer the face of the earth: but you forget that
towards Christs comming there shall scarce be found any faith vpon the earth.Luke 18.8. You remember that the Church shall extend from sea to sea, and from the Riuer to the worlds end;Psal. 72.8. and the Kings of Tharsis, Arabia, and Saba, shall bring gifts, and all Nations shall serue the Messias.2 Thess. 2.3, 4, 7. But you for∣get there must be an Apostacy, a reuolt, a falling away, (which your Rhemists say, shall be from many points of true Religion) and that the man of sinne shall sit in the Temple of God, carrying himselfe as if he were God (not in plaine termes, but) in a mystery.) SaintAmbr. Epist. lib. 5. ep. 31. Ambrose and S.Aug. in Psal. 101. & De Temp. ser. 134. epist. 48. & . Augustine compare the Church to the Moone,§. 3. which receieth her light from the Sunne, and sometime shineth in her full light, some times with halfe light, sometimes obscurely, and some∣time is ecclipsed. You would haue this Moone al∣wayes in the full. And if she shew but little light to vs, or be ecclipsed, you will not yeeld she is the Moone. And yet (except in the eclipse) Astronomers demon∣strate that the Moone hath at all times as much light as in the full: but oftentimes a great part of the bright side is turned to heauen, and a lesser part to the earth. And so the Church is euer conspicuous to Gods eye, though it appeare not alwayes so to vs. As when Eli∣as thought there had beene no more true seruants of God but himselfe, yet God knew of 7000 more; though their names be not recorded. I pray you consider well these and other places of Scripture, that describe the Church persecuted, scatte∣red and obscured, as well as those that describe the largenesse, conspicuousnesse and glory of it. And re∣member the one must be true as well as the other, and each must haue their times to be fulfilled in. So shall you runne straight forward, and not on a byas as you haue done. Consider the Doctrine of the Fathers,§. 4. B. Vsher grau. quaest. cap. 6. §. 5. and of your owne learnedest men, speaking especially of the time of
Sathan let loose.Aug. epist. 80. a Hesychium Saint Augustine saith, [Ecclesiam non apprituram, impijs tunc persecutoribus vltra modum saeuientibus.] The Church shall not appeare, the impi∣ous persecutors then beyond measure raging.Greg. in Iob lib. 9. cap. 29. Grego∣ry, The Church as one weakned with old age, will scarce bring forth children by preaching.Sermn d con∣summatione mundi & Anti∣christo edit Co∣lo. 1603. pag. 219 Ephraim Syrus, Men will earnestly enquire, whether the Word of God be any where vpon earth, and it will be answe∣red, No whereSoto in 4. Snt. dist. 40. q. 1. rt. 1. Dominicus à Soto, your great schoole∣man saith, That faith will be extinguished in the world, and vnder the leading of Antichrist, the City of God will be ouerthrowne. And of preaching the Word of God, yourAquin. Com∣ment. in cap. 9. Apocal. Aquinas saith, At first when Antichrist is borne, before he haue enlarged his power, there will be preaching: but after he is in his greatest dominati∣on, then preaching (he meaneth preaching of the truth) will be particular, and not (as now) generall, nor so so∣lemne as now. And before Aquinas, This wroteApud. Vsher. ibid. Valent. post. lit. t. Vsher. ib. §. 7. Jo∣achimus Abbas Florensis; The whole Church of the Saints will be hidden, for so the Elect of God will bee wise for themselues, that they will not presume to preach publikely (the darkenesse preuailing) not that they will cease to encourage and exhort the faithfull more secretly, but because they will not dare to preach openly. §. 5.Haply you will appropriate this to be the last times of Antichrist (which your Doctors hold to be very short) but your Valentinianus extends it to other former times and applies it to the times of the Arrian Here∣sie. Of whichNazian. initio Orat. 25. ad. Ari∣anos. Nazianzen writes thus: Where are they now that obiect pouerty vnto vs, and insolently brag of their riches? which define the Church by mul∣titude, and scorne the little flocke? whereofSee Hilar. contra Aurent. Bsil. pist. 70, 71. & Vitam. Atonij inter ora Atanij other Fathers sayVncen.  commi∣o. that almost the whole world was shooken with the cruell tempest of that sudden heresie: Bcri. , so that it defiled not onely the parts of the East and West, but entangled also the South and North, and the Ilands,
with the perfidiousnesse thereof:Hieronymus contra Luciferia∣nos. So that the whole world groaned, and wondered that it was become Ar∣rian. But theAthanasius epist. ad solitari∣am vitam agen∣tes. godly, true followers of Christ (as that great Prophet Elias) were hidden, and thrust them∣selues into holes and dennes of the earth, or continued wandring in the Wildernesse. For,Basil. epist. 69. auoyding the houses of prayer (which were then become schooles of impiety) they were compelled to lift vp their hands to the Lord in deserts: andVincent. Lirin. in commonitorio. the greatest part being thrust out and banished from the Cities, were among the deserts, holes, sauage Beasts, and rockes, with hun∣ger, thirst, nakednesse, afflicted, worne and wasted. AndBasil. epist. 17. when they suffered the same things that their Fathers suffered, yet they were not thought to suffer for Christ, because their persecutors also were called by the name of Christians. Thus was it with the true Christians in the Arians times: thus with the Church of God in the middle∣times, after Sathans loosing: thus with the Protestants in those later times: all persecuted by them that cal∣led themselues Christians and Catholicks, and held the chiefest places in the Christian world. And such was the paucity and obscurity of Christi∣ans in the Arians times, that S.Basil. ib. Basil cryes out, An Ec∣clesias suas prorsus reliquit dominus? Hath God verily for∣saken his Church? Is it now the last houre? and doth the defection or departure thus take beginning, that now henceforth that man of sinne, that sonne of per∣dition may be reuealed? &c. But let vs heare the very words of your owne lear∣ned IesuiteGreg. de Val. Analysis fidei lib. 6. cap. 4. pro∣batione 4. §. Iam vero. §. 6. Gregory de valentia, who grants as much as we desire. Now to refute the cauils of Sectaries (saith he) Note—we doe not say, The Church is alwayes a∣like conspicuous, or alwayes alike easie to be discerned. For we know it is sometimes tossed with the waues of Errours, Schismes, Persecutions; so that to the vnskil∣full, not wisely esteeming the reasons of Times and
Circumstances of things, it is hard to be knowen. Which then specially happened, when the perfidiousnesse of the Arians, domineerd well neere in all the world. For at that time wrote Saint Ierom, that the ship of the Church was almost ouerwhelmed. And Hilary admo∣nished in many words, that the Church at that time was not to be sought, Jn tectis & exteriori pompa, sed potius in carceribus & speluncis (not in houses or Temples and outward pompe, but rather in prisons and caues.) Therefore we deny not, but that it is harder to discerne the Church one time then another. But this we affirme, that it may alwayes be knowne of them that weigh things wisely. For in that very time when it seemed to be hid, compared with the times foregoing, it might be perceiued, that the Church was not with the multitude of Innovators, but rather with those few who followed that which the ancient Fathers of the Church and all the faithfull held, with great con∣sent, and long continuance. Thus writes Gregory of Valence. §. 7.Out of which testimony I obserue. 1 That he excludes the perpetuall and vn-inter∣rupted glory of the Church, as not necessary, nor any marke of the Church, as you and many of your side make it. 2 He grants that the Church may be in a few, and not alwayes in the great multitudes. 3 It may be onely in secret places, prisons, dennes, and caues, and not be found in temples and houses. 4 It may be hard to be discerned and knowne. 5 It is discerned and knowne (not to euery one, but,) to them that weigh things wisely. 6 It is not with Innovators (such as bring in no∣uelties, or new doctrines) but with them that hold what the ancient Church and Fathers held with great consent, and long continuance. This note makes wholly for the Protestants, who reform the Church according
to the first and best times: and against the Church of Rome which hath brought in the worshipping of Ima∣ges, the Popes supremacy, halfe Communions, priuate Masses, sale of Pardons, and other things vnknowne to the Fathers and the Primitiue Church. Antiquus. Of these things we shall consider here∣after. §. 2. The Protestant Church hath euermore beene so visible as the Church of Christ ought to be. Subsection 1. §. 1. for it hath euermore taught the same do∣ctrine which the Scriptures and the Fathers taught. §. 2. As appeares by Irenaeus, Tertullian, and the Creedes. But, §. 3. The Romists Cannot alleadge the Fathers for their new Doctrines. Now, proue your Protestant Church to haue beene so visible in all Ages, as the Church of Christ ought to be, or else you haue said nothing. Antiquissimus. It might be sufficient (according to your owne Valentinianus) to shew that our Church was sometime in some few, and them hidden as the woman in the Wildernesse, Reuel. 12.6.) and vnknowne to the greatest part of the world, which weighed not times and things wisely; and was slandered by the persecu∣tors thereof, as a false Church: But I will not take all aduantages, but giue you a full visibility thereof at all times. Subsection. 1. First I say,§. 1. our Church (for the doctrine thereof) is the same which the Primitiue Church of Christ was for many ages. For neither it nor ours taught any o∣ther points of faith necessary to saluation, then such as are contained in plain places of the Scripture, or neces∣sarily deducted from them by good consequence. When
the Fathers are vrged against Bllarmine in this point, he yeeldethDe verbo De lib. 4 cap. 11. §. his notatis. that whatsoeuer the Apostles publikely taught to the people which was necessary, all that they wrote:De iustific. lib. 3. cap. 8. §. prima ratio. This I haue proued more fully cap. That nothing can be certaine to be beleeued with the certainty of faith, but what is immediately contained in the Word of God, or thence deducted by euident consequence. Now it is our Generall course to examine all do∣ctrines by the Scriptures: holding the Scriptures the vndoubted Oracles of God for the ground of all our beleefe,King Iames praemonition to all Christi∣an Monarks pag. 35, 36. as the Fathers did: and holding the true sense of the Scriptures, as it is deliuered for all funda∣mentall points, in the three Creeds, and in the foure first generall Councells, and the vniforme consent of the ancient Fathers. In which is contained, the full instruction for saluation, and the vnity of the Catho∣licke Church. §. 2.Jrenaeus Bishop of Lions in France, liuing within 200 yeeres of our Sauiour (a disciple of those that heard Saint Iohn the Apostle) writing against the Heretickes Ʋalentinians, Gnosticks, and others: layeth downe in his first booke and 2 chapter, no other Articles of faith, and grounds of Religion then our ordinary Catechisme tea∣cheth: and in his third chapter sheweth that in the v∣nity of that faith all the Churches of Germany, France, Spaine the East Egypt, Libya, and all the world, were founded: therein they sweetly accorded, as if they all dwelt in one house, had all but one soule, one heart, and one mouth, and this ground he laies for the confutation of all Heresies. b. e praescript aduer∣ss heretio. folo qarto.The like doth Tertullian, liung 200 yeeres after Christ. He giues the funamntall points of Religion, gathered out of the Scriptures, and deliuered by the Churches, the same which our Church deliuereth and no other, for the rule of faith. See King Iames Paemonition, pg 35.The three famous Creeds, named the Apostles, A∣thanasius, and the Nicene Creeds ordayned for rules of
Christians beleefe, and badges differencing them from Infidels and Hereticks, we hold intirely and firmely, and proclaime them ordinarily in our Churches. And whatsoeuer the Fathers held vniformely, and agreed vpon as necessary to be beleeued vnto saluation, we doe with reuerence receiue. But the particular or priuate opinions which any of them held different from other Fathers doe not binde vs now, more then those other Fathers then, or the Romans at this pre∣sent. The foure first generall Councels with reuerence we receiue as Orthodoxe,See B. Andrew Ad Bellarmine Apologiam Re∣sponsio. cap. 7. pag. 161. and so they are acknowledged by our Church, and by our Acts of Parliament The following Councels are subiect to some exceptions. We therfore holding the same points of faith which the Primitiue Fathers held vniformely to be necessary to saluation, and holding no other points that doe any way crosse or weaken them; may iustly challenge them for our predecessors: and their Church and ours in point of doctrine to be all one. Antiquus.§. 3. We challenge the same Fathers to bee ours also: and we deduce both our Bishops and do∣ctrine by good succession from them: which you can∣not doe. But I require not of you a discourse of those times, which either of vs lay alike claime vnto: but of the times nearer vnto Luther. Shew mee any visible Church in the world that held Luthers doctrine for 500. yeeres next before Luthers time. Antiquissimus. You may challenge the Primitiue Fathers for the points wherein you and we agree, as the Canonicall Scriptures, the doctrine of the Trini∣ty in Vnity, Baptisme, and such like: But you cannot challenge them to be yours in those additions and cor∣ruptions which they neuer knew, and which you haue brought into the Church in later times, and which make the great difference betwixt you and vs: as the worshipping of Images, the Popes pardons, priuate
Masses, or Communion without communicating halfe Communions without the Cup, the Popes transcen∣dent supremacy, and such like. §. 4.But in calling vs to these later times, you are good disciples of the Poet Horace, who in his Arte Poetica, saith, A witty Poet must vse this Art, The point which he hath no hope to burnish faire, and bright, he must leaue vntouched, Et quae desperat tractata nitescere posse, relinquit. This is good Poetry indeed in them, but pitifull Di∣uinity in you, to leaue the best times and purest pat∣ternes and draw vs to the worst. But, Sectionis. 2. Subsectio. 2. §. 1. Propounding (1) the Easternt and Greeke Churches, (2) the Waldenses, &c. And (3) the Roman Church it selfe, misliking and groaning vnder the tyranny of the Papacy, and desiring reformation. §. 2. The Greeke Church condemned by the Romish as Hereticall. §. 3. Js cleered by Scotus, Lombard, Aquinas, and o∣thers. Now presupposing you yeeld vs those best times, wherein our Church was very gloriously visible, wee follow you to the worst. Wherein you propose vnto you, first, the spacious and famous Churches of Grecia,D. Field of the Church. booke 3. cap. 5. Armenia, Aethiopia, and Russia; which holding the same rule of faith which we hold, and beleeuing all points absolutely necessary to saluation, as we beleeue, and refusing the same cor∣ruptions of the Church of Rome, which we refuse; were the same with our Church: true Churches of God; notwithstanding some defects, errours, and di∣uisions among them, which stayned their beauty, and hindered their perfection, but did not cut them off
from possibility of saluation. And so (for ought I know they continue till this time. These Churches therefore in the East, South, and North, especially the Greeke Church, so famous for ma∣ny Ages before our Westerne reformation, as for all o∣ther things, so also for their separation from the Church of Rome, for the enormities thereof, wee may rightly call our predecessors, which maintained our doctrine long before Luthers time. Againe, in the West wee propose vnto you the Wal∣denses,  separated from the Community of the Romish Hierarchy, and their followers, continuing vnto Lu∣thers time. And great numbers of others also that held Com∣munity  with the Romish Hierarchy, but misliked their tyranny and corruptions, groaned vnder them, longed for reformation, and gladly embraced it when they found it. What say you to these? Antiquus. I except against them all. First,§. . against the Greeke Church (which yet is farre better then the Armenian, Aethiopian, or Russian) I say it is no Church at all, both because it is cut off by Schisme from the Catholicke Roman Church, and because it is hereticall in a fundamentall point, denying the procession of the Holy Ghost, from the Sonne of God. Antiquissimus.See the answer to Mr. Fishers Relation to his third Con∣ference by R. B. pag. 5, 8. §. 3. You offend much against charity in condemning such famous Churches for separating from the particular Roman Church by Schisme: and against verity by charging it with fundamentall heresie. Of schisme afterwards, now for the heresie. It seemes by Scotus,Scotus in 1. Sent dist. 11. quaest. 1. that the Greekes held no other Heresie then Saint Basil and Gregory Nazianzen held 370 after Christ; whom yet no man durst euer call Heretickes. Surely out of their words (as they ex∣presse themselues) saying [That the Holy Ghost pre∣ceeds
from the Father by the sonne and is the spirit of the sonne] you cannot gather the denyall of the pro∣ceeding of the Holy Ghost from the Sonne, or that they make the Sonne vnequall to the Father, or make any difference in the consubstantiality of the persons. If the manner of their speech by some great iudgements be condemned as incommodious, and containing an errour, yet happily not an errour simply fundamentall, sufficient to cut them off from being a true Church. Magister Sententiarum saith,Magister 1. Sent. dist. 11. d. The Greekes from the Latines in this point, Ʋerbo discordant, sensu non differunt. And Scotus saith, The difference is in voce & in modo explicandi potius quam in re. And A∣quinas saith,Aquin. 1. part. q. 36. art. 2. in corore. that Quidam Graecorum dicuntur concede¦re, quod fit à Filio, vel profluat ab eo, non tamen quod pro∣cedat. And whereas Damascene saith, Spiritum per fili∣um esse dicimus, ex filio non dicimus:Bellar. de Christo. lib. 2. cap 27. §. Re∣sponde digitur. Bellarmine an∣sweres with Bessarion and Genuadius, that Damascen denies not spiritum sanctum procedere ex silio quod ad rem¦attinet, but thinkes it may be more safely said, per filium quam ex filio, for the manner of speech, to auoyd the he∣resie of Macedonius and Eunomius, who said the spirit proceeded from the Sonne, as from the primary cause, yea indeed the onely cause. But (saith Bellarmine) as to auoyde the heresie of Macedonius, it was rightly said, Spiritum esse à Patre per filium, so for the errour of the Grecians, it is now more rightly said, à patre et filio. Lastly, Thomas AquinasAquin, ib. part. 1. q. 36. art. 3. ad. 1. saith, Spiritus sanctus im∣mediatè à Patre procedit, in quantum est ab eo, & mediate in quantum est a Filio. Et sic dicitur procedere à patre per filium. Yet I hope you account not Saint Thomas an Hereticke. To shut vp all without exception: Azorius (a lear∣ned Iesuite, a choice man to deliuer the Roman doctrine, as it is held at this day:) in his booke dedicated to Pope Clement 8. and Printed by the approbation of Claudius Aqua viva, Generall of the Iesuites, and of
the Master of the sacred Palace, &c. He reckons the Grecians Armenians, and other Christians of the East for Schismatickes onely, because they obey not the Bi∣shop of Romes gouernment: but he excuseth them of heresies imputed vnto them. Azorius Institut. moral. part. 1. lib. 8. cap. 20. §. Decimo quaeritur. §. 3. A sufficient historicall discourse of the Waldenses in 4 Subsections. The first of their doctrine; the second, of their great numbers, and visibility; the third, of their large spreading into all Countries; the fourth, of their continuance aboue 400 yeeres, vntill Luthers time and after. Sectionis 3. Subsection 1. The Doctrine. §. 1. Of the Waldenses. §. 2. Their diuers names: but all one, and §. 3. All of the Protestants Religion, as say Aeneas Syl∣vius, Du Bravius, Poplinerius, Cocleus, Eckius, Gret∣serus, &c. §. 4. Many bad opinions, badly & falsely imputed to them. §. 5. Nine Articles different from the Protestants ascri∣bed vnto them by Parsons the Iesuite, but cleared by au∣thenticke Authors. Antiquissimus. What say you then, to them that re∣fused the new doctrines and vsurpations of the Pope in these Westerne parts? the Waldenses, Albigenses, Bohe∣mians. Antiquus. You know our men count them all He∣retickes. Antiquissimus. So they account vs, and all that speake against their abuses: but vniustly. So was Saint Paul accounted by some: but he answered as they and we may, Acts 24 14. After the way which they call he∣resie, so worship we the God of our Fathers: beleeuing all
things which are written in the Law and the Prophets. 15 And haue hope towards God, which they themselues also allow, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the iust and vniust. 16 And herein wee exercise our selues to haue alwayes a conscience voyde of offence towards God, and towards men. But now the question is not whether they and we be heretickes, or no: but whether they were not of our faith, and in number sufficient to make a visible Church. Antiquus. I deny both; for neither were they of your Faith or Religion, but differed much from you: neither were they so great and visible a company as the Church ought to be. Antiquissimus. That they were of our Faith, and our predecessors, I proue first by your owne Writers con∣fessions. Who first did yeeld vs that these names Wal∣denses, Albigenses, Leonists, or Pauperes de Lugduno, Pi∣cards, Bohemians, Thaborists, and such like, were all one kinde of people, for their faith and Religion, and the di∣uersity of their names were giuen them by their ene∣mies, partly of the places of their inhabiting (as Leo∣nists, and poore men of Lions, a City in France; Picards, of the Countrey Picardy; Albigenses, of the City and Countrey of Albi; Bohemians, of Bohemia; Thaborists, of the Citie of Thabor, &c.) and partly of their prin∣cipall teachers (as of Peter Waldus. Waldenses: of Pe∣ter Bruis, Petrebrusians: of Henry, Ioseph, Espernon, Ar∣nold, Wiclife, Hus, Henricians, Iosephists, Esperonists, Ar∣noldists, Wiclifists, Hussits, &c.) to omit other nick∣names giuen them vpon other causes. And now secondly, that they were our fore-runners in the points of Religion wherein we differ from you, your Writers shew plentifully. Hist. Waldens. Book. 1. cap. 8.Aeneas Sylvius, and Iohn du Bravius, in their histo∣ries of Bohemia, make the doctrine taught by Calvin, all one with that of the Waldenses.
And the same Sylvius saith,Aeneas Sylv. hist. Bohem. cap. 35. The Hussites did im∣brace the opinions of the Waldenses. And Hosius (he∣res. lib. 1.) saith, the leprosie of the Waldenses infected all Bohemia. Lindanus (in his Analyticke Tables) makes Caluin inheritor of the Doctrine of the Waldenses. Thomas WaldenVValden lib. 6. de reb. Sacram. tit. 12. cap. 10. saith, The doctrine of the Waldenses crept out of the quarters of France into England, meaning by Wiclife, against whom he wrote. D. Vsher. Gra∣vis. quaest. cap. 8. §. 1.Poplinerius saith, The Waldenses and Albigenses a∣bout the yeere 1100, and the succeeding times spread their doctrine (parum differentem) little differing from that which the Protestants now imbrace. Lancelotus du voisin Poplinerius histor. Franc. lib. 1. fol. 7. b. edit. an∣no 1581. Ib. cap. 9. §. 22.Gretserus the Iesuite, calls the Albigenses, Walden∣ses, and Berengarians, (Caluinianorum atavos) the Cal∣uinists great grandfathers. Gretser. prolegm. in scripta edita contra Wald. cap. 5. D. Abbot a∣gainst Hill. Reason 1. §. 18.Francis Guicciardin an Italian, and Florentine Histo∣rian writing of the yeere 1520. (lib. 13.) saith, that Lu∣ther set abroad the doctrine of the Bohemians (naming Hus and Hierom.) And Petrus Messias, a Spaniard (in the life of Wenceslaus) mentioning the opinions of Hus and the Bohemians, saith, They were the seed of those errours (as he cals them) which were afterwards in Germany, (to wit, taught by Luther.) Ib. §. 29.And Iohannes Cocleus (a man that had laboured in the story of the Hussites, and set out bookes thereof, and also wrote sharpely against Luther,) saith, that Hus did commit spirituall fornication with many aliens, with the Wiclivists, the Dulcinists, the Leonists, the Wal∣denses, the Albigenses, and others of that sort, enemies of the Church of Rome. And he saith, that Luther fol∣lowed Hus his Doctrine, lib. 2. de. Actis & scriptis Lu∣theri. And cals the Lutherans new Hussites. And a∣gaine, lib. 3. and lib. 8. he saith, that vnto his time (till
Luthers time and after) there remained the sect of the Thaborites in many places of Bohemia and Moravia, vnder the name of Picards and Waldenses. Histor. Albi∣gens. lib. 1. cap. 8.Eckius (in his common places, cap. 28.) saith, Lu∣ther had done nothing else but renew the heresies of the Waldenses, Albigenses, Wiclife, and Iohn Hus. Antiquus. Sir, our men deny not, but these Wal∣denses and others, were Luthers fore-runners in many things: but they held some things which you are a∣shamed to hold, and therefore were not of your Church or Religion. Antiquissimus. I know well, that many errours were imputed to them which they neuer held. AsB. Vsher. Gra∣uiss. quaest cap. 10. §. 15. Ber∣nardus Girardus, the French Historian (lib. 10.) saith: Although they had some ill opinions, yet these did not so much stirre vp the hatred of the Pope and great Princes against them, as their freedome in speech which they vsed in blaming and reprouing the vices, dissolute manners, life, and actions of Princes, Ecclesi∣asticall persons, and the Pope himselfe. That was the chiefe thing which drew the hatred of all vpon them. (& effecit vt plures nefarie affingerentur eis opiniones, à quibus omnino fuerant alieni) this caused many wicked opinions to be deuised and fathered of them, from which they were very free and guiltlesse. Ib. cap. 8. §. 28.Thuanus (histor. lib. 5. anno 1550.) reckons vp their opinions thus: They held that the Church of Rome, because it had forsaken the true faith of Christ, was that Whore of Babylon and that barren tree which Christ cursed, and therefore we ought not to obey the Pope and Bishops which fostered his errours: that the Mo∣nasticall life was the sinke and kennell of the Church, the vowes thereof vaine, and seruing onely for vnclean lusts: that the Priests orders were notes of that beast mentioned in the Reuelation: that purgatory fire, sa∣crifice of the Masse, Sanctuaries, or hallowed places a∣bout Churches, worshipping of Saints, offerings for the
dead, were the Inuentions of Sathan. Then he addeth, To these certaine and chiefe heads of their doctrine (alia afficta) others are fained and deuised, concerning Mariage, resurrection, the state of soules after death, and of Meates. B. Iewel Apol. cap. 1. diuis. 1.Bishop Jewell saith, our ancient Christians were slandered, that they made priuy meetings in the darke, killed yong babes, fed themselues with mens flesh, and like Sauage and brute beasts did drinke their blood: In conclusion, how that after they had put out the Can∣dles, they committed adultery or incest one with ano∣ther, brethren with sisters, sonnes with thei mothers, without shame or difference: men without all Religi∣on, enemies of mankind, vnworthy to be suffered in the world. Thus they said of the ancient Christians, and thus they said of the Waldenses, most vniustly and vntruely of both: you doubt not of the former, let many of your owne Writers satisfie you of the later. Vsher grav. qu. cap. 6. §. 11.Rainerius (whose booke Gretserus the Iesuite late∣ly set out among other Writers of the Waldenses) saith, The Waldenses, were the most dangerous sect to the Church of all other, for three causes: the third where∣of is, that whereas other sects, through the outragious∣nesse of blasphemy against God, worke a horrour in men, this sect of the Leonists hath a great shew of piety; because before men they liue iustly, and of God they beleeue all things piously, and hold all the articles con∣tained in the Creed: onely they blaspheme and hate the Roman Curch for which the multitude is easie to beleeue. Hist. ald, booke 1. cap. 5.Iacobus de Riberia (in his collections of the Citie of Tholous) saith, the Waldenses wonne all credit from the Priests, and made them little esteemed, by the holi∣nesse of their liues, and excellency of their doctrine. The like saith Rainerius, cited ib. De forma haeret. fol. 98. And Clauius de Scissel, Archbishop of Turin, saith,
they liued vnreproueably without reproach or scandall among men, cited ib. In his Treatise against the Wal∣denses. The B. of Canaillon, sent a certaine Monke, a Diuine,Vesembec. Ora∣tion of the Wal∣denses citat. ib. to conferre and conuince the Waldenses of Me∣rindal in Prouince, who vpon his returne, said, He had not so much profited in all his life in the Scriptures, as hee had done in those few dayes conference with the Waldenses. Wherevpon the Bishop sent diuers Doctors to confound them, but vpon their returne, one of them said with a loud voyce, that he had learned more tou∣ching the Doctrine necessary to saluation, by the Wal∣denses, instructing their children in their Catechisings, then in all the disputations of Diuinity which he had euer heard in Paris. Antiquus. I will not stand vpon those foule errours which some authors attribute to the Waldenses; but there are nine points which the late learned Iesuite,Parsons three Conversions part. 2. cap. 10. §. 26. Robert Parsons saith, All Authors that write of the Waldenses, doe attribute vnto them, which I hope you will be ashamed to maintaine: Those shew that you and they are not of one Church. Antiquissimus. Those shew the vanity and shameles∣nesse of that man, that to the face of the world auou∣cheth all Authors, when many Authors say the plaine contrary. This first article or errour (which he saith they hold) is, that all carnall concupiscence and coniunction is lawfull, when lust doth burne vs. (And therefore some adde, that in the darke they practise all kinde of carnall mixtures, with whomsoeuer they first meet, &c.) A filthy slander, laid as well vpon theOrigenes lib. 6. contra Celsum. Euseb. hist. lib. 4. cap. 7. See Cecilius his wicked Orati∣on in Minuty Felicis Octauio. recited also by D. Vsher Grau. quaest. cap. 6. §. 12 See him also ib. §. 20. Primitiue Christians, as vpon them. And them your owne Rai∣nerius (cited before) cleareth, saying, Haec Leonistarum (secta) magnam habet speciem pietatis: eo quod coram ho∣minibus iuste viuant, & bene omnia de Deo credant, &c. Againe, Casti sunt Leonistae, pag. 231. lin. 48. And a∣gaine, Quaelibet naturâ turpia deuitant. Item, suos subdi∣tos
ad eadem diligenter informant. Ib. pag. 232, 42. Rerum Bohemic. script. a M. Frehero edit. Hanov. an. 1602. TheyIn their booke of re∣medies against sinne, cap. 21. cited in the History of the Waldenses, booke 1. cap. 4. informe their people against this sinne, thus: The sinne of luxury is very pleasing to the Diuell, dis∣pleasing to God, and iniurious to our neighbours: be∣cause therein a man obeyeth the basest part of his body, rather then God who preserueth it. A foolish woman doth not onely take from a man his good, but himselfe too. He that is giuen to this vice, keepes faith to no man, and therefore Dauid caused his faithfull ser∣uant to be slaine, that he might enioy his wife. Amon defiled his sister Thamar. This vice consumes the he∣ritage of many, as it is said of the prodigall child, that he wasted his goods liuing luxuriously. Balaam made choice of this sinne, to prouoke the children of Israel to sinne, by occasion wherof there dyed 24000 persons. This sinne was the cause of the blindnesse of Sampson: it peruerted Solomon, and many haue perished by the beauty of a woman. Prayer and Fasting, and distance of place, are the remedies against this sinne. For a man may ouercome either vices by combating with them, but in this he is neuer victorious, but by flying from it, and not approaching neere vnto it, whereof we haue an example in Joseph. It is therefore our duties to pray daily to the Lord, that he will keepe vs from the sinne of luxury, and giue vs vnderstanding and chastity. Thus they taught and professed: and is it credible, had they practised the contrary, they could haue conti∣nued so long, and drawne so much of the world to im∣brace their Religion, with so great dangers and perse∣cutions as they did? No, (saith yourRainer. cited before, §. 4. ltn. Rainerius) the honesty and rghteousnesse of their liues was the grea∣test attractiue that drew the world after them, to the greatest danger of the Church of Rome. The scod article of Parsons, is, They held all othes  vnlawfull to Christians, for any cause whatsoeuer in the world, cause it is written, Nliturare, doe not
sweare, Mtth. 5. Iames 5. Aswer. Indeed they es∣chewed the common practise of swearing, according to Christs precepts, Matth. 5 37. but (saith your Rai∣nerius) to avoyd corporall death, and the reuealing of their brethren, they would sweare But how agrees that with that whichGabriel Prate∣clus. Pauperum de Lugduno error 3. Pratoclus saith of them: That they held that no deadly sinne was to be tollerated, though it were to auoyd a greater euill? The truth is, in iudgement they sticked not to sweare truely, but in triuiall matters they would not sweare rashly, which gaue occasion of that cavil: As your Rainerius saith, D∣cent vitare mendacium, detractionem, iuramentum, ibid. 222. 15, 16. In their book entituled, The spirituall Al∣manacke, in the third com∣ment, cited by Hist. Wald. Book. 1. cap. 4.Their own doctrine is, that there are lawfull oathes tending to the honour of God, and the edification of our neighbours, as in Hebr. 6.16. and as Israel was in∣ioyned to sweare by the Name of the eternall God, Deut. 6.13. and by the example of those oathes that past betwixt Abimeleck and Isaac, Gen. 26.30. and the oath of Iacob, Gen. 31.53. The third article is: that no iudgement of life and death is permitted to Christians in this life: for that it is written, Nolite Iudicare, Matth. 7. luke 6. Answ. But Rainerius tels a contrary tale, of a Waldensian Glo∣uer, who being condemned and led to death, said open∣ly in the hearing of all, You now condemne vs rightly for if we had power ouer you as you haue ouer vs, we would ex∣ercise it against your Clerkes and Religions. ib. 222. 47. This cauill arose vpon their complaining of the Magistrates, (to whom they were deliuered vp by the Inquisitors, Priests, and Fryers, who were their ene∣mies, not indifferent men, but passionate) and so they were condemned and executed by them, without hea∣ring, examining, or knowing of their cause. This cruell simplicity of the Magistrates they spake against in their complaint to Ladislaus, King of Hungary and Bohemia, and elsewhere.
In their booke entitu∣led, The light of the treasure of Faith. fol. 214. cited ibid.But their doctrine was, That they were not to suf∣fer the Malefactor to liue: and that without correcti∣on and discipline, doctrine serues to no purpose, neither should iudgements be acknowledged, nor sinnes puni∣shed. And therefore iust anger is the Mother of disci∣pline: and patience without reason, the seed of vices, and permitteth the wicked to digresse from truth and honesty. The fourth article is; That the Creed of the Apostles  is to be contemned, and no account at all to be made of it. Answ. Who would thinke that wise men would thus play the fooles? In deed, they account not the Salutation of the Angel to the B. Virgin, nor the Apo∣stles Creed to be prayers saith Rainerius (ibid. 232. 10.)Rainerius su∣pra §. 4. lit. m. But yet they reuerently receiue the whole New Te∣stament, and the Apostles Creed which is gathered out of it: Et credunt omnes articulos qui in Symbolo continen∣tur, saith the same Author. And in their books they haue very good and Catholicke Expositions of the Creed. The fift Article is, That no other prayer is to be vsed,  but onely the Pator noster, set downe in Scripture. Answ. And yet their owne Writers (Rainerius, Ey∣mericus, &c.) record diuers other of their prayers, as for Grace before meat, this: He that blessed the fiue bar∣ley loaues and two fishes, in the Desert to his Disciples, blesse this Table vnto vs. And after meat, that of the Re∣uelation, 5.12, 13. Blessing, and honour, and wisedome, and thankes, and vertue, and power, be vnto our God for euer and euer, Amen. Also, God giue a good reward and recompence to all that doe well vnto vs. And, God which hath giuen vs corporall food, giue vs also spirituall life. And, The Lord be with vs, and we with him for euer. And the rest answered, Amen. There is a large and punctuall confession of sinne, set downe in the third part of the History of the Waldenses and Albigenses, booke 1. cap. 2. taken out of their booke, Intituled, New Comfort.
All which and many other shew the vanity of this cauill. The sixt Article, That the power of consecrating the body of Christ, and of hearing Confessions, was left by Christ, not onely to Priests, but also to Laymen, if they be iust. Answ. The first part of this Article they held not, but rather the contrary, that neither Priests nor Laiks could consecrate the body of Christ. ForRainer in sum∣ma de Catharis & Leonisti. Rai∣nerius saith, They doe not beleeue the Sacrament to be the true Body and Blood of Christ, but the Bread consecrated is called in a certaine figure, the Body of Christ, as it is said, The Rocke was Christ, and the like. The second part they said truely,Iames 5.1. and we hold, That the power to heare Confessions, is left by Christ, not onely to Priests, but to discreet and godly Lay-people, who are able to counsaile and comfort them. The seuenth Article is, That no Priests must haue a∣ny Liuings at all: but must liue on Almes, and that no Bishops or other dignity is to be admitted in the Cler∣gy, but that all must be equall. Answ. That their Mi∣nisters may not lawfully take and enioy Liuings, or that it was sinne so to doe, they taught not,So they pro∣fesse in their answer. Ad li∣teras Augustai Olomucensis ann. 1508. & plenius in scripto edto 1572. but were sor∣ry they had not sufficient stayed Liuings for them, whereby they might haue more time to their studies, and greater opportunity to instruct them with necessa∣ry doctrine and knowledge: but they were not asha∣med of their Ministers that were content to worke with their hands to get their liuing, since the doctrine and example of the Apostles lead them to it; and they had rather see them so to doe, then to liue idly, follow Tauerns, venery, vanity, vsury, sacriledge, & other wic∣kednesse. That all Ministers must be equall, they meant in orders, but not in Iurisdiction, for they allowed Dea∣cons, Presbyters, and Bishops, as both Guido and San∣ders obserue. The eighth Article is, That Masse is to be said once onely euery yeere: to wit, vpon Maundy Thursday,
when the Sacrament was instituted, and the Apostles made Priests. For that Christ said, Doe this in remem∣brance of me, to wit, (say they) that which he did at that time, Luke 22.1 Cor. 11. Answ. Parsons preten∣ding to bring no articles but such as all Authors charge the Waldenses withall, brings this, which no Author im∣putes to them, but onely one Guido Carmelita; andAlphons. de Ca∣stro lib. 6. adv. haereses tit. de Euchar. Al∣phonsus de Castro, wonders where Guido found it.Aeneas Sylv. hist. Bohem. cap. 35. Ae∣neas Syvius mentions it not, but contrarily saith, they hold that the Priest may consecrate in any place, and at any time, and minister to them that require it.Rainer. ib. 224. 12. And Rainerius, They mislike that the faithfull should com∣municate but once in the yeare: and they communi∣cate daily. And concerning the Masse, he saith.Ib. 224. 14. They hold that the Masse is nothing, that the Apostles had it not, and that it was made for gaine. AndIb. 224. 17. that the oblation made by the Priest in the Masse, profiteth no∣thing. The ninth and last Article obiected by Parsons: That  the words of Consecration must be no other, but onely the Pater noster, seuen times said ouer the bread, &c. Answ.Alph. Castro ibid. Alphonsus de Castro saith, Jt is possible that the Waldenses might haue had this, but not probable; for only Guido Carmelita saith it; but Aeneas Sylvius, a farre more diligent man, and of better iudgement, mentions it not; neither Antoninus, nor Bernardus de Lutzenburge, (though they all professedly reckon vp their errors) but rather they say the contrary. That the Waldenses held, The Priest might consecrate in euery place, and time, and minister to them that desire it; and that it was sufficient to speake the Sacramentall words onely.Rainer. pa. 224. 14. Edit. Fro∣heri. And Rainerius saith, They receiue not the Canon of the Masse, but onely the words of Christ vulgarly. By these nine selected Articles, whereby Parsons would make the world beleeue the Waldenses differed much from vs the world may see they differed nothing at all: had there beene greater differences, doubtlesse
he would haue shewed them, for he purposely sought the greatest. Finding therefore no difference, we may safely conclude, they were fully of our faith and Religi∣on, our predecessors and fore-runners, and that the Pro∣testants doctrine was held and taught in the world o∣penly and professedly aboue 400 yeeres before Luther taught it in Germany. Sectionis. 3. Subsectio. 2. §. 1. Of the great numbers of the Waldenses. §. 2. Their disputations. §. 3. Warres against them. §. 4. By the famous Simon Montfort. §. 5. Carcasson taken. §. 6. and 7. New Armies by Croysadoes against them out of all Christendome. Tolous taken, the King of Aragon slaine. §. 8. Tolous recouered. Simon slaine. The King of France continueth the warres. The Albigenses thriue, recouer Carcasson, spread in many Countries. §. 9. The Earle of Tolous deceiued by the Pope or his Le∣gate, fortifies Avignon. The King of France besiegeth it, dyeth mad; the Legate vnable by force, gets it by fraud and periury. §. 10. Tolous ouerthrowes the French Armies. The Pope offers him peace. The great warres cease. Councels are held to root out the Albigenses. § 11. Jgnorance of Histories makes men loue the Pope. §. 1.Antiquus. Well Sir, if it should be granted, that these Waldenses held your doctrine intirely, without difference, and so were of your Church: yet were you neuer the nearer, because their numbers were so few and scattered, that they did not make a Church so visi∣ble, as the true Church of God must alwayes be. Antiquissimus. I will proue they did, and that plen∣tifully
and manifestly, without all exception, out of your owne Authors. This Raineri∣us is set out by Freberus, a∣mong other writers of Bo∣hemian matters Hannov. anno 1602. see there pag 222. 223. and by Grets. Iesuita. Ingolstad anno. 1603. see there Rainer. contra haeret c. 4. pag. 54. And his testimony is often cited by Protestants, as Morney My∣sterium iniquita∣tis pag 731. aedit. Salmurin 8. 1612. Vsher grav. quaest. c. 6. §. 11. Archb. Abbot. contra Hill Reason 1. §. 29 &c.Rainerius saith, That of all Sects which either are or haue beene, none hath beene more pernicious to the Church (he meaneth of Rome) then that of the Leonists. For three causes (marke them well) first, for the long continuance: for some say it hath continued from the time of Sylvester (he sate anno Christi 314.) others say, from the time of the Apostles. Secondly, for the generality, for there is almost no countrey into which this Sect hath not entred. Thirdly, that whereas all o∣ther haue wrought a horrour through their outragious blasphemies against God, this of the Leonists hath a great shew of piety, because that before men they liue iustly, and of God they beleeue all things well, and all the Articles which are contained in the Creed; onely they blaspheme and hate the Roman Church: where∣in the multitude is prone to hearken vnto them. Note you the antiquity, and the generality in all Nations, arguing a visibility sutable to the Church? Now heare your Poplinerius,Genebrard Chronol. lib. 4. an. 1581. pag. 782. edit. Paris. 1600. (whom Genebrard calls an vpright and right learned man, and one who hath written all things purely and simply, according to the truth of the History, not for fauour of the cause.) HeePalinerius hist. Franc. lib. 1. edit. an. 1581. fol. 7. b. saith, The Roman Church was neuer more sharpely oppugned, then by the Waldenses and their successors in Aquitania, and the Regions adioyning, &c. For these (saith he) against the wils of all Christian Princes about the yeere 1100, and in the succeeding times, spread a∣broad their doctrine, little differing from that which at this day the Protestants embrace, not onely through all France, but almost through all the Countries of Europe also. For the French, Spanish, English, Scots, Italians, Germans, Bohemians, Saxons, Polonians, Lithuanians, and other Nations, haue obstinately defended it to this day. Gretserus the Iesuite saith,Gretserus pro∣legom. in script. edit. contra Wald. cap. 2. The Waldenses multi∣plied so, that [vix aliqua regio ab hac peste immunis &
intacta mansit: adeo se diffuderat, vt cum plurimorum exitio in varias provincias infuderat, &c.] Scarse any Region remained free and vntouched of it, so greatly it spred it selfe into all Prouinces. The Albigenses errour so increased (saith CesariusCaesarius Hei∣sterbach. hist. lib. 6. cap. 21.) that in a short time it infected [Vsque ad mille ciuitates] a thousand Cities: and if it had not been repressed by the sword, I thinke (saith he) it would haue corrup∣ted all Europe. This also your IesuiteParsons three conuersions. part. 2. cap. 10. §. 28. Robert Parsons acknowledgeth, and saith, they had an army of 70000. men to fight for them. Obserue here their multitude, and obserue how it was repressed, not by soul-convi∣cting disputation, but by body-killing-persecution. We reade indeed of some disputations and conferen∣ces with them, wherein the Popes learned Doctors and Bishops sought to conuince and winne them: but all without fruit.Altissiodoren∣sis Chronloog. an 1207. Vsher cap. 10, §. 20, 20. Diuers Abbots of the Cistercian or∣der (by appointment of the Pope) and one Bishop (Episcopus Oximensis,) with their assistants, to the number of 30, went by two or three together thorow their Cities, Villages, and Townes, preaching for three moneths space: but (saith the Author, Paucs reve∣cant) they converted but few. Ibid.At other times the like preachers assayed to per∣swade them, but profited little or nothing. Bertrand. de gest. Tholossanor. fol. 46 col. 4.One among all other disputations, is most famous,Montreal. apud montem Regalem, in the Diocesse of Carcasson, be∣twixt Fulco B. of Tolous; Didacus, B. of Exon. Saint Dominicke, Peter de Castro nouo, and Ranulphus, on the one side: and Pontanus Iordanus, Arnoldus Aurisanus, Arnoldus Ottonus, Philebertus Castrensis, and Benedictus Thermus, Pastors of the Albigenses, on the other side:Iacobus de Riberia in col∣lectaneu de vrbe Tlcsa. before foure Moderators or Arbiters (two of them Noble men, Bernardus de villa noua, and Bernardus Ar∣rensis: and two Plebeians, Raimundus Godius, and Ar∣noldus Riberia.) The herosies (or questions) were these: That the Church of Rome is not the holy Church nor
Spouse of Christ, but a Church defiled with the do∣ctrine of the Deuill, and is that Babylon which Saint John describes in the Reuelation, the Mother of fornica∣tions and abhominations, made drunke with the blood of the Saints, and that those things are not approued of God, which are approued of the Church of Rome. And, that the Masse was not ordained by Christ nor his Apo∣stles, but is an inuention of men. This disputation held them many dayes, without fruit: sauing, that di∣uers histories giue the victory to the AlbigensesHistor. Albig. booke 1. cap. 2. See Vsher. ib. §. 22. And it is certaine, thatChronolog Al∣tisiod. an. 1208. fol. 103. b Albigenses saepiùs attentati, nulla∣tenus gladio ver∣bi Dei poterant expugnari. Odo B. of Paris, finally infor∣med the Pope, that, The Albigenses being often set vp∣on, could by no meanes be conquered by the sword of Gods Word; and therefore it was fit to beat them downe by warres.Hilagarus hist. of Foix pag. 126. And some say, It was the Popes policy to entertaine them with conference and dispu∣tations, that in the mean season he might prepare great Armies to root out them and their Religion. These oft and great trauailes in preaching, confer∣ring, disputing, needed not to men invisible, obscure, of small numbers, or contemptible;§. 3. much lesse needed those great Armies which were gathered to put them downe, if they were few and obscure.Vsher ib. cap. 8. § 31, 32, 37. Pope Alexan∣der 3. had cursed them, anno 1163. persecuted them with warre, 1170. and with Inquisition 1176. And after this, spoyled a great number of them (anno 1181) exercitu militum peditumque infinite, with an Army in number of horse and foot infinite (saith NangiacusGulielmus Nangiacus chron. M S.) and yet (saith the MonkeAltissiodorens. chrono. an. 1181. Altissiodorensis) they reco∣uered, returned to their former opinions and multi∣plied,Antonin. hist. part. 3. tit. 23. cap. 1. prope miti∣um. which, Innocent 3, seeing, and foreseeing the great danger of the Popes downefall by their spreading doctrine: thought best to arme both heauen and earth against them. Authorizing theFryers ori∣ginal, about 12 hundred yeer after Christ. new-sprung Friers Dominicans and Franciscans, to preach in all places, (whether the Bishops and ordinary Pastora would or no) and to vphold the Popes falling kingdome: and
withall to execute a most cruell Inquisition against he∣reticks (for by that odious name were all good Christi∣ans branded, that would not be subiect to the popes tyranny and Romish corruptions.) But all this being insufficient,Rigordus histor. anni. 1208. pag. 207. he published his Croysadoes, promising par∣don of all sinnes, and the ioyes of heauen to all that would take the signe of the crosse vpon their Coates or Armour, and become souldiers against the Waldenses, and continue in the warre for forty dayes together, af∣ter they came, or that happened to dye in their way comming thither. A very politicke and a thrifty course: he promised paradise and eternall life, very li∣berally to his crossed souldiers, but bestowed not one crosse of siluer to maintaine them. But withall, they that were once crossed thus for the holy warres, in what land soeuer, were no longer the Kings subiects, but the popes: neither might they be arrested, sued, or troubled for any debts or actions; but must be suffered freely to goe about to prepare themselues; and all men must thinke it a holy and meritorious deed to furnish and ayde them with whatsoeuer they needed, and ac∣count them the vndoubted citizens of heauen, whether they liued or dyed. Thus the politicke pope turned the Croysadoes, and Armies, ordained to goe against Christs enemies the Sarazens or Turkes, now to goe against the popes own enemies, Christians, the best seruants of Christ.Gretserus Pro∣legom. in scripta edita contra Wal∣dens. cap. 6. Vsh. ib. cap. 9. §. 4, 5. The Catholicks (saith your Iesuite Gretser) which tooke the badge of the crosse vpon them, to warre and roote out the hereticks, (Albigenses or Waldenses) were promised to enioy the same Indulgence and be guarded with the same holy priuiledge, which was granted to them that warred against the Turke, for defence of the holy Land. And further, the better to gather numbers of souldi∣ers in euery place,Vmbert. Bur∣gund. Serm. part. 2. serm. 64. the pope vsed the helpe of Prea∣chers to stirre vp the people. And the Preachers taking this, or some such like text [Psal. 94.16. Who will rise
vp for me against the euill doere? or who will stand vp for me against the workers of Iniquity] would common∣ly conclude their Sermons with this exhortation [Be∣hold, deare Brethren, you see the malice of the Heretickes, you see how much hurt they doe in the world: and you see againe how carefully, and by all holy meanes the Church doth labour to recall and recouer them: but with such men she cannot preuaile; no they defend themselues with the se∣cular power. And therefore our holy mother the Church, sore against her will, and with great sorrow, is compelled to call together a Christian army against them. Whosoeuer therefore hath any zeale of Religion, whosoeuer is touched with the honour of God, whosoeuer desireth to be a parta∣ker of that great Jndulgence, let him take vpon him the signe of the crosse, and ioyne himselfe to the army of our Lord cru∣cified.] By these meanes the pope drew out of all parts an innumerable company of Souldiers, in the yeere 1209. conducted by many Bishops, Earles and Barons, &c. The King of France himselfe (saith Guiliel∣mus Armoricanus) sent fifteene thousand at his owne charge, giuing example to others. This great Army in short time, tooke one great strong populous City,Vrbem Bitu∣rensem. and put to the sword threescore thousand, among whom were many of their owne Catholickes.Caesarius Hei∣sterbachensis histor. lib. 5. cap. 21. Let our Eng∣lish Catholicks consider what they are to looke for in like cases of our enemies preuailing. For Arnol∣dus the Cistercian Abbot (being the Popes Legate in this great Warre) commanded the Captaines and soul∣diers, saying, Cedite eos; novit enim Dominus qui sunt ejus: Kill them all (Catholicks or Hereticks) for the Lord knoweth who are his. Then the Army marched on to Carcasson, a City both of it selfe, strong and well manned: not likely, without strong siege effusion of much blood, and great losse of time to be taken with this great Army, and therefore the Leaders were glad to gaine it by composition, suffe∣ring a wold of people, of the Albigenses religion, thence to depart, so they would leaue the City vnweakned, and vndefaced: which City thus gotten,§. 4. they made
the head City of the warre, which they foresaw would be very long, the number, strength, and resolution of the Albigenses, being very great.Vsher cap. 10. §. 26. This City tnere∣fore they fortified and furnished with all manner of store for all future euents, and made Simon of Montfort (a Noble man highly descended, and allied to the Kings of England, and of France) gouernour of the City, and generall of the whole Army, and Lord of all the Land already conquered or to bee conquered by these warres. The cunning Legat, to get the great Earle of Beziers into his hands perswaded him with faire promises and safe conduct to come to a parley,Vsh. ib. Hist. Albig. booke 1. cap. 6, 7. and when he had him in his power, contrary to promise tooke him prisoner, saying, that faith is not to be kept with Hereticks. He dyed shortly after in prison, suspected by poyson: and Simon Montfort succeeded him in his Lands, and in a monethes space tooke an hundred Castles with much slaughter of the Albigenses and their fauourers. But this course of victories had interchanges of losses. For the Gentlemen of the Vicounty of Beziers, by secret instructions of the King of Aragon, tooke such aduan∣tages, that Simon was faine to send to all the Prelates of Europe for new supplies, affirming hee had lost aboue forty Townes and Castles since the last depar∣ture of the Pilgrimes. Then Simon taking the Castle of Beron, neere vnto Montreal, caused the eyes of aboue an hundred Albigenses to be put out, and their noses cut off, leauing onely one with one eye to conduct the rest to Cabaret. §. 7. See ib. and the Authors there alledged.The new pilgrimes (or crossed souldiers) arriuing, the next yeere 1210, Simon taketh Minerbe, a strong Castle situate vpon the Frontiers of Spaine, where 140. (some say 180) men and women chose rather to bee burned on earth then in hell for changing their Reli∣gion. Among many other, hee tooke also the Castle of
Thermes, and Remond lord of the place and Countrey, spoyling all with fire, euen the lord also, his wife, sister, daughter, and other Nobles, for their constancy in their old faith. Vsher ibid. §. 9 & seq. Caesarius hist. lib. 5. cap. 21.The next yeere also 1211.§. 6. another great Army ar∣riued, which tooke many Cities and Castles, hanging and burning many of the Albigenses: and besieged La∣vallis, a towne strongly fortified and defended: during which siege, others of the Religion tooke Montem gau∣dij, and flue great numbers of the Pontificians: But af∣ter along siege Lauallis was taken, the souldiers slaine, foure hundred Albigenses burnt, the rest hanged, and the like executions were done in many other Cities and Castles. But the City Tolous, though besieged, could not then be taken. Remond Earle of Tolous, was a great man, neere in blood to the King of France, in the 2. degree: he had married Joane once Queene of Sicilia, sister to Iohn King of England, by whom he had a son, called also Remond, (who was the last Earle of Tolous) and after the decease of Joane, he married Elenor, sister of Peter, K. of Araegon. He was strong therfore in bloud, affinity, and confederacy, andArmoricanus philippid lib. 8. one saith, he had as ma∣ny Cities, Castles, and Townes, as the yeere hath daies. He had many great prouinces vnder him: BertrandusBertrand de gests Tulosar fol. 32. col. 4. reckons them thus, Tenebat Cemes Tolosanus comi∣tatum Tolosae, comitatum de Sancto Egidio, Prouinciam, Delphinatum, comitatum venaissimi, Ruthenensem patri∣am, Cadurcensem, Albigensem, & Tolosae circumvicinas Iu∣diciarias, linguam Occitanam, & lata dominia intra & vltra Rhodanum & Aquitaniam. But because he was a great defender of the Albigen∣ses, and was one of their Religion himselfe; The pope proscribed him, and exposed him to extirpation and ruine, and to be a prey to Simon Montfort with his pil∣grimes.So saih m. Marian ch. hspan. lib. 1. cap. 2. The Earle therefore gathering an Army of an hundred thousand, was very likely to haue vtterly ouerthrowen Simon, had not the vnexpected death of
the King of Aragon (intercepted by ambush) quite dis∣couraged and dissolued the Albigenses Army, so that they could not be stayed by their Captaines from run∣ning away,Vsher ibid. §. 34. & seq. Some write that the Albigenses lost 15000 fighting men, some say 17000, others say, 32000Hist. Albig. lib. 1. cap. 11. By this meanes, Simon now able to take the City of Tolous sendeth for the King of France his sonne, to come and haue the honour of taking the City: who came accordingly, tooke it, and dismantled it, beating downe the towres thereof. §. 7.Yet this great mifortune cast not downe the Albi∣genses, but their courage and power was still so great, that new Croisadoes and Jndulgences were sent abroad to gather new crossed souldiers against them, anno 1213 by whose aide Simon wonne many other Castles and townes. And now in a Councell of many Bishops, was Simon declared Lord of all the Countries and Do∣minion gotten by this holy warre; and possession shortly after giuen vnto him by Lewis, eldest sonne of the King of France, and confirmed also by the pope in the Councell of Lateran, anno 1215. §. 8.Yet for all this, while Simon made a iorney to Paris to the King, and stayed there about honourable Cere∣monies, and making marriages for his children: Re∣mond was returned to Tolous, and ioyning with many Aragonians (that were come to reuenge the death of their King) tooke the City and many other Castles, an∣no 1217. Vpon the newes whereof, Simon returned, and for recouering of the City, besieged it, but was most strangely and suddenly slaine with a stone which a woman threw out of an Engin. Whereupon the siege brake vp, that town remained, and many other townes and Castles returned vnder the obedience of old Re∣mond, Earle of Tolous. Againe, anno 1219. The King of France sent his sonne (now the second time, taking vpon him the signe of the crosse) with a great Army against the Albigenses; who
slew of them 5000, and besieged Tolous againe, but in vaine. The Albigenses also retouer many Castles. Againe, anno 1221 King Philip of France sent 10000 footmen, and 200 horsemen against them, still with∣out fruit of their labours. In the yeere 1223. by the popes appointment,Vsh d cap. 10. §. 46. was a Councell held at Paris by the popes Legate, two Archbishops and 20 other Bishops, against the Albi∣genses: and King Philip of France at his death appoin∣ted 20000 pounds (or as some write 100000 pound) to be bestowed in winning the Albigenses lands (saithRigord. pag. 225. Rigordus.) For now the Albigenses had recouered the strong City, head of the warre, Carcasson, and many o∣ther Castles which their enemies had wonne and held 14 yeeres:Math. Paris hist. an. 1223. pag. 306. And were now growne so powerfull in Bulgaria, Croatia, and Dalmatia, that among many o∣thers they drew some Bishops to their partie. But on the other side, Remond the Earle of Tolous,§ 9. sub∣mitted himselfe nto the pope, & vpon his oath that he would endeuour to root out the Albigenses, the pope restored him. Yet when he came before the Legat, in a great Councell of French Bishops, and there claimed re∣stitution of his lands, according to the popes grant: Simons sonne came also and claimed the same lands, as wonne by his father, and assured by the pope, and also by the King of France: hereupon the Legat demurred,Vsher ib §. 51. & seq. Math. Paris hist. pag. 319. & seq. and vnderhand procured the King of France, Lewis to to gather a great Army of crossed souldiers, to winne from the Albigenses the Citie of Avignion, (a place of theirs of great strength, and thought to be invincible) The King (mak ng peace with the King of England by mediation of the pope) raiseth a great army (anno 1225) of 50000 horse, and innumerable foot, and mar∣cheth towards Avignio, (then being in the power of the Earle of Tolous,) and being denyed entrance, besie∣geth it: The warlike Earle defended it brauely: Hee had very prouidently before the kings comming with∣drawen
all kind of prouision out of the Countrey round about, into the City to furnish them within, and dis∣furnish them without: and now by often sallies hee mightily afflicted them, killing at one time 2000, at another 3000, being helped by the breaking of a bridge: and the pestilence daily wasted great numbers. So that the King (though he had sworne neuer to depart, till he had taken the City) went aside to an Abbey not farre distant to auoyd the pestilence, where he dyed shortly after (as some write) out of his wits. The Legat, the more easily to winne the City, kept secret the Kings death: and despairing to preuaile by force, attempted to doe it by fraud. He cunningly perswaded the City to send vnto him 12 of their Citizens to conferre about some good conditions, giuing them his oath for their safe returne: but when the gates were opened to re∣ceiue them so returning, his Army rushed in and tooke the gate, and finally the City, contrary to his oath gi∣uen. For the Pope (or himselfe by the popes authori∣ty) could easily enough dispense with such oathes. Thus the city of Avignion, which could not be taken in three monthes siege and assault by the power of the King of France,Math. Paris. hist. an 1228.  237. was easily taken by the fraud and per∣iury of his Holinesse holy Legat. §. 10.In the yeere 1228, thrice in that Summer did the Earle of Tolous ouerthrow the French Armies. In the end peace was offered to the Earle by Legates from Rome, and from the French King, and confirmed vpon condition that he should root out all of the Religion of the Albigenses in his Countries. Which hee vnderta∣king,ac. gna.  11 Vt.  1 8. Mas∣s.  sh. 5. V. cap. 10.  seq. was absolued from his excommunication, Tolous reconciled: and at Tolous (in the yeere 1229.) a Coun∣cell was held against Heretickes; and shortly after, an∣other Councell at Narbona, and a third at Biterras. In which Councels it was finally concluded, that all guilty persons should abjure their heresies, that the houses of Heretickes should be demolished, &c also many strait
statutes were made at Tolous against the Albigenses, anno 1233. What say you Antiquus? were not here great num∣bers visible enough, and mighty? against whom so great Armies were so often raised throughout Chri∣stendome, so mighty Warres made to bring them vn∣der the popes subiection, such miserable massacres and bloodshed of so many thousands, and yet could neuer subdue them? Antiquus. You relate more then euer I heard,§. 11. or read, or euer imagined could be said for this point. I haue alwayes thought, and so haue beene taught, that there was neuer any great assemblies, or numbers of your Religion, but some few single, simple, obscure per∣sons, that haply held some points with you, and many points different from you: nor euer any multitude, nor any of worth or respect, that opposed the Church of Rome. Antiquissimus. It is very likely that ignorance was the mother of your deuotion to that Church, wherein not onely the light of the Scriptures, but also the histo∣ries of the Church and of States, that would discouer these things, are kept from you,, by your politicke Lea∣ders; and your selues are willingly blinded, and affected with that selfe-pleasing idle-ignorance. But if you did iudicially reade your own Authors, which write these things at large, or ours which collect them more briefe∣ly, and confirme them strongly by yours, (out of which I haue abridged my short Narration) you could not but manifestly see and admire the tyranny of your popes, that thus sought the rule and riches of the world; and both the multitude and constancy of Gods seruants, who sought the saluation of their soules with contempt of the world, and their owne liues: Sectionis. 3. Subsectio. 3. The Waldenses were spred into all Countries: namely, for
example, Spaine, England, Scotland, Italy, Germany, Bohemia, Saxony, Pomerania, Polonia, Livonia, Li∣tuania, Digonicia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Dalmatia, Con∣stantinople, Sclavonia, Sarmatia, Philadelphia: in all parts of France: In Italy, also they had Churches in Lombardy, Millan, Romagnia, Vicence, Florence val Spoletine, &c. Antiquus, But Sir, all you haue yet said (for ought I conceiue) concernes but one part of France, and that for a short time, some twenty or thirty yeeres. Sup∣pose your Religion had abundance of open professors in that little place, for that little time: what is a small part of France to all Christendome? and what are so few yeeres to such succession and continuance as the Church of God must haue throughout all Ages. Antiquissimus. If you desire satisfaction rather then contention, truth rather then victory, or victory onely ioyned with the truth; you may gather sufficient out of that I haue said to satisfie you; but to shew this point more distinctly, (which in the lumpe, it may bee, you obserued not) first I cited out of yourSubsect. 2. §. 1. lit. a Rainerius, that there were three causes of danger to the papacy from the Waldenses, whereof the second was, because there was almost no Countrey free, into which that sect had not entred: and out ofIb. lit. c Polinerius, that the Waldenses were spread, not onely throughout France, but almost throughout all the Countries of Europe. For the French, Spanish, English, Scots, Jtalians, Germans, Bohemians, Saxons, Polonians, Lithuanians, and other Nations, haue strongly defended it (yea, and he addeth) euen to this day. And out ofIb. lit, d. Gretserus your Iesuite yet liuing, that scarce any Region or Nation remained fee, and vntouched of it. And yourMatth. Paris ib. §. 8, 9 Mathy Paris saith, The Albigenses were so mighty in the parts of Bul∣garia, Croatia, and Dalmatia, that they also drew Bi∣shops,
besides many others of those Regions to their parties. And that the Waldenses were not onely in one part of France, but spred thorow all the parts thereof:§. 2. History of the Waldenses book. 2 cap. 2. the hi∣story of the Waldenses (gathered out of authenticke Re∣cords, and publike writers of your owne side) sheweth abundantly, and in seuerall Chapters of the seuerall places. Insomuch that the Archbishops of Aix, Arles, and Narbonne assembled at Avignion (anno 1228.) about the difficulties of the executions of those which the Dominican Fryers had accused: said plainly, There were so many apprehended, that it was not possible to defray the charge of their fooding; nor to find enough lime and stone to build prisons for them. In the third Chapter mention is made of many Churches of the Waldenses in Daeuphine, Piedmont, Pro∣vince, Calabria, and of great numbers of them in the Di∣ocesse of Aix, Arles, Ambrun, Ʋienna, Aubonue, Savoy, the Venetian Countrey, Dyois, Forrests, the Principality of Orenge, the City of Avignion, and Selon. More particularly: in the fourth Chapter are des∣cribed the persecutions in Piedmont. In the fift Chapter, of the Marquisate of Saluces, and nere thereunto, from whence aboue fiue hundred fami∣lies were banished. In the sixt Chapter, in the new lands, and in the Alpes. In the seuenth Chapter, in Calabria, where the Gen∣tlemen vsed meanes to continue the Waldenses, a long time without persecution, because they were excee∣ding good Tenents, made the ground formerly barren, very fruitfull by their diligent husbandry, payd great Rents, discharged all duties, were honest, iust, innocent, peaceable and dutifull, and paid good Tithes to their Parsons, such as in former times the ground would not yeeld. Yet in the end, they were miserably persecuted and killed vp, because they would not yeeld to the
Romish doctrine, gouernment, and ceremonies, which they abhorred worse then death. The Romish Inquisi∣tor Pauza, cut the throats of fourescore of them, as a Butcher doth his Muttons, and set vp their quarters on stakes in the high wayes, and hanged others. Three∣score women of Christ were racked, and most of them perished: nine of the chiefest and handsomest women were deliuered to the Fathers of the Inquisition, and what became of them it is vnknowen The eighth Chapter describes them of Province, the parts of Cabriers, Meridal, la Coste, and other places adioyning, with their great persecutions and massa∣cres. §. 3.The ninth, tenth, and eleuenth Chapters speake of their further spreading in great numbers in Bohemia, and Austria, and of the Communion by letters and messengers betwixt them. And of many in Germany, especially in Alsatia. About anno 1213. and 1220. §. 4.The twelfth Chapter sheweth there were many of the Waldenses Religion in England,Matth. Paris. in anno 1174. some burnt in anno 1174, saith Math Paris, and in King Henry the second his time, many were grieuously persecuted in England, saith Thomas Waldensis an English man.Waldens de Re sacram. lib. 6. tit. 12. cap. 10. Wiclife taught their very doctrine, and greatly spread it in England. Also in Saxony and Pomerania, and in the Diocesse of Eisten, in Germany, (ib. cap 11.) were many Waldenses, they had twelue Pastors knowen, besides the vnknown. Yea (as Trithenius reports) they were in such numbers, and so spread in Germany, that they could trauell from Colen to Milan in Italy, and euery night lodge with hostes of their owne profession. §. 5.The thirteenth Chapter shewes many in Flaunders, the fourteenth in Poland,Sigonius de Reg∣no Italiae lib. 17. Rainer. in sum∣ma fol. 18. the fifteenth in Paris it selfe: the sixteenth in Italy, as writeth Sigonius. Rainerius saith, in anno 1250. The Waldenses had Churches in Al∣bania, Lombardy, Millan, Romagnia, and also in Vicence, Florence, and Ʋal Spoletine. Anno 1280. there were
many Waldenses in Sicilia, saith Du Haillan. Roger,Haillan in the life of Philip. 3. Sigonius lib. 17. King of Sicilia, made constitutions against them: and Pope Gregory the ninth, persecuted them in Jtaly, espe∣cially in Millan, as saith Sigonius. So did Honorius, and Boniface the 8. The seuenteenth Chapter sheweth,Rainerius de forma haereticor. fol. 10. an. 1250. the Waldenses had Churches in Constantinople, Philadelphia, Slavonia, Bolgaria, Digonicia, by the testimony of Rainerius, and they were spred into Livonia and Sarmatia,Vignier. histor. Biblio thec. part. 3. pag. 130. as Vignier sheweth. Sectionis 3. Subsectio 4. §. 1. The Waldenses continued aboue 400 yeeres, vntill Lutherrs time and after. §. 2. Jn England by meanes of Wiclife. §. 3. His doctrine, and many followers. Oxford Diuines. §. 4. The story of Iohn Hus, Ierom of Prage, and Bohemi∣an affaires. §. 8. and 9. The continuance of the Waldenses after Lu∣thers time. Luther wrote a Preface to one of their bookes. Letters passed betwixt them and Oecolampa∣dius, Bucer, Caluin, &c. Antiquus. Enough Sir of their spreading, but ex∣cept you shew also their succession and continuance till Luthers rising, you can haue no hope to satisfie. Antiquissimus. I haue shewed Councels, consultati∣ons, persecutions, massacres, and mighty warres against them: whereby many thousands of them haue beene burnt, slain, rooted out, banished & wasted:Vsher. ib. cap. 10. §. 64. but yet the maruellous hand of God, still appeared in preseruing multitudes of them, in diuers and many places, in the middest of all their grieuous and continuall persecuti∣ons, their doctrine was still preserued, preached, belee∣ued, spred, continued, and deliuered to posterity. YourThuanus hist. sui temporis in praefatione. Thuanus writing but the other day, saith, Sup∣plicia parum profcerunt. Persecutions or punishments
preuailed little. They were slaine, banished, spoyled of their goods and dignities, and scattered into diuers Countries, rather then conuicted of errour, or brought to repentance. Surely as the persecution of the Apo∣stles at Ierualem quenched not the Gospell, butActs. occa∣sioned the spreading thereof in Samaria and remoter parts: so did the persecutions of the Waldenses in some parts of France, occasion their spreading into other parts and other Countries, as Germany, Bohemia, Polo∣nia, Livonia, &c. asThuanus ib. Thuanus there sheweth. §. 2.In Britany (or England) the Waldenses doctrine was quickly receiued by many. Haply by means of the enter∣course of the English people, with the great Earle of To∣lous his subiects, by reason of theBefore subs. 3. §. 4. affinity betwixt those Princes, for in the yeere 1174, and in Henry the seconds time, there was persecution and burning of them, asSubs. 2. § 6. Mathy Paris, and Thomas Walden haue recorded. But that doctrine was more generally receiued, and had fuller passage in King Edward 3 raigne, whenSee Archb. Abbot against D. Hill. Reason. 1. §. 25 & Fox i ita Wicl . Iohn Wiclife, a learned Doctor of Diuinity,Bailiol Col∣led. Master of a Colledge in Oxford, and publike Reader of Diuinity in that Vniuersity, taught it there with the great liking & applause of the hearers and approbation of the whole Vniuersity. For the Vicechancellour, Proctors, diuers Preachers and Batchelors of Diuinity, tooke part with him. And when Buls came thicke from Rome against him and his Doctrine; First from Gregory 11. anno 1378. And afterwards from Gregory the 12, whereby he was to be condemned for an Hereticke: The whole Vniversity gaue a testimony in fauour of him, vnder their seale, in their Congregation house, in these words among others.Anno 1406. Octob. 5. God forbid that our Prelats, should haue condemned a man of such honesty for an Hereticke, &c. §. 3.This mans doctrine (as the said Bulles of the two Popes did say) agreed with the doctrine of Marsilius Patavians, and Johannes de Ganduno.Abbot. ib. This Marsilius, a very learned man in that Age (about the yeere 1324)
had written a booke (entituled Defensor Pacis) in de∣fence of the Emperor Lewis of Bauier (who was mighti∣ly laid at by three Popes successiuely) demōstrating the supreme authority of the Emperour, and beating down the iniquity of the Popes vsurpations ouer Christian Princes and generall Councels: shewing that things are to be decided by the Scriptures; that learned men of the Laity are not to be debarred voyces in Coun∣cels; that the Clergy and pope also are to be subiect to Princes; That the Church is the whole company of the faithfull; that Christ is the foundation and head of the Church, & hath not appointed any one to be his Vicar; that Priests may be married as well as other Christians; that S. Peter was neuer at Rome; that the Popish court or Synagogue is a denne of theeues; that the doctrine of the Pope is not to be followed, because it leadeth to euerlasting destruction. The popes being informed that this was also Wiclifes doctrine, must needes con∣demne him, or yeeld themselues guilty. Many other positions were attributed vnto him also, some bad e∣nough, and vndoubtedly false, as had been before to the Waldenses, and the Primitiue Christians: but what hee truely held, may be seene in his owne workes that re∣maine, and in Mr. Foxe writing his life, and in Catalogo testium veritatis, lib. 18.Gabr. Powel. De Antichrist: In Prafatione n. 25. The summe whereof Mr. Ga∣briel Powel (a diligent searcher and obseruer) deliuereth thus: Hee taught, that there ought not to be one su∣preme Bishop in the Church: that the pope is not on∣ly not Christs Vicar, but also that he is Antichrist: that his priuiledges, bulles, dispensations, and indulgences are not onely idle and vnprofitable, but also wicked and impious: that to spirituall men is not to be giuen the politicke Dominion: that the pope and his Cler∣gy haue engrossed the Keyes of the Kingdome of hea∣uen into their custody, and neither enter themselues, nor suffer others to enter: he disallowed Transubstan∣tiation, Masses, Offices, Canonicall houres, and other Battologies: from Baptisme he remoued the Chrisme,
and taught that the faithfull ought to be baptized with simple water, as Christ did: he disallowed Auricular confession, the papists doctrine of penance, satisfaction and worship of Relickes: and the Inuocation of Saints, (whom he called Seruants, not Gods: for the word Knaue which he vsed, signified in those dayes a seruant, not as it doth in our dayes a wicked Ʋarlet, as his ene∣mies malitiously interpret it, Bellarmine for one, a man vtterly ignorant of the English tongue.) Hee reiected humane rites, new shadowes and traditions: he deny∣ed it to be lawfull for any man to adde any thing to the religion contained in holy Scriptures, and to make it harder, as hee complained the pope had done: hee thought fit that the pallaces, and all that pompe and maiesty of the Pope, and also diuers degrees of the Spi∣ritualty, should be taken away: he condemned the or∣ders of Monks, as superstitious, impious, and very hurt∣full to true Religion: and said they were to be forsa∣ken as soone as could be: he defended the holy Com∣munion in both kindes: he wrote (as Aeneas Sylvius witnesseth) aboue two hundred volumes, mostwhat against the impious liues, traditions, and abuses of the Popes, Monkes, and Clergy: for which he liued a while in banishment: but at last being restored, he had many fauourers, (as appeateth by the writings of Walden) Knights and Peeres of the Land, who in places vnder their gouernment abolished Images, and cast out other rites of the Popes. [He flourished anno Dom. 1360. See Bale. century 6. chap 1.] These were the points of doctrine which Wiclife taught: for which, and other such like fathered vpon him, he was condemned by the Councell of Constance, forty yeeres after he was dead and his bones digged vp and burned.D. Abbot contra Hill. reason 1. §. 25. Histor. Waldens. lib. 2. cap. 12. His preaching while he liued, was eui∣dent, and so powerfull, that beside the Vniuersity of Ox∣ford, it gained him many great fauourers of the Nobili∣ty, as John of Gaunt, and the Lord Henry Percy, the one
Duke of Lancaster, the other Marshall of England:Fox ex Regisiro & Cetney. & Aot. Parlam. An. 5. Rich. 2. cap. 5. also Lewis Gifford, and the Chancellour, the Earle of Salis∣bury: and in a manner, all the inferiour people, among whom it was preached in many places, in Churches, Churchyards, Markets, Faires, and other places of great Congregations, so generally, commonly, publikely, with such plainnesse and euidency of the truth, and no∣toriousnesse of the abuses which he reprooued, that it wonne all mens assent and liking; and tooke so large and deep root that it could not be rooted out,Gabriel Powel De Antichristo. edit. Lond. 1605. in praefa∣tione. by all the meanes that for many yeeres after his death, the popes, Princes, Bishops and their officers could deuise or vse. Gabriel Powel reckons vp a great number of Diuines of that one Ʋniuersity of Oxford (beside all others) that from time to time, and age to age, euen to Luthers time, maintained Wiclifes doctrine in England and ma∣ny of them were persecused and put to death for it: of which number, these are some: Vtred Bolton anno 1380.Io. Bale. cent. 6. cap. 85. and John Ashwarby, fellow of Oriel Colledge, Doctor of Diuinity Pastor of S. Maries in Oxford, both of them much troubled for preaching and promoting Wiclifes doctrine the same yeere, anno 1380. Iohn Ashton, Fellow of Merton Colledge, anno 1382.Ib. cap. 78. persecuted and finally condemned to perpetuall pri∣son. Philip Repington of Merton Colledge,Ib. cap 90. afterwards Bi∣shop of Lincolne, 1382. Nicholas Herford, Doctor of Diuinity,Jb. cap 92. he taught that there was nothing in Wiclifes Doctrine disagreeing from the holy Scriptures, 1382. Walter Brute of Merton Colledge:Ex catalogo soci∣orum Merton. & Fox act. tom. . Bale. cen. . cap. 2. ib. cap. 10. persecuted by the Bishop of Hereford, 1390. Peter Pateshal preached Wiclifes doctrine ordinarily at London, and in the Court: auoyded persecution by flying into Bohemia, 1390. At the same time, Richard With of Merton Colledge, preached the same doctrine. Henry Crumpe, an Irish man, Doctor of Diuinity in
Oxford,Ib. cent. 14. cap. 58. Ex Waldeni fasciculo zizanio∣rum. first an aduersary to Wiclife, but after conuicted by his doctrine, taught it boldly: and being therefore persecuted by the Bishops, fled into Ireland, and there was long imprisoned by a Bishop, 1393. Catal. sociorum Mert.Richard Wimbleton, Fellow of Merton Colledge. 1394. Fox act. & mo∣nu.William Sawtrer, a Diuine of Oxford, imprisoned de∣graded, and finally burned, by Thomas Arundell, Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, 1400. Fox tom. 1.William Swinderby, of Kings Colledge in Oxford: af∣ter preacher at Leicester, taught Wiclifes doctrine being maintained by the Inhabitants against their Bishops will: at last taken, was compelled to recant: but short∣ly after, repenting and gathering strength, and renuing his doctrine, he was burned in Smithfield, 1401. Walsing. in chron.Thomas Ocleue, maintained the doctrine of Wiclife and Berengarius, publikely in the schooles at Oxford, 1410. Ludovic. Rabus in 3 parte de martyr. Fox. to 1. Fox ib.William Thorp, Fellow of Queenes Colledge in Ox∣ford: examined, imprisoned, and there secretly put to death, by Thomas Arundell, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1407. Laurence Redman. Dauid Sawtrey, William Iames, Thomas Brightwell, William Hawlam, Radulph Green∣hurst, Iohn Schut, grieuously persecuted by the popes friends, 1420. Capgraue lib. 1. de nobilibus Hen. Fox tom. 1.Sir Iohn Oldcastle, Lord Cobham, student in Oxford vnder William Thorp, after many warres and victories for his Prince and Countrey, imbracing Wiclifes do∣ctrine, with other Lords and Knights (Iohn Clenborow, Lewis Clifford, Richard Sture, Thomas Latimer, William Neuel, John Montacute, he was lastly accused before the Archbishop of Canterbury, and finally condemned and burned in Saint Giles fields, 1417. Puruey in com. in Apoc. Bale. cent. 7. cap. 50.John Puruey, who wrote a learned Commentary vp∣on the Reuelation, reprouing the pope as Antichrist, and the Babylonian whore: complained that many before
him who had oppugned this spirituall Babylon, had bin imprisoned, killed, and their bookes burnt: and that none was suffered to preach, but such as first sware o∣bedience to the pope. He was secretly made away in prison by the Archbishops appointment, 1421. William White, Fellow of Wickam Colledge,Fox tom. 1. for his preaching was taken by the Archbishop, and compel∣led to recant, 1424. but quickly repenting, and pub∣likely confessing his weaknesse and inconstancy with great lamentation, and renuing his former doctrine, at last hee was taken and condemned to the fire by the Bishop of Norwich, 1428. Richard Wiche, Fellow of Wickam Colledge,Ibid. burnt for the like profession, 1428. Peter Clerke, an Oxford Diuine,Caxton. in aucta rio Polychron. cap. 19. Fabian. in Chron Bale cent. 7. cap. 86. Hondorfn theat. hist. disputed with Thomas Walden, publikely in the Schooles of Oxford, of many questions of Wiclifes doctrine, for maintaining which being persecuted, he fled into Bohemia. afterwards hee was chosen to be preacher to certaine Christians, at Melda in France which misliked the corruptions of the pope; where in processe of time, he and 62 of his hearers, were surprised by the Magistrate, and sent to Paris, bound in Carts: where 14 of the principall were burned the rest tormented, and put to other deathes o banished: he and Steuen Mangris (in whose house they had vsed to meet and heare the Gospell preached) had their tongues cut out, then were hanged, and lastly bur∣ned 1433. The next day the Clergy went in solemne procession (carrying the hoste) thanking God for that happy ex∣ecution: and a Doctor inueighing against the Martyrs, said it was necessary for euery man to beleeue to his sal∣uation, that these men were damned, whose bodies they had burned: and that God could not be God, if he did not damne them, 1433.Aeneas Sylv. in discript. Europae. & cap 49. hist. Iohem. Peter Pain, or Peacocke, Fellow of All-S ules Colledge in Oxford for his constant preaching against the Roman
Antichrist, was faine to flye into Bohemia, whence he was sent with other Legats to the Councell of Basil, where he defended the doctrine fifty dayes. He flou∣rished, 1438. Bale. ibid. cent. 8. cap. 4.Roger Oueley in Oxford, Diuine, Chaplen to the La∣dy Elenor Cobham, wife of the Duke of Glocester: wrote a learned booke against the peoples superstitions: and for attempting somthing with the said Lady, against the papacy: hee with some of his associats was ex∣ecuted and quartered at London: and the Lady banished into the Ile of Man, 1442. Bale. ibid. cap. 2.Humfrey Duke of Glocester, sonne of King Henry the fourth, brother to the fifth, vncle to the sixth, hauing bin educated in Oxford in Baliol Colledge, was a great fa∣uourer of Preachers of the purer Religion: he was the Founder of a worthy Library in Oxford, which he en∣riched with an 129 most choyce bookes, procured out of Italy and France. The Bishops and others hated him deadly, by whose meanes he was taken in Bury Ab∣bey in the night, cast in prison, and there shortly after found suddenly dead, whether smothered by pillowes or by some other means, 1447. Bale. cent. 14. cap. 99.Philip Norise an Jrish man, Deane of Dublin, a Di∣uine of Oxford, inveighed against Antichristian Monks and Fryers, calling them Antichrists, Wolues, Theeues, Traitors, Swine, Hypocrites, Hereticks, more pestilent then the Arians, Pelagians, Donatists, Nestorians, oro∣ther Heretickes whatsoeuer. For which the Fryers complained of him to pope Eugenius, 4. from whom he appealed to a generall Councell, 1446. Bale cent. 8. cap. 12.David Boyse, Fellow of Merton Colledge, a witty and learned man, embraced the syncere Religion, and abhorred the blindnesse and tyranny of the Clergy of his time, 1450. Ibid cap. 63.To omit many others, I conclude with Iohn Colet, a Diuine of Oxford, and Deane of Saint Pauls in London; he taught in Oxford, that Mans iustification was by the
meere grace of Iesus Christ: that Images are not to be worshipped: that Bishops not feeding their flockes, are Wolues, &c. He was accused of heresie, by Richard Iames, Bishop of Lond n, and two Franciscan Fryers, Bricot and Standish, 1507. which was but tenne yeeres before Luthers rising. Iohn Hus might well say,§. 4. Hus tomo 1. in Replica conta Anglicum Ioan. Stoaks fol. 108. a. & 109 b. & 110 a. that for thirty yeeres (from Wiclifes time to the time of Husses writing) the Vni∣uersity of Oxford did read Wiclifes bookes, and he yet saith further, that there was scarce a man to be found in that Vniuersity, which did not read, hold, and study the doctrine that Wiclife taught. Hus speakes of 30 yeeres, we find 100 yeeres and more, euen vnto Luthers dayes. And if Oxford was so fruitfull of such teachers, can we imagine that her sister Cambridge was barren? or that the Countrey yeelded them no disciples? No, we read in most kings raignes of persecutions, and executions of them, beside the se∣cret ones, whose persons escaped their enemies, and their names the histories, which doubtlesse were not a few. But were they many or few remaining in England, wee see the learned professors being persecuted here, found good refuge & entertainment in Bohemia where (as we formerly obserued) many Waldenses had planted themselues before. Some of them carried thither, first the bookes of Wiclife, entituled, De realibus Ʋniuersali∣bus, (saith Aeneas Sylvius.Aenean Sylvius hist Bohem. cap. 35. Cochleus hist. de Hussitis lib. 1.) Afterwards (saith Cocle∣us) Peter Paine brought into Bohemia, Wiclifes bookes in quantity as great as Saint Augustins workes, many whereof Iohn Hus translated into the Bohemian tongue, for the better instruction of the Waldenses there, of whom the said Hus, and Ierom of Prage were the chiefe pastors:Cochl. hist. lib. 2. Bellar praefat. general. conto∣uers. and of his name their aduersaries called them Hussites. Cochleus and Bellarmine ioyne the VViclefists, Hussites and VValdenses together, as holding the same points of doctrine, and reprouing the same abuses of Rome. The same Cochleus also saith, The Hussites and
Thaborites were branches of VViclife,Cochleus ib. lib. 2. 3. & 6. Platina in vita Ioan. 24. and (lib. 6.) cals the German Protestants, New VViclifists. And Platina saith, The Hussites as Sectators of VViclife, were con∣demned in the Councell of Constance. Thus therefore (by these confessions and many o∣ther) the VValdenses doctrine was continued (not now to name others) in the VViclifists, and Hussites. Iohn Husse (a very carefull and painefull man) translated also the holy Scriptures into their mother tongue: where∣by the common people were so well grounded in the soundnesse of his doctrine, and multiplyed so much in short time, thatOnuphrius in tabula concil. ad Platinae hist. partly to represse them, and partly to take away the schisme betweene the Popes, the Councell of Constance was called.Fox in concil. Constant. histor. D. Abbot. ib. §. The Nobles of Bo∣hemia so much fauored Hus, that they wrote two seue∣rall supplications to the Councell in his behalfe: but for all that, and contrary to their and the Emperours safe conduct, (or promise that Hus & Ierom of Prage should goe and come safely) both Hus and Ierom were there burnt: wherat the Nobles of Bohemia greatly displeased and complaining, the Emperour SigismundCochleus lib. 4. layed all the fault vpon the Councell. §. 5. Ibid.The Bohemians thus robbed of their principall Pa∣stors, were much moued at the perfidiousnesse of those at Constance; and assembled together to the number of thirty thousand, and in the open fields, vpon three hun∣dred Tables (which they erected for that purpose) they receiued the holy Communion in both kindes. After∣wards rushing into the Churches and Monasteries,Cochleus lib. 5. & Petrus Messi∣as in Sigismundo they brake downe the Images there: and not long after vn∣der the conduct of Joannes Zisca (a noble and victori∣ous Warriour) they grew to be forty thousand strong in one Armie, and got into their hands the Castle of Prague the chiefe City of Bohemia. Shortly after (con∣temning the Curses and Croysados of Pope Martin) they wanne many victories vnder the leading of Pro∣copius and other Captaines; but especially vnder Zisca,
of whomlib. 5. Cochleus saith, scarce any Histories of the Greekes, Hebrewes, or Latins, doth mention such a Generall. He built a new City of Refuge for his men, named Thabor, whereof the best of the Hussites were called Thaborites. Vpon a new Croisado of Pope Martin (wherein hee promised remission of sinnes to all that would either fight or contribute money against the Hussites) forty thousand German Horsemen were gathered to destroy them:§. 6. but vpon their approach they turned their backes and fled; not without some secret Iudgement of God, saith Cochleuslib. 6.. Then was the Councell of Basil called (saithOnuph. ib. Onuphrius) against the Hussites: and in that Councell (contrary to the Act of the Councell of ConstanceSession. 13.) the vse of the Cup in the Sacrament was granted to the Bohemians: an argument of their great numbers, and vnresistable strength at that time. For the Bookes of Hus, full of wholsome and mouing Do∣ctrine liued though he was dead; and through the me∣mory of his constant standing for the Truth against the whole Councell, and the Councls perfidious and out∣ragious burning of a man so learned, so painfull, so greatly beloued and lamented, his bookes were earnest∣ly desired and read, and wanne many. The like wrought the memory of Ierom his admirable learning, elo∣quence, memory and patience in his death:Poggius Epist. ad Leonardum Aret. num. which Poggius in an Epistle doth very much commend, (be∣ing an eye-witnesse) and feelingly describes the same, as one much affected with his excellent parts. Recor∣ded also by CochleusLib. 3.. So that notwithstanding the continuall opposition against them, they continually encreased, and in short time got a Bishop, Suffagan to the Archbishop of PrageIb. lib. 4. and after him Conradus the Archbishop himselfe on their side, to giue orders to their Clerkes, and to helpe for the compi∣ling a confession of their faith, anno 1421Ib. lib. 5.. Which the Archbishop and many Barons afterwards did
stiffely maintaine, and complained against the Empe∣rour Sigismund, for offering wrong to those of their Re∣ligion. Alexander, Duke of Lituania, gaue them aid, and was reproued by pope Martin 5 for it. And Si∣gismund in fine (in a treaty with the Bohemians) gran∣ted that the Bishops should promote to holy orders the Bohemians euen Hussites which were of the Vniuersity of PrageIb. lib. 8.. §. 7.Aeneas Sylvius complaineth, that (about the yeare 1453.) the Kingdome of Bohemia was wholly go∣uerned by Heretickes for that all the Nobility, and all the Commonalty were subiect to one George or Gyr∣zik, who then was gouernor vnder K Ladislaus, & af∣terwards was King himselfe. Who with all his Nobles shewing vndaunted constancy and resolution, rather to dye then forsake their Religion, caused the pope Pius to tolerate many things in them. But his successor Paul the second excommuicated King George, publi∣shing a Croisado against him, and gaue his Kingdome to Matthias, King of Hungary: for which they warred for seuen yeares space, and in the end concluded a peace. But while some Princes mediated to the pope for King George his absolution,Abbot. ib. §. 18. he dyed, anno 1471. not long before Luthers rising, §. 8.And yourCochleus lib. 2. Cochleus (who wrote his history in Lu∣thers time) sheweth that the Hussites continued to those dayes. For (saith he) Hus hath slaine soules for an hundred yeares together, neither doth he yet cease to slay them, by the second death. And againe,Ibid. Hus did so rend the vnity of the Church, that at this day there remaineth a pittifull division in Bohemia. And,lib. 8. vnto this day remayneth the sect of the Thaborites in many places of Bohemia and Moravia, vnder the name Picards and VValdenses. And,lib. 12. in the yeere 1534, he wisheth that he may see the remainders of the Hussites to returne to the Church, and the Germans to cast out all new sects. And it is certaine that in the
very yeare 1517. wherein Luther began to oppose the corruptions of Rome, the Councell of Lateran ended vnder pope Leo the tenth, and consultation was had there and then, of reforming the manners of the Church, and of recouering the Bohemians to the vnity thereof. See the booke extant. And D. Featlie Replie to Fi∣sher pag. 154.Luther himselfe writeth a Preface to the confessi∣on of faith, which the Waldenses (then odiously called Picards) dwelling in Bohemia & Moravia, did set forh, wch he greatly approueth & cōmendeth to godly men to read: with thankes to God for the vnity which he found betwixt them and vs, as the sheepe of one fold. Besides, we find many Waldenses remaining in France,§. 9. in, and after Luthers time. Vesembe. Oration of the Waldenses citat, in history Wald. booke 1. cap. 5. See ib. booke 2. cap. 8.Anno 1506, Lewis 12. King of France, hearing much euill of the VValdenses in his Realme, sent the Lord Adam Fumce, Master of Requests, and Parvi a Doctor of Sorbon, his Confessor, to try the truth; who visiting all their parishes and Temples in Provence, found indeed no Images, nor ornaments of Masses or o∣ther Ceremonies: but they found also no such crimes could be found in them as were reported: but that they Religiously obserued the Sabboth dayes, baptized their children after the order of the Primitiue Church, taught them the articles of the Christian faith, and the Commandements of God, &c. Vpon which report, the King said, (and bound it with an oath) that they were better men then he or his people. The same King being informed that in the valley of Frassinier, in the Diocesse of Ambrun in Dauphiney, there were a certaine people that liued like beasts, without Religion, hauing an euill opinion of the Ro∣mish Religion: he sent his Confessor with the officiall of Orleance, to bring him true information thereof: who found them all so truely righteous and religious, that the Confessor wished in the presence of many, that He were as good a Christian as the worst of the said valley.
Ioachim Ca∣merar. in his hist. pag. 152.King Francis 1. successor to Lewis 12. seeing th Parliament of Provence, grieuously afflict the VValden∣ses of Merindal, Cambriers, and places adioyning, ap∣pointed VVilliam de Ballay, Lord of Langeay, then his Leiutenant in Piedmont, to search and informe him more fully of them. Vpon whose information of their piety, honesty, charity, peaceablenesse, painfulnesse, and dutifulnesse, he much pttied them. Hist. Wald. book. 2. cap. 8.And one Guerin an aduocate, was hanged for falsely informing the King against them. But the Ecclesia∣stickes persecuted and massacred them cruelly. Ibid. cap. 4.In this Kings time the VValdenses sent two of their Pastors, one George Morell of Frassiniers in Dauphine, the other Peter Masson of Burgundy, to the Protestant Ministers, to wit, to Oecolampadius, Minister at Basse, to Capito and Martin Bucer at Strasburg, and to Ber∣thaud Haller at Berne, to conferre with them about some points of Religion; where they found so great a∣greement in their faith, with equall mislikes of the Ro∣mish corruptions, that they much reioyced and praised God, that had continued them and their fathers in the truth of that doctrine aboue foure hundred yeeres in in the middest of many troubles, as they write. The letters passing betweene them are to be seene in the HistoryIbid. cap. 8. & lib. 1. cap. 6.. The like letters passed betwixt Preachers of the VValdenses and CalvinTo be seene among Calvins Epistles Epist. 250.. I hope I haue satisfied you concerning these VVal∣denses; first, that they were fully of our ReligionSbsection 3. subsect. 1.. Secondly, that they were in great numbers, and made great visible ChurchesSubsect. 2.. Thirdly, that they were spread in diuers Coun∣triesSubsect. 3.. Fourthly, that they continued from the time of your great Revolt from the purity of Religion, vnto the late and more publike Reformation by M. LutherSubsect. 4.. Antiquus. Indeed you haue said very much, both
for the Greeke or East Church, that it held your faith, and so continueth: and also for these Separatists, the VValdenses in the West. But youSection 2. subsect. 2. mentioned a third part, that many conti∣nuing in outward communion with the Church of Rome, were yet truely of your Faith and Religion: let me heare what you say of that part, and you shall haue my reply against them all. Section. 4. §. 1. The Church of Rome (excepting the Papacy, and the maintainers thereof) continued to be the Church of God vntill Luthers time: proued by many Protestant Di∣uines. §. 2. Their Reasons. §. 3. But now then the state of that Church, is much alte∣red, since the new light in Luthers time and since, fully discouering the corruptions thereof. §. 4. And since the great alteration made by the Councell of Trent. Antiquissimus. I say, first, that I haue already alled∣ged a great number liuing in community with Papists in outward Ceremonies, which yet in substance of Re∣ligion, were ours and not yours: as the followers of Wiclifes doctrine, and other teachers in all Countries, which were innumerable (as may appeare by my for∣mer Relation) many of them being persecuted for it, and many other (knowne among themselues, but) con∣cealing themselues from ther persecutors.§. 1. B. Vsher. B. White. Mr. Ric. Hocker. But now I say further (with D. Field, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Morney, Melanchthon, Bucer, Mr. Deering, Bishop Carlton, and many other learned Protestants) that set∣ting aside the pope and Cardinals, and their Hierarchy, with the maintainers thereof (which I account no part of the Church, but a domineering faction, tyrannizing ouer the Church) the Church of Rome (consisting of the rest, which were innumerable) continued to be the
Church of God, and in substance all one with vs vntill Luthers time. Thus teacheth Doctor Field, Of the Church, Booke 3. chapter 6. And in the 8 chapter, he addeth, although we doe acknowledge Wiclife, Hus, Jerom of Prage, and the like, to haue been the worthy seruants of God, and ho∣ly Martyrs and Confessors, suffering for the cause of Christ, against Antichrist: yea, we doe not thinke that the Church was found onely in them, or that there were no other appearance or succession of the Church and Ministery, as Stapleton and other of that faction falsely impute vnto vs. For we most firmely beleeue all the Churches in the world, wherein our Fathers li∣ued and dyed, to haue beene the true Churches of God, in which vndoubtedly saluation was to be found, and that they which taught, embraced and beleeued those damnable errours which the Romanists now defend a∣gainst vs, were a faction onely in the Churches, as were they that denyed the Resurrection, vrged Circumcisi∣on, and despised the Apostles of Christ, in the Churches of Corinth, and Galatia. This matter D. Field prosecu∣teth there, and also in the Appendix to the fift booke, part. 3 pag. 7. Luther is also alleadged by Bellarmine, De not is Eccle∣siae cap. 16. out of his booke against the Anabaptists: we confesse (saith Luther) that vnder the Papacy, there was much good, yea all Christian good, and it came thence vnto vs, the true Scriptures, two true Sacra∣ments, true keyes for remission of sinnes, true office of preaching, true Catechisme, as are the Lords Prayer, the tenne Commandements, the Articles of Faith; Yea, I say moreouer, that vnder the papacy was true Chri∣stianity, yea the very kernell of Christianity. Calvin in his fourth booke of Jnstitutions, chap. 2. §. 11. saith, That God suffered not his Church to pe∣rish, in France, Italy, Germany, Spaine, and England, ha∣uing made his Couenant with them, but it continued
there through effectuall Baptisme and other remain∣ders: though for mens ingratitude he suffered the buil∣ding to be much wasted, rent, and torne. Beza in his questions saith, The Church was vnder the papacy, but the papacy was not the Church, Master Perkins hath the like, in his Exposition of the Creed, pag. 405. edit. Cambridge, 1596. Morney, in his Treatise of the Church, chapt. 9. In the later end deliuereth the same: That vnder the papacy was the Church and Flocke of Christ, but gouerned, partly by hirelings, partly by wolues, and that Anti∣christ held it by the throat, the people were of the Chri∣stian Common-wealth: but the pope with his faction, a Catiline to set it on fire, whom Cicero fitly calleth a plague, and not a part of the Common-wealth, borne Ex luxu reipublicae; as an impostume or disease is no part of the body, but a corruption bringing dammage and death. Bucer and Melancthon teach the same. Mr. Edward Deering, in his Lectures preached in Pauls Church in London, vpon the Epistle to the He∣brewes, Lecture 23. pag. 374. hath these words. In this was the great goodnesse of God, that in time to come, his children might assuredly know, hee reserued to himselfe a Church, euen in the middest of all desolation: and that hee called them by his word, and confirmed by his Sacraments, euen as at this day. For seeing there could be no sinne so great, but faith in Jesus Christ scattereth it all away, it was impossible, that the man of sinne doth not so much adulterate, either the Word of God, but that it should be to the faithfull a Gospell of saluation: or else the Sa∣cramenta of God, but that they should be pledges of eternall life to those that did beleeue. And a little after, God of his infinite goodnesse, who calleth things that are not, as though they were, euen in that Ministery gaue grace vnto his Saints. Bishop Carlton, wrote a booke of purpose, entituled, (Consensus Ecclesiae catholica contra Tridentines) to
shew that although the doctrine of Christian Religion was much altered in the chiefest Articles of Faith by Fryers: yet a great number of godly learned men held the ancient truth, and preserued the Church vntill the times of Reformation, and that the Reformed Chur∣ches still continue the same, and are separated onely from the Roman Court, so farre as the Roman Court had separated it selfe from the Roman Church: and that our Fathers and Ancestors, liuing & dying in the Roman Church, had sufficient meanes to bring them to salua∣tion. And this he sheweth in the seuerall discourses of the principall fundamentall points of faith. See of this matter also Bishop Ʋsher, De successione Ecclesiarum, cap. 6, § 8, 9. and his Sermon. And Archbi∣shop Abbot, against Hill. Reason 5. §. 28. And Mr. Ri∣chard Hookers discourse of Iustification. §. 2.Their Reasons are, I. The corruptions in the Roman Church, sprung not vp all at once, nor came to their full height vntill these late yeres: and were not so dangerous in their Spring, as in their full growth and strength. D. Field. book 3. chap. 6. Of the Church. & Ap∣pend. to the 5. booke part. 3. pag. 8. &c.II. They were not generally receiued by all men, nor as the vndoubted determinations of the Church: but controuerted and variously disputed among the lear∣ned, and holden with great liberty of iudgement by the greatest Doctors (as appeares by thier owne bookes of Controuersies written by Bellarmine, Suares, Azorius, &c. which confute their owne wri∣ters as much as they doe Protestants: and by those 27 points which D. Field mentions in his Appendixe to the seuenth Chapter of the third booke of the Church, printed at the end of the fourth booke) for had they beene the vndoubted doctrines and determinati∣ons of the Church, all men would haue holden them v∣niformely, entirely, and constantly, as they held the do∣ctrine of the Trinity and other articles of the Faith. As long therefore as men yeelded outward obedience to the Church-ceremonies without scandall, and in other
things were suffered to abound in their owne sence, there was no such danger in holding the right faith. III. Our forefathers held the true foundation of Religion that is, Iustification and Saluation, by Iesus Christ his merits onely: and so were taught ordinari∣ly in their bookes of visitation and consolation of the sickeAs we shall shew in the article of Iu∣stification.: and they erred onely in points inferiour, of lesse moment and danger (which defaced indeed and ble∣mished, but did not nullifie or take away the beeing of the Church.) Diseases in the heart, braine, liuer, and vitall parts, are dangerous and deadly: but wounds or blemishes in the fleshly, sensuall, or organicall parts one∣ly (as the hands, feet eares, eyes, &c. doe onely impaire the beauty and actions, but endanger not the life, nor cut of hope of recouery.Greg. Nissen. de opific. hom. cap. vlt. It is Saint Gregory Nissens Simile. So (saith he) it is with the Church of God, and Religion. A man is a man while he hath life, though he be sore diseased; as Naaman was in his leprosie. IIII. They misliked and derided (as Chawcers plowman) many of their ceremonies and idle things (as holy water, pardons, relickes, &c.) and deplored the greater corruptions and abuses: and cryed for re∣formation, most readily receiuing it when it came. V. In what they erred, they erred ignorantly,Aug de vtilitate credendi ad Ho∣norat. Idem epist. 162. ad Donat. with mindes ready to be reformed, vpon better information. Saint Augustine puts a difference betwixt Heretickes and them that beleeue Heretickes. And he saith, They that defend an opinion false and peruerse without per∣tinacious animosity, especially which not the boldnesse of their owne presumption hath begotten, but which from their seduced and erroneous Parents, they haue receiued; and themselues doe seeke the truth with care and diligence: ready to amend their errour, when they find the truth: they are in no wise to be reckoned among Heretickes. This was the case of our fathers vnder the Papacy. VI. If any did erre in points fundamentall (as long
as they denyed not the foundation directly:See of this more, chap. 4. sect. 3. for that is plaine infidelity or apostacy, and quite cuts them off from the Church) if they did it onely vpon meere igno∣rance, with a mind ready to reforme their errour vpon better instruction: those were still the accounted mem∣bers of the true Church. For this was the case of the Corinthians, denying the resurrection of the dead (1 Cor. 15.10,) and of the Galatians, erring dangerously about Iustification (Gal. 3.3, 4 5. & 5.4.) whom yet Saint Paul calles Churches of God, 1 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1.2. and doubtlesse he would not haue taken such paines to write vnto them, except he had so thought them, and had hope to find them tractable and recouerable. §. 3.Antiquus. Sir I heartily thanke you, I need heare no more, nor trouble you any longer: since you allow the Church of Rome to be the true Church of God, wherein saluation may be had, and you alledge great Doctors of your owne side, and good reasons for it: I am satisfied. I haue no reason to cleaue to your Church (which all our Catholickes condemne for hereticall and schismaticall) and to leaue the Roman, which you ac∣knowledge to be the true Church, wherein saluation is to be had. The Roman Church is iustified on all hands, by friends and enemies to be safe: yours is condem∣ned of all but your selues. I will take my leaue. See this more at large in D. Field in the places before alledged, and B. Carlton, Iu∣risdiction, & consensus, &c.Antiquissimus. Stay, good sir, and draw no more out of my words then they yeeld you. I spake of the Church of Rome, as it was till Luthers time, and you conclude of the Church of Rome, as it is now: Deceiue not your selfe, there is great difference betwixt them; betwixt the times, then and now; and betwixt that Church, then and now. In those times the errours of our fore∣fathers were of meere ignorance: what they perceiued to be euill, they misliked, they desired knowledge, they wished many things reformed, and gladly embraced re∣formation when they found it comming. But now it is all otherwise: now men are admonished of their
errours, offer is made them to be better instructed: and yet either they dote on their owne old opinions, vnwilling to be instructed in the reuealed truth: or af∣ter sufficient knowledge and conviction, for some worldly respects they wilfully and obstinately persist in their old errours; and (which is farre worse) they hate and persecute the maintainers of the truth. Saint Cyprian saith, if any of our predecessors,Cypr. ep. 63. §. 13. either of ignorance or simplicity, hath not obserued and held that which our Lord hath taught vs by his Word and example: by the Lords indulgence, pardon may be granted to his simplicity; but to vs, that are now ad∣monished and instructed of the Lord, pardon cannot be granted. The ignorance therefore wherein our Fathers were bred and trained freed them from the danger of those things, which being well vnderstood and knowne,B. Vsher. serm. at Wansed. pag. 39. might haue beene preiudiciall to their soules health. They knew not these depthes of Satan, they could not diue into the bottome of such mysteries of iniquity; This was a good and a happy ignorance vnto them. But this ignorance is now taken from you,Reuel. 2.24. and a more happy knowledge offered you; happy, if you haue grace to receiue it, if not, then remember that,Iohn 3.19. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loued darkenesse more then the light. And,Iohn 15.22. If J had not come and spoken vnto them (saith our Sauiour) they had not had any sinne: but now haue they no cloake (or ex∣cuse) for their sinne. There is therfore great difference of the former times, and these, then meanes of better knowledge was deni∣ed to our Fathers; now it is afforded to you that gaue some excuse to them, this takes all excuse from you. They that walke in the night, though they stumble and fall, foile and soile themselues, yea, hurt their bodies, and teare their cloathes, by rushing vpon bushes, or into bogges: yet are ordinarily pitted, and pardoned, yea,
and commended for their desire and paines to finde home: but so are not they that rush into the same euils in the faire day-light. God pittieth the blinde, that would faine see and cannot: but will hee pitty them that may see and will not? that harden them∣selues in their affected wilfull blindnesse? He deliuered Jonas from drowning in the bottome of the Sea:Vsher. ibid. pag. 41. will you plunge your selues therefore, to see if God will de∣liuer you? Because wee grant, that some may scape death in Cities, and Streets, infected with the plague; will you therefore chuse to take vp your lodging in a Pest-house? If you doe, we may well say, Lord haue mercy vpon you: but you may iustly feare, that you dan∣gerously tempt the Lord, to deliuer you vp to the effi∣cacy of delusion and damnation, 2 Thess. 2.10.11.12. You see therefore a manifest difference of the times: the times of darkenesse before, and the times of light now. §. 4.Marke now also another difference of the Roman Church, as it was in those times, and as it is now. In those times the errours that were,D. Field. Church booke 3. chap. 6. & cap. 47. & Append. were the errours of some men onely in that Church: now they are the er∣rours of the whole Church. In those times men might be of that Church, and not of that faction: now that Church and faction are all one. B. Carlton.The faction hath so preuailed by the Art of the Councell of Trent, that the errours which some held before, now all of that Church must hold. Before, they were held with much liberty of iudgement, they were not determined, men might assent or dissent, and a∣bound in their owne opinions: now they are all made De fide, the absolute determinations of that Church, and imposed vpon all men, vnder paine of Anathema, or curses annexed. That Councell (being wholly ruled by the meere faction of the Papacy) hath quite altered the state of that Church, taking away all liberty that for∣mer Ages enioyed in many things, and making many
new points of faith, which were not so before. Therefore, before the Councell of Trent,D. Hall Columba Noe. men might doe well in that Church, when meat being set before them, they might picke out the worst, and eat the best; picke out the vnwholsome, and feed on the wholsome; picke the worme out of the apple, pare away the cor∣rupted, and eat the sound; take the Spider out of the bowle of Wine before they drinke it. But now, where they are cursed, if they eat not all, and compelled to drinke downe all: they that loue their liues must take heed of that society. To answer your question therefore directly [Where was the Protestant Church before Luthers time?] that is, where was any Church in the world, that taught that doctrine which the Protestants now teach?Sect. 2. subsect. 2. I say it was not onely apparant enough in the Greeke and Easterne Churches: and in the open separatists (Waldenses,Section 3. &c.) from the Romish corruptions in these Westerne parts:Section 4. but it was also within the community of the Romish Church it selfe. Euen there (as in a large field) grew much good corne among tares and weeds:Lib. 1. cap. 1. there (as in a great Barne, Heape, or Garner) was preserued much pure Graine, mixed with store of chaffe. And (as I said in the beginning of our Conference) there is no other d fference betwixt the Reformed and the Romish Church, then betwixt a field well weeded,§. 5. D. Field Church Booke 3. cap. 6. and the same field formerly ouergrowne with weedes: or betwixt heape of corne now well winnowed, and the same a heape lately mixed with chaffe. And if it be a vaine and friuolous thing to say;B. Vsher ser. ibid. pag. 48. It is not the same field, or the same Corne, now after the weeding and fanning; as vaine and friuolous it is to say the Church is not the same it was, or in the same place, af∣ter it is swept, and clensed of the filth and dust: or to say, the Churches of Corinth and Galatia (after their reformation occasioned by Saint Pauls writing) were new Churches, and not the same they were before: be∣cause
that in them before, the Resurrection was denied, Circumcision practised, Discipline neglected, & Christs Apostles contemned: which things now are not found in them: or to say Naaman was not still the same per∣son, because before he was a leper, and now is clensed. As long as we can demonstrate that nothing is al∣tered that doth constitute the Church or is of the true essence or being of it: the Church is the same it was, onely the leprosie, and other corruptions are clensed a∣way; and the health, beauty, and better habit restored, that it may more comfortably breed and bring vp chil∣dren to God, and heires of saluation. And this is the blessed and long-wished alteration, that we haue made. And I would to God you had not made an vnworthy altration, from a corrupt Church, to a farre worse, and either altogether, or very neere none at all! by con∣tinuing, encreasing, establishing the corruptions you found, making them now De fide, points of faith, compelling all to receiue them, and persecuting, euen to extirpation (as farre as by power and policy you can) the gainesayers of them.See before sect. 4. §. 4, initio. If the Protestant Church be new, yours is newer. The Tridentine faith is not so old as Luther, neuer seene in the world of many yeares af∣ter his death.
CHAP. 2. Answering the vaine alleadging of some words and cu∣stomes, and corrupt alleadging of the Fathers words against Protestants. § 1. Obiection. None (alleadged in the former chapter) agree with Protestants in all things: ergo, are not of their Church or Religion. 2 Answered. It is no consequent. For so also euery one of them differed from the present Romish Religion, and yet are accounted theirs. Protestants haue iustly abstained from some words and phrases of some Fathers. 3 And also haue left off some ceremonies and customes. 4 As the Church of Rome hath left many, knowne to be ancient, and thought to be Apostolicall. 5 Which confutes the vanity of W.G. his booke; and shewes his owne alleadged authors, by his owne argument, to bee none of his Church and Religion. 6 By the same argument, many Fathers (for example, A∣thanasius, Ierom, Gelasius, Gregory, Chrysostome, Augustine) are plentifully proued to be against the pre∣sent Church and Religion of Rome. 7 Foure seuerall wayes (at the least) the Romish make shew of the Fathers to be for them. The first, by allead∣ging counterfeit books, falsely bearing the Fathers names. Many examples hereof. 8 The second, by corrupting the bookes which the Fathers wrote, putting words in, or out, and altering the text, to speake contrary to their meaning. 9 The third, by blinding or perverting the sense of the Fa∣thers sentences by glozes and interpretations. 10 The fourth, by citing the Fathers to proue that which is not in question.
§. 1. Antiquus. NOw that you haue said what you can, or will, to shew that Protestants had a sufficient visible Church in all Ages since Christ: I reply, you neuer had any. For neither the Fathers nor Greeke Church, nor Waldenses, nor the Church of Rome before Luthers time, were of your Religion. Campian. Ratio 5.For the Fathers, it was Mr. Campians fifth reason, why he challenged combate with the Protestants, be∣cause all the Fathers backed him. Ad Patres si quando licebet accedere, confectum est praelium. If we may try it by the Fathers, the fight is at an end. For they are as sure ours as Pope Gregory the 13. These, and the other three sorts, euery one of them, either in many points, or at least in one or other differed from you. As the Rhemists say in their Annotation vpon Rom. 11. ver. 4. We will not put the Protestants to proue that there were 7000 of their sect, when their new Elias, Luther began: but let them proue that there were seuen or any one his either then, or in all Ages before him, that was in all points of his beleefe. Thus the Rhemists. §. 2. Adrationes Campians G. Whitakeri re∣sponsio, ad ratio∣nem. 5.Antiquissimus. The vanity of Campian, you may see by D. Whitakers answer, who shewes that euery one of the Fathers, whom Campian picked out and named, held points directly against him and for vs. Euen Dionysius Cyprian, Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzin, Ambrose, Ierom, Chrysostome, Austen, Gregory. The vanity of your Rhomists, and other lipellers fol∣lowing them, is palpable, in that they thinke euery smal point of doctrine, or practice, yea, euery small rite or ceremony, vsed by some, and not vsed by others, makes a difference of their Religion. We doe not de∣ny,
but that we haue left off and disused diuers traditi∣ons, ceremonies, and phrases, which were vsed in the ancient Church, but we constantly affirme we carefully and entirely hold all the substance of doctrine, and all things necessary for saluation, not onely for the essence, but for the perfection, beauty, and ornament of the Church: so that notwithstanding the things left off wee are wholy and fully of the Primitiue and ancient Reli∣gion. Atiquus. Why haue you left off any words and phrases of the ancient Fathers: if you hold their do∣ctrine, why forsake you their words? Antiquissimus.Bellar. De cultu Sanctorum lib. 3 cap. 4. Ad te∣stim. patrum di∣co. & De Roma∣no Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 13. §. Ratio autem cur Apo∣stoli in Scriptu∣ris nunquam vocant sacerdo∣tes Christianos, sacerdotes, sed solum episcopos & presbyteros &c. See Here. cap. 5 sect. 9. See this mat∣ter handled a large by. B. Morton. Appeal. lib 2. cap. 7. & B. Andrees. Ad Bellarmini Apologiam, Re∣sponsio cap 8. pag. 184. Because those words are now taken to signifie such doctrines as then they intended not. Their doctrine we hold, though some of their words we doe not so frequently vse: you vsurpe those words, but refuse their doctrine. Your Bellarmine tels vs truly, that the Apostles and first Christians abstained from the words Temple and Priests, vsing the words Ecclesiae, Episcopi & Presbyteri. And thus, Iustinus, Ignatius, and the other most ancient Fathers vsed to speake. The reason was, lest people might vnderstand them, as if they meant that the Iewish ceremonies continued, with the Temple of Salomon, and the sacrificing Priests. But afterwards in Tertullins time, when the danger of that misconceit was worne out, Christians began to call Presbyters and Bishops, by the name of Priests, &c. So that the words which the Apostles and first Fathers neuer vsed, for feare of mistaking, the following Fathers ordinarily vsed, hoping (after that long disusing) they should not be mistaken: they vsed the words, Priests, (or Sacerdotes) altars sacrifices, oblations, and such like, not properly, but by allusion to the Priests, altars and sa∣crifices of the Iewes, which were types, figures and (as it were) foretokens or foreprophesies of Christs sacri∣fice, offred once by himselfe for the sinnes of the whole world, wch was the Antitype & verity of those of the
Jewes; and was continually to be remembred againe, as oft as the blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood was celebrated.useb. demonstr. Evang. lib. 1. c. 10. Chrysost. hom. 17. in Hebr. Ambr. in Epist. ad Hebr. 10.  August. in Psal. 75. Jdem. lib. 20. aduers. Faustum Manichaeum cap. 21. tom. 6. Thus the Fathers haue expressed their owne meanings: Eusebius, Christ hath offered a mar∣vailous sacrifice for the saluation of vs all, commanding vs to offer vnto God a memoriall instead of the sacrifice of his Body and Blood. Chrysostome, wee offer vp the same sacrifice which Christ offered, or rather a remem∣brance thereof: the like hath Ambrose. Augustine saith, when we doe not forget our Saui∣ours gift, is not Christ daily offered for vs? Christ was once offered for vs:—and by that memory he is so dai∣ly sacrificed for vs, as if he daily renued vs. And more fully, Sacrificij nostri vera caro, & caro Christi olim in veteri lege per victimas pollicebatur, in passione vero Chri∣sti & in cruce per veritatem reddebatur: at hodie in nostre sacrificio per sacramentum, memoriae celebratur. Sententiarum lib. 4. distinctio. 12. lit. g.The Master of the Sentences asketh, whether that which the Priest holdeth, may be called properly a sa∣crifice or offering; and he answereth, that which is offered and consecrated by the Priest, is called a sacrifice and oblation, because it is a memoriall and representa∣tion of the true sacrifice, and holy offering made vpon the Altar of the Crosse. Bellar. De Missa lib. 1. cap. 15. §. Alter modus.These, and many other testimonies Bellarmine alled∣geth, and laboureth by wit to elude, saying, it is so in∣deed, but not onely so. He will not onely haue it to be a commemoratiue and representatiue, but a true and proper sacrifice of Christs Body and Blood, really the same hoste, not differing from his Body in heauen, and the immolation or sacrificing of him in the formes of Bread,Concil. Trid. sess. 22. cap. 2. & A∣lanus de Euchar. sacrif. lib. 2. c. 12. the very same with his sacrificing vpon the Crosse: as the Councell of Trent speakes. The con∣trouersie therefore is, concerning the proper and im∣proper signification of the Fathers tearmes. They take them as properly spoken, as of a true reall propitiatory sacrifice, auaileable in it selfe for remission of sinnes;
and so turne the Sacrament into a sacrifice, profitable without receiuing: and the Priests office (which should be in preaching and ministring the Sacraments, Matth. 28. Mark. 16.) is now onely to say Masse, or of∣fer vp the daily sacrifice, frustrating Christs institution with a gainfull inuention of their owne. In regard of this mistaking of the Fathers words of Priests, altars, sacrifices,Ministers the ordinary word of the new Te∣stament, Rom 15.16. 1 cor 3, 5. & 4.1. & 2. cor. 3.6. & 6.4. Eph. 3.7. cor. 1.7, 23, 25. & 4.7. 1 thes. 3.2.1 tim. 4.6. And their of∣fice or worke called Mini∣stry, Act. 6.4. & 20.24. & 21.19. & 12.25. 2 cor. 58.1. & 6.3. Eph.  12. col. 4.17 4.2 1 timoth. 1.12 1. tim. 4. Com∣munion 1 cor 10.16. table 1 Corinth. 10.21. The Lords Super. 1 cor. 11.20. 2 Kings 18.4. See Cassander consultatio artic. 7. De ecclesia § De Pontifice Rom. &c. and of the abuses arising thereupon; we rather chuse the words of Scripture and of the more ancient Fathers, Ministers, Commu∣nion Table, Sacraments, then those words which are ne∣uer vsed in the New. Testament, nor in the anci∣entest Fathers, but by them purposely auoyded, for feare of being mistaken, by your owne confession. The same reason therefore that moued the blessed A∣postles and Primitiue Fathers to abstaine from those words, the same rason oes vs to doe the like. §. 3. Antiquus. But why haue you left off any of those customes and ceremonies which were vsed by the Fa∣thers? what reason had you for that? Antiquissimus. First, the same reason that Heze∣kiah had to breake & abolish the brazen Serpent, which had been of good vse to the honour of God, and edify∣ing of men: but in his time was abused to be an instru∣ment of Idolatry. Secondly the same reason that S. Paul had, against the Agapae or Feasts of Loue, 1 Cor. 11.19, 20, 21, 22. For, (as your Rhemists acknowledge vpon that place) at first the richer Christians made feasts (bringing store of meat and drinke to the Churches) to ioy and cheare vp themselues and the poore that wanted, when they came to receiue the holy Sacrament: which Feasts were cal∣led Agapae, Feasts of Charity. These Feasts afterwards through abuse, became occasions of pride in them that had to bring, of contempt to them that had not, of glut∣tony
and drunkennesse, yea, of rejecting the poore, and of the formost, deuouring all without expecting one another. This occasioned Saint Pauls reproofe of them then: and the whole abrogation of them afterward. August. epist. 119 ad Ianuar. cap. 19. See B. Morton. Appeal. lib. 1. cap. 3. sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.Thirdly, the same reason also that Saint Augustine had to complaine of the multitude of rites and ceremonies grieuous and burdensome to the Church in his time, which continually increased till our times, and with the mulitude and painfull or too carefull obseruance thereof, much decayed the due obseruance of the sub∣stantiall points of Religion. As too many branches of the Vine, hinder the fruitfulnesse; and therefore good husbands prune them off. Fourthly, and finally, the same Reason which the Ro∣man Church it selfe had, to disuse or abolish many cu∣stomes, traditions, rites and ceremonies formerly vsed, whereby they iustifie vs. Antiquus. Name some of them I pray you. §. 4. See B. Morton. Appeal lib. 2. cap. 25. sect. 10. and the Au∣thors there alledged. & Bellar. De Euch. lib. 4. cap. 28.Antiquissimus. Our B. Morton deliuers you a dozen at once, citing his Authors and places of their bookes for them: (1) the threefold dipping in Baptisme, in memory of the Trinity, thought by Dionysius, Basil, A∣thanasius, Ierom, Austen, Ambrose, to be an Apostolicall tradition; now (saith Binius and Canus) abolished, and one dipping or sprinkling, thought sufficient by the common consent of Diuines. (2) Remouing the old custome of tasting honey in Baptisme, spoken of by Tertullian and Ierom. (3) Of abrogating the ceremony of washing the feet, in Baptisme, spoken of by Saint Ambrose and Augustine, epist. 119. cap. 28. (4) Decreeing also (in the Councell of Trent, sess. 21. cap. 4) the administration of the Eucharist vnto Infants, (vsed sixe hundred yeeres in the Church) to be
vnnecessary and vnfitting, Maldonat, comment. in Ioh. 6. Binius. (5) he custome that it was not lawfull to Baptise but onely at Easter and Whitsontide, is abrogated, be-because of the dangers of common life. Durand. (6) Night vigils mentioned by Tertullian and Ie∣rom, and praised by other Fathers, forbidden to Wo∣men by the Councel of Elliberis, to be in Churchyards: and afterwards in the Toletan and Tridentine Councels. Binius. (7) The standing at publike prayers, all the time betwixt Easter and Whitsontide, decreed by the Nicene Councell, and obserued by the ancient Fathers, as Saint Ambrose and Ierom witnesse, and counted an A∣postolicke constitution: now haue left no foot-steps of it, Durand. Cassander. (8) Washing of the bodies of the dead, vsed by the Ancients, mentioned by Tertullian, Eusebius, and Gre∣gory. Durand. (9) The Feasts of Charity (called Agapae) mentio∣ned in the Constitutions of Clement, reproued by S. Paul to the Corinthians, but in other Churches long continu∣ed, the Councell of Laodicaea forbad; now they are for∣gotten. Bouius. (10) The dispensing with an Apostolicall Canon concerning the Consecration of Bishops. Bel. Binius. (11) The neglecting of the Wednesdayes and Fri∣dayes Fast in the East Church, (by the 68 Canon of the Apostles) or of Friday and Saturday in the West (by A∣postolicke Constitution) mentioned by Clemens, Jgna∣tius. Epiphanius, Athanius and others. Bouius. (12) Of fourescore and foure Canons of the Apo∣stles, scarce 6 or 8 are obserued in the Latin Church, saith Michael Medina; cited by D. Rainolds, Thes. 5. Vnto which I might adde many other things, as 1. The times of prohibiting marriage, much abridged. For by some ancient Councels (as namely that of Laodi∣cea,
celebrated aboue twelue hundred yeeres agone) there were three times prohibited from the celebrati∣on of marriage (which the Church of England still ob∣serueth.Concil. Laodice. cap. 25. Bellar. De Matrimonio. lib. 1. cap. 31. §. Alterum im∣ped. & §. Ratio hujus. Concil. Trident. session. 24. ca. 10 1 From Aduent to the Epiphany; 2 From Septuagesima, vntill a weeke after Easter; 3 From the dayes of Rogation, vntill a weeke after Whitsontide. But the late Councell of Trent, hath onely continu∣ed the first entire: cut the second shorter by 16 dayes (beginning with Lent, and ending a weeke after Ea∣ster) and the third it hath quite cut off. Concil. Trident. sess. 24. canon. 3.2 The degrees prohibiting marriage, both enlarged and abridged. For, the Councell of Trent hath this Ca∣non; If any man say, that the degrees onely expressed in Leuiticus of consanguinity and affinity, doe hinder the contracting of Matrimony, and dissolue it being contracted: and that the Church hath not power to dispense in some of them, or constitute that more de∣grees may hinder and dissolue: let him be Anathema. Here is a change of Gods law, loosing where God hath bound, binding where God hath loosed. And they accursed that grant not this power to the Roman Church.Bellarmine de Matrimonio lib. 1. cap. 29. initio. And here is a change of the Churches custome also. For Bellarmine addeth, Recte Catholica Ecclesia conjugia prohibuit olim vsque ad septimum, postea vero vs∣que ad quartium gradum consanguinitatis & affinitatis. The Catholicke Church in former time rightly forbad mar∣riage to the seuenth degree; and afterwards to the fourth degree of consanguinity and affinity. Concil. Trid. sess. 21. cap. 3. & canon 1, 2, 3.3 And yet the Church of Rome is bolder, euen to change Christs owne Ordinance and Institution of the Blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood, denying the Cup to the people, and accursing them that hold it ne∣cessary for the Laity; although the whole Church v∣sed it aboue a thousand yeeres together. And yet they hold themselues to be one and the same Catholicke Church that so long vsed it. In their opinion therfore, the abrogating or changing
of traditions or ceremonies (howsoeuer they declaime against Protestants for such matters) cuts not men off from being of the same Church that vsed them. Antiquus. Indeed, ceremonies are inuentions of men, and therefore alterable by the wisedome of the Church, as times place, and occasions require. And the Church may ordaine new ceremonies also, as Bellar∣mine teacheth. lib. 2. de effectu Sacramentorum cap 31, §. tertia propositio, &c. Antiquissimus. I let passe much superstitious and sa∣crilegious doctrine which Bellarmine there vttereth, attributing almost as much to Ceremonies inuented by men, as to the Sacraments ordained by Christ. And I accept what is granted, that being invented by men, they are alterable by men: and not being of the sub∣stance of Religion the vsing or disusing of them makes no alteration or difference in Religion. Saint Augustine discoursing of the diuersity of cere∣monies and customes in seuerall Churches and Coun∣tries, tels a story of his mother Monica,Aug. epist. 118. who comming to Milan, and finding that they fasted not vpon Satur∣dayes, (as in her countrey they did) was much disquie∣ted in her mind (as at diuersity of Religion,) and knew not what to doe: but she was resolued by Saint Am∣brose, Bishop of that City, that such things made no dif∣ference of Religion. When I come to Rome (saith he) I fast on the Saturday, when I am at Milan, I fast not. So you to what Church soeuer you come, Ejus morem serua, si cuiquam non vis esse scandalo, nec quenquam tibi. Obserue the custome of that Church, if you will not be offensiue to others nor others to you. Here obserue, Rome and Milan, two great Cities in one Countrey, both in Jtaly, yet had seuerall customes and ceremonies, which to some weake consciences, through ignorance might be offensiue, yet were they all of one Religion in substance; and for rites or ceremo∣nies,
at that time Milan was no more bound to obey Rome, then Rome to obey Milan. §. 5. As your Rhe∣mists insinuate Annot. vpon Rom. 11. ver. 4.But now if a man be not in all points (though neuer so small) nay in all traditions, rites, and ceremonies con∣formable to the ancient Church, or to the Church of Rome late before Luthers dayes; you count him not of the same Religion. One of your idle Pamphleters (idle for the matter he brings, but too to busie in lying and rayling, one W. G. (ashamed belike to adde his full name) professor in Diuinity, writes a Booke, points and repoints it, Per∣missu superiorum 1619. entituled, A Discouery of shifts, &c. His principall matter is to shew, that before Lu∣thers time, No man was euer of the Protestants Religi∣on: His reason, because all men held one point or other, at least tradition, rite, or ceremony different from the Protestants, which he labours to shew by running tho∣row a great number of Instances, not considering, that by the same reason it might be as well prooved, that neuer any man vntill the late Councell of Trent was of the Papists Religion. For he asketh thus: First, was Dionysius Areopagita, a Protestant? and answereth, No, for he maintained traditions, spake of Altars, places sanctified, rasue of Priests, burning of incense at the Altar, &c. Answer. To omit that many doubt, and some censure the bookes imputed to him to be counterfeits, (as Case∣tan, Valla, Erasmus, Possevin, and Bellarmine: see Censura librorum Roberti Coc. pag.) I aske againe, was Dionysius Areopagita, a Papist? No: for he hath many things of the Eucharist, which condemne Priuate Masses, Com∣munion vnder one kinde onely, and Transubstantiati∣on. See Ctalogus testium veritatis lib. 1. Secondly, Was Papias (scholler to Saint Iohn Evan∣gelist) a Protestant? No, saith W. G. for hee defended
Traditions, and Peters primacy, and Romish Episcopa∣lity. How then? was he a Papist? No, say we, for hee taught such traditions as Papists condemne, as namely the errour of the Chibiasts or Millenaries, and said it was a Tradition deliuered from the Apostles, Baronius anno 118. n. 5. &c. & n. 2. Thirdly, was Ignatius a Protestant? No, for he ap∣proued traditions, limbus patrum merits, and the reall presence. Not so, But was he then a Papist? no, for Protestants cite him against Transubstantiation, and Communion vnder one kinde; priuate Masses, and the Popes supremacy. Catalogus testium, lib. 2. & appendice pag, 2087. Bellarmine reects the Greeke copies of his workes being against the Papists. Fourthly, was Tertullian a Protestant? no for hee hold the Montanists heresie. Was he a Papist then? no, for the same reason, also he writes sharpely against the Popes budding supremacy, and against Transubstanti∣ation, and for the sufficiency of Scriptures to confute heretickes, See Catal. test. lib. 3. Fiftly, was Saint Cyprian a Protestant? no, saith he, for he was a Montanist also; was he then a Papist? no, for Papists condemne Montanists as well as Protestants also, he equals all the Apostles with Peter, reiects the popes authority & infallibility, giues sentences against Purgatory, acknowledgeth two Sacraments onely, hath much against Transubstantiation, and denyall of the Cup. See the allegations out of him in Catalogo te∣stium lib. 3. Sixtly, was Jrenaeus a Protestant? no, for he defended free-will so farre, that Protestants count it Pelagia∣nisme. So did many other Fathers, Hilary, and Epipha∣nius: yea, Chrysostome, Cyril, Ambrose, Theodoret. What then? were all these papists? No, for though in heat of exhortation they gaue sometimes too much to free will, and in hatred to the Maniches and Stoicall
Christians that held such a fatall necessity of mens actions as tooke away mans guiltinesse of sinne: yet in their more moderate and settled writings, they taught as the Protestants doe.August. contra Iulianum l'clag. lib. 1. cap. 2. Pelagianis nondum liti∣gantibus, Patres securiùs loqubantur; saith Saint Au∣gustine, Vntill the Pelagians began to wrangle, the Fa∣thers tooke lesse heed to their speeches. But such their speeches, The Papists themselues con∣demne. Maldonate in John, 6.44. pag. 701. Pererius in Rom. 9. nu. 33 pag. 1001. Sixtus Senensis. Tolet, &c. See D. Mortons Appeal. lib 2. cap. 10. sect. 1, 2. §. 4. &. sect. 3. §. 7. lit. n. See also my Chapter of Free-will. §. 6. I might runne thorow the rest of this W. G. his allegations, and shew his vanity and folly, in shoo∣ting such arrowes against the Protestants, as being re∣torted and shot backe againe, doe mortally and vnre∣couerably wound his owne cause. But I will leaue off following his order, and adde a few more; and by occasion of this last, I aske of Saint Cyprian, Augustine, Fulgentius, Gregory Nyssen, Gregory the Great, Anselm, Bernard, were they Papists o of the now Roman-Catholicke Religion? No, for they taught concerning Free-will, iust as the Protestants teach, Morton ib. sect. 3. Was Athanasius a Papist? no, for hee reckons the number of Canonicall bookes, otherwise then Papists doe, and magnifies them for their perspicuity, certainty and sufficiency, as Protestants doe: he teacheth Iusti∣fication by faith onely; writeth against adoration and prayer to Saints, and Idolatrous worship of Images: shewes the custome of the Church in his time, to mini∣ster the Communion in both kindes, and not on Al∣tars but tables of wood, writes to the Bishops of Rome, as his brethren and equals: giues reasons why the
dead cannot appeare againe to men, for feare of teach∣ing lies, and errours, and because the good are in Para∣dise, the euill in Inferno. He counts marriage of Bishops, a thing indifferent, and vsed indifferently in his time, and it appeares by his bookes, that in his time the sacrifice of the Masse, and the fiue new Sacraments were not knowne. Was Saint Ierom a Papist? no, for hee earnestly maintaineth the sufficiency and excellency of the Scrip∣tures; & exhorteth married Women, Virgins, & Wid∣dowes, diligently to study them; he teacheth Iustifi∣cation by Gods mercy, and beateth downe mans me∣rits: hee writes sharpely against free-will without Gods grace against purgatory, against transubstantiati∣on and orall manducation: hee taxeth the popes su∣premacy, and the Clergies liues: and for his sharpe writing he was faine to flye from Rome. See Catalogus testium lib. 4. Was Gelasius (your owne Bishop of Rome) a Catho∣licke of your now Roman Religion? no, for he condem∣demned (as sacrilegious) your now-halfe Communi∣on (without wine) and seuerely commanded either to minister both the kindes, or neither to the people. The necessity whereof now you call heresie. De conse∣crat. dist. 2. comperimus. Was S Gregory (your owne Bishop likewise, long af∣ter Gelasius) of your Church, and now-present Religi∣on? no for he taught the sufficiency and perfection of the Scripture, reiected the Apochryphall bookes from the Canon, held the reading of Scripture profitable for all men; Iustification by faith, and not by in∣herent righteousnesse, wrote against mans merit, and for the glory of Gods grace and mercy; hee forbad the worshipping of Images: and wrote sharply against
the title of vniuersall Bishop, as a badge of Antichrist, or his forerunner, &c. And (for conclusion of this point) were the other two greatest Doctors of the Church, Saint Chrysostome, and S. Augustine, of your present Religion? No, for, Saint ChrysostomeHomil. De La∣zaro. & passim alibi. extolled the authority, dignity, sufficiency, perspicuity, necessity, and commodity of the Canonicall Scriptures, and exhorted Lay-men, and Tradesmen to get them Bibles, and reade the Scriptures at home, and that man and wife, parents and children, should reason and conferre of the doctrine thereof.In 4. cap. E∣phes. hom. 10. He taught that the Church of God was nothing but a house built of our soules, and the stones thereof were some more illustrious and faire polished, other more obscure and of lesse glory:In Matth. hom. 55. & 83. & Serm. de Pen∣tecost. tom. 3. that the Church was built not super Petrum, but super Petram, not vpon Peter, but Peters confession, (that Christ was the Sonne of God, the Sauiour of the world:)In Matth. hom. 35. ad cap. 20. That whosoeuer desired primacy vpon earth, should find confusion in heauen, and not be reckoned amongst the seruants of Christ:In 2 Thess. homil. 3, & 4. That Antichrist would command himselfe to be ho∣noured as God, and fit in the Church: that he would invade the Roman Empire, and striue to draw to him∣selfe the Empire or Rule of God and men. And though he extolled the power of free-will in the Regenerate, and exhorted all men to vse the power they had: yet heeIn Gen. hom. 29. perswaded the godly to acknowledge it to pro∣ceed from Gods grace: and taught all men, that sinne entring lost their liberty, corrupted their power, and brought in seruitude: andHom. de Adam. that without Gods grace man could neither will, nor doe any thing that was good; thatHom. 1. in Acta. as they that die Purple, first prepare it with other colours, so God prepares the cares of the mind, and then infuseth grace: thatHom. 1. dom. Advent. before sinne, we had free-will to do good, but not after: that it was not in our power to get out of the Deuils hand, but like a ship that had lost his sterne (which guided it) wee were
driuen whither the tempest would, euen whither the Diuell would driue vs, and except God by the strong hand of his mercy did loose vs, we should continue til death in the bonds of our sinnesIn Rm. om. 5. & 17. That the Law would iustifie man, but cannot; for no man is iustified by the Law, but he that wholly fulfils it, and that is not possible to any mā.In 2 cor. hom. 11. He that must be iustified by the law, must haue no spot found in him, and such an one cannot be found, but onely Iesus Christ;In Rom. hom. 5 & 17. therefore he onely hath attained the end and perfection of the Law;Hom. 7. in 3. cap. ad Rom. as soone as man beleeueth in him, he is presently instified. Consequently,In Psal. 142. Ne intres in iu∣dcium. man can haue no merits to trust vnto, there is nothing properly his owne, but sinne.In 1. cap gen. hom. 2 & serm. de fide & de lege nat. Yet faith wrought in vs by Gods grace, will be fruitfull in good workes, or else it is a dead faith and vnprofitable. He taughtHom. 4. de penitentia. & hom. 12. in Mat. & in 15. de mu∣liere Chananaea. prayer to God only, and directly; with∣out running about to Patrons or Intercessors, Media∣tors, Porters (naming Iames, John, Peter, and the Quire of Apostles) take (saith he) repentance for thy compa∣nion, to supply the place of an aduocate, and goe to the head fountaine it selfe. Of the Eucharist (though he haue many rhetoricall and hyperbolicall speeches in the vehemency of his mouing the people to humble deuotion; as, Thou seest, touchest, eatest Christ; and hee suffereth teeth to bee fastned in his flesh, and to be made red with his bloud: whichBellar de Eu∣char. lib. 1. cap. 2. §. quinta Regula & de Missa lb. 2 cap 10. §. ad illad. Va∣lentinian. tom. 4. in Thom. disp. 6. quest. 4. punct. 3 §. quare non est assentiendum Alano. Iesuites confesse cannot be vnderstood proper∣ly, without impiety: but tropically of the signes onely, not of the body which cannot suffer of vs, nor be viola∣ted: yet) he hath much against Transubstantiation; for he saith,Hom. de Eu∣charist. The Table is furnished with mysteries, thou seest bread and wine, but thinke not that you re∣ceiue the diuine body, of a man. Ne putetis quod acci∣piatis divinum corpus ex homine. And,Hom. 11. Op. imperfect. in Mat. in his vasis sancti∣ficatis, non est verum corpus Christi, sed mysterium corpo∣ris ejus continetur. In these hallowed vessels there is not contained the true body of Christ, but the mystery of
his body. Also,Hom. 83. in Matth. if thou wast incorporeall, hee would haue giuen to thee his incorporeall gifts naked: but because thy soule is ioyned to a true body (in sensibilibus intelligenda tibi traduntur) in things sensible, are deli∣uered vnto thee things to be vnderstood. Againe,Hom. 7. in 1 Cor. An vneleeuer seeing the water of Baptisme, thinkes it is simply water: but I, doe not simply see what I see but I consider the purging of the soule by the spirit, and the burying, resurrection, sanctification, iustice, redempti∣on, adoption, inheritance, and Kingdome of heauen. For I iudge them not by sight, but by the eyes of my mind. He writes alsoJn 1 Cor. hom. 27. against priuate Communions, when people doe not communicate (called now pri∣uate Masses) andHom. Oportet. haereses esse. halfe Communions, without mini∣string the Cup to the people. Against Purgatory after this life, he saith,In Matth. hom. 4. & hom. 3. de poenit, & hom. De Lazaro. Hee that washeth not away his sinnes in this life, shall finde no comfort afterward:Hom. 7 in Matth. as when a ship is sunke, or a man dead, neither can the Saylor, nor Physitian helpe it. When we are once gone, nothing is lest to satisfie for vs.Homilia 2. de Lazaro. while we are heere, we haue faire hopes: but be∣ing once departed, it is not in vs to repent afterward, or to wash off our sinnes. Saint Augustine writes fully and plentifullyAug. De vni∣tate Ecclesiae, & alibi p. sn. for the perfection and sufficiency of the Scriptures to de∣termine where the true Church is, and to end all Con∣trouersies, andDe doctr. christ. lib. 2. ca 9. plaine enough to ground all necessary doctrines vpon:De Bapt. con∣tra Donatistas. lib. 6. cap. 3. that the Church to which the pro∣mises of grace and saluation belong, is the company of faithfull beleeuers and that wicked men doe not belong vnto it:Ib. lib. 7 cap. 51. & de vnita∣tate Eccl. cap. vlt & alibi saepe. they may be in the Church, but not of the Church, in the house, but belong not, ad compagem do∣mus. Retract. lib. 2. cap. 21.That Peter was not the Rocke wherein the Church is built, but Christ,In psal. 44. & psal. 60. & and that we are Christiani, not Petriani, &c. the Rock was Christ,De verb. Dom. serm. 13. in mat. & tract. 124. and vpon the Rock which Peter confessed (saying, Thou art Christ the Son
of the liuing God) I will build my Church; Vpon mee, not vpon thee. They that would be built vpon men, said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, that is, Peter; but others that would not be built super Pe∣trum but super Petram, said, Ego sum Christi. Quomo∣do nec in Pauli, sic nec in Petri, sed in nomine Christi, vt Petrus aedificaretur super Petram, & non Petra super Pe∣trum. He writes thatTract. 118. & 114. in Ioan. & libro quaest vet. & novi test. quaest. 93. the Keyes of binding and loosing were not giuen onely to Peter alone, but in him to the whole Church, that all the Church might haue power to binde and loose sinnes. Of Antichrist, he saith,De civ. Dei l b. 20. cap. 19. He shall sit in the Church of God, andIn psal. 9. extoll himselfe aboue all that is worshipped, and come by wicked arts to that vaine height and do∣mination: andDe civ. Dei. ibid. when the Roman Empire is taken a∣way, then Sathan by Antichrist shall worke mirabiliter, sed mendaciter, with lying wonders. Saint Augustine reports and applauds Saint Cyprians speech to the Donatists, thus:De Baptismo contra Donatist. None of vs makes our selues Bishop of Bishops, nor doth by tyrannicall terror compell his fellowes to the necessity of obedience: see∣ing euery Bishop for the license of his liberty and pow∣er, hath his proper iudgement, as if hee could not bee iudged of another, as himselfe cannot iudge another, but we must all expect the Iudgement of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, who alone hath power, both to set vs in the gouernment of his Church, and to iudge of our acts. A doctrine plaine against the popes supremacy. Against Transubstantiation (though Bellarmine cite him for the truth of Christs body deliuered, which we deny not) he writes plainly; deliuering a Rule how to know figuratiue from proper speeches in the Scrip∣tures:De doctrin Christiana lib 3. cap. 15. & ib. that When a precept seemes to command a fowle or wicked act, or forbid a good and profitable thing, then it is to be taken figuratiuely: He giues this for an example; Except you eat the flesh of the Sonne of
Man, and drinke his Bloud, you, haue no life in you: this in the proper sense seemes a foule and wicked thing: fi∣gura est ergo: Therefore it is a figuratiue speech. And hee defines Sacraments to beContra Maxi∣minum. lib. 3. cap. 22. Sacra∣menta sunt signa, aliud existentia, aliud significan∣tia. signes, being one thing, and signifying another. And of this Sacrament he saith,In psal. 98. Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis, & bibituri illum sanguinem quem fusuri sunt qui me crucisi∣gent. Sacramen¦tum aliquod commendavi vobis. You shall not eat this body which you see, nor drinke this blood which they will shed which crucifie me. I commend a cer∣taine Sacrament thereof vnto you. And he often beats vpon this, that though wicked men doe eat the signe and Sacrament, yet none but the worthy receiuers doe eat rem Sacramenti, the very Body of ChristSerm. 11. de verbis Apostoli. And Manducabant illi Panem dominum, Iudas panem domini contra dominum: illi vitam, ille paenamTract. 59. in Iohannem. See also Tract. in Ioan. 11. & 13. & 26. & De civ. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 25. De Doctp. christiana lib. 3. cap. 9. epist. 23. ad Bonifaci∣um & epist. 57. De Trinitate lib. 3. cap. 10. Contra Adiman∣tum cap. 12. Contra Faustum lib. 20. cap. 21. & alibi passim.. He held two Sacraments of the new Testament, one∣lyEpistola 118. & Libro 3. de doctrina Christiana. cap. 9. Baptisme, and the Lords Supper. CalvinCalvin. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 17. § 28., Peter Martyr, and the rest of the Prote∣stants count Saint Augustine wholly theirs, as did Be∣rengarius before them, by Bellarmines confessionBellar. de Euchar. lib. 2. cap. 24. initio.. Saint Augustine condemnes Image-worship. Fol∣low not (saith heDe moribus ecclesiae lib. 2. cap. 34. & De civ. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 27. See Vines comment vpon it.) the company of ignorant men, who in true Religion are superstitious, worshippers of Sepulchres and pictures, which customes the Church condemneth, and daily laboureth to correct. And hee saithDe fide & symbolo. cap. 7. Contra Adimantum cap. 13., It is great wickednesse to place the Image of God in Churches. And that to worship the Prototy∣pon (sampler, or thing resembled) by an Image resem∣bling it (as the Heathen excused their Idolatry) is an absurd, servile, and carnall thingDe doctr. Christiana. lib. 3. cap. 7, 8, 9. See in psal. 113 & epist. 49.. And hee writes a∣gainst Pilgrimages for Religion. Serm. 3. De Mar∣tyribus. Of Purgatory (a thing which came to be imagined
in his dayes) in some placesEncherid. cap. 69. & de octo quaest. Dulciij qu. 1. De side oer. cap. 16. De civ. Dei. lb. 21. cap. 26. hee doubteth whether there be any such place or no: but in many places hee giueth sound reasons to ouerthrow it. The Catholicke Faith (saith heContra Pelag. Hypogn. lib. 5.) resting vpon Diuine authority, be∣leeues the first place, the Kingdome of Heauen: and the second Hell:— a third we are wholly ignorant of: Yea, wee shall find in the Scriptures, that it is not.De pecc. me∣rit. & remiss. lib. 1. cap. 27. & lib. 24. De civ. Dei. c. 15. & serm. 232. de tempt. There is no middle place, he must needs be with the Diuell, that is not with Christ.De verbis A∣postoli serm. 18. There are two habi∣tations (after death) Vna in igne aeterno, altera in regno aeterno. And,Homil. 5. when we are passed out of this world, no satisfaction remaineth. And,Epist. 80. wherein euery mans owne last day finds him, therein the worlds last day will hold him: For, such as in this day euery one dies, such in that day hee shall be iudged. Againe,Epist. 54. there is no other place then in this life to correct our manners: for after this life euery one shall haue that which in this life he sought to himselfe. For,De verbis Dom. serm. 37. Christus suscipiendo pae∣nam, & non suscipiendo culpam, & culpā delevet & panam. Christ by taking vpon him our punishment, and not ta∣king our sin, hath put away both our sin & punishment. He that holds these things, cannot hold Purgatory. In briefe therefore, In all these former points: And furthermore, against Free-will, and for Gods grace: a∣gainst Mans merits, and iustification by our inherent righteousnesse: and for Iustification by Gods free mer∣cy, and Christs merits onely: for the doctrine of faith and good workes: for prayer to God alone, and by the onely Mediator Iesus Christ: against the adoration and inuocation of Angels and Saints departed: and other the most necessary and profitable points of Theologie, Saint Augustine was no Papist, but wholly and entire∣ly of the Protestants Religion. §. .7 Antiquus. How can this possibly be so? when (you see) our Catholickes doe continually cite Saint Au∣gustine,
Chrysostome, and the rest of the Fathers, for confirmation of their doctrine, and against yours? Antiquissimus. They may, first cite bookes vnder the names of the Fathers, which the Fathers neuer wrote: secondly, they may corrupt the Fathers, put∣ting in or out, words or phrases, to alter their sense, and speake contrary to their meaning: thirdly, they may by glosses and interpretations wrest the sentences which they finde in them, to meane otherwise then they intended: and fourthly, they may alter the state of the questions betwixt vs, and then alleadge the Fathers against their owne fancies, not against our Do∣ctrine. And by these meanes they may cite and multi∣ply the Fathers names in shew against vs, but in truth nothing to the purpose. And thus they doe. First, they alledge many bookes and writings, which were not written by those holy learned Fathers whose names they beare. For examples. Our Bishop Jewell propounding 27 Articles which the Church of Rome holdeth at this day: for confirma∣tion of any one of which, if any man liuing could shew him any sufficient sentence of any old Catholicke Do∣ctor, Father, or generall Councell, &c. within 600 yeeres after Christ: he would yeeld and subscribe. See Casaubon. Prolegom. §. Spectare ad. Master Harding vndertaking to answer, alledged for ancient Doctors and Fathers; The Constituions Apostolicall of Clemens, Abdias, Dionysius Areopagita. The decretall Epistles of ancient Popes, Amphilochius, and such like: which are all censured by their owne learned men, for counterfeit writings, vniustly attribu∣ted to the Reuerend Authors, whose names they beare. Obserue them well. Clements Apostolicke Constitutions are cited also by the RhemistsRhemes Test. annot. in Luc. 4.1 to proue Lent Fast to bee as ancient as the Apostles times: and by BellarmineBellar. lib. 1. de clericis c. 12., for the an∣tiquity of Ecclesiasticall Orders: AlsoSee Bellar∣mines seuerall Treatises of these things. for vowes of continency; for prayer for the dead; for holy water,
for reseruation of the Sacrament, for mixing Wine and Water in the Sacrament, for confirmation, &c. And yet Saint Hierom (a great searcher of Antiquities) knew not these Constitutions of Clement. And 227 Fathers in the Trullan Councell reiected them, as corrupted writings. And so dothBaronius an∣no 32. n 18.19. et anno 102 9. Baronius in his Annals. Abdias is reiected for a counterfeit byBaron. an. 31. n. 18. & 51. n. 51. Baronius, byPossevin. Ap∣parat sac verbo Seuerus Sulp. Possevine, byBellar. De bo∣nis operib. in par∣ticulari. lib. 2. cap. 24. Bellarmine; yea bySixtus Senens. Bibl. lib. 2. Apo∣stolorum. Paul the fourth Bishop of Rome, saith Sixtus Senensis. Dionysius Areopagita, is not author of the bookes that goe vnder his name, saithCaietan. com∣ment. in Act. 17 Cajetan, as alsoValla. & Eras. in act. 17. Valla, and Erasmus, andPhotius apud Possevinum Ap∣parat. sac. verbo Photius. Photius, BellarmineBellar. lib. 2. de confirm. cap. 7 doubts of them, Yet those bookes are cited by theRhem. in Luc. 21.19. Rhemists, for the sa∣crifice of the Altar: and bySee Cooke censra pag. 50. Bellarmine, for Invocati∣on of Saints, and for Purgatory, and to proue the booke of Wisedome to be Canonicall, and for the forme of Mo∣nasticall profession. The Decretall Epistles, which are said to be written by more then thirty of the first Bishops of Rome, which liued in the first three hundred yeeres (set downe in the late Editions of the Tomes of the Councels of Crab and Binius, printed anno 1606.) and often cited for the popes supremacy, and in other Controuersies, and greatly magnified by some popes: yet are plainly found to be counterfeits, both by many reasons, and by the Romists owne confessions. Reasons, first, the barbarous Latin, or rather Lead of their stile, most vnlike the elegant stile of that Age. Secondly, the likenesse of the stile in them all, which proues them to be all of one mans writing; and that in a farre more barbarous Age. Thirdly, the scriptures in them alledged after Ieroms Translation, which Translation was not made, nor in vse of duers hndred yeeres after. For the last of these Bishops dyed before Ierom was borneBaronius, saith the last of these Bi∣shops, dyed anno 333. and Ierom was born anno 342. See confe∣rence of D. Rainolds and Hart, chap. 8. divis. 3. and D. Field. church. booke 5. chap. 34 and 42.. Fourthly, neither Eusebius in the East, nor Ierom in the West (after search of al libraries, to furnish their histories
and memorialls) doe any where mention these Epi∣stles. Fiftly, Nether were they euer spoken of, or alleaged in the tough Controuersies betwixt the Bishops of Rome, and the Bishops of Africa, concerning Appeales to Rome, which Controversies, these Epistles would haue clearely ended, if they had been at that time ex∣tant, shewed, and approued. Beside all this, the Romish Doctors themselues ac∣count them no better then corrupted writings, or sup∣positious. So their owne Cardinals,Cusanus De concordia Ca∣thol. lib. 3. cap. 2. Cusanus,Bellar. de Ro∣mano Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 14. Bellar∣mine, andBaron. anno 265. n. 6, 7. Baronius finde them: andConlius annot. in dist. 16. c. septuaginta. Contius vtterly condemnes them as false. Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, and the Narrati∣on of Saint Basils life going vnder his name, gloriously cited by MasterHarding. art. 1. divis. 33. Harding, to proue priuate Masses, and byBellar. de con∣firm. cap. 5. Bellarmine, to proue confirmation a Sacrament, and byCosler. in En∣chiridio. Costerus the Iesuite, for the Reall presence: yet is reiected as false, byBaron. anno 378. n. 10. & anno 363. n. 55. Possevin. Ap∣parat. sac. verbo Amphilochius. Bellar. lib. de script. eccles. ad ann. 380. Baronius, and by Possevine; yea, and by Bellarmine himselfe. To auoide infinitenesse, I will insist vpon Tracts fals∣ly imputed to Saint Augustine. Bellarmine in one place lib de script. eccles. ad annum 420.) amongst many others reckons these: 1 liber de Eccl. dogmat. 2 lib. de Fide ad Petrum. 3 lib. de mirabilibus scripturae. 4 lib. de spiritu & anima. 5 lib. viginti vnius sententiarum. 6 lib. de sa∣lutaribus documentis. 7 lib. hypognosticon. 8 lib. de Predestinatione & gratia. 9 The Epistles to Boniface, and of Boniface to Austen. 10 Explicatio Apocalypsis 11 Some Sermons, De verbis Domini. 12 Sermones ad Fratres in Eremo, which also Baronius reiectsBaronius an∣no 382. n. 26. & anno 385. n. 12. a∣mong many other. Also, 13 Epistol. ad Cyrillum, de gestis & obitu Hieronymi, ci∣ted by Bunderius for inuocation of Saints, and by Pere∣sius, for choyce of meates: is not Saint Austens, saith BellarmineDe script. Ec∣cles. ad annum 390. and BaroniusBaronius an. 420. n. 46.. 14 De spiritu & anima (cited by Turrian, to proue
that Saints in heauen heare the prayers of the liuing, and by the Colonienses for Inuocation of Saints;) is not Saint Austens, sayTrithem. de script. eccles. Trithemius,Louan. in cen∣sura in tom. 3. Theologi Lovanienses, andDelriu dis∣quis mag. lib. 5. cap. 26. Delrius. 15 Sermones de tempore serm. 2. cited by Bellar. for the reall presence: serm. 55. for Canonicall houres: serm. 60. and 62. for satisfaction to God by fasting: serm. 124. and 142. for Peters primacy: and serm. 226. cited by the English of Doway, to proue the booke of Tobias Canonicall: and serm. 228. and 229. cited by Serarius, to proue the booke of Judith Canonicall: and serm. 244. cited by Sonnius, art. 3. for invocation of Saints, &c. These Sermons de tempore, were not writ∣ten by Saint Augustine, say Erasmus, and Martin Lip∣sius. The Louan Diuines reiect 48 of them, and sus∣pect all the rest but 47. so that 48 are counted plaine bastards and 145 doubted. 16 De vera & falsa poenitentia (cited in the Tridentine Catechisme, for auricular confession,Cathechis. Trident. fol. 320. and byAlan. defens. purgator. cap. 1. Alan and others, for Purgatory) reiected by ErasmusErasm. cens. sura in hunc li∣bruus., and theLovanienses censura in Ap∣pend. tom. 4. Diuines of Lovan, andTrithemius de script. Eccles. Trithemius, andBellar. lib. de Script. Eccles. ad annum 420. Bellar∣mine, and many others. 17 De quaestionibus vet, & novi testamenti, cited by Turrian, forConfess. Aug. lib. 4. c. 9. sec. 11. Priests vestments, and byDial. 1. c. 13. Cope, and theAnnot. in Matth. 17.27. Rhemists, for Peters primacy: and byDial 1. c. 14. Cope, andEuchir. c. 19. Ec∣kius, for the single life of Priests: This booke (saithBellar. de gratia primi ho∣minis cap. 3. & lib. 1. de effe∣ctu sacram. c. 10. & lib. de script. eccles ad. an. 420 & lib. 1. de missa cap. 6. Bellarmine,) is not Augustines, nor the worke of any Catholicke man, (for which he sheweth great reasons,) but of some Hereticke, who teacheth many things a∣gainst the faith, and against Augustine. So saith also Angelus Roccho, Espencaeus, The Diuines of Lovain, Al∣fonsus de Castro, Maldonatus, Salmeron, Azorius, Leu∣saeus, Velosillus, Penerius, and Harding, as they are allead∣ged by Robert Cooke, in Censuraquorundam scriptorū vete∣rum, aedit. Londini 1623. who addeth these words: Here I must in few words meet with your conscience, you Pontificians, and especially with yours ô Turrian, ô Har∣ding,
ô Bellarmine. I demaund of thee Turrian, why didst thou write.Jn praesatione confess. Augusti∣ni. Be it so, that all are not Augustines bookes, which haue Augustines name inscribed, yet surely most of them are of Saint Augustines equals, and plainely all of them are the workes of learned and godly men? when it is plaine by this very booke, the Author was an Hereticke, and by the confession of your owne brethren, a blasphemous and wretched man. I demaund of thee Harding, with what face couldest thou alleadge those questions vnder Saint Au∣gustines name for the primacy of the Pope? which else∣where thou didst confesse was none of Augustines. I demaund of thee Bellarmine, with what forehead coul∣dest thou reckon vp the Author of these questionsBellar. de Rom. Pontif lib. 1. cap. 25. a∣mong the 24 Fathers which thou comparest to the 24 Elders in the Apocalyps, while thou fightest for thy pope? since elsewhere thou hast written plainly, that neither Augustine, nor any Catholicke man, but an here∣ticke was the author of these questions. May we not truely say here, Frons Meretricis facta est vobis? you haue the forehead of an whore and cannot blush! Ier. 3 3 Thus said Mr. Cooke out of his iust indignation for this one booke. And we may say the same of many more. To reckon vp all that is falsely fathered vpon S. Au∣gustine alone, would fill a good volume, saith Trithemi∣usTrithem. de script. eccles. Aug.. And the like may be said of S. Chrysostome, Jerom, and other Fathers. Let this taste which I haue giuen you, suffice, and thereby gesse at the rest. If you desire to see more of S. Augustine, you may read Paulus Langius in Chronico Citizensi, anno 1259. And Erasmus epistle ad Archiepisc. Toletanum Parisijs 1531. And li. 3 de metho∣do concionandi. If of all the Fathers; reade Mr. Perkins Probleme, but especially Mr. Cooks censure aforenamed. And D. Mortons apologia Catholica pars 2. l. 2. c. 1. & seq. §. 8. 2 In the bookes which the ancient Fathers, and o∣ther learned Authors haue written, much intollerable corruption hath been vsed.
Lodovicus VivesVives Comm. in August. De civ. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 8. vpon one Chapter of Saint Augustine saith, In hoc capite non dubium quin multa sunt addita, ve∣lut declarandi gratia, abijs qui omnia magnorum autorum scripta spurcis suis manibus contaminabant. It seemes, in that long tract of time, when all bookes were in such mens hands, they were shamelesly bold to corrupt them. For Viues speakes of the generallity, Omnia; and of their sawcinesse, to meddle with magnorum auto∣rum scripta; and of their wickednesse contaminabant; and of their beastlinesse spurcis suis manibus. No doubt (saith he) but many things were added to this Chapter (of Saint Augustine) by them which with their vncleane hands, defiled or corrupted all the writings of great au∣thors. This happily was then a worke onely of darke∣nesse, done secretly and without authority, (tares sowne in the night, by wicked men among the good wheat of the Fathers.) But now, the like is done by authority, avowed and commended. For what else meanes this of Sixtus Sinensis in hisPraefat. in ∣pus Bibli. Epistle Dedicatory to pope Pius Quintus? Tu Beatissime Pontifex expurgari fecisti omnium autorum Catholicorum & praecipuè Ʋeterum Pa∣trum scripta. Thou most blessed Bishop hast caused the writings of all Catholicke authors, and especially of The ancient Fathers to be purged or cleansed. For now are dispersed to Printers certaine bookes called Indices Expurgatorij, appointing both in ancient and latter books, what must be put out wch the authors wrote, & what to put in which the authors wrote not; and so to print the books new againe (being so altered for the best aduantage of the Church of Rome) to the end, that men may not find in the new prints any thing against them (though it be in the old) and yet many things for them (which the old and true bookes had not) sometimes altering one word will serue the turne:See D. Morton Apologia Cath. part. 2 l. 2. c. 17 pag. 239. as in stead of Non habent Petri hareditatem, qui Petri FIDEM non habent, to print Non habent Petri haereditatem, qui Petri SEDEM non habent;
the seat of Peter, put for the faith of Peter, to tye salua∣tion to Peters seat, (Rome) in stead of Peters faith (Christ, confessed by Peter.) Sometimes whole sentences, or pages, are altered or left out, &c. See D. Featly Appendix to the Romish Fi∣sher pag. 13. & seq & D. Mort. ibid.Thus haue they serued Gratian, with his glosse, Cajetan, Ferus, Polydore, Ʋives, Stapulensis, Stella, Arias Monta∣nus, Masius, and hundreds of others their owne wri∣ters. As you may see in the Index Expurgatorius com∣mitted to the Belgicke Printers 1571, and brought into the open light by Junius, anno 1586. and another In∣dex expurgatorius, printed at Madril in Spaine, anno 1584. by commandement of Gasper Quiroga, Cardinall and Archbishop of Toletum, and found by the English in their voyage to Cales, and published to the world at Salmure, anno 1601. And a third Index expurgatorius, ordained by the Cardinal of Sandovall, and Roxas, prin∣ted, anno 1612. Beside others not yet so publikely knowne. Obserued by Mr. Bedell in his letters to Mr. Wadsworth, pag. 100, 101.Among many hundreds of examples of these cor∣ruptions, I giue you these euen in the Fathers, for a taste. Pope Pius the fourth, called Paulus Manutius, (an elegant Printer) from Venice to Rome, to print the Fathers without spots. In his print of Saint Cyprians workes,See B. Bilson. Dffer. of subie∣ction and re∣bellion, first part. pag 89 in 8. In the Epistle De vnitate Ecclsiae, these words are added, [Et primatus Petro datur] and afterwards, these [Vnam cathedram constituit] and these also [& Ca∣thedra vna] And in the edition of Pamelius, another clawse is added, [Qui cathedram Petri super quam fun∣data est ecclesia, deserit, &c.] though the supervisors of the Canon law appointed by the Commandement of Gregory 13, acknowledge that in eight copies of Cypri∣an found entire in the Vatican Library, this sentence is not found. And had these passages been in old Cyprian in Waldensis time, when he wrote for Peters chaire and primacy, he would not haue failed to vse them being so pregnant for his purpose.
In the same edition of Manutius,Bedel. ibid. See D. Field. 5. cap. 42. fol. vlt. the Epistle of Fir∣milianus, Bishop of Cesaria, beginning Accepimus per Rogatianum, is quite left out: (although Saint Cypri∣an thought it worthy his translation and publication.) and good cause why. For that Bishop tartly vilifieth the Bishop of Romes both place & person, farre beneath that height which they now assume. Firmilianns re∣proueth the folly of Stephanus, that boasting so much of the place of his Bishopricke, and succession of Peter, bee stirred vp contentions and discords in all other Chur∣ches: and bids him not deceiue himselfe; he is be∣come aschismaticke, by separating himselfe from the communion of the Ecclesiasticall vnity: for while hee thinkes he can separate all from his Communion, hee hath separated himselfe onely from all He taxeth him for calling Cyprian a false Christ, a false Apostle, and a deceitfull workeman; which being priuy to himselfe, that these were his owne due, preuentingly he obiected to another. This Epistle is omitted in the new prints. And thus graue Authors are shamefully curtalled and corrupted; when they speake against the Pope and his doctrine, their tongues are cut out; & contrarily words and sentences are foysted into their workes, to make them seeme to speake for him, when they neuer meant it. Franc. Iunius reports that he comming (in the yeare 1559.) to a familiar friend of his,Junius in prae∣satione ante In∣dicem expurga∣torium Belgicum à se editum 1586 named Lewes Sauari∣us, Corrector of a Print at Leydon, found him ouerloo∣king Saint Ambrose Workes, which Frellonius was printing. Whereof when Junius commended the ele∣gancy of the Letter and Edition, the Corrector told him secretly, it was of all Editions the worst: and drawing out many sheets of now-waste-paper, from vnder the Table, told him they had printed those sheetes accor∣ding to the ancient authenticke copies: but two Fran∣ciscans had by their authority cancelled and reiected them, and caused other to be printed and put in their
roomes, differing from the truth of all their owne bookes, to the great losse of the Printer, and wonder of the Corrector. Gretzer. De iure prohib. libros lib. 2. cap. 10.The Iesuite Gretzerus defendeth these doings; and writing of the purging or altering of old Bertram, hee saith the Index hath done him no iniury, when it hath done him that fauour, which is done to some of the an∣cients, as Tertullian and Origen. Them and some o∣thers, though very ancient, Gratian quite cut off: and the Church hath this authority (saith hee) to proscribe whole bookes, or any parts of them, great or small, Thus Gretzerus. And indeed, of the two, it were better to proscribe or cut them off (as no witnesses) then to corrupt and make them (false witnesses) to speake what they thought not, or what is not true. But for a Particular Church, to proscribe or corrupt all the witnesses that speake a∣gainst her is vntollerable. See more in D. Morton. Apo∣logia Catholica part. 2. lib. 2. c. 17In the former point (of Counterfeits) the Children begot the Fathers: In this point (of Corruption) the Children will teach the Fathers to speake, and alter their testimonies and testaments at their pleasure. §. 9. Index Expurg. Belg. fol. 4. & per Iunium edit. pag. 12.3 By deuised glosses, and witty (but wrong) inter∣pretations, they wrest the sentences of the Fathers to meane otherwise then the Fathers intended. This is confessed by the Diuines of the Vniuersity of Doway; speaking of Bertrams booke: The title, Vt liber Ber∣trami presbyteri de Corp. & sang. Domini, tolerari emenda∣tus queat. Iudicium Vniversitatis Duacensis Censoribus probatum. Then their iudgement followes, with some reasons why they rather mend the book then forbid it: lest the forbidding should make men more desirously seeke it, and greedily reade it: and condemne the Church for abrogating all antiquity that is alleadged a∣gainst them &c. Therefore they will vse it as they doe other ancient Catholike bookes, which they deliuer in
these words. Cum in Catholicis veteribus alijs plos feramus errores, & extenuemus, excusemus, excog o∣mento persaepe negemus, & commodum ijs seasum ffinga∣mus, dum opponuntur in disputationibus, aut in confactio∣nibus cum aduersarijs: non videmus cur non candem aequi∣tatem & diligentem recognitionem mereatur Bertramus, &c. that is, Seeing in other ancient Catholike writers, we beare with many errors and we extenuate, excuse, and oftentimes by witty expositions deny, and duise a commodious sense vnto them, when they are opposed in disputations and conflicts with our aduersaries: we see no reason why Bertram may not deserue the same equity and diligent recognition. In this passage we may obserue these things. 1 They acknowledge many errours to be in ancient Writers, whom yet they account Catholickes, and of their owne Church or Religion. (Otherwise they must haue a small, and the Protestants a large Church.) 2 That those opinions, though many (which they Call errors) make for their aduersaries (the Protestants) and are against Romes present doctrine, and so obiected by the Protestants. 3 How they auoyd them: euen by applying their Art, Wit, and Learning (Gods talents committed to them) to obscure the Truth, corrupt the witnesse there∣of; deceiue the simple, and gull the learned: making all beleeue that the ancient Writers are nothing at all a∣gainst them, but fully for them by peruerting their alle∣gations to speake quite contrary to the Authors mea∣ning. O wit and learning wickedly bestowed! consci∣ence seared! poore people miserably deluded! And note further 4, the generality of this practise,Iudicium Vni∣uersitatis Dua∣censis, Censoribus approbatum. confessed, professed by a whole Vniuersity at once, and deliuered for their deliberate iudgement, and approo∣ued by the most learned and iudicious censors, appoin∣ted to that great office by the Hierarchy of the Church of Rome: & though this practice was a long time close∣ly carried in darkenesse; yet now it is defended in the open light by Gretzer the Iesuite.
§. 10. 4 The Roman Doctors may bring in whole Armies of witnesses on their side, when they change the question, and proue what no body denies;Bedel. letters to Wadworth pag. 109. As when the que∣stion is whether the pope haue a Monarchy ouer all Christians, an vncontroulable Iurisdiction, an Infallible Iudgement, &c.Bellar. de sum∣mo Pontifice. lib. 2. cap. 15. & 16 answered by D. Field. lib. 5. cap. 35, 36. Bellarmine alleadgeth a number of Fathers, Greeke and Latin, to proue onely that Saint Pe∣ter had a primacy of honour and authority, which is farre short of that supremacy which the popes now claime, and which is the question. So, to proue the verity of Christs Body and Blood in the Lords Supper;Bellar de Eu∣charistia. lb 2. toto. Bellarmine spends the whole booke in citing the Fathers of seuerall Ages. To what purpose? when the question is not of the truth of the presence, but of the manner, whether it be to the teeth or belly (which he in a manner denies) or to the soule and faith of the Receiuer. So alsoBellarm. De Purgat. lib. 1. cap 6. Bellarmine for the proofe of Purgatory, al∣leadgeth a number of Fathers (as Ambrose, Hilary, Ori∣gen, Basil, Lactansius, Jerom,) but farre from the pur∣pose of the question, and quite beside their meaning: for they spake of the fire at the end of the world, (asSixtus Senens. Bibl. lib. 5. An∣not. 171. Six∣tus Senensis saith,) and Bellarmine cites them for the fire of Purgatory before the end.Bellarib. Hee cites many other Fathers also to proue Purgatory, because they com∣mended prayer for the dead, though he well knew, that proceeded from anSarez in 3. pa t, ome qu. 59. art 6. disp. 57. §. 1. pag. 1159. errour which they held, that mens soules were not iudged till the last day, nor rewarded or punished but reserued in some secret receptacles vn∣to the vniuersall Iudgement. Which opinion is as con∣trary to Purgatory (to confirme which he alleadgeth them) as it is to the truth, and therefore they are guile∣fully alleadged, beside their meaning. Antiquus. These practises of alleadging counterfeit books, vnder the reuerend names of ancient holy Fa∣thers:
& of corrupting the genuine writings of the Fa∣thers: and of auoyding or peruerting their true meaning by any sophisticall interpretations; and of producing them in shew to the purpose, but indeed, beside the purpose and the true question: and by all or any of these meanes, to seeke the victory by obscuring the truth: are things to my heart and soule odious and ab∣hominable. Neither should I beleeue that euer any such thing was done by Men that professe Religion; but I should thinke it rather a malicious slander deuised by their aduersaries, if I had not seene manifest proofe of all by their owne bookes, layed open be∣fore mine eyes. But to let passe my iust griefe of this, for the pre∣sent: I must adde, that—
CHAP. 3. Of the differences of the Fathers and Protestants and of their contentions. §. 1. Many Fathers are confessed (by all sides) to haue held some erronious opinions, which none are boun  receiue: and yet in the substance of Religion were good Catholicke Christians, and our predecessors. 2 Many differences also are noted among Romish Do∣ctors, which yet hinder them not from being all accounted Catholickes. 3 The differences among Protestants are nothing so great or many, as those afore noted of the Fathers, and the Ro∣mish, The especiall one, about Christs presence in the Sacrament, is much lesse then it seemeth. 4 The Popes vnwillingnesse to reforme manifest abuses by the way of generall Councels, was the cause of all diffe∣rences in Reformed Churches. 5 The Protestants contentions for Gods cause (as they take it) are nothing so hote or troublesome, as the contentions of many ancient holy Fathers haue beene about smaller matters. §. 1. Antiquus. YEt I cannot thinke, but in the vn∣doubted and vncorrupted writings of the Fathers, you find many things differing from the Doctrine of Pro∣testants. It cannot be otherwise, for the Protestants differ among themselues, the English from the German, the German from the French, one Nation from
another, and in euery Nation one company from ano∣ther. It is possible the Fathers may disagree from them all; but to agree with them all, that agree not among themselues, it is impossible. Besides, the Protestants disagreements are so great, with such bitter contenti∣ons, and virulent writing one against another, that they shew themselues not to be of the Church of God, which is a City at vnity in it selfe; and consists of men more mortifyed in their affections. I tell you truely, these dis∣agreements and contentions do mightily alienate mens affections from your Religion. Antiquissimus. Your obiection hath three parts, 1 Differences of the Fathers from vs; 2 Differences among our selues; 3 The hot contentions of Protestants for these differences. Let me answer them in order. First, I doe ingenuously confesse that the Fathers do in many things differ from vs: and no whit lesse from you. Though they were very Reuerend learned & holy men, yet still they were men, and had their errours and imperfections. Your owne men first discouered them (as Cham did his Fathers nakednesse and told his bre∣thren, Gen. 9.) and we cannot hide them (though wee gladly would, and with Sem and Japhet, turne our backs on thē) neither is it now expedient, when you so much vilifie the Scriptures, and magnifie the Fathers beyond their right: and seeke to draw the tryall of the truth of Religion, rather then the Riuelets of Fathers and Histories, then from the Fountaine of the Scriptures. We must therfore tell you more necessarily thē willing∣ly, what your own men haue said, of the Fathers slips and errours, wherein not onely we, but themselues are constrained for the truthes sake to forsake them. And yet both wee and they account the same Fathers our predecessors for the other necessary points of sauing faith, which they soundly held, neither doe we any way doubt but that they are blessed Saints in Heauen.
Baron. an. 118. n. 2. Senous. Bibl. lib. 5. amos. 233.1 Your Cardinall Baronius, and Sixtus Senensis, rec∣kon vp many Fathers that held the Millenary errour, to wit, Papias the scholler of Iohn the Apostle & Evangelist, Apollinarius, Irenaeus, Tertullianus, Victorinus, Lactantius, Seuerus, Sulpitius, Justin Martyr, & many other Catho∣like Fathers, being deceiued by Papias, Bish. of Hierapo∣lis (a man much reuerenced for opinion of his Holinesse and learning,Baron. ib. n. 5. &c. & n. 2. ci∣ting Eusebius. but yet homo ingenij pertenuis, saith Eusebi∣us) who taught it as a tradition receiued from the Apo∣stles, and grounded vpon Revel. 20. v. 4, 5. The mat∣ter was this, That there should be two Resurrections, the first of the godly, to liue with Christ a thousand yeeres on earth, in all worldly happinesse, before the wicked should awake out of the sleepe of death: and after that thousand yeeres, the second Resurrection of the wicked, should be to eternall death, and the godly should ascend to eternall life.Baron. an. 373. n. 14. This errour continued almost two hundred yeeres after it began, before it was condemned for an heresie: and was held by so many Church-men of great account, and Martyrs, that Saint Augustine and Ierom did very modestly dissent, saith Senensis, ib. Concil. Carthag. in Cypriani o∣perib.2 Saint Cyprian held, that such as were baptized by heretickes, should be rebaptized, and so determined with a whole Councell of African Bishops. Contrary to the African Bishops in the time of Aurelius, and contrary to Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, and the rest of the Italian Bishops. And yet was Cyprian alwayes counted a Saint, a true member of the Church, & an ho∣ly Martyr.Bellar. de confir. lib. 2. cap. 7. §. respond. ad. 1. Aug. cont. 2. ep. Pelag. lib. 4. c. 8. Aug. de Bapt. contra Donatum. lib. 1. & l. 2. Saint Augustine wrote strongly against his errour, but reuerently of his person, calling him Beatis∣simum, & corona Martyrij gloriosissimum. 3 But was Saint Augustine free from all error him∣selfe? No, for he held opinion that Infants dying vn∣baptized, were damned to the eternall torments of hell fire; Which none (either Protestants or Papists) doe hold at this day.
Also he held that the holy Eucharist ought of neces∣sity to be administred to Infants.Aug. epist. 106. & 28. Maldonat. in Ioan. 6. ver. 53. pag 719. Vsher Answ. to Irish Iesuite pag. 23. & D. Field lib. 3. cap. 9. who shew∣eth that Cy∣prian and Tert. were of Aug. opinion Bellar. de Christo lib. 2. cap. 3. Maldonate saith al∣so, this was the opinion of pope Innocent the first, and that it was the vse of the ancient Church, and that it preuailed in the Church about 600 yeares. Bishop Vsher sheweth that the Christians in Aegypt, and Ae∣thiopia, hold that vse still. The Church of Rome now doing otherwise, yet will not yeeld that she hath forsa∣ken the Religion of Saint Augustine, Pope Innocent, or the ancient Church, but glorieth that she is of the same Church with them. 4 Eusebius Casariensis fauoured the Arrians: and Eusebius Nicomediensis was an Arrian hereticke, saith Bellarmine. 5 Tertullian held some errours of the Montanists,Bellar. de Rom. Pont. lib. 4. cap. 8 § Sexto, Re∣spondeo. Bellar. de Christo lib. 2. cap. 23. §. Sed objicies. Bellar. de verbo dei non scripto lib. 4. cap. 12. § arg. tert. we grant: but Bellarmine saith plainly, he was a Mon∣tanist, and so reported Pope Zepherinus to be. 6 Damascen did plainly deny the Holy Ghost to proceed from the Sonne, saith Bellarmine. 7 Bellarmine also saith, that Irenaeus taught (by tra∣dition) that Christ suffered about the fiftieth yeare of his age: and contrarily Tertullian and Clemens Alex∣andrinus taught that Christ suffered in his thirtieth yeere: both which doctrines by traditions are false, saith Bellar. ib. 8 Many Fathers held that the soules of the Iust en∣ioy not the vision of God in heauen, neither are blessed,Sixtus Senens. Bibl lib. 6. annot. 345. D. Field. church. lib. 3. cap. 17. & lib. 5. Append. 1. p. 54. but onely in hope: and kept in some secret receptacles, vntill the generall Resurrection. Sixtus Senensis rec∣kons many of them, and cites their words: namely, Ju∣stin Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus,See D. Whites Defence. pag. 57. in fine & D. Morton. Appeal. lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 15. Bellar. de San∣ctor. beat. lib. 1. cap. 4. & 5. Lactan∣tius, Victorinus Martyr, Pope John 22. Ambros. Irenaeus, Theophylact, Bernard. Bartholomeus Medina, addeth many more, to wit, Saint Iames his Leiturgie, Origen, Prudentius, Chryso∣stome, Augustine, Theodoret, Areas, Oecumenius. Bellar∣mine laboureth to cleare some of these, whom his fel∣lowes condemne.
vpon this errour, we find in some of the Fathers, pray∣ers for the faithfull departed, as for them that were not yet iudged, nor in heauen: which all Papists grant to be an errour, and yet alleadge the prayers grounded thereon to confirme their purgatory out of which they say soules may be fetched, and sent to heauen long be∣fore the generall Iudgement, contrary to these Fathers tenets. Bellar. de San∣ctor. beat. lib. 1. cap. 6. §. Sunt tamen. & Sanctus Aton.9 Many Fathers also thought, The very Diuels should not be tormented with the paines of Hell, be∣fore the Iudgement day. Bellarmine reckons these, Iu∣stin Martyr, Irenaeus, Oecumenius, Epiphanius, Antonius apud Athanasium, Ambrose, Ierom, Chrysostom, Augu∣stine, Gregory Theodoret, Bernard, and some of them hee excuseth fauourably: but of Iustin Martyr, Irenaeus, Oecumenius, and Epiphanius, he saith, Non video quo pa∣cto corum sententiam ab errore possimus defendere; I know not how to excuse their opinion from errour. Bellar. de Baptis. lib. 1. cap. 3. § Praeter hos er∣rores. Ierom. contra Vigilantium. Greg. dialog. 4. cap. 33. Aug. de cura pro mortuis. Hugo de sacram. fidei lib. 2. part. 16. cap. 11. See D. Field. church. lib. 3. cap. 9. Gloss. in Esay 3. 1 Aug. de civ. dei. lib. 21. cap. 18. & 24. 2 Jb. cap. 1. & 25. 3 Ib. cap. 20. & 25.10 Bellarmine also saith, that many Catholicks held a wrong opinion that it is sufficient to baptize in the name of one of the three persons, contrary to the cu∣stome of the Church. Yet of this errour hee reckons Saint Ambrose, Beda, Bernard, Hugo de Sancto victore, Magister Sententiarum, and Pope Nicholas. 11 Saint Jerom and Saint Gregory (beside many o∣thers) doe confidently affirme, that Saints departed are present in all places, know all things, and worke won∣derfully where their memories are solemnized. All which is modestly doubted of and denyed by Saint Au∣gustine, Hugo de sancto victore, the author of the glosse, and others, and not so held by the Papists at this day. 12 Origen held, that all the wicked, euen the Di∣uels also, should finally be saued. 1 Others held, that not the Diuels, but yet all men should finally bee saued: 2 Others, that onely Christians, whether Hereticks or Catholickes. 3 Others, that onely Catholickes. All which Saint Augustine refutes, lib. 21. de civitate Dei,
and in his Enchiridion ad Laurentium cap. 67.Bellar. de Purg. lib. 2. cap. 1. D. Field. lib. 3. cap. 9. and saith they are deceiued, as men led by a humane kind of pitty towards sinners. 13 Many Fathers, seeing the Maniches and Stoicall Christians teach a fatall necessity of mens actions, which takes away mans guilt of sinne: in their heat of opposition gaue too much to freewill, and taught that a man before he was drawen to grace by grace,Maldon in Ioan. 6.44. pag. 701. Perer. in Rom. 9. nu. 33. pa. 1001. might merit grace. Foure great learned Iesuites, Senensis, Tolet, Maldonate, and Pererius, find this errour (and reprooue it) in Chrysostome, Cyril, Theophilact, Euthymius, Am∣monius, Photius, Ambrosius, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Hieronymus. Maldonate and Pererius say plainely.See D. Morton. Appeal. lib. 2. cap. 10. sect. 1, 2. §. 4. & sect. 3. §. 7. lit. n. These Fathers opinion is affinis Pelagianorum errori, nere of kin to the Pelagian errour, and contrary to the Apostles doctrine. Yet many Roman Doctors in this point, obiect these Fathers against vs. But we may well interpret their heat by more coole places of their owne writings, wherein they speake more soundly of the point: and we oppose many other learned Fathers that are fully Protestants in the point, as Gregory Nyssen, Anselme, Bernard, Gregory, Cyprian, Fulgentius, and Saint Augu∣stine,Erasmus epist. dedic. ante libros Hilarij cita Mortono ib. who is counted the mouth of the Fathers to de∣liuer the iudgement of the Church, who stood so much for grace, that the Schoolemen say, he yeelded too lit∣tle to freewill. Moderate Master Hooker saith well;Hooker discours. of Iustification § 26. The heresie of freewill was a milstone about the Pelagians necke: shall we therefore giue sentence of death inevitable a∣gainst all these Fathers in the Greeke Church, which be∣ing mis-perswaded, died in the errour of freewill? He addeth in the Margen: Error conuicted and afterwards maintained, is more then errour. For though the opi∣nion be still the same, yet the men are not the same, af∣ter that the truth is plainly taught them. This cleareth these Fathers from heresie, but not from error.
Out of these premises you may conclude these Con∣sequents. 1 It is vniust for the Romish Doctors to binde vs to the Fathers opinions, when themselues refuse them. 2 It is not reasonable to make the Fathers tenets rules of our Doctrine, when it is confessed on all hands, that the Fathers haue in many things erred.Bellar. lib. 3. de verbo Dei. cap. 19. §. dices quid ergo. Bellarmine saith, who can deny that many of the ancient Fathers had the gift of interpreting in great excellency? and that they were spiriuall? and yet it is manifest that some of the chiefest of them haue slipped in some things non leuiter, not lightly. Rossensis in re∣sponsione ad pro∣oemium Lutheri. veritate septima in fine fol. 10. & 11.Bishop Fisher answering Luthers obiection, That the ancient Fathers haue sometimes erred, saith, This doe not I deny; they haue erred sometimes, and they were suffered to erre, that we might know they were but men. 3 It is not onely vniust, and vnreasonable, but vn∣possible, to make vs in all things agree with the Fa∣thers, who doe not in all things agree among them∣selues When Saint Austen confutes Cyprian for re∣baptization: Irenaeus and Tertulian differ in the time of Christs suffering: some Fathers against freewill be∣fore grace, some for it, &c, How is it possible to agree with them all? Aug. lib. 2. con∣tra Crescomium gram. cap. 30. Ego Cypriani au∣toritate non te∣neor sed ejus di∣ctum ex Scriptu∣rae autoritate considero, quod∣que cum ea con∣gruit, cum ejus lade recipto; qd non, cum cius pace respuo.4 Therefore there is a necessity, to trie the Fathers doubtfull tenets by some superiour and vndouted rule: and that rule (the Fathers selues say) is the holy Scrip∣ture, inspired by God, and therefore infallible: examine all doctrines by that rule, hold what agrees to that, and refuse that which disagrees. Thus did Saint Augustine by Cyprians writings. I am not bound with the authority of Cyprian (saith hee) but I weigh his sayings by the authority of the Scrip∣tures, and what agrees to them, with his due praise I receiue; what agrees not, with his good leaue I re∣fuse.
And thus would Augustine haue men doe with his writings.Aug. de trinitate. lib. 3 cap. 1. Sane cum in om∣nibus literis me∣is, non solum pi∣um lectorem, sed etiam liberum correctorem desi∣derem, multo maxime in his, &c.—sicut le∣ctorem meum nolo mihi esse deditum, ita cor∣rectorem nolo sibi: Jlle me non amet amplius quam catholicam fidem, iste se non amet amplius quam catholicam vetatem. Sicut illi dico, Noli meis literis quasi scripturis canoni∣cis inservire, sed in illis & quod no credbas cum inveneris incun∣ctanter crede. in istis autem ad certum non habe∣bas nisi certum intellexeris, noli firmiter re∣tinere: Ita illi dico, Noli meas literas ex tua opinione vel con∣tentione, sed ex divina lectione vel inconcussa ratione corrigere. In all my writings (saith he) I desire not one∣ly a pious Reader but a free Corrector: as a Reader not wholly yeelding to me, so a Corrector not yeelding to his owne affections: not louing me more then the Catholicke faith, nor louing himselfe more then the Catholicke truth. As I say to him, Bee not subiect to my writings as to the Canonicall Scriptures. But in those when thou findest what thou beleeuest not, be∣leeue without delay: in those what thou thoughtest not certaine except thou vnderstand to be certaine, doe not firmely hold: so I say to him correct not my wri∣tings by thine owne opinion or contention, but by the holy Scripture and sound reason. §. 2. Antiquus. You haue said enough to cleare you for differing from the Fathers in some things: now cleare your Protestants (if you can) of the great scandall of differences among themselues. Antiquissimus. This was your late second obiection, which you may partly answer by that which wee haue said of the Fathers: for if the different opinions of the Fathers in some points hindred not their vnion in sub∣stance of the saith, and their being members of all the same Church: why should the like or lesser diffe∣rences now among the Protestants, hinder their vnion in substance of the same faith, and their being members all of the same Church, both among themselues and with the Fathers? You see differences among the Fa∣thers that touched not the foundation, life, and soule of Christianity, brake not their vnity; still they were all of one Church, and of one faith in the most necessary substance thereof. In which respect also we truely say they were our Predecessors, and of the same Church whereof we are, notwithanding our differences and theirs in other lesser points: your new-Catholikes
also challenge them to be theirs, notwithstanding many differences betwixt them. But of this point, more fully hereafter. For the present, I will shew you a number of great, and many of them (for ought I see) endlesse differen∣ces, among your owne Doctors, and yet you account them all Catholickes and of one Religion. Archb. Abbot. against D. Hill. reason. 3. §. 11.1 In Peter Lombard, a prince of the Schoolemen, called by that honourable name of Master of the Sen∣tences, for searching and iudiciously deliuering the Sen∣tences and doctrine of the Fathers, so farre as he could see in them: In him (I say) the Diuines of Paris haue noted 26 errors, in quibus Magister non tenetur, where∣in the schollers of Rome must not hold with him. These errors are added to his foure bookes of sentences, to warne the trauellers through his bookes, of his rockes and sands. 2 Those foure bookes of Sentences, alone may shew the great and numberlesse variety of opinions, which he reciteth in most points of doctrine, and yet all the Authors of them Catholickes. The like may be said of Thomas Aquinas his summes. See D. Hall. The Peace of Rome.3 The latter bookes of Controuersies, written by the Iesuites Bellarmine, Gregory de Valentia, Azorius, Suarez, and other their large writers, doe as ordinarily confute men of their owne side, as they confute Protestants. Yea oftentimes I finde in Suarez, fiue co∣lumnes against their owne Doctors, for one against ours. Yet these confuted Doctors are still Catholicks with them. Archb. Abbot. ibid.4 The whole Nation of the Dominican Fryers fol∣lowing the Thomists, doe hold that the Virgin Mary was conceiued in originall sinne: the whole Nation of the Franciscans hold the contrary,Concil. Basil. session. 36. following the Scotists. The Councell of Basil ratified the Franciscans doctrine for the vnspottednesse of the Blessed Virgin. The Do∣minicans, excepted against that Councell, as not law∣fully
called. The contention continued and grew so great, that Pope Sixtus was faine to interpose his au∣thority, commanding by a solemne decree, that the matter should neuer be disputed afterward.Hist. of the Councell of Trent. Notwith∣standing, in the Councell of Trent, either of the sides contended with great earnestnesse to haue it determi∣ned on their side. But to auoyde the endlesse offence of both sides, the Cardinall de Monte, President of the Councell, told them, The Councell was called to end Controuersies with Heretickes, not to meddle with Controuersies of Catholickes. And so it continued vn∣decided. Lately Cardinall Bellarmine hath written much hereof, on the Dominicans side: but yet without resolution. And so they stand irreconciliably conten∣tious. 5 Cardinall Caietan, a deepe learned Diuine,Arch. Abbot. ib. and much imployed by the pope against Luther, wrote ma∣ny bookes of seuerall matters:Sixt. Senensis Bibliotheca san∣cta libro 4. & 6. against which Ambro∣sius Catharinus, Archbishop of Compsa, wrote sixe sharp bookes of Annotations and Inuectiues, as Sixtus Senen∣sis records, and reckons vp the particular points, lea∣uing to euery man his free iudgement thereof. 6 In the great piont of Iustification Cardinall Con∣tarene agrees with the Protestants, in his booke printed anno 1541. some few yeares before the Councell of Trent. 7 Albertus Pighius, also taught the Protestants do∣ctrine of Iustification in a booke published, anno 1549. which he dedicated to Paulus, then pope, complaining of the Schoole-Diuines who had much obscured the doctrine of Iustification and who (he feared) would contemne his iudgement. 8 The learned Diuines of Colen also taught the Pro∣testants doctrine of Iustification by faith in Christs me∣rits; and wrote against the merit of our workes, in their Antididagma, and Enchiridion,Antididagma. pag. 30. as Bellarmine con∣fesseth. And yet both Pighius and the Doctors of Co∣len
are excused by Bellarmine,Bellar. de Iustif. lib. 2. cap. 1. § in candem sent. & § Deinde quod est discrimen. they were no heretickes, though they erred, because they kept community with the Church of Rome, and submitted their writings to the censure thereof. 9 Their great Doctor Durandus, had many errours, which Bellarmine meets withall, and confutes in many Controuersies. And concerning the Eucharist, he held that the matter of the bread remained still after the Consecration, and that there was onely a transformati∣on,Bellar. de Fu∣charistia libro 3. cap. 13. initio. but not a transubstantiation of the matter, Where∣of Bellarmine saith, Sententia Durandi haeretica est, licet ipse non sit dicendus haereticus, cum paratus fuerit Ecclesiae iudicio acquiescere. The opinion of Durand is hereti∣call, though he is not to be called an hereticke, seeing he is ready to rest vpon the Churches iudgement. Sentent. lib. 4. distinct 11. lite∣ra a.10 Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris, Master of the Sentences, found such variety of opinions concerning the elements in the Sacrament, that he knew not what to determine. Some held that the substance of the bread remained, some that it vanished, or was resolued into his first matter, some that it was turned into Christs body. But for his owne part, what kinde of conuersion it should be, whether formal or substantiall, or of some other kinde, he saith, Definire non sufficio, I am not able to define. Ibidem. dist. 13. b. in sine.11 Lombard also saith, that bruit Beasts that eare the consecrated hoste, doe not eate the body of Christ. What doe they eat then? He answereth, Deus nouit hoc, God knowes that.Aquinas Sum∣ma 3. part. qu. 80 ut 3. ad ter∣tium. But Tho. Aquinas teacheth the con∣trary that Christs body is still vnder the species, as long as the species remaine, though a Mouse or Dog should eate them. For it is no dignity (saith he) to Christs body to be eaten by Beasts, when they touch not the body in its proper species, but onely according to the Sacramen∣tall species. Lombard. ibid. dst. 11 lit.12 Lombard also saith, that the Eucharist is to bee receiued in both kinds. And Gerardus Lorichius, a great
Papist, protesteth that they are false Catholickes,Lerich. de missa publica prorogan∣da. hin∣derers of the Reformation of the Church, and blasphe∣mers, who deny the people the Cup in the Eucharist. 13 Bellarmine himselfe a great learned Iesuite and Cardinall, late Reader of Controuersies at Rome,Bellar de Eu∣char. lib. 3. cap. 18. §. Ex his col∣gimus, &c. tea∣cheth that the substance of the bread in the Sacrament, is not turned into the substance of Christs body produ∣ctivè, (as one thing is made of another) but that the bread goes away, and Christs body comes into the roome of it, adductivè (as one thing succeeds into the place of another, the first be voyded) and this (saith he) is the opinion of the Church of Rome. But Suarez, another learned Iesuite,Suarez. tomo 3. in Thom. disp. 50 sect. 4. §. tertio principaliter. pag. 639. (who hath writ∣ten many great volumnes, and is Reader of Controuer∣sies at Salamanca, in Spaine) confutes Bellarmines opini∣on, terming it Translocatio, not Transubstantiatio; and saith it is not of the Churches opinion. Thus these great Master-builders are confounded in their lan∣guage: and thus hard it is to know what the Church of Rome holdeth. Her owne dearest and learnedest sonnes know not. Either Doctor Bellarmine, or Do∣ctor Suarez mistooke it, and doubtlesse either of them haue multitudes of followers, and all on both sides Ca∣tholickes. Yea I hope, both Suarez and Bellarmine, Du∣rand and Lombard, the Dominicans and Franciscans, Ca∣jetan, Catharine, Contarene, Pighius, and the Colen Do∣ctors shall still be counted good Catholicks, and all of one Church notwithstanding their differences. 14 Beside these,See before, lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 12, 13, 4. you may remember a number of learned Catholickes (with their numberlesse followers) which I reckoned before, which differed from you in some points, and wrote against your doctrine and pra∣ctises: as Saint Bernard, Ioannes Salisburiensis, Cardina∣lis Camericensis, Cardinalis Cusanus. Robert Grosthead, B. of Lincolne, Ockam, Cesenas, Clemangis, Gerson, Valla, Bradwardin, Ariminiensis, Contarene, Bonaventure, Sco∣tus, Clethoveus, Rhendius, &c.
Doctor Field reckons aboue 20 Fathers, and later Doctors,See aboue lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 14. B. Vsher An∣swer to the Irish Iesuite, pag. 500. & seq. that accounted those bookes onely Canoni∣call, which wee so reckon, and the rest Apocryphall. Bishop Vsher, reckons vp, against your doctrine of Merit, aboue 50 authors new and old, wherof some are manifold, as Liber Caroli Magni, composed by a great number of Diuines: Instructions of the sicke, appro∣ued by all the Diuines of the Kingdome. The Canons and Vniuersity of Colen. The Chancellour and Diuines of Paris. And both they, and all the rest, had infinite followers of their o∣pinion. All which (to let passeSee D. Field. Appendix 1. part. pag. 100. & seq. and Appendix of 27 Articles, to the seuenth chapter of the third booke, printed at the end of the fourth. multitudes of others) you still count Catholickes, and of your Church, though they taught many things against you. And therefore, out of your owne iudgement we may conclude, that some few differences in some points, betwixt Prote∣stants, doe not hinder them from being all of one Church and Religion. §. 3. Antiquus. Yes, for your differences are great and many, ours small and few. Antiquissimus. When you looke through false spec∣tacles, things may be seene greater or smaller then they are: take heed you looke not on our differences through the spectacles of malice, which makes euery small thing great and vgly: and on your owne differen∣ces, through the spectacles of selfe-loue, which makes them seeme small and tollerable. One speciall point, of the manner of Christs being, and being receiued in the Sacrament:Archb. Abbot. ag. Hill. Reason 5 §. 26. makes the maine difference bewixt the Lutherans in Denmarke, and some places of Germany, and the other reformed Churches. Anthony, sometime King of Nauarre, said to the Ambassadour of Denmarke,Comment. Relig. & Reip. in Gal. lib. exhorting the reformed French to be of Luthers doctrine; There bee forty points wherein Luther and Calvin doe differ from the
pope, and in 39 of them they agree betweene them∣selues, and in that single one they dissent. Their fol∣lowers therefore should doe well to ioyne in the grea∣ter number against the pope, till they haue runated him; and when his heart is broken, they should fall to compound that last single difference. God in his good time grant it. Now in that one speciall point,Zanchius de dis∣sidio Cana Dom. Iudicium, tomo septimo, in fine Miscelaneorum. D. Field. Church. lib. 5. Appendix part. 1. pag. 114. the difference is no∣thing so great, as you would haue it thought. For (as the most learned and iudicious Zanchius obserueth, and our Doctor Field out of him.) In all necessary points, both the parties agree, and dissent in one vnnecessary, which by right vnderstanding one another, might easily bee compounded. First, both parties agree in the necessity of the recei∣uers due preparing themselues, with knowledge of their sinnes, repentance of them, faith in Christ for par∣don of them, and resolution to liue according to Gods Law. Secondly, both sides agree in the acknowledgement of the excellent vse of the Sacrament for a perpetuall memoriall of the death and passion of Christ for our saluation, and that with him we should dye to sinne and be raised againe to newnesse of life; be made one with him; and nourished by him in a spirituall life here, to e∣ternall life hereafter. Thirdly, both sides agree, that the very body and blood of Christ are to be receiued in that Sacrament, that thereby we may be partakers of the life of Grace, and also be strengthened, confirmed, and continued therein. Fourthly, both sides agree, that the elements of bread and wine, presenting to our consideration and faith, the spirituall nourishing force that is in the body and blood of Christ, are not abolished in their substance: but one∣ly changed in their vse; which is, not onely to signifie, but also to exhibit and communicate vnto vs, the very
body and blood of Christ, with all the gracious wor∣king and fruits thereof. Fiftly, both sides agree, that the meaning of Christs words, [This is my Body, This is my Blood,] when hee gaue them the Bread and Wine, was this: This, which outwardly and vsibly I giue you, is in substance, Bread and Wine, and in mystery, or exhibitiue signification, my Body and Blood: but this, which (together with them) I giue you inuisibly, is my very Boy that is to be crucified, and my very Blood which is to be shed for the remission of your sinnes. Sixtly, both parties agree, and professe they firmely beleeue, that the very Body and Blood of Christ (which the Sacraments doe not onely signifie, but exhib t, and whereof the faithfull are partakers) are truely present in the Sacrament, and by the faithfull truely and really receiued. Thus farre all parties agree, that is, in the whole ne∣cessary and sufficient substance of the doctrine of this Sacrament: for the other matter wherein they differ, De modo, of the manner how Christ is present in the Sa∣crament, seeing it is not expressed in the Scriptures, In the iudgement of Zanchius, it might be well omitted: themselues confesse, when they haue gone as farre as they can to determine it, still it is ineffable, and not pos∣sible to be fully vnderstood. It is enough for vs to be∣leeue the Body and Blood are there, though how and in what manner we cannot define. §. 4. Antiquus. Whether it be of so little importance or no, I dispute not: but I am sure the Controuersie still remaines, and is hotly pursued; and yet this is not the onely difference betwixt your Protestants, there are many other. Antiquissimus. The more greatly to blame is your pope and Romish Hierarchy, that when many grie∣uous corruptions of your Church both in Doctrine
and gouernment were manifestly layed open,See D. Field. Appendix to the fift booke of the Church part. 1. pag. 71. Gerson 3. part. Apologet. de concilio Constan∣tion. Idm de concilio vnius obedientiae. would not for al the importunity of Princes, Prelats & people, yeeld to any wholsome reformation, but with obstinate resistance hindred all publicke proceeding in Reforma¦tion by the course of a general Councell: so that seuerall States and Kingdomes were faine to redresse things amisse seuerally within their owne compasse, without sufficient Intelligence and consultation one with ano∣ther: which could not bee done without some diffe∣rences, and it is lttle lesse then miraculous that the diffe∣rences were not many more and greater. Cassander saith when many were moued out of a godly affection sharply to reproue certaine manifest abuses,Cassander con∣sultation, art. 7. they were repelled and disdainfully contemned by them who were puffed vp with the swell ng con∣ceits of their Ecclesiasticall power, which caused the great distraction or rent of the Church: and no firme peace is to be hoped for, vnlesse the beginning there∣of be from them that gaue the cause of this diuision; that is, vnlesse they that haue the gouernment of the Church remit something of their too great rigor, and listning to the desires of many godly ones, correct manifest abuses, according to the rule of sacred Scrip∣ture and the ancient Church, from which they are departed, &c. Thus writes your Cassander, though a papist, yet moderate and truely Iudicious.Contarenus in confutatione Ar∣ticulorum Lu∣theri. Also your Cardinall Contarenus, writing of the grieuances and complaints of the Lutherans, for the manifold abuses brought into the Church; makes a prayer to God, that he would moue the hearts of the Prelats of the Church, at the last to put away most pernicious selfe-loue, and be perswaded to correct things manifest∣ly amisse, and to reforme themselues. There needs no Counsell, thoe need no syllogismes, there need no alleadging of places of Scripture for the quiering of these stirres of the Lutherans: but there is need of good minds, of loue towards God and our neighbour, and
of humility, &c. Thus writes Contarenus. I might cite your Thu anus, and many others, that lay the fault of the diuisions, rents, and differences in the Church, vpon your Pope and Prelats. Bad Statists, and worse Christians. But I pray you, what other differences of moment do ye finde among the Protestants: Antiquus. When the Diuines of the Reformed in France were called to the Mompelgart colloquy in the yeare 1586: they looked for no more differences then of our Lords Supper, which you spake of; but they found more, of the Person of Christ, of Predestination, of Baptisme, of Images in Churches. Antiquissmus. They found those fiue indeed. And it was a wonderfull prouidence of God, that so many seuerall Countries, Kingdomes, and States, abandoning the abuses of the Church or rather Court of Rome, and making particular Reformations in their own domini∣ons, without generall meetings and consents, should haue no more, nor greater differences then these. And of these, the first two (of Christs presence in the Sacrament, and of the communication of properties of the diuinity and humanity in the person of Christ) are in a maner all one, and reconciled both alike: Con∣cerning the two next, the differences among the Fathers, (who notwithstanding still continued mem∣bers of the same true Catholik Church) may well ex∣cuse the differences among the Protestants. And for the fifth difference, concerning Images; it proued no difference at all. Both sides therin fully agreed. But these are not the Tithe of the differences a∣mongst your men: and in these fiue which you reckon, many of your owne men differ one from another, and yet with you are good Catholiks. Antiquus. Happily I might insist vpon many other differences among you, if I carried a minde rather to
number then to weigh them. But I will name onely one more: the great and scandalous dissention among you about the gouernment of your Church betwixt the Bishops and Formalists on the one side, and the Puritans or Separatists on the other side. Antiquissimus. Both these sides agree in all necessary sauing points of doctrine. But in this very point of gouernment,D. Field. Appen. first part. pag. 120. first pull out the beame out of your owne eyes, before you stare vpon our motes. Some of your Doctors hold that the Pope is aboue Generall Councels: some that he is not. Some hold that the pope hath the vniuersality of all Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction in himselfe. Others hold the pope to be onely the Prince Bis∣hop in order and honour before other, which are equall in commission with him: and at the most but as the Duke of Venice among the Senators of that State. Some hold that the pope may erre Iudicially, Others that the pope cannot erre Iudicially. Some hold the pope to be temporall Lord of al the world. Others hold that he is not so. Some hold, that though the pope be not temporall Lord of the world, yet in ordine ad spiritualia, he may dispose of the Kingdome of the world. Others hold that the pope may not meddle with Princes States in any wise. §. 5. Antiquus. The differences among Protestants you say are not great, but I am sure their dissentions are great, bitter, scandalous and odious, while they write most virulent inuectiues one against another, & damne one another most grieuously for their different doc∣trine, without shew of any touch of Christan mortifi∣cation or moderation.
Antiquissimus. Those that do so are much to blame. It is farre from mee to defend them. Yet you know sometimes very holy and well mortified men, may happen into strange contentions euen for smal matters. Saint Paul and Barnabas, appointed by the Holy Ghost to ioyne for the worke of the ministry in planting Churches among the Gentiles (Acts 13.2) which they did very laboriously, cheerefully, & with good successe, and though they suffered persecution in doing it, yet were comfortably deliuered, and allwayes found God (who had sent them) present to protect and blesse them: and afterwards they were sent by the Church to Ie∣rusalem to the Apostles and elders,Acts 15.1, 2. about questions that troubled the Church: and by the whole Councell of Apostles, they were sent againe Iointly to the Churches of Antioch, Syria and Cilicia and other Nations, to giue them notice of the decrees of the Councell, to direct and confirme the brethren: now hauing de∣liuered their message and done their businesse imposed, at Antioch, and were so to go forward to Syria and Cilicia; They fell to contention: and for a matter of no great moment, to wit, Barnabas would haue Iohn to goe with them, and Paul refused him: the con∣tention grew so sharp, that they parted company, and went seuerall wayes. See how flesh and blood boyled in these good mens hearts! Euen in those mens hearts, whom God had made speciall choyce of, and Ioyned them together for his most especiall and extraordinary workes: vpon whom the Church of God after fasting and prayer had laid their hands, and separated them to goe Ioyntly together about that holy busines; who had power to doe many miracles and extraordinary workes:Acts 15. who made report of the wonderfull successe which God gaue them in conuerting the Gentiles, to the great admiration and consolation of the Apostles: whom the Apostles sent againe with their decrees to the
Churches: euen these holy men, fell out for a light cause and parted company. Haply some man might say, Are these to be ac∣counted truely mortified and holy men, who were carried away with such a humor of pride and slfe will, that neither of them would yeeld to other? are these guided by the spirit of God? the spirit of peace, loue, concord, humility? are these fit to teach others, that cannot ouerrule their owne passions? or haue they no part of the spirit of God, but are men ouerborne with haughtinesse wilfullnesse, stubbornesse? vnfit for men of this profession, able to make men vtterly distaste and abhorre whatsoeuer they preach? Thus would some men gather out of this action: But Saint Paul (a chosen vessell, yet still an earthen vessel, who knew well he had his cracks and his flawes, himselfe gathereth another thing: (2 cor. 4.6.2 Cor. 4.6.) God, who hath commanded the light to shine out of darknes, hath shined in our hearts, to giue the light of the know∣ledge of the glory of God in the face of Iesus Chirst: But we haue this treasure in earthen vessels that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of vs. Secondly, At the first Councell of Nice, many Churchmen offred vp to the Emperor Constantine Bills of Complaint one against another,Zozomen. hist. lib. 1. cap. 16. which the Emperor tooke very ill, and said this was worse then all the euils that the Church of God had endured, that it shold be rent with contentions and contrary opinions of her owne children (for the contrary opinions among the learned at that time, and their dissentions (saith the Story) were so scandalous, that many were thereby alienated from embracing Christian Religion) But Constantine, appointing a day to receiue all their Bookes of complaints, when it came hee exhorted them to vnity and concord, and to ioyne hands for the holy worke of their calling, and in one great fire he burned all their Books of accusations.
Matth. 11.29. 1 Pet. 2.21, &c.Thirdly, Meeknes and mildnes is an excellent vertue in all Christians, and especially in the Ministers of God, Leaders of others: our Sauiour Christ calls vs to learne it of himselfe, as his peculiar vertue. But yet when the cause is Gods, and not our owne, we may learne also euen of him, a holy zeale and earnestnesse: he pro∣nounced many woes against the Scribes and Pharises,Read Matth. 23. ver. 13. to the end. for dishonouring God, corrupting his Religion, misleading the people, and abusing them: he called them hypocrits, damned creatures, children of hell, fooles and blind guides, painted sepulchers, full of hypocrisie and iniquity, serpents and generations of vipers.Ioh. 8 44. And elsewhere saith to the Pharisies and other Jewes, ye are of your Father the Deuill, and the lusts of your Father ye will do &c. Acts 8.20, 23.So Saint Peter to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee, Thou art in the gall of bitternesse, and in the bond of Iniquity:Act. 13.10. and Saint Paul to Elimas (who went about to turne Sergius Paulus the Deputy from the faith) O full of all subtilty and all mischiefe, thou child of the Deuill, thou enemy of all righteousnesse &c. Zeale of Gods glory is not onely excusable, but com∣mendable, euen when it is mixed with Error which is condemnable:Phil. 3.4, 6. for so Saint Paul reckons it among the things wherin he might glory, Concerning Zeale I persecuted the Church. Bellar. De Rom. pont. lib 4. cap. 7. §. & per hoc respondetur.Fourthly, Bellarmine somewhat excuseth Cyprian, though (sa th he) he seemeth to haue sinned mortally in crossing and vexing the pope, being in the right, him∣selfe being in the wrong. At least he should not haue written such reuiling and reproachfull words against the pope (Steuen,) as he did in tht Epistle to Pompey, calling the pope superbum, imperitum, caecae ac prauae men∣tis, &c. Proud, vnskillfull, of a blind and corrupt mind. Yet (saith Bellarmine also,) It seemes Cyprian sinned not mortally, because hee sinned onely of Ignorance,
thinking the pope (perniciosè errare) to erre, dange∣rously: and while he so thought, hee was bound (in conscience) not to obey him, because he ought not to do against his conscience Thus saith Bellarmine. Fiftly the question of Rebaptizing such as were bap∣tized by Heretickes,See D. White Way digress 21. Eu ch. hist. lib. 7. cap. 2. & seq. bred many broyles in the Church betwixt Saint Cyprian with the Councell of 80 Bishops of Africke, and also the Metropolitans, Dionysius, and Firmilianus, with most of the Bishops of Egypt, Cap∣padocia, Galatia, and Cilicia, on the one part: and the Bishop of Rome with the Westerne Bishops, on the other part: There was scarce any Church or Catholicke Bi∣shop therein which was not entangled in this discord. And many bitter speeches and contumelious actions and writings passed betweene them. Sixtly,Eusb. hist. lib. 5. cap. 21. the strife betwixt the East and West Churches about the day of the celebration of Easter, proceeded so farre as to excommunications. The Easterne Chur∣ches kept Faster day the 14 day of the first Moone in March after the vernall Equinoctiall, though it hap∣ned on the weeke day, by tradition from Saint John and Saint Philip,Ibib. cap. 22. and many other holy men and Mar∣tyrs, liuing and dying in Asia, as Bishop Polycrates wrteth. But in diuers Synods held, 1 in Palestina, vn∣der B. Theophilu of Caesarea, and Bish. Narcissus of Jeru∣salem: 2 In Rome vner pope Ʋictor: 3 in Pontus vnder Palmas: 4 in France vnder Irenaeus: 5 In Greece and other places It was ordered that Easter should be kept (not on the weeke day but) on the Sunday after the 14 day. And Ʋictor, Bishop of Rome,Ibid. cap. 21. Jbid. cap. 23. proceeed in sin to pronounce all the Reueren Easterne Bishops that kept it otherwise, excommunicated: and inueighed sore against them by letters. But not onely they, but the Westerne Bishops also, disliked Victors doing therein: yea, dissaded, and sharpely reproue him Especially Jrenaeus with his brethren of France, alleging that for such like differences as this. For example, for the kp ng
of Lent Fast some onely one day,See the Epistle of Irenaeus in Euseb. History, ib. some two, some more, some forty dayes before Easter and that by custome of long time before that Age, in such difference of fasting they kept the vnity of faith, and peace one with ano∣ther; and neuer proceeded to hate or excommunicate one another for such petty differences. D. Field. Appen∣dix 1. part. pag. 116. Zozemen. lib 8. cap. 15. Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 13.Seuenthly, Grieuous were the differences and con∣tentions betwixt Saint Chrysostome and Epiphanus, the one refusing to pray with the other; the one accu∣sing the other of manifest breaches of the Canons; the one cursing the other, and praying that he should nuer die a Bishop: the other cursing him agane, and pray∣ing that he should neuer returne into his Countrey a∣liue. Bth which came to passe. For Chrysostome was cast out of his Bishopricke, and dyed in banishment. And Epiphanius dyed in his reurne homeward. Yt were both of these excellent holy and Catholicke Bi∣shops that thus contended. Eightly, And beside their owne contentions, the ta∣king of parts with them drew on much mischieife. The∣ophilus Patriarke, of Alexandria ioyned with Epipha∣nius against Chrysostome; and with them ioyned the other Bishops of the Prouinces as they fancied. The Empresse was set against Chrysostome, being informed that he had made a Sermon against women. She in∣censed the Emperour by whose appointment, Theopilus called a Counsell of Bishops at Chalcedon, whither all Chrysostoms enemies resorted, and there pronounced him deposed. Cyrinus, Bishop there, called him impi∣ous arrogant, and froward From thence most of the Bishops went to Constantinople but none of the Clergy met them, to doe them honour. There they obiected many crimes against him and cited him to answer. But he refused to come, excepting against them as his ene∣mies, and appealing to a generall Councell. But finally they condemned him for obstnacy, in not comming vnto them, and depriued him of his Bishopricke. This
being noysed in the City, caused a great sedition multi∣tudes watching about the Church to hinder his carry∣ing away, an cryed out, his cause ought to be heard in a greater Councell of Bishops. But by the Emperours command and practise, he was driuen out. Notwith∣standing within a few dayes after, to appeale the tu∣mults of people, he was recalled,Socrates lib. 6. cap. 16. placed agine in his Bi∣shopricke restored to preaching and so continued a while: but not without tumults wherein many were wounded, and many killed And when hee was banished againe, the Cathedrall Church at Constantinople, with the Senate huse, were set on fire, and burned to the ground in the pursuit of reuenge. Baronius beginning the story of this contention,Baron. tomo 5. anno 400. nu. 51. saith thus: I take in hand a great and lamentable narration, of strife, and direfull persecution, not of Gentiles against Chri∣stians, nor heretickes against Catholickes, nor of wicked men against good and iust but (which is monstrous and prodigious) euen of Saints and holy men one against ano∣ther. Ninthly,Socrates lib. 7. cap. 33. D. Feld church. lib 5 cap 33. & pend. 1 part. pag 116, 117, 118. &c D Hall Columb Noe, pag. 44. In the first Councell of Ephesus (being the third generall Councell) there arose great contntions btwixt Cyril of Alexan ria, and Iohn Bishop of Anti∣och, two Patriarkes, either of them thundring Anathe¦matismes againt other, and depriuing each othr of their Churches. Theodores vnhappily thrust his sickle into Iohns haruest, against whom (at the nstigation of Euoptius) Cyrillus grieuously inueighed. Theodoret ac∣cused Cyrill of Apollinarisme, and Cyrill accused Theo∣doret of N storianisme. And this fury spred so farre, that it drew almost the Christian world into sides. So that when afterwards Theodoret would haue come into the Chalcedon Synod, the Aegyptian and other reuerend Bi∣shops cryed; If we receiue Theodoret, we cast out Cy∣ril: the Canons cast out Theodoret God abhorres him. This was done in the first action of the Chalcedon Coun∣cell,
and againe in the eight action, the Bishops crying out openly he is an Hereticke, he is a Nstorin, away with the Hereticke. Yet when the matter was fully knowen, and that Theodoret had willingly subscribed to the Orthodoxe Creedes, and to Leo's Epistles; The whole Syno cryed with one vyce, Theodoret is wor∣thy of his Ecclesiasticall Sea let the Church receiue her Catholike Pastor. Antiquus. Your discourse hath  t me into a mix∣ture of griefe and o: Griefe that any of the holy, an∣cient Fathers haue held any errours at all; and that there were such bitter contentions among them: Ioy, that seeing there were such, they are not hid from me. For that will make me more moderate in thinking of them, though reuerently as holy men; yet still as men, subiect to humane infirmities; and not in all things to make their sayings rules of my faith, or their doings paternes of my life: but altogether to make the most holy, perfect, infallible, and vnstained word of God, the guides of both; and it shall make me also more wise in esteeming men now liuing, reuerently for the graces of God which I see in them notwithstanding their hu∣mane fralties, such as I perceiue the best Saints of God haue had. But yet I see not any sufficient rule to leade mee, to Iudge how you can challenge the Fathers to be of your Religion more then the Romans may challenge them to be of theirs. I perceiue well, they diffred from both in many things, wherein you both refuse them. Antiquissimus. You make that vse of my discourse that I wish. For the Rule to direct your iudge∣ment, I haue pointed at it often: and now I will briefely and as fully as I can, lay it open vnto you.
CHAP. 4. Of the Rule, to iudge the soundnesse and purity of all Christians, and Churches by. This Chapter hath foure Sections. The first Section; of the Rule vsed in the Primitiue Church. The second, of the Rule enlarged and approued in this Age: The third, of Obiections arising from the former discourses, and their answeres. The fourth, of the necessity of Preaching still to them that hold the Rule. The first Section. §. 1. The Rule in generall. §. 2. Opened by distinctions of the foundation of Reli∣gion. §. 3. A necessity to haue a short rule drawne out of the Scriptures. §. 4. This rule is described by Saint Paul. §. 5. The practise of it, by the Apostles, who onely deliue∣red the most necessary fundamentall points to the Iewes, and then baptized them. §. 6. The like practise vsed by the following Primitiue Church, to their Catechumeni before Baptisme. §. 1. THe Rule to Iudge all Christians and Churches by, is this; They that hold the same funda∣mentall points of Christian Religion, which doe sufficiently constitute the Church of Christ: and hold no other
opinions wittingly and obstinately that ouerthrow any of these fundamentall points; they are vndoubted∣ly of the same true Church and Religion. §. 2. For the vnderstanding of this Rule, note, 1 Saint Paul distinguisheth betwixt the foundation, and that which is built vpon the foundation, 1 Cor. 3.10. As a wise Master-builder, I haue laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon. The word Foundation is taken two wayes; First, for the principall thing which is to be beleeued, and wher∣upon our saluation is builded; that is, Iesus Christ: as Saint Paul saith there, verse 11. Other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Iesus Christ. Acts 4.12. There is no saluation in any other; there is none other name vnder heauen giuen among men, whereby we must be saued, 1 Tim. 3.16. This is the great my∣stery of godlinesse, God was manifest in the flesh, &c. This was Saint Peters confession, Matth. 16.16. Thou art Christ, the Sonne of the liuing God. Vpon which con∣fession (as Saint Augustine and Chrysostome expound it) Christ said he would build his Church, and the gates of Hell should not preuaile against it. Secondly, the word Foundation is taken for the Do∣ctrine of the Scriptures, which teach saluation onely by Iesus Christ: as Ephes. 2.20. The house (that is the houshold, or Church) of God is built vpon the Founda∣tion of the Apostles and Prophets: Jesus Christ him∣selfe the chiefe Corner stone. And so the Apostles are called twelue foundations, Reuel. 21.14. to wit, in res∣pect of their doctrine, whereby they laid the foundati∣on of the Church, and of mens saluation by Iesus Christ. §. 3. 2 Although the whole Scripture, and euery thing therein contained, or from it necessarily deduced, be a fit obiect for faith to apprehend; Yet that all Christi∣ans
should thorowly conceiue and vniformely professe them all, is not to be hoped,B. Vsher. Serm. at Wansted. pag 22. nor in any Age hath beene found. As we haue manifestly prouedIn the for∣mer Chapter.. Variety of Iudgements in some points of lesser moment, which are not plainely deliuered in the Scriptures, may be tol∣lerated, and must not dissolue the vnity which all must hold in the fundamentall principles. Heauen was not prepared for deepe Clerkes onely, which vnderstood all, or for such as neuer differed in any opinion:1 Cor. 132, 12. but euen for such also as knew but in part, and saw through a glasse darkely.Aug. epist. 57. Regula Fidei pufillis magnis{que} communis. And therefore beside that larger mea∣sure of knowledge, whereof all are not capable, there must be a rule of Faith common to great and small (as Saint Augustine calls it.) And as there is a common sal∣uationIude v. 3. (whereof the meanest beleeuer is capable, as well as the greatest Apostles2 Pet. 1.1.) so there must be a com∣mon faithTit. 1.4. sufficient to conduct vs all vnto it. §. 4. This Saint Paul calls, The fourme of sound words, 2 Tim. 1.13. hold fast the forme of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in faith and loue, which is in Christ Iesus. 1 It must be a forme, frame or fashion, body, method, Rule of Faith, or of sound and sauing Doctrine, fit for all Preachers to frame their Sermons by, and all Chri∣stians to frame their faith and life by; Timothy in prea∣ching, and the Ephesians in hearing and practizing. 2 It must be, not only  (as rom. 6.17.) but  (here) a short forme, or briefe method. There must per∣spicuity for the vnderstanding, and breuity for the me∣mory of simple men. 3 To these must be added certainty (which thou hast heard of me:) learned of men, inspired by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. 2 Tim. 3 15, 16, 17.Bellar. De verbo Dei lib. 1. cap. 2. § quare cum. Sacra Scriptura est regula credendi certissima, tutissimaque, saith Bellarmine.
4 Adde also sufficiency: both for Credenda all things to be beleeued (in Faith:) and for Facienda all things to be performed (in Loue,) which is the fulfil∣ling of the Law. For true Faith and good life containe all things belonging to a Christian. And all things ap∣pertaining to these, that are necessary for all men to know, are contained in the Scriptures: saith Bell alsoIdem ib. l. 4. c 11.9. His notatu Duo omnia illa scripta esse ab A∣postolis, qua sunt omnibus necessa∣ria, & quae ipsi palam omnibus pradicaverant. Costerus in En∣chiridio c. 1. de sacra scriptura §. Caeterum. Caete∣rum non insicia∣mur praecipna il∣la capita qua omnibus Christi∣anis ad salutem necessaria, per∣spicue satis essè Apostolicis scrip∣tu comprehensa. As Augustine also de doctr. Christiana l. 2. c. 9. ellar. de Iu∣stif l. 3. c. 8. § prima ratio. B. Vsher. serm. Wansted p. 42. Vincent. Lirinen si contra haeres. c. 3. Jn ipsa ca∣tholica ecclesia magnopere cu∣randum est, vt id teneamus, quod vbi{que}, quod sem∣per, quod ab om∣nibus creditum est, hoc est enim verè proprin{que} ca∣tholicum. Ioan. Serran. in Apparat. ad fidem call l. edit. Paris. 1607. pag. 172. Vsher ib. pag. 59. See S. August. libr. de fi de & operibus cap. 9.. Yea, and that plainly enough saith the Iesuite Costerus. 5 And to these belong also that Antiquity, Ʋni∣uersality, and Vnity which are so much spoken of, and are vsually, (but most falsly) applyed to the new addi∣tiōs of the Roman Church, as well as to these fundamē∣tall principles: to which onely they belong. Vincenti∣us Lirinensis saith well; That is truely and properly Catholicke and to be held in the Catholicke Church, whch in all places, in all times, and of all Christians, hath beene, and is beleeued. And this (saith Serranus a late learned man, who hath written a full discourse of this argument) is that doctrine, against which the gates of Hell shall neuer preuaile; and which the Father of lies by all his deuises and attempts, could neuer yet, nor euer shall abolish, or foote out of the hearts of men. This Antiquity Ʋniuersality, or Catholicisme, and this Vnity or Generall consent of Christian doctrine, will ne∣uer be found any where, but in the essentiall, substanti∣all and fundamentall points thereof. 6 Saint Paul yet addeth these words, Which is in Christ Iesus, because he is the deepest Foundation, root, Author, and finisher of our Faith and Loue: of our future saluation, and of our present gracious con∣uersation. Other Foundation can no man lay, saith the same Saint Paul 1. cor. 3.11. Not that there need no other principles of Faith then those that concerne his person onely and directly,
(for the Articles concerning God the Father, the Holy Ghost, the forgiuenesse of sinnes, resurrection of the dead, the last Iudgement &c. haue their place in the Foundation. Hebr. 6.1, .) but because Christ is the most especiall obiect of our Faith, and the primary Foundation of all the other, for they haue all reference vnto him, being such as concerne either His Father, or His spirit, or His incarnation, or His office of mediation, or His Church, or the speciall benefits which he hath purchased for it. And also, all the Articles, as they build vs vpon the Foundation, and as they incorporate vs into the mysticall Body, or as they are meanes of our Iustifi∣cation and life, they looke vpon the sonne of God, and him onely. Also, we must not onely know the originall cause of our saluation, but also our need therof by knowledge of our originall and actuall sinnes, which deserue damnation and the meanes to communicate this salua∣tion vnto vs, the Church, the Ministery, preaching, sacraments; and the dueties which we must do. For (rom 10.14) how can we know God, or pray to him, without beleeuing; or beleeue without hearing; or heare without preaching; or haue preaching, except Preachers be sent from God by meanes of the Church? or know our duties without Gods comandments; Mat. 15.9. Faith is necessary. Rom. 4.14. gal. 2.21. hebr. 11.6 so is new birth. Joh. 3.5. 2. cor. 5.17. Ioh. 13.8. Re∣pentance. luc. 13.3. Deniall of our selues. luc. 9.23.24 &c. §. 5. But how farre these Fundamentall principles (which are absolutely necessare to saluation) must extend, is a Question of some difficulty. The Apostles contented themselues in conuerting the Jewes to Christian Religion, to teach them that Christ Iesus was the Sauiour of the world, and that
Saluation was to be had onely by Repentance from Dead works, and Faith in him. For that he was the very Messias foretold by the Patriarks and Prophets, had died for our sinnes and rose againe for our Iustification. They mentioned not God the Father, Creator, and Preseruer of the world, nor the doctrine of the Trinity and other things (which the hearers knew before, with∣out any new teaching, being Jewes and well acquainted with the Olde Testament) but presupposing they were grounded in these points before, they layd the foun∣dation of the New Testament, to wit Saluation by Iesus Christ onely:B. Vsher in his Sermon at Wansted, 1624 And Bellarmin. also lib. 4. de verbo Dei cap. 11. alleadge these exam∣ples to this purpose. which when the people receiued and beleeued, they presently baptized them, and re∣ceiued them into the Congregation of Christs flocke. Thus did Sant Peter Acts 2. and Acts 3. and Acts. 4.10, 11, 12. The like course was vsed by Phillip to the Eunuch who embraced the Old Testament Acts 8.28-35-37. &c. And by Saint Peter to Cornelius, and his company (who had before receiued the Religion of the Iewes. Acts. 10.2, 22, 35, 43.) And by Saint Paul Acts 13.14, 16, -32, -38, 39. &c. The Apostles receiuing the Conuerts to Baptisme, vpon adding to their former knowledge these few principles of true Faith in Christ Iesus, and good life; shewed, that in their Iudgement they wanted no essentiall thing, necessary for the making of them true members of the Church, and perfect Christians: or (as our Catechisme calles them) members of Christ, Children of God, and inheritors of the Kingdome of Heauen and that if God should take them out of this world in their first entrance into these principall grounds of saluation, without further knowledge or practise: yet vndoubtedly they should die sufficient Christans, and in the state of Grace. §. 6. Conformable to the Apostles practise, the Christians
of the Primitiue Church baptized those that were Catechized in the grounds of sauing doctrine (as the essentiall points of Religion, that constitute a Christian) as appeareth by Irenaeus and Tertullian,See Irenaeus and Tertullian cited before. chap. 1. sect. 2. sub. 1. §. 2. whom I alleadged before, and by the Creeds which were ordayned as Badges of Christians and differences of true beleeuers frō either vnbeleeuers or hereticks. The Westerne Churches vsed in their Baptisme that short form of confession, comōnlly called the Apostles Creed: which in the more ancient times was breefer then now it is (as our Learned Bishop Ʋsher hath punctually ob∣serued.B. Vsher serm. at Wansted. p. 28.) The mention of the Fathers being Maker of Heauen and Earth, the Sonnes death and descending into Hell, and the Commuion of Saints, being wholly omitted (happily as not necessary for all men to know as Suarez saith, or sufficiently implied in other articles, or knowen by the light of reason, and so not making difference betwixt Christians and heathen, these reasons some for one point, some for another) But being in time made (for better explication) so full as it is, now the whole Westerne Church hath long receiued as a badge of their Faith distinguishing the Beleeuer from the vnbeleeuer. The Eastern Church vsed in Baptisme a larger Creed,Vsher. ib. p. 30. Euseb. ep. apud Socrat l. 1. hist. cap. 8. (al. 5.) & Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 12. the same or very little different from that we call the Nicene Creed, because the greatest part thereof was repeated and confirmed in the Nicene Councell; to which it was presented by Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, with this Preamble: As we haue receiued from the Bishops that were before vs, both at our first Cate∣chising, and when we receiued Baptisme; and as we haue learned from the holy scriptures; and as we haue both beleeued and taught, when we entred into the Ministery, and in our Bishoprick it selfe: so beleeuing at this present also, we declare this our Faith vnto you. To this the Nicene Fathers added a more cleare
explication of the Deity of the Sonne (against the Ar∣rians, which then troubled the Church) professing him to be begotten not made: and to be of one substance with the Father. The second generall Councell assembled 56 yeares after, at Constantinople, approuing all the former, added also something concerning the holy Ghost (which then was oppugned by the Macedonian Heretickes.) The same Fathers also then added the Articles concerning the Catholicke Church, and the priuiledges thereunto belonging. The Roman Church, after the dayes of Charles the Great, added the Article of Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Sonne. And the late Councell of Trent recommended it vnto vs,Concil. Trident. seff. 3. as That principle in which all that professe the faith of Christ, doe necessarily agree, and the firme and onely foundation against which, the gates of Hell shall neuer preuaile. And by which alone, our Fathers sometimes drew Infidels to the faith, ouer∣came Heretickes, and confirmed the faithfull. Such are the words of the Trent Councell. So that in this Creed they confesse, That onely foundation and princi∣ple of faith is to be found, in the vnity whereof, all Christians must necessarilly agree. Section. 2. §. 1. The rule enlarged, and approued in this Age. §. 2 By Azorius, out of the School-diuines, in 14 Articles. §. 3. Some obseruations and censures of those 14 Articles. §. 4. The rule set downe by Bellarmine, more briefly. §. 5. By D. Field, farre more sufficiently, in 6 Articles, with his iudgement of the deductions therefrom; eui∣dent, or obscure. §. 6. B. Vshers distinction of superstructions vpon the foundation. §. 7. Consequents of this doctrine.
§. 1. But, because we see, this foundation of faith, hath from the Apostles times continually been enged by reason of errours and heresies arising in serall A∣ges; let vs search a little further how the most Iudcious men do bound it in these our dayes. §. 2. Azorius the Iesuite deliuers the vnanimous consent of all the Roman Diuines in 14 Articles,Azorius Institu. tionum morali∣um part. 1. lib. 8. cap 5. § At iuxta. ibid § tertio quaeritur. & seq. whereof seuen concerne the Diuine nature, and seuen concerne the hu∣mane all which are to be beleeued explicitè, (with di∣stinct vnderstanding) of all men. Of the first seuen, there is taught in the First, That God is in Nature and Substance, eternall, infinite, immense, and in maiesty highest, euery where, not onely in power, might, and efficacy, but also in deed and truely, present: who hath power of life and death; is the supreme Lord of all things: who can with his becke, and at his pleasure doe all things which he will: who knoweth, seeth, careth for, and moderateth all things Secondly, The first person in nature and diuine sub∣stance, to wit, The Father is the beginning of two di∣uine persons and therefore the begetter of the Sonne and breather of the Holy Spirit: vnbegotten, subsisting of himselfe and by himselfe; not receiuing, and hauing his essence of another. Third, The second person in the Diuine nature is true God, begotten of the Father onely, from all eterni∣ty, the naturall Sonne of God, consubstantiall and equall to him in all things, the onely Word and expresse Image of the Father, most perfectly representing and expressing him. Fourth. The third person in the diuine Nature, the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the
Sonne from all eternity, is true God, coaeternall to them both, coquall, and consubstantiall, and to be worshpped with the same faith, and with equall seruice and honour. Fifth. God is the creator of all things, who by his onely becke and word out of nothing produced all things visible and inuisible or the whole frame of the worl in the beginning of time; and hauing produced them, preserues, directs, cares for, and gouernes them with great goodnesse and wisdome. And as he is the creator of all things, from whom all things be ng made of nothing did in time proceed: so he is the end of all, to whom all things are referred Sixt. God is the giuer of all righteousnesse holines, and grace. He forgiueth sinnes and restoreth sinners by the grace of adoption to his fauour and friendship. Seuenth. God is the bestower of eternall glory and heauenly felcity in whom the highest happinesse of blessed soules consisteth. Of the other seauen Articles concerning the humane Nature: The First sheweth that the Sonne of God for our sakes debased himselfe from Heaun to these inferior parts, descended and assumed the humne Nature, and coupled it to himselfe with a maruelous knot and bond, in such sort, that after that coniunction there was one person of both, subsisting in two Natures, diuine and humane; and therefore in time he was conceiued, without Father, of an vncorrupt Virgin, the power of the holy Ghost so working in her, that the word was made flesh, and God Man. The Second sheweth the same Sonne of God taking humane Nature of the vndefiled Virgin was borne into the world in such sort, that Many was at once the Mother of God and a pure V rgin. The Third sheweth how Chri our Lord did most excellently performe the office of teaching & working
miracles, died and made his end vnder Pilate the Iudge and President, and vnder him endured an vniust condemnation and suffered the most shamefull kinde of punishment of the crosse, and sustayned the most bitter death for vs and refused not buriall offered vnto him in another Mans sepulcher. The Fourth article teacheth how Christ after he had died vpon the crosse, descended in his soule intoOr, the lower parts, infero. hell, both that he might shew himself conquerour of death and Diuells, and also the dliuerer of the Fathers there detayned: and in his body he lay three dayes in the sepulcher. The Fifth professeth that Christ the third day returning conquern from the lower parts, to lfe immortall and full of glory, by his owne force and power, did rise from the dead. The Sixt sheweth how Christ hauing performed the worke of Mans redemption, the fortieth day after his resurrection by his owne power ascended into heauen, that in his humane Nature he might be exalted aboue all things, and he aboue all might be chiefly worshipped of all; who sits in heauen at the right hand of the power of God, and as God exercising equall power with the Father, and shining with diuine Maiesty. The Seuenth article setteth out the last Iudgement day, when Christ in his humane Flesh shall descend againe from the highest heauen, and performing the office of the terrible Iudge of the whole earth, shall openly render vnto euery one according as he hath done in his body, whether it be good or euill: before whose tribunall all men both good and euill shall stand, whether that day of Iudgement finde them yet aliue in the flesh, or dead before. These 14 articles I haue set downe at large, and in the full wordes of Azorius (not that I approue euery word and point therin, but) to shew what is the generall doctrine of the present Roman Church, what
and how much is necessary for euery man to know and to beleeue explicitè to his saluation. Note, he is said to beleeue explicitè who assenteth to any thing that is told him, or which he conceiueth in his thought; and hee beleeueth implicitè, which beleeueth any thing in gene∣rality, and in that thing beleeueth many other things which are contained in it, as when a man beleeueth all things which the Church beleeueth.Azor ib. cap. 6. in calce. Thus saith Azo∣rius out of Gabriel the Schoolman. §. 3. Abundant in su∣perfluis, deficiunt in necessarijs. Be spr l tk See ellar in tht chapter at large.First, These Articles vpon due consideration will bee found to haue two faults, they containe too much, and too little. Too much, for all things in them are not taught in the Scriptures (as namely that of the fourth Article of the Humanity, that Christ descended into hell to deliuer the Fathers there detained) as by Bellar∣mines confession, and the ancient Fathers testimonies they should be.Costerus uchir. cap. 1. pag. 49. § Caterum. Costerus the Iesuite saith also, that the chiefe heads of faith, necessary for all Christians to know, and to beleeue vnto saluation are plainly enough contained in the Apostles writings. Secondly, these Articles also containe too little, for here want somethings that are deliuered in the Apostles Creed, which Creed was ordained for the necessary instruction of all Christians, and called Symbolum a badge, or signe to dstinguish Christians from Infidels and wicked people.Axor ib. cap. 5. § Postremo ob∣tes. There were indeed three Symboles or Creedes receiued in the Church for briefe comprehensions of the publicke necessary do∣ctrines thereof, for all Christ ans to know and professe, the Apostls Creed, the Ncene and Athanasius his Creed which three do not containe diuers doctrines, but rather one and the same faith, set forth more largely o briefly, n more or fewer words, more cleerely and distinctly to confute heresies as they sprung vp in the Church. In these Creedes, we are taught that there is
one holy Catholicke Church, and Communion of Saints, &c. which in these fourteene Articles are not mentioned. Thirdly, Besides some other things which the Roma∣nists account very necessary Articles of their faith, as that of transubstantiation, that of Purgatory, that of the Popes supremacy, which they haue wholly left out, as they haue done also the worshipping of Images, In∣uocation of Saints, Prayer for the dead, (and generally all other things almost which wee refuse) shewing thereby, (and so much gratifying vs) that in their own iudgement these things are not necessary for ordinary Christians to beleeue to saluation. Fourthly, and the view of these Articles may con∣firme any man in the sufficiency of the Protestants Reli∣gion, because they stedfastly beleeue (excepting that one clause of one of them) all these Articles, which the Romanists themselues say are sufficient for saluation. Neither doe the Protestants hold any thing at all that crosseth them. §. 4. But Bellarmine touching vpō this point,Bellar. De verbo Dei lib. 4. c. 11. initio. in answering to Irenaeus, and diuers other Fathers that say, The Apo∣stles wrote all that they preached: saith more briefely, There are some things simply necessary for all men to saluation, as the knowledge of the Articles of the Apo∣stles Creed, and of the ten Commandements, and of some Sacraments: other things are not so necessary, that without the manifest knowledge, faith, and pro∣fession of them a man cannot be saued, if so be that hee haue a ready will to receiue and beleeue them when they shall be lawfully propounded vnto him by the Church. And this distinction, (saith he) is gathered from hence, that without the knowledge and faith of the Mysteries of the first kinde, no man of a ripe Age is admitted to Baptisme: but without the knowledge
and Faith (at least explicit) of the latter, men were or∣dinarily admitted, Acts 2 after one sermon of Saint Peter wherin he had taught the principall heads of faith in Christ, in one day 3000 men were baptized, who whithout doubt knew nothing else but those necessary things. And therefore it is added, that after baptisme they perseuered in the Doctrine of the Apostles, that is, they learned what yet they had not heard of Christian Misteries &c. B. Vsher. Ser∣mon at Wan∣std pag. 32. See also his booke De Chri∣stianarum eccles. successu & statu cap. 1. § 15.This our Bishop Ʋsher agreeth vnto, alledging the Apostles sermons to that purpose, which treated onely of the first principles of the Doctrine of Christ, vpon the receiuing whereof (as of sufficient doctrine to make them Christians) men were baptized. And this he further confirmeth by the writings of Irenaeus and Ter∣tullian, and the Creeds receiued by the Church, the Apostles Creed, the Creed of Athanasius, The Creed of the East Church,See before, cap. 1. sect. 2. sub∣ject. 1. §. 2. recited and confirmed for the be∣leefe of the whole Church in the Councells of Nice and Constantinople and the late Councell of Trent. Whereof I haue spoken already. § 5. D. Field of the Church booke 3. chap 4.Our Doctor Field, doth more fully and perfectly de∣scribe those things, that so neerely touch the very life and being of Christian Faith and Religion, that euery one is bound particulaly and expresly to know and be∣leeue them, vpon paine of eternall damnation. He reduceth them to sixe principall heades: First, concerning God, whom to know is eternall life: we must beleeue and acknowledge the vnity of an infinite, incomprehensible, and eternall essence, full of righte∣ousnesse, goodnesse, mercy, and trueth; The Trinity of persons subsisting in the same essence; the Father, Sonne and Holy Ghost, coessentiall, coeternall, and coequall: the Father not created, nor begotten, the
Sonne not created but begotten, the holy Ghost not created nor begotten, but proceeding. Secondly, we must know and beleeue, that God made all things of nothing, that in them he might ma∣nifest his wisdome, power, and goodnesse, that he made men and Angels capable of supernaturall blessednesse, consisting in the vision and enioying of himselfe; that he gaue them abilities to attaine thereunto, and lawes to guide them in the wayes that lead vnto it; that no∣thing was made euill in the beginning; that all euill entred into the world by the voluntary aversion of men and Angels from God their Creator; that the sinne of Angels was not generall, but that some fell, and other continued in their first estate; that the sinne of those Angels that fell is irremissible, and their fall irre∣vocable; that these are become deuils and spirits of er∣rour, seeking the destruction of the sonnes of men; that by the misperswasion of these lying spirits, the first man that euer was in the world, fell from God by sinnefull disobedience and apostacy; that the sinne of the first man is deriued to all his posterity, not by imitation onely, but by propagation and descent, subiecting all to curse and malediction; yet not without possibility and hope of mercifull deliuerance. Thirdly, we must beleeue, that for the working of this deliuerance, the Sonne of God assumed the nature of man, into the vnity of his Diuine person; so that he subsisteth in the nature of God, and Man, without all corruption, confusion, or conuersion of one of them in∣to another: that in the nature of man thus assumed, he suffered death but being God could not be holden of it, but rose againe, and triumphantly ascended into hea∣uen: that he satisfied the wrath of his Father, obtai∣ned for vs remission of sinnes past, the grace of repen∣tant conuersion, and a new conuersation, ioyned with assured hope, desire, and expectation of eternall happi∣nesse.
Fourthly, we must constantly beleeue, that God doth call and gather to himselfe out of the manifold confu∣sions of erring, ignorant, and wretched men, whom hee pleaseth, to be partakers of these precious benefits of eternall saluation: the happy number and ioyfull so∣ciety of whom, we name the Church of God; whether they were before or since the manifestation of Christ the Sonne of God in our flesh. For both had the same faith, hope, and spirit of adoption, whereby they were sealed vnto eternall life; though there be a great diffe∣rence in the degree, and measure of knowledge, and the excellency of the meanes, which God hath vouchsafed the one, more then the other. Fiftly, we must know and beleeue, that for the pub∣lishing of this ioyfull deliuerance, and the communica∣ting of the benefits of the same, the Sonne of God com∣mitted to those his followers, whom he chose to bee witnesses of all things he did or suffered, not onely the word of Reconciliation, but also the dispensation of sa∣cred and sacramentall assurances of his loue, set meanes of his gracious working: that those first messenges, whom he sent with immediate commission, were in∣fallibly led into all truth, and left vnto posterities that summe of Christian Doctrine, that must for euer be the rule of our faith: that these blessed messengers of so good and happy tidings, departing hence, left the Ministery of Reconciliation to those whom they appointed to succeed them, in the worke so hap∣pily began by them. Lastly, we must know, and be assuredly perswaded, that seeing the renouation of our spirits and mindes is not perfect; and the redemption, of our bodies still remaining corruptible, is not yet; therefore God hath appointed a time, when Christ shall returne againe, raise vp the dead, and giue eternall life to all, that with repentant sorrow, turne from their euill and wicked wayes, while it is yet the accepted time, and day of
saluation; and contrary wayes, cast out into vtter darkenesse, and into the fire that neuer shall be quen∣ched, all those that neglect, & despise so great saluation. All these things, and these onely, doe directly con∣cerne the matter of eternall saluation: saith Doctor Field. These things (saith he) make the rule of faith, whereof a man cannot be ignorant, and bee saued. By these all the holy Fathers, Bishops and Pastors of the Church, measured and made their Sermons, Commen∣taries, and interpretations of Scripture. This rule is deliuered by Tertullian, Irenaeus,Tertull. de prae∣scriptionibus ad∣versus hareticos, & adversus Praxcam. Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 3. See here before. cap. 1. sect. 2. subsect. 1. §. 2. and other of the Fa∣thers: and with addition of conclusions most easily, clearely, and vnavoydably deduced hence, by Theodoret in his Epitome Dogmatum. For a second sort of things there are that attend on these first as consequents deduced from them, or some way appertaining to them: such as a man being per∣swaded of these, will see the necessary consequence and deduction of them from these, if they be propounded vnto him. As that there are two wills in Christ: that there is no saluation, remission of sinnes, or hope of eternall life out of the Church, &c. In such second things clearely deduced from the first principles, if a man erre he can hardly be saued. A third sort of things there are, which are not so clearely deduced frō those first indubitate principles; as, namely, concerning the place of the Fathers rest before the comming of our Sauiour Christ; concerning the locall descending of Christ into the hell of the damned, &c. Of this third sort, a man may be ignorant, and erre in them without danger of damnation, if errour be not ioyned with pertinacy. §. 6. The like doctrine doth our Bishop Vsher deliuer,B. Vsher, Ser∣mon at Wan∣sled. pag. 33. 1 Cor. 3.12. in words of analogy to Saint Pauls similitude of buil∣ding; Some build vpon this foundation, gold,
Siluer, pretious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble. Some (saith he) proceed from one degree of wholesome Knowledge vnto another; increasing their maine stocke, by the addition of those other sacred truthes that are reuealed in the word of God: and these build vpon the foundation, gold, and siluer, and pretious stones. Others retaine the pretious foundation, but lay base matter vpon it; wood, hay, stubble, and such other, ei∣ther vnprofitable or more dangerous stuffe: and o∣thers goe so farre, that they ouerthrow the very foundation it selfe. The first of these be wise, the second foolish, the third madde builders. When day of triall commeth, the first mans worke shall a∣bide,Ibid. v. 14, 15. and hee himselfe shall receiue a reward; the se∣cond shall lose his worke, but not himselfe. The third, shall lose both himselfe and his worke to∣gether.— And as in buildings there is great difference to bee made betwixt such parts as are more conti∣guous to the foundation, and such as be remoter off; So the doctrines or conclusions neerely conioyned to the first principles of Religion, and grate vpon the foundation, may more establish or endanger the buil∣ding, then those that come not neere the foundation; and therefore the nearer they are to the foundation, the more important be the truthes, and the more peri∣lous be the errours: And againe, the farther they are remoued off, the lesse necessary is the knowledge of such verities, and the swaruing from the truth lesse dangerous. §. 7. Out of all this we may deduce these consequents. First, to these fundamentall points (which are ab∣solutely necessary to saluation) the vnity of faith is to be restrained, and beyond them not to be extended. So that such as hold diuersity of opinions in other points
of lesse moment not crossing these may still be of one faith or Church, and heires of saluation, as long as they hold the true foundation. Secondly, by this rule the ancient Fathers are cleared to be sound Christians.This we haue shewed in the former chap∣ter. For though many of them (as is aforesaid) held the millenary errour: many held that the soules of iust men shall not see God till the resurre∣ction, many that the very Deuils should not be tormen∣ted in hell till the Iudgement. Many taught free-will before Grace. Some taught the Omnipresence, and Omniscience of Saints departed. Cyprian and many more held rebaptization necessary for such as were baptized by Heretickes: Saint Augu∣stine, and the greatest part of the Curch for sixe hun∣dred yeeres, held a necessity of the Eucharist to In∣fants: and in many other things they differed one from another and from the Church in the aftertimes:See D. Field. Church. book. 3. chap. 5. § All these. Yet because they all entirely and stedfastly held all the necessary fundamentall principles which these errours did not infringe, neither held they these errours obsti∣nately or incorrigibly, but onely for want of better in∣formation: they were certainely of the same Church and Relgion whereof we are, and whereof all are that hold the same principles vnweakned by any other. Thirdly the lke is to be said of the Waldenses, though many of those smaller errours were true, which (as I haue shewed before) were falsely imputed vnto them. Fourthly, the same may be said also of our Fathers that liued in the Communion of the Church of Rome, before Luthers time, and bfore the Councell of Trent. Their holding and professing thse necessary funda∣mentall points as I haue shewed before,See before chap. 1. sect. 4. per tot. was suffici∣ent to make them true Christians, if in life and death they shewed the power and vertue thereof: and main∣tained not obstinately any grosse points that infringed the foundation. Fiftly, the same may be also said of all the Churches
in the world, where the ancient foundations are retai∣ned,B. Vshers serm. at Wansted. pag. 43. The Greeke, Armenian, Aehiopian, Russian, &c. For if we should take a generall view of them all, put∣ting by the points wherein they differ one from ano∣ther, and gathering into one body the rest of the Arti∣cles wherein they all did generally agree: wee should finde, that in those propositions which without all con∣trouersie are vniuersally receiued in the whole Christi∣an world, so much truth is contained, as being ioyned with holy obedience, may be sufficient to bring a man to euerlasting saluation.B. Vsher. ib. D. Field. church. book. 3. chap. 5. This is Bishop Vshers opini∣on, and Doctor Fields of these Churches. Section. 3. §. 1. Obiection. If holding the foundation will serue, then we may safely obtaine saluation in the Church of Rome. §. 2. Answer. The Curch of Rome holds many things which by consequent destroyes the Foundation, by ma∣ster Hookers Iudgement. §. 3. Obiection. This crosseth what was said before: That many before Luthers time might be saued in the Roman Church. Answ. no, for they liued in those errors of ignorance, not obstinacy; and not knowing any dangerous consequence of them. §. 4. Such men, by particular repentance of sinnes knowne, and generall repentance of vnknowne; might by Gods mercy be saued. §. 5. Obseruations hereof. §. 6. Other learned Protestants ioyne in opinion with master Hooker. §. 1. Antiquus. If this be so: then (to omit other Churches) I see no reason, but wee may well and safely continue in the Roman Church, and therein receiue saluation: because (as you haue said, and it appeares by Azorius and all the schoole-diuines) that Church holdes the Foundation, which is (by your owne confession) suf∣ficient
to saluation: though she hath added many othe things, not necessary absolutely to saluation, yet profitable for the fuller seruice of God, beauty of the Church, and pious life. §. 2. Antiquissimus. If shee added none but such things, wee should account them not onely tollerable, but commendable. But wee charge her with addition of such doctrines and practises, as being obstinately pursued, spoile and ouerthrow the Foundation which shee professeth to hold. Whereof heare one man, Mr. Richard Hooker, a man of great account for learning, Iudgement, and moderation, who vsed very carefully to waigh in the ballance of impartiall discretion all the words, senten∣ces and phrases, which he wrote; and whose workes haue been already sixetimes printed without any altera∣tion:Hookers Dis∣course of Iu∣stification. § 17. Hee grants that the Church of Rome holds the foundation in profession, but ouerthrowes it by the consequence of many opinions and practises now gene∣rally retained in it. As the Galatians held the founda∣tion (to wit, saluation by Iesus Christ) and yet with∣all held a necessity of ioyning circumcision with Christ; which doctrine by consequence destroyed the very foundation, for so Saint Paul wrote vnto them, Gal. 5, 2, 4. If they were circumcised, Christ profited them nothing, he became of none effect vnto them, they were fallen from grace. In like manner (saith he) The Church of Rome, pro∣fessng to hold the foundation of faith, yet by ioyning other things with Christ, and by teaching many things pernicious in Christian faith, doth by consequence plainely ouerthrow the foundation of faith. Plainely (saith his Margen) in all mens sight whose eyes God hath enlightned to behold his truth, for they which are in errour are in darkenesse, and see not that which in light is plaine.
One of their pernicious errors, he toucheth there in the Margensaying,Ibid. §. 11. They hold the same with Nestorius, fully the same with Eutiches, about the proprieties of Christs Nature. More he mentioneth else where in the text, calling them such Impieties as by their law, they haue established, and wherevnto all that are among them, either doe indeed assent, or else are by powerfull meanes forced, in shew and appearance, to subiect themselues.See also ibid. § 2. For example: In the Church of Rome is maintained, that the same credit and reuerence that we giue to the Scriptures of God, ought also to be giuen to vnwritten verities; that the Pope is supreme head ministeriall ouer the vniuersall Church militant, That the bread in the Eucharist is Transubstantiated into Christ; That it is to be adored and to be offered vnto God, as a sacrifice propitiatory for quicke and dead; That Images are to be worshipped; Saints to be called vpon as Intercessors, and such like. §. 3. Antiquus. How agrees this with that you said be∣fore, that the Church of Rome (excepting the Papacy therein) continued to be the Church of God till Luthers time? for euen those (whom you call the Church of God) liued and dyed in the profession of these errours which now you say destroy the foundation of the Church of God. Antiquissimus Vnderstand vs right; They that hold these and such like errours for worldly respects, knowing them to be heresies, and make semblance of allowing that which in heart and iudgement they con∣demne: as also they that heretically maintaine them, by holding them obstinately after wholsome admonition: Mr. Hooker makes no doubt,Cyprian cited beore, cap. 1. Sect. 4 § 3. Tit 3.1, 11. so alo il. 3.2 gal 3.0, 12. & 1, 7, 8, 9. but their condemnation without an actuall repentance, is inevitable. And this is confirmed by Saint Cyprians famous sentence by me cited before; and by Saint Paul, saying, A man that is an hereticke, after the first and second admonition
reiect: knowing that he that is such is subuerted, and sinneth being condemned of himselfe. But many liued in these errors in the Church of Rome, not knowing them to be errors or heresies;Hooker ibid. § 12. nor euer vnderstanding that the consequent thereof destroyed the Foundation of Faith. They following the conduct of their guides, and obseruing exactly what was prescribed them,Ibid. § 13. thought they did God good seruice, when indeed they did dishonour him. They did but erroniously practise what their guides hereti∣callly taught. And though the pit bee ordinarily the end both of the guide and of the guided in blindnesse, yet Gods mercy might saue them that sinned onely of erroneous piety, and were merely deceiued by thinking too well, and trusting too much their hereticall tea∣chers; not being in the rank of them who receiued not the loue of the truth to beleeue it, and had pleasure in vnrighteousnesse, and so were worthy to be giuen ouer to strong delusions and damnation: 2 thes. 2.10, 11, 12. This is confirmed likewise by the former sentence of Saint Cyprian;Cyprian cited before, cap. 1. sect 4. sect;. 3. Augustine cited before cap. 1. sect. 4. in the V. Reason. 1 Cor. 1.2. & 15.14 gal. 1.2. & 5, 2, 4, 10. Hook. ib. § 26. and by the iudgement of Saint Augu∣stine, formerly alleadged; and by Saint Pauls imbra∣cing the Corinthians and Galatians, as Churches of Christ, notwithstanding the errours which they held, being of mere ignorance and seduced by false Teachers. For the false teachers of circumcision, or the froward, stiffe-necked, and obstinate defenders thereof, after wholsome admonition, Saint Paul calleth dogges (Phil. 3.2.) and wisheth them cut off, (Gal. 5 12.) and pro∣nounceth them accursed (Gal 1.8.) But them that held the same errour, of ignorance, not knowing the dange∣rous consequence of it, and retained a mind docible and desirous to be instructed in the truth: and to follow it, Them Saint Paul pittieth, to them he writeth as to the Church of Christ (Gal. 1.2.) them with fatherly tender∣nesse, he admonisheth, instructeth, and imbraceth as his children.
§. 4. And although many of our Fathers in the Church of Rome, dyed in their errors, not knowing them to be er∣rors, and therefore may be thought neuer to haue re∣pented of them: yet the same may be said of the Corin∣thians and Galatians, that many of them dyed before S. Paul either heard of their seducing, or had time to re∣duce them, but of their & the liuing also, in the very be∣ginning of his Epistles (before he deliuered his instructi∣ons) he spake comfortably, and saluted thē as the Chur∣ches and Saints of God.Hooker ibid. § 18. &. 20. And Mr. Hooker giues a rea∣son, why they that hold the foundation of Christian Re∣ligion, cannot be said to dye without some kind of Re∣pentance, euen for vnknowen sinnes. The least sinne in deed, word, or thought, is to be accounted deadly without repentance, and Gods mercy. Yet many sins es∣cape vs without knowledge of them, & many which we obserue not to be sinnes: and without actuall and parti∣cular knowledge, or obseruation of them, there can be no actuall or particular repentance of them: yet for as much as all that hold the foundation of religion invio∣lable in their harts, haue a general hatred of all sin, thogh for actuall knowne sinnes an actuall and particular re∣pentance is required,See Archb. Ab∣bot. ag. Hil. rea∣son 5. § 28. yet for secret and vnknowne sins (as common ouersights, errours, and such as we either know not, or know them not to be sins) a generall ha∣tred, and a generall repentance of all, obtaines the mer∣cy of God, through the mediation of Iesus Christ. Psal. 51. title. Psal. 19.12.Dauid repented actually, particularly, and punctually for his knowne particular sinnes: but of others he saith in generall, who can vnderstand his errours? or know how oft he offendeth? Lord, clense thou me from my secret faults. See heere chap. 3. § 1.13.Many ancient Fathers erroneously held free-will, and yet were not accounted heretickes, because it was of meere ignorance, whereof they were neuer conuicted,
neither was there any full sufficient setling of the truth of that point in the Church before their times, nor the euill consequence thereof discerned. And heresie is the obstinate maintaining of such errours, after the truth is plainely taught, sufficient to convict them. The like may be said of the Millenary errour,See ibid. and many other which diuers of the ancient Fathers held, as afore is mentioned. §. 5. Here you may obserue, First, the Church of Rome is charged with errours,Hock. ibid. § 17. by consequence whereof the very foundation of faith is plainly ouerthrowen, and the force of the blood of Ie∣sus Christ extinguished. Secondly, the wilfull and obstinate maintainers thereof, after wholesome admonition, are guilty of vnauoydable condemnation, without actuall repen∣tance. Thirdly, our Fathers that liued in those errours,D. Whi Woy. pag. 448. Morny church. cap. 9. end. and held them onely vpon ignorance; as they were taught, not thinking they did amisse, and neuer vnderstanding the dangerous consequence of them; might, by their ge∣nerall hatred and repentance of all sinne, though vn∣knowne, be saued through Gods mercy: and by hol∣ding the foundation, and nothing in their knowledge and intent contrary therevnto, were to bee accounted members of the true Church of God. Fourthly, this ignorance in these times cannot giue any colour of excuse, since by reason of Luthers opposi∣tion, these things haue beene better discussed, the er∣rours discouered, and the dangerous consequence of them sufficiently published to the world, not onely by the Diuines of other Countries, but euen by our owne English; So that after so large a publication thereof we may say as Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 4.3.2 Cor. 4.3, 4. If our Gospel he hid, it is hid to them that are lost. In whom the
God of this world hath blinded the mindes of them which beleeue not, lest the light of the glorious Gospell of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine vnto vnto them.2 Thess. 2.10, 11, 12. And 2 Thess. 2.10. In them that perish, be∣cause they receiued not the loue of the truth, that they might be saued: for which cause God sendeth them strong de∣lusion, that they should beleeue a lie; that they might all be damned, who beleeue not the truth, but had plea∣sure in vnrighteousnesse. §. 6. Antiquus. You bring forth but one man, and make him great with praises, as if with his great person and big words, like Goliah, he were sufficient to scarre and and fright the whole army of God. Antiquissimus. No, Sir, I bring him forth as hum∣ble Dauid against your Goliah of Rome: and I will, (if you require it) adioyne vnto him many other Wor∣thies (like Dauids) able to quell all your Giants, not with bigge words, but with sound blowes. D. Field. ap∣pendix to the fift booke pag. vlt.Secondly, Our worthy Doctor Field in his whole fiue bookes of the Church euery where sheweth your corruptions and refuteth them. But for the present read onely the last page of his whole worke, where hee layeth to the charge of the present Church of Rome, 2 number of erroneous points, wherein men liuing and dying, can neuer be saued, and wherein that Church sheweth her selfe to be the Synagogue of Sathan, the fa∣ction of Antichrist, and that Babylon, out of which we must flie, vnlesse we will be partakers of her plagues. Thirdly, our worthy Bishop Downam, in his bookes De Antichrist, sheweth the same. His whole third booke setteth out the opposition of the Pope to Christs especially the sixt and seuenth Chapters containe a Ca∣talogue of the errors and heresies of the present Roman Church: and the eight Chapter sheweth her oppositi∣on against the offices and benefits of Christ, euery
where alledging your owne authors for confirmation of that the saith. Fourthly, The like doth D. Gabriell Powell in his two bookes, De Antichristo, & De Ecclesia Antichristi. If I should but reckon vp the names onely of Prote∣stants which write of these points Punctually (as these aboue named) or otherwise other largly or briefely, ei∣ther purposely or occasionally and obiter, by the way,) I should be needlesly tedious. Fifthly,M. Perkins vp∣on the Epistle of S. Jude pag. 261. I will therefore conclude with one in stead of all, to wit Mr. Perkins. In his Lectures vpon Iude verse. 19 he saith, we may not separate from the (vi∣sible particular) Church, 1 for the corrupt manners of Men (except from the priuate society of notorious of∣fendors onely in priuate conuersation. 1. cor. 5.11) but onely for errors in doctrine: 2 and not for all errors, but onely for errors great and waighty (for smaller errors cut not of saluation, and therefore must not cause a se∣peration. 1 cor. 3, 15) and 3 for those waighty errors euen in the substance of doctrine, or in the Foundation, if they beheld onely of frailty, we may not seperate: but if they be held and maintained with obstinacy, then with good conscience we may, and must seperate from the maintainers of them. 1 tim. 6.3, 4.5. Acts 19.9.2 Chron. 11.4, 16, 17. Antiquus. I like well of Mr. Perkins Iudgement, that we may not make seperation for any other cause but onely for great and waighty errors against the foundation of Religion, and for those onely when they are held with obstinacy. But where doth he charge the Church of Rome with any such? Antiquissimus. Euen in the same Exposition of that Epistle of Saint Iude verse. 3 where he speaketh of the points of Common Saluation from pag. 37 to pag, 97. There he describeth 21 grounds of Faith, and 11 groundes of Gods seruice and good life: which the Church of Rome (as there he sheweth) doth very much
infringe, and in many things ouerthrow, by the points of doctrine and practise, which it maintaineth. Reed and waigh them aduisedly. Section. 4. § 1. There is a necessity, or great profit of Preaching euen to them that are well grounded in all necessary Princi∣ples. § 2. As Israel needed all helpes after the giuing of the Law: and all were too little. § 3. The profits of Preaching in generall. § 4. Some particulars, for continuall spirituall food, cordi∣all medicine and comfort, memory, armour, &c. § 5. The continuall need thereof was found in all Chur∣ches, planted euen by the Apostles, and in their times. §. 1. Antiquus. I will reade them at my better leasure. But now by the way, by your allowing these principall grounds of Religion, to be sufficient for all men to sal∣uation. You seeme to cut off all necessity of so much preaching, as is vsed amongst you. For what needes so much preaching and hearing, when men are already instructed in all points necessary to saluation; Antiquissimus. Preaching is still necessary, because faith and regeneration must continually receiue in∣crease.2 Pet. 3.1. As S. Peter exhorteth in the last words of his la∣ter Epistle, Grow in grace, and in knowledge, &c. If know∣ledge and grace were so perfect in all beleeuers at the first instant, that no reliques of blindnesse or corrupti∣ons remayned in their vnderstanding,1 Cor. 13.9, 12. rom. 7.23. gal. 5.17. eph. 6.11, 12, 13, &c. will, and affecti∣on: no temptation, auocations, suffocations and sedu∣ctions in the world to withdraw them; your speech were to some purpose. But since these things are so common in this world, and so powerfull; it is most necessary to vse of all those meanes which God hath prescribed, especially the continuall vse of the publike
Ministery, which by the inward working of the Holy Ghost, reneweth, raiseth, and bloweth vp (as Bellowes doe the fire) our faith and loue, which else would soone waxe cold, die out, and be extinguished.2 Cor. 4.10. But by these meanes (whatsoeuer become of the outward Man) the Inward man is renewed day by day. §. 2. When the Israelites were already taught the grounds of Religion, in the ten Commandements, Exod. 20. Yet the Lord thought it necessary to adde Interpretations, and fuller explications, thereof, and many ceremonies for their better training and exercise in those grounds, and for the better keeping of them from the Idolatry of the Gentiles. He thought it also necessary to giue them a Deuteronomie or Repetition of the Law,Deut. 1.3, 6. &c after it had beene fully deliuered; Beside the extraordinary testi∣monies of his continuall presence with them,Exod. 13.21. & 16.11, 14. & 17.5. by the pillar of fire by night and the cloud by day; by Manna from heauen. Quaiks from the Sea, water from the Rock, strange victories, deliuerances, signes & wonders, blessings and punishments: all which were Sermons vnto them of Gods power and loue to keepe them in his obedience and seruice. And in the land of Canaan,Acts 15.21. (where they were setled) they had continuall reading and interpreting of the Law euery Sabboth day; con∣tinuall vse of the Sacraments, Circumcision and the Passeouer, and of all sacrifices and ceremonies to keepe them in memory of the Couenant, to stirre them vp and exercise them to obedience, comfort, faith, and hope in the Promised Messias, the saluation and glory of the world. And yet all these were too little to keepe them in the true seruice of God, or from falling away to the Idolatry of the Nations.See 1 Cor. 10. the 11. first verses. For all this many fell to Ido∣latry Adultery tempting of God, murmuring and o∣ther sinnes, so that multitudes of them were one way or other destroyed. And all these things happened vn∣to them for our examples.
§. 3. Therefore we also haue need not only of the grounds well layed; but of continuall explications, and appli∣cations thereof, excitations of our affections, exhorta∣tions to obedience, renouations of our memories, ar∣mour against temptations of seductions, or prophane∣nesse, comforts against all afflictions, food against all faintings, and phisicke against all the maladies of the soule. All which the contiunall vse of the Preaching of the word Ministreth vnto vs.Col. 3.16. Heb. 10.25. Heb. 3.12, 13. Psal. 1.1. Deut. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. Heb. 6.1. Eph. 4 11, 12, 13, 14. 2 Pet. 1.5-10. And therefore wee are euery where exhorted that the word of God may dwel plentifully among vs, that wee forsake not the assemblies, that we exhort and stirre vp one another, that wee meditate vpon the law of God day and night; that we grow vp to perfection, to a full measure of knowledge and holines; that wee be not as children tossed to and fro, and caried about with euery wind of doctrine, by the sleights of men, and cunning craftines; that by adding to Faith, vertue, and to vertue, knowledge; (by continuall adding further degrees to our first graces) wee make our calling and election sure, and put our selues out of danger of falling away. Somethings are absolutly necessary Necessitate finis, to attaine the end (as are these Fundametall doctrines) other things are also necessary, but Necessitate medi, as profitable meanes to be vsed for that end: such are the remouing of all hindrances, and the vsing of all furthe∣rances wherein the Preaching of the word of God is a principall Instrument. §. 4. Luke 8.11. 1 Pet. 2.2. Heb. 5.12, 13, 14.1 Gods word is not onely seed (to be once sowen) but food (to be often Ministred) milke for babes, and strong meat for men growen. As our bodies by corporall, so our soules by continuall vse of spirituall food, must grow, increase, and be strengthened.
2 Not onely food, but wine,See psal. 119.49.50, 9. 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. Acts 2.46 & 3.15.31. or medicine to comfort the fainting heart in all afflictions, in life or death. The beleeuers did eate their meat with gladnesse and single∣nesse of heart. And receiuing letters from the Apostles, reioyced for their consolation. 3 And for renewing of weake memories:1 Pet. 1.12, 13. Rom. 15.14, 15. Phil. 3.1. 2. Thess. 2.5. St. Peter saith, he would not be negligent to put them alwayes in remembrance, though they knew the things before, and were established in the present truth. The like saith Saint Paul to the Romans, Philippians, Thessaloni∣ans. Vpon which last place Saint Chrysostome Com∣menting saith thus much in effect, that we had need of∣ten to review, and renew the seed we haue sowne, co∣uer it well from the Fowles of the ayre hedge and fence it from the beasts of the field, weed and water it, that it may grow, &c. 4 For preseruing the doctrine of saluation, pure and sound from corruption, which may come into the Church by wicked teachers, and witlesse hearers. Some may teach other doctrine, and turne aside to vaine jangling yea to loose faith and a good conscience;1 Tim. 1.3, 6, 19. & 4.1. 2 Tim. 3.6, 7, 8. to depart from the faith, and giue heed to seducing spi∣rits, and doctrines of Deuils. Some creepe into hou∣ses and lead captiue silly women laden with sinnes, led away with diuers lusts: euer learning and neuer able to come to the knowledge of the truth; men of cor∣rupt mindes, reprobate concerning the faith. And of witlesse hearers Saint Paul saith also,2 Tim. 4.3.4. The time will come, when men will not endure to heare sound doctrine, but after their owne lusts they will heape to themselues Teachers, hauing itching eares: and will turne away their eares from the truth, and will be turned vnto Fables. To preuent which mischiefe,2 Tim. 4.1, 2. Saint Paul (for an espe∣ciall remedy) seuerely chargeth Timothy to preach the Word, be instant in season out of season, reprooue, re∣buke, exhort, withall long suffering and doctrine. And
giues him especiall warning. To hould fast (the foun∣dation) the forme of sound words,2 Tim. 1.13. which Saint Paul had taught him, in Faith and loue, which is in Christ Iesus. §. 5. These warnings which Saint Paul gaue to Timothy, we shall finde needefull in all Churches, euen in those of the new Testament, where the foundation was substantially layed by the Apostles themselues. Saint Paul had planted a glorious Church at Rome,Acts 28.30, 31 con∣tinuing there two yeares together in his owne hired house, receiuing all commers, and preaching the king∣dome of God, no man forbidding him. He called them in his Epistle Beloued o God,Rom. 1.7, 8. Saints and saith their Faith was spoken of throughout the whole world:Rom. 5.14. and that they were full of goodnesse, filled with all know∣ledge, able also to admonish one another. And yet Saint Paul was faine to admonish the same Romans, to marke them which caused diuisions and offences, con∣trary to the Doctrine which they had heard and lear∣ned, and to auoid them. For such serue not our Lord Iesus, but their owne belly, and by good words and fayre speaches deceiue the hearts of the simple. Rom. 16.17, 18The same Saint Paul had planted a famous Church at Corinth continuing there a yeare and an halfe: so famous, that he said of it (1 Cor. 1.5) I thanke God, that in euery thing ye are inriched by God in all vtte∣rance and knowledge &c. But that Church of Corinth, which Paul had planted,Acts 18.11. Apollo watered, and God so encreased, The Diuell and wicked men corrupted both in life,1 Cor. 5.1. to suffer such wickednesse as was not so much as named among the Gentils: and in doctrine to embrace such points as made the Apostles preaching vaine,1 Cor. 15.14, 19. and their faith vaine; Yea and made Christians of all men most miserable. Whch Saint Paul was faine laboriously to reforme by writing two large Epistles vnto them.
The Galations erred so dangerously about the doctrine of Iustification,Gal. 5.2, 4. that Saint Paul told them if they re∣formed it not, they were fallen from grace, and Christ profited them nothing. The Philippians had among them dogs, euill workers,Phil. 3.2, 18, 19 enemies to the crosse of Christ, whose God was their belly, whose glory was in their shame, whose end was damnation: Of whome Saint Paul tels them wee∣ping. Saint Paul praised the Colossians. Col. 1.3, 4, 6.Col. 2.8, 16, 21 22. yet he found it necessary to warne them of the danger of vaine philosophy, traditions, worshipping of Angels, and other fruitlesse obseruations after the commandements and doctrines of men. He praised the Thessalonians also:1 Thes. 1.2, 3. &c. & 2.13, 14. ib. cap. 3.7, 5. 2 Thes. 2.2, 3. Yet he found it fit to send Timothy to strengthen and comfort them, least the tempter should by some meanes tempt them, and frustrate his labour. And by two Epistles he stirres them vp to continuance and stedfastnesse in the truth, and giues them many good precepts of life. As he doth also in all his other Epistles to other Churches. The seuen Churches of Asia had their imperfe∣ctions,Reu. 2.4, 5. their dangers and their need of helpes against them. Ephesus fell from her first loue.verse 7. Smyrna dwelt by the Synagogue of Sathan; Pergamus by Satans seat,verse 13. in danger of Balaams stumbling blocks, and the Nicolaitans hatefull Do∣ctrine. Thyatyra tempted by Iezabels fornication and Idols.verse 20. Sardis had a name to liue, and was dead.Reu. 3.1. Philadelphia had but little strength.verse 8. verse 15. Laodicea was neither hot nor colde: thought all well, and knew not she was wretched, miserable, poore, blinde and naked. These Churches, to which (it may be presumed) all other may, in some sort more or lesse, be resembled and ranked; had the foundation well layed in them: but
yet they stood in need of continual renewed instructiōs excitations, exhortations, consolations, armour against temptations, physicke against diseases, and food against faintings: and consequently, of the Word of God (which is all these) to dwell plentifully among them, and duely and daily to be ministred vnto them. I verely thinke, the want of frequenting our Ser∣mons, is the cause that so many fall away to the Romish. It is the policy of your seducers, to keepe them by all meanes from hearing and knowing the truth.2. Thes. 2.10, 11, 12. Other∣wise they could neuer be so blinded, to beleeue lies, to take Nouelty for Antiquity, Idolatry for Gods wor∣ship treasons and massacres for holy acts: to take pleasure in vnrighteousnesse, and be carried away with such other strong delusions and withall deceiuablenesse of vnrighteousnesse to their owne perdidition: and not rather receiue the loue of the truth that they might be saued. Psal. 58.4, .These deafe Adders might be charmed, if they did not willfully stop their eares against the voice of the Charmer,Heb. 4.12. & 2 cor. 10.4, 5. charme he neuer so wisely. For the word of God i quick and powerfull, and sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing euen to the diuiding asunder of the soule and the spirit, and of the Ioints and marow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. The fruit whereof you may see, where it is plentifull and graceously preached, obseruing how religious, de∣uout, iust, and truely honest, the people become; how temperate, sober, charitable vpright dealing and bles∣sed people, abhorring all sinne, desirous and diligent to practise all good duties that tend to the honor of God, and the good of men. I doe not thinke, but if your backsliders would care∣fully heare many of our Preachers, they would be (as Saint Paul saith) conuinced of all,2 Cor. 14.24, 25. and iudged of all: & the very secrets of their hearts made manifest, and so
falling downe on their faces, would worship God, and report, that God is in the Preachers of a truth Antiquus. Oh Sir, so we thinke of our Priests; wee reuerence them as Gods Angels, we heare them as sent from God, as God himselfe; or as men sent and endued with power from God, to teach vs the true way to heauen; to absolue vs from our sinnes, to offer vp the reall sacrifice of Christs body and blood for vs, and to giue vs the true naturall body of Christ himselfe into our moothes to our eternall saluation. Which priui∣ledges your titulary Ministers haue not; They are no Priests, they are meere secular men, without any pow∣er and authority from God to doe any of these things. And therefore we haue no reason to heare them: or to reuerence them otherwise then we doe other ordi∣nary men, for their personall honesty or ciuility, not for their offices. You haue therefore offered mee iust occasion to proceed and vrge this thing, as
CHAP. 5. Of the succession of the Protestants Bishops and Ministers from the Apostles. Section 1. The necessity thereof, vrged, without which there can be no such Church. 2. This succession is clamourously denyed to Protestants. 3. But manifestly proued, and the slanders confuted. 4. Particularly in Cranmer, our first Archbishop. 5. Jn other Bishops of King Henry 8 his time. 6. And of Edward 6. and of Queene Maries time. 7. And of Queene Elizabeths time. 8. The false reports hereof doe alienate many from the Reformed Religion. 9. A proofe of the sufficient ordination of Ministers in forraigne Reformed Churches. 10. Which is further confirmed by the Doctrine and practise of the Romish. Section 1. Antiquus. ANother principall argument, to proue that you Protestants haue no Church at all: because you haue no Priests (or true Ministers) sent and authorized by the Lord. In vrging whereof, giue me leaue somewhat to enlarge my selfe. Antiquissimus. Say what you will. I hope to giue you a sufficient and satisfactory answer. Antiquus. First, there can be no Church without true Ministers to teach the holy Doctrine, to performe the holy seruice of God, and to minister the Sacraments vnto Gods people, and bring them to saluation.Ephes. 4.8. &c. And therefore when our Sauiour ascended into heauen, he
gaue all necessary gifts vnto men, making Apostles, Prophets, Euangelists, Pastors, Teachers, for the worke of the Ministery, gathering and perfecting of the Saints, and edifying of the Church, to continue (by succession) to the end of the worldJb. verse 13.. That all might be kept from errour, and vnited in the Truth. These are the Lords Ambassadors2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20., planters, wa∣terers, husbandmen, builders; yea, co-adjutors, and workers-together-with God1 Cor 3.6, 9. Secondly, therefore these Ministers must be furni∣shed  by the Lord with two things: 1 With authori∣ty to meddle with this holy seruice: 2 with power effe∣ctually to performe those ancient acts of gracious effi∣cacy belonging to their office (as teaching of true sa∣uing doctrine forgiuing of sinnes, and administring the admirable holy Sacraments) which no man of any o∣ther ranke can doe, and which they onely can doe who are sent of God, and furnished with his authority and power, and with whom God effectually worketh. To which end the Sacrament of Order, giuen to Priests by the hands of Gods officers, imprints a Character in the Receiuer,Bellar. de sacrā. in genere lib. 2. cap. 19. § propo∣sitio. sexta & § prop. tertia in sine. that wheresoeuer it is, God is present,By Coue∣nant or pro∣mise. ex pacto, and concurreth to the producing of supernaturall effects, which he doth not, where his Character is wan∣ting. Therefore when Christ sent his Apostles with this Commission, As my Father sent mee, euen so send J youIoh. 20.21, &c.: He breathed on them and said, Receiue yee the Holy Ghost, whose sinnes soeuer yee remit, they are remitted vnto them: and whose soeuer sinnes yee retaine, they are re∣tained. Where he gaue them both Commission and power to performe it. And in the end of Saint Mat∣thewes GospellMatth. 28, 18, 19, 20., first mentioning his vnbounded pow∣er both in heauen and earth: he sends his Apostles to teach, and bring the world into his subiection: adding, that he would be with them to the end of the world, to wit, with their persons while they liue and with their successors while the world lasteth, with his power and
effectuall working with them. So that Christ must send, and he must furnish with gifts and power. And no man taketh to himselfe this office or honour, but he that is called of God as was AaronHeb. 5.4.. Thirdly then, As the Father sent the Sonne, and the Sonne his ApostlesIoh 20.21.: so the ApostlesBellar. De no∣tis ecclesiae lib. 4. cap. 8. afterwards chose and ordained other Bishops, and gaue them the like power to ordaine others both Bishops and inferiour Priests and Deacons, as Timothy at Ephesus, Titus in CreetAs appea∣reth by the Epistles to Tim & Tit.. By this meanes all true Bishops and Priests haue their succession and ordination from hand to hand from the very Apostles. And none are to be ac∣counted true Bishops, that were not ordained by the imposition of hands of former true Bishops, and they by other former, and so vpwards ascending to the very Apostles, & to Christ Iesus, from whō they must deriue their authority and power for all workes of the Mini∣stery. Therefore Saint Ierom saithHieroym. contra Lucife∣rianos Ecclesia non est qua non habet sacerdo∣tem., It can bee no Church that hath no Ministery. And Saint Cyprian, that the Church is nothing else butCypr. Plebs Episcopo aduna∣ta. lib. 4. ep. 10. citat. à Possevi∣no. bibl. select. lib. 6. cap. 31. ad interrog. 4. & D. Field. Church. lib. 3. cap. 39. People vnited to the Bishop. And Tertullian further,Tertull. lib. De praescript. Bellar. quo su∣pra. Let Heretickes shew the originall of their Churches, and runne ouer the order of their Bishops, comming downe by succes∣sion from the beginning so that their first Bishop had some Apostle or Apostolicke man for his author and Predecessor. For thus the Church of the Romans reckons Clement, ordained by Saint Peter. And Saint Cyprian saithCypr. lib. 1. ep. 4. ad Magnum. Nouatianus is not in the Church, neither can bee accounted a Bishop, who contemning the Apostolicke tradition, succeedeth no man, but is ordained of him∣selfe. The like haue many other Fathers alleadged by BellarmineBellar. quo su∣pra.. And by the Canons of the Apostles, and many ancient CouncelsSo Bellarm. sheweth lo. citato. & D. Field. lib. 3. cap. 39. & lib. 5 cap. 36.. A Bishop must receiue his Consecration by three Bishops at the least which were formerly consecrated in like manner. And all inferious Ministers must receiue orders of such a Bishop, or else
they are not Canonicall, Lawfull, nor to be receiued. They that come in other wayes then by this doore, are theeues and robbersIohn 10.8.9, 10.. All this (describing, and prouing the nature, succes∣sion and ordination of true Bishops and inferiour Mi∣nisters) is the first proposition, or major of my Argu∣ment. Then comes my Assumption, or minor proposition, thus: But the Protestant Ministers are not such:1 Kings 20.11 (namely, their Bishops were not consecrated by three Bishops, so formerly consecrated as abouesaid: neither did their inferiour Ministers receiue their orders from true Bishops.) The conclusion will necessarily follow: Ergo the Protestant Ministers are no true Ministers of the true Church. And consequently they haue no true Church among them. An argument inuinsible, vnanswerable. Sect. 2. Antiquissimus. Good Sir, triumph not before the victory: let not him that putteth on his harnesse, boast himselfe, as hee that putteth it off. It is your mens fashion first to confirme that with glorious words and arguments, which we sticke not at (as you haue done your Major) to make the world beleeue (it seemes) that we denyed all that which you so busily and so brauely proue, and so to make vs odious. And your other fashi∣on is as ill, to leaue the maine matter in controuersie, vtterly vnproued (as here your Minor) thinking to carry it away with out facing, and great words. This is a charming and bewitching of the credulous world without all truth and honesty; As I shall make it plainly appeare. For why else doe your Rabbins so generally declaime against vs and neuer proue it? YourBristow, Mo∣tiue 21. Bristow,Harding, con∣fut. Apol. part. 2. cap 5. Har∣ding,Sanders de schis. lib. 3. pag. 299. Sanders,Howlet brife discoursason 7. Howlet,Card. Allen. with Rhemists, Annot in Rom. 10.15. Allen, with his Rhemists,D. Stapleton princ. doctr. l. 13. cap. 6. Stapleton,Doctor Kelli∣son Reply to D. Sutclif. p. 31. Kellison,Will. Rainolds Calvino-Turr. l. 4. c 15. p. 975. William Rainolds,The Cath. Priests in their supplication to K. Iames, an∣no 1604. The num∣ber of Catholicke Priests,Bellar. eccles. milit. lib. 4. c. 8. Bellarmine,Posnanienses assert. de Christi in terris ecclesia. thes. 60. Posnanienses,
Gregorius de Valentia tom. 4. disp. 9. q. 3. punct. 2. Valentianus,Turrian de Iure ordinand. lib. 2. c. 3. The like hath Turrianus,Mattheus Lanoius, and Lanoius,D. Tyreus cited by Schal∣tingiu ib. ca∣thol. t. 4. pag. 33. The words of these uthors you may see in the booke of Mr. Francis Mason. lib. 1. cap. 2. Tyreus? and other not worth the reckning without measure or end. Why doe they so bitterly inueigh against our Bishops and Ministers (leauing their Doctrine and dis∣crediting their calling, to make people forsake them) as men vnsent, vncalled, vnconsecrated, without successiion ordination or iurisdiction, yea calling them false prophets, inuaders, vsurpers, and other Apostataes from the Church or Rome or mere Laymen: but neither true Bishops nor Ministers at any hand. Which they onely say, and repeat, and affirme with great vehe∣mency, but neuer proue. Sect. 3. Antiquus. Yes, they proue it too.Christ. a Sa∣crobosco de In∣vost. Christi eccl. cap. 4. Sacroboscus re∣ports the story of the Consecration of the Bishop Iewell, Sands, Scory, Horne, Grindal, and others, who met at a Tauerne or Inne in Cheapside (called the Horse∣head) in the beginning of Queene Elizabeths raigne: & being disappointed of the Catholicke Bishop of Lan∣daffe, who should there haue beene to consecrate them: some of them imposed hands vpon Scory, & he vpon the rest: and so were sons made without a father, and the fa∣ther procreated by the sons. Thus saith Sacroboscus ad∣ding that one Thomas Neal, Hebrew Lecturer at Oxford, (who was present) told this to his old confessors and they told it to Sacroboscus, and that afterward it was enacted in Parliament, that these men should bee ac∣counted lawfull Bishops. The same story is also repor∣ted in a Preface to a Catholicke booke called. A discussi∣on, numb. 135. citing Sacraboscus for it. And thus (saith that Preface) they vsed the like Art that the Lollards once did in another matter, who being desirous to eate flesh on Good Fryday, and yet fearing the penalty of the Lawes, tooke a Pig, and diuing it vnder the water, said, Down Pig, and vp Pike: and then after constantly auou∣ched that they had eaten no flesh but fish. So these cau∣sed
him who kneeled downe Iohn Iewell, to rise vp Bi∣shop of Salibury: and him that was Robert Horne be∣fore, to rise vp Bishop of Winchester: and so forth with all the rest. Antiquissimus. I wonder that men of any fore∣heads are not ashamed to vent such fantasticall and false tales, which are confuted fully by the pub∣like Records and Registers of those times. Bishop Iewell published his answer to Hardings obiections, threescore yeeres agone (Anno Dom. 1567.) wherein he plainely shewethJewels De∣fence of the Apology 2. part. cap. 5, printed anno Dom. 1567. that himselfe and all our other Bi∣shops succeeded the Bishops that had beene before them, and were elected, consecrated and confirmed, as they were. So that your learned men haue had time e∣nough to read, search, consider, and confute, or be satis∣fied: and not still thus wickedly to proclaime to the world such falsities. And Master Francis Mason hath done it more thorowly in a compleat TreatiseOf the con∣secration of the Bishops in England: and ordinati∣on of Priests and Deacons. Fiue bookes printed Anno Dom. 1613. Ex Register. Park. 1. fol. 18. & fol. 39. (printed anno Dō. 1613.) who sheweth out of the Register books of the Archbishops of those times, among all other, the Consecrations of these Bishops whom your Catholicke scoffers thus depraue. 1 B. Scory was consecrated August 30. anno 1551. in the time of Edw. 6 by Archbishop Cranmer, Nicholas London, and Iohn Bedford. 2 3 B B. Grindall and Sauds were consecrated both vpon one day, the 21 of December, anno 1559. being the Sabboth day, and in the forenoone, in the Chappell at Lambehith: by Matthew, Archbishop of Canterbury, William Cicester, Iohn Hereford, and John Bedford, Master Alexander Nowell, the Archbishops Chaplein, then preaching vpon this Text, Acts 20.28. Take heed to your selues and to all the flocke whereof the Holy Ghost hath made you ouerseers: and a Communion reuerently ad∣ministred by the Archbishop. 4 B. Iewell was consecrated, Ian. 21. 1559. being the Sabboth day, in the forenoone, in the Chappell of
Lambehith: by Matthew, Archbishop of Canterbury, Edmund Grindal,Ib. fol. 46. Bishop of London, Richard Gox, Bishop of Ely, and Iohn Hodskius, Bishop of Bedford: with Common prayers, Communion, & a Sermon preached by Master Andrew Pierson, the Archbishops Chaplein, vpon this Text, Matt. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good workes, and glorifie your Father which is in Heauen. Ib. fol. 88.5 B. Horne was consecrated, Febr. 16. 1560. being the Sabboth day, in the forenoone, in the Chappell at Lambehith, in all respects as the former, by Matthew, Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Bishop of Saint Da∣uids,See also An∣nals of Q. Eli∣zabeth, Engl. Darcy. pag. 32. Edmund, Bishop of London, & Thomas B. of Couen∣try and Liechfield, which I doe thus punctually relate, that the world may be satisfied thorowly, and wonder at the impudency of these forgers of lies, and at the fol∣ly of their beleeuers. Antiq. I doubted alwayes of that vnlikely tale of the Consecration of the Nags-head, depending onely vpon the report of one sole witnesse, Thomas Neal, an ob∣scure man, and telling it in darkenesse: and now I am fully resolued out of publicke Records by you alledged, easie to be sought and scarched, that it is vtterly false. But if it be granted that all these Bishops mentioned in that tale, were orderly consecrated by 3 Bishops at the least, according to the Canons: how may it appeare that those other Bishops which consecrated them, were themselues true Bishops? Shew me how your first Re∣forming Bishops (as you call them) which vpon the ba∣nishing of the Popes authority by K. H 8 consecrated the fallowing Bishops) were consecrated themselues by lawfull Bishops their Predecessors, and then you say something.All this out of Mr. Mason lib. 2. cap. 7. & Antiq. Brit. pag. 321, 322. & Act. & Mon. Sect. 4. Antiquissimus. Our first reformed Bishop was Tho∣mas Cranmer: who had beene sent before by King Henry to the Pope with other Ambassadours, who de∣liuered
to the Pope a booke of his own writing wherin he proued by criptures, Fathers and Councels, that no mortall man had power to giue a dispensation for a man to marry hs brothers wife: and told the Pope they had brought also other learned men out of Eng∣land, which were ready by dispensation to maintaine it. The Pope promised sundry times a day of disputati∣on: but after many delayes, giuing them good enter∣tainement, he made Cranmer his enitentiary, and dis∣missed them. Then the rest returning, Cranmer was sent by the Kings appointment Embassadour into Ger∣many to the Emperour, where hee drew many to his side and among the rest, Cornelius Agrippa. While hee was in Germany; Archbishop Warhan dyed: and the K. sent for Cranmer, to make him Archbishop of Canter∣bury: who delayed his returne, partly for businesse, and partly for conscience and feare that he should be vrged to receiue the Bishopricke as from the Popes Donati∣on, when the right or Donation was in the King; As he plainely told the King after his comming home. But yet the matter was so handled, that both with the Kings and the popes consent, Cranmer was made Arch∣bishop. There are many letters from the pope, so to the King, some to Cranmer, in fauour of Cranmer, re∣corded in the Register of Cranmer, fol. 1, 2, 3. and rela∣ted in Master Masons Booke, lib. 2. cap 6. Whereof one for his Consecration runnes thus: Clement, Bishop  our welbeloued sonne, Thomas, elect of Canterbuty; We grant he ec to thee, that thou mst eiue the gift of Consecration of whatsoeuer Catholicke Prelate thou wilt, so he enioy the fauor and communion of the Apostolicke See, two or three Bishops enioying the like fauour and communi∣on being sent for, and assisting him in this businesse, Dat. Bouon. 1532. Pontificatus numeri decimo. And he was accordingly consecrated, March, 30. 1533 (24. H. 8.) by three Bishops, to his Lincolne, John Exon, Hyry Assaph.
I hope there can be no quarrell picked against this Consecration. The most busie-headed Iesuite of our times, Robert Parsons, acknowledgeth Cranmer a true Bishop, in his three Conuersions, part. 3. pag. 340. Antiquus. But did not Cranmer take the oath to the Bishop of Rome at his Consecration, as his predcessors had done, and afterwards brake it? Sanders de schis. lib. 1 cap. 58. Mason lib. 2. cap. 7. Ex Regist. Cran. fol. 4. b.Antiquissimus. Indeed your D. Sanders so slanders him: as if he had taken it simply and absolutely: which he did not, but with a protestation often made and re∣peatd plainly and publikely, first in the Chapter-house: secondly, kneeling before the high Altar, in the hearing of the Bishops and people at his consecration: thirdly, in the very same place, and in the very same words, when by Commission from the Pope, they deliuered him the Pall. The summe of the protestation was this. That hee intended not to binde himselfe to any thing which was contrary to the Law of God, or contrary to the King or Common, wealth of England, or the Lawes and prerogatiues of the sme, nor to restraine his owne liberty to speake, consult, or consent, in all and euery thing concerning the Reformation of Christian Re∣ligion, the Gouernment of the Church of England, and the prerogatue of the Crowne, or the commodity of the Common-wealth. And euery where to execute and reforme such things, which he should thinke fit to be reformed in the Church of England. And according to this interpretation, and this sense, and no otherwise, he professed and protested, that hee would take the oath. Sect. 5. Antiquus. Well, I am satisfied for Cranmer. What say you to the rest of that time? for he alone could not consecrate. Antiquissimus. I say first, the Bishops in King Hen∣ries time which had beene consecrated before the re∣nouncing of the popes authority, lost not their power
of consecrating afterwards. For their Character is indeleble, and cannot bee nullified by schisme, heresie, or censure of the Church: being a thing imprin∣ted in the soule by God, and not by Man: as the Coun∣celsConcil. of Florence & Trent. cited by Bellar. De Sa∣cram. in genere lib. 2. cap. 19. and your owne DoctorsBellarmine in the same chap∣ter, & De Rom. pont. lib. 4. c. 10. § Respondeo. falsissimum esse in fine. he saith, Quis ignorat Catholicorum, baptizatos ab Haereticis verè esse baptizatos? & similiter or∣dinatos vere esse ordinatos, quando ordinator vere episcopus fuerat, adhuc erat sal∣tem quantum ad Characterem. teach. Secondly, I say, that by the Statutes made in the 25 yeare of King Henry 8, it was ordained that euery Bi∣shop should be consecrated by three former Bishops, and with all due ceremonies. And this is acknowled∣ged by yourDe schis. lib. 3 pag. 296. D. Sanders: and was duly performed in all Consecrations: as of Cranmer of Canterbury, 1533. Lee of Liechfield, 1534. Browne Archbishop of Dublin, 1535. Wharton of Assaph, 1536. Holgate of Landaffe, 1537. Holbecke of Bristow, 1537. Thurlby of Westminster, 1540. Wakeman of Glocester, 1541. Bucklsy of Bangor, 1541. Bush of Bristow, 1542. Kit∣chin of Landaffe, 1545. Euery one consecrated by three Bishops, at the least, and with all due ceremonies. So that of King Henries time (both by the statute De jure, and by Records De facto) you may be fully resolued, that (according to your owne rules) all were true Bi∣shops that were consecrated either before or after the schisme (as you call it.) nd so they were acknowled∣ged that liued still in Queene Maries time, they that had beene thus consecrated in King Henries time, were acknowledged (I say) by all your Catholickes, and by the Pope himselfe, to be rightly consecrated neither needed they any new consecration, as B. Bouer, Bishop Thurlby, and Cardinall Pole. But Thurlby made Bishop of Westminster in King Henries time, was translated to Norwich by King Edward, and to Ely by Queene Mary and made of her priuy Councell. And Anthony Kitchin made Bishop of Landaffa, in King Henries time, so con∣tinued in King Edward and Queene Maries time, and till his death in the fift yeare of Queene Elizabeth, with∣out any new orders or consecration, the first being suf∣ficient, and in all times vndoubted. Also Reginal Poole
Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Watson, Dauid Pole, Iohn Christoferson, made Bishops in Queene Maries time, deriued their Consecration from Bishops which were made in the time of the pretended schisme, and some of them from Cranmer himselfe. Now then if you allow them for Canonicall, you must allow their con∣secrators also to be Canonicall. Sect. 6. King Henries Bishops then being thus cleared come we to King Edwards time, wherin, the Bishops for∣merly made and then continuing are cleared also to bee truely Consecrated: and the Priests also formerly made, and continuing in King Edwards time must be acknowledged to be rightly ordered, and therefore to be capable of consecration to be made Bishops, as were Ridley, Hooper, Ferrar. These therefore being con∣secrated by three Bishops became true Canonicall Bishops and so were all throughout King Edwards dayes, as appeareth both by your Doctor Sanders con∣fessionSanders de schism. lib. 3. pag. 297.. And by our publicke Records or RegistersExtracted & published in Mr. Masons booke.. Ridley, 1547. Ferrar 1549. Hooper 1550. Poynet, 1550. Scory and Couerdale, 1551. In whose consecrations good and fit prayers were vsed, and all necessary ceremonies, as of imposition of hands, &c. Auoyding onely vnne∣cessary, superfluous & superstitions Ceremonies (as we call them) which your owne men confesse to be acci∣dentall things onely, and not touching the essence of orders: without which orders may well stand and be prefect enough. Of Queene Maries time you make no doubt: all was according to your minde: all the Bishops and Priests were true and Canonicall: and might well de∣liuer the like to posterity: I speake this ex concessis. And of Queene Elizabeths time you haue as little rea∣son to doubt. Sect. 7. Antiq. Yes, for in the very beginning of Queene Eli∣zabeths
time, some Bishops were depriued,See Arnls of Elizabeth Eng∣glish Dar pag. 32. and the rest denyed to consecrate new ones. So that for the con∣secration of D. Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, there could not be found Bishops to do it, D. Sanders saith you had neither 3 nor 2 Bishps to do it: D. Kellison saith you could finde none. Antiquissimus. This is a shameles vntruth. For when the Deane and Chapter had elected D. Parker for their Archbishops according to the ancient and in∣uiolated custome of the Church (as the RecordRegister Mat. Parker. saith) the Queene sent her letters Patents to seuen Bishops, giuing commission that they, or at least foure of them should consecrate him, &c And foure of them did it ac∣cordingly the 17 of December 1559. To wit William Barlow, and Iohn Hodgskins both made Bishops in King Henries Dayes, and John Scory, and Miles Couerdale, made Bishops in King Edwards dayes. Antiq. There may be some doubt whether these were Bishops or no, because they fled and left their Bishop∣rickes in Queene Maries dayes, and other Bishops were placed in their roomes. Antiquissimus. These prelats did but as Athanasius and many other holy Bishops did in the dangerous times of the domineering Arrians,Matth. 10.3. who according to Christs precept fled to saue their liues and reserue their gifts to better times. But as Athanasius and those oter Bishops, were still accounted the true Bishops: and those that were set vp in their roomes were accounted vsurpers, and put downe, when those better times came, and the other true Bishops restored to their places: so at the comming of Elizabeths happy times, these Bishops that fled were recalled returned, and re∣stored to their former places: or preferred to other. Now except you will condemne that most worthy Athanasius (and the other) for no Bishops in the time of their exile, when others had their places: you cannot reiect these worthy men as no Bishops,
their case being the same with those ancient Bishops. And of all other, you should least quarrell at these things. For you know there are many in your Roman Church, both Bishops and Priests, which haue no par∣ticular places, Bishoprickes or Benefices, and yet you account them true Bishops and Priests. Such was Olaus Magnus, Archiepiscopus VpsalensisGentil. in Ex∣amine.: and blind Robert, Archiepiscopus ArmachanusJdem ib.. Who both were sent by the Pope to the Councell of Trent, to fill vp the number of BishopsSleidan. com. lib. 17.. And Robert King, entituled Episcopus Roa∣nensisGoodwin Ca∣talogo., in the Archbishoprick of Athens in Grecia, vnder the Turke, and many the like: And your innumerable Priests without Benefices sent into England and other Countries. Your owne Bellarmine saith,Bellar. De Sa∣cram. conf. lib. 2. cap. 12. in fine. Respondeo Suf∣fraganeos esse verè episcopos, quia & ordina∣tionem habent, & iurisdictio∣nem, licet care∣ant possessione pro priae ecclesia. They are true Bishops which haue ordination and Iurisdiction, though they want the possession of their proper Church. And this also warranteth our Suffragan Bishops (wherof we had some in later times) who had both due consecration by three Bishops, and also Iurisdiction, though not very large as other Bishops hadBy the sta∣tute of 26. H. 8. c. 14.. Antiquus. Since you haue so well satisfied mee of Archbishop Parkers consecration, (when true Bishops, willing to put to their hands, were so hard to be found) I need not doubt of the rest of al the Bishops the in more plentifull reignes of Queene Elizbeth or King Iames: since D. SandersSanders de schism lib. 3. pag 297. confesseth that the Law of King Hen∣ry 8 for consecration by three Bishops, was reuiued by Queene Elizabeth, and standeth in force: and hath been very duely obserued in these later times. Antiquissimus. If you desire yet fuller satisfaction, you may see the Consecrations of the Bishops in both these Princes raignes set downe largely in Master Ma∣sons booke; together with a deriuation of the Episco∣pall line from the Bishops of King Henry 8 (which you acknowledge to be Canonicall) vnto George, now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; with the dayes and
yeares when euery of them and their Consecrators were consecrated, euer more by three former Bishops, and sometimes by foure, or more. I conclude with Bishop Andrewes answere to Bel∣larmine:Eliensis Respon∣sio ad Bellarmini Apologiam con∣tra Praefationem monitoriam Ia∣cobi Regis cap. 7. pag. 168. Our Bishops haue been alwayes ordayned by three true Bishops. Bishops, not (as you sometimes against the Canōs) by abbots. Also by true Bishops, euen your Bishops (except yours be not true) This Canon was neuer violated by vs, nor that order euer inter∣rupted. And in our Bishops there is res Episcopi, non nomen solum; et opus, non opes, the office and not onely the benefice. Which they performe much more fre∣quently and diligently then yours doe. Sect. 8. Antiquus. I haue been very much wronged and abused with the contrary opinion which our teacherr hold so confidently, and vrge so vehemently, with such seeming certaine knowledge of the trueth, that I thought it a shame to doubt of it. And I confesse, it was one principall cause of my alienation from hearing or regarding your Ministers whom otherwise I knew to be very honest and learned men. Antiquissimus. You may see by this, how mens mindes leauened with malice will Imagine euill with∣out cause: and how mightily their passions and af∣fections transport them to receiue vayne surmises for truest oracles, and vent them for arguments vnanswer∣able. This may occasion you to suspect their dealing in other things. And as you do wisely and religiously to yeeld to the manifest truth, greuing that you haue been abused by the vnskilfull or deluded by the willfull euill teachers: so (I hope) when others see the same truth they will be stayed from falling: and they that haue fallen, be re∣stored to the bosome of their naturall mother: and the
deceiuers themselues be confounded and ashamed of the books they haue so falsely written; and all Godly people be confirmed in the truth so manifestly cleared from forgeries which obscured it. All which I hope the rather, because the Papist prisoners in Framlingham castle in Queene Elizabeths time said to the Protestant Ministers: if you can iustify your calling, we will all come to your Church, and be of your ReligionMason lib. 1. cap. 3. in fine pag. 20.. Sect. 9. Antiquus. Well Sir, be it that your English Clergy was canonically ordained and consecrated; yet what say you to the Protestant Ministers in other countries, which could haue no Bishops to ordaine them? But (as our learned men say) they ordained one another very disorderedly and insufficiently. Antiquissimus. You draw mee to a Digression im∣pertinent to the Church of England, to speake of other countries, in whose affayres I am not sufficiently ac∣quainted, and am loth to meddle. It may be your learned men wrong them, as they haue done vs. But if what they say, be true; It was your Popes fault so auerse from all reformation, that did driue the Refor∣mers in those countries to that necessity that either one Minister must ordaine another, or else the Churches must be without many profitable Ministers. By the way; because you dislike our word Minister, as we doe your word Priest, vsed in your sense for sa∣crificing Priest. (Though the word Minister bee vsed by theBellar. de Rom. pont. li. 3 cap. 13 pag. 392. § Ra∣tio autem cur, Apostoli in Scripturis nun∣quam vocant sa∣cerdotes Christi∣anos, sacerdotes, sed solum episco∣pos & presbyte∣ros. Apostles in the New Testament, for Minsters of the Gospell: and the word Priest, neuer vsed at all by them; no, nor by the most ancient Fathers, asBellar, decultu Sanctorum lib. 3. cap. 4. § Ad te∣stimonium Pa∣trum dico, pag. 275. See before chap. 2. § 2. Bell. himselfe confesseth) I will (to auoyd offence to both) vse the word Presbyter: (which the Apostles vsed, and which I see our late learned writers do more willingly frequent) to signifie such as haue taken full orders in the
Church of God. But note you also by the way, that our fault is very small, in vsing sparingly the termes of some later Fathers, and vsing commonly the words of the A∣postles: yours is very great, in forsaking and deriding the word of the B B. Apostles, and preferring the words of some Fathers, and vsing them contrary to their meaning. But, Then I doubt not to affirme that Orders giuen to Presbyters by Presbyters onely, in times of necessity, when Bishops cannot be procured to giue them, are of full validity, and sufficiency. For, the giuing of orders was appointed to Bishops, not of absolute necessity, but for their greater honour, and for the better gouernment and preseruation of peace and vnity in the Church, and for those and the like reasons, it is fit, that course be obserued, when possibly it may. But when it cannot: we must consider, that euen Bi∣shops themselues doe not giue orders by any other power then is found in any other Presbyter. Not by their power of Iurisdiction (for they may ordaine Pres∣byters liuing out of their Iurisdiction:) but by vertue of their orders onely: whereby they stand Presbyters. Which is manifest by this, that Bishops and Suffragans which are not Presbyters, cannot giue orders which they neuer receiued: therefore seeing the power of gi∣uing orders, is from the vertue of the orders formerly receiued (which vertue is in euery presbyter, as well as in a Bishop: and therein Priests, Bishops, and Popes are all equallSee D. Field. lib. 3. cap. 39. in medio. alled∣ging many Schoolmen to this pur∣pose..) Then for want of Bishops to giue or∣ders, Presbyters may giue them. For that is but a breach of decency and honourable conueniency, whereby that thing is tyed to some chiefe Presbyters (namely to Bi∣shops) which otherwise all Presbyters may doe. But to the validity of the orders it maketh nothing, what Presbyter soeer giueth them. The best learned in the Church of Rome in former times agreed to this. AmachanusArmachanus lib. 11. in 4. Ar∣menorum cap. 7., a worthy Bishop
saith, If all Bishops failed by death, (Sacerdotes minores possent Episcopum ordinare,) Inferior Priests might or∣daine a Bishop. And Alexander of HalesHalensi part. 4. q. 9. memb. 5. art. 1 cited by D. Field. ib. saith. that many learned men in his time and before, were of o∣pinion, that in some cases, and in some times, Presbyters may giue orders, and that their ordinations are of force: though to do so, not being vrged by extreme necessity, cannot be excused from ouer-great boldnesse and presumption. And why not orders by ordinary presbyters, as well as Baptisme by meaner persons? For your Doctors in times of necessity allow Baptisme (which is a principall Sacrament) to be administred not onely by Bishops and Priests, but by Deacons, or any Laiks Baptized, yea Laiks vnbaptized, and very Pagans, (if they knew and preforme the Rites of Bap∣tisme) and women also: by any person that is Homo rationalis and intendeth to doe as the Church would doe. The Baptisme preformed by them is sufficient, effe∣ctuall, and needs no rebaptization, as Bellermine teacheth at largeBellarm. de baptismo. lib. 1. cap. 7.. If this will not suffice, you may see more in Doctor FieldsD. Field. lib. 3. cap. 39. & lib. 5. cap. 56. and Master Masons bookesMason lib. 1.. Sect. 10. Antiquus. Sir you may not thinke that your priuate Reason and iudgement can ouersway the iudgement and determinations of graue, learned, and holy coun∣sels. Antiquiss. Far be from me the presumption to thinke so. Yet giue vs leaue to see what we see and to say what we know, we see it in your owne learned mens books, and know it to be your owne practise, oftentimes to breake the Canons, both of ancient Councels and of the Apostles. If Protestants do it in times of necessity,
condemne them not, for necessity hath no law, it is so great a tyrant, that it will not suffer the Law to stand. Your men are faine sometimes to yeeld vnto it. YourThis ap∣peares plain∣ly by Greg. E∣pistles lib. 12. Iud. 7. epist. 31. rectified by Bede of D. Sta∣pletons owne iudicious edi∣tion & trans∣lation, though other copies somewhat differ. See Mason lib. 2. cap. 5. pag. 61. Gregory the great Bishop of Rome, sending Augustine the Monke into England (who was not vntill after∣ward made Bshop of Canterbury) appointed him to or∣daine the first Bishops himselfe alone, in case the Brittan Bishops opposed him, and that of the English or Saxons there were no Bishops, and that the French Bishops would be slacke and vncertaine of ayding him. And accordingly himselfe alone, ordained Melitus the first Bishop: and by the assistance of Melitus onely, hee or∣dained Iustus the second: and when there was a Cano∣nicall number, then they obserued the number of three to consecrate others. In like manner your BaroniusBaronius an∣no 555. n. 10. sticks not to record that pope Pelagius the first, was consecrated by two Bishop onely (when more could not be procured) and a Priest. And yet was he accounted a good lawfull Bi∣shop: and in his time he ordained 29 Priests, and 49 Bishops. If his consecration were a nullity, then so were all theirs, and all other consecrated by them: and so there followed a world of nullities in the Church of Rome. Euagrius Patriarke of Antioch, was consecrated by Paulinus alone, and yet accounted a lawfull Bishop,Ioannes Ma∣ior in 4. Sent. dist. 24. q. 3. in∣ter opera Ger∣son. Paris. 1606. pag. 681. asTheodoret lib. 5. cap. 23. Theodoret sheweth. Joannes Maior, a Doctor of Paris, saith that Rusticus and Eleutherius who came into France with Dionysius were not Bishops; But Dionysius alone ordained the Bishops of France. He saith also,Maior quo supra. who ordained Pe∣ter? they will not find vs three ordainers. Therefore I say it is an humane constitution that a Bishop shall be ordained by three. S. Paul did not seek for two more for the ordination of Titus and Timothy. And Petrus de PaludePetrus De Pa∣lude De potesta∣te Apostol cited by B. Iewel De∣fens. 2 part. cap 5 diuision 1. p. 130 saith one Bishop, is sufficient to consecrate an∣other, and it is onely for the greater solemnity a deuise
of the Church, that three shall concurre. This is there∣fore no essentiall part, but an accidentall ornament of the Consecration: a complement of honourable con∣ueniency, fit to be vsed where it may be had; no sub∣stanciall point of absolute necessity, making a nullity of consecration where it wanteth. The like may be said of orders to be giuen by  Bishop onely. Pope Gelasius saithGelasius epist. 9. Bn. t. 2. pag. 243. Priscis pro sua reuerentia manentibus con∣situtis, qua vbi nulla vel rerum vel temporum per vrget necessi∣tas, regulariter conuenit custo∣dire. when no necessity of things or times compell to the contrary, it is fit reuerently to keepe the ancients constitutions. So saith Leo alsoCited by Ioh. 8. epist 8. Bin. c. 3. pat. 2. pag. 977. Omitten∣dum esse & in∣culpabile iudi∣candum, quod intulit necessitas., but he addeth, that may be omitted and iudged vnblameable which ne∣cessity inforceth. And FoelixIb. apud Bin. Aliter tractan∣da necessitatis rationem, aliter voluntatis. the respect of necessity is to be handled one way, the respect of voluntary minde another way. Andradius affirmethAndrad. De gen. conciliorum autoritate. pag. 115, 116. that humane lawes made vpon the best counsell and aduise, are varied by the variety of times, and may be inuerted and changed by the necessities of men, and so are dispensable wher∣vpon Saint AustenAug. De lib. arb. cap. 6. calls humane lawes temporall, be∣cause though they bee iust, yet they may be iustly changed according to the times. Binius saithBin. t. 2. p. 243 in marg. Pro temporum neces∣sitate rigor ca∣nonum relaxa∣tur. Haec plera∣que apud Mason. Canones Aposto∣lorum 85. cum Ioannis Mona∣chizonare com∣mentarijs, set ut in Latin by I. Quintinus Haeduus printed with Zonaras and others at Frankford, by Farubendiu 1587. ac∣cording to the necessity of the times, the Rigor of the Canons is released. But you make this necessity of times farre larger then Protestants may, for of the Canons of the Apostles you brake some willingly, yea you decree the contrary and make it vnlawfull to keepe them, as the fift Canon that saith that Bishops or Priests that put away their wiues for occasion of Religion, shall be excommunica∣ted: and the ninth Canon, which will haue them ex∣communicated also that after hearing the Scriptures and prayers, depart and doe not with other faithfull receiue the communion, This Canon, and that of thrice dipping in Baptisme (the 49 or 50 Canon) and diuers other, are abolished contraria consuetudine saith
your CanusCanus De l∣cis theol. lib. 3. cap 5. pag. 195.. Christs Doctrine (saith hee) may not be changed but must stand firme: but the Apostles Rules for the gouerment of the Church are not so fixed but they may be remoued. And your Michael Media saithMedina lib. 5. de sacrorum hom: continentia cap. 106. as D. Reinolds alled∣geth him. De∣fence, Thes. 5. Morton appeal. lib. 2. c 25. sect. 10. that of the 84. Canons of the Apostles, which Clement Bishop of Rome and the Disciples of the same Apostles gathered together, scarse doth the Latin Church obserue 6 or 8 entirely. But (as I said) you draw mee from our owne Country into others: and yet therby you gaine no∣thing: for if they be censured for their necessary and ineuitable breach of some ancient Church Canons, to maintaine the substance of Christs Doctrine; much more must you be condemned for breaking them or∣dinarily and willfully without necessity. And on the o∣ther side, if their Ministery be cleared though necessity hath enforced the breach of some Canonicall cir∣cumstance: then much more is ours of England cleared, who neuer found any such necessity, nor euer brake them. Nay we haue euermore obserued them farre more precisely then you haue done that thus accuse vs, and boast of your strictest owne obseruations.
CHAP. 6. Of the Popes supremacy ouer the whole Church. Section 1. The necessitie thereof vrged, § 2 As the maine pillar: the matter and method of the answer propounded. § 3 The ancient Church yeelded to Rome (the greatest  City of the world) to haue the dignity of one of the fiue Pa∣triarchs. § 4 And among them sometime the chiefest place. § 5 Which dignity their ambition and couetousnesse haue impaired. § 6 Bellarmine gathering the strength of all learned Writers, sheweth no strength in them to maintaine the Papa∣cy;  either by vrging, Mat. 16.18. § 7 Or Ioh. 21.15, &c. § 8 The Romish strange extractions out of the words, Feed my Sheepe. § 9 And vaine allegations of diuers other Scriptures. § 10 The Scripture is against the supremacy of Peter, § 11 The Fathers vrged for it in vaine. § 12 The Fathers are against it. § 13 St Peters prerogatiues descended not to his suc∣cessors. § 14 The conclusion; collecting the parts of the chapter briefly, and iustifying the Protestants. §. 1. Antiq. I Am satisfied, that your Ministers haue true succession from the Apostles, and or∣dination according to the Canons. And for the present, I will suppose, that all that you haue said is true; that your Church hath had a visible succession deriued from the
Apostles without interruption: that it deliuereth all the substantial points of doctrine necessary to saluation, sufficiently. Suppose all this; and yet further: Sup∣pose that in the Church of Rome there are some things now taught and vsed, which were not in the Primi∣tiue Church; as the vse of Images, Purgatory, Indul∣gence, the doctrine of transubstantiation, Communi∣on of the Laity in one species, priuate Masses, and such like; yet all this cannot proue yours to bee the true Church, nor the Roman to bee false; because yet you are defectiue in this: That the Church being one one∣ly true, entire body of Iesus Christ, you are seperate from it, and will not be vnder the gouernment of that visible-hood, which Christ hath appointed ouer it, to wit, the Bishop of Rome, the successor of Saint Peter; to whom is giuen the highest iurisdiction and gouern∣ment of the whole Church vpon earth, and the infal∣libility of iudgement to guide it right, and keepe it from error; so that they that are not vnder his go∣uernment and guidance, are out of the Church, in which saluation is to be found, and no where else. Neither can the things now vsed, which were not vsed in the Primitiue Church, any way nullifie or dis∣grace the Church, since in the wisedome of him, that is infallibly assisted by the holy Ghost, for the guidance of the Church, they are iudged profitable in these times, which were not so necessary in former ages. All inferiour and priuate spirits must submit to the iudge∣ment of that Head, whom Christ hath constituted o∣uer his Church, and doth assist with his spirit that hee shall not erre. That Saint Peter was made Prince and Head of the Apostles by our Sauiour Christ; the Proofes are plaine in the Scriptures, and Fathers. Mat. 16.16.In the 16. of Saint Matthew, when Saint Peter had confessed, Thou art Christ the sonne of the liuing God: Christ answered, Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rocke will
I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not preuaile a∣gainst it. To thee will I giue the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, to open and shut, to bind and loose. In the 21 of S. Iohn, Christ saith to Peter,Ioh. 21.15. Since thou louest mee more then these (the rest of the Apostles) Feed my Sheepe: Be thou the generall Pastor ouer my whole flocke, euen ouer the rest of the Apostles. In the 22. of Saint Luke, Christ saith, I will pray for thee Peter, that thy faith shall not faile;Luk. 22.32. and when thou art conuerted, strengthen thy Brethren. Con∣formable to these Scriptures the Fathers doe ordinarily giue vnto Saint Peter the Primacy of the Apostles; call him the Mouth, the Chiefe, the Top, the Highest, the Prince, the President of the Apostles, the head and foundation of the Church; all which laid together and well considered, doe proue such a prerogariue in Saint Peter, that the Church taught and guided by him and his Successors, shall neuer erre in matters of Faith and good life, but bee infallibly lead into all truth, that bringeth to holinesse and happinesse. And this is not promised to Saint Peters person, or for his life onely, but to all his Successors, when Christ promiseth to bee with them to the end of the world, Mat. 28. in the last words. Whereupon these things will follow: 1 That the Church of Rome,See the Rela∣tion of the Re∣ligion in the West parts. pag. 15. now gouerned by S. Peters Successors, is vndoubtedly the true Church of God, deliuering and practising the true meanes of sal∣uation, and hath the prerogatiue to keepe men from erring in matters of Faith, and from falling from God; hath the keyes of heauen in custody, to admit in by in∣dulgence such as shall be saued; and shut out by excom∣munication such as shall bee condemned; so that in it there is a happy facility, and without it an vtter impos∣sibility of saluation. 2 And consequently, It is of the necessity to salua∣tion, that all particular Churches, and all men, be sub∣iect to the Bishop thereof, Christs Vicar, and the visi∣ble head of the Catholike Church vpon earth; and who∣soeuer,
or what Nation or people soeuer, are not sub∣iect to him in spirituall things, are no part of the Ca∣tholike Church of Christ. §. 3. Antiquis. Were all this true and substantiall, it were able to charme all the world to be of your Church, and to make the Pope absolute Lord of all. And you do po∣litikely to keep this point for your last refuge, and final ground of all controuersies betwixt vs: for if you can euict this, you need no more. If your Popes bee Saint Peters successors in all those things which you ascribe vnto Saint Peter, and thereby haue full iurisdiction o∣uer the whole Christian world, and cannot erre, all is yours,Stapleton prin∣cipio. doctr. lib 6. cap. 2. Sanders Rocke of the Church. Bristow Motiue 47. &c. See Bellarm. letter to Blackwell. there is an end of all controuersie and disputati∣on. And therefore your Chieftaines haue great reason to fortifie this piece with all the art and artillery their wit, learning, and power can afford them: thereby to cut off all particular controuersies wherein they finde we are too strong for them. This Gorgons head alone is able to affright the simple, that they shall not beleeue their owne eyes, or see your palpable corrupti∣ons, or beleeue that any thing can be amisse with you, be it neuer so foule and and manifest. But alas (deare friend) I shall shew you plainely that all this is but an Imaginary Castle built in the Ayre without ground or foundation; and that all your men stretch the Scrip∣tures and the sayings of the Fathers farre beyond their meaning.B. Iewel. B. Bil¦son. B. Morton. B White. D. Rainolds. D. Field. &c. To answere their bookes and arguments punctually, would aske too great time, and be a need∣lesse labour, because our Learned men haue done it suf∣ficiently and often already. But for your satisfaction, I  will shew you, first, what dignity the ancient Church  hath yeelded to the Bishop of Rome: Secondly, that  the Supremacy now claymed cannot be proued to bee giuen to Saint Peter either by the Scriptures, or third∣ly by the Fathers; but cōtrary, that both the Scriptures
and Fathers are against it. Fourthly, that the true pri∣macy  and Prerogatiues of Saint Peter aboue the rest of the Apostles, were personall, and did not descend to his successors. §. 3. 1. For the first: Aeneas Syluius (who was after∣terwards made Pope,Aeneas Syluius epist. 288. Ante conciliū Nicen qu s{que} sibi viue∣bat, & paruus respectus habe∣batur ad eccle∣siam Romanam and called Pius Secundus) saith plainly, that before the Councell of Nice (327. yeeres after Christ) little respect was had to the Church of Rome, yet was Rome the chiefe City of the world, by reason of the Antiquity, Magnificence, Dominion, and the residence of the Emperours there at that time. The Apostles vsed to plant Churches in the chiefest Cities, from whence the Gospell might best be propagated in∣to the Countries adioyning. Cities therefore were first Christians, the people dwelling in Country Pagis & Villis (in Pages and Villages) being not conuerted,See D. Field. Church, book 5. epist to the Reader, & cap. 27. 30, 31. were called Pagans or Infidels. But for their conuersion, and for the better gouernment of the Church, Bishops were by the Apostles placed in the Cities, with power of iurisdiction to gouerne, and of Ordination to insti∣tute Ministers , in euery towne; as was Ti∣mothy in Ephesus, Titus in Crete. If any difficulty arose either in doctrine or gouernment too great to be orde∣red by these Bishops; the wise policy of the Church ordained it should be referred to the determination of higher Bishops called Archbishops, that is, chiefe Bi∣shops,Metropolis in the Greeke tongue signi∣fies a Mother City. by some fatherly authority ouer the other Bi∣shops and Clergy, or being Bishops of the chiefest or Mother Cities within the Nation, whereof they were called Metropolitans. And ouer these Archbishops or Metropolitans in seuerall Lands or Nations some one was made the Primate, for better vnity and commodi∣ty of gouernment, and calling together and guiding of National Councels vpon occasions. It was thought con∣uenient also for the better keeping of all Christian Na∣tions
in the vnity of Faith, Holinesse and peace, to ap∣point yet a higher degree of Patriarchs in some of the most eminent Cities of the world, who might haue some ouersight & authority ouer all the Primats, Arch∣bishops and other Clergy of all the Nations which were vnder their Patriarchall Iurisdiction. Of these Patriarchs we read in the Counsell of Nice, and before that in the whole Christian world, there were but three:B. Carlton. The Bishop of Rome for the West parts, of An∣tioch for the East, and of Alexandria for the South. D. Field ib. li. 3. chap. 1 Concil. Nicon. cant. 6.The Bishop of Rome had these fiue principal Nations within his Patriarchship, Italy, Spaine, France, Germany, and Brittany. The other had their Patriarchships boun∣ded also by the Councell of Nice. Afterwards, when the Emperours had translated the seat of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople (whereupon that City was called new Rome) and that City was grown very great, Noble, and Magnificent, it was thought fit there to e∣rect a fourth Patriarch, the Patriarch of Constantinople: And lastly, for the honour of Ierusalem (where our Sa∣uiour liued and dyed, and from whence Christian Re∣ligion was propagated into all parts of the world) the Bishop of Ierusalem was made a fifth Patriarch, and their dominions were assigned vnto them. D. Field ib. Bellar. praefat. in 16. de pontif. Rom Concil. Constantinop. sub Theodosio seniore. can. 1. & Socrat. lib. 5, cap. 8. Concil. Chalce∣don can. 23. Eli∣ensis Responsio ad Apologiam Bellarmini. pag. 170, 171.§. 4. Amongst these, the Bishop of Rome had the first place of dignity: and in the second generall Counsell holden at Constantinople (anno 383.) the Bishop of Constantin∣ople obtained the second degree of honour among the Patriarchs, next vnto the Bishop of Rome, and before the other of Alexandria and Antioch. And in the great Counsell of Chalcedon (anno 454.) it was decreed that Rome and Constantinople should haue all Rights, Priui∣ledges, and Prerogatiues equall: because as Rome was before (Sedes regia) the seat of the Empire, so now was Constantinople; this was the reason then alleadged. But
not long after, the magnificence of Constantinople en∣creasing, and with it the haughtinesse of her Bishop, he challenged to be superiour to the Bishop of Rome, and encroached vpon the right of all other, as greater and more honourable then all the rest, and to be the chiefe Bishop of the whole world, because his City was then the chiefe City of the world.See before. lib. 1. cap. 4. §. 4. About this was the con∣tention betwixt Gregory the first of Rome, and Iohn Bi∣shop of Constantinople, whereof I haue spoken before. But Iohn carried away the title and honour for ten yeeres, during his life by fauor of the Emperour Mau∣ricious; and Cyriacus his successor for eleuen yeeres more.Phocas is thus described by Zonaras, who calls him pessi∣mus tyrannus, & postis humani generis: & saith, he was worthi∣ly slaughtered by Heraclius, who cut off his wicked hands and fee, and then his geni∣tals by peecemeale. Paulus Diacouus in Phoca. The same writeth Bibliothearius in Bonifacio 3. & Platina in Bonifacio 3. and Sabellicus. 8 6. thogh Bellarmine lay that Boniface sued not for that title in Apologia pro Torto Baronius anno 606. nu. 2. But when Phocas the Emperour succeeded (a wild, drunken, bloody, adulterous tyrant, who like another Zimry hath slyne his Master Mauricius) Bo∣niface the third Bishop of Rome (who had been Chance∣lour to Phocas) obtained of him by earnest suite, to haue that title and honour of Primacy transferred from Con∣stantinople to Rome. And thus (saith Paulus Diaconus) at the entreaty of Boniface, Phocas appointed the seat of the Roman Church to be the head of all Churches: or as Baronius deliuers it, onely the Roman Bishop should be called vniuersall Bishop, and not the Bishop of Con∣stantinople. But the contention betwixt the two Patriarchall seas ended not thus; for they of Constantinople vpon euery occasion stirred againe, vntill at length difference growing betwixt the two Churches (the Greek & the Latine) about the proceeding of the holy Ghost, either pronounced other to be Heretiks and Schismaticks. In the yeere 869 (aboue 400.B. Vsher. De Ec∣clesiarum suc∣cessione c. 2. §. 28 yeeres after the two Patri∣archs were equalled at Chalcedon) in a Councell at Con∣stantinople (wherin Image-worship was established) the two Patriarchs were made friends, and it was agreed,
that the one should be stiled Vniuersall Patriarch,Onuphrius in Platinam, in vi∣ta Bonifaci. 3. Gnebrard l. 4. Chronograph. Vniuersalis Pa∣triarcha. Vni∣uersalis Papa. and the other Ʋniuersall Pope, and so the word Pope (which before that time had beene common to all Bishops) be∣came then the proper title of the Bishop of Rome. Hereby we may obserue, 1. That this Primacy or Supremacy of the Bishops of Rome was of no such Antiquity as is pretended. 2. That in those times, it was not thought either by the Emperours or by the Councels to haue beene giuen to the Bishops of Rome, or established vpon any at all, by the diuine Scriptures (as now the Popes do claime) but left at the discretion of Princes and Wise-men, to giue it to whom they would, and to order or alter it as occasion serued, and the respect or dignity of Cities and times required. For neither were their arguments that then claimed it, drawne from the Scriptures, but from ciuill reasons of State and Policy: neither was it vpon any other reasons setled: and the controuersie procee∣ded not from any institution of the Omnipotent God, but from the ambition of Impotent men. 3. The author (that setled it vpon the Roman Bishop) was Phocas, one of the Diuels eldest sonnes, a murde∣rer of his master, a drunken adulterous tyrant, a scourge and plague to mankinde. §. 5. 4. Obserue the Romish Bishops ambition in those times, swaruing from the most honored humility of a number of their first Ancesters, holy men and Martyrs: to whom the ancient Fathers, Councels & Emperors, yeelded much honour and reuerence, as to men sitting at the principall sterne of the Ship of Christs Church to direct and guide it, and men right worthy of their place, as appeareth by innumerable testimonies in Hi∣stories and Fathers both Greeke and Latine, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Optatus, Ierom, Ambrose, Basil, Chrysostome, Augustine, &c. Thus saith your learned and moderate
Cassander, and now mark what he immediately addeth.Georgi Cassan∣dri Censulatio artic. 7. §. De Pontifice Romano. Ne{que} vnquam credo, &c. Neither doe I thinke that euer any controuersie would haue beene amongst vs of this point, if the Popes had not abused this authority to a certaine shew of Domination, and stretched it beyond the bounds prescribed by Christ & the Church, through their ambition and couetousnesse. But this abuse of that Bishops power, which first his flatterers stretched out beyond measure, gaue occasion to men to thinke ill of the power it selfe, which that Bishop had obtained by the vniuersall consent of the whole Church: yea, it gaue occasion to men wholly to forsake it, which yet I thinke hee might recouer (saith Cassander) if hee would reduce it within the limits prescribed by Christ and the ancient Church; and vse it according to Christs Gospell, and the tradition of his ancestors, onely to the edification of the Church. Therefore at the first, Lu∣ther thought, and wrote modestly enough of the power of the Pope, though afterwards being offended and enraged at the most absurd writing of some of his flat∣terers, he inueighed more bitterly against it, &c. And in the next page before this, Cassander saith, Non negarim, &c. I cannot deny, but many men were com∣pelled at first by a godly care sharpely to reproue some manifest abuses: and the principall cause of this cala∣mity and distraction of the Church is to be imputed to them that being puffed vp with a vaine pride of Eccle∣siasticall power, did proudly and disdainfully contemne and reiect those that iustly and modestly admo∣nished them. Wherefore I thinke there is no firme peace of the Church to be hoped for, except it take be∣ginning from them who gaue the first cause of the di∣straction; that is, that those that sit at the sterne of Ecclesiasticall gouernment, remit something of their too much rigor, and yeeld something to the peace of the Church, and harkening to the earnest enertaties and admonitions of many godly men, correct manifest
abuses according to the rule of holy Scriptures, and the ancient Church, from which they haue swarued. Thus writes your Cassander. D. Field Of the Church, book 5. cap. 50. §. These are all.Our D. Field saith much like to Cassander, that if the Bishop of Rome would disclaim his claime of vniuersall Iurisdiction, of infallible Iudgement, and power to dispose at his pleasure the kingdomes of the world, and would content himselfe with that all Antiquity gaue him, which is, to be in order and honour the first among Bishops; we would easily grant him to bee in such sort President of generall Counsels, as to sit, and speake first in such meetings, but to bee an absolute Commander, we cannot yeeld vnto him. Thus writes D. Field,Idem. Appendix to the fifth booke. pag. 78. and more fully in another place: If the Pope would onely clayme to be a Bishop in his Precinct, a Metropolitan in a Prouince, a Patriarch of the West, and of Patriarchs the first and most honourable, to whom the rest are to resort in cases of greatest mo∣ment, as to the head and chiefe of their company, to whom it especially pertaineth to haue an eye to the preseruation of the Church in the vnity of Faith and Religion, and the acts and exercises of the same, and with the assistance and concurrence of the other by all due courses to effect that which pertaineth thereunto, without claiming absolute and vncontroulable power, infallibility of Iudgement, and right to dispose the Kingdomes of the world, and to intermeddle in the administration of the temporalities of particular Churches, and the immediate swaying of the iurisdi∣ction thereof,Luther in libro contra Papatū. Luther himselfe professeth he would ne∣uer open his mouth against him. King Iames in his Praemoni∣tion to all Christian Mo∣narchs. § Of Bishops. pag. 46Our late most learned and iudicious King Iames of happy memory writes the like: Patriarchs (I know) were in the Primitiue Church, and I likewise reue∣rence that institution for Order-sake: and amongst them was a contention for the first place. And for my selfe (if that were yet the question) I would with all
my heart giue my consent that the Bishop of Rome should haue the first seat: I being a Westerne King would goe with the Patriarch of the West. And for his temporall Principality ouer the Signory of Rome, I doe not quarrell it neither; let him in God his name be primus Episcopus inter omnes Episcopos, and Princeps Episcoporum; so it be no otherwise but as Peter was Princeps Apostolorum. But as I well allow of the Hie∣rarchy of the Church for distinction of orders (for so I vnderstand it) so I vtterly deny that there is an earth∣ly Monarch thereof, whose word must bee a Law, and who cannot erre in his sentence. Thus ye see, if the Bishop of Rome enioy not the ho∣nours and priuiledges which the ancient Church gaue vnto his predecessors; the fault is not in vs, but in him, who vnworthily abusing his power to vntollerable ty∣ranny, hath worthily lost it,Iude vers. 6. Mat. 24.45. as the Angels not content with their first estate, and the euill seruant, that instead of well guiding his Masters house intrusted to him, misused and beat his fellow seruants; and therfore was cut off, and had his portion with hypocrites. §. 6. Antiquus. I am ioyfull that such iudicious mode∣rate Princes as King Iames; and such great learned men as Cassander, Luther, D. Field, &c. yeeld so much honor to the Pope, but I doubt the greatest part of Prote∣stants doe not so, yet all that they are content to yeeld comes farre short of that which the Scriptures and Fa∣thers doe attribute to Saint Peter and his successors. Antiquissimus. Scriptures and Fathers neuer yeeld more. For the Scriptures, will you stand to the exami∣nation and iudgement of the most famous Iesuite Bellarmine? Antiq. That most Reuerend, Learned, Iudicious, and laborious Reader of controuersies at Rome, Bellarmine (the most eminent man, in the most eminent City of
the world) handling all points so exactly and excellent∣ly, that he was therfore made an honourable Cardinall of Rome, and his bookes printed with the priuiledges of the vnerring Pope, the Emperour, and the State of Venice, &c. he (I say) shall ouer-rule my iudgement in all points. Antiquis. Yet take heed your implicit faith doe not deceiue you when it is vnfolded.Bellar. praesatio ante libros de Romano Pon∣tifice. But in this cause you need seeke no further then to see what hee saith: for first, This cause (of the Popes primacy and power) is the greatest of all other, as himselfe saith, it is De sum∣ma rei Christianae, the summe totall of Christianity de∣pends vpon it. In it the question is, whether the Church shall stand any longer, or bee dissolued and fall to no∣thing; for what is it else to demand whether wee may not take the foundation from the building, the Sheep∣hard from the Flocke, the Generall from the Army, the Sunne from the Starres, the head from the body: but to aske whether we may not let the building fall, the Flocke be scattered, the Army dispersed, the Stars ob∣scured, the body lye dead? Bellarm. ibid.Therefore secondly, to make this piece (of the state∣ly height, wealth and magnificence of the Papacy, which is forsooth the foundation of Religion) most strong: the choycest men for wit, learning, and all o∣ther habilities haue beene set on worke to doe their vttermost to maintaine it: of which Bellarmine reckoneth the chiefest of sundry Countries: In Polonia one, in France two, in Germany fiue, in Low Germany six, in England six, in Spaine six, in Italy eight, in Grae∣cia two. And thirdly, if there be any strength in any of their writings, Bellarmine hath it, and sets it out to the vt∣termost: therefore if thou finde him weake, know for certainty there is no strength in the cause. He mu∣sters indeed Scriptures and Fathers, and rangeth them into goodly rankes: but all ad Pompam, rather than ad
pugnam. For neuer a one of them strikes a sufficient blow for him, nor against vs. Against his vrging of the place of Math. 16. (when he hath with all his wit, stretched it as farre as he can) he is faine to admit three exceptions of the Protestant which ouerthrow all that he would proue. First, that as Christ asked (not of Peter onely but) of all, Whm say yee that I am? Peter answered for all, Thou art Christ the Sonne of the liuing God; for all could not speake at once, neither was it decent; one must be the speaker. So also Christ replyed vpon him as vpon all, and there∣fore what was spoken vnto him belonged to them all: And thus the ancient Fathers interpret it; Chrysostome vpon the place, and Ierome, and Austine, as Bellarmine himselfeBe lar. de pont. lib. 1. cap. 12 §. Secunda ob. citeth them, and reciteth their words: neither saith he any thing to auoid their testimonies, but addeth this onely, Peter answered for all; as the Prince and Head of all: which in the true sence wee deny not, neither makes it any thing for them. Secondly, the Protestants say, It was not vpon Pe∣ters person, but vpon Peters faith (which was the saith of all the Apostles) whereupon Christ would build his Church: to wit, That Christ was the Sonne of the li∣uing God; that is, the great Messias promised from the beginning, the Sauiour of the world. Thus the Fa∣thers also teach, as Bellarmineib cap 10. §. quarta senten. confesseth, Hilariuslib 6. de Trin., Ambroselib 6 cap. 9. in Luk, ChrysostomeHom. 55 in Mat & 83. i Mat., Cyrillib. 1. de Trin.: Hee might haue added also AugustineDe erbs  om serm. ., who saith, The Rocke is Christ, not Peter, vpon this Rocke which thou hast confessed, vpon this Rocke which thou hast knowne, saying, Thou art Christ, the son of the liuing God, will I build my Church, I will build thee vpon mee, not mee vpon thee, &c. but this your Doctor StapletonDe erbs  om serm. . Princip. doctr. lb . cap . See  Ht pag 0,  calleth humanus lapsus in Saint Austin. To all this Bel∣larmine saith, they meant not Peters faith without some relation to his person. What is this to the purpose? This wee admit both in him and in all the Apostles:
their persons may bee said to bee foundations in some sort, (as in Ephes. 2.20. Reuel. 21.14.) yet that is in re∣gard of the Faith and Doctrine which they taught; the subiect and substance whereof was Iesus Christ. Thirdly, the Protestants alleadge, that whatsoeuer was promised to Saint Peter in the 16. of Matthew, was certainly performed to all in Ioh. 20.23. where Christ said to all the Apostles, Whose-soeuer sinnes yee remit, they are remitted: and whose-soeuer sinnes ye retaine, they are retained. And this the Fathers also plentifully teach;Cypr. de sim∣plicitate praela∣torum, siue de vnitate Eccl. Cyprian,Hilari. lib. 6. de Trinit. Hilary,Hieron. lib. 1. ad Iouinianum. At, inquit, dicis, super Petrum fundatur eccle∣sià: licet id ip∣sum in alio loco superomnes A∣po olos siat, & cucti accipant, &c. Ierome; and Saint Augu∣stine in many places hath the like. All whichIb. lib. 1 c. 12. § Obitio vl∣tima. Bellar∣mine confesseth, adding still (lest he say nothing) that yet Peter was a chiefe man among the rest, which is not the question, and none of vs denies it. Thus he granteth, first, that what was there spoken to Peter, belonged to all the rest: secondly, that the Church was built vpon Peters Faith (which was the common faith of all the Apostles) and not vpon Peters person either wholly or principally: and thirdly, that which there was promised to Peter, was afterward performed to them all: and so this place of Mat. 16. makes nothing to the end for which your men so often and so gloriously alleadge it. Antiq. Were it not that I see it with mine eyes, and read the whole tract aduisedly, I should neuer haue beleeued that Bellarmine had yeelded thus much, but yet he doth it with modifications. Antiquis. Hee must needs make some flourishes to satisfie his owne side; but you see, the substance of the matter is flat against him. But note what he grants fur∣ther.Bellar de Pont Rom li.  cap. 11. §. Alte∣rum arg. Peter was made the foundation of the Church by those words of Christ (Mat. 16.18.) vpon this Rock will I build my Church: so all the Apostles were foun∣dations, and all the three wayes that Peter was. First, as efficient causes, by founding and planting Churches, some in one Country, and some in another:
forRom. 15.20. Paul would not build vpon another mans founda∣tion: and1 Cor 3.10. he layd the foundation in Corinth, and an∣other built thereon. And thus were all the Apostles e∣qually the foundations of the Catholike Church, Re∣uel. 21.14. Secondly, as materiall causes, by their Doctrine first reueiled vnto them by the Lord, and then taught by them in all Churches, which was pure without mix∣ture of error; infallible, being inspired by the holy Ghost, and sufficient both for true faith and holy life; whereupon the Church for euer was to rest, without need of any addition: And thus is the Church built e∣qually vpon all the Apostles.Ephes. 2.20. And in this Saint Peter was no greater then the rest, nor more infallible. Thirdly, as formall causes, by their gouenment; for all the Apostles were (Capita, Rectores, & Pastores Eccle∣siae Vniuersae) Heads, Gouernors, and Pastors of the Church Vniuersall. Antiq. This Bellarmine saith indeed, but he addes a difference in this third point; the other were onely heads, as Apostles and Legats, but Peter as the ordi∣nary Pastor; they had fulnesse of power, yet so as Peter was their head, and they depended vpon him, not hee on them. Antiquiss. What Bellarmine yeelds and proues against his owne side, wee may well take as true, and wrested from him by the euidence of the truth. This last, which hee addes in fauour of his side, hee onely saith, but proues not, as behoued him. For how depended the Apostles more on Peter then hee on them? where doe we reade, that euer hee appointed, enioyned, limi∣ted, or rerained any of them, or shewed any autho∣rity ouer them? but contrarily.Acts 11. Wee reade that he was censured by them, and caused to giue an account of his actions, Act. 11.Gal . And that hee was repro∣ued to his face, and openly by St. Paul: who protest∣ed also that hee was not inferiour to St. Peter, neither
receiued they ought from him. And further, euenlib. 4 depot. Rom. cap. 23. Bellarmine himselfe saith, they were all equall in the Apostleship, which they rceiued equally of Christ immediately, and none of them of Peter, as he proueth against manyCardinalis Turrecremata. Dominicus Ia∣cobatius, &c. great men of his owne side in a whole chapter of set purposeibid.. For (the better to make all the Clergy depend vpon Peter, though many succeed the other Apostles) many great Catholikes hold that the Apostles receiued not their authority and iurisdiction of Christ immediately, but Saint Peter only, and all the rest of Saint Peter, whichib. Bellarmine soundly confutes, both by Scriptures and Fathers, shewing that Christ himselfe gaue them all parem potestatem, equall power: that not Peter but Christ himselfe did chuse Matthias by Lot at the instant prayer of the Apostles: that Paul was an Apostle not of men, neither by man, but by Ie∣sus Christ, and God the Father, Gal. 1.1. &c. All which makes for the equality of Peter with the rest, and not for his superiority ouer them. Antiq. Yet surely he holdeth the same Supremacy which other Catholikes hold, though he think it can∣not be grounded so firmely vpon these places. Antiquis. You may well imagine, he giues not o∣uer (without much compulsion and reluctation,) these castles and holds which other great Captaines with all their power and policy, held and maintained. §. 7. But there is one poore castle more which hee la∣boureth to hold, though very weakely, that is in Iohn 21.15.Bellar. de Rom. pontif. l. 1. c. 12.  vt autem. See D. Field. Church, book  chap 22. where it appeareth, saith hee, that Christ gaue more to Saint Peter then to the other Apostles, for hee said vnto him, Louest thou mee more then these? and then addes, Feed my sheepe. To him that loued more, he gaue more, to wit, the care of his whole Flocke, euen the care ouer his brethren Apostles, making him generall Pastor ouer them also: for there can no cause or rea∣son
be imagined (saith Bellarmine) why vpon Peters an∣swere of his singular loue aboue the rest, Christ should singularly say to him Pasce oues meas, if he gaue him not something aboue the rest. To which, we say, the Fathers shew another cause or reason: Peter had denied Christ more then the rest, and being forgiuen, was to loue more then the rest, (Luk. 7.43.47.) and therefore Christ vrged him singu∣larly, by thrice asking (Louest thou mee?Cyril. super Ioan. lib. 12. cap. 64. Augustin. tract. in Ioan. 123. See this large∣ly handled be∣twixt Raynolds & Hart. p. 135. & seq.) answerable to his three denials, to performe the office enioyned in generall to all the Apostles. So saith Cyril, Because he denyed him thrice at his Passion, therefore there is a threefold confession of loue required of him: and so the glosse: and Saint Augustine saith, A threefold con∣fession answereth to a threefold negation, that the tongue may expresse as much in loue, as it did in feare. And so in very truth, Christs words were rather a stay of Peters weakenesse, then a marke of his worthinesse, or a proofe of his supremacy. Thus we haue the onely place of Scripture (where∣upon Bellarmine insisteth) of performance and bestow∣ing supremacy particularly vpon Peter:Bellarmin saith De iustift 3. c. 8. initio. Non po∣test aliquid cer∣tum esse certitu∣dine fidei, nisi aut immediate contineatur in verho Dei, aut ex verbo Dei per euidentem consequentiam deducatur, &c. and that not a plaine and euident place of Scripture, or by deduction of euident reason (such as necessary points of diuinity should haue,) but onely their owne infirme, and vn∣sound interpretation: a poore and weake ground of so great a building. The transcendent supremacy of the Pope of Rome ouer the whole Church of Christ, and the many Doctrines and practises that depend thereup∣on, haue no other ground in Scripture but this, their owne conceited and forced interpretation of this place, [Peter louest thou mee more then these? Feed my sheepe:] that is, Take thou authority more then these, to make thy successors aboue all theirs, heads of the vniuersall Church, with such power, as themselues shall list to take or exercise. Antiq. I cannot but ingenuously confesse this infe¦rence
to be weake indeed, and it doth much amaze me, and makes me quake and stagger, to consider how con∣fidently I haue beene perswaded that the Scripture is most plaine and euident for the Popes supremacy, and now to see that nothing of any moment can thence be alleadged for it. §. 8. Isa chus Casau∣bonus excrcita∣tio, ad Baronium Epist. dedic pag. 19. Luk. 22.25, 26. Gasper Sciop∣pius in Ecclesi∣astico suo ex pos. cap. 47 Is not this quidlibet e quolibet? or rather Contra∣rium é contrarioAntiquis. By such alleadging of Scriptures, they may make quidlibet è quolibet, make any substance of a∣ny shadow. The learned Frenchman Casaubon won∣ders at them. Pasce oues mea, that is, as Baronius inter∣prets it, Supremum in ecclesia dominium tibi assere, Feed my sheepe, that is, Take to thy selfe the highest domi∣nion in the Church: or as Bellarmine, Regis more impe∣ra, Rule and command after the manner of Kings: as if he would of set purpose contradict Christs words; The kings of Nations exercise dominion ouer them, but yee shall not doe so. Nay further, and more strangely, Gaspen Scioppius saith, that Christ by those words hath taken away Kings power and dominion ouer the Nations, and forbidden it to be exercised among Christians: and hath established that infinite power in the Pope o∣uer Princes by this, and such like places of Scripture. The pious world wonders at the Popes challenge to be the highest Iudge in controuersies of Faith (which heretofore was the office of Councels, by the word of God) but this power and right Bellarmine drawes out of the word Feed. Men wonder at the Popes Immunity from error and infallibility in points of Faith: but Bellarmine also rayseth it out of the words Feed my sheepe. Men won∣der at the Popes clayme of power (of many ages neuer heard of) to make Lawes in the Church to binde con∣science, yea, as some say, to make new Articles of Faith; but this also Bellarmine findes in the same words, Feed my Sheepe.
They that are practised in reading the Scriptures and Fathers, wonder at the superabundant merits of the Saints, which the Pope dispenseth at his pleasure: but let them cease to wonder, the Scripture giues it to the Pope in that word of Christ to Peter, Feed my Sheepe, For so teacheth Bellarmine in his booke of Indulgence. Those that will not be rebels to their Prince the Lords annoynted, wonder and that with indignation, that the Pope (corrupted by his flatterers) should assume to himselfe a power to transferre kingdomes, absolue sub∣iects from the oath of fidelity, and make Kings no Kings: but this power of the Pope, Bellarmine and o∣thers extract out of the word Feed. Nay, there want not them that gather out of the same word a power in the Pope to chastise with temporall punishments, yea, with death, such Princes as are vndutifull to him. So taught Becanus and Suarez, famous Iesuites in their most infamous bookes: such things writes Casaubon. If the word Feed should signifie all these, it would be very inconuenient for the Pope: for then all Mini∣sters (which are bidden feedActs 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2.) should haue all that power and priuiledges which the Pope by that word challengeth. The Fathers tooke the meaning of Christ to be one∣ly feed by doctrine, and that they bet vpon and vrged:See Tortura Torti, p. 52 & seq. the Pope takes it to gouerne, Regio moro impera. Indeed the greeke word  (though most commonly it signifie to feed, yet) sometimes signifies to gouerne: but  alwayes to feed. Yet (marke)  is twice in the Text, for  once, but they catch at go∣uernment, and let goe feeding; what Christ meant not, nor Peter euer vsed, that they lay hold on, gouerning the whole Church: the feeding that Christ meant, and Peter vsed, they leaue to others: to labour in the Word and Doctrine is too laborious a feeding for them: and the Friars or Iesuits to whom they leaue that labour, feed vere strangely. It is strange feeding,
to teach men to be Law-breakers, vow-breakers, Oath-breakers; breakers of all Lawes and duties: this is not to feed the sheepe, but to scatter them, to kill their leaders, tread downe their pastures, muddy their wa∣ters, stop vp their wells; not to feed, but either to starue or to poyson them. In like manner, they make Receiue the keyes of the Kingdome of heauen, to bee also exclude from the kingdomes of the earth. Christ restraines the keyes to sinnes (Iohn 20.23. Whose sinnes ye loose) they extend them to Lawes, Othes, and Vowes: Whatsoeuer thou bindest, that is, whatsoeuer league of wickednesse, conspiracy, treason, rebellion, thou tyest, shall be ratified in heauen; and whatsoeuer thou loo∣sest, be it bonds of Lawes, duty, faith, oath, obedience, or allegiance, it shall be loosed in heauen. If this be so, Christ should rather haue said to Peter,Luk. 12.32. When thou art (not conuerted, but) preuerted (by such Doctrine) strengthen thy brethren (strengthen thy brethren in euill, in their euils, with hope of rewards from God, for breaking his Lawes.) This is most damnable do∣ctrine, not onely against Gods word and the analogy of Faith, but against common ciuility, sence, and rea∣son. Thus they abuse the Scripture to wrong purposes, and peruert it contrary to the meaning, to strengthen euill. §. 9. Antonim suma mai. dist. 22 c. 5. Psal. 8. ver. 7, 8. Marta. Par. 1. c. 24. Tortura Torti. pag. 177.Some haue very ridiculously turned the eighth Psalme to serue the Popes turne, Thou hast put all things vnder his feet, that is, vnder the Popes gouernment: all sheepe and Oxen, and the beasts of the field, that is, men on earth; the fowles of the ayre, that is, Angels; the fishes of the sea, that is, soules in purgatory. And lately, D. Marta out of the same Psalme, very seriously brings both Christians and Saracens vnder the Popes power; for sheepe, saith he, signifies Christians, and oxen Sara∣cens; and so he makes the Pope not onely a sheephard,
but a Neat-heard, much like to that of Lumbard,Sent. lib. 3. d 25. & Aquin. 2. 2. q. 2. art. 6. inter∣preting a sentence of Iob 1.14. The Oxen were plowing, and the Asses feeding in their places: the oxen plowing, that is, saith he, the Priests reading the Scriptures;Archb. Abbot ag. Hill Reason 8. §. 5. the Asses feeding, are the people not troubling their heads with such matters, but content to beleeue in grosse, as the Church beleeues. A trim text, and finely applied to keepe the people from reading the Scriptures. Such lewd, childish, and ridiculous expounding and alleadg∣ing of Scriptures, shewes, first, their want of Scrip∣ture proofes for the maintenance of their errors: se∣condly, their bad mindes, striuing against their owne knowledge and conscience, to blind and gull the world with a false shew of Scriptures, when in truth, the whole Scriptures are rather against them: thirdly, the base opinion they had of people and Princes too, whom they thought they could coozen with any false sha∣dowes. The obseruing whereof,Bedel. letters to Wadsworth, pag. 62. 64. 66. Carerius de po∣testate Pape l. 2 cap. 12. x C. Solitae, de maior. & obed. Mor∣ton Appeal. l. 5. cap. 26. sect. 1. not onely in their o∣ther Authors, but euen in their Decretals, is able alone to make a man hate Popery. For example, in the De∣cretals, Deus fecit duo magna luminaria, God made two great lights, that is, the Pope and the Emperor, and that the Pope is so much bigger then the Emperor, as the Sunne is bigger then the Moone (which, Clauius saith, is 6539. times and one fift.) A notable text to shew the Popes greatnesse aboue the Emperour, and that the Emperour receiues all his power and glory from the Pope, as the Moone doth her light from the Sunne, and is light onely on that side that is toward the Sunne, and darke on the side that is auerse. Also,Mat 16.18. al∣leadging that text, Tu es Petrus, & super hanc petram ae∣dificabo Ecclesiam meam: The Lord, saith he, taking Pe∣ter into the fellowship of the vndiuided vnity (oh foule blasphemy!) would haue him to be called that which he was himselfe: that the building of the eter∣nall temple might by the maruelous gift of God,Cap. Fundamen∣tū de clect. in 6 con∣sist in Peters firmnesse—that from Peter as a certain
head, he should as it were powre abroad his gifts into the whole body,—that the Church might stand vpon Peters firmnesse. King Iames Re∣monstrance, pag. 163. Eng∣lish. 1 Cor. 2.15.In these latter times, they haue found out more texts, but no whit better for their purpose then these. Our learned King Iames in his Remonstrance to the Cardinall Peron, reciteth some of the chiefest. Saint Paul saith, The spirituall man discerneth all things: ergo, (they gather) the Pope must be Iudge of all men and matters. Mat. 28.18. Mat. 8.31. Mat. 21.2.Christ said, All power is giuen to me both in heauen and earth: ergo to his Vicar. The Diuels said, If thou cast vs out, send vs into the heard of swine: and Christ said to his Disciples, Ye shall find an Asses colt bound, loose him and bring him to me. This sheweth that Christ disposed of temporall things, ergo so must his Vicar. Ioh. 21.15. Act. 10.13.Iesus not onely commanded Peter to feed his sheepe, but also said, Arise, kill, and eate: therefore, saith Baroni∣us, Duplex est Petri officium, vnum pascere, alterum occide∣dere: Peter had two offices, one to feed, another to kill. (Belike Peter is now come to the top of the house, and entred vpon his second office, to kill and deuoure.) Ier. 1.10.God said to Ieremy, I haue establishd thee ouer Nations and kingdomes, to wit, to preach Gods promises and threatnings;Luk. 22.38. Mat. 26.52. Molina Iesuita. lib. de iure, tract. 2 disp. 29. and Peter said to Christ, See here are two swords; and Christ answered, It is sufficient (not too ma∣ny.) Also Christ said to Peter, Put vp thy sword into thy sheath; ergo the Pope hath power ouer Nations and Kingdomes, and two swords, one spirituall, the other temporall. Psal. 45.16.It is said Psal. 45. In stead of thy fathers thou shalt haue children, whom thou shalt make Princes in all lands. Ioh. 12.32. 1. Cor. 6.3.Christ said, If I were lift vp from the earth, I will draw all things vnto me; and Saint Paul, Know yee not that we Paul and the Corinthians &c. shall iudge the Angels? how much more the things that pertaine vnto this life? Vpon these places the Papall monarchy for tempo∣rall
causes hath beene built in these latter ages. As in former time, Pope Boniface the eight,Extrauag. vnam sanctam. grap∣ling and tugging with Philip the Fayre, built his tem∣porall power vpon this, that In the beginning God created heauen and earth. Antiq. I am very sorrowfull to see the sacred Scrip∣tures so vainly alleadged by men accounted holy, wise, and learned, I cannot iustifie them:Bellarm. de iustif. l. 3. c. 8. initio. Bellarmines rule condemnes them, when he saith, that All we are bound to beleeue with certainety of Faith, must be contained in Gods word in plaine words, or else euidently de∣ducted from thence by good consequence of Reason. But for this great point (I speake my conscience) here is neither euident words nor scarce any shew of con∣sequence. §. 10. Antiquis. But for the contrary,See K. Iames Praemonition. pag. 47. you shall finde in the Scripture, both euident words and manifest con∣sequence. The Scripture is plaine, that the words Tibi [tibi da∣bo claues] in effect are spoken in the plurall number in another place, Mat. 18.18. [Whatsoeuer yee shall binder loose in earth, shall be bound and loosed in heauen.] where∣by the very power of the keyes is giuen to all the A∣postles. And the words Pasce oues vsed to Peter, were meant to all the Apostles, as may bee confirmed by a Cloud of witnesses, both of Ancients, and euen of late Popish writers, yea, and diuerse Cardinals. Other∣wise, how could Paul direct the Church of Corinth to excommunicate the incestuous person, cum spiritu suo; whereas he should then haue said cum spiritu Petri: as our gracious King Iames gathereth: adding also, that all the Apostles vsed their censures in Christs name, neuer speaking of his Vicar: that Peter in all the Apo∣stles meetings sate amongst them as one of their num∣ber: that when letters were sent from the Councell
(Acts 15.22, 23.) the style was, It seemed good to the A∣postles and Elders, with the whole Church, &c. without mention of the Head thereof: that Saint Paul blameth the Corinthians, for that some said they were of Paul, some of Apollo, some of Cephas, some of Christ, which he would not haue done; if Cephas (that is, Peter) had beene Christs Vicar, and head of the Catholike Faith: that Saint Paul compareth or rather preferreth him∣selfe before Peter, Galat. 2. which had beene rudely done, had he thought Peter his Head. Such reasons al∣leadgeth our iudicious King,See also be∣fore, sect;. 6. to which might bee ad∣ded also that Saint Peter was compelled to giue account of his doings, to the rest of the Apostles, who conten∣ded  and contested with him about them. Acts 11. I hope these Allegations are farre more pregnant a∣gainst the Supremacy of Saint Peter, then the Romists are for it. §. 11. Antiq. Yet the ancient Fathers vnderstand the Scrip∣tures so,These Fathers are thus al∣ledged by Mr Hart; Confe∣rence with D. Raynolds, cap. 5 diuision 3. p. 217 out of Stapleton priu. do. l. 6. c. 13 Raynolds. ib. pag. 21. that they gaue S. Peter most honorable titles: S. Austen saith, The Primacy of the Apostles is conspi∣cuous & preeminent with excellēt grace in Peter: Chry∣sostom calleth him the mouth of the Apostles, the chief, the top of the Company: Theodoret, the Prince of the Apostles; which title is giuen him by all Antiquity. O∣thers ad out of Epiphanius, The highest of the Apostles: Austen, the head, president, the first of them. And Cy∣prian saith, The Lord did chuse Peter first (haply hee meant, his first Apostle, not his first Disciple: for Au∣drew was first a Disciple, and followed Christ, as Saint Ambrose obserueth.) And Saint Ierom saith, Peter was of so great authority, that St. Paul went to visit him, as himselfe writeth, Gal. 2. and Ierom saith also, that Peter was chosen one among the twelue, to the intent that (a head being appointed) occasion of Schisme might be taken away. Of such sayings as these the Fa∣thers bookes are full.
Antiquis. Doth not DoctorSee Raynolds & Hart, ibid cap. 5. diuis. 3. Raynolds there answer you soundly and fully? which you may reade there at large: the briefe substance whereof is this; that all the Fathers sayings touch onely three prerogatiues; the first of Authority, the second of Primacy, the third of Principality, but all far short of the Supremacy which the Pope now claymeth. 1 The authority mentioned by Saint Ierom, is onely Credit and Estimation; for so Ierom expresseth his owne meaning. Saint Paul went vp to Ierusalem to conferre of the Gospel with them that were esteemed, that is, with Peter and other Apostles, to wit, with Iames, Peter, and Iohn, who were esteemed to be Pil∣lars, Gal. 2.2.9. for his conference with Apostles of such authority or estimation might adde some credit, authority and estimation to his preaching in the peo∣ples minds. If by authority Saint Ierom did meane su∣preme power ouer the other Apostles, then Iames and Iohn should haue had it as well as Peter, which is not your Catholike doctrine. Also an inferiour (or equall) in power, may be superiour in authority or estimation: as Tully saith of Metellus a priuate man (though chosen Consull for the yeere following) That hee forbade cer∣taine playes (when an officer had allowed them) and that which he could not obtaine by power,Cicero oratione in Pisonem. he did ob∣taine by authority: that is, with the credit which hee had with the people. 2 The Primacy which the Fathers speake of, was the Primacy of Order, not of Power, because Peter was first called to be an Apostle, and first reckoned; this argues no more power then the Fore-man of the Iury hath o∣uer the rest. 3 The prerogatiue of Principality, was in the excellen∣cy of grace, and not of power, (as we say, the Prince of Philosophers, Aristotle; the Prince of Poets, Homer; that is, the wittiest, or most excellent, not Lord and master ouer the rest.) In this sence Saint Austine spea∣keth
Peter the Apostle in whom that grace and Pri∣macy are so superminent, was corrected by Paul a lat∣ter Apostle: by calling Saint Paul a latter Apostle, hee sheweth his meaning of Saint Peters Primacy to bee of his first being an Apostle: and by ioyning Grace with Primacy, he sheweth that in greatnesse of grace consisted his supereminency. So saith Saint Austen also,Aug. in Ioan. Tract. 124. that Peter was Natura vnus homo, gratia vnus Christianus, abundantiori gratia vnus idem{que} primus Apo∣stolus. But to be chiefe in grace is one thing, to be chiefe in power another thing.Turrecrem. in Summa de Ec∣clesia, l 2 c. 82. Cardinal Turrecramata saith, A meane Christian (yea an old woman) may in perfe∣ction of grace, and amplenesse of vertues, be greater then the Pope; but not in power of iurisdiction. If excellency of grace might carry the supremacy of power, you should take it from Saint Peter, and giue it to the blessed Virgin. By gifts of grace, we vnderstand all blessings wherewith our Lord honoured him, inso∣much as in one thing or other, he surpassed euery one of the Apostles. Saint Iohn might exceed him in mul∣titude of prophesies and reuelations, and many gifts of grace, as Saint Ierom declareth:Ierom. aduer∣sus Iouinianum lib. 1. Saint Paul excelled him in the chiefest gifts, and laboured more then all the rest, (1 Cor. 15.) so that Saint Austen giues excel∣lent grace to PeterDe bapt. con. Donatistas, lib. 2. c. 1., most excellent grace to Paulin Psal. 130., and cals him The Apostle, by an excellencyCont. duas epist. pelagiano∣rum lib. 3. c. 1.; yet Saint Peter excelled Saint Paul in Primacy (or being first chosen) and Saint Iohn in age (being the elder) and therefore preferred before them to be the chiefe of the Apostles, by Saint Ieroms opinionAetati delatū est, quia Petrus erat senior. Hiero 1. adu. Iouin. lib. 1.. To this Bellarmine yeeldeth:Bellar. lib. 1. de rom. pontif. cap. 27. § respō∣deo Paulum. seeing Paul was called The Apostle per Antonomasiam: quia plura scripsit, & do∣ctior as sapientior fuit cateris: also for planting more Churches then any other, for the other Apostles were sent to certaine Prouinces, he to all the Gentils with∣out limitation, and he laboured more abundantly then they all, 1 Cor. 15. And after,§ testatur. ib. § & fortasse, Paul also may bee called
(princeps Apostolorum) quia munus Apostolicum excellen∣tissime ad impleuit, as we call Virgil prince of Poets, and Cicero prince of Orators. Againe, Nam etsi Petrus ma∣ior est potestate, Paulus maior est sapientia.— Leo makes them the two eyes of the body, whereof Christ is the head: De quorum meritis at{que} virtutibus nihil diuersum, nihil debemus sentire discretum, quia illos & electio pares, & labor similes, & finis fecit aequales. The like hath Max∣imus, ib. and Saint Gregory, Paulus Apostolus, Petro A∣postolorum primo in principata Apostolico frater est. Againe,Bellar. ib. §. deni{que} si hac. Paulus videtur plus Ecclesiae profuisse quàm Pe∣trus; plures enim ex gentibus ad Christi fidem adduxit; plures prouincias summo cum labore peragrauit; plura scripta, ea{que} vtilissima nobis reliquit. Antiq. Saint Ierom saith further, that Saint Peter was made the head of the Apostles, that all occasion of Schisme might be taken away. Will you make nothing of those titles which the Scriptures and Fathers so fre∣quently giue him, of authority, primacy, principality, supereminency, the mouth of the Apostles, the top, the highest, the president, the head and such like? Antiquis. Nothing at all for that power which the Church of Rome now claymes by them, and which hee neuer claymed nor vsed, neither did the Scriptures or Fathers giue him: What they gaue him we willingly yeeld, A principality of Order, Estimation and Grace. For all Saint Peters power is comprised in the keyes promised him, and in building the Church vpon him: but all the Apostles receiue the keyes by Ieroms iudge∣ment, and the Church is built vpon them equally: Ergo, by his iudgement Peter was not ouer them in power: and if you will yet say, hee had some gouern∣ment ouer them, what can it else bee but a guidance, (not as a Monarch ouer subiects or inferiours,D. Raynolds. ib. pag. 226, 227. D. Field. l. 5. cap 24. but) as in Aristocracy, head of the company, which in power are his equals. For in all assemblies about affayres of gouernment, there must needs bee one for orders sake
and peace, to begin, to end, to moderate the Actions; and this is Saint Peters preheminence, which Saint Ie∣romeHieronym. adu. Iouin. lib. 2. meant. For, hauing set downe his aduersaries obiection, (But thou saist, The Church is built vpon Peter) he answereth; Although the same be done in an∣other place vpon all the Apostles, and they all receiue the keyes of the Kingdome of Heauen, and the strength of the Church is grounded on them equally: yet there is one chosen among the twelue, that (a head being ap∣pointed) occasion of Schisme might be takē away. The like hath S. CyprianCyprian de V∣nitate. Ecclesia. Erant vtique & caeteri Apo∣stoli quod fuit & Petrus, pari consorio praediti & honoris & potestatis, sed exordium ab vnitate prosici∣scitur, &c.: The other Apostles, saith he, were that which Peter was, endewed with the same fellow∣ship both of honour and power: but the beginning proceedeth from vnity, that the Church may be shew∣ed to be one. To speake at once; view all the titles of excellency giuen by the ancient Fathers to S. Peter, alleadged by BellarmineDe rom. pont. lib. 1. cap. 25., weigh them aduisedly without preiudice or partiality, and you shall finde they proue no more, then the excellency of honourable estimation, the primacy of order, and the principality of grace, and are farre short of prouing the Supremacy of power ouer the whole Christian world now claimed and practised by the Bishop of Rome. B. Carlton. iurisdiction, pag. 55, 56.Wee may also iustly alleadge that the honours and titles that other Bishops gaue to the Bishops of Rome for their great vertue in former times, the Romists of these latter times vniustly draw to proue the iurisdi∣ction of that Sea: because they may finde the same or greater giuen to other worthy Bishops: as to Saint Ambrose, to whomBasil. epist. 55. Saint Basil writing, saith, He hol∣deth the sterne of that great and famous shippe, the Church of God, and that God hath placed him in the primacy and chiefe seate of the Apostles. SoSidon lib. 6. ep. 1 & 4. Sidonius Apollinaris Bishop of Arvern calleth Lupus (a French Bishop) Pope Lupus; and his Sea Aposto∣like. And writing to Fontellus (another French Bi∣shop,
Lib. 7. ep. 4. Quod Aposto∣latus vestri pa∣trocinium copio∣sissimumconferre vos comperi. saith, he greatly reioyced, that he found he did aboundantly defend his Apostleship. And againe,Lib. 6. ep. 7. Ego quoque ad Apostolatus tui noticiam accedo I come to the knowledge of your Apostleship.Chrysost de laudibus Paul hom. 8. & in Gal. 2. Erat Paulus Princeps Apostolorum, honore par Petro, ne quid dicam amplius. Saint Chrysostom called Saint Paul, Prince of the Apostles.Ruffin. histor. lib. 2. cap. 1. Iacobus Apostolorum princeps. Ruffinus gaue Saint Iames the same title.Greg in 1 Reg. lib. 4. cap 4. Paulus ad Christum conuersus, caput effectus est nationum, qui obtinuit Eccle∣siae totius principatum. See D. Field. Church, booke 5. chap. 41. Saint Gre∣gory gaue Saint Paul the title of Head of the Nations, and that hee obtained the gouernment of the whole Church. What titles doe the Fathers giue vnto Saint Peter beyond these? If these doe not proue any gene∣rall Iurisdiction in others: how doe they proue it in Saint Peter? §. 12. But what need we stand vpon Titles which the ancient Fathers gaue to Saint Peter or the Pope, when the whole course of their actions were against the Supremacy now challenged? Remember what I haue saidSee before booke 1. chap. 1 §. 2. before of the Fathers misliking and disswading the Popes assumed authority in the smallest matters (as Polycarpus disswading Anicetus; Polycrates and the Bishops of the East, and Irenaeus with his French Bishops in the West, disswading Victor, from new, vn∣usuall, vniustifiable courses.ibid. §. 3.) Other Fathers afterwards plainely resisting and reiecting the Popes iudgement and authority, as the holy Martyr Cyprian, with many whole Councels of the African Bishops, Saint Basil the Great, and the whole Greeke Church. I shewed you also, how three Popes in succession, Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine (aboue 400. yeeres af∣ter Christ) claymed their superiority and priuiledges, (not by the Scriptures, but) by a Canon of the Coun∣cell of Nice, which Canon, the holy learned Bishops in the Councell of Carthage reiected, finding no such
thing in any of the Copies of the Councell of Nice, which their Church kept, or the Church of Alexandria, or the Church of Constantinople. So that finally (con∣demning that Canon to be countefet, and the claymed authority of the Church of Rome to bee new and vn∣lawfull) they made Decrees against the Popes clayme, conformable to their owne Decrees and Customes of former times.Ibid. sect. 4. I shewed you further, by the Con∣tention betwixt Iohn Bishop of Constantinople, and Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, that your owne Gregory condemned the titles and supremacy which Iohn then laboured for, and which your Popes now take vnto them: he, I say, condemned them for Anti∣christian, and said, none of his ancestors did euer claym them.Ibid. sect. 5. I shewed you also, how the Bishops of France, Germany, and Brittany, with many Councels, one at Constantinople, another at Frankfurt, another at Paris, with whom also ioyned Charles the Great, and Ludo∣uicus Pius (beside many learned men in their bookes at that time) opposed the Pope and his Councels, and his authority, in imposing the worship of Images vp∣on the Church. Of these, and of the succeeding times, I haue spokenSee ibid. sect. 9. 10. &c. (in mine opinion) sufficient to satisfie any moderate man: and vpon occasion. I haue much more to say. But reade aduisedly at your leysure, B. Iew∣el, B. Morton, D. Field, and our other learned Prote∣stants: or our most iudicious King Iames his bookes; or reade onely B. Bilsons bookeB. Bilson. The true difference between Chri∣stian subiectiō & vnchristian rebellion, spe∣cially the first part, p. 94. & seq in 8. (who writes fully e∣nough and punctually of these matters) and if you bee not prejudicate and obstinate beyond all reason, you will be satisfied. Onely I will adde here for the present, one thing of the African Church, about Saint Cyprians time and af∣ter: The Contention betwixt the Bishops of Africa and the Bishop of Rome was so great, that on the one side, (as CassanderCassander con∣sultation, aric. 7. pag 54. obserueth) Pope Steuen repelled Saint Cyprian (à communione suâ) from Communion
with him;See efo chp. 2. admitted not to his speach the Bishops of Africa comming from Saint Cyprian as Legats: yea, and fobade all his fraternity to receiue them into their houses: denying them not only peace & cōmunion, but also, tectum & hospitium, house-room & lodging: calling Cyprian (Pseudo, hristum, & dolosum operarim) a false Christ, and deceitfull worker. And on the other side, Saint Cyprian and the Africans stood out, thinking the Pope and the Italians, in the wrong; neither sued they, neither cared they for the Communion of the Pope and the Church of Rome. Do∣ctor Harding saith,Hardings an∣swer to Iewels challenge, pag. 290. The whole Church of Africa withdrew it selfe from the Church of Rome, by reason of this difference of Appeales, and so continued in Schisme an hundred yeeres, and in that time were brought into miserable captiuity by the Vandales. (Harding might remember that Rome it selfe, about the same season, in the space of 140. yeeres, was brought to miserable calamities, being sixe times taken by the wilde and barbarous enemiesB. Iewel. ib.) after which time of 100. yeeres, Eulabius B. of Carthage, condemning his predecessors disobedience, and seeking reconciliation to the Pope, did by publike instrument (or writing) submit and reioyne the African Church to the Roman. And Boniface the Pope writes thereof to the Bishop of Alexandria, exciting him to reioyce and giue thankes to God for this reconciliation: saying, that Aurelius Bishop of Carthage and his fellowes (whereof Saint Augustine was one) being set on by the Diuell had borne themselues proudly against the Church of Rome, &c. So were Saint Austen with 216. other Bishops, with foure generall Councels, of Africa, Carthage, Mil∣leuis and Hippo, condemned and cursed by Eulabius, and declared by Boniface the Pope, to bee pricked forwards by the Diuell, and wilfully to liue out of the Church of God, and die in Schisme. This History, reported by Mr Harding, yeelds a great
inconuenience that such good men, as Saint Augustine, Cyprian, Fulgentius, and many others, should willingly liue and dye out of the Community of the Roman Church, as Schismatiks, and excommunicated by the Pope: and yet thinke themselues safe enough, and ge∣nerally accounted by the world to be good Catholikes, and many of them Saints: And therefore Bellarmine hath reason to discredit this story of the reconciliation, and laboureth to proue it counterfet either in whole or in partBellar. de Rom. Pontif. l. 2. c. 25.. And thus Mr D. Harding is not onely proued often by our B. Iewel, but heere confessed by his fellow Bellarmine to be an errant Catholike, an abuser of the world by fables; and yet lately againeCoster. enchir. cap. De summo Pont. obiectio decima solet. & Sanders de visib. monarch. lib. 7. pag, 39. as Lindan be∣fore Panopl. lib. 4. cap. 48. Costerus the Iesuit mentions the same story as true. Such is their v∣nity among themselues, and the certainty of their both histories and doctrines. If this history be true; then in those times, holy men, Saints, and Martyrs, made no great conscience to resist the Pope, to reiect his soue∣raignty, to liue and dye out of the communion of the Church of Rome: if the story be false, then condemne your great D. Harding, and the Authors which he fol∣lowes, as abusers of the world by falsities. By all this, it appeareth that whatsoeuer titles the Ancient Fathers gaue to Saint Peter: they denyed the supremacy now challenged to the Bishops of Rome his pretended successors. §. 13. For indeed, the things wherein Saint Peter excelled the other Apostles, were personall, proper to his person onely, and not communicable to his successors. To be the eldest, first chosen, of greatest estimation, fullest of grace, &c. were not things descending to his successors, but proper to himselfe. Antiq. Neither doe the Bishops of Rome challenge these properties: but his Vniuersality of commission o∣uer the whole world, and his Infallibility of Iudgement.
Antiquis. But in these two things the other Apostles were his equals.Proued before § 6, & 11. Saint Paul had care ouer all Churches 2 Cor. 11. so had the rest: and all of them were guided by the holy Ghost from error, both in teaching and writing. Antiq. True, but they could not leaue these to their successors, as Saint Peter might. Antiquis. So saith Bellarmine indeed:De pont. lib. 1. cap. 9. § Respondeo Pontificatum. Iurisdictio v∣niuersalis Petro data est vt ordinario pastori, cui perpetuò succederetur: alijs vero tanquam delegatis, quibus non suc∣cederetur. What should be the reason of this? Forsooth, they say that Christ made Saint Peter supreme Pastor and Bishop of the whole world, and so likewise his succes∣sors for euer:See Doctor Field. Church, Booke 5. cap. 23. pag. 114. but afterwards he gaue the same autho∣rity to the rest of the Apostles for their liues onely: A strange conceit, Christ first gaue him a Monarchy, and afterwards tooke it away againe; auoyding his first grant to one, by his second grant to eleuen more: for by making al the twelue of equall authority in all parts of the world and towards all persons, so that no one of them could limit or restraine another, hee tooke away the Monarchy from one which he had first giuen him, and made it an Aristocracy of twelue equals in power: and at their deathes, taking away succssion from ele∣uen, and giuing it to one, made a Monarchy of the Ari∣stocracy againe, and raysed Saint Peters successor to be greater then Peter himselfe had beene without any peeres, honouring the Pope more then he honoured Peter. For Peter was onely one of the Duodecem viri, but his successor a sole and absolute Monarch, and all the other Apostles successors were vnderlings, receiuing all their calling, mission, and commission from him, and not to be restrayned, limited, gouerned by him alone. Who would not take this for a strange Paradoxe, vn∣worthy of wise and learned men? and yet this they are compelled to hold, for two reasons: first, because it is
most cleare that the Apostles were all equall in power and commission, and receiued it immediately from Christ and not from Peter, which they cannot, they do not deny. Secondly, because if all the Apostles should leaue their power to their successors, then their succes∣sors should not depend vpon Saint Peters, but should deriue their power from Christ himselfe, by a line of succession as well as Peters did; and consequently all the Bishops ordayned by the other Apostles and by their successors to the worlds end (whereof there were and are innumerable) should haue no dependance of Saint Peter, neither could be limited or ordered by his successors, as Bellarmine saw well enoughLib. 4 cap. 24. §. At contra: & lib. 2. cap. 23. §. & secunda ratio.. There∣fore, where Saint Cyprian saith, The rest of the Apo∣stles had equall power with Peter: Their note saith, This must be vnderstood of the equality of the Apo∣stleship, which ceased when the Apostles dyed: and passed not ouer vnto BishopsIn the anno∣tation to Cy∣prian, printed at Rome by Paulus Manuti∣us, at the Popes command, Raynolds & Hart, p. 221.. BellarmineBellar. de pont lib. 1. c. 23 §. vi∣gsima prima. saw that this shift would not serue the Popes turne (because the world is full of the Apostles successors, lineally comming from them, which no way should depend vpon Saint Peter) therefore he hath another conceit more strange than the former; That the rest were made also Apostles by Christ, and so con∣tinued for their life: but they were consecrated Bi∣shops not by Christ, but by Saint Peter: and so con∣sequently (the Apostolike office ceasing) all the Bi∣shops authority was deriued from Saint Peter; A fine conceit, were it true; but himselfe saith presently af∣terIb. §. Respon∣deo in Apostola∣tu contineri Episcopatum. that the Bishops office is contayned in the Apo∣stles office, so that in being Apostles they were Bishops also without any further or new ordination; for what Ecclesiasticall acts can any Bishop doe, which the A∣postles could not? Christ gaue to the Apostles power to preach and baptize, Mat. 28.19. power to minister the holy Communion, Luke 22.19. power of the keyes, of binding and loosing, of remitting and retayning
sinnes, of planting Churches, ordayning Bishops and Ministers. For the Apostleship is the highest office in the Church of God, and containeth the power of all the rest in it.Bellar de pont. lib. 4. cap. 23. §. Addit Cyril. Christ by sayingIoh. 20. Sicut misit me Pater, & ego mitto vos, gaue them his owne office and autho∣rity, and made them his Ʋicars, as the Fathers Chry∣sostome, and Theophylact speake, and Bellarmine allow∣ethIb. initio capitis.. And whereas Saint Iames the younger was orday∣ned Bishop of Ierusalem by the other Apostles (as the Ancients shew;) that ordination was not a new power giuen him, but a speciall application of his old power to that particular diocesseWherein Bellar. troubles himslfe idly, de pont l. 1. c. 23 §. praetereaquod; as also the translation of a Bishop to another Sea, is not the making of a new Bishop, but a meere application of the old to a new placeD Field, ib. pag 116, 117.. §. 14. Thus you see sufficiently (I hope) that though the ChurchSection 3, 4, 5. attributed much to Saint Peter, yetSect. 10, 11, 12 not such supreme iurisdiction ouer the whole Church, as now is claymed;Sect. 13. neither could the prerogatiues due to him, descend to his successors; no such thing can be proued either by theSect. 6, 7, 8, 9. Scriptures, or theSect. 11. Fathers, but plainly theSect 10, 12. contrary.Cyprian epist. 67. D. Field, Church, book 5. c. 42. p. 288. Saint Cyprian saith wisely, that Al∣mighty God wisely foreseeing what euils might fol∣low such vniuersality of power and iurisdiction in one man; ordayned, that there should be a great number of Bishops ioyned in equall commission, that so, if some fell, the rest might stand and keepe the people from a generall downefall, as it was in the time of the Arians, wherein many Bishops were corrupted, and amongst them theSee the next chapter, sect. 4. Liberius: and before, c. 1. sect. 1. subsect. 2. §. 5. Bishop of Rome: others remay∣ning sound, and preuayling to saue the Church from ge∣nerall corruption. To conclude this great point, we account this clay∣med iurisdiction to be one of the great corruptions of
the Church of Rome: a politike deuice to set vp an earthly Kingdome. We know there was a Church of God vpon earth perfect and pure, before there was a Church at Rome: and that the Churches in other Na∣tions, of Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippy, &c. had no dependance vpon the Church of Rome: they were her sisters, not her daughters: equally branches of the Oliue tree, Rom. 11. Rome was not the Root, and they the Sprigs. And the Church of Rome was more per∣fect and pure before this great iurisdiction was euer claymed and practised, then euer it was after; and sal∣uation therein more easily attained. We know that in the smallest Churches, euen those in Philemons, and in Aquila and Priscillaes houses,Philem. 2. 1 Cor. 16.19. saluation was to bee had, without subiection to Rome; For wheresoeuer two or three are gathered together in Christs name,Mat. 18.20. hee is a∣mongst them. They that heare his voyce and follow him,Iohn. 10 27. are his Sheepe and Church, whethee they be vn∣der the Pope or no. And they that are built vpon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,Ephes. 2.19, 20. Christ him∣selfe being the chiefe corner stone; are not strangers and aliens, but of the houshold of God, and fellow Ci∣tizens with the Saints. The condition of being vnder the Pope is no where required in Scripture, but salua∣tion promised (wheresoeuer it is promised), without it. If nothing be necessary to be beleeued to saluation, but what is deliuered in plaine words in Scripture, or else thence deducted by euident consequence of reason (as Bellarmine teacheth) then this point is not necessary to be beleeued, then saluation may be had without it. The ancient Christians indeed reuerenced the Church of Rome, and thought fit to keep in the Community of so famous a Church: but they neuer acknowledged the Prerogatiue of the Bishop thereof to bee such, that it was damnable to be from vnder him, or separate from community with him, or feared his excommunication as damnable. For the Greeke Church (which was a
long time a principall part of the Christian world) was neuer subiect to the Roman Bishop,See B. Morton. Causa Regia cap, 1. §. 4 pag. 4. but (as Bellarmine confessethBellarmine in Praefat. ad libros de Rom. Pont. pag. 15.) diuided from the Roman 800. yeeres. AndBellar. li. 3. de verbo Dei c. 6. § secundo All the Churches of Asia were excommunicated by Pope Victor, vniustly, and contrary to the course of all his predecessors, as both Irenaeus with his Westerne Bishops, and all the Easterne Bishops manifested it vnto him, and therefore they little regarded it, though (as Bellarmine saithBellar de Rom. pont. li. 2. c. 19. §. At objicit.) we neuer read it was recalled, or they absolued. Binius Annot. in Concil. 1. Car∣thag.Pope Steuen threatned the African Bishops with excommunication, which they, ioyning with Saint Cyprian the famous Bishop of Carthage, made none ac∣count ofSee before, .12.. Saint Cyprian was notwithstanding alwaies accounted in the number of Catholikes,Bellar. lib. 2. deconcil. c. 5. §. 1 and afterward crowned with Martyrdome. In Saint Augustines time the African FathersCard. Cusan concord cath. lib. 1. cap. 20. continued to withstand Pope Celestine and his successors, and stood willingly excom∣municated an hundred yeeres, as appeares by the Epi∣stle of BonifaceSee before, §. 12., whereof I spake before.Bellar de Rom. pont. lib. 2. c. 25. Bellarmine andSalmeron. rom 12. tractat. 58. p. 498 col. 1. Baronius that deny the story thereof, and would discredit that Epistle, know very well that many lear∣ned men of their side allow, applaude and alleadge it, (as Lindan, Sanders, Harding, Coster, &c.) and so ei∣ther are blindely deceiued, or wilfully deceiue the world: they know also that the African Bishops (and among them Saint Augustine the Chiefe) did very sharpely withstand the Roman Bishops clayme for Ap∣peales to Rome: andSalmeron. rom 12. tractat. 58. p. 498 col. 1. they know also that from the time of Saint Cyprian the Church of Africa began to be separated from the Church of Rome.Baronius tom 5. anno 49. u. 93. In which time there were innumerable troopes of Martyrs that dyed for the Catholike Faith, as Baronius confesseth.Baron. tom 8. anno 604. nu. 55 & 58. Ba∣ronius describeth also out of Beda, how the Churches of great Brittain (England and Scotland) were diuided a long time from the Roman Church, and subiection to her rites, which were commanded vnder paine of
excommunication, and stood out in Gregory the Greats time, aboue 600. yeeres after Christ, and would not yeeld the desired subiection for all that Augustine could doe, and yet they were accounted Catholike Christi∣ans: and on one day, twelue hundred of them were crowned with Martyrdome, dying for the Faith of Christ, contra Northumbrot infideles, as your histories tell vsGalfrid Mo∣num. hist. lib. 1. cap. 12, 13.. In these latter times, our Aduersaries reckon examples enowAzorius Iesu∣ita Institut. moral. part. 1. lib. 8. cap. 20. §. Decimo quar. of Greekes, Armenians, Ruthenians, Aegyptians, Aethiopians, and other remote parts of the world, which doe not acknowledge the Pope to bee their superiour, no more than the Protestants doe. And yet your Azorius (a choyce man, deliuering the do∣ctrine of the Roman Church) dare not affirme them to be heretikes, but excuseth their opinions different from the Romists, and cals them onely Schismatikes, because they refuse the Roman superiority. To say nothing of the Protestants, whereof there are innumerable in Germany, France, Britaine, Pelonia, Dauid, Bohemia, Hun∣garia, Heluetia, Sueti, Silesia, Morana, Transiluania, and other parts, which in this age make the greater part of Christendome; which all reiect the Roman Hierar∣chy, as contrary to the Apostles doctrine, and the Pri∣mitiue Church for many ages. It may seeme strange that any man that hath any dram of Christian Charity, or come of Christian salt in his heart, should perswade himselfe, or force his heart to thinke, that so many learned Bishops of old time, and Christians suffering Martyrdome for Christs sake; and such infinite store of people of all nations in these latter ages, professing Iesus Christs religion, hol∣ding all points necessary to saluation; and for them suffering losse of goods, imprisonment, banishment, death and depriation of all earthly comforts besides it, should cease to be Christians, and become damned creatures onely because they will not become subiects to the Pope of Rome, as to their superiour; who (as
they are verily perswaded) sitteth as Anrichrist in the Church of God, abrogating many of Gods Lawes, and establishing his owne. Or shall they that in tendernesse of Conscience haue reformed many grosse abuses in life, and errors in do∣ctrine, which had crept into the Latine Church, bee condemnd for reforming them, and not communica∣ting with him in his continued abuses, though they hold all good things with him, and refuse nothing which the Scriptures and pure Antiquity hath deliue∣red? No (my friend.) Be you Antiquus, if you will and sticke to Hildebrands dictates, broached eleuen hundred yeeres after Christ (when Satan was newly loosed) or to Boniface the eights decree 200. yeeres after Hilde∣brand (for that is your greatest Antiquity:) I will bee Antiquissimus and hold the old Religion which the A∣postles taught, which the first Churches held, the East, the South, the West, the middle Churches, yea all Churches (euen the Roman Church it self) for many hun∣dred yeeres next after Christ; according to which pat∣terns the Protestants haue reformed their Churches in these latter ages as neere as was possible for them: and make no more doubt of saluation therein, then of the holy Fathers, Saints, and Martyrs of former times, which reiected the Popes superiority and soueraignty, as we doe.
CHAP. 7. Of the Popes infallible iudgement in guiding the Church by true doctrine. §. 1. It cannot be proued by Scriptures, or Fathers, or by the Analogy to the chiefe Priests of the old Testament. §. 2. Neither is such infallibility now necessary in any man. §. 3. But if in any man, most improbably in the Popes, whereof some haue been children, and many most wicked men, and monsters of men. §. 4. And many Popes haue erred (De facto) in Iudge∣ment. §. 5. Which the Romists distinctions and euasions cannot auoyd. §. 6. The manifold and manifest Iudgement of Anti∣quity ouerthrowe this supposed infallibility. For §. I. The Ancients euer accounted the Pope, fallible: §. II. And neuer in their writings mentioned their In∣fallibility. §. III. But reiected often both their iurisdiction and Iudgement: §. IIII. Which if they had beene established and belee∣ued, the Fathers studies, and commentaries vpon the Scrip∣tures, had beene in vaine. §. V. And Councels had beene called to no purpose. §. 1. Antiquus. SVppose the Popes claymed-supreme-go∣uernment ouer the whole Church can∣not bee proued by Scriptures nor Fa∣thers, yet if he haue infallibility of iudg∣ment in all points of heauenly doctrine, we are bound to submit vnto him.
Antiquissimus. Proue that hee hath such infallibility, and we wiil submit to his iudgement. Antiq. It is proued by the textBe lar. de Rom Pont. lib. 4 cap. 3. Luk. 22.31, 32. Si∣mon, Simon, Behold Sathan hath desired to winnow you like wheat, but I haue prayed for thee that thy Faith should not fayle, and when thou art conuerted, Strengthen thy brethren. Antiquis. These words are no way appliable to Pe∣ters successors, except you will haue them first deny Christ outwardly (though faith fayle not in their heart) and secondly conuert, and afterward strengthen their brethren. Else these things are proper to Peter, who indeed was so grieuously tempted by Sathan, that in that triall, through the extremity of feare, he deni∣ed Christ, and that with bitter imprecations: but yet by vertue of Christs prayer, he denied him not by infi∣delity, the perswasion of his heart remayned the same it was before; then repenting bitterly for his outward Apostacy, and receiuing the sweetnesse of Gods mercy in forgiuing, conuerting, and strengthening him, hee was able and fit to strengthen his brethren, to preuent their like fals, or restore them after their fals by hope of the like mercy. Thus your Iesuite Sa Iesuita schol. in Luk. 22 id est, sicut ego orando te pro∣te i (inquit in∣terlinearis glas∣sa) ne deficeres, sictu infimiores sratres exemplo tuae poenitentiae consorta, ne de veia desperent. Se Ar as Mor∣tanus, & Aqui∣nas Catena, on this place. Sa interprets this place, truely alleadging the interlineall glosse for it. And thus dothTheophylact. vpon Luk. 22. Theophylact also, attributing the confirmation of his brethren, not to Peters constancy in the true Faith, but to his sence of Gods tender mer∣cy recalling and recouering him: by which he was able to strengthen the weae, to comfort the sorrowfull, to confirme the doubtfull, and to rayse them vnto as∣sured hope of finding mercy, that otherwise were rea∣dy to despaire. For who will not be confirmed (saith the same Theophylact) by Peter, in the comfortable per∣swasion of Gods gracious mercy to repentant sinners, that seeth him (whom Christ had so much hooured) after so shamefull and execrable fault of Abnegation of his louing Master, the Lord of life, not onely receiued to mercy, but restored to the dignity of the prime and
chiefe Apostle? Bellarmine bringeth some reasons and allegations to proue those words of Luk. 22, to make for Saint Peters (and his successors) infallibility, but all farre too weake to proue his purpose. See them ful∣ly examined and answered by D. Field,D. Field, Church, booke 5 chap. 42. who answers also the other allegations of Mat. 16.18. Vpon this Rocke I will build my Church: and of Iohn 21.15, 16, 17. Feed my sheepe, seed my lambes. Vpon which, the infallibility of the Pope cannot possibly be grounded, neither doe the Fathers come neere to proue it, which are alledged for it, as he sheweth. Antiq. For the places of Saint Matthew 16. and St. Iohn 21. Vpon this Rocke, and Feed my sheepe, since you haue proued by the Fathers iudgementBefore chap. 6 section 6, 7. that they belong as well to the other Apostles as to Saint Peter, I relye not vpon them, nor vpon the Fathers, who byib. sect. 12. refusing the Popes supreme gouernment, seeme there∣by also to deny his infallibility. But there is another thing, vrged byBellar. de pont. lib. 4. cap. 3. §. quarto probatur many, and seemes to be of great force to proue this questioned infallibility: That the high Priest of the old Testa∣ment had in his brest-place the Vrim and Thummim, Exod. 28. & 30. that is, Doctrine and Verity, which is expounded in the 17. & 9. of Deuteronomy, where the Lord commands them that doubt of the sence of the diuine Law, to repayre to the Chiefe Priest, and en∣quire of him, adding That he shall tell them the truth of iudgement. Therefore both by signes, and by words the Lord hath promised that in the brest of the Chiefe Priest shall reside Doctrine and Verity; and therefore that he cannot erre, when he teacheth the people. And if this was fit for the Aaronicall chiefe Priest, much more for the Christian. Conformable whereuntoIoh. 11.51. & Rhemists ther∣vpon. Caiphas, the Iewes high Priest, in a Councell, prophe∣sied (truly) that Christ should dye for the Nation. Vp∣on which Text, the Rhemists do note, That the gifts of the holy Ghost follow the Order and Office, not the
merits and persons of men; as Caiphas a man many wayes wicked, and in part an vsurper, in the time when the Priesthood began to decline and giue place to the new ordinance of Christ, had yet some assistance of God for vtterance of truth, which Caiphas himselfe meant not: therefore we should not maruell that Christ deliuereth his truth by Prelats, his officers, though wicked and vnworthy of their office, as alsoCanus loc. theol. lib. 5. cap. vlt. §. Ad id. Canus saith, alleadging the same text, and Bishop Fisher alsoRoffensis con∣tra Assert. Lu∣theri. veritat. 3. pag. 12.. Antiquis. The high Priests, by their education, of∣fice, reading, study, and conference, must in all reason, haue knowledge farre beyond ordinary people, for signe whereof, they might weare the Vrim and Thum∣mim: and the people were to repayre to them for di∣rection in their doubts, (as now to their learned Mi∣nisters, whose lips must preserue knowledge.) But the people were not to take all for infallible which they said.B Morton Appeal l. 3 c. 15 sect. 3. & D. Field, Church, booke 5. c. 42. The Iewes had a glosse vpon that text [If the Iudge shall tell thee that the right hand is the left, and affirme he left to be the right, thou must beleeue him] But this is absurd (saith their Lyranus) for no iudge∣ment that is manifestly false must be beleeued from any man of what authority soeuer he be. But the people are appointed onely to doe all things which the high Priests shall teach according to the Law, Deut. 17.11 Whereupon Christ saith,Mat. 23.2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit vpon Moses Chayre, and therefore are to be harke∣ned vnto (not in all things generally, whatsoeuer they say, but (onely when they vtter and deliuer pertinentia ad Cathedram things agreeable to Moses doctrine: as the author of the ordinary glosse notethGlossa in un∣dem locum. See. Raynolds, Hert.. This therefore proues no infallibility in the high Priest, nor in the Pope, no more doth that ofIoh. 11.49, &c. Caiphas (to whom wee wonder that you in earnest parallell your Pope:) For he spake once in the Councell, truely, and prophetically (God directing him, and the euent)
confirming it:) but he spake also in the Councell most vntruely and blasphemously, when he said that Christ blasphemedMat 26.65.: as Bellarmine saith wellBellar. lib. 2. de conciliis cap. 8. § alii dicunt.. Therefore to establish an opinion of an infallible Iudge by an exam∣ple of a Iudge blasphemously erroneous in iudgement, is little better then to erect a Roman Caiphas. §. 2. You see therefore by the insufficiency of your proofes, first, that you haue no probability of your Popes infallibility. Now I tell you secondly, there is no necessity of any such thing in any one man in the Church of God, be∣causeBellar. de Ver∣bo Dei li. 4. c. 11. §. hic notatis Costerus Enchir ca. 1. §. caetorum. we haue all the points of Christian doctrine ne∣cessary to saluation,Coster. ib. Aug. Doctr. Christia∣na l 2. c. 9. Bel∣lar. de iustif. lib 3. cap. 8. § primara. plainely and infallibly deliuered in the Scriptures. Saint Peter wasMat. 16.17. infallibly guided by the holy Ghost, and freed from all error in doctrine either by teaching then presently, or deliuered by wri∣ting to posterity; so were all the other Apostles. AndBellar. de ver∣bo. Dei l. 4. c. 11. § his notatis. what they taught necessary for all men to beleeue vn∣to saluation,2 Tim. 3.16. Gal. 1.12. 2 Pet. 1.21. 1 Thes. 1.13. what they wrote and left for the instructi∣on of the Church in succeeding ages to the end of the world, whereupon all true Christians may and must stay themselues for all points touching the foundation of Religion, & necessary to saluation. If it were possibleGal. 1.8, 9. for an Angell from heauen to come and teach other∣wise, St. Paul doth confidently and doubly pronounce him Anathema. As long as any men or Churches hold fast what the Apostles haue deliuered, they doeBellar de verbo Dei, lib. 1. c. 2. § quare cā. Faber Sta∣pulensis praefati∣one in Euange∣istas. vn∣fallibly hold the truth: when they swarue from that, they swarue from the Rule of truth, and may quickly lose themselues in inextricable errors. The latitude of this vnfallible necessary sauing knowledge, I haue de∣scribed beforeIn the 6. chap¦ter next be∣fore., and it is that wee must earnestly con∣tend for, as Saint Iude saith, Earnestly contend for the Faith which was once deliuered to the SaintsIude vers. 3.; once deli∣uered, that is, first, and once for all deliuered by the
Apostles to the first Church, and neuer after to be al∣tered; for that contend earnestly, and for other profi∣table doctrines that are thence deducted by manifest consequence of Reason, contend also, but more mode∣rately. For things obscurely thence deducted, and not profitable at all, contend not. Let euery mans iudgement submit to the rule (of the absolutely necessary points sufficient for saluation) once and first giuen: and we shall need no more nor fur∣ther infallibility in any man. §. 3. But if this (so much spoken of) infallibility of iudge∣ment for teaching and gouerning the Church, should be giuen to any one ranke of men, it is very vnlikely the Popes should be the men. Is it reasonable to thinke that children in yeeres and vnderstanding, or men of corrupt and filthy liues, monsters of men (such as many of your Popes were) should be Gods chiefe infallible gouernours of his Church? Benedict the 9. was made Pope at 12. or 10. yeeres old (as Baronius confessethBaronius an∣no.) and ruled that Church 20. yeeres. A likely Sheephards boy in Saint Peters place, to feed his sheepe (the flocks, they say, of all Christendome) by doctrine and exam∣ple! more likely to be a plague to the flocke: as God, threatning a plague to the Common wealth,Esay 3.4. said, Children should reigne ouer them. Aristotle iudged a Youth not a fit hearer of Morall Philosophy, and yet must this childe bee thought a fit teacher of heauenly doctrine, yea, to be the Vniuersall Oracle of the world, that hath neither possibility to erre himselfe, nor mis∣leade others. Such a vertue hath the Popes Chayre to infuse learning and all habilities into a Schoole-boy, that knowes not his Grammar, to serue the Roman turn well enough; to interpret the Scriptures, assoyle all questions, resolue all doubts, sit at the sterue and guide the shippe of the Church, call Councels, and iudge of
all their decrees, ratifie some, nullifie others (as one of farre greater iudgement than all the learned of the world) yea, to determine all causes, depose Kings, com∣mand Angels, open and shut both heauen and hell, and doe euery thing as well as Saint Peter himselfe. How thinke you? is it reason for any man to thinke so? Antiq. Many defects may bee supplied by learned Cardinals, graue and wise Counsellors. Antiquis. A miserable head that hath his wit to seeke in another mans brains; but youGreg Val. Anlys. fidei l. 8. c. 10. §. Ex quo. This were to giue infallibi∣lity not to the Pope, but to the Pope with his Cardinals. place not infallibility in the Counsellors, but onely in the Pope himselfe; his faylings are not to be amended by theirs, but theirs by him: and indeed, if he be infallible, they are superflu∣ous, and so are all Councels and learned men. See ano∣ther Pope somewhat elder, but a great deale worse; Iohn 12.Banonius anno 955. He was made Pope at 18. yeeres of age: the Romish Church thought it a lesse euill to endure one head, though monstrous (Monstruosum quantum libet ca∣put ferre, saith BaroniusBanonius anno 955.) than to be infamed with two heads, and one body to be cut in two. Vpon Saint Dun∣stans comming to him to receiue his Pall to bee Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, at last, Baronius addes, Vidisti ex∣trema duo, Episcopum sanctissimum, pontificem vero mori∣bus perditissimum: Thou hast seene two extreme con∣traries, A most holy Bishop (Dunstan) and a most wic∣ked liuing Pope (Iohn the twelfth.)Baron. anno 963 n. 17. Baronius saith, this Iohn was accused of many most notorious crimes, of a∣dultery with Rainerius his widdow, and with Stephana is Fathers concubine, and the widdow Anna, and with his (or her) neece, and that he made the holy pal∣lace a stewes and brothell house, that hee put out the eyes of his ghostly Father Bened, who died vpon it: that hee cut off the stones of Iohn the Cardinall subdea∣con, and so killed him: that he dranke to the loue of the Diuell in wine: that in playing at dice, he would inuocate the ayde of Iupiter, Venus, and other heathen gods: that the whole Councell of the Bishops of Italy
wrote vnto him that he was accused of murder, periu∣ry, sacriledge, yea, and incest with his own kindred and his two sisters, &c. they required him to come and an∣swere for himselfe, promising him to doe nothing but according to the Canons. He wrote againe thus ridicu∣lously and childishly, Ionnes episcopus, seruus seruorum Dei, omnibus episcopis: Nos audiuimus dicere, quod vos vultis alium papam facere: si haec feceritis, excommunico vos de Deo omnipotenti, vt non habeatis licentiam vllum ordinare & missam celebrare. Platina in Ioan. 13.Platina in his life (reckoning him Iohn 13.) cals him sceleratissimum hominem, vel monstrum potius, a most wic∣ked man, or rather a monster: and againe, Virum om∣nium, qui vnquam ante se in pontificatu fere perniciosissi∣mum & sceleratissimum: A man of all that euer were be∣fore him in the Popedome, the most pernicious and wicked. When this Iohn fled, the Emperor Otho made Leo Pope in his roome; but assoone as the Emperour was gone, Iohn by the helpe of his kindred and clients, put downe Leo, and reygned againe; shortly after, committing adultery with another mans wife, he was thrust thorow and slayne: or asBaron. anno 964. n. 17. Baronius thinkes, he was in his adultery strucken in the Temples by the di∣uels, and so dyed. Was this a man likely to be the infal∣lible mouth and organ of the holy Ghost? If Baronius and Platina be not witnesses sufficient, reade he same story in your owneSigonius l. 7. de regno Italioe. Sigonius (the Popes hyred reader in one of his Vniuersities) who writes it somewhat fully, following Luitprandus, Martinus Polanus, Trit∣mius, Platina, Krantzius, all your owne Catholike Historians. I omit a number of wicked Popes, fellowes and e∣quals to these; for I should both weary and stinke you out, if I should rake long in the dunghill of these Popes liues: whereof there were fifty in one plumpe (as your owneGenebrard. l. 4. Chronologiae, se∣ulo 10 anno 90 pag. 546. Genebrard writeth) rather Apostaticall than A∣postolicall in the space of an 150. yeeres. I will onely
shew you a briefe of the story of a few Popes in a short time, and their strange Vnity, Infallibility, and Holi∣nesse. These things yee may reade in Platina, Luit prandus, and Bellarmine al∣so lib. 4. de Rom. pont. cap. 12. §. vigesimus septi∣mus. and in Baroni∣us anno 897. Who onely differeth in at∣tributing to Stephanus that which others doe to Sergius.Formosus a Cardinall and Bishop was cursed, depo∣sed, and degraded by Pope Iohn the 8, (whom Platina reckons Iohn the ninth) who driuing him out of Rome, caused him to sweare neuer to returne either to the City, or to his Bishopricke. But Iohn being dead, his successor Martin 2, absolued Formosus from his oath, and restored him to his former dignity. Not long af∣ter, the same Formosus obtained the Popedome, where∣in hee liued fiue yeeres. After him, succeeded Bonifa∣cius 6, liuing Pope but twenty six dayes: then Stepha∣nus 6. Who abrogated Formosus his decrees, disanul∣led his acts in a Councell, tooke vp his body, dis∣poyled it of the pontificall habite, as vniustly made Pope after periury; cut off two of his fingers where∣with hee had consecrated, cast them into Tyber, and buried him in lay-mens garments. This Steuen rey∣gned but one yeere and three months. After him suc∣ceeded Romanus 1. Who abrogated the decrees and acts of Steuen, and reygned but three months: then came Theodorus 2. who restored also Formosus his acts and followers, liuing Pope but twenty dayes. Then succeeded Iohn 9. (Platina cals him Iohn the tenth) who fully restored the acts of Formosus, and abrogated Steuens, confirming all by a Councell. Notwithstan∣ding all this, Sergius 3. restored Steuen, and condem∣ned Formosus agayne, admitted them to priesthood againe, whom Formosus had deposed: and whom For∣mosus had ordered, hee againe degraded, and caused them to take new Orders: and againe tooke vp Formo∣sus his body, out of the sepulcher, beheaded it, and cast the body into Tyber, as vnworthy the honour of buriall. Whereupon (saith BaroniusBaron. anno 908.) one Auxilius then wrote a dialogue betwixt Infensor and Defensor, against this inbred discord of the Romish Church, and
of the Popes ordinations, exordinations, and supe-ordinations, &c. Nauclerus ge¦nerat, 31. initio.Thus were Saint Peters successors whirled about (not with the spirit of godlinesse, but) with the spi∣rit of giddinesse. Vertigo rotabat Petri successores (saith KrantziusKrantzius Me∣trepolis l. 2 c. 22. Martin. Polon. Nanclerus ib. saith there were 8. Popes in one King Lo∣dowicks time, who reygned not aboue 12 yeeres.) and the head of the Church was long without a brayne. Where was then the infallibility of these Popes iudgement in the gouernment of the grea∣test affayres of the Church? where was their charity and holinesse? nay, where was ordinary honesty, ci∣uility, or humanity? Here was indeed a most bestiall rage, reaching not onely to the death-bed, but to the graue, with digging vp bones, dismembring dead carkasses, derogating from their persons, abrogating their acts, disanulling their ordinations, disgracing their Fauorites, degrading the Prelats by their prede∣cessors preferred, Pope against Pope, one head of the Church against another, and Councells against Coun∣cells, setting the world in amaze, dissoluing religion and gouernment, that men knew not what to thinke, nor what to doe. Where was the vnity of minde and peace among inferiours, when the heads were so brain∣sicke, or so hare-braind, or rather wolfe-braind? Antiq. Enough enough, you haue wearied and stuncke mee out indeed, with these filthy storyes: which I would neuer haue beleeued, had you not tur∣ned mee to their owne authours, to reade them with mine owne eyes. But it is most admirable that God did yet preserue his Church by such wicked instru∣ments, for you know the doctrine and sacraments de∣liuered by Iudas were good and profitable, though hee was wicked. Antiquiss.Genebrard. quo supra.  tanto numero pontificū quin{que} modò & satis tenuiter lan∣datur. Our Sauiour in chusing Iudas had a pur∣pose to saue vs, by working good out of his treason; but had hee chosen ten Iudasses for one or two good A∣postles, the world would haue muttered at him as im∣prouident. Your Genebrard reports of 50 Popes Apo∣staticall
together, and scarce fiue of them any whit A∣postolicall; and doubtlesse hee speakes the best for his owne side: and the after times grew worse rather than better. Also, though the ministeriall acts being ordi∣nary and receiued of the Apostles (you will say) might bee effectuall, though wicked men performe them, (which to deny is contrafidem, and so condemnes them that abrogated Formsus his ordinationsBellar. de Rom. pont. l. 4 cap. 2. § vigesi∣mus sept & §. sed obiicies.) yet their infallibility (being an extraordinay priuiledge) in things not ordered by the Apostles, hath no probabi∣lity at all, but rather, the crossing one of another in their Decrees, and in their Counsells (called and con∣firmed by themselues) vtterly confutes it. §. 4. Antiq. These things you draw in (à latere) sidelings: shew mee some Popes that haue directly, and (facto) indeed erred in the Faith: and then I shall thinke them fallible.See D. Field, Church, booke 5. cap. 43. Bellar. de Rom pont. lib 4. Antiquis. Bellarmine himselfe yeelds you enow, though he labour with all his art and wit to excuse all, for some haue erred too grossely to be excused, too ma∣nifestly to be denied. 1 Pope Gregory 3. Ex ignorantia lapsus est (saith Bellar∣mineBellar. ib c 12. §. sed contra hoc est, &c.) when he permitted a man to take a second wife, his first yet liuing, but vnable to pay her debt vnto him: and taught, that in some case a man might with the license of his wife, marry another, and so haue two at once, which indeed is false doctrine, and so defined by the Councell of Trent, sels. 24. can. 2. 2 ib cap. 8. §. Decimus est Marcellinus.2 Pope Marcellinus (beyōd decreeing, proceeded to fact) sacrificed to Idols: teaching Idolatry and Hetheamsme by fact and example. But it was for feare of death saith Bellarmine. And 3 ib. cap. 9.3 Pope Liberius subscribed to the Arrian heresie, set his hand against Athanasius, wrote wicked Epistles: but (saith Bellarmine) it was for feare of death or tor∣ments.
A man may by the same reason excuse Peters deniall of Christ, and say, it was no sinne, if this was no error. Pope Vigillus wrote to the Empresse,4 ib. cap. 10. and to the he∣retikes confirming their heresie, and cursing the Ca∣tholike teachers that confessed two natures in Christ: wicked letters, vnworthy a Christian man. But (saith Bellarmine) hee did it for desire of the Papacy, and in great strayts, into which his ambition had cast him. As though wicked affections could excuse mens errours. Pope Honorius was condemned for an heretike,5 ib. cap. 11. by the sixt generall Councell, and againe by the seuenth: and in an Epistle of Pope Leo: but all these were cor∣rupted (saith Bellarmine) or misinformed. See, this man liuing but yesterday, knowes better than whole Councels, Popes, and authors liuing in that age, and is bold to accuse whole generall Councels of corruption, to keepe one Pope from corruption. Pope Celestine 3.6 ib. cap. 14. § cricesimus tertius. cannot bee excused from heresie (saith their Alphonsus de Castro) for teaching that by heresie Matrimony is so farre dissolued, that the inno∣cent party may marry againe: the contrary whereof is defined by the Councell of Trent, Sess. 24. Cannon 5. and by Innocent 3. Bellarmine saith, This was indeed Celestines opinion, but not any decree: a poore excuse.7 ib. cap. 14. See many Popes crossing one another in iudgement, ex diam etro, no∣ted by Erasmus annot. in 1 Cor. 7. pag. 373, 374. Basilea 1522 ci∣ted by B. Mortō Appeal l. 3. c 15 §, 1. p 403. Pope Iohn 22. held opinion that the soules departed came not to see God till after the resurrection. Bellar∣mine answers, hee might so hold without danger, be∣cause yet there had beene no definition of the Church in this point; also, he purposed to define the question, but was by death preuented. A slender answer, leauing him still infallibly faulty. §. 5. Antiq. Sir, you know, the Catholikes haue many distinctions: The Pope may erre in manners, but not
in doctrine: in matters of fact, but not in Faith: in person, but not in office: before hee be fully setled (as Vigilius) but not confirmed in his seate: in the premis∣ses, but not in the conclusion: by way of conference, but not in determining: in a priuate letter, but not in a Decretall Epistle: in his chamber, but not in his Con∣sistory: in his pallace, but not in the Pulpit. In a word, he may erre as a man, but not as Pope. Antiquis. Your men (like the Foxe) being hunted out of one hold, flie to another; their distinctions are but meere euasions, and illusions to gull the world withall. Their first hold was, that the Pope could not erre at all, neither ought to bee iudged by any man; but being driuen from that hold, they flye to another: He may erre in manners, or in matter of fact, but not in matters of doctrine or faith: Well, wee driue them from that also, for Gregory 3. Liberius, Vigilius, Honori∣us, Celestine, and Iohn, erred in points of Faith. Then they flie to another hold, they erred in Faith indeed, but yet as men onely, not as Popes. I thinke our lear∣ned King Iames hunts them from this hold also;King Iames Re∣monstrance to Card. Peron. pag. 99. in de∣manding wherefore then doth not the Pope instruct and informe the man? or wherefore doth not that man require the Popes instruction? shall we say that Esay and Daniel might sinke into heresie as men, but not as Prophets? would not the man Esay consult with the Prophet Esay, to be free from error? if he cannot assure himselfe, how shall hee assure vs of his freedome from error? I adde that the world by such distinction is gul∣led and abused:Bellar. de Pont. Rom. l. 4 c. 2. §. Deinde catholici pontificem so∣lum, siue errare posset. siue non, esse ab omnibus fidelis obedi∣enter audien∣um. for the Romists labouring to proue their Pope infallible onely in some few things, would haue the world obey him in all things. Some of them draw his infallibility into a narrow scantling: first, he must enter canonically, else hee is not a true Pope, and so wants the priuiledge: secondly, hee is free from error onely when he sets himselfe (as Pope) to decree mat∣ters of Faith: and thirdly, to the end to teach or guide
the whole Church: and fourthly,See Greg. Val. Analysis fidei, lib. 8. totum. Specially ca 4. 10. & Bellar. de Pont. Rom. l. 4. c. 2. . quarta o∣pinio, &c. proceedeth aduised∣ly, and maturely, vsing all due meanes to finde out the truth. Into these narrow limits & straits some are com∣pelled, all are compellable, to bound the Popes infalli∣bility, by the manifest histories of their errors both in fact & Doctrin, both as men & as Popes in euery degree. But obserue (I pray you) whether it bee likely that the Pope vsing all these meanes be infallible: for would he not then vse them, and quickly cut off all con∣tentions? would hee suffer troublesome controuersies among his owne people to be endlesse? The Dominicans following Thomas teach that the Virgin Mary was conceiued in originall sinne,Archb. Abbot. against Hil. pag. 110. Bedels letters pag. 52. Concil. Basi. sess. 36. the Franciscans following Scotus teach the contrary and these two families (like the Guelfes and Gibelines) are at mortall feood for the point: the Councell of Basil was troubled with it, and decreed on the Franciscans side; the Dominicans excep∣ted against it, as a Councell not lawfully called: and the dissention continued still so great, that to quiet all, Pope Sixtus was fayne to make a decree and command, that the question should not be disputed of afterwards, and yet they are still hot in it vpon any occasion, and BellarmineBellarmine. himselfe hath lately disputed it, and leaues it with a piè creditur on the Franciscans side. Why did not the Pope decide this; and giue perfect vnity to his Church, whereof there are so great brags? and that o∣ther also of Grace and Free will betwixt Dominicans and Iesuits? and all other controuersies, whereof their books are ful? so that their exactest writers (Suarez and others) spend more leaues in confuting their own men, then vs? May it not be suspected, they know well e∣nough that this infallibility of the Pope is but a meere fiction & shadow, so that the Pope dare not trust him∣selfe, to determine such matters wherin witty & lear∣ned men are engaged, lest they fall to quarrell and deny not onely his infallibility, but authority? and therefore it is obserued, he seldome proceeds to determine such questions.
Obserue againe, that if the Pope be onely infallible when he vseth such meanes, it argueth there is no di∣uine inspiration extraordinary from the holy Ghost proper to the Pope, but onely Gods ordinary assistance, vpon the vse of the meanes, promised to all Gods ser∣uants: And so is hee no more infallible than another man, Obserue thirdly, that the world hath no sufficient meanes to be assured, that such was the Popes entrance, and such meanes vsed by him, that all men may with∣out hesitation obey him. Pighius lib. 4. hierarch. eccl. c. 8 Valentia Ana∣ysis fidei part. 8. cap. 10. Bellar. de Pont. Rom l. 4 c. 10.To auoyd all inconueniences, Bellarmine and Gregori∣rius de Valentia teach that whether the Pope in defi∣ning vse diligence or no, hee shall define infallibly. Well, but yet how shall we know whether he be a true Pope or no? Entring canonically, without simony, violence, or other euill meanes: for Vigilius erred most heretically (saith Bellarmine) because hee was not yet true Pope (truely setled) though he carried himselfe as Pope; and many Popes were rather Apostaticall, than Apostolicall (saith your Genebrard) because the Em∣perours put them in (vncanonically it seemes) and there haue beene often two, and sometimes three Popes together, when the world could not know, which was the true Pope.Anno à Christo¦nato 13. à Christo passo. 1000. Greg. Heymburgensis, in Confutat. Primat. Papae. part 2. citatus a Iacabo Vsserio. De Christianarū Ecclesiarum successione & statu. c. 4. §. 19. Three Popes sate all at once in seuerall places in Rome, Benedict 9. Syluester and Gregory 6. of whom an Heremite wrote thus to the Emprour: Im∣perator Henrice (Omnipotentis vice) Vna Sunamitis, Nup∣sit tribus maritis: Dissole connubium, Et triforme dubi∣um. But to let this passe, miserable is the state of that people that is ouer-ruled by your distinctions to obey the Pope without distinction. For example, Suppose there comes a Breefe, Bull, or Decree from the Pope, enioyning his Catholicks to refuse the oath of allegi∣ance to their naturall Prince, (as from Paul the fift to the English) by which refusall they shall bee suspected
to bee Traytors in heart, and all the Kingdome shall bee iealous of them, that vpon any occasion they will bee ready to cleaue vnto the Pope, or to any that hee shall appoint (open or secret enemies to the State) a∣gainst their King, and to take armes against him, and by warres, insurrections, or treasos, to throw the Land on heapes, and bring in a Chaos of miserable confusion: Or, suppose the Bull goeth so farre (as Pius V. his Bull against our right gracious and fa∣mous Queene Elizabeth,) to pronounce the King to bee no King, to discharge the subiects from their al∣legiance to him, to command them to take armes a∣gainst him, and by any meanes to depose or bring him to ruine: Now the Kings life, and the spoyle of the Kingdome, and the damnable sinne of the people must depend vpon this Breefe or Bull; for it must be execu∣ted, whether it come from the Pope as a man, or as Pope. Poore blinded people must be ledde with a Piè credendum, and neither haue the meanes or any minde to know whether this Bull came from the Pope cano∣nically entring, or maturely deliberating, or wisely and orderly proceeding (if any such thing can be ima∣gined in such mischieuous practises) or whether it come from a Non-Pope, or misinformed, or vniust,Bellar. de Rom. pent l. 4. c. 2 §. Deinde Catholi∣ci conueniunt, Pontificem siue errare possit, siue non, esse omni∣bus fidelibus o∣bedienter audi∣endum. rash, or ill aduised; howsoeuer it is, No man must iudge Christs Vicar, but for conscience sake, and vn∣der paine of damnation, all must obey. Alas, that Christs pretended Vicar should doe the workes of Antichrist! Alas, that men piously minded, should be so impiously bewitched to become the instruments of Antichrist, thinking to doe seruice to Christ himselfe! Alas, that learned men should abuse Gods gifts of wit, learning, and other talents, bending all their forces to maintaine such doctrine! Antiq. Sir, keepe your passion for other company, Reason shall preuaile with mee more than passion. Antiquis. Deare friend, it is not passion, but com∣passion
to poore deceiued soules, brought into such damnable courses by such efficacy of delusion, though I know not how in such causes a good man should not be passionate. §. 6. §. I.But to returne to Reason (from which your Reason∣lesse distinctions drew me) In our former examples of Popes errings, doe you not see that although the Pa∣pists of this age excuse Honorius of all heresie, and count him a Saint, yet the Catholikes of former ages accounted him an heretike; for the sixt generall Coun∣cell condemned him,Bellar. de Rom. Pontif. l. 4. c. 11. and if that Councell were misin∣formed, or corrupted (as Bellarmine imagineth) and thereby induced also the seuenth Councell, and Pope Leo also to curse and condemne him: yet it appeareth thereby that they thought it possible for a Pope to be an heretike; and surely neither Liberius, nor Honorius, nor any other Pope had euer beene taxed of heresie, if the world had then thought the Popes to bee in∣fallible. §. II.This also giues vs another argument against the as∣sertion of the now-Church of Rome; that none of the Ancients euer knew or acknowledged any infallible Iudge in the Church,Mr Bedels let∣ters to Wads∣worth. p. 53. 59, 0. though (wee may imagine) such an one would haue beene a wonderfull benefit in secu∣ring all men fom error, with great tranquility of the Church; in easing leatned men of much vnnecessary contention, and of great labour and study; and choa∣king all heresies both easily and quickly; and thereby Diuinity should haue had the honour aboue all other professions to reduce all doubts to certaineties. If any such thing had beene, it were most strange that the Ancients (writing of all other points of Christian do∣ctrine) should neuer speake word of it, being a thing of such excellent and necessary vse, (as is imagined) therefore their very silence thereof proueth there was
no such thing. But their contentions with the Pope shew it more fully. For no man that beleeueth the Pope to be the infalli∣ble Iudge of the Church, and so appointed by God,§. III will refuse his opinion or gouernment. But we find the ancient, wise, and holy Bishops, made no bones ordina∣rily to reiect them both. In the very infancy of this affected Supremacy,See this sto∣ry in Euseb. hist. l. 5. c. 24, 25, 26. when Pope Victor tooke vpon him to excommunicate the East Church for not con∣curring with him in the Celebration of Easter day: not onely Polycrates and the Easterne Bishops reiected his decision; but most of the Westerne (as Irenaeus with his French Clergy) grauely reproued him of too much presumption.See Cyprians Epistles. Afterwards when the Pope tooke vp∣on him to heare Appeales of men pretending to be wronged by their owne country officers (which is the smallest portion of Supremacy) yet Cyprian (an holy Martyr) resisted him;Bellar. de pontif. Rom l. 4 cap 7. and the whole Nation of Afri∣ca, refused his iudgement and gouernment; yea, Saint Cyprian with a Councell of fourescore Bishops, decreed directly against the Pope.Concil. ar∣thag. de Haeret. bptiz. inter o∣pera Cypriani. And when Cornelius Bishop of Rome (with a Nationall Councell of the Bishops of Italy) had decreed (Non debere Haereticos rebaptizari) that heretikes should not be rebaptized: yet Cyprian thought and taught the contrary. Constat Cyprianm contrariū sensisse, & mordicus defendisse, saith BellarmineBellar. l. 2. d concilijs c. 5. See Euseb. hist. li 7 cap. 2, 3, 4. See these and many more the like histories in B. ilson True iffēce part. 1. p. 96. &c. The Fathers of the Councell of Africa, and Saint Au∣gustine among them, resisted three Popes in succession, Sosimus, Bonifacius, and Celestine, about Appeals to Rome. These things are notorious, and histories haue many more the like: and though some of these were in the wrong, yet they alwayes thought the Pope in the wrong, and would neuer haue opposed him had they thought him their infallible Iudge. By their doings therefore and writings, they shewed the generall opi∣nion of men in their times, that the Pope was not ge∣nerall gouernour ouer them, and that he was as fallible in iudgement as other Bishops.
Bedel letters, pag 61.Consider also, If the Pope were the infallible inter∣preter of Scripture, and could not erre in his interpre∣tations; why did Pope Damasus consult with Ierom a∣bout the sence of many places of the Scripture? and not rather set down the sence thereof himselfe, and declare with his owne pen what the whole world should hold without danger, or possibility of error? Or why haue our fond Fathers macerated their bodies and beaten their braines to write Commentaries vpon the Scrip∣ture, and not rather registred the Popes Expositions? which had beene a worke worth all the Fathers books, and indeed equall to the Canonicall Scriptures, or bet∣ter, and more vsefull for the Church: whereas now ma∣ny condemne that of the Canon Law for blasphemy, where it saith (by a shamefull corruption of Saint Au∣gustine) that the Decretals of Popes are inrolled a∣mongst the Canonicall Scriptures.Decret. c. in Ca∣nonicis. dist. 19. § V. Thus Erasmus argueth, Annot. in 1 Cor. 7. B. Mort Appeal. l. 2. c. 20. sect. 5. & l 3. c. 15. §. 4. Consider lastly, what need had there beene of any Councels? to what end was so much labour and cost bestowed? to what purpose to trouble so many Vni∣uersities? to call together so many learned Diuines? to turne ouer so many bookes? to beate their heads in the finding out of the truth, in discussing of hard questions, and satisfying of doubts? if all this might be so quick∣ly, easily, and sweetly done by the onely iudgement and determination of the Pope?
CHAP. 8. Of the good which the Popes Supremacy might doe to the Church. §. 1. That is vrged: but 2. answered, that policies a∣greeable to Gods word and the Primitiue Church, onely are sufficient, and blessed by God. §. 3. But this policy might be set vp by any sect. §. 4. It is vnprofitable, and vntollerable, 5. shewed by examples of Hildebrand: 6. The voiages against the Turke proued profitable to the Pope, not to Christian Princes, 7. as appeared by the Story of Gregory 9. and Frederik 2. Em∣perour: and 8. many other most wicked Popes. §. 9. The Emperour Phocas erred much in gouernment, in making the Pope so great, so farre from him. For Popes shortly after, proued Masters of mis-rule, eiecting the Em∣perors out of Italy. §. 10. Their turbulent proceeding to dethrone Princes. §. 11. Their troubles wrought in England in King Henry 1. his time, by Anselme: In King Henry 2. time, by Becket: In King Iohns reygne, by Pope Innocent. §. 12. In these latter times, of Queene Elizabeth, by the Bull of Pius Quintus, and the erecting of Seminaries at Rome and Rhemes, Schooles of Traytors. The reasons briefly touched, 1. Of the Rebellion in the North: 2. Of Ormonds brethren: 3. and 4. Of other petty conspiracies: 5. Stukely: 6. Sanders: 7. Someruile: 8. Motiues to the Ladies of Honour: 9. Of Throgmorton: 10. Men∣doza: 11. Creighton the Iesuite: 12. Parry: 13. Per∣cy: 14. Sauage: 15. Balard with his complices: 16. Au∣bespineus: 17. Stanley and Yorke: 18. The Spa∣nish Armado: 19. Lopez: 20. Squire: 21. Tyrone. And in the time of King Iames, 22. Watson, Clarke and others, 23. The Powder treason. Some obseruations out of these. §. 13. A good Christian abhorreth these treasons, and
reiecteth the doctrine that teacheth them: §. 14. And thereby is (by reason) forced to renounce to be an absolute Papist: and to thinke the doctrines grounded onely vpon the Popes authority without Scripture, to be vn∣necessary: and consequently to acknowledge, that it is not ne∣cessary to be a Roman-Catholike. The conclusion, with a briefe recapitulation of the whole precedent conference. §. 1. Antiquus. ALthough the supreme gouernment of the Church by the Pope, and the infallibility of his iudgement, could not bee proued by diuine proofes: yet is the good thereof so great, for the preseruation of peace and vnity, and much other happinesse both in the Church and Common-wealth, that euen in good reason and policy, the very shadowes of proofes should be admitted as sufficient to establish it. And if such power and infallible iudgement may be giuen to any, it is most fit it be giuen to him that hath from all An∣tiquity beene accounted the principall Patriarch, and the high Bishop of the principall City of the world. Antiquissimus. Indeed (Antiquus) now I thinke you hit the nayle on the head: for the Popes Supremacy and infallibility hath no other ground, but meere hu∣mane policy, shadowed by the Scripture cunningly wrested, deuised by their learned Politicians for their owne wealth and greatnesse; and taught by their A∣gents, as most necessary for peace, vnity, and much o∣ther good.Bellar de Rom. Pont. l. 4. c. 6. § quarta pro∣posit o. Probabi∣le est, pe{que} credi potest, pontificem vt pontificem errare non posse, &c. Bellarmine seemes to confesse thus much, when he saith, It is probable & may piously be thought that the Pope as Pope cannot erre, nor as a particular person be an heretike. Had hee had better arguments, is it probable hee would haue come in with Probabile
est, pié{que} credi potest? But yourCosterus En∣chir. pag. 123. Si nullum caput visibile in eccle∣sia a Christo con∣stitutum foret, vehementer op∣tari ab omnibus oporteret. Costerus the Iesuite is a little more plaine. If there were no visible head (saith he) appointed by Christ, in the Church: yet such an one ought to be wished for of all men: and your D.Alablaster, Motiue 6. Alablaster yet more plainely, Where (saith he) there is not an infallible authority, which doth iudge and de∣cide controuersies, by remouing all occasions of doubt and reply; and vnto which absolute obedience is tied: there must needs be variety of iudgements and opini∣ons, which cannot be tyed in one knot. And therefore the Protestants haue done very vnwisely to disgrace and reiect this profitable policy of the Church, the fountaine of vnity. Mr Alablaster cals it policy. §. 2. But alas (Deare friend) In Gods businesse I looke onely for Truth and Sincerity, which God may blesse and prosper, not for shadowes and policy without them, which God doth ordinarily infatuate and con∣found. Happy had it beene for the Angels, if they had continued in the excellency of their first estate; but when they stroue to be higher, their policy failed them, they fell lower, and of Angels became diuels. Gods or∣dinance forEphes. 4. vers. 12, 13, 15. gathering of his Saints,vers 14. preseruing true and vncorrupt doctrine, andvers. 16. effectuall perfecting of the Church in euery part, was (saith Saint Paul)vers. 11. He gaue some Apostles, some Prophets, some Euangelists, some Pastors and Teachers. If one visible Head had beene necessary to these purposes, heere was the place he should be spoken of: wherein, since hee is not men∣tioned, doubtlesse Saint Paul knew no such ordinance of God. See the like Catalogue of Church-Officers in 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. &c. this one visible head is neuer men∣tioned nor heere, nor in any other place of Scripture, but left out as supernumerarius and superfluous. And we finde, whilst Gods ordinance was obserued, the Church did wonderfully prosper: when it was shouldered out
out by humane policies, all things grew worse, and went to wracke. It was an euident worke of Gods Spi∣rit,B. Vsher Ser∣mon at Wansted pag. 20. that the first planters of Religion, and their suc∣cessors, spreading themselues through the whole world, layd the foundations of the ame Faith, euery where in great vnity and vniformity: and yet were kept only by the Vnity of the Spirit, in that bond of peace without setting vp any one man on earth ouer them all, to keepe peace and vnity. The true bond, which contained the Doctors and Fathers of the Primitiue Church in the vnity of Faith, and wrought the conuersion of Nations, continueth in our Church also: Sacra Scriptura est Regula credend cer∣tissima, tutissima{que} saith BellarmineBellar. de verbo Dei l. 1. c. 2. § quare cū.: The Scripture is the most certaine and safe rule of Faith; and Spiritus dominatur in conscientijs fidelium, The holy Spirit rules in the faithfuls consciences, making them all to submit to the word of God: and though disioyned in Nations, Lawes, and Languages, yet still to consent in the sub∣stantiall points of reformed Religion, and constantly to suffer for them in persecution; which vnity is not wrought by any Kingdome inter nos among vs (such as the Pope assumeth) but by Christs Kingdome intra nos, within vs, ruling our hearts by his Word and Spirit: which Kingdome (hee saith) is not of this world, but meerely spirituall and diuine. §. 3. But now, as if Gods truth stood need of our shadowed lies to maintaine it, or that humane policy could de∣uise better means for the gouernment of Gods Church, then either he by his own prouidence hath prescribed, or the Ancient Primitiue Church practised: or else (which is the truth) because there are some newer do∣ctrines and practises to be maintained, neither imposed by God, nor able to stand of themselues: we (forsooth) must deuise, to set vp a man as blinde and corrupt as
our selues, and attribute vnto him infallibility in iudg∣ment, and vnbounded iurisdiction in gouernment (which neither Scripture, Fathers, nor any reason doth giue him) and by him we must suffer our selues to bee ledde blindefold, in a conceit of greater peace and vni∣ty, than the Truth and Gods Spirit at first afforded; which is a meere dreame, and not onely a carnall, but a most deceiuable policy, and no better than the Priests of Antichrist may plot, in being content to yeeld them∣selues to the whole guiding of their wicked Master, and attribute vnto him infallibility of iudgement, without ground or reason. §. 4. That the Popes infallibility and iurisdiction haue no ground in the Scriptures or Fathers, I haue shewed be∣fore, with many reasons against them both: Now (since you vrge the profit thereof) I will shew you the vnprofitablenesse, and the intollerable inconuenience thereof to the Church, Princes, and Common∣wealthes. Antq. If you can doe so, you shall goe beyond my expectation. Antiquis. I haue done it in part already,See before book 1. cap. 5. §. 3, 5, &c. when I shew∣ed you how the Popes earthly kingdome, erected and maintained by many vniustifiable practises and poli∣ces, spoyleth Christs heauenly Kingdome, and robbeth earthly kingdomes of wealth, peace, comfort, and ma∣ny other blessings; as by exempting all the Clergy both their persons, goods and lands from the gouernment, right, or maintenance of secular Princes and Magi∣strates. By making the Pope superiour to Emperours and Kings, to depose them and dispose of their Kingdomes to others, if he thinke it good for the Church: and to that end freeing subiects from their sworne fidelity, and arming them against their Soueraignes. A doctrine
fruitfull of treasons and rebellions. Ib. sect. 7.By dispensing and dissoluing oathes, couenants, and leagues, and all other bonds and sinewes of humane so∣ciety, peace, and security. Ib. sect 8, 9.By dispensing with Gods Lawes in matrimoniall causes: and in other matters of great moment. Ib. cap. 6. per totum.As also by many hurtfull policies to maintaine this power, depriuing Gods people of Gods word, and au∣thorizing Monks and Friers to preach where they list without controule of Bishops, corrupting diuinity by Schoolmens subtilties, Iesuits, Statists, and Incen∣diaries; and many other deuices to draw to their facti∣on the Wealth and Soueraignty of the word. Meditate and consider well of that which then I de∣clared, and you will be satisfied that a number of things in the Papacy practised are most vnprofitable to the Church, and vntollerable to Princes and Common∣wealths. §. 5. But to satisfie the more thorowly, I will shew you some examples. Hildebrand (who, as Onuphrius saith, first set vp the Popes princedome) made himselfe Pope by help of the Diuell (so he was accused by a SynodTrithem. chrō. Hirsaugiens. an. 1081. Auentin. annal. Boior. l. 5. & Marian chrō. l. 3. an. 1081, &c of 30. Bishops of Italy, France, and Germany,) and by the ayd of armed men with some few of the Clergy, and furthered by the great riches of Maud a powerful Gentlewoman of Ita∣ly, his familiar friend: without either theCarlt. iurisd. cap. 7. §. 103. Benno. Naucler. generat. 36. This story I collect out of those histories and our lear∣ned men, K. Iames, BB Iew∣el, Morton, Carl∣ton Bilson, Vsh∣ &c. Emperours consent, or the Cardinals, hee called his name Gregory the seuenth. Being now warme in the Popes Chayre, he cites the Emperour Henry the fourth (anno 1076.) to appeare and answere in a Synod at Rome, to crimes obiected against him, vpon paine of present depositi∣on. Henry cals a Synod at Wormes, where all the Teuto∣nick Bishops (except the Saxons) renounce Hildebrand from being Pope: and to their decree, the German and
French Bishops, and most of the Italian Bishops (as∣sembling at Papia) subscribed, taking their oathes ne∣uer to obey him more as Pope. With this decree, Cae∣sar sends his letters to Hildebrand, renouncing him, and pronouncing him deposed from the Popedome. The letters and deposition were deliuered in a Synod at Rome, whereupon Ioannes Portuensis episcopus rushed vp, and cried out Capiatur (let him bee taken:) at which word the Prefect of the City and souldiers were at point to take and slay him in the Church. But he stout∣ly catching vp a sword, and calling vpon the name of Peter, Prince of the Apostles, with solemne words cur∣sed the Emperour, depriued him of his Empire, absol∣ued all Christians from their oath of fidelity made vn∣to him, and forbade them to obey him as King. And this was the first time, that euer any Emperour or King, was pronounced deposed by the Pope, and sub∣iects set free from their Alleagiance, asSee Onuphri∣us cited before Booke 1. cap. 4. §. 9, & 10. & Vrspergens fol. 226. B. Carlton. Iurisd. c. 7. §. 105. Malmsbu∣riensis hist. in Willm. primo Angl. Reg. Otho Frising. in vita Henrici 4. l. 4. c. 31. B. Vsher De Eccles succes. cap. 5. §. 6. Onuphrius and many other historians say. This Emperor Henry (saith Vrspergensis) was valiant, and fought 62. set battles, in number surpassing M. Marcellus, and Iulius Caesar, of whom the one fought 30. the other 50. This fact of Hildebrand opened all mens mouthes with outcries a∣gainst him, calling him Antichrist, and that by deui∣sing fables, corrupting histories, abusing Scriptures, through his headlong ambition, hee sought the rule of the world vnder the title of Christ, and played the ra∣uening wolfe in sheepes cloathing, spoyling all religi∣ous piety, raysing warres, seditions, rapes, murders, periuries, and all euils. Thus cryed the world, saith A∣uentine. Meane season Hildebrand prosecuting the de∣position of Henry, stirred vp the Saxons against him, offring to make them Kings of the whole West; be∣sides many great men and Bb. were alienated from him, which bred so great troubles in the Empire, and proceeded so farre, that the Princes of Germany meant to create another Emperour, if Henry were not absol∣ued
by the Pope from his curse. Whereupon hee was compelled sore against his will to goe and submit him∣selfe to the Pope, and finding the Pope at Canusium, put off his kingly robes, and waited three daies barefoot in very cold weather at the Popes gate, crauing pardon for his deeds: a spectacle to men and Angels, and a mocking stock to his proud enemies. At last, by mediation of the Empresse his mother, & Matildis his kinswoman, and at the earnest intreaty of all his people crying for pitty, with much difficulty hee obtained absolution from his Anathema. This storme thus blowne ouer, raysed another; for many condemned Henry for basenesse in himselfe, and wrong to them, whom he had brought into trouble, and now made his peace with their enemy so bad a man, an enemy to all religion and goodnesse, when hee should haue beene a protector of his friends and fol∣lowers, and a reuenger of Ecclesiasticall lawes viola∣ted. Thus the Princes and Bishops of Italy raised ha∣tred to the Emperour, with purpose to chuse Henries sonne, though young, and to goe with him to Rome, and to set vp another Pope who should presently con∣secrate the Emperour, and nullifie all the acts of this a∣postate Pope. This, Caesar hearing of, sent to appease their minds, excusing all by necessity, and promising henceforward to right all things amisse. But Caesars enemies chose Rodulph Duke of Sueuia to bee King of Romans, taking order that the Empire should thence∣forward goe by election and not succession. Whereup∣on grew mighty troubles, Nation against Nation, Bi∣shops against Bishops, euery one thinking they were in the right: Henries side, as Emperour by birth and long continuance: Rodulphs side, as autorized to kill the excommunicate and all his fauourers. For the Pope had againe (vpon new discontentments) excommuni∣cated Henry and all his fauourers, and sent a Crowne to Rodulph with this inscription, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus
diadema Rodulpho. This Rodulphus after some bloody battels with Henry, at last lost his right hand; and be∣ing brought to Mersburge, said to the Bishops and great men present, that this was a iust punishment due to his periury, because with that hand he had sworne, feaulty to his Lord, and at their perswasion had bro∣ken it. Henry then hastens towards Rome with his ar∣my to regaine the Popes fauour, but being denyed it, except hee would resigne his Crowne and Empire into the Popes hands; he besieged the City, and did much harme to it and to the Country about for two yeeres: at last, the good Pope that had brought them all into misery and danger, left them wrapped therein, and fled: and the people repenting their rebellion, with much money purchased that the City should not bee destroy∣ed. Henry enters, shewes openly the iniuries of the Pope, causeth a new Pope Clemens to bee elected, by whom, Henry was consecrated Emprrour, with the good liking of all; and hauing established all things well, departed into Germany.Anno 1085. B. Carton iu∣risd c. 7. §. 105. Sigebert anno 1085. Florent. Wigorniens. anno 1084. Math. Paris. anno 1086 Specul. historial. lib. 25. cap. 82. And Hildebrand wan∣dring like a vagabond without comfort, without help, without hope, though brought to a most pittifull e∣state, yet pittied of no man, trauelling vnder the vnsup∣portable burthen of a restlesse conscience, he died for griefe at Salernu, confessing that hee had greatly sin∣ned in the Pastorall charge committed vnto him; and by the Diuels perswasion had stirred vp hatred and wrath against mankind. This was the end of Hildebrand, whom the Germans alluding both to his name and conditions called Hell∣brand (the Dutch tongue and the English sounding much alike) as if he were a firebrand fetcht from Hell to kindle a fire in the Church to consume temporall e∣states, which is not yet quenched. Antiq. The euill liues of some few Popes, is a Theame that you Protestants take great pleasure in speaking of, and wee Catholikes exercise our patience in vnwilling hearing of it: I assure you, I haue suffe∣red
much in holding out to heare this your discourse. Antiquis. Good friend, we should not onely pati∣ently, but diligently and gladly heare, try, and examine out the truth in matters of such weight. Antiq. But I make a question, whether your relation be the truth or no, for learned Baronius, and many other Catholiks doe much praise Pope Gregory 7. and account him a Saint. Antiquis. For the truth of my relation, I cite your owne Authours, who liued and wrote in those times, or neere vnto the times wherein the things were done, who set downe the whole substance of the story: and it is not reasonable, to thinke that late writers, men of yesterday (such as Baronius) knew the truth of these things better then they: But that the Italians and mo∣derne Catholikes doe much commend Gregory, I mar∣uell not; It behoues them to say with Demetrius and the craftsmen of Ephesus (Acts 19.) Sirs, you know that by this meanes (by the Popes Supremacy and the maine∣tayners thereof) we haue our liuing, our wealth, and honour: let vs cry downe this Paul, and all that speake against it, and still perswade the world that Great is Diana of the Romans. §. 6. Antiq. Well, I let passe your mirth, and will sup∣pose that some of the Popes liues haue beene very faul∣ty; but the faults of the person must not take away the good vse of the office. This height of Supremacy might be of excellent vse, to knit all Christian Princes in per∣fect vnity & amity, not only to liue happily among thē selues, but to ioyne all their forces together against the common enemy, the Turke. And while the Pope was in reuerend esteem and authority with Christian Prin∣ces, many worthy matters were performed, and much more might haue beene done, had it not been thwarted. Antiquis. You speake by imagination and fancy, what might bee done; but reade the histories of the Empe∣rours,
Princes, and Popes liues, and see what was doe; and you shall finde all contrary to your imagination. Our late learned and iudicious King Iames shewes (by the issue and euent) that the expeditions to Ierusalem were a deuice and inuention of the Pope,K. James his Remonstrance to Peron. p. 61. whereby he might come to be infeoffed in the kingdomes of Chri∣stian Princes; for then all such of the French, English, or Germans, that vndertooke the Croisado, became the Popes meere vassals: all robbers, adulterers, and bank∣rupts, once crossed on their Cassoks or Coat-armors, were exempted from the secular or ciuill power, and their causes sped in consistorian courts: whole Coun∣tries were emptied of their Nobles, & common souldi∣ers: the Nobles were driuen to sel their goodly Manors and ancient demeanes, to the Church men at vnder pri∣ces (the very meanes of Church and Church-mens re∣uenues growing to so great height) And then his boun∣tifull holinesse would giue to any of that rif-raffe rank, that would vndertake this expedition into the holy Land, a free and full pardon of all his sinnes, besides a degree of glory aboue the vulgar in the celestiall para∣dise. This our deepe sighted King obserues. And if the Emperour or Kings went in person, the Pope had the cunning to make vse of their absence: to which pur∣pose let me tell you one story (among many other) of your Popes doings, out of Cuspinia a man of your own religion, whose larger relation I will contract as brief∣ly as I can. §. 7. The Emperour Fredericke the second, was valiant, learned, liberall, magnificall, and gaue great gifts and lands to the Church to procure the Popes fauour; yet he found that the Pope receiued his enemies, publike rebels, and fostered them flying vnto him; where∣with he was much offended, yea the Pope (to wit, Grego∣ry the ninth) excommunicated and anathematized him.
for no other cause, but that he went not yet to Ierusalem to fight against Gods enemies, as he had promised, and for which he had taken the Crosse vpon him. Which iourney, the Emperour answered, was onely deferred, till he had setled the Imperiall businesse, and should find a fit time, and that he was prouiding all things necessa∣ry for that iourney. Meane season, the Pope mightily vexed him, and wrought much euill to the Empire: and when the Emperour called an assembly of Princes at Rauenna, they of Verena and Millan intercepted the Princes way, and preyed vpon them that had taken the Croisado for the holy Land, robbing them of their prouision, and that by the Popes commandement (who had procured the voyage, and written to all Christian Princes to make it, and thrust the Emperour and all men into it.) Yet the Emperour went forwards, and while he was absent from his Countrey, in this holy voyage, labouring to defend by his sword Christs sheepe from the Wolfe, the Pope himselfe did sheare, slay, and deuoure them. While Fredericke tooke Ieru∣salem, Nazareth, Ioppe, and other Townes from the Ba∣bylonian Sultan, and made ten yeeres peace with him, re∣edified the holy City and diuerse others and was crow∣ned King there with great ioy vpon Easter day, and wrote to the Pope of his happy successe, that all Chri∣stendome might reioyce: That proud vicar of Christ, in his absence had, with a great army, entred Apulia, taken it, and made it subiect to himselfe, forbidden them that had taken the Crosse to passe the seas, and draue them out of Apulia and Lombardy, and did many monstrous things vnworthy a Pope or Bishop. And now receiuing the Emperors letters, contemned them, cast them away, and spread a rumor that the Emperor was dead, that he might the better thereby draw some Cities of Apulia to yeeld to him, which hitherto kept their faith to the Emperour. And when the Almain and French, and other Souldiers returned, hee caused
them most cruelly to bee slayne, lest they should tell the truth. When the Emperour knew this falshood, hee re∣turnes with a great army into Apulia, driues out the Popes army, and easily recouers his lands. The Pope making league with the Lombards and Tuscians, cur∣seth the Emperour againe, because hee had made that peace with the Turke: for the gentle Vicar of Christ could finde no other cause. Yet the valiant Emperour enduring all for Christs sake (though hee had also in∣tercepted the Popes Nuncios with letters to the Turke, desiring him not to restore the holy land to Caesar, as by umors bee heard he would) seemed not to take knowledge of any wrongs, but desired absolution from the Pope, if in any thing he had offended: and though he imployed many Princes and Bishops in that busi∣nesse, yet could he obtaine nothing that yeere: yet at last, after much entreaty, and chiefly by the mediation of Leopold Duke of Austria (who died presently after) the Emperour was absolued and feasted by the Pope, and (the Italian writers say) he payed an hundred and twenty thousand ounces (of gold) for his absolution. A deare price for one turning of the keyes, which the Pope had of Christ for nothing. A deare purchase of vnsure fauour, the Popes excommunications stand in blood, cruelty, ambition: his absolutions in couetous∣nesse. Shortly after, vpon some small stirres, and also because the Pope doubted, the Emperour (passing in∣to Germany) would find out all his deuices: hee strikes the Emperour againe with Anathema: Who, finding himselfe so mocked by the Pope, grew enraged, ioyned with the Popes enemies, entred and subdued many Ci∣ties in Italy, many in Vmbria, many in Etruria, quieted the Lombards rebels, recouered Verona, burned two Townes of Mantua, threatning to besiege the City it selfe; tooke Vincentia by force, and roasted it with fire, forraged the territories of Padua, and spoyled al∣most
all Lombardy, afflicting Millan with many slaugh∣ters: conquered Viterbium, Fauentia, Perusium, Cr∣mona, and did much other harme, for which the Pope excommunicates him againe; and then were first heard in the world the names of the Guelfes and Gibelines (mighty factions) the Gibelines fauouring the Empe∣rour, the Guelfes the Pope, from which factions many euils followed for many ages. Now, when the grea∣test part of the Cities of Italy, and almost all the Romans claue to the Emperour: the Pope ordayned supplica∣tions to God for ayd, and caused the heads of the Apo∣stles to be carried about to procure helpe from heauen, and to encourage the people; and made an Oration to them in the pallace of Saint Peter, and signed them with the Crosse as if they should fight against Infidels, and so brought them out against Fredericke who ledde a great army before the walles of the City. The Em∣perour seeing Christians come crossed against him (who had vsed to fight for the Crosse of Christ against Infidels) moued with indignation, commanded the heads of them that were so crossed (whom hee tooke with great slaughter) to bee cut into foure parts. And at last leauing the City, he tooke Beneuentum, and thence leading his army to the Picentes, wasted the Aesculans fields: then he euery where seized on the Templars goods, and did other much hurt. Then Pope Gregory 9. (for very griefe) departing this life, Cele∣lestine succeeded and sate only 18. dayes: and the Popes sea remained voyd one and twenty moneths, for that the Cardinalls could not come safely to the City for e∣lection of a new Pope. Then Fredericke spoyled Fa∣uentia, oppressed first with famine: depriued Bononia of the Vniuersity, and translated it to Padua, and besie∣ged Parma. Meane season Innocent III. was made Pope who formerly had beene a friend to Fredericke, but now placed in the Papall dignity, became his deadly enemy, as Gregory had beene before. Hee, calling a
Councell at Lions, caused Fredericke to bee cited, and making an Oration, cited him himselfe, and cursed him with Anathema, and faigned many things as spoken by him against Christ; which the Emperour plainely confuted as meere fictions in an Epistle (yet extant) to all the Prelats. There this Pope againe depriues the Emperour of his dignity, absolues the Princes from their oathes of fidelity, and vrges them to set vp ano∣ther in his roome. Fredericke hearing this, hastens to∣wards Lions with gowned men equall to an Army: but hearing of stirres at Para, turned his course thi∣ther, continued long there, and vsed great cruelty to∣wards the reuolting Citizens. Afterwards hee ouer∣threw Placentia, and tooke all Etruria. By this you may see, what a blessing the Popes greatnesse was to the world: what safety, peace, prosperity and vnity it wrought among Christians, what a Bulwarke against the Turke. Alas, all was contrary to your fancy. There could not be a greater meanes deuised by Sathan to scourge the Empire, to weaken Christendome to make way for the Turke, to plague Italy, and to vndoe the Pope himselfe, than the Pope himselfe deuised and pra∣ctised. The woefull conclusion was; When the Pope had thus farre prouoked the Emperor, procured much euill to many Cities and Countries, and so fired the world, that by the light and waste thereof, the Turke might see an easie entrance into Christendome: then hee studied night and day how to destroy the Empe∣rour: some conspiracies were discouered: but finally, poysoned he was effectually, wherein his bastard sonne Manfredus was thought to be an Agent, by the Popes procuring. All this, and much more writes your owne Cuspinian, reprouing the Italian Writers, who flatte∣ring the Pope, impute many vices to the Emperour; and preferring the German Writers, who knew him & his acts far better. Now Crimine abvno, disce omnes. Iudge of other Popes by this, or these, and see what great be∣nefits
their Supremacy brings to Christendome, and what hinderance to the Turkes infidels. §. 8. Antiq. Sir, One Swallow makes not Summer, nor one Woodcock Winter. Among so many Popes as haue beene since Saint Peters dayes (neere 250.) haply you may picke out some few, that haue abused their place and power, which ought no more to disgrace the o∣ther good Popes and their offices, than Iudas the other Apostles. Antiquis. Some few doe you say? then take more. Your owne Platina (Recorder or Historian to some Popes,Tortura Torti. pag. 219. and by Sixtus 4. appointed to write the liues of Popes) writes horrible and monstrous things of them. 40 Articles and more proued against Iohn 24. in the Councell of Constance, containing many grieuous crimes, for which he was deposed. Paul 2. pronoun∣ced them Heretikes that did but name the name Aca∣demy (that is, an Vniuersity, or great Schoole of lear∣ning) either in earnest,See also B. Bil∣son, part. 1. pag. 154. & seq. & D. Rainolds with Hart. or in iest. Boniface 7. getting the Popedome by ill meanes, robbed St. Peters Church of all the Iewels and precious things, and ranne his wayes: and returning not long after, caught one of his Cardinalls and put out his eyes. Boniface 9. simoniacal∣ly sold all things against right and equity, and openly kept Fayres or Markets of indulgences. Hee sheweth the Rusticity of Vrban. 6. the Stupidity of Celestine 5. the Stolidity of Iohn 22. the fraud, ambition, arrogan∣cy of Boniface 8. at the end of whose life, he addes this Caueat: Let all Princes learne, by this mans example, to gouerne not by pride and contumely, but seeke ra∣ther to be loued than feared, wherby destruction comes vpon Tyrants, &c. He records the troublesome broyles for fifty yeares together, betwixt the Popes, and Senate, and people of Rome (though also there was no firme peace for
foure hundred yeeres betwixt them) how often were those holy Fathers, Christs Vicars, driuen out of Rome and worse vsed by them (no doubt) not for any great holinesse or vertue found in them? Benedict 9. Siluester 3. & Gregory 6. occupied the seat all at once; which three, Platina cals Tria teterrima monstra (in vita Gregorij sexti:) and not onely those three, but most of the others also he feares not to call Porteta (in Benedict. 4.) and monstra (in Christopher 1.) He tells how Boniface 8. deluded Celestine by imposture: how Chri∣stopher 1. thrust out Leo 5. by force: how Damasus 2. tooke away Clement 2. by poyson: he records Syluester 2. a Magician: Iohn 13. incestuous: Boniface 7. sacri∣legious: Iohn 8. an adulterous woman: he recites 30. Schismes of the holy Church of Rome, in which, some∣times the Church had two heads, sometimes three, for fifty yeeres together.See before ca. 7. sect. 3. I haue told you before of a troop of Popes, troubling the world about Formosus his bo∣dy and his acts, Iohn 8. Martin 2. Boniface 6. Stephanus 6. Romanus 1. Theodorus 2. Iohn 9. and Sergius 3. and of 50. Popes (or at least 49.) succeeding one another, whereof scarce one was found worthy the name of a ishop, not sixe (saith Genebrard) in 150. yeeres, but were Apoacticall or Apostaticall rather than Apo∣stolicall. I could tell you also, how Piu 4.Onuphrius in vita Pij 4. pag. 378. Pandulph. Col∣len. hist. Neapol. l. 5. ad an. 1385. caused Cardinall Caraffa to be strangled, and other Earles and Cardinals slaughtered in prison, to the great amazement of the people: and how Vrban 6. misused seuen Cardinalls, putting fiue into sacks and drowning them in the Sea; and killing the other two, dried them in a Furnace or Ouen, and carried them (in triumph) vpon Mules in bagges or trusses. Antiquis. These things strike a horror into my soule, but yet these reached not to State-matters, and depositions of Princes, as your former tale insinua∣ted.
§. 9. Antiquis. Let mee search this mystery of iniquity a little neerer the bottome, and reueale the carriage thereof vnto you. St. Iohn Hay∣ward, Supre∣macy, pag. 55.It was a great error in the Emperour Phocas (as our Sir Iohn Hayward well obserued) and contrary to pre∣cedent policies, to settle so great a dignity in the Popes at Rome, so farre from Constantinople the seat of the Em∣pire,See before cap. 6. sect. 4. when he made them Heads of Christendome (as I told you before,) for that gaue the Popes power (if they list to be so wicked) greatly to trouble the affaires of the Empire, and to endanger the state thereof. And so it came to passe, for by this meanes the politike Bi∣shops of Rome found opportunity to steale into such strength with the common people (in the Emperours long and farre absence) that they were able to make them shake off the Emperours yoake; first, at Rome, and after further off, for the good of the Church, as they pretended, watching therfore all occasions. When the Emperour Philippicus Bardanes (about the yeere 713.K. Iames Re∣monstrance, p. 29. Example 5.) finding the worshipping of Images vntollerably to encrease, to the foule misleading and distracting of Christian people, & also to the great offence of the Sa∣racens thē growing great in the East, who took occasiō thereby to make Christians odious, and much to annoy them: caused the scandalous Images to be taken out of Churches according to primitiue times, partly to v∣nite the people in Gods purer worship, and partly to take away offence from the Saracens: Pope Constantine, instead of ioyning with the Emperour and Easterne Christians against the Saracens, directly tooke occasion to disable them against the Saracens, and to encrease the scandall for his owne priuate ends, to the great ruine of the Empire, and hurt to all Christendome. Now he saw the Empire decayed in the West, and by the Sa∣racens sore shaken in the East, and encombred also with
a ciuill warre, and the greatest part of Italy seized vp∣on by the Lombards, the Exarchate of Rauenna, and the Dutchy of Rome onely left to the Emperour, and those but weakely guarded, now (he thought) was the time for him to play his prizes, he gripes the occasion, cals a Councell, declares the Emperour heretike for de∣facing holy Images, forbids his Rescripts or Coyne to be receiued, or to goe currant in Rome, and his Statue or Armes to stand in the Temple. The tumult groweth to height, promoted principally by the Pope, and the Exarch of Rauenna loseth his life. But this tumult at last being appeased, and Rome (for ought the Pope could doe) remaining firme to the Emperour: about twelue yeeres after,Palmerius ebr anno 726. when the Emperour Leo Isauricus began sharpely to prosecute Image-worshippers, Pope Gregory the second seeing him haue his hands full else∣where, and Rome weakely guarded with men and mu∣nition, found meanes by helpe of the Lombards to make the people rebell, and so the Pope quickly became master thereof. And (saith Nauclerus) Such authority then had the Popes decrees, that first the Rauennates,Naucler. 2. gen. 25. B. arton, iuris∣diction. c. 6. §. 7. after that the Venetians did rayse an open rebellion a∣gainst the Emperour, and this rebellion proceeded so farre, that euery City and Towne put downe the Em∣perours Exarches, and created proper Magistrates to themselues whom they called Dukes: and thus, as at a great shipwracke euery man catches a piece, so euery City made her owne Duke, and the Pope was carefull that his part should not be the least. Not long after this,Ado Ʋiennensis in Chronico & Trithemius Annals. when the Cities of Italy began to prey one vpon another, the stronger vpon the wea∣ker; and the Pope and the Lombards (being the stron∣gest of all) who had agreed in conspiring against the Emperour, now fell out about diuiding of the spoyle: the Pope hauing made vse of the Lombards to oppresse the Emperour; vseth still the same Art to call in Pe∣pin the Constable of France into Italy to suppresse the
Lombards, and settle the Pope in that which both had gotten from the Emperour;Anno 742. which was done. And shortly after, the States and Peeres of France (by the counsell of Zachary the Pope) put downe King Childe∣rike as a man too weake to gouerne, and made Pepin King of France. Thus the power which the BB. of Rome had receiued of the Emperor and other Christian Kings, they now turned against them, as the Iuy that is supported and riseth aloft by the Oake, in the end decayes and spoyles the Oake it selfe. This was a great steppe to the Popes Supremacy, but yet it was not come to the height. Emperours were not yet deposed by Popes, not cut downe, but some of their branches cut and pruned off.B. Carlton. ib. cap. 6. §. 13. And Charles the sonne of Pepin (who still further subdued the Lom∣bards) enioyed the power (by the Popes kinde grant) which ancient Emperours held before him, to chuse Popes and inuest Archbishops and Bishops in all the prouinces of his gouernment. Sanders l. de clauib Dauid.But of this strange purchase of Rome by the Popes from the Emperours D. Sanders writes, that it is to be accounted one of the greatest wonders of the world: that the Roman Bishops, without any power, or ar∣mies, haue remoued the Roman Emperours from the Tower of the Empire, and made themselues Lords of the Pallaces of Caesars, and turned the whole City into their owne power. Indeed it is a wonder, that men pretending holi∣nesse, peace, comfort, and blessings to the world, should vse such wicked, detestable, rebellious, treasonous cour∣ses, to depriue their Soueraignes of their Rights, Ci∣ties, Lands, and Honours, by such audacious fraud, and damnable policies. §. 10. Of Gregory 7. that first attempted absolutely to de∣pose
Kings, I haue spoken before. It seemes he tooke heart at the successe of his Predecessors, to goe beyond them; seeing Leo Iconomachus (as they called him, the warriour against Images) cast downe; and Childerike of France cast downe, and K. Pepin set in his place. From these and such like facts, other Popes (and especi∣ally Gregory 7.) deriued a Ius, a right, and from these workes of darknesse tooke light, making them the rules of their vnruly gouernment, and therefore after this, the world could neuer take rest for the Popes. Then the Kings set vp in place of the deposed, must needs bee firme to the Pope, and so must others that hoped by the Popes authority to enlarge their domi∣nions, and encroach vpon others; and they againe must be honoured by the Pope, and one mutually support another, how bad soeuer the liues either of Popes or Princes were: and thus the best minded, quiet and best were beaten downe, and one Tyrant strengthened another. Sir Iohn Hayward reckons vp a number of Popes,Sr. Iohn Hay. Supremacy p. 56. & seq. that raised other Princes, or Subiects against their own Emperours or Soueraignes. Iohn the 3. raised Berengar and Adalbar against Otho the Great. Iohn 18. raysed Crescentius against Otho 3. Benedict 9. stirred Peter K. of Hungary against Henry the blacke. Gregory 7. Rodulph against Henry 4. Gelasius 12. raised many against Hen∣ry 5. Innocent 2. set Roger the Norman against Lothaire 12. The same Innocent raised Guelphus of Bauier against Conrade 3. Hadrian 4. raised Millan and the other Lombards against Frederike Barbarossa. Alexander 3. stirred the Dukes of Saxony and Austria to disquiet Al∣maine. Innocent 3. thrust Otho D. of Saxony into bloody warre against Philip brother to Henry 6. Pope Honori∣us 3. raysed the Lombards against Frederike 2. Clemens 5. opposed Robert King of Sicilie against Henry 7. Iohn 22. opposed Frederike of Austrich, and Lewes of Bai∣er to fight for the Empire. Clemens 6. opposed Charls 4.
King of Bohemia against the said Lewes. Eugenius 4. rai∣sed tragedies against Sigismond, specially to impeach the Councell of Basil. Paul 2. raised stirres against Fredericke 3. to chase him out of Italy. When eight Emperours had beene scorched with excommunications of the Popes, and their dominions set on fire, and potent enemies enflamed against them, and many of them consumed: the rest afterwards grew coole, and were content with what holy water the Popes vouchsafed to sprinckle vpon them: those eight were Frederik 1. Frederik 2. Philip, Conrade, Otho the fourth, Lewes of Bauaria, Henry 4, and Henry 5. §. 11. Antiq. I am glad yet, that these troubles reached not to our English Kings. Antiquis. If you thinke they did not, you are much deceiued. Reade our histories, and enforme your selfe better; you shall finde troubles enough from the Pa∣pacy, euen in these remote parts, farre from Rome: af∣ter the thousandth yeer of Christ (that is, after the loo∣sing of Sathan, Reuel. cap. 20.7, 8.) and after that, the Pope came to his height. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury did somewhat trouble King Henry the first, for whereas in former times, the Bishops and Abbots of England vsed to re∣ceiue their Inuestitures from the King, by receiuing a Pastorall Staffe and Ring at his hand (as Saint Wulstan had done from St. Edward the King, professing thereby he would resigne it onely to him) now Anselme refused to consecrate certaine Bishops whom the King aduan∣ced and gaue them their Inuestitures, so that the King was compelled to send an Embassage to the Pope Pas∣chalis, and before him to pleade his cause, as Anselme al∣so did his in like manner. But this matter was indiffe∣rently quietly ended, for the Pope (by the mediation of white and red, saith a Monke, the historian) was
content to confirme the Bishops, but ordained with∣all that the King should doe so no more; that is, that the King should lose the priuiledge of his Ancestors. This was done Anno dom. 1104. Anselme died Henries primi anno 11.Speed. Chron. pag. 457. But Thomas Becket being made first Lord Chancelor, and afterwards Archbishop by the fauour of King Henry 2. troubled the King much more; for the King being informed of much misdemeanour of Clergy men (who besides other offences, had commit∣ted an hundred murders in his raigne) and that they were not punished nor degraded by the Bishops, but shifted away into Abbeyes or otherwayes defended; so that the wronged had no remedy, the wrong-doers no punishment, true innocent men no safety, and none of them were in condition of subiects: the King re∣quired such to be punished by his Lawes, and to haue the customes of his Ancestors obserued: whereunto all the Bishops assented, but onely Becket; who not on∣ly resisted, but complained of the King to Pope Alex∣ander: and Alexander at first, desiring to hold the Kings loue, willed Becket to yeeld, and Becket so pro∣mised to the King absolutely. But when the King assem∣bled his States at Clarendon in Wiltshire, Becket relapsed, and said hee had grieuously sinned in promising, but would not sinne in performing, yet at the instance and teares of many Noble persons and others priuately in∣treating him for the good of the whole land, he yeel∣ded againe and promised in verbo sacerdotali to obserue all; and all the Earles, Bishops, Abbots, and Clergy did sweare and promise the like: but when hee should set his hand and seale to a writing thereof, hee refused againe. Of all this the King by Embassage en∣formed the Pope, desiring a legantiue power to be sent to the B. of Yorke: which the Pope vnwillingly gran∣ted, and withall made it so slight, that the King in dis∣daine sent the Bull backe againe to the Pope. Then was Becket required to giue an account of his Chance∣lorship,
which he refused to doe, and to come vnto the King: and being told, he would be condemned of per∣iury and treason for not yeelding temporall alleagiance to his temporall Soueraigne (as hee had sworne) and that the Prelates would disclayme all obedience vnto him as their Archbishop: hee caused to bee sung be∣fore him at the Altar, The Princes sit and speake a∣gainst mee, and the vngodly persecute me: And forth∣with taking his siluer Crosier in his hands, went armed into the Kings presence. Whereat, the King inraged, caused his Peeres to proceed in iudgement against him; they condemne him to prison for treason and periury; he appeales to Rome, and away gets him into France, procures the French Kings fauour, and by him, the Popes. To the Pope the King sends a Noble Embassage desiring to haue two Cardinalls sent into England to end the matter. The Pope denies it, reseruing the iudg∣ment to himselfe. The King by his Sherifs, Seque∣sters all Beckets profits in England; Becket in France excommunicates all in England that maintained the Auitall (or ancient) customes, naming some great men. The King fearing his owne excommunication, gathers a great Army, pretending to subdue Wales. Meane season the Pope is perswaded to send two Car∣dinalls; but they cannot perswade Becket to yeeld any thing, and so that designe for peace was frustrate. At length the two Kings of France and England being re∣conciled, met in France: before whom, Becket being called, and earnestly dealt withall, would not yeeld a∣ny thing, so that all men blamed him. The Pope willed Gilbert B. of London to admonish the King to giue o∣uer: hee did so, but excused the King to the Pope. The Pope excommunicates Gilbert, and went so farre, that the King had scarce one left to reade diuine Ser∣uice in his Chappell. The King prayes the Pope to send two Cardinals to absolue his subiects, and to make peace: Two come into Normandy, but returne with∣out
possibility of doing any good, because Becket would not yeeld a iot. At last, by the Popes mediation the two Kings met at Paris, where King Henry offered to stand to the iudgement of the Diuines of Paris, but no peace would be had. After all this the King crowned his sonne, the Archbishop of Yorke supplying Canterbu∣ries absence. And in the beginning of the seuenth yeere of the banishment of Becket, the two Kings met againe in France, and the King (fearing the whole Realmes interdiction by the Pope,) receiued Becket into fauour, yeelding him his Bishopricke with all the profits and arrearages, and signified it to his sonne in England. Now Becket Archbishop in England, shortly after pub∣lished the Popes letters suspending the Archbishop of Yorke, (for crowning the young King, which was Can∣terburies office) with all his adiuuants, and would not absolue them but vpon conditions at the earnest re∣quest of the young King: which the Father King hea∣ring in Normandy, was sore displeased; and shewed it by some words: which, foure Knights Courtiers, hea∣ring, and thinking to doe a great pleasure to the King, and to ease the Kingdome of much trouble, posted in∣to England; and at Canterbury, the next day after In∣nocents day killed the Archbishop at the high Altar, and fled into the North. The old King was exceeding sor∣rowfull at the newes of this murder, and sent to the Pope desiring him to send Cardinalls to enquire of the murder, to whose wils he would submit himselfe, if he could be found consenting. Here obserue 1. What these customes were, which Becket withstood. (1) That without the Kings licence none should appeale from the Courts of England to the Court of Rome: (2) That no Bishop, nor Archbishop, should leaue their Flocke and goe to Rome without the Kings license: (3) That they should not interdict nor excommunicate any officer, or such as held on the King in chiefe, without the Kings licence: (4) That Clerkes
accused for secular offences should bee tried before se∣cular Iudges. 2. Obserue, that these Customes, besides profitable and necessary, were also ancient, and so termed; but now shortly after Hildebrands time, must be altered, Kings and States depressed, and the Pope aboue all former times exalted. 3. Obserue, If Becket had stood for the substance of Religion, or any necessary point thereof, it had beene a worthy (which now was a wicked) part: but his stan∣ding for matters against the good and peace of the Church and Common-wealth; and them ancient, and well established; and that with obstincy, against the iudgement not onely of the King, Bishops, and Nobles at home: but euen of the Pope himselfe at the first, the Cardinalls, the King of France, the Vniuersity of Parts, and (as I may say) all the world; argued his ex∣ceeding folly, pride, and peeuishnesse. 4 Obserue, that euen the best sort of Popes, against their owne knowledge and inclination, may be drawn by their Counsellors and flatterers; and by the tickling desire of wealth and greatnesse, to take par, counte∣nance, and backe most obstinate rebells, periured per∣sons, and vntollerable troublers of Church and Com∣mon wealth: yea, to defend them while they liue, and Saint them after their death. Thus King Henry was troubled much by the Romish Hierarchy: but King Iohn much more. It appeares by this which hath beene said,Flores historia∣rum Matthaei West monast. l. 2. p 81 anno 1205 that there had beene trou∣bles about the ancient customes & libertie of Princes in the English Church, which the Kings stroue still to maintaine, and the Popes to infringe: whereof, one was, that no Bishop should bee elected and inuested without the Kings consent in his owne dominions: which King Iohn maintained as his predecessors had done. It hapned in the seuenth yeere of his raigne, that Hubert the Archbishop of Canterbury dyed; and
the Monks of Canterbury secretly in the night chose Reginald their Sub-prior, and brought him in with Te Deum, first to the high Altar, and then to the Archbi∣shops chayre: and presently causing him to sweare se∣cresie, sent him with some of their company to the Pope, to see how it would be taken: but the Pope (see∣ing no letters commendatory from the King) made some stay, and tooke time to deliberate. In the meane season the Monks at home hearing of this delay, and finding that Reginald in his way towards Rome had car∣ried himselfe as Archbishop elected, and so published their secrets: now repenting their euill choyse and bad successe, sent to the King and craued license to chuse a new Archbishop, whom the King would commend. The King (winking at their former iniury) tooke this kindly, and commended vnto their choyse Iohn Grey, Bishop of Norwich, and brought him to Canterbury himselfe: and the Monks in the Kings presence very solemnely chose him, put him into the Archbishops seate; and the King put him into all the Archbishops possessions, writing to the Pope, to accept him. Had the Pope beene a pious Father of the Church (as you describe him) giuen to seek peace and ensue it,Rom. 12. as much as in him lay; he might haue beene well pleased with this peaceable course: but hee was led by the spirit of Hildebrand, not of Peter and Paul; and tooke a course that there might be no peace, and that the peo∣ple might not vnder their natural Kings leade a peace∣able and quiet life in all godlinesse and honesty.1 Tim 2. For he would neither accept of Reginald nor Iohn, but vr∣ged the Monks that were sent vnto him, to chuse a third, one Steuen Langton, and against all excuses com∣manded them vpon their obedience, and vnder payne of Anathema, to doe it presently. Whereupon they all yeelded, except onely one Elias de Brantfield, who still stucke to the King and to the election of the Bishop of Norwich, a man worthy of honourable memory, for his
constant standing (though standing alone, in danger, and to the Popes face) to the right, to his Prince, to the good and liberty of the Church. The rest, with the Hymn brought Langton to the Altar, and the Pope wrote to the King to receiue him. B. Caritou. iuris. c. 7. §. 124.The King was herewith much moued, because Ste∣uen Langton (though an Englishman born) was brought vp vnder the French King, promoted by him, and ty∣ed to be at his command: And therefore King Iohn wrote to the Pope, that he had no reason to admit such a one as Langton to such a great place in his kingdome. And withall hee banished the Monks that had chosen Langton, as traytors, and confiscated their goods. This was done vpon Saint Swithens day.Mat. Westmonast vbi supra. The Innocent Pope (Pope Innocent the third, who about the same time ex∣communicated Otho 4. Emperour, and discharged the States of Almaine and of the Empire from their allea∣geance vnto him) being set on fire with this news, sent to the Bishops of England commanding them to put the King and his land vnder the sentence of interdicti∣on, which was executed the 24. of March by the Bi∣shops of London, Ely, and Wigorne, who now turned plainely subiects to the Pope, and leauing England, fled to Rome. The King for this cause of Interdict (whereby himselfe and his whole land stood accursed) comman∣ded all the goods of the Clerks to bee confiscate, and thē drew as many as he could of his people to an oath of alleageance. The Pope proceeds to excommunicate the King by name: and finally to pronounce sentence of deposition against him; discharging all his subiects of their oath of alleagiance vnto him; sending also Pan∣dulph his Legate first into England, and then to Philip Augustus King of France, to bestow vpon him the kingdome of England, so that hee would expell King Iohn and take it by force. By this meanes King Iohn was strangely and suddenly weakened, and vtterly dis∣abled to hold his kingdome, seeing strong inuasions
from without, and daily reuolting within to open insur∣rections, and euery man now counted a Saint and Mar∣tyr that would fight or suffer in wars against him; con∣sidering that the Popes Bulles, like Magike spelles, had let loose many turbulent spirits, not easie to be layd a∣gaine, but by him that raised them. After much strug∣ling he was finally compelled to deliuer vp his Crown to Pandolph, that he might receiue it againe from him, as from the Popes hands, and be protected hy him. And this was done in the 15. yeere of King Iohns reygne, anno dom. 1213. And Steuen Langton made Archbishop. Thus the King became the Popes vassall: and the King of France forbidden by the Popes Nuncio to med∣dle any further against him,K. Iames Re∣monstrance pag. 256. being now the Popes liege man, whom he would protect. And now Iohn held his Crowne of the Pope, as a man holds his land of ano∣ther in Knights seruice, or by homage and fealty: and did faire homage to the Popes Legate, laying downe at his feet a great masse of the purest gold in coyne; which the reuerend Legate in token of his Masters So∣ueraignty kicked and spurned with his feet and at so∣lemne feasts was easily entreated to take the Kings Chayre of estate. Obserue here first, The progresse of the Hildebran∣dine Religion in deposing of Kings, and discharging their subiects of their alleagiance, fidelity and obedi∣ence, dissoluing gouernment, and filling kingdomes with warres and miseries, begunne by Hildebrand, and still continued by his successors. Obserue secondly, out of the story of King Iohn;Mat. Westmonast Flores: loco quo supra pag. 95. K. Iams Re¦monstr. p. 58. That this successor of Peter fished not for soules, but for kingdomes, euen with the destruction of millions of soules (if your owne doctrine be true,) for he caused the whole land to be interdicted, and so to continue six yeeres, fourteene weekes, and two dayes: plaguing all this while the whole body of the land for the head, the Kings offence (a point of iniustice) with a heauy spiri∣tuall
plague, for a light temporall offence (a point of impiety.) For al this while the Church-dores, through the whole kingdome were shut vp, no belles stirred, no prayers, preaching, Sacraments, permitted; Chil∣dren kept vnbaptized, bodies vnburied, all people ac∣cursed, liuing like heathens, dying like dogs; with∣out instruction, exhortation, consolation: and all that dye thus vnder the curse of the Interdict (without some speciall indulgence or priuiledge) are thought for euer damned and adiudged to eternall punishments, as dying out of the communion of the Church. Alas, how many millions of soules did this Innocent the Pope wilfully send to hell in this large kingdome of Eng∣land and Wales, in this large time of aboue six yeeres, for anothers offence: for what could they doe? or what offended they, poore people! if the King would not be ruled by the Pope? Nay, they offended the King also, and incurred much danger and dammage, by fal∣ling from their obedience for the Popes sake: and yet are thus recompensed by him. Are these the actions of the Vicar of Christ, to saue soules? or rather of An∣tichrist, to destroy them? Is this the kinde Father of the Church? K. Iames ib. p. 257.But obserue further, thirdly, how these pretended successors of Saint Peter, change their spirituall power into temporall, for their worldly gaine and greatnesse: and change Christs Kingdome, which was not of this world, into the winning and disposing of the king∣domes of this world; and make the pennance of sinners the forfeiture of their estates. Is this the satisfaction to be imposed vpon a sinner, that of a Soueraigne and free Prince, he must become vassall to his Ghostly Fa∣ther? and make himselfe and all his subiects tributary to a Bishop? that shall rifle the whole Nation of their coyne, and make them doe him homage? Shall not a sinner be quitted of his faults, except he be turned out of all his goods, possessions, inheritance, and his Pastor
be infeoffed in his whole estate? Is this holinesse? or is it not plaine tyranny and robbery? It is plainely to heape robbery vpon fraud, and tyranny vpon robbery; and to change the sinners repentance into a snare or pit∣fll of coozening deceit. And as the end is naught, so the meanes is worse to bring it to passe by such subtill pranks and wicked deuices, as not to sticke at setting a whole flourishing kingdome on fire by warres, and se∣ditions: not to care what becomes of mens estates, of their bodies, liues, or soules, but bring them all to ru∣ine: so that the kingdome may be weakened, and the King brought to so low a degree of misery, that hee may be easily lifted out of his estate, and the kingdome seized vpon. Of King Henry the thirds reygne,See before, booke 1. cap. 6. sect. 14. Reade also Math Paris, & Math. Westmin∣ster. in Henr. 3. & B. Carlton of Iurisdiction. exhausted of trea∣sure, and scourged of his subiects by the Popes most intollerable exactions; which caused the people to wish rather to dye, than to liue to endure them; I haue spo∣ken something already, and can say much more. §. 12. Antiq. This is enough for me, and for this matter more than enough. But it may be in these latter times of greater light, and opposition, the Popes haue beene more moderate, and become more like to their first Ancestors. Antiquis. Neuer a whit:See before, Booke 1. cap. 5. §. 3. consider. 6. haue I not told you before of K. Henry 8. who though he continued the Popes re∣ligion entire, yet for reiecting his iurisdiction, was condemned by the Pope, excommnicated, pronoun∣ced no King, his subiects commanded to deny subiecti∣on to him, and all men to take armes against him? &c. The like course the Pope hath runne agaynst our late most excellent Princes, Queene Elizabeth, and King Iames. For I will passe by the mischiefes done in other Countries, and the murders of the two last Kings of France: the troubles of our owne kingdome will hold me long enough.
Camden. Annal. Elizab. p. 27.By the happy abolishing of the Popes authority by Queene Elizabeth, England became the most free of all Countries in the world; the Scepter being (as it were) manumitted from forraign seruitude, and a great masse of mony kept at home, which formerly was exhausted, and yeerely, and daily, carried to Rome, for first fruits, Indulgences, Appeales, Dispensations, Palles, and such other things; so that the land grew much more rich than in former ages. The Popes could not be insensible of their losse this way besides all other, and concei∣uing some hopes of recouery by encouraging persons discontented with this mutation,B. Car ton, thankfull re∣membrance pag 13 See the Bull of Pius 5. in Cam∣dens Annals pag. 183. in the eleuenth yeere of her reigne Pope Pius the fifth excommunicated her, deposed her by his Bull, dated anno 1569. quinto Calend. Mart. thereby also absoluing her subiects from their oath of alleagiance, and from all other offices and du∣ties, accursing all that did obey her. This was done, to procure a strong party in England to ioyne with the Pope and Spaniard in their designe for the inuasion and conquering of England when their forces should bee ready.Camden ib. pag. For the Papists in the Land were so strangely perswaded and bewitched, as to admire with astonish∣ment a certaine omnipotency in the Pope, and that his Bulles were dictated by the holy Ghost, and that they in executing them, and in murdering their Princes, should doe meritorious acts, very acceptable to God, and dying therein should become glorious Martyrs, and haue higher places in heauen, than other men. See Camden Annales Eliza∣bethae, p. 315. & p. 348. in fine anni 1581.To gayne more people of all sorts, Noble, Gentle, inferiours, to their faction, and to gull them with such false opinions, the Pope out of his Seminaries at Rome and Rhemes sent out yeerely a number of Priests disgui∣sed into England to grope and peruert the hearts of men, secretly and wickedly telling them, that the Pope had supreme power ouer the whole world, yea, euen in politike affayres: that such as were not of the Roman Religion were to be depriued of all regall power and
dignity: that it was lawfull, yea, and a meritorious work to depose Princes excommunicated by the Pope: that the Pope had actually pronounced & published by his Bull, Elizabeth to be excommunicated and deposed, that since that publication, all her actions were by the Law of God disanulled, and to be held for nought: her Magistrates were no Magistrates, her Lawes no Lawes. Yea, some of them denied not in publike hearing, that they were sent for no other cause into England, than to absolue euery one particularly from their obedience to the Qu. as the Bull had absolued all in generall: and this they did in taking confessions of their Reconclliation to their Church priuately, and promising absolution from all mortall sinne, so doing, most safely and secretly. These Seminaries were not erected to teach true Re∣ligion, and points of doctrine necessary to saluation (for those might bee taught and learned in all places without such cost) but principally to fit young wits, and fiery spirits to become instruments to vphold the Papacy with the dominion, greatnesse,Camd. ib p. 844. & alibi passim. and wealth thereof, and to regaine those that were fallen from it; though it were with the destruction of Kings, dissipa∣tion of kindomes, bloodshed, murthers, insurrections, treasons, poysonings, massakers, and many other euils: as the histories following will declare most plainly; and by their owne confessions may appeare. 1.This story and the rest of the treasōs against Q Elizabeth are set out at large by B. Carlton in his booke entitu∣led A thankful remembrance, whose chapters I here note in the margent. To come therefore to the Plots and Treasons practised against Queene Elizabeth, effects of the Popes excommunication: The first was, The rebellion in the North, stirred vp by one Nicholas Morton a Popish Priest; the chiefe leaders within the land were the Earles of Westmerland and Northumberland, who were to ioyne with the Duke of Norfolke, entending a marriage betwixt him and the Scottish Queene, there∣by to make clayme to the Crowne of England (Queene Elizabeth being deposed by the Popes Bull.) With them also was to ioyne, the Duke of Alua, with his
power from the Low-Countries; the Earle of Ormond at the same time raysing tumults in Ireland, and all pro∣cured by Pope Pius 5. who also secretly wrought the mindes of many English, by one Ridolph a Gentleman of Florence,Camden. Annal. an. 1568. p. 146. & an. 1572. p. 227. & an. 1569. p. 158, 166— vnder colour of Merchandise, by whom the Popes Bulles, letters, and money, (to wit, an hun∣dred and fifty thousand crownes) were conueighed, for the managing of this businesse. The Pope further promising to the King of Spaine, to engage all the goods of the Sea Apostolike, Chalices, Crosses, and holy ve∣stiments, to further it. But God preuented this mis∣chiefe: for the Northerne Earles preparations being discouered, and rising before the other associats were ready, were dispersed; the Duke of Norfolke taken and put to death, and the whole plot defeated, to the great griefe of the Pope and the Spaniard. The King of Spaine said before the Cardinall of Alexandria, the Popes Nephew, that neuer any conspiracy was more aduisedly begunne, more constantly concealed, nor more likely to prosper than this. For that an Army might be sent out of the Low-Countries in 24. houres space, which might suddenly haue taken the Queene and the City of London vnprouided, restored the Popes authority, and set the Queene of Scots in the Throne, especially hauing so mighty a faction within land and Stukely an English fugitiue (made Marquesse of Ireland by the Pope) vndertaking at the same time with the helpe of 3000. Spaniards, to bring all Ireland to the Kings of Spaines obedience, and with one or two ships to burne all the English Nauy. This story is written at large by Hieronymus Catena in the life of Pius the 5. and printed at Rome anno 1588. by the same Popes au∣thority and priuiledge, by which we come to the know∣ledge of the whole plot. B. Carlton ib. c. 3. Camden. ib. pag. 72.2. I passe by the treasonous leagues made by the Earle of Ormonds Brethren with Iames Fitzmorice of Desmonds Family, and others to serue the Pope and
Spaniards designes against Queene Elizabeth. And the Earle of Darbies sonnes with Gerard, Hall, Rolston and other Darbishire mens conspiracy, to set vp the Queene of Scots. And other conspiracies of B. Rosse, Henry Percy, &c. and of Powel and Owen, for the Queene of Scots. Also of don Iohn of Austria his plotting to marry the Q. of Scots, and put downe Elizabeth with the fauor of the Pope and Guises: for these plots miscarried in their Infancy. Thomas Stukely hauing rioted out his State in England,Ibid. cap. 4. Camden. Annal. part. 2. pag. 193. 229. passed to Rome, and made Pius 5. beleeue, that with 3000. Italians he would driue the English out of Ireland and burne the Queenes Nauy. Pius dying, Gregory 13. employed Stukely to get Ireland for his bastard sonne, creating the said Stukeley, Marquesse of Lagen, Earle of Wexford and Caterlogh, Vicount of Morough, and Baron of Rosse, (famous places in Ireland) and made him Generall of 800. Italian souldiers. But Stukeley comming by Portugal ioyned with the King in a warre in Africa, that the King afterward might goe against England with Armes, as he against Ireland: but in A∣frica they were both slayne, and two other Kings died also at the same battell, 1572. Whereupon the Spanish King turned his forces (prepared for England) to sub∣due Portugall. Note here the Popes zeale, not to win soules to Christ, but Kingdomes to their Bastards. Note also, two Popes proceed in malice and maledicti∣on against Queene Elizabeth, and one English fugitiue makes them both fooles. And note thirdly, how God can diuert the great preparations of puissant Princes; and turne their wise policies into fooishnesse. Nicholas Sanders D. of Diuinity,Ibid. cap. 5. Reae Camd. Anal. part 3. pag. 371, 372. hauing written a witty and wicked booke, to maintaine the Roman vi∣sible Ecclesiasticall Monarchy, comes into Ireland (1579) with the Popes legantiue authority, and a con∣secrated banner, with three shippes to ioyne with the rebels against Queen Elizabeth; where much mischiefe
was done, supplies sent of men, money, and armour from the Pope and Spaniard: but after diuerse yeeres, diuerse fortunes, the Earle of Desmond (chiefe of the rebels) wandering, and poore, was killed by a common Souldier, and D. Sanders for griefe ran mad, and finally died miserably being hunger-starued. Ibid. cap. 6. See Camdens Annals p. 315. &c.Anno 1568. began the Seminaries, deuised by Car∣dinall Allen (an Englishman as Sanders was) first, at Doway for English fugitiues, but remoued to Rhemes by the Guises, and another erected at Rome by Gregory 13. In them were trayned vp many fit instruments for Rome and Spaine, traytors to England, issuing out thence when they were fitted, as Campian, Parson, Sherwin, Kirby, Briant, and multitudes of others, not in the habits of Priests, but of Gallants, Seruingmen, Summo∣ners, or any other, the better to insinuate into compa∣ny, and peruert men without danger of discouery. Cap. 7. 1583. Camden. Annal, part. 3. p 370.7. Someruile bewitched by the wicked seditious bookes of the Iesuits, sought to come into the Queenes presence to kill her, and by the way set vpon one or two with his drawne sword: but was taken and han∣ged, as was also Ardern his father in Law. 8. Among other mischieuous bookes, one exhor∣ted the Ladies and maids of honour to doe as Iudith did to Holofernes. 1584 See Camd. An∣nal. ib. p. 398.9. Francis Throgmorton practised to deliuer the Q. of Scots: Vpon discouery whereof, Thomas L. Paget, and Charles Arundell fled into France, the Earles of Northumberland and Arundell commanded to keepe their houses, and 70. Priests (whereof some were con∣demned to dye) were sent out of England, whereof the chiefe were Gasper Heywod, Iames Bosgrate, Iohn Hart, Edward Bishton, &c. 10. Bernardine Mendoza Embassadour from the K. of Spaine, was commanded to auoyd England for trea∣sonable practices with Thrgmorton and others, to bring strangers into England and depose the Queene. This
Mendoza had made two Catalogues, One of the Ha∣uens of England, fit to land forces in; the other of all the Noble men that fauoured the Romish Religion. 11.Cap. 8. Queene Elizabeth purposed to set the Queene of Scots at liberty, and sent Sir William Wade to her, to conferre of the meanes, and was ready also to send o∣ther Commissioners to effect it, but a strange accident hindred it. One Creighton a Scottish Iesuit, being taken by Dutch Pirats, tore certaine papers and cast them into the Sea, but they were blowne backe into the shippe, gathered, brought to Sir William Wade, who peeced them againe, and they discouered new practises of the Pope, Spani∣ards, and Guises, to depose Queene Elizabeth and King Iames, and set vp the Queene of Scots, and marry her to some English Lord, to be chosen by the Catholikes, and confirmed by the Pope; their children to succeed them: to this purpose were to be employed Cardinall Allen for the English Ecclesiastikes, Sir Francis Inglefield for the Laikes, and the Bishop of Rosse for the Queene of Scots. 12. William Parry a Welshman,1585. Reade the whole story in Camden. Annal. part. 3. p. 391. Doctor of the Ciuill Law, sought occasion to kill the Queene, insinuating into her fauour by telling her that hee had found out treasonable intents in Morgan and other fugitiues, who practised her destruction: and that hee had conferred with them closely to finde their purposes, and keepe her safe, desiring her leaue to doe so still, and to haue accesse vnto her to discouer what he found. But Parry himselfe in good time being suspected, ac∣cused, taken, imprisoned, and examined by graue Coun∣sellors, at last freely confessed, that in France, and from Rome by Cardinall Como, he was confirmed, that it was lawfull and meritorious to kill the Queene: and especially by D. Allens booke written against the Iustice of England, and that hee was imployed to that purpose; for which he was executed.
Cap. 9. Camd ib. part. 3 pag 399.13. Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland (though pardoned for his rebellion 16. yeeres before, restored and made Earle by the Queenes mercy, yet) practised with Mendoza and Throgmorton to put downe Eliza∣beth and set vp the Queene of Scots, and being impri∣soned, killed himselfe with a Pistoll, was found dead, the dore bolted on the inside: oh mischieuous Popish∣nesse, the ruine of many Noble houses! Camd. ib. p 431. & seq. Reade it there at large.14. Sauage also vowed to kill the Queene, as did al∣so George Gfford a pentioner, hired by the Guise for a great summe of money, and perswaded by Doctor Gif∣ford, Gilbert Gifford and Hodgeson Priests, that it was lawfull and meritorious. 15. And Ballard a Priest, walking in a souldiers ha∣bit, and calling himselfe Captaine Foscue, promised an inuasion by the Pope, Spaniard, Guise, and D. of Parma: he told Babington of the Queenes death to bee acted by Sauage, perswaded him to see the Queene of Scots fauour, and drew more heroik Actors (as they called them) into the conspiracy, Tilney, Tichburne, Abington, Barnewell, Charnocke, besides others for o∣ther purposes, Windsor, Salisbury, Gage, Trauerse, Iones, Dun. And they practised how to stirre Ireland, to draw Arundell and his brethren, and Northumberland to their side, and call Westmerland, Paget, and others home. But Sir Francis Walsingham found out all the plot, by meanes of one Gifford a brother false to them, but true to the State, so that when the proiect was ripe, and the Queen made acquainted, the Traytors (though fled and dispersed) were taken, conuicted, and executed. Cap. 10. Camd. ib. p. 483.16. Anno 1587. Many discontented persons still conti∣nually haunted the Queene of Scots like euill spirits tempting her. L'Aubespineus the French Embassadour lieger, went about by treason to free her, mouing Wil∣liam Stafford (whose mother was of the Queenes Bed-chamber) to kill the Queene, by poyson, Gun-powder, or rather sword. Trappius the Embassadours Secretary
perswaded Stafford and Moody, but Stafford reuealed all to the Queenes Councell: Trappius was intercepted going into France. The Embassadour being called be∣fore the Councell, denied all: but Stafford affirmed it to his face. The Lord Burleigh told him, though he were not punished, yet he was not iustified. 17. Shortly after,Camd. ib. part. 4. pag. 843. William Stanley and Rowland Yorke became Traytors: Yorke being made Captaine of a Sconse neere Zutphen, betrayed it to the Spanyard: and Stanley betrayed to them the rich fenced Towne of De∣uenter; and sent for Priests to teach his English and Irish the Popish Religion; being in number 1300. calling them The Seminary legion (as the Seminary Priests) ordained to defend the Romish Religion. Not long after, Yorke was poysoned: Stanley tossed from place to place ignominiously; and his fellowes some died for hunger, some stole away, himselfe was neuer trusted: for the Spaniards vsed to say, Some honour might bee giuen to a traytor, but no trust: and hee found too late, he had most of all betrayed himselfe. 18. The maruellous, climactericall,Cap. 11. &. 72. See the whole history hereof in Camdens An∣nales, part. 3. pag. 513. & seq. & Meteranus. & Hakluits voyages, & Speeds chron. and fatall yeere (as some called it) 1588. whereupon the superstitious built great hopes, brought forth the Spanish Armado a Nauy by them termed inuincible, furnished with the best experienced and famous Captaines and souldiers from Spaine, Italy, Sicily, America, and all other places, to be gotten, to conquer England by huge force, which had before beene vainly attempted by false treachery. It consisted of 130. shippes, 19290. souldiers: Mari∣ners 8350. chayned rowers 2080. Great Ordnance 2630. Vnto which, the Prince of Parma in Flanders was to adioyne his forces, building shippes and brode vessels to transport 30. horses a peece with twenty thousand vessels, with 103. companies on foot, and 4000. horsemen, and among these were 700. English fugitiues. These were blessed by the Pope, and with the Catholikes prayers and intercessions to Saints: and for greater terror to the English, a booke was set out of
all the preparation in particulars, which was so great through Spaine, Italy, Sicily, and the Low-countries, that the Spaniards themselues were in admiration of their owne forces. Pope Sixtus Quintus sent Cardinall Allen, (who wrote a pestilent booke to discourage the English, and encourage their owne side) by him re∣newing the Bulles of Pius 5. and Gregory 13. and ex∣communicating the Queene againe, deposing her, ab∣soluing her subiects from all alleagiance: and setting forth a printed Cruciata of full pardons, to all that ioy∣ned against England. Whereupon the Marquesse à Burgaw of the house of Austria, the Duke of Pastrana, Amady Duke of Sauoy, Vespasian Gonzaga, Iohn Medi∣ces, and diuerse other Noble-men were drawne into these warres. And yet in the meane season, to gull the English, and make them more negligent, the Prince of Parma sent to the Queene to entreat of peace: so that Commissioners were sent into the Low-Coun∣tries about that entreaty, but the businesse was cun∣ningly protracted with promises and delaies, vntill the Spanish Fleet was come neere the English shore, and their Gunnes heard from the Sea, and Parmas forces brought to the shore. Yet God so blessed our English forces, that they got the winde, played vpon them, tooke many of their ships, sunke many, droue the rest out of the Channell, and in a moneths space so dispersed them, that they durst not returne; but fled about beyond Scotland and Ireland, losing many by the way, and returned to Spaine with sorrow, losse, and shame: the English hauing lost onely one ship, and scarce an hundred men in bea∣ting and chasing them. For which our safety and vi∣ctory, our Gracious Queene Elizabeth with her Nobles and Citizens of London in their colours, resorted to the Cathedrall Church of Saint Pauls and gaue God hum∣ble and hearty thanks, and shewed the banners taken from the enemies, with publike ioy. Many both at home and abroad wrote Poems and Epigrams, of this
great enterprize so happily defeated, and I, this one Numerall verse, noting the yeere, and the businesse, Est DeVs Ang LorV M pVgnaX qVI strauIt Iberos. 19.Cap. 13. Comd Annal. part. 4 pag 63. The King of Spaine practised both to doe away Don Antonio King of Portugall, and also to poyson Queene Elizabeth, by meanes of D. Lopez a Iew, her Physitian, for fifty thousand crownes, which was dis∣couered by letters intercepted, and hee committed to the Tower, yet he denied it with vehement oathes and execrations; and though the knot of this treason was most closely carried, yet by diligent examination it was confessed by Pedro Ferrera, Steuen Ferrera, and Manoel Lowis Tinoco, and at the last by Lopez himselfe, saying, Indeed he had so couenanted with the Spaniard, with a purpose to get the money, and bring it to the Queene, and then to reueale the whole matter vnto her: and that to that end he had spoken to Ferrera, Andreda, Ibarra, Count Fuentes, &c. by mouth, messen∣gers, and letters; but neuer intending to doe it. This vnder his hand, Febr. 25. 1593. Roger Lopez. It was confessed also, that Lopez should haue the mony brought to Antwerp: that the King of Spaine should bee infor∣med of the very day, when the act should bee done, that hee might cause the Queenes ships to be burned, and the Ile of Wight to be surprized. 20. Edward Squire,Cap. 14. See Camd. ib. p. 725. & 843. hauing beene a Scriuener at Greenewich, and afterwards one of the Queenes Stable; going in a voyage to the Indies with Sir Francis Drake, was taken and brought into Spaine; and there in pri∣son was wrought vpon by Walpoole the Iesuite, and the Inquisition, and finally by paine and pouerty became perfectly Iesuited, and perswaded to kill the Queene of England by impoysoning her saddles pummell, with poyson which they deliuered him in a bladder, teach∣ing him how to vse it. Hee performed all accordingly, but it tooke none effect, but onely brought the traytor to his vntimely end: for Walpool grieuing that it was not performed, spake of it to some, by whom it came
to light, and he being examined, confessed the whol matter. Cap. 15. Comd. ib. p. 573. & 617. 635. 655. & seq & 701.21. Tyrone a bastard (hauing had such fauour of Q. Elizabeth as to be made Earle, and twice pardoned, once for murder, and againe for vsurping the title of O-neal) being a banished fugitiue, lurked in Spaine, and promised to do some seruice to the Pope and Spaniard: and being set on by them anno 1597. hee assayled the Fort of Blackwater, but being crossed by the English forces, and proclaymed traytor, hee fell downe before the Queenes picture and craued pardon, and yet at the same present dealt for ayd out of Spaine. But a cessation of Armes being granted, he still harried and wasted the Country and made many reuolt, still suing dissembling∣ly for pardon. Thomas L. Burrugh, Deputy defeated the rebels, tooke the Fort of Blackwater. But Tyrone be∣leagured it: the Deputy dying 1598. Henry Bagnal, came with 14. Ensignes against him, and there lost his life, with 15. other Captaynes slayne, and 1500. souldiers put to flight, so that Tyrone tooke the Fort of Blackwater, furnished with armor and munition, which was the greatest losse that euer the English receiued since their first footing in Ireland. And thus the rebel∣lion was increased, and became so dangerous, that the Queene sent the Earle of Essex with an army of 20000. against them, to wit, 16000. foot, and 4000. horse; who not going directly against Tyrone, but labouring to cleare other parts, and affording parly with Tyrone a rebell, and granting a cessation of warre for some time,Cap. 16. much offended the Queene, so that shee wrote somewhat sharpely to Essex, because the Spring, Sum∣mer, and Autumne were spent without seruice against the arch-rebell, many men lost, much mony spent, the rebels were incouraged, and Ireland hazarded where∣upon Essex posted home to pacifie the Queene, but was presently confined to his owne house, and after to the custody of the Lord Keeper. Meane while, Tyrone re∣uolted, and stirred, receiuing mony from Spaine, and
indulgences from Rome, with a plume of Phoenix fea∣thers for an especiall fauour. Anno 1600. Clarls Blunt Lord Monicy came Lieuetenant Generall, and with great celerity and felicity slue and chased many of the rebels, and remoued Tyrone from the Fort of Blackewa∣ter. Now the Spaniard sent Don Iohn D' Aquila Ge∣nerall of his forces into Ireland, and the Pope elected a Spaniard to be Archbishop of Dublin, employing also the Bishop of Clowfort, the Bishop of Killalo, and Ar∣cher a Iesuite. Aquila with 2000. old trayned Spaniards, and some Irish fugitiues, landed at Kinsale the last of October 1600. and drew many to him. Our Deputy encam∣ped neere, and Sir Richard Leuison with two shippes inclosed the hauen, and our Canons played on the Towne. Newes of 2000. more Spaniards arriued at Bear-hauen, Baltimer, & Castle-hauen, drew Leuison thi∣ther, who sunke fiue of their ships. To their leader Al∣fonso O Campo, came Odonel, and shortly after Tyrone, with Oroik, Raymund, Burk, Mac Mahim, Randal, Mac Surly, Tarrel the Baron of Lixnaw with the choice Nobles, making 6000. foot, and 500 horse, confident of victory, being more and in better plight, then the trauelled, wearied English, which were also pinched of victualls. I tell you this thus largely, to shew the greatnesse of the danger, and our mens va∣lour. Tyrone now went about to put 300. Irish and o∣ther supplies of Spaniards into Kinsale: but our Depu∣ty preuented him, gaue him a great ouerthrow, and slue many. Tyrone, Odonel, and the rest, flung away their weapons and fled. Alfonso O Campo, and six En∣signe bearers were taken prisoners: nine Ensignes were borne away by the English, and 1200. Spaniards slayne. Don D' Aquila sought peace, confessed the Deputy to be an honourable person; the Irish, vnciuill, and perfidious; Peace was granted, for the Spaniards to be gone, to haue victualls and ships for mony at reasona∣ble
prices: the ships to passe and returne safely, hosta∣ges giuen, and so they departed. The Deputed pursued the rebels from hole to hole, building ramparts still as he went, and receiuing ma∣ny Fortts. Tyrone finally came in, submitted, and when he was to be sent into England, Queene Eizabeth a Conquerour of all her foes, dyed. King Iames entring, pardoned Tyrone. But he afterwards stirring agayne and fearing deserued punishment, fled out of Ireland, and left it to b planted with more ciuill people. Cap 17 Reade this sto∣ry in Speeds Chronicle.22. In King Iames his time, Watson and Clarke Papist Priests entred a strange conspiracy to surprize the King (ere he was crowned) and Prince Henry, to keep them in the Tower, or conuay them to Douer Castle, and seize vpō their treasures til they had obtained their purpose, to wit, to get their pardons, alteration of Re∣ligion, remouall of some Counsellors, and some other proiects executed. In this practise were inuolued Hen∣ry Brooke L. Cobham, Thomas L. Gray of Wilton, Sir Wal∣ter Raleigh, Sir Griffin Markham, Sir Edward Parham, George Brooke, Brtholomew Brooksby, and Anthony Cop∣ley: who were all apprehended, committed, and con∣demned, saue Sir Edward Parham who onely was ac∣quitted by the Iury Watson, Clark, and Brook executed; the rest pardoned their liues. A foolish conspiracy, hauing neither strength to act the businesse, nor heads to carry it. Cap. 18. Speeds Chro∣nicle.23. The vpshot of all the Romish irreligious practi∣ses was the powder treason anno 1605. contriued by Henry Garnet the Arch-priest or chiefe gouernour of all the Iesuits and Priests in England, or with his know∣ledge and allowance, by Catesby, Robert Winter, Thomas Winter, Thomas Percy, Iohn Wright, Christopher Wright, Guy Fauks, Francis Tressam, Iohn Graunt, Bates Catesbies man, Robert Keyes, St Euerard Digby, Ambrose Rookwood. Some of these wrought in a secret mine beginning in Percies hired house, to bee continued through a strong wall vnder the Parliament house, with very great la∣bour
and difficulty. But ere that mine was made through the wall, they found meanes to hire the roome iust vnder the Parliament house, to lay in prouision of wood and coales. In which roome they couched se∣cretly at one time twenty barrels of gun-pouder, and afterwards more, couering them with Faggots and Billets, which they purposed (when the King, Prince, Nobles and all Parliament-men were assembled aboue) to set on fire with a trayne of gun-powder, to blow vp the house, and murder all therein in one instant. And at the same time they appointed a great hunting to bee at Dunnesmore heath, to draw multitudes of people, get certaine great horses into their hands, and to seize on the Lady Elizabeth the Kings daughter lying neere that place, to proclayme her Queene (vpon newes of her Fathers and Brethrens death) seruing her a while, till they had made themselues strong enough to sway the State, and to set vp another fitter for their purpose; crying out continually of the Puritans as authours of the Kings death, and of blowing vp the house. This most mischieuous plot came to light by occa∣sion of a letter sent from an vnknowne person to the Lord Mount Eagle, warning him to absent himselfe from the Parliament, for that there should a great blow be giuen which might endanger him, and the danger might be past as soone as hee had burned the letter. With this letter the Lords being acquainted, shewed it to the King, who presently conceiued some treason by Gun-powder, and appointed the roomes vnder the Parliament to be searched. The search was made se∣cretly in the dead of the night, and Fanks was found and taken with his matches and powder, layd hold of, and vpon the remouall of the Billets and Faggots, 36. barrels of Gun-powder found: all which when Fauks saw discoered, hee confessed what hee meant to haue done. Winter and the two Wrights hasted from London to carry the newes of the discouery of their plot to their fellow hunters neere Couentry: where Grart
with helpe of other violent Papists had broken one Be∣noks stable, and taken out some great horses (sent thither by some Noble men to bee managed) for which the Countrey rose to pursue them. But vpon this newes, they rose into open rebellion, hoping to draw multi∣tudes vnto them. But the Sherifs of the Counties pre∣uenting the swiftnesse of proclamations, raising the Countries pursued them, so that finally the chifest of them entred into Steuen Littletons house at Holbeach in Staffordshire to shroud themselues, and the house be∣ing assaulted by the Sheriffe, as they were drying some Gun-powder in the house, the fire tooke it, blasted and disabled the faces of some of the chiefest rebells, and discouraged them (that God by such powder as they meant to destroy others themselues were scourged) so that they fell on their knees and cryed God mercy for their bloudy intents: and presently opened the gates, and desperately sought their owne destruction. Catesby, Percy and Winter ioyning backe to backe, the two first were slayne with one shot, the third taken aliue: the other whole, or lightly hurt, carried away prisoners, and sent to London: where with the rest of their fel∣lowes (as they had formerly liued blindly, and practi∣sed desperately, so) they by the iust doome of the Law, died miserably, leauing their memory to bee cursed throughout all generations. First, by all this, you may see how vaine your con∣ceit is, that the Popes in these latter times haue beene more moderate, and become more like to their first Ancestors; nay you see, the abuse of their Supremacy hath encreased and growne more vntollerable. In these last times they haue set vp Schools at Rome and Rhemes to trayne men vp to the defence and practise of Idola∣try and treasons:See before Book 1 c. 6. §. 4. Camd. Anna. pag 315. 348. & a libi passim. out of which (as out of the Troian Horse) haue proceeded innumerable wicked instru∣ments, troublers of the Church and Common-wealth, Incendiaries, homicides (for Kings are men) parri∣cides (for Kings are Fathers of the Common-wealth)
yea Christicides (for Kings are the Lords Annointed) yea Deicides (for Kings are callled gods) and regnicides (the quellers of the Common-wealth.) Neuer was a∣ny Doctrine so fruitfull of Treasons and Rebellions. The desire to mainetaine it, the hunger to plant it a∣gaine, hath beene the onely cause to the superstitious, and pretence to the couetous and ambitious, of all late treasons. The traytors euer confirmed by the Doctrine of their books, the exhortations of their tongues, and the Sacrament deliuered by their hāds, & many of their Priests partakers and actors of their crimes. The know∣ledge and experience of the intollerable mischiefe of this doctrine doth iustifie our Lawes that were sharpe∣ned against the practisers of it,See Cambd. Annals 4. pa t. 842, 843. as many of your owne Priests haue confessed. Secondly, you may note, that neuer any Nation was so often, so strangely, so strongly, so diuellishly assaul∣ted and endangered with treasons, as this our land: and on the other side, neuer any Nation so strangely and mightily defended, and the traytors confounded. Thirdly, consider whether these actions bee not ma∣nifest tokens of a false religion. If we must iudge the tree by his fruits (as Christ teacheth vs) how can the tree be good that bringeth forth such fruits?Mat. 12.33. Are those true Prophets (howsoeuer they come in sheepes clo∣thing) that doe the acts of Wolues? No, you shall know them by their fruits, to bee false Prophets.Mat. 7.15.16. Be∣ware of them. Your Bellarmine giueth it for one note of the true Church, Sanctity of life and doctrine. If these things so taught and practised taste of sanctity: what is villany? Your Gospell is not the Gospell of peace, but of confusion and mischiefe, in stead of building the Church, it ruines Common-wealths and kingdomes. Fourthly, looke well,Bellarm. e no∣tis Ecclesiae, Nota 15. if Gods protection and bles∣sings be notes of the true Church (as your Bellarmine teacheth) what thinke you of ours, which God hath so mightily defended and blessed, euen when Balaam most cursed? Though you neuer ceased heauing at
our foundations, Church, and Princes, in these two last Princes times, Queene Elizabeth and King Iames, yet they haue both liued to see all your wicked practi∣ses ouerthrowne; the practisers ruined, their peoples defended, Gods truth maintayned; they liued happi∣ly, dyed in their beds peaceably, and left a blessed me∣moriall behind them. Our one Queene brought more happinesse to vs, then nine Popes did to Reme, who all liued in her time; Paul 4. Pius 4. Pius 5. Gregory 13. Sixtus 5. Vrbanus 7. Gregory 14. Innocent 9. Clemens 8. They wrastled against her and cursed her in vayne; and their curses fell vpon their owne heads: and King Iames wounded the learnedst of thir leaders with his penne. Lastly, consider well, whether they that perswade you to be absolute Roman Catholikes, doe not in deed and effect perswade you to be traytors, troublers of the world, cursed and deuilish people! for perfect and ab∣solute Papists are no better, as you may see by these manifold examples of these treasons: and therefore it is a wonder, that Princes doe not concurre to root out this wicked Sect, that make wickednesse godlinesse, yea that make a traffik of Kings sacred liues, to set vp an Idoll of mans inuention at Rome aboue them all. §. 13. Antiq. Good Sir, I doe not hold that the Pope hath any such power ouer Kings to depose them and set vp others, or to dispense with subiects oathes of alleagi∣ance, or to rayse warres or other troubles against ci∣uill Magistrates. I finde many good Catholikes doe reiect and condemne such doctrine and practises: they take the oath of alleagiance willingly; and write in defence of it. I hould (with all my heartConference of D. Rainolds & M. Hart. in Hart preface to the Reader.) that the Pope hath onely a fatherhood of the Church, not a princehood of the world, or dominion ouer Princes temporall states, to depose or dispose any way of them. For Christ said, His kingdome was not of this worldIoh. 18.36.:
he payed ribute to secular MagistratesMat. 17.27.: medled not with temporall matters, no not with diuision of inhe∣ritance amongst brethrenLuk. 12.14.: he acknowledged Pilate to haue power to crucifie him, and power to release him, euen lawfull power giuen him from aboueIoh. 19.10 1: Saint Paul acknowledged Caesar to bee his lawfull IudgeActs 25.10.: and Saint Peter (the first Bishop of Rome) taught thus,1 Pet. 2.13. Subiecti estote omni humanae creaturae propter Deum, siue regi, &c. Be siect to euery humane creature for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as excelling: or to rulers as sent by him to the reuenge of malefactors, but to the prayse of the good. Saint Paul taught euery soule to be subiect to the higher powersRom 13 1.. By those higher powers, meaning secular and ciuil MagistratesAs the Iesuits Pererius and Tolet (in locum) obserue out of the Fathers., that beare the sword: be subiect to them, not onely for feare of wrath, but for conscience sakeRom. 13.5.. And who must be subiect to them? all sorts of people, both Ec∣clesiasticall and secular, euen Apostles, Euangelists and Prophets, saith Saint ChrysostomeChrysost. in lo∣cum. Ista Impe∣rantur omnibus, & sacerdotibus, & monahis, nō solum seculari∣bus Omnis ani∣ma etiamsi Apo∣stolus sis, si E∣uangelista, si Propheta, siue quisquis tandem fueris., And Saint Ber∣nardBernard. epist. ad Episcopum Senonensem. Omnio anima; tum vestra: quis vo excipit? qui tentat excipere, tentat decipere. writing to a Bishop, tells him hee is not excep∣ted from temporall subiection to Princes, he that ex∣cepts him, deceiues him. Our late gracious Soueraigne King IamesKing Iames Apology for the oath of Alleagiance. pg 23. & dein∣ceps. alleadgeth many Fathers, Saint Augustin, Tertullian, Iustine Martyr, Ambrose, Optatus, Gregory Bishop of Rome, for subiection euen of Bishops and Popes to the secular Emperours and Princes. Hee al∣leadgeth many Councels, six vnder Charles the Great, to wit, of Frankford, Arles, Towres, Chalons, Metz, and Rhemes: yea all the Generall Counces, that of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and the rest, who submitted themselues to the Emperours wisedome and piety in all things, and desired from him power and validity to their decrees: and for the oath of Alleagi∣ance he alleadgeth diuerse Councells. These Scriptures, Fathers, Councels are so playne, so plentifull, so powerfull with me, for giuing domi∣nion to Princes, and subiecting all, both Clergy and Laity vnto them in all ciuill things: that all the world
shall neuer draw me to deny my Alleagiance and sub∣iection to my Soueraigne: but I will readily take Armes in his defence, as Gods Lieutenant and Deputy, though the Pope should excommunicate him. Antiquis. I ioy to heare your good resolution, built vpon so good grounds: I hope then you iustifie vs Pro∣testants for departing from the Popish Religion in this point. Antiq. I must needs doe so; and I doe not thinke them true Catholikes that hold and practise this point of Supremacy. Papists they may bee (as you terme them) for so holding with the Pope: but Catholikes they cannot be, for this Doctrine is not Catholike. §. 14. Antiquis. Doe you not see also how greatly you shake the Popes authority by this meanes, and ouer∣turne the foundation of his Supremacy? for your Popes haue both claymed and practised this full authority as well in ciuill and temporall things as in Ecclesiasticall, and vpon the same grounds. And your learned Do∣ctors thinke their grounds as firme for the one as for the other. Your Great Bellarmine (vpon whom you so much rely) saith,Bellarm. de Pont. Rom l. 5. cap. 6. initio. Although the Pope as Pope, hath not any more temporall power (which other Doctors say he hath) yet so farre as it may make for the spiri∣tuall good, he hath supreme power to dispose of the temporall things of all Christians. AndIb. cap. 7. hee labours to proue that the Pope may depose Princes and dispose of their kingdomes, if he finde it good for the Church: as a sheephard may deale with Wolues and vnruly Rammes, and other sheepe. And many of your Do∣ctors haue the like, as Eudaemon, Ioannes Sidonius, Sua∣rez, Becanus, Mariana, Grotzerus, Costerus, Baronius, Sanders, Allen, and thousands more. Antiq. I am very sorrowfull that so great learned men should hold such an opinion, I hold them errone∣ous and euill.
Antiquis. Then you must confesse that the Church of Rome may erre, and that in a maine point both of doctrine and practise, to the great hurt of the Catholike Church, and many mens destruction both of body and soule, in being traytors and rebels against their Soue∣raignes, and murderers of people, of which crimes your Popes and Doctors are guilty. Antiq. I must needs grant that some haue erred in the Church, but not the whole Church, neither (I hope) hath any Pope taught this Ex Cathedra. Antiquis. This some is a large some, the greatest part of your Church, and I thinke the Pope teacheth it Ex Cathedra, when hee decrees it out of his Pontifi∣call iudgement and authority, and sends out his iudici∣all excommunications vnder seale against Princes to depose them (as Pius 5. did against our Queene Eliza∣beth) and Breefes to forbid his Catholikes to take the oath of ciuill Alleagiance (as Paulus 5. did to our English.) Now consider well what you grant: in effect, that the greatest part of the Church, yea, the most conspi∣cuous and eminent men in the Church, and the Pope also, may erre in some great and dangerous point; and yet because some few inferiour and obscure persons hold the truth, the true Church is still sufficiently vi∣sible and illustrious. This you had not wont to yeeld to the Protestants.See card. Pe∣rons oration in the third in∣conuenience. In K Iams his Remonstrance p. 183. 187. &c. Cardinall Perone dare not grant it, but saith, this would proue the Church of Rome to be Antichristian and he∣reticall, and to haue ceased to be the Spouse of Christ for a long time, and to haue taught many points with∣out authority, as Transubstantiation, auricular confessi∣on, &c. (for these he ranketh with the Popes power to depose Kings: and if the Scriptures yeeld no ground for the one, no more doe they for the other.) These and diuerse other points (which they hold different from vs) haue no other ground, but the authority of that Churh, which is found to erre in great and dan∣gerous matters.
See this in B. Whites answer alleadged p. 87Your owne learned Iesuite Mr Fisher, vpon whose iudgement your English Roman Catholikes doe much relye, saith, Tht if the Church could deliuer, by con∣sent of Ancestors, together with truth, some errors: her Traditions, euen about the truth, were questionable, and could not be beleeued vpon the warrant of her Tradition: and this he proueth substantially. Neither doe we receiue doctines vpon the Churches warrant, only (as Doctor White there largely & learnedly shew∣eth) but vpon their agreeing with the holy Scriptures. Now we may assume; The Church of Rome doth de∣liuer by consent of many Ancestors (from Gregory 7. time to our times) some errours (as this concerning her power to depose Kings, and dissolue oathes of Al∣leagiance, &c.) Ergo her traditions (or teaching) are questionable, and cannot be beleeued vpon the account of her Tradition, Consequently, all other her doctrines not grounded vpon Scripture, are questionable, and our subiection to her iudgement vnnecessary. Antiq. Truly, if I grant the former doctrine of her power to depose Kings &c. to be erroneous (as I must needs grant) I know not how to auoyd this reason. 1 Booke 1. cap 1.And therefore not to trouble you longer at this time: Since you haue shewed me, 1. that your Chuch diffe∣reth nothing from the Romish Church in the old true doctrine which it continueth, but onely in some cor∣ruptions which it hath added: and that 2. corruptions may in time come into any particular Church (the Roman not excepted,2 cap. 2. but warned thereof by the Scrip∣tures) 3.3 cap. 3. shewing also the time when they grew ob∣seruable and notorious in the Roman Church:4 cap. 4. and 4, that they were opposed from time so time, and refor∣mation called for:5 cap. 5. shewing also 5. the principall points wherein the difference consists, and that you hold all necessary doctrines:6 cap. 6. 6. misliking many policies by them vsed to maintaine their new corruptions. And
further haue shewed mee,Booke 2. that this your Church for the substance of the doctrine thereof, hath alwayes beene visible, 7. as all one with the Primitiue Church,7 cap. 1. and the Greeke and Easterne Churches, and the Wal∣denses that separated from the corruptions of the Pa∣pacy, yea and with the Roman Church it selfe, excep∣ting the Papacy and the maintainers thereof: although in some 8,8 cap. 2. ceremonies and priuate opinions both you and the Romish haue departed from fome Fathers (wherin 9.9 cap. 3 also there was difference among themselues as there is also still among the Roman Doctors.) And further you haue shewed mee 10.10. cap 4. a Rule to iudge all Churches and Christians by: By which Rule (iudged right by the Roman Doctors) you approue your selues to hold all things necessary to saluation, and thereby to be the true Church of God, and agreeing therein with all true Churches that are or euer were in the world: yea and that 11.11 cap, 5. your Bishops and Mi∣nisters haue as good succession from the Apostles, as a∣ny other in the world: although 12.12 cap. 6. 13. cap. 7. you admit not the B. of Romes Supremacy ouer al Churches and Chri∣stians in the world: neither 13. his Infallibility: both which you proue to be vnknowne, and vnreceiued of the Ancients, and 14.14 cap. 8. both vnprofitable and vntolle∣rable in the Church of God: Since all this you haue deliuered with such plentifull and pregnant proofes, as I haue nothing (for the present) to say against them: I must needs thankfully confesse that they sway much with me; yet will I not be rash to resolue vpon a sud∣den, without further meditation, and consultation with men of better iudgement than my selfe: but I promise you, if you (at our next meeting) can as well satisfie me in the particular points of Doctrine, as you haue now presently in these generall obiections, I shall be very inclinable with all due reuerence to returne vnto your Church. Antiquis. Deare friend, I pray God blesse your me∣ditations and consultations. I haue told you the truth
from my heart, so farre as my reading and iudgement could direct me. Quaere doctiores. Inuenies praesumptiores. Seeke more learned, you shall haply finde them that will presume more of their learning (as Saint Augustine said) such as will seeke rather the victory than the Truth. I am old, past my climactericall yeere (as they call the yeere 63.) other men may haue death at their backes, I haue him alwayes before my face. I was ne∣uer dissembler, and least of all now, hauing one foot in the graue. Meditate vpon that I haue said; and especi∣ally reade the holy Scriptures, the Cloud and Pillar to guide you to the land of Promise, the Light and Lan∣terne to your feet: quicke and liuely in operation to moue your heart. And when you are either to reade, meditate, or conferre first, shut your selfe in your Closet, or priuate Chamber, there fall downe humbly vpon your knees, and pray the most gracious God, to illuminate your minde, and make pliable your heart, for true diuine faith: For all your reading and confe∣rence, study and meditation can worke no more than humane faith, builded vpō humane testimonies, which may prepare good entrance and introduction to di∣uine faith, which must afterwards bee fully wrought, confirmed, and sealed by the holy Ghost; all our plan∣ting and watring is nothing without this. The testimo∣ny of the Church, of histories, of former ages (which yet onely the Romish pretend to relie vpon, and call vs thereunto▪ and wherein we proue our selues superiors, and, which are the greatest assurances that mans wit or humane meanes can afford, yet) are farre short of be∣getting the Faith that assureth of the Truth, and saueth either them or vs, without the diuine working and as∣surance of the holy Ghost: whose guidance and heauen∣ly influence seeke for by seruent and diligent prayer. And so I commend you to Gods grace. FINIS.
An Appendix. Christian Reader, after J had sent this booke to the Printer, there came to my hands, a worthy learned booke of Doctor Morton, Bishop of Couentry and Liechfield, entituled, The grand Imposture of the (now) Church of Rome: which J commend vnto thy diligent reading, for thy yet-fuller satisfaction in that main point. There thou shalt see many of those Histories, which I haue alledged briefly (e∣specially in my later Chapters) more largely discoursed, & thorowly vrged, against all possibility of contradiction. And now, for a peroration or conclusion, beside my for∣mer proofes, J offer vnto thee these three waighty consi∣derations, to meditate vpon. I. Of the excellent benefit of pure Primitiue Religion. II. Of the euils of false or corrupted Religion. III. Of the great blessings of the Reformation thereof. Thinke not thy time lost, nor thy labour long in reading them. CHristian Religion,I. Of the ex∣cellent bene∣fit of pure Pri∣mitiue Religi∣on. when the excellency of it was once knowne, was embraced as the greatest benefit that euer came vnto Mankind: because it not onely brought men out of darkenesse into light, to the knowledge of the true God, and of themselues and of the most comfortable meanes of their saluation; but also because it trained vp men in all things profitable for this present life and made a second heauen vpon earth. That City Countrey, and Nation, was found to prosper in wealth, peace, honesty, diligence in euery Calling, faithfulnesse among men, sobriety in themselues, obedience to Magistrates, and all kind of goodnesse, where it was receiued, and where both people and Gouernours feared God, and serued
him as he had prescribed.y 11.6. For it wrought a wonder∣full blessed change in all true beleeuers hearts, farre be∣yond all Lawes and Ordinances of Man. Of Wolues they became Lambes; of Vultures, Doues; of Leopards, Kids; of Aspes and Cockatrices, Innocents and Chil∣dren; of Barbarous, Sauage, and rude people, they be∣came ciuill, deuout, iust cleane, peaceable, and holy. All vices rooted out all vertues planted in their hearts, and practised in their liues. Whereupon followed peace, loue, vnity, prosperity, and felicity in the Chri∣stian world. Pliny lib. 10. E∣pist. 97. citat. à Baronio anno 14. num. 3.Pliny certified the Emperour, that vpon his thorow-search and full knowledge of Christians, he found them strongly bound together by Sacraments (or oathes) not to do any wicked thing; But, not to commit these, rob∣beries murders, deceit, or deny any things committed to their trust or keeping, &c. Baron. tom. 2. an. 195. nu. 21. Euseb. Praeparat. Evangel. lib. 6. cap. .Baronius cites Bardezanus Syrus giuing this testimo∣ny to the Christians, that in whatsoeuer City or Coun∣trey they liued (Persia, Media, Parthia, Aegypt, or other barbarous Nations) they quite changed the nature and qualities of men, to forsake and abandon theit old, wilde, vniust, beastly customes, and become iust, chaste, honest, charitable, suffering people. And although some Emperours and Princes for a time persecuted Christians, vpon misinformation that they were enemies to their state and dignity, and a re∣bellious kinde of people: yet in time they found the contrary and fauoured them aboue all others.Tertul. ad Sca∣pulam liber. pag. 162, 163. Tertul∣lian writing to Scapula the President tels him, A Chri∣stian is no mans enemy, much lesse enemy to the Empe∣rour, whom Christians know to be ordayned by their God; and they are compelled by their Religion, to loue, reuerence, and honor him, and to seeke his safety with the safety of the whole Empire. And therfore they professe & say, Colimus Jmperatorem sic, quomodo & nobis licet, & ipsi expedit, vt hominē à deo secundum, & quicquid
est, a deo consequutum, solo deo minorem. We honour and obey the Emperour so farre as is lawfull for vs, and needfull for him, that is, as a man next vnder God, and hauing obtained of God, whatsoeuer he is, being infe∣riour to God alone. Origen testifies that the Church of God was euer calme and quiet at Athens though the Athenians were turbulent and seditious. So also at Corinth. Alexandria,Origen contra Celsum lib. 3. Baron. tom. 2. an. 15. n. 2. and euery where, the Church was farre more excellent then the best composed Common-wealth. Gregory the great, Bishop of Rome,Greg lib. 7. epist. 8 cited by Kng Iames Remonstr. pag. 137. & Apolog. for the oath of Allegiance, pag. 94. 600 yeares after Christs birth, professeth that he had power to ruine the Lombards, his sworne enemies, and to bring them to extreame confusion: yet for the feare of God settled in his heart, he neuer had any such intent. And he wri∣teth to Mauritius the Emperour, that although a cer∣taine Law (which the Emperour commaded to be pro∣claimed) was in his iudgement, vniust;Greg. lib 2. In∣dict. 11. ep 61. cited also by King Iames. Apol. pag. 24. yet he as a du∣tifull subiect, and vnworthy seruant of his godlinesse, had caused it to be sent into diuers parts of his domi∣nions: paying to both parties what he ought to wit, obedience to the Emperour, and speaking what hee thought for God.Espencaeus in Tit. digress. 10. aedit. Paris. 1568. Whereupon B. Espenceus saith Gre∣gorius primus, idem & magnus lib. 2. epist. 64. Gregory the first, called also the Great, ingenuously acknowledged that God had granted the Emperours a dom nion ouer Priests. This Gregory I, and his predecessors were plaine contrary to Gregory VII and his successors. Bozius makes it one of the signes of the Church of God that it yeelded so many Martyrs,Bozius de signis Eccles tom 1. lib. 7. cap. 5. §. 5. suffering patient¦ly vnder cruell Emperors and Princes, seuen and twen∣ty Roman Bishops, for their onely cleauing to the do∣ctrine and honour of Christ.Greg Tolossan. 1. V. Doctor lib. 26. de Repub. cap. vlt. . 10. And Gregorius Tolossa∣nus, Doctor of the Lawes saith, That for 300 yeares af∣ter Christs Passion, though Christians suffered most cruell torments and death,— yet wee neuer read they rebelled against their Princes, nor moued against the
Commonwealth, though they had number and power sufficient But by that argument they shewed that they and their Religion were to be preferred before all other, because their pus doctrine taught the to obey Ma∣gistrates Whiles therefore the Church continued such a schoole of good life among Christians, and of faithfull loyalty & true subiecton to Princes,Rom. 13.5. whom they obey∣ed not onely for feare of punishment but especially be∣cause they were boun in conscience and so taught by their holy Relig on:B. King. Ser∣mon at Yorke on the Queens day, 1595. Religion was he ioy, glory, and happinesse of the world. It was the glor of Princes and Emperors to maintaine it and it was the glory of the Chuch to maintaine them. Constantius, the father of Constantine the Great, made more reckoning (he said) of those that professed Christianity, then o geat trea∣sures. Jouianus after Julian, refused to be Emperour (al∣beit elected and sought to the Emp re) except he might gouerne Christans. Great Constantine, and Charles the Great had their surnames of greatnesse not so much for authority,Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 5. 6. 24. as for godlinesse Saint Auustine saith Em∣perours were not therefore happy, because they raigned long, or left sonnes to raigne after them, or tamed ene∣mies, or quieted rebelling subiects &c. but because they ruled iustly remembred they were men, when men al∣most made them Gos; vsed their power to promote Gods honour, loued feared, worshipped God; loued that kingdome best, wherein they feared not to haue partakers slwly reuenged, easily pardoned; punshed for necessity to preserue the Commonwealth, not to serue their priuate hatred; pardoned, not to impuni∣ty of euill but for hope of amendment: and if compel∣led to deale more sharply, recompenced it with mercy, lenity, and larges of benefits: f their luury was so much the more restrained, as it might bee more free: if they had rather rule their euill lusts, then any Na∣tions: and all these, not for desire of vaine glory, but for the loue of heauenly felicity, — Such a
happy Emperour was Great Constantine,Ibid. cap. 25, 26. Constantine was celebrated in the old Mar∣bles, with these ti∣tles, Vrbis li∣berator, quietis fundator, rei∣pubilicae instau∣tator publicae, li∣bertatis au∣ctor, restitu∣tor vrbis Romae, at{que} orbis. Mag∣nus, maximus, in∣victus. And in the lawes, Qui veneranda Chri∣stianorum fide Romanum mu∣nivit imperium. Divus. Diuae me∣moriae. Divinae memoriae, &c. Camden Britan∣nia in Yorkshire, describing Yorke City. II. Of the euils of false or cor∣rupted Reli∣gion. Esay 1.21. Rome Reuel. 17.9, 18. be∣cante Babylon, v 5, 2, 4. 6. Nauel generat. 39 H Mulius Chron. German. lib 18. Vsher De eccl. succes. c. 7. §. 17. whom the Lord blessed also with all other happinesse; and such an one was Theodosius, who desired rather to be a mem∣ber of the Church, then a King ouer Peoples. Then was the world happy, when the Church bred and trayned vp the best people and subiects in the world: and Emperours, Kings, and Princes were the nusing Fathers of the Church: and so the one vpheld the other, and the one was happy in the other. But, alas for griefe, that euer so excellent a blessing should be corrupted, and turned to a curse and scourge to mankinde! that Ierusalem the whilome faithfull Ci∣ty should become an Harlot! And Rome, the Imperiall City (whose faith was spoken of through the whole world, Rom. 1.8.) should be turned into Babylon, the seat of Antichrist, and inebriate the Kings and Inhabi∣ters of the earth, with the wine of her fornications, her selfe becomming drunken with the blood of the Saints, and Martyrs of Iesus! that Emperours and Princes should shut the Cardinals out of their Churches and Cities, and write to the Pope their reason, because they found them nor Predicatores, sed Predatores, Non pacis corroboratores, sed Pecuniae raptores; non orbis Re∣paratores, sed auri Insatiabiles corrasores— deni{que} superbiae detestabilem bestiam vs{que} ad sedem Petri reptasse. So wrote the Emperour Fredericke Barbarossa to the Pope, to wit, your Cardinals come not to preach vnto vs, but to pray vpon vs: not to strengthen our peace, but to ransacke our purses: not to repaire the decayed world, but vnsatiably to rauine after gold.— Finally, we see the detestable beast of Pride hath crept euen into Saint Pe∣ters seat. The Hierarchy of Rome is here charged with vnsatia∣ble couetousnesse, (the roote of all euill, 1 Tim. 6.10.) and Ambtion or Pride, (the cause of the fall of Angels in heauen, and men in Paradise) frō wch two euils pro∣ceeded many mischiefes, & corruptiōs into the Church.
Sabellicus obserueth that the feare and reuerence of Potent Princes,Sabellicus Enne∣ad 9. lib. 1. Genebrard. Chro¦nol. lib 4. in 10. saculi initio. Baron. tomo 10. anno 900. §. 1. Matth. 8.24, 25 kept the Popes of Rome a long time in some good moderation: but when they were out of feare of such Princes, they rushed into all impudency and wickednesse. And Genebrard speaking of the tenth Age saith, Then was the world exhausted both of learned men, and po∣tent Princes, and good popes: and confesseth that in 150 yeares, there were about 50 popes, vtterly swar∣uing from the vertue of their predecessors, and were ra∣ther Apotactici, Apostaticive, quam Apostolici; debosht Apostataes, rather then Apostolcke. Bellarmine and Baronius complaine of the ninth and tenth Ages, wherein powerfull and sordid Whores ru∣led at Rome, and at their pleasure changed the Seas, gaue Bishoprickes, and brought their louers or Harlots (Amasios suos) into Saint Peters seat, as false popes: that in those times Christ slept in the ship which was ouerwhelmed with the waues, and there was none to awaken him. For bad popes set vp bad Cardinals, bad Bishops, bad Priests, as nothing is more common, then for like to beget his like. And for the liues of the Romish Religious in generall, Gerbertus said. TheGerbert. epist. 40. Romanorum mores mundus perhorrescit. ci∣tat. ab Vsserio cap. 2. § 32, 33. Ro∣mans manners are abhorred of the world.Werner. fasc. temp aetat. 6. circa an. 944. Sanctitatem. Papas dimisisse, & ad Jmperato∣res accessisse. Wernerus, that holinesse had forsaken the popes, and betooke it selfe to the Emperours: Cameracensis,Petrus de Alli∣aco Cardinal s Cameracensis. De Reform. Ec∣cle. Ad hunc statum venit Ecclesia, vt non esset digna Regi, nisi per Reprobot. Vsher c. 7. §. 7. The Church of Rome is come to this state, that it is not worthy to bee gouerned but by Reprobates.Naele. vol. 3. gecra. 39. pag. 220. Nauclerus reports out of Joannes Flatzboricosis, that pope Adrian 4 said, No man was more wretched then the pope of Rome: andOnuph de Vi∣tis Pontifn vi∣ta Marcell. 2. addit. ad Pla i∣nam pa 359. Onuphrius testifieth that Marcellus sitting one day at dinner, after long silence, remembring the words of A∣drian 4 speaking of the troublesome bitter, and misera∣ble liues of the popes, and the difficulties of managing their estates: at last, striking his hand vpon the table, said,Non vidio quo∣modo qui hunc locumallissimum tenont, salvari possunt. I see not how those that hold this high place of the popedome, can be saued. As if there were a neces∣sity
imposed vpon the pope to be a wicked man, that his place required it, and that otherwise, he could not maintaine his estate. ThisGenebrard. chrono. lib. 4. pag. 753. Marcellus liued, anno 1555. In our Queene Maries time, and dyed the 22 day of his popedome, not without suspition of poyson (as Genebrard saith) because some doubted hee would proue too goodQuod nimb∣um rectus qui∣busdam futurus videretur..Guicci ardin. lib. 16. pag. 586. lat edit. Basil. 1567. Tunc in Pontifice probi∣tas laudatur, cum caeterorum hominum nequi∣tiam non exce∣dit. Guicciardine, describing the dissem∣bling and vnpriestly prankes of pope Leo the tenth (who began his raigne, anno 1513,) saith, he was coun∣ted a good Prince; for then honesty is praised in a pope, when he exceeds not all other men in wicked∣nesse.Sarith. in Po∣licratic. lib. 6. cap. 24. Vsher. de statu & suc. Eccl. cap. 7. § 6. Joannes Sarisburiensis saith, The Church of Rome shewes her selfe Not a Mother, but a stepmother. There sit the Scribes and Pharises, laying heauy burdens on mens shoulders, but touch them not with their least finger. There Iustice, Piety, and Verity are set to sale. They hurt most commonly: and herein they imitate the deuils, which then are thought to doe well, when they cease to doe no hurt: except a few which performe the name and office of Pastors. Yea, euen the Roman Bishop himselfe, is grieuous to all, and almost intollerable. Thus write their owne Authors. Pope Gregory the 7.So saith Onu∣phrius in vita Greg 7. Aven∣tine. Otto Fri∣singensis. Gotfri∣dus Viturbiensis, Trithemius. Sige∣bert, and many other Catho∣licke histori∣ans. See their alle∣gations and words at large in B. Vshers booke. De Ec∣cles. successione & statu. cap. 5. (alias Hildebrand) who liued in the tenth Age, (and began his raigne, anno 1073.) when Sathan was let loose, Reu. 20.7. was the first that set vp the popes earthly kingdome, (instead of Christs Heauenly) and raised it in wealth Maiesty, and autho∣rity aboue all secular Princes and Emperours: which their successors haue continually encreased, mauger the world, mauger the Emperours, and haue brought into subiection both hie and low, terrifying all with their thunders: and embroyling the Christian world, with insurrections, warres, and miserable vexations, setting the subiects against their Princes, sonnes against their fathers, and making the Christian world, worse then the Heathen, a very Shambles of Christian blood. Ve∣ry many (saith Aventine Pleri{que}) cryed out against
Hildebrand, and cursed him, saying, That vnder the Ti∣tle of Christ, he acted the businesse of Antichrist, and o∣uerthrew Peace and Piety; and to hide his execrable ambition, deuised Fables, corrupted Histories, and adul∣terated the very Scriptures, interpreting them falsly to serue his owne affections;Sir Iohn Hay¦ward of Supre∣macy. pag. 61. he made blinde people be∣leeue that it was not sufficient to know and embrace the Catholicke faith vnlesse it were with subiection to the Pope: and that all that fought against the Pope, drew their swords against heauen, and mae offer (like those Giants, of whom the Poets write) to scale the skies, and to pull God out of his throne. And that to fight for the Pope euen against their owne gouernours and naturall Princes (whom the pope iudged to be his enemies) was to fight for the Church and for God, was a meritorious worke, and the most sure vndoubted way to heauen. When this opinion was once planted in euery state, by that opinion any state might be sup∣planted.Hist. of the Councell of Trent. lib 5. pag. 437. It was well obserued by the Chancellor in an Assembly of the States of France, at Orleance: that Re∣ligion is the potent weapon, ouercommeth affctions and charity, and is the surest bond of humane society: that Kingdomes are more bounded, and more diuided by Religion, then by the Confines themselues: that he that is moued with Religion, contemneth wife, chil∣dren, and kinred. This he said of Religion, whether it be true or false. The more potent weapon Religion is, the greater care is to be had that people be instructed in right and true opinions. For where people haue beene rightly instructed, they haue for conscience sake, obeyed their Princes (Rom. 13 5.) and princes haue pre∣uailed against many popes.Sigebert anno 1088. Haec sola nouitas, redicam haresis, nec dum in mundo emer∣serat &c. Vsher ib. c. 5. § 3 But when the popes had setled that strange nouty (or rather intollerable here∣sie) in the hearts of men, that subiects owe no subiecti∣on to euill princes (to wit, whom the popes account eu ll) and though they haue sworne fidelity vnto them, yet they owe none; neither are periured that fight
against the King, but they must be taken for Excom∣municants that doe not sight against him at the popes command: and doing so are absolued from all sinne of iniustice and periury, and doe highly merit at Gods hand: when this (I say) is settled in mens hearts, the popes may vnsettle and ouerthrow what prince and state they list. They neen no other Armies not treasure, while they haue mens consciences at their commands: let them but thunder out their threats and Excommunications of such as disobey them, and set their Agents to publish them and stirre vp the people, and then all subiects will forsake their princes, and serue the pope against them, all Religious persons will be their Trumpters, Captaines and Leaders, all Cloysters, Abbeyes, and Colledges will be as good as Castles vnto them; the promise of heauen, a sufficient pay, and the threatning of death, not onely temporall (which happily might be contemned, or avoyded) but eternall (which by dis∣obeying the pope is thought to be vnauoydable) is terrour enough and all these giue courage enough to doe their bst for the pope against all princes of the world.Sir Iohn Hay∣ward of Supre∣macy, pag. 62. By this meanes eight Emperours (besides other Kings and princes) haue been excommunicate by the pope namely, Fredericke the first, Fredericke the second, Philip, Conrade, Otho the fourth, Lewis of Bauaria, Hen∣ry the fourth and fift, (which was occasion enough for their subiects to revolt, and for other Princes to in∣uade) The succeeding Emperours, partly vnwilling, but principally vnable to sustaine so sad and heauy blowes submitted themselues to the papall power, and renounced the right, which by long custome they clai∣med and held. I omit the troubles of other princes and Nations, and of our owne also in formr times of our Kings Henries and Iohn. Our late troubles in the times, of our most gracious Soueraignes Elizabeth and Iames
are fresh in memory, to the detestation of the Authors thereof: and they are published to the world in their owne bookes. See the booke entituled, Im∣portant Conside∣rations set forth by the Secu∣lar Romish Priests in England, anno 1601. with Watson the Priests Pre∣face or Epistle before it.The secular Priests sticke not to relate to the world, what they cannot hide, the treasons, insurrections, in∣uasions, and other troubles (which I haue reckoned vp before and more also) plotted by the Pope and his A∣gents, to bring Queene Elizabeth and her Kingdomes, to confusion. Pius Quintus his plot (ioyning with the King of Spaine) to depose her by his Bull and execute it by the Northerne Rebellion, 1569. And after, anno 1572. by D. Sanders booke, De visibili Monarchia, iusti∣fying that course, and shewing the world how the pope had sent Morton and Webb, Priests, to stirre vp the Nobles and Gentlemen, to take Armes against the Queene. Then how Stukeley was made a great Lord and Marquesse of Ireland by the pope, to take Jreland from the English, but miscarried by the way: After how Doctor Sanders came furnished by the Pope to take Ireland by Inuasion and Rebellion, and there dyed miserable and mad: After this, how Gregory 13, re∣nued the pestilent Bull of Pius 5, cursing and disabling the Queene to raigne: and anno 1580. sent into Eng∣land, Campian, Parsons, and other Iesuites, to perswade the subiects to execute it, assuring them of a mighty in∣uasion from Spaine to ioyne with them: and how these wicked practises iustly inforced straiter lawes to bee made against such Vipers. For what Prince or state of any force or Mettall could endure their owne ruine to be wrought, with their eyes open, and their hands vnbound? Then followed his Holinesse displaying his banner as a temporall Prince in Ireland, to dispos∣sesse the Queene; and afterwards the Duke of Guises practises to transferre the English Crowne to the Q. of Scotland, imploying therin Mendoza the Spanish Leager Ambassadour, Throgmorton and others. And anno 1583. Arden and Somerviles treason. Then Doctor Parries to
murder the Queene. Againe, Babington and his fellowes treason, discouered anno, 1586. And sir William Stanlies, 1567. and the great Spanish Armado, 1588. Then the Bull of Sixtus Quintus against the Queene. And new Seminaries errected in Spaine by the procurement of Parsons the Iesuite, whence issued 13 accomplished Priests, to infuse Treasons into Englishmens braines, an∣no 1591. to prepare them for a new Inuasion. And anno 1592. Heskot was sent by the Iesuites to stirre the Earle of Darby to Rebellion. After this, Father Holt a Iesuite, perswaded Patricke Colen to murder her Maie∣stie. And anno 1593. Doctor Lopus his poysoning plot was discouered: also Holt the Iesuite, animated Yorke and Williams to shed her blood: and Walpool the Ie∣suite, set on Edward Squire to poyson her saddle Pom∣mell. After this, for the other intended Inuasion, the Spanish Fleet put twice to Sea, and both times were sea beaten, torne, and dispersed. Meane-season, Father Parsons in printed bookes, entituled, The Jnfanta of Spaine to the Crowne of England, and vsed all possible meanes to make it take place. All these vncatholicke, vnchristian, inhumane courses the secular Priests con∣fesse, condemne and lament, laying all the fault thereof from themselues and other Roman Catholckes, vpon the Iesuites. We doe all acknowledge (say they) that by our lear∣ning, Ecclesiasticall persons by vertue of their Calling,Important con∣sid pag. 37. are only to meddle with Praying Preach ng and admi∣nistring the Sacraments, and such other like spirituall functions: and not to study how to murder Princes, nor to licitate Kingdomes,Jb. pag 38. nor to intrude themselues into matter of state-Priests of what order soeuer ought not by force of Armes to plant or water the Catholicke Faith, but In spiritu lenitatis & mansuetudinis, to propa∣gate and defend it. So it was in the Primitiue Church ouer all the world. The ancient Christians, though they had sufficient forces, did not oppose themselues in
armes against their Lords,Ib. pag. 39. See the Epi∣stle Dedicato∣ry of B. Carl∣ton, before his booke of Iu∣risdiction. the Emperors, though of a∣nother Religion.— The Catholicke Faith for her sta∣bility and continuance hath no need of any treachery or Rebellion it is more dishonoured with treasons and wicked policies of carnall men, then any way furthered or aduanced. Thus the Priests giuing vs a good hint, what to iudge of their Religion that hath euermore beene thus planted and propagated. It is not the Catholik Faith and Religion of the Ancients. But er∣roneous superstition is alwayes more violent then true Religion. They giue vs an Item also, what our English Roman Catholiks may looke for, if the Spaniard should preuaile. Watson in his Epistle to the Important Con∣siderations, saith: The old King of Spaine aimed at the Crown of England, with the death of her Maiestie, and subuersion of the State, and the vtter ruine of the whole Ile, and the ancient Inhabitants thereof; and neuer once shewed any care or respect that he had to the re∣storing of the Catholik Romish Faith amongst the Eng∣lish. Nay his direct course was taken quite contrary, still to extirpate the name of all Catholikes (that were English) out from the face of the earth. Therefore he would not aid Stukeley to get Ireland for the pope: and also charged the Duke of Medina (his generall in 88) rather to spare Protestants then Catholikes. And the Booke of important Considerations written by them∣selues pag. 25. saith: It is well knowne, that the Duke of Medina Sidonia had giuen it out directly, that if once he might land in England, both Catholikes and Heretiks that came in his way should be all one to him: his sword could not discerne them, so he might make way for his Master, all was one to him. How vnlike are the Romish Religions of this age to the Ancients! As the pure Primitiue vncorrupt Religion was the greatest blessing both to Prince and subiects: so this corrupt, ambitious and turbulent visor of Religion hath beene an vntollerable scourge and
Plague vnto them, meanes more likely to make Religi∣on stinke in the nostrils of men, then to make it sweet and comfortable vnto them. All these vnatholike courses, (I grant) the secular Priests lay vpon the Iesuites as if all other Papist were cleare of them. Which is nor so. 1 For who were in the fault n the troubls of the German Emperours and o∣ther Kings before there wre any Iesuites in the worl? (whose first beginning was little abue an hundred yeares agone, and their ploting Statizations within halfe that time.) 2 Secondly, all Papists in common (seculars not ex∣cepted) hold the Apostolicke power, and necssity of obeying it. Quodliet, 8. art 9 ag. 277. 3 The secuars often bewray it in their writings, though somewhat couertly, because the times fit not so well to vtter their mindes plainely. See Watsons Quod∣lib. i 9 art. 3. pag. 293 & art. 5 pag. 306. & quodl. 8. art. 6. pag 243. 4 They also submit themselues and all their wri∣tings yea euery word and tttle to the censure of the Roman Church: as Quodl 8. art. 8. pag. 267, & 361. & 362. and Important Considerations pag. 3 in the Post∣script. 5 The seculars sometimes plainly confsse it Jmp Con. pg. 15 (hauing spoken of diuers attempts of the pope and Spniard in England and Ireland, to depriue Queene Elizabeth of her Crowne) they say plainely, in all these plots none were more forward then many of vs that wer priests; adding that if they the prists had oppo∣sed those designments, the Laity would haue beene o∣uer-ruld by them. 6 Beyond all this, Watson himselfe, a secular priest, (who had set forth the said Important Considerations, with a flourishing Epistle before as also the Qodlibets, &c. to cleare the secular priests from all treasons & euil practises) became himselfe a Traitor, and a Ringleader
of diuers others in the beginning of King Iames his raigne: for which he and Clarke his fellow were exe∣cuted, and the Traitor Ballard 1586, was a secular priest. And many secular priests were in the Spanish army against England, anno 88 as saith the Quodlibet 8. art. 7. Doctor Sanders, Morton and Webb, were secular priests. So that howsoeuer they would excuse themselues, and lay all vpon the Iesuites: it i certaine that all per∣fect papists are conscious or guilty in heart, and many of them in action of these courses vntollerable to the Church and State. Isaacus Cosaubo∣nus. pist. dedic. ad bum Re∣gem. praefix. Ex∣cercitatn Ba∣ronium.But concerning the corruptions of the Church, both in doctrine and practises, and our happy Reformation thereof; I present the Reader with the substance of a worthy discourse of learned Casaubon. Who, after hee hath shewed that neither Truth nor Christians. nor Christ himselfe (the Way, the Truth, and the Life) euer wanted enemies: and that amongst those enemies, two troopes haue euer beene most infest and most in∣fectious, Nonatores & Veteratores, the Introducers of new Doctrines, and they that vnder colour of (forged) antiquity, oppugne the true antiquity (as some oppug∣ned the most ancient true worship of the true God, to maintaine old Gentilisme, the worship of Idols:) he pro∣ceedeth to shew the old enemy of mankinde, seeing himselfe shut out of the gates, crept in at the backore, into the Christian Church, and not being able to hin∣der the sowing of good seed he secretly sowed Tares a∣mongst it: as in our Europe (the Westerne part of the world) the worship due to God alone, to be many waies giuen to creatures; Ceremonies, (vnder whose bur∣den the Church groaned in Saint Augustines time,) wonderfully encreased, drawing men from the sub∣stance of Religion to place all their hope of saluation in obseruing them: from whence grow the worship of sacred Reliques beyond custome and due measure: the
trust in the aide of Saints, and the carefull inuocation of them: the worship and adoration of Images, (which we see at this day increased) which nouelty, when it was first brought in, set the East and West at jarres and warres, and droue the Emperour out of Italy. Thence came also new idle worships deuised by mans brain, and new rites of new superstition: and the better to keepe the world from mistrusting or misliking such Innoua∣tions the holy Scriptures were (by the vncredible fraud of Sathan) withheld not onely from the Laity, but from the greatest part of the Clergy. And to top vp all these euils was introduced a terri∣ble domination of one man. The seat of Rome, which before thought it sufficient to bee accounted the first among the Patriarkes seates; now would bee the Lady and Mistresse of the whole Church. And when her Bishop had lifted vp her power in spiritu∣all things to the highest top: not content with that height, set his heart also to bring all temporall power vnder him: and would neuer be quiet, till hee saw himselfe lifted aboue Emperours, Kings and prin∣ces, and looked vpon them as persons farre beneath him, vpon whom he might tread with his feet, as oft as he list, or iudged expedient for his affaires. Thus the light of the Gospell was turned into darknesse; the golden simplicity of true piety into innumerable super∣stitions; Christian liberty into horrible seruitude; the Rights of the Church, together with the Crownes of Emperours and Kings made subiect to that Monarches Miter, who challenged to himselfe alone the power to giue and take away Empires and Kingdomes. Which he practised by bringing in all kinde of calamities, wars and vexations; wherewith Europe was so often and mightily shaken wh le the truth lay hid, euery where neglected, and deepely ouerwhelmed, drowned and bu∣ried. Thus Gasaubon of the former times:III. Then hee pro∣ceedeth
to the times of Reformation.The great blessings of the Reformation of Religion. After a long suf∣fering (saith he) of vnspeakeable euils: after long sigh∣ings and gronings of Emperours, Princes, Clergy, and Laity: after much expectation of many Ages for refor∣mation in the head and members, often promised, ne∣uer performed: At last there were some found, which brake the patience; and shewed themselues leaders to them that sought the truth from their hearts. What they were, or what infirmities they had, it mattereth not to argue. (Malice neuer speakes well of the best and most innocent.) This is certaine by the very euent, that they (as men stirred vp by God) awaked and row∣zed vp the world to looke into the corruptions of Christian Religion (which long-time had brought in) and to thinke of the grieuances and complaints, which both Princes and people throughout Europe had shew∣ed. And if then the Bishop of Rome had carried the mind to suffer himselfe to be ouercome with the entreaties & prayers publke or priuate of the Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Nations, and of the whole Church: their hopes should not haue beene so often deluded, who sought and promised to themselues at least some tolle∣rable reformation from him: neither should there haue beene such a Rent among the Churches of Europe, when euery Nation (seeing Rome would doe nothing) was constrained to looke to it selfe, and make, if not a per∣fect reformation yet as good as it could: and as neere to the Word of God, and the custome of the Primitiue Church, as time and meanes would afford. For, if it be obiected, that the intended Reformation is not perfect, as appeareth by the differences of some Reformed Churches: yet surely first th Reformers mindes were good, who with all their hearts and endeuours sought it: and secondly, the coniunction of all Nations, Wits, Learning, and other meanes, by a free generall Councell (which might ouer-rule the Pope, and all other parti∣culars)
was onely hindred by the Pope and his Faction. But 3 surely, the Reformation was most laudable and necessary, if it had effected no more but this (as one of them wrote in answere to Cardinalll Sadolet) that they freed themselues from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome; and had constituted in their Countries some∣what better forme of the Church, which before was most vntollerable both to Princes, and People. Such a Reformation as many former Ages had with gree∣uous sighes and grones, wished and desired, hungred and thirsted after: but all in vaine, because the truth in Europe had not yet shined out of darknesse; of which our Sauiour had said, ye shall know the truth,Ioh. 8.32 and the truth shall set you free— Therefore 1 Our late Princes, 2 all the orders of the Kingdome, and 3 all the people, haue seene and felt the goodnesse of God, and are, bound to be most thankfull to him (except they be of all men the most insensible and vngratefull) for their great blessing following the Reformation of Religion in Eng∣land. 1 The Princes, that they reigne now in their  owne right; they are not the liege-men, and Vassals of the Pope, that haue not their kingdome, Precariò, at the pleasure of another, as Bayliffes of another mans in∣heritance: that they and their Reuerend Clergy are at vnity, neither fearing excommunications nor deposi∣tions from other: that they diuide the care of placing Ministers with their Bishops, challenging to them∣selues without feare that part which is due to them and concerneth the temporalls; and leauing that part of the care to the Bishops, which toucheth spirituals: and all things which proue them to be true Kings. For this blessing, Kings are behoulden to Gods truth, which is a friend to them, which establisheth them, and is with all care and diligence by them to be established. Alas for those former times,Inas. See Poly∣dor. hist. Angl. lib. 5. pag. 86. wherein amongst our Kings glorious Ancestors, one led away with blinde superstition, hauing zeale, but not according to know∣ledge,
did of his owne accord when no necessity com∣pelled him, make his Kingdome tributary to Gregory the third,King Iohn. Bishop of Rome. Another brought into de∣speration by aduerse crosses, yeelded vp his Kingdome of England and Ireland to Pope Innocent 3. By whom he had bene miserably embroyled, and was compelled to be content to be the Popes steward or Baily. O horrid blindnesse of those times! O sucessors of Peter, egre∣giously resembling Peter in their doings! O what a griefe surprized not onely the Barons, Nobles, and all subjects of the Realme, but also the Kings and Princes throughout Europe, as euery one was more wise and better then other, to see the fall so heauy, so foule, of so great a Prince! The speaches which some of them vttered at the newes of so inhumane example, are com∣mitted to writing for perpetuall memory, as witnesses also of their most iust both indignation and amazement. Yea the speach of that vnfortunate King is extant in the writers of those times, most worthy to be deeply setled in all Princes hearts: After that I was reconciled to God (saith hee) and subjected my selfe and my King∣domes (alas for sorrow) to the Roman Church nothing came to me prosperous. But al things contrary. Post quā, ut dixi, Deo reconciliatus, me ac mea regna, proh dolor; Ro∣mana subjeci ecclesiae, nulla mihi prospera, sed contraria om∣nia aduenerunt. 2 The Clergy and people of England liue happily. The Bishops elect neede not run beyond the Alpes to buy their confirmation of the Pope for great summes of money; nor purchase their Palles with the waight of gold; nor run to Rome euery 3 yeares, or as oft as the Pope list, that is, as oft as he thirsteth after English coyne. Now they haue no such care, as in times past the Bishops of England had, to take vp the best benefices for Italians [In which benefices (as Mathy Paris saith) neither lawes nor order were kept, nor releefe for the poore, nor hospitality, nor preaching of Gods
word, nor necessary ornaments or repair of Churches, nor care of soules, nor diuine or deuout prayers, as was fit, and as was accustomed in the country: but in their buildings the walles and roofes fell downe, or were pitifully rent and torne] Now the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury feareth not new Bulles from the Pope to suspend him from colla∣ting any benefices vntil 300 Romans be prouided for, by benefices next falling void: as it fell out anno 1239 to Edmund the Archbishop by Buls sent from Gregory 9. The Pope hauing promised it to the Roman citizens, who at that time little fauored him. 3 The Ecclesiasticall controuersies arising in England, by a very ancient Canon (wherof S. Cyprian also maketh  mention) are determined in England: The collectors of Peter pence, and other contributions, the Roman visitors, proctors, and farmers, the Marchants of Indulgences or pardons to men according to their wealth, the dispencers of vowes, and Institors, of legiti∣mation to make men capable of orders; the Caursine Vsurers, that liued at Rome, but drew thither all the wealth of England, (lending to English Nobles & others vpon morgage of their lands or other extreme vsuries, money to satisfy the Pope and his Harpies): The bringers of Buls for new extortions. The witty Mice-catchers (Muscipulatores as the Story cals them) such as Petrus Rubeus and many others, conning Artificers to drain money from men for the Pope: and sixe hun∣dred such like greedy and greeuous Arts; by the vn∣vtterable benefit of the truth of Religion, their names are now scarse heard of, and should be vtterly vn∣knowne, were it not for the monuments and histories of former ages, Neither doth now any Legat à latere, any messenger from the Popes side, exercise any Rauin for money in England, as many did heretofore, and some with execra∣ble hunger of gold, as we read of one of them. Otto,
sent by Gregory 9, who after three yeeres raking toge∣ther of money, by most detestable Artes, at last depar∣ting hence, left not so much money in the whole King∣dome, as he either carried with him, or sent to Rome before him. And yet these euils are small in compari∣son of others which Englishmen haue felt continually for many Ages from the Court of Rome, as the Histori∣ans of those times, with full consent record. Verè e∣nim hortus deliciarum Papis fuit tum Anglia, & puteus inexhaustus; As we reade it was truly and trmly said by Pope Jnnocent 4. England was a Garden of delici∣ousnesse to the Popes, and a fountaine inexhaust or vn∣drainable. I speake not now of the true blessings of the soule, for which all men may thanke the Reformation of Re∣ligion, which pious Princes make more account of, then of all the Kingdomes of the earth. The sincere worship of God alone, without fellowes or copartners; The veneration of the B. Virgin, and holy Saints, with∣out superstition: The peace of conscience with God, by faith in the merits and death of Christ: not that the faithfull should cease from good works: (fie! away with such madnes,) but that when a man hath doneall he can do, yet to acknowledge himself an vnprofitable seruant, and neuer place confidence in his owne merits: to ga∣ther exceeding great comfort in the daily and continual reading and meditating of the Scriptures; not in∣terpreting them after his own sense, but in those things which he finds in them perspicuous and plaine, (for in such sort they afford vs, if we beleeue the Fathers, all things necessary to saluation) and such as are agreeable to the expositions of the first Doctors of the Church, he may sortisie his minde against false opinions, which at this day are obtruded vpon the vnwary for ancient articles of faith: The receiuing of the holy Commu∣nion, according to the institution and commandement of our Lord, and the continuall practise of the Chuch
for more then a thousand yeeres, vnder both kinde: Mindes confirmed against those thunders of Excom∣munication, so terrible in former times; which the Popes cast abroad oftentimes against innocent Princes, and rather for humane causes then Diuine, as euery man knoweth. As when Innocent 3 kept all the people of this Land, vnder a curse most deadly and damnable (as the Popes would haue men beleeue, and then it was so beleeued) whole sixe yeeres, three moneths, and four∣teene dayes. In which time all that dyed in the Land, were depriued of buriall, and iudged to bee damned creatures, all new borne remained vnbaptized, prayers and teaching ceased in all Churches and men liued like Infidels. In so large a land, so plentifull of people, to continue this curse but for one day vpon so many thou∣sands of Innocents, had been doubtlesse a most wicked and damnable thing. But from all these euils, and ma∣ny other, the blessed Reformation of that formerly cor∣rupted Religion, hath redeemed vs. Such things writes the learned and iudicious Casaubon. And as the Reformation deliuered vs frō many euils, so it hath filled vs with many blessings, which we daily feele in full measure, but are not able in any sufficient measure to expresse. Take a short view of our blessings enioyed vnder our late Princes.Cambden An∣nales Elizabe∣thae, initio, & B. Carltons Thankfull Re∣membrance, initio. Queene Elizabeth en∣tring her raigne, anno 1558, found at first many potent enemies, few and impotent friends. Philip King of Spaine, (who sued to marry her by a dispensation from the Pope, hauing buried Mary her sister, his former wife) now being refused by her, turned his loue into ha∣tred. Henry 2, King of France, with whom she sought peace and amity, brake out into open hostility. His sonne Francis hauing married Mary the Queene of Scotland, professed his Wife to be the heire of England, assumed the Armes and Title thereof, and sought to dis∣place Elizabeth, as one also accounted an Hereticke. So were the great neighbour-States of Spaine, France and
Scotland, her professed enemies. Her Friends that would haue hped her, were weake, and could not, but stood in need of helpe from her. The Scots sore trou∣bled with the French Armies procured by the Guisians: The Low-Countries beaten down by the Duke of Alva, Agent for the King of Spaine: The Protestants of Den∣marke and France, were faine to craue aide from Her, as also other friends did. The State at home was much troubled; the treasure exhausted, and oppressed with great debt, contracted by King Henries boundlesse ex∣pences, King Edwards minority, and Queene Maries forraigne marriage and other troubles: the land with∣out strength, forces, souldiers, artillery, powder, and treasure: Calis lately lost, and nothing seemed lef but a weake and poore State, destitute of meanes and friends. So that her great neare Neighbours round a∣bout her, made no other account of her, but as one left to be a prey to the strongest that would inuade her. Yet see the mighty hand and blessing of God vpon her, not onely to deliuer her out of all these difficulties; but further to enable her to support her friends, and to match and master her enemies. When shee prouided Armour at Antwerpe, and King Philip caused it to bee stayed; yet she partly procured Armour and Weapons out of Germany, but principally God opened new Brasse Mines in England, (which had been long before neglected) sufficient for vs, and to vent into other Countries: and yeelded vs then first the stone called Lapis calaminaris, needfull for working in Brasse. By meanes whereof, She caused store of Gunnes to be cast of Brasse and Iron at home: and Gunpowder also then first to be made in England, which before was bought from other Countries. Camden ibid. pag 27.And further, By the happy abolishing of the Popes Religion, as England became the most free of all other Countries in the world, the Scepter being (as it were) manumitted from the former seruitude of the Bishop
of Rome, so it became also more rich then in former A∣ges: a great masse of money being kept at home, which formerly was exhausted, and yearely and daily carried to Rome, for first fruits, Indulgences, appeales, dispensations, Palles, & such other things. Strengthned therefore by all these blessings, She fortified Barwicke against Scotland; and prouided a great Nauy to safe∣guard the Sea-coasts. And whereas former Kings hy∣red ships from forraigne places, (Hamburg, Lubecke, Dantiske, Genua, Venice, &c.) Now She built great store of ships of Warre Herselfe; and all Coast-townes with incredible alacrity, wondring at her wisedome and care of them, did the like. So that in short time England was able to employ twenty thousand men in Sea-fight at once. And her enemies began to feare her, more then she did them. And such was her power and policy,See Speedes Chronicle in Elizabeth § 347. & seq. and Gods extraordinary blessings vpon them, that the great affaires of Europe mainly depen∣ded vpon Her directions. She sitting at the helme of the ship, (as Fronto spake of Antonius the Emperour) arbitrated and guided their estates both in peace and warre. Spaine seeking to ouerflow all, was beaten backe, and scarcely able to maintaine her owne Barkes: In France, the house of Valoys vnderpropped by Her coun∣sell; that of Bourbons aduanced by her countenance, forces and treasure; Scotland releeued by her loue, Ne∣therlands by her power, Portugals King by Her bounty; Poland by her commiseration; likewise Germany, Den∣marke, Sweueland, often tooke vp and laid down Armes at her becke and dispose. The great Emperour of the Turkes, in honour of so great a Mediatresse, granted peace vnto the Polonians, outworne with warres. Her Kingdome was a receptacle, and her Court a Sanctuary for the banished Protestants, as was the Palace of Con∣stantius (the Husband of our Helena) for the persecuted Christians, when he sate Emperour of the West, in this Iland of Britaine. Whereby, as in her life-time, sh at∣tained
to be stiled by forraigne Churches; so at Her death was she by them generally lamented, as the Nur∣sing Mother of the French,Beza in ep. pra∣fiu. Comment. in Iob. Dutch, Italian, Exiles for Christs Name, and the vnconquered Defendresse of the whole Christian Religion. Thus our Land became as Gods Paradise, his Eden, his blessed Garden, replenished with all necessaries both for sufficiency and delight. Aboue all, the Tree of Knowledge, and the Tree of Life, are planted plentifully in it; and all men permitted, perswaded, commanded to seed on them, the Knowledge of God, and the Bread of Life: and all other blessings consequent and appen∣dant vnto them. Whereof our feeling and experience out-strippeth all possible words and discourses. I will therefore shut vp all with the Royall testimony of our late most Learned and Iudicious King Iames.King Iames to the Reader of his asilicon Doron. towards the end. First, of Queene Elizabeth he writeth thus: She hath so long, with so great wisedome and felicity gouerned her Kingdomes, as I must in true sincerity confesse, the like hath not beene read or heard of, either in our time, or since the dayes of the Roman Emperour Augustus. And he caused this Epitaph to be set vpon her Tombe.Speeds Chron. quo supra. Sacred vnto memory. Religion to its Primitiue sin∣cerity, restored: Peace throughly settled: France neere ruine by intestine mischiefes, releeued: Netherland sup∣ported: Spaines Armado vanquished: Ireland with Spaniards expulsion, and Traitors coertion, quieted: both Vniuersities reuenues by a Law of prouision ex∣cellently augmented, finally all England enriched; and 45 yeeres most prudently gouerned; Elizabeth, a Queene, a Conqueresse, a Triumpher, the most deuoted to Piety, the most Happy, after 70 yeeres of Her life, quietly by death departing, hath left here (in this most famous Collegiat Church, wch by her was established, and refounded) these Remaines of her mortality, vntill at Christs call, they shall againe rise Immortall. She dy∣ed 24 March, 160. of her Raigne 45, of her Age 70.
Secondly of himselfe, his owne times, and King∣domes, he writeth thus: One thing is necessary,King Iames in his answer to the Oration of Cardinall Perene. pag. 243. namely the feare and know∣ledge of my God: vnto whose Majesty alone I haue deuoted my scepter, my sword, my penne, my whole industry, my whole selfe, with all that is mine, in whole and in part. I do it, I do it in all humble acknow∣ledgement of his vnspeakable mercy and sauour, who hath vouchsafed to deliuer mee from the erroneous way of this age, to deliuer my Kingdome from the Popes tirannicall yoke, vnder which it hath Fen in times past most greeuously oppressed. My Kingdome, where God is now purely serued, and called vpon in a tongue which all the vulgar vnderstand. My King∣dome, where the People may now read the Scriptures, without any speciall priuiledge from the Apostolike sea, and with no lesse liberty then the people of Ephesus, of Rome, and of Corinth did read the holy Epistles written to their Churches by Saint Paul. My King∣dome, where the people now pay no longer any tribute by the poll for Papall indulgences, as they did about an hundred yeares past; and are no longer compelled to the Mart, for pardons beyond the Seas and moun∣taines: but haue them now freely offred from God by the Doctrine of the Gospell preached at home, within their owne seuerall parishes and Iurisdictions. And in another place he saith thus:Ibid. pag. 274. Greater blessings of God, greater outward peace and plenty, greater in∣ward peace, with spiritual and celestiall pleasures were neuer heaped vpon my Great Britaine, then haue beene since my Great Britaine became great in the greatest & chiefest respect of all; to wit, since my Great Britaine hath shaken of the Popes yoake; since she hath refused to receiue and to entertaine the Popes Legates, em∣ployed to collect Saint Peters tribute, or Peter pence; since the Kings of England, my Great Britaine, haue not beene the Popes Vassals, to doe him Homage for
their Crown, and haue no more felt the lashings, the scourgings, of base, and beggarly Monkes. Of Holland, Zeland, & Friesland, what need I speake? Yet a word and no more. Were they not a kinde of naked and bare people, of small valew, before God lighted the torch of the Gospell, and aduanced it in those Nations? were they not an ill-fed and scragged people, in comparison of the inestimable wealth and prosperity (both in all military actions, and mechanicall trades, in traffick as Marchants, in marting as men of warre, in long nauigation for discouery) to which they are now raised and mounted by the mercifull bleing of God, since the darknesse of Popery hath beene scattered, and the bright Sunshine of the Gospell hath shined in those Countries? Behold the Venetian Re∣publik: hath she now lesse beauty, lesse glory, lesse peace and prosperity, since she hath lately fell to bicker and contend with the Pope? since she hath wrung out of the Popes hand the one of his two swords? since she hath plumed and shaken his temporall domini∣on? Vpon these considerations, I. Of the excellency of the first primitiue Christian Religion: II. Of the in∣tollerable euils which the corruptions of Rome brought into the world, with the grones and cries of men for Reformation: and III. of the great blessings which the Reformation hath brought vpon the countries which receiued it; Mee thinkes there should need no further perswasion to men of any reasonable vnder∣standing and Iudgement, to forsake the vncatholike corruptions of the Romish Church, and imbrace this so blessed a Reformation, with all due thankfulnesse to God, for the true doctrine of Saluation, and peace of Conscience, with the desired peace of their estates, loue of Prince and Country, wealth, ioy, and happinesse, and all both earthly and heauenly blessings, that mans heart in this world can desire.
O fortunates nimium, bona si sua norint Angligenas! O happy English, if they knew their happinesse. But if they will not open their eyes to see, nor their hearts thankfully to imbrace the happinesse so gracious∣ly offered vnto them: if they will still blinde their eyes, harden their obstinate hearts, and striue against all rea∣son and Religion to returne backe into the Egyptian darkenesse and bondage: alas, what can I doe? but with greife of heart say with the Prophet Ieremy,Ieremy 2.12, 13. Bee astonished, O yee heauens at this: My people haue com∣mitted two euils, they haue forsaken me the fountaine of li∣uing waters, and hewed themselues out Cesternes, broken Cesternes that can hold no water! Or with the Poet Ho∣race, Eia, Nolint, at qui licet esse beatis. They may,Horace Serm. lib. 1. Satyra. 1. but will not be happy. For, be a man neuer so happy, Non est beatus, esse se qui non putat He is not happy that thinkes himselfe not so. And then (as Horace addes) Miseros iubeo esse libenter. I can but bid them wil∣fully be wretched. But in hope of better successe, I haue vndertaken this great labour; which I beseech our gracious God to blesse, to the good of euery Reader; whose good acceptance of my loue and paines, I craue, with their prayers to God for me. Glory be to God on high, on earth Peace, and good will amongst men. Luke 2.14. FINIS.
