7213 20212127 23805
THE OWLE By Michaell Drayton Esquire. Noctuas Athenas. PRVDENS NON LOQVAX LONDON Printed by E. A. for E. VVhite and N. Ling. and are to solde neere the little north doore of S. Paules Church, at the signc of the Gun. 1604.
TO THE WORTHY AND MY MOST ESTEEMED Patron Sir VValter Aston, Knight of the Honorable Order of the BATH FOr the shril Trumpet and sterne Tragick sounds, Objects out-ragious and so full of feare; Our Pen late steep'd in English Barons wounds, Sent war-like accents to your tune-full eare. Our actiue Muse to gentler Morals dight; Her slight conceits, in humbled tunes doth sing; And with the Bird (regardlesse of the light) Slowely doth moue her late high-mounting wing. The wreathe is Iuye that ingirts our browes, Where-in this Nights-Bird harboreth all the day: We dare not looke at other Crowning boughes, But leaue the Lawrell vnto them that may. Lowe as the earth, though our Inuention moue: High yet as heauen (to you) our spotles loue. Michaell Drayton.
To the Reader. REader, I thinke it not amisse breefely to let thee know, that a yeere is almost now past, since this small Poeme was lastly fini∣shed: At which time (it gaue place by my inforcement) vndertak∣ing then in the generall joye of the Kingdome, and my zeale to his Highnesse, to write his Majesties descent in a Poeme gratulatorie. And now, for that this subject may (perhapes) seeme idle and worthlesse: I might this answere (to him that will see in reading, or read with vnderstanding) that the greatest maisters in this Arte (though my selfe, not for any affectation of singularitie) haue writ∣ten vpon as sleight matter. As the Princes of the Greckes and La∣tines, the first of the Frogges warre, the latter of a poore Gnatte: and VIDA verie wittilie of the Chest-playe and Silke-worme. Besides many other that I could recite of the like kinde. By how much immateriall, so much the more difficult to handle with any encommiastick defence, or passionate comparison, (as their strong testimonie) who can giue vertue her due, and by the powrefulnes of witte, maintaine vice not viciously. Some other likewise in a para∣doxicall manner, as ISOCRATES Oration in prayse of HELLEN whom al the world dispray seth: AGRIPPA'S declamation vponthe vanitie of the Sciences, which knowledge, all the world admireth. Thus leauing thee fauorablie to censure of my poore labours, I ende. M. DR.
In Noctuam Draytoni. QVae noua Lemniacas deturbant tela Volucres? Quis furor aligero perstringit corpore Graios Transfixo, proceres? Posita Paeantius irâ Contulit Herculeas ad Troïca fata pharetras. Fallimur? an puro tonuit pater altus Olympo? Aut tremuit sonitu Phoebaej Caelifer arcus? Novimus augurium: tanto Deus ille tumultu Sacrorum exagitat mortalia pectora vatum. Hinc furor in syluas Draytouum mittit: oberrat Hinc saltus nullo signatos tramite Musa: Hinc & in aëriam libratur machina gentem: Quae ferit immemores (iterato verbere) reges: Proterit & Vulgus (audaci more) profanum. Eia, age: dum crebrò fugiat tremebundus abictu Immitis seruus vitij, dece dat aboris Anglorum longè: lustratis lampade sancta Cujus conjuncti exultant fulgore Britanni. A. GRENEVVAI.
THE OVVLE WHat time the Sunne by his all-quickning power, Giues life and birth to euery plant and flower, The strength and feruor of whose pregnant ray, Buds euery branche and blossomes euery spray; As the frim sap the yeerly course assyg'nde From the full roote, doth swell the plenteous rynde, The vitall spirits long nourisht at the hart, Flye with fresh fier, to each exterior parte: Which stirres desire in hot and youthfull bloods; To breath their deare thoughts to the listning woods. With those light flocks the garish fieldes frequent, This frolick season luckylie I went, And as the rest did, did I franckly too, Least is he marck'd, that doth as most men doo. But whether by some casuall defect, All Flowers alike the time did not respect: Some whose new rootes ne're saw a former May, Floorish now faire, those withered quite away, Into my thoughts that incidently brings Th' inconstant passage of all worldly things.
The rarest worke whereat wee wonder long, Obscur'd by time that enuie could not wrong. And what in life can mortall men desier, That scarsly comm'n, but quickly doth retier? The Monarchies had time to grow to head, And at the height their conquered howers fled: And by their wane those latter kingdomes rose, That had their age to winne their howers to lose, Which with much sorrow brought into my minde Their wretched soules so ignorantly blinde, (When euen the great'st things in the world vnstable) Clyme but to fall, and damned for a bable. Whil'st thus my thoughts were strongly entertain'd The greatest lampe of heauen his height had gayn'd; Seeking some shade might lend content to me, Loe neere at hand I spy'd a goodly tree; Vnder the'xtenture of whose lordly armes, The small Birds warbled their harmonious charmes Where sitting downe to coole the burning heate, Through the moist pores euap'rating by sweate, Yeelding my pleas'd thought to content (by chance) Vpon a suddaine drop't into a trance, Wherein me thought some God or power deuine Did my cleere knowledge wondrously refine. For that amongst those sundry varying notes, Which the Birds sent from their Melodious throats
Each Siluan sound I truely vnderstood, Become a perfect Linguist of the Wood: Their flight, their song, and euery other signe, By which the world did anciently deuine, As the old Tuskans in that skill profound, Which first great Car, and wise Tyresias found,Diuina∣tiō by Birds. To me bequeath'd their knowledge, to discry The depth and secrets of their Augury. One I could heare appoynting with his sweeting, A place conuenient for their secret meeting, Others, when Winter shortly should declyne, How they would couple at Saint Valentine.The tim when Birds Couple. Some other Birds that of their Loues for saken, To the close desarts had themselues betaken, And in the darke Groaues where they made aboad, Sang many a sad and mournefull Palinod. And euery Bird shew'd in his proper kinde, What vertue, nature had to him assignde. The pretty Turtle, and the kissing Doue, Their faiths in Wedlock, and chast nuptiall Loue: The Hens (to women) sanctitie expresse, Hallowing their egges: the Swallow clenlinesse, Sweeting hir nest, and purging it of dong And euery hower is pickiug ofhir yong. The Herne, by soaring shewes tempestuous showers, The princely Cocke bistinguisheth the howers.
The Kite his traine him guiding in the aire, Prescribes the helme, instructing how to stere. The Crane to labour, fearing some rough slawe, With sand and grauell burthening his crawe: Noted by man, which by the same did finde To ballast shippes for steddines in winde. And by the forme and order in his flight, To march in warre, and taught to watch by night. The first of house that ere did groundsell lay, Which then was homely of rude lome and clay Learn'd of the Martin: Philomel in spring, Teaching by art her little one to singe; By whose cleere voyce sweet musicke first was found, Before Amphyon euer knew a sound. Couering with Mosse the deads vnclosed eye: The little Red-breast teacheth charitye. So many that in sundry things excell, Time scarse could serue their properties to tell. I cannot iudge if it the place should bee, That should present this pretty dreame to mee, That neare the Eaues and shelter of a stacke (Set to support it) at a Beeches backe In a stub'd Ttee with Iuy ouer-growne, On whom the sunne had scarsly euer shone: A broade-Fac'd Ceature, hanging of the wing, Was set to sleepe whil'st euery Bird did sing.
His drowsy head still leaning on his brest, For all the sweet tunes Philomel exprest: Noe signe of ioy did in his lookes appeere, Or euer mou'd his melancholy cheere. Ascallaphus that brought into my hed, In Ouids changes Metamorphised,Ascalla∣phus in Bubonē Or very like: but him I read aright, Solemne of lookes as he was slowe of sight; And to assure me that it was the same; The Birds about him strangely woundring came. Fye, quoth the Lennet tripping on the spray; Rowse thee thou sluggish Bird this mirthfull May, For shame come forth and leaue thy Luskye nest, And haunt these Forrests brauely as the best. Take thy delight in yonder goodly Tree, Where the sweet Merle and warbling Mauis bee. Next, quoth the Titmouse which at hand did sit, Shake off this moody melancholly fit. See the small brooks as through these groues they trauell Sporting for ioy vpon the Siluer grauell, Mocke the sweet notes the neighboring Siluans sing With the smooth cadence of their murmuring. Each Bee with Hony laden to the thye, From Palme to Palme (as carelesly they flye) Catch the soft winde, and him his course bereaues, To stay and dally with th'inamored leaues.
This while the Owle, which well himselfe could beare, That to their short speech lent a listning eare: Begins at length to rowse him in the Beech, And to the rest thus frames his reuerend speech. O all you feathered Quiresters of nature, That mighty power distinguish'd euery creature; Gaue seuerall vses vnto euery one: As seuerall seedes, or things that liue vpon; Some as the Larke that takes delight to build, Farre from resort amid the Vastie field. The Pellican in desarts farre abrode, Her deare-lou'd issue safely doth vnload. The Sparrowe and the Robinet agen, To liue neare to the Mansion place of men; And nature wisely which hath each thing taught, This Place best fitting my content fore-thought, Though not presuming in the statly Trees, Yet where fore-sight lesse threatning danger sees, The tempest thrilling from the troubled ayre, Strikes not the shrub the place of my repayre. The Fowlers snares in Ambush neuer lay'd T'intrap my steps which often you betrayd. A silent sleepe my gentle fellow Birds, By day, a calme of sweet content affords; By night I tower the heauen deuoy'd of feare, Nor dread the Griphon to surprise me theare.
And into many a secret place I peep, And see strange things whilst you securelye sleep. Wonder not Birds although my heauie eies, By daie seeme dim to see those vanities. Happie's that sight the secret'st thinges can spye, By seeming blinde vnto communitie; And blest are they that to their owne content, See that by night that some by day repent.Caelius. Secure vi dit qui dum om∣nia nouit opinionē tamen, &c. Did not mine nyes seeme dim to others sight, Without suspect they could not see so right. O sillie creatures, happie is the state, Thatwayes not pittie, nor respecteth hate: Better's that place though homely and obscure Where we repose in safety and secure, Then where great Birdes with Lordly tallants seazeEras, Cui plus licet quam par est, &c. Not what they ought, but what their fancies please: And by their power preuailing in this sorte, To rob the poore, account it but a sporte: Therfore of two I chose the lesser euill, Better sit still then rise to meete the deuill. Thus the poore Owle vnhappily could preach, Some that came neere in compasse of his reach, Taking this Item with a generall eare, (A guilty conscience feeles continuall feare) Soone to their sorrow secretly do finde, Some that had winck'd not altogether blinde.
And finding now which they before had heard, Wisdome not all, in euery garish Bird, Shrewdly suspect that breuyting by night, Vnder pretence that he was ill of sight, Slylie had seene which secretly not kept, Simply they wak'd; he subtilly had slept. The enuious Crow that is so full of spight, The hatefull Buzzard, and the rauenous Kite. The greedy Rauen that for death doth call,Plinie. Spoyling poore Lambs as from their Dams they fall. That picketh out the dying creatures eye; The theeuish Dawe, and the dissembling Pye, That onely liue vpon the poorers spoyle, That feede on Dung-hilles by thelothsome foyle. The Woodpecker whose hardned beake hath broke, And perc'd the hart of many a sollid Oke. That where the Kingly Eagle wont to pray In the calme shade in heate of Summers day: Of thousand of faire Trees there stands not one For him to pearch or set his foote vpon. And now they see they safely had him here, T'eschew th'effect of euery future feare: Vppon the suddaine all these murdrous fowle, Fasten together on the harmeles Owle. The cruell Kite because his clawes were keene, Vpon his broad-face wreaks his angry teene.
His weasant next the rauenous Rauen plyes, The Pye and Buzzard tugging at his eyes. The Crow is digging at his brest amaine; The sharp-nebd Hecco stabbing at his brayne, That had the Falcon not by chance bene neere,The natu∣rall loue of the Fal∣con to the Owle. Plinie. That lou'd the Owle and held him onely deere, Come to his rescue at the present tyde, The honest Owle vndoubtedly had dyde. And whilst the gentle Bird doth yet pursue, The ryot done by this rebellious crue, The lesser Birds that keep the lower spring, There-at much greeue with wofull murmuring, Yet wanting power to remedy his wrongs, Who tooke their liues, restrained not their tonguest The Larke, the Lennet, and the gentler sorte, Those sweete Musitions, with whose shrill reporte, The senceles woods, and the obdurate rocke, Haue oft bene moou'd: the warbling Throstle Cocke, The Ousell, and the Nightingale among That charmes the night calme by her powerfull song, In Phaebus Lawrell that do take delight, Whom Ioues fearce thunder hath no Power to smite. Iustice say they, ah whether art thou fled? Or this vyle world, hast thou abandoned? O why fayre vertue wer't thou made in vaine? Freedome is lost and libertie is slayne:
Whylst some whose power restrained not their rage, Loudly exclame vpon the enuyous age, That rockes for pettie doe resume them eares, The earth so wette with plentie of their teares. But thus it haps in heat of all these things, As Kings rules realms, God rules the harts of Kings, The Princely Eagle leauing his abode, Was from his Court stolne secretly abrode, And from the couert, closely where he stood, To finde how things were censur'd in the wood; Farre in the thickets might a chattring heare, To which soone lending an officious eare, With a still flight his easie course doth make Towards where the sound he perfectly doth take. At euery stroke (with his Imperiall wings) The gentle ayre vnto his feathers clings; And through his softe and callow downe doth flowe, As loath so soone his presence to forgoe, And being at last arryued at the place Where the poore Owle in miserable case (For wome much sorowe euery where was heard) Sadly bemoan'd of many a helples Bird. But when this Princely Iouiall Foule they sawe, As now deliu'red from their former awe: Each little creature lifted vp a wing, With Aue Coesar to their soueraigne King.
Who seeing the Owle thus miserablie forlorne, Spoyl'd of his feathers, mangled, scratcht and torne: Wil'd him his name and qualitye to showe, How and wherefore he suffred all this woe. Which the Owle hearing, taking hart therby, Though somwhat daunted with his pearcing eye, (With a deep sigh) my soueraigne Leidge, quoth he, Though now thus poore and wretched as you see, Athens sometime the Muses Nurcerie, The source of Science and Philosophie, Allow'd me freedome in her learned Bowers, Where I was set in the Cecropian towers, Armed Bellona (Goddesse of the field) Honor'd my Portraict in her war-like Sheild. And for my studie (of all other Fowle) To wise Minerua chalenged the Owle. For which, those graue and stil-autentique Sages Which sought for knoledge inthose golden ages, Of whome we holde the science that we haue; For wisdome, me their Hiroglifique gaue. The frutefull Ceres to great Saturn borne, That first with Sickle cropt the rip'ning Corne, That bore the swartye Acheron, whose birth Scarsely yet perfect, loathing of the earth, And flying all communitie with men, Thrust hos blacke head into the Stigian fen;
Where the Nymph Orphne in th'infernall shade, As in his streame she carelesly did wade: The flood Imbracing craftily beguilde; By whom soone after she conceau'd with childe, Of her deare sonne Ascallaphus, whose youthOuid Me∣tam. Lib. quinto. So cherish'd Iustice, and respected truth; As to the gods he faithfully did tell, The tasted fruit by Proserpine in hell: Which an offence imagined so fowle, Ceres trans-form'd into the harmeles Owle. To our disgrace though it be vrg'd by some, Our harmeles kinde to Creet doth neuer come; The Cretians euer lyars, nor come we thether, For truth and falshood cannot liue together. And those that spurne at our contented state, With Viperous enuie and degenerate hate; Striue to produce vs from that Lesbian bed, Wherewith blinde lust the fleshly letcher led On his owne childe, vnnaturally to praye, (For that fowle fact) transform'd Nyctimene,Ouid. Me∣tam. Libr. Secund. But sildome seene vnto the publique eye, The shreeking Litch-Owle that doth neuer crye, But boding death and quick her selfe interres, In darksom graues and hollow sepulchers. Thus much, my Soueraigne, whence my fathers came Now for the cause of this my present shame,
Few words may serue a mischiefe to vnfolde, For in short speech long sorrow may be tolde. But for my freedome that I vsd of late, To lanch th'infection of a poysoned state, Wherein my free and vncorrupted tongue, Lightly gaue taste of their injurious wrong. The Kyte, the Crow, and all the Birds of pray, That thy Liedge people hauock night and day; Rushing vpon me, and with foule despight, Thus haue they drest me in this piteous plight. The Eagle now a serious eare that lent, To the religious and deuout intent, Of the good Owle, whom too injurious fate Had thus rewarded; doth commiserate The poore distressed Bird, hoping to heare What all the rest through negligence or feare, Smothred in silence, and had buried still, Couering the sore of many a festred ill, Not onely grants him libertie of speech, But further dayning kindly to beseech, The vertuous Bird no longer to refraine: Who thus emboldned by his Soueraigne, At length his silence resolutely brake, And thus the Eagles majestie be-spake. Mightie, said he, though my plaine homely words, Haue not that grace that elegance affoords.
Truth of it selfe is of sufficient worth; That needs no glosse of arte to set it forth. These hoary plumes like mosse vpon that Oake, By seeing much, yet suffring more I tooke. Long haue I seene the worlds vnconstant change, Ioy mooues not me, affliction is not strange. I care not for contempt, I seek not fame, Knowledge I loue, and glory in the same.Bartas. Th'ambicious judgment seat I neuer sought, Where God is solde for Coyne, the poore for nought. I am a helples Bird, a harmles wretch, Wanting the power that needfull is to teach. Yet care of your great good and generall weale, Vnlocks my tongue, and with a feruent zeale Breakes through my lips which otherwise were pentPithago To that seuere Graue Samnites document. I knowe before my harmles Tale be tolde, The gripple Vulture argues me too bolde. The Cormorant (whome spoyle cannot suffice) Stickes not to charge and slander me with lyes. The Parrts taxe me to be vainely proud, And all crye shame the Owle should be allow'd, Which with this Axiome doth them all confute, When Kings bid speake, what subject can be mute? The latest winter that rore-went our prime, O nightie prince, vpon a certaine time
I got into thy Pallace on a night, There to reuiue my melancholy spright, And there (for darknes) wayting all alone, To view (by night) what Lords by day looke on, Where I beheld so many Candles light, As they had mok'd the Tapers of the night. Where for it grew vpon the time of rest, And many, great sinceritie profest, Expecting prayer should presently proceed; To aske forgiuenes for the dayes misdeed, There is soft Downe the liquerous Sparow sat, Pamper'd with meates, proud, insolent and fat. His Drugs, his drinks, and sirrops doth apply, To heat his blood and quicken luxury; Which by his billing female was imbrac'd, Clasping her wings about his wanton waste. O God thought I, what's heere? by light within, Where some in darknes should haue fear'd to sin. The Cormorant set closely to deuise How he might compasse strange Monopolies. The gawdy Gold-finch and his courtly mate, The iolly Bunting power-full in the state, Quickly agreed, and but at little stick; To share a thousand for a Bishoprick, And scramble vp some feathers from the Larke, What though a Pastor aud a learned Clarke?
And for his reuerence though he weare a Cowle,Mantuan Bardo cu∣culatus ca∣put, &c. Yet at his entrance he must pay them tole. I saw a Buzzard scorning of the blacke, That but of late did cloath his needy backe With Ostridge feathers had adorn'd his crest, As he were bred a Faulcon at the least. Thus strouts he daily in his borrowed plume And but or shame he boldly durst presume, With Princely Eglets to compare his sight: Not the proud Iris in her coullers dight, Could with this base Kyte equally compare. What fowle before him stood not humbly bare? No lesse then Lords attending euerie beck, At his commaund his betters brooke his check. But O my Liedge, the Birds of Noble race, Knowe whence he is and who affoords him grace, And inlie greeue to see a seruile mate, Crept vp by fauour to out-braue a State. The poore Implumed Birds that by offence, Or some disgrace haue lost preheminence Can poynt and say, this feather once was mine: Some winck, some would, some greeue, & some repine Besides all this, I saw a Bird did scower, A Serpents teeth, that daily did deuoure, Widdowes and Orphanes, yet th'Egiptian Sawes, Commend this Bird for clensing Serpents Iawes.
For the base Trochyle thinketh it no paine, To scowre vile Carion for a sauorie gaine. When soone I saw about the Serpents nest, Whil'st this slaue Bird his nastie grinders drest. A thousand little Flyes, as many Birdes, Of labouring Bees, a thousand thousand heards, A thousand sundrie Foule, that strangely carp And curse that beake that made his goomes so sharp. Yet in this base Bird I might well discry, The prosperous frute of thriuing Policy. Casting mine eye and looking through a glasse, I saw a Gos-howke (that in state did passe) That by faire showes did mens affections feele, Golde (his attendant) alwaies at hes heele. Whole Mannors did him reuerence as he staid, Whose name (if written) could possession plead In any Lordship that adioyned his: Lawe was his vassall, he and purchase kis. Zeale was his foole, and learning was his ieaster, Pride was his page, and Gluttony his taster. A thousand suters wayted at his hand, Some call'd his honor Patrone of the land; The sole commaunder of the Common-weale, And vnto him they humbly all appeale. When in a Closset strangely I beheld, That was adjoyning to a pleasant field,
How euery suter when he was retyr'd Bought out his peace, or his promotion hy'rd; Yet what he wonne with cursses was rewarded, When the poore Birds for bribes alone regarded. To th'secret of all secrets when I came, Hauing mine eyes euen glewd with griefe & shame: I tell not how the vulture fate apart, Spending the blood and marrow of his hart, And by all meanes his faculties t'apply, To taynt the Phoenix by his surquedry, That of her kinde had she bene more then one,Claudian: de Phoe∣nice. (Parent and Infant to her selfe alone) This heauenly Bird (in touching their defame) Had had her purple soyled with their shame. And for the Turtle would not be vnchaste, Her did they banish to the barren waste. I dare not say how euery sorte were searched, Nor dare I tell how Auarice was perched Vnder the pillow of the grauest head, (That freedome with the golden world is dead) How age had cast off a religious life, Humor of late become Opinions wife. Counsaile secure, nor Companies with care, The wit that woundeth zeale, accounted rare. But whither wandreth my hye rauish't Muse? O pardon Leidge, the feirce exclaimes I vse;
And let my Barque (throgh gales of your good grace Through these rough Seas) bear sayle a little space. Scarse had these words found vtrance through my lips But ther-with all a pratling Parrot skips About the priuat lodging of his Peeres. His eyes were watchfull, open were his eares. He had a tongue for euery language fit, A cheuerell Conscience, and a serching wit. Comming in hast as he hadcrost the Mayne, And brought some strange intelligence from Spayne Yet euen at mid-night (for the Rogue was poore) I found him knocking at a great mans doore; And where of course the wise are turnd away, His errand brookes no dilatorie stay, But presently conducted (by a light) Into a Chamber very richly dight, Where sat the Vulture with a dreadfull frowne, Proud and ambitious, gaping for renowne: His talents red with blood of murthered foules, His full eye quickly euery vay controles. Which when this Parrot sted fastly beheld, His feathers brisled and his stomack sweld; Anp to the Vulture openeth where he sat, (Whose eares attentiue listing still thereat) The state and hauiour of each priuate man, Layd out for searching Auarice to scan.
Whereby strict rule and subtilties in art, Such traqs are set, as not a man can start. And where th'offenders maintenance was great, Their working heads they busily doe beat, By some strange quiddit or some wrested clause, To finde him guiltie of the breach of lawes, That he this present injurie to shift, To buy his owne, accounts a Princely guift. And for a cloake to their corrupt Decrees, The Vulture with this subtill Bird agrees; That they that thus conuicted are aparte, Shall be surpriz'd by policy and arte. Then picke they forth such theeues as hace the light, The black ey'd Bat (the watch-man of the night) That to each priuate family can prie, And the least slip can easily discrie; And since his Conscience is both loose and la, ge, Is onely set to vnder-goe this charge; Adrest to drinke of euery priuate Cup, And not a word slips but hecakes it vp. To minister occasion of discourse, And ther-with-all, some dingerous Theame in-force, To vrge a doubtfull speech vnto the worst, To broach new treasons and disclose them first; Where-by him-selfe still cleeres: and vn-awares Intraps the Foule, vnskilfull of these snares.
And (against law) he beares his Lords Protection, As a it meane and by the States direction. O worthy Birds, preuent this ill in time, And suffer not this rau'nous Bat to climbe; That is occasion of the bests offence, The brat of ryot and of indigence, The moath and canker of the Commou-weale, Bred by corruption to disquiet zeale. Holla thou wandring Infant of my braine, Whither thus fling'st thou? yet diuert thy strayne; Returne we back vnto our former gate, From which a little we digrest of late, And leaue this monster beating of his head, The honest Owle hath quickly stroke him dead. And forth agame the Parrot let vs finde, That winning credit so the world doth blinde, Vnder protection of so dread a hand, Spoyles and familes ransacketh thy land. The Pellican that by his fathers teaching, Hath with deuout zeale folow'd wholsom preaching That rent his bosome and inforc'd his toung, To teach his tender and beloued young. When now these fauters of all vile abuse Haue found a stand where they may note his vse, How father-like he giues affliction bread, Conuerting soules; through blind-folde error led.
The naked Orphan in his bosome wraps, With the poore widdow doth bewaile her haps; And neuer reaps his plentious field so cleane, But leaues his haruest that the poore may gleanc; Steps in this false pye, this promoting wretch, Closely betrayés him that hee giues to each: And for his deedes of charity and grace, Roots vp his godly Hospitale place. Most like to that sharp-sighted Alcatras,The Al∣catras. That beates the ayre aboue the liquid glasse: The New-wotlds Bird, that proud imperious fowle, Whose dreadfull presence frights the harmeles Owle: That on the land not onely workes his wish, But on the Ocean killes the flying fish. Which since the Owle hath truely done his arrant, O Princely Eagle looke vnto this tyrant: But if my words thou willfully impung, Thy pcacefull Empyre that hath flourish'd long, Headlong at length shall to confusion runne; As was this great globe ere the world begunne: When in an huge heape and vnweldie masse, This All was shut and nature smothered was. And in this Lumpe and Chaos out of frame, The contraries conuers'd and one became, Strictly together th'Elaments were clasp'd And in their rough hands one the other grasp'd:
That each did others quallitie deface, Beautie was buried, light could finde no place. But when th'al-seeing Soueraigne did disperse, Each to his place vpon the vniuerse, To his owne region and his contrarie; Enuy'd his place, impungn'd his qualitie. Fyer, Aire, Earth, Water, in their Mansion sate, By that great God to them appropriate. All is compos'd within this goodly roome; A perfect shape this Embrion is become; Which thus disseuered by their friendly jarres, Contriue the worlds continuance by their warres. So in confusion members are inclosd, To frame a state if orderly dispos'd: For to the proud maleuolent aspect, Of angry Saturne that would all direct, The long exiled but Imperious Loue, When for his regal Soueraigntie he stroue, With god-like state and presence of a King; Calmes Saturnes rage, his furie limiting. But leaue we those vnto their owne decay, Other occasions hasten vs away: Let Princes viewe what their poore subjects trye, Blinde is that sight, that's with anothers eye; It is full time that we should get vs hence, O mightic Soueraigne Oceans of offence,
Stand here opposed in my passing by, When in a Chamber nere thy Maiestie A jetting Iaye accomplished and braue, That well could speake, well could him-selfe behaue; His Congeis Courtly, his demeanor rare, As strangely fashion'd as his clothes he ware; Which could each man with complement salute, And to the VVood-Cocke fram'd a speciall sute. Who him imbracing like a braineles foole, Desir'd him sit, commaunding him a stoole. The jolly Iaye thus graced by a Peere, Pluckes vp his spirits, and with a formall cheere Breakes ther-with-all into most strange reports, Of Flemmish newes, surprising Townes and Fortes. Of troubles rais'd in France against the King, Spanish Armadoes and embattailing, Protesting method in Intelligence To be a thing mightie consequence; And pawnes his soule, he can deuise away, Which put in acte, the Leaguers loose the day, To frame a Bridge of Bow-string o're the Rhine, Supplant the Alps and lay them smooth and plaine, And that if all the Princes of the North, Will with an Armie Royall set him forth, Before the yeere expyr'd that is to come, He will with Burbon new be-leaguer Rowe.
Then of his knowledge in the Cabalist, And what pertaines vnto an Exorcist. Then of Philacters what their vertue be, Homers Nepenthe and of his degree; Each seuerall vse in practique what it is; How much he wants that doth these secrets misse, And by some little piller in that place, To giue some Window or some Chymnie grace, Now to proportion presently doth run, And talkes of the Collossus of the Sun: Of Columes the Diameters doth tell, Euen from the Bace vnto the Capitell. And by the Roose he something both allude, And will demonstrate of the Magnitude. And what is all this from his addle pate, But like a Starling that is taught to prate, And with a lisping garbe (this most rare man) Speakes French, Dutch, Spanish, and Italian. No day doth passe, he doth his compasse misse, To send to that Lord, or to visit this, And kissing of his clawe, his Cox-combe bare, Is come to see how their good graces fare. And presently vnto their face reports, Their rare perfections woundred at in Courts; Scratching the Ideot by his itching eares; Heauens spit downe vengeance or dissolue in teares,
And send the Ibis to repulse our shame,The Bird Ibis, a de∣stroyer of the locust. Plinie. to driue those Locusts to whence first they came. Woe to these slaues whose shape the deuill tooke, To tempt the holy Esay at his booke. O morall Mantuan liue thy verses long, Honor attend thee and thy reuerend Song. Who seekes for truth (say'st thou) must tread the path Of the sweet priuate life, which ennies wrath, VVhich poys'ned tongues, which vaine affected prase Can-not by scorne suppresse, by flatrery raise. For Adulation but if search be made, His dayly mansion and his vsuall trade, Is in the Monarchs Court, in Princes Halles, VVhere Godly zeale he by contempt inthralles. There calles he euill good, the good tearmes euill, And makes a Saint of an incarnate deuill. These boldely censure and dare set at naught, The noblest wit, the most Heroique thought. This Carion Iaye approaching to the spring VVhere the sweet Muses wont to sit and sing, VVith filthy ordure so the same defyl'd, As they from thence are vtterly exyl'd. Banish their issue, from whose Sacred rage Flowes the full glory of each plentious age. Still with the Prophets chalenging their partes, The sweet Companions of the Liberall Artes.
Those rare Promethij fetching fire from Heauen; To whome the functions of the Gods are giuen, Raysing fraile dust with their redoubled flame, Mounted with Hymnes vpon the wings of Fame; Ordayn'd by nature (Truch-men for the great) To fire their Noble harts with glorious heat. You Sun-bred Ayerie, whose immortall birth Beares you aloft beyond the sight of earth, The heauen-tuch'd feathers of whose sprightly wings, Strikes (from aboue) the Pallaces of Kings, By how much neerer you ascend the Skye, Doe lessen still to euery mortall eye; Who in this time contemptfull greatnes late Scorn'd and disgrac'd which earst renown'd hir state. O basterd mindes vnto this vylenes brought, To loath the meanes which first your honors wrought But who their great profession can protect, That rob them selues of their owne due respect? For they whose mindes should be exhal'd and hye, As free and noble as cleere Poesye, In the slight fauour of some Lord to come, Basely doe crouch to his attending grome. Immortall gift that art not bought with golde! That thou to peasants should be basely solde! And thus euen cloy'd with busines of the Court, To neighbour Groues inuyting my resort,
Where I suppos'd the solitarie Owle Might liue secure vnseene of any fowle; Loe in a valley peopled thick with trees, Where the soft day continuall Euening sees, Where in the moyst and melancholy shade, The grasse growes rancke, but yeelds a bitter blade. I found a poore Crane sitting all alone. That from his brest sent many a throbbing grone; Groueling he lay, that sometime stood vpright; Maim'd of his joynts in manie a doubtfull fight. His Ashie coate that bore a glosse so faire, So often kis'd of the enamored aire; Worne all to ragges and fretted so with rust, That with his feete he troad it in the dust: And wanting strength to beare him to the springs, The spyders woue their webbs euen in his wings: And in his traine their filmie netting cast, He eate not wormes, wormes eate on him so fast. His wakefull eies that in proud foes despight, Had watch'd the walles in many a Winters night, And neuer winck'd nor from their object fled, When heauens dread thunder ratled ore his head, Now couered ouer with dimme cloudy kelles, And shruncken vp into their slymie shelles. Poore Bird that striuing to bemoane thy plight, I cannot do thy miseries their right;
Perceiuing well he found me where I stood, And he alone thus poorely in the Wood: To him I stept desiring him to showe, The cause of his calamitie and woe. Nights-Bird (quoth he) what mak'st thou in this place To view my wretched miserable case? Ill Orators are aged men at Armes, That wont to wreake and not bewayle their harmes: And repetition where there wants reliefe, In less'ning sorow, but redoubleth greefe. Seuen sundrie Battails, seru'd I in the feeld, Against the Pigmies, in whose battered sheeld, My prowes stands apparantly expres'd, Besides these scarres vpon my manly breast, Along the Mid-land coasts my troupes I led, And Affrickes pride with feare astonished; And maym'd I was of this decrepit wing, When as the fowle from the Proponticke spring,The Sea frō Helle∣spont to Bosphorus Thracius. Fild all Th'Egean with their stemning ores, And made the Iles euen tremble from the shores. I saw when from the Adriaticke seas; The crosse-adoring Fowles to Europs praise, Before Lepanto and Morae a fought, wrought Where heauen by winde, earths wonder strangely Weary at length and trusting to my worth, I tooke my flight vnto the happie North:
Where nobly bred as I was well ally'd, I hop'd to haue my fortune there supply'd, But there arryu'd, disgrace was all my gayne, Experience scorn'd of euery scuruye swayne. Other had got for which I long did serue. Still fed with wordes whil'st I with wants did sterue. Hauing small meanes but yet a mighty hart, How ere in fame, not honor'd for desart, That small I had, I forced was to gage, To cure my wounds and to sustaine mine age; Whil'st those that scarce did ere beholde a foe, Exult and triumph in my ouer-throwe. And seeing in vayne with miserie I stroue, Retyr'd me to this solitarie Groue; Where in dispayre (euen loathing of my breath) I long to dwell in the colde armes of death. Heere sanke downe in a sound and could no more, And I returne from whence I came before. Where by the way the countrie Rooke deplor'd, The grip and hunger of this rauenous Lord. The cruell Castrell which with deuilish clawes, Scratcheth out of the miserable iawes Of the poore tennant, to his ruyne bent, Raysing new Fynes, redoubling auncient rent; By strong inclosure of olde Common land, Rackes the deare sweate from his laborious hand,
Whil'st he that digs for breath out of the stones, Cracks his stiffe Sinewes and consumes his bones; Yet forc'd to reape continually with strife, Snarling contention feeding on his life. Yet hoping Fortune bettered by his heyres, He hath their loue, his hate made onely theires; Laboring to keepe him in his quiet state, When enuie doth his gathered Manors threat: And being fauored of sonie higher Peere, Who not for Loue, inforcing by his feare, Which by their Clownish industrie and art, Now to the Court reduce him from the Cart, With slight prouision that defrayes his charge, Whil'st with his graine he ballast manie a Barge, And fo his gripple Auarice he serue, What recks this rancke-hinde if his Countrie sterue? Hell on that wealth is purchased with shame, Gold in the Trunck, and in the graue defame: Yet his clawes blunt and when he can no more, The needie Rooke is turn'd out of the doore. And lastly doth his wrechednes bewayle, A bond-slaue to the miserable Iayle. Thus wearied with the sight of worldly crimes, The wane of kingdomes, and the change of times; Betooke my selfe by searching to espye, What sinnes in secret did in Cities lye:
For there I deem'd where law had chiefest force, Strongly to limmit euery lewder course, Things turn'd to nature and disdain'd excesse, That plaguy foe to humaine happines. And as I went (with busie search about) Casting by cunning how to finde them out, I found the Fesant that the Hauke doth feare Seeking for safetie bred his Aerye there: Yet is accus'd through close informing hate, By lawles lending to offend the state. Who being Rich, and louing coyne and ease, Still buyldeth lowe for feare he should displease. Yet the Blad-Buzzard being appoynted Iudge, To this base, muddy, miserable, drudge: A paire of young ones taking from his nest, And leaues this fearefull Recreant the rest, Who giues him thankes his goodnes would so doe, Might take the Aerye and the old one too. He liued best that most liu'd out of sight: I dare not say that Birds were all vpright; For some had golden Beaks but brasen clawes, That held the guildes to minister their lawes: The Castrell for possession of his heyre, Is by the Ringtayle offered woundrous faire, To haue a match betwixt their goodly breed, T increase their lands, and raise their happie seed.
But the coye Castrell turnes it to a mocke, And scornes to match in his ignoble stocke, For which the Ryng-taile by a secret plot, Subbornes the Starling, which hath closely got, To be the Broker slylie to seduce The Castrels Heyre, by giuing thriftlesse vse. And in strong Statutes to enthrall him so, To lyme him sure which way so ere he goe. For this young Foule (drawen from his fathers eye) Will with the fond world swimme in vanitye. The subtil Ring-tayle neuer thus doth leaue, Till he the Castrell cunningly deceiue. And caught this young one in the Cities snare, Deuoures his Mannors ere he be aware. Mongst which the Dawe (by giuing of a bribe) Became a Clerke amongst the learned Tribe; That being a Bankerout, a dis-honest better; Can get his liuing onely by the letter, Whil'st Arts goe beg, and in a seruile weed, Are made the slaues of penurie and need. The Goose exyled, humbly doth appeale To all the Birds, professing faith and zeale. And though he proueth by the Roman book,Plutarke. What care to keep the Capitall he took; Yet is not heard: The Doue with-out a gallColumba sine felle. Is left forsaken, and contemn'd of all.
There growes such difference and such strange con∣fusions, Twixt old decrees, and later Institutions: Yet being inspyr'd, desisteth not to speake, To edifie the conscience that is weake, And by approoued arguments of's owne, By scriptures, Fathers, and greate writers knowne, Discouereth their abhominable trade; So that the Storke their vmpyre being made, Iudgeth the Dawe should from the Church be driuen, To prate in corners, and to preach by Euen. And since his arte and cunning was so scant, To haue no patron but the Ignorant; And by his doctrine onely teaching fooles, To be exilde and hiss'd out of the Schools. Hence like the seede Thebes-buylder Cadmus throwes, More armed mischiefes sudainely arose: The Bittor brings his action gainst the Quayle, And on th'arest allowes him hardly bayle; Because he durst presume amongst the Reeds, To let his Lemmon where his female breeds. And Mistris Titmouse a neate merrie dame, With her friend VVagtaile, one of speciall name; Su'de by the Cucco in his proper wronge, For accusation of a sclanderous tongue. That to the barre his Aduocate doth bring, That hath by rote the acts of many a King.
The Lawes, the Statutes and decrees assignde, Customes so old, as almost out of minde. A day of hearing good my Lord cries hee, For Master Cucco that retaineth me; Whom the lewd VVagtayl basely hath abus'd, In'so vyle tearmes as cannot be excus'd: The parties likewise present here in Courte, And tis a case that well deserues reporte: For which a Iury summoned with speed, And to the tryall presently proceed. The Braine-bald Coot a formall witlesse Asse, Must now the fore-man on this matter passe: The Sottish Dotterill, ignorant and dull; And next to him the Mawe-cram'd gluttonous Gull. The Lecherous Mallard cal'd vnto the booke, The squealing Lapwing, the rediculous Rooke, The witles VVoodcock, and his neighbour Snite, That will be hyr'd to passe on euery rite, With all the rest empanyled to wayte: Which when the Iurye fullie was compleyte, Cald to the Barre, admitted and alow'd: Vp start the Pecocke insolent and prowd; Of goodly stature and of gratious porte, In presence of the honorable court: Thus for the Playntiffe learnedly began. My Lord (saith he) was neuer worthy man,
So nobly bred and of so high descent, Of so faire liuely-hood, and so large a rent As is the Cucco, when our plea shall trye, His losse sustained by their infamye. First for the worth and honor of his name, You may the better censure his defame; From mightie Birds descended euery way, And by his birth (the messenger to may) His house still loyall, and his Coate as faire, His fathers tunes he neuer did impaire. His name and nature doe so well agree, As showes his blood repurifyed to bee. In frutefull Sparta, it is since now long, That famous Greece tooke notice of his wrong, When for his wanton and vnchaste desire, A thousand ships stuf'd with reuengefull fire, To Tenedos the proud Aegean laddes, Whence sprang those high immortall Illiades. And since the Romans from the Asian broyles, Return'd with conquest and victorious spoyles. The Cuci heere continually haue beene, As by their auncient Euidence is seene.Liuius. Of Consull Cuccus, from whose mightie name, These liuing Cuccos lineally came. To him, the Auncients, Temples did erect, Which with great pompe and ornament were deckt.
Th' Italians call him Becco (of a nod) With all the reuerence that belongs a god. What though in loue supposed to be vs'd, What is his vertue need not be excus'd? The wise man telles (if nature be our guide) In following her, we sildome slip aside. And in this Bird (who can her power deny) If nature fram'd him to communitye? Then wisely thus considering his profession, You reuerend Iudges of this lawfull Session: As you are patrones of the righteous cause, Vouchsafe my clyent judgement. Heere doth pause. Scarce could the Peacocke his conclusion make, When straight his turne the Turkie-cocke doth take A learned Lawyer (worthy of his gowne) Of reputation both in Court and towne. And to the Bench for audience hauing cry'd, Thus to the Peacock learnedly reply'd. Graue reuerend fathers of the Law (he said) The matter that our aduersaries plead Is vaine and idle; we the poynt inforce Against the Cucco and his lawles course. The Peacock here a cunning speech hath made, To help his clyent and vpholde his trade; But strip this maske that doth conceale the cause, Examine each perticuler and clause
Gainst proose so poore, so indigent of truth, The Bastard Cucco bringing from his youth, First lay'd and hatch'd vp in a nothers nest, Such vilenes raign'd in his base parents breast, Who since that time they neuer sought for shame,Plinic. Nor but their vice dare for his birth-right claime: The Hedge-Sparrow, (this wicked Bird that bred) That him so long and diligently fed, (By her kinde tendance) getting strength and power, His carefull Nurse doth cruelly deuower: Base as his byrth, so baser is his trade, And to the world a bye-word now is made: No Nation names the Cucco but in scorne, And no man heares him, but he feares the horne: No month regards him but lasciuious Maye, Wherein whil'st youth is dallying with the daye; His song still tends to vanitie and lust: Amorous deceits; poligamies injust. But to cut off these tedious allegations, The Lawe commands these publicke defamations, Be straightly punish'd in the Noblest men. Why should you spare the cursed Cucco then? Who all his life to lewdnes being bent, Rightly deserues the publick'st punishment. Then gentle Iurors, good men, and elect, As vou your safeties carefully respect,
If loues sweet Musick and his blisfull cheere; E're touch'd your harts or mollify'd your eare; Tender the case, and euermore the wed Shall praise your conscience both at borde and bed. Thus said, he ceas'd; the Iurors step't aside, Wisely consulting, warily they tryde The circumstance of euery secret sin; Thus they return'd and brought their verdict in, Cast is the Cucco guiltie of the deede, And for a fine, for his deserued meed Allowes to Mistres Titmouse for hir charge, That she shall after haue her tayle at large: And when she Reuells as she did before, T'exclude the Cucco freely out of dore: And such offenders as they could present, Likewise adiudg'd deserued punishment. The Ringdoue plag'd with Maggots in the Mawe, The VVoodcocke gets the swelling of the crawe, The Crowe with dropsie (whil'st yet liuing) rottes, The Quayle a Leaper fild with lothsome spottes. The Buzzard of the Letergie is sicke, The Kyte with Feuors falleth Lunaticke, The Epilepsy grew vpon the Iaye, And of a sweat the Bunting drops away. When now the Owle that with a vigelent eye, All these demensions perfectly could trye:
Fore-sawe the perrill threatned vnto all, Apt by their loose credulitie to fall, And whose preuention if they did fore-slowe, Their vtter spoyle immedately should growe. My friends (quoth he) looke warily about, Many the daungers which you are to doubt: This gallant Oke wherein so oft you play, Perhaps (at length) your safetie may betray. And though his shade be delicate and sweet, His truncke beares lyme that may intrap your feet. If, fearing what is requisite and fit, You like my judgement and allowe my wit; Yours is the good: but if you fondly deeme, Things be within, as outwardly they seeme; Head-long runne on, and fall into the snare, And say a freind once warn'd you to beware. Thus spake the Owle, whose talke could not be heard, So little, fooles good counsell doth regard, But thinking frensy him his witts beguylde, The honest Bird despightfully reuilde. But marke their end who set aduice at naught, Fooles still too deare haue sound experience bought; The Husband-man surueying of his ground, Mong'st all the trees this Oke had quickly found: And by all signes and likely-hood of trade, The Birds therein there nightly roosting made.
And by the lyme that issued from the tree, They all entangled easily might bee. Taking the same, he spreads it on the sprayes, And through the thicket closely creepes his wayes. When the sad arndern shutting in the light, Wan-sighted Cynthia (Lady of the night) Proudly ascending the aetherial state, Whence the bright Phoebus but dismounted late, The dull-ey'd euening his moyst vapours threwe, Strewing the still earth with sweet showers of deawe. When euery Bird replenished with foode, Clapping his stretch't wings liuely from the wood, And on each small branch of this large-lymb'd Oke Their prettie lodgings carelesly they toke, No ill suspecting, fondly vnawares, Quickly entangled in the Fowlers snares. Whose mournfull chirping and their chattering cryes Incites the Owle before his hower to ryse, And hearing from his melancholy seate, The Birds them-selues thus wofully to beate, (The deed discouered with the mornings light) Flewe from his pearch: though greeued at the sight, Yet with a smile, his wisdome that became, VVhich mock'd their folly, though bemoan'd their shame, Quoth he, you foolish Burgers of the field, That in contempt my counsailes lewdly held
That, where at late you did but laugh and jeere, Now to your ruyne plainly doth appeere The greatest thing you lightly are to lose, Onely your plumes that fortune can dispose. Tis yet a comfort in the depth of smart; Enuye but seazeth on the outward part. But present perill in a thing of price, Rather craues action then doth stay aduice. Therefore to help you will my power assay: Where-with his wing doth presently display, And with his clawes, the birds of euery kinde Pluckes from the lyme, that left their plumes behinde. The little Robin featherles and free. Regreets the Owle with many a cap and knee. The warbling Mauis mirth-full Peans sung, The Nightingale with her melodious tongue Gaue him such musicke (to declare their thanks) That springes and riuers dance aboue theirbanks; That (with the repercusion of the Ayre) Shooke the great Eagle sitting in his Chayre: Which from the mountaine (with a radiant eye) Brau'd the bright Cressit of the glorious skye; Moouing his princely majestie to see, Whence this applause so sodainly should bee, Whose sinewed wings (in their resistles course) Beat the thinne Ayre, with such a viloent force,
That the light Birds drip't head-long from the skyes, The rocks and forrests trembling with the noyes, Some-what amaz'd at this vn-usuall sight, To see his people in this piteous plight: His soueraigne eare doth presently addresse, Willing to heare the cause of their distresse, To whom the poore Owle) his obedience done) Thus to his Liedge Lord, reuerently begon. Monarche of all that beat the ayre with wings, Thou Bird of Ioue, beloued amongst kings: Here stands an Oke well tymbred, largely spred, That many a day hath borne his curled head, Aboue his fellowes dwelling farre and neere, That in the Forrest neuer found his peere; Whose root well fastned in the frutefull ground, His barke so louely and his heart so sound, (Through his great wealth) grew insolent and proud, Because the Birds that in his boughs did shrowd, Vnto his praise continually did sing, And kept their vigils to th'enamored spring. The virgin-huntresse sworne to Dians Bowe, Here in this shade hir quarries did bestowe, And for their Nimphals, building amorous Bowers, Oft drest this tree with Anadems of flowers; And Flora chose her Nurcery here to shield, Her tender buds the Infants of the field. By which, this tree grewe arrogant in time,
In his ranck sap hath bred a loath-some slyme, VVhose nature and vile qualitie is such, Strongly to holde what euer it doth tutch, And not content to minister this meane, Which in short time might haue vndone vs cleane; But euen his boughs the Birds haue honoured so, Lastly imploy'd vnto their generall woe, That when thy subjects dreading no deceit, Came to this Tree as to their safe retreit Falsely betrai'd, and he that sped the best, Hardly escap't, with feathers at the least. Those that I could as I had power and might, Though with much paine, yet lastly did acquight. The rest whose freedome doth exceed my reach, O King of Birds I humbly thee beseech In mercy, let thy mightines puruay, To ransome from this imminent decay. When now the Eagle cutting off his tale, And euen for sorrowe wexing wan and pale; At which sad sight, this poore implumed crew, Stand faintly trembling in their Soueraigns view: And hauing strech't his Lordly tallant forth, To show th'acceptance of this deed of worth; You sillye Birds, you wretched Foules (quoth he) Hence-forth let this a freindly warning be. Had you (as nature and our lawes admit) Built where your noble Auncestors did sit,
VVisely prouiding to maintaine their state, VVhose names and freedomes you participate, You had not thus bene spoyled of your goods, For subtiltie now dwelleth in the woods. For if too high and haughtily you soare, Those see your falles that houer neere the shoare. If in the Cedar you your nests dispose, The dreadfull lightning euer threatneth those. If in the lowe earth (in the flattering shade) The Foulers snares there secretly are laide. Then my deere subjects, as you wish my good, Or haue respect to your succeding brood, Let your wise fathers an example giue, And by their rules learne thriftily to liue. Let these weake Birds, that want wher-with to fight, Submit to those that are of grip and might. Let those of power, the weaker still protect, So none shall need his safetie to suspect; Suppressing those enormities that are, VVhose cure belongs vnto our Soueraigne care. For when wealth growes into a fewe mens hands, And to the great, the poore in many bands; The pride in Court doth make the Countrie leane, The abject rich holdes auncient honor meane. Mens wits employ'd to base and seruyle shifts, And Lay-men taught, by learn'd mens subtill drifts; Ill with this state 't must incidently fare.
For euen as from th'infection of the ayre, Sundry contagious sicknesses proceed, These mischiefes more continually do breed. Shun beastly lust (you young well feathered Foule) That wounds the body, and confounds the soule. That as the subtil'st of the Syrens brood, Bindes all the spirits and ouer-comes the blood; Darkning the purenes of the inward light, Weakneth the sense and murd'reth reason quite. And you that sit as Iudges of the Lawe, Let not vile gaine your equall Ballance drawe. O! still retaine the Ethiopians guise, (As iust and vpright, as select and wise) That in their judgements (sacred and profound) Dispos'd them euer meekely on the ground, To showe the Angels (siting ouer head) Them were to judge, as they had censured. Thus spake the Eagle, when with muttering noyse The rest attentiue to his power-full voyce; Giuing a signall of their admiration, The Owle this while in serious contemplation Softly replyes: O mightie soueraigne! With all the Synod of thy winged traine, Th'aboundant ioyes that in my hart do throng, Require more organs then the onely tongue. O blessed Birds! how sweet is your subjection Vnder the safe and absolute protection?
Of so exact and excellent a King, So sole and perfect in his gouerning: The reason this (my graue selected Peeres) Because tis knowne that in these latter yeeres, The peacefull state prepost'rously disturb'd, By such whose power the great haue hardly curb'd. The iocund Throstle for his varying note, Clad by the Eagle in a speckled coate, Because his voye had judgment for the Palme, Suppos'd him selfe sole patrone of our calme. All say, for singing he had neuer peere: But there were some that did his vertue feare. Why should'st thou then ambitiously despise The manly Falcon? on whose courage lyes The Kingdomes safetie, which abroad doth rome, By forraigne warres to keepe vs safe at home. I knowe, the straine of an alluring tongue Can tye the full eare and detaine it long, But other fortunes, and the altred place, Craue new directions and an actiue grace. The former vertue may consist alone, But better two (if firmly ioyn'd in one) Experience once (by seruice in the warres) Did quote his strong Authorityes in scarres; But in this latter time, it hath beene said, The tongue doth all contemning th'others aid. Virtue whose chiefe praise in the act doth stand,
Could wish the tongue still coupled with the hand. But in the Cocke which death vntimely wrack't, In him was both the elegance and act. O when that Bird was rauish'd from our sight, (Intombing him) the world intomd'd delight. Lot neuer accent passe my mournfull pen, That leaues his fame vnregistred to men. The Muses vayled with sad Cypres tree; Vpon his graue, shall powre their teares with mee. O! if the world can weep so many teares As his losse craues, or if in Heauen appeares More plentious sorow; let them both agree T'lament that hower that reft the earth of thee. O! thought I not some spirit could giue thee more Then this small portion of my scantled store! I would not leaue (I first would leaue to liue) To giue thee fame: O who can greater giue? This said: sunk downe, as growing faint with spea∣king, Sighing withall, as though his hart were breaking. The Princely Eagle pittying of his plight, To cheere the poore Owle doing all he might. The Birds applauding with a free consent Followed the Eagle (with deuout intent) To the great mountaine, to haue all amended: Thus I awak't, and heere my Dreame was ended. FINIS.
