7987 99847491 12528
¶ By the Quene, Where as the Quenes Maiestie, by her proclamation published in No∣uember, the thirde yere of her Maiesties raigne, touching the valuation of forrayne coynes of golde, dyd amonges other thinges warne all her subiectes of an errour that myght easely be committed in receyuyng a forrayne peece of golde, hauyng a prynt and stampe on both sides, lyke to an Englishe Angell, whereof a number were before that tyme brought into this Realme, beyng not worth. ix. s. iii. d. and neuerthe∣lesse, payde and vttered commonly for. x. s. of siluer, the printes of which forrrayne Angelles, were then set forth in the margent of the sayd for∣mer proclamation. Her Maiestie now vnderstandynge, that there are sithens that tyme certayne o∣ther forrayne peeces of golde, of the like quantitie and fashion (although of lesse value) lyke to an Englyshe Angell, brought hyther, and here vttered and payde for ten shyllynges of syluer, beyng for they lacke of wayght, and for the basenesse of the allay, not worth. vii. shillinges, to the great deceite and losse of the subiectes of this her Realme: Hath thought good eftsones to geue notice hereof, to the intent her good subiectes may eyther vtterly forbeare to receyue any such forrayne Angels, or els to take them accordyng to theyr waight as bullion, and to bryng them to her Maiesties Mynte, where they shall haue redy money in golde or syluer at theyr pleasure, accordyng to the iust value thereof. And generally, her Maiestie woulde all her subiectes to beware howe they shall receyue any maner forrayne coyne of golde or syluer, not beyng valued by publike aucthoritie and well knowen, for that thereby great losse may come through ignoraunce, the remedy wherof, only is to receyue them as bul∣lion, at such value as they contayne in finenesse and wayght. Yeuen at her Maiesties Palace of Westminster, the first of June, the seuenth yere of her Maiesties most prosperous raigne. God saue the Queene. ¶ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Rycharde Iugge and Iohn Cawood: Printers to the Quenes Maiestie. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
