8197 99850652 15873
❧ By the Queene. A Proclamation forbidding the transportation and carriage of all manner of graine and Beere out of the Realme, to endure vntill the next Michaelmas hereafter follow∣ing. The viij. of October, 1590. THe Queenes Maiestie vnderstanding the likelihood of great de arth of all man∣ner of graine, to follow this present yeere within her Realme, if good foresight be not had to restraine the carying out of all sortes of graine to forreine partes, where it is knowen there is scarcity, and thereby occasion giuen for priuate lu∣cre, to carry into forreine parts, such kinds of graine, as (God be thanked) there is sufficient thereof in this Realme for her owne people and subiects: hath by aduise of her Counsell, determined to prouide remedie for such inconueni∣ence. And therefore her Maiestie doeth most straitly charge and command, that no persons of what condition soeuer they be, shall carrie or cause to be caried out of the Realme, or bargaine, graunt or couenant with any person, to the intent to be caried out of the Realme, any Wheate, Rye, Barley, Malte, Beanes, Otes, or Pease, vpon paine of imprisonment during their liues, and such fine, as shalbe assessed by her Maiesties Counsel, vpon their lands or goods. And that all Owners and masters of Ships, and all mariners that shalbe priuy to the lading and carying of any such graine into any parts out of the Realme, shal also be committed to prison for one whole yeere, and the ship that shalbe laden belonging to any ow∣ner being priuy thereto, to be arrested, and not to be suffred to make sayle, during one whole yere following. And because her Maiesty vnderstandeth, that there is great abuse in carying out of Beere, by colour of certaine licen∣ces, and in the name of victualling Beere, or fowring Beere: Her Maiestie commandeth and willeth the Lord Treasorer of England, to stay the carriage of any maner of Beere out of the Realme, by vertue of any licences re∣mayning yet in force, which her Highnes pleasure is, to be suspended vntil Michaelmas next nowe following, And that no Beere be either for victualling of ships to be occupied in trade of marchandize, or any shippes law∣fully set forth as shippes of warre, or for a kinde of victualling of strangers ships, in the name of fowring Beere, shipped to the caried, but that the same be limited and rated in euery port, according to such good orders as haue bene of late yeeres prescribed for the same in the port of London, and as shalbe further prescribed to the Officers of euery port within the Realme, by the Lord Treasorer of England. And yet neuerthelesse, her Maiestie thin∣keth it meete, that such reasonable quantitie of wheate for bread corne, and Beere, shalbe caried out of the vsual ports of her Realme, into the lowe countries, for the sustentation of her souldiers seruing in the same low coun∣treies, according to such a conuenient proportion as hath beene of late limited to such persons as haue or shall haue the charge thereof, and not otherwise. And to the intent this her Maiesties straight commandement may take the better effect, Her Maiestie hath commanded her priuie Counsell to make choise of certaine speciall tru∣stie persons in all the Maritime Counties of her Realme, where portes are meete to lade any such graine, and them by special letters to authorize and charge, to haue regard from time to time, to all manner of shipping that shall lade any graine to transport from port to port, that by colour thereof no graine be laden, but vpon bondes first giuen with good sureties, to be certified into her Exchequer, that the same shall not passe out of the Realme, And to adde to the same bonds such other needfull conditions as shall seeme meete to restraine the same, the bet∣ter thereby to performe the intent of this her Maiesties commandement, which her Highnesse expresse pleasure is shall be and continue in force, vntill Michaelmas next comming after the publication hereof. Giuen at her Maiesties Castle of Windsor the eight day of October 1590, in the two and thirtieth yeere of her Maiesties raigne. God saue the Queene. ❧ Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie. 1590.
