8675.4 22348949 25423
❧ By the King. ¶ Orders for the Postes of Our Realmes, and for all men to obserue and obey in the speedie cariage of Packets, di∣rected for Our Affaires. Whereas heretofore the Lords of the Priuie Councell to the Queene Our sister deceased, for great and weightie causes concerning the State, haue endeauo∣red to set do wne, and publish fundry Orders, and generall directions for mat∣ters of Posting, especially for the speedie dispatch of Packets and Letters im∣porting the Princes immediate Affaires, the colour whereof seruing priuate turnes, hath greatly frustrated their endeauours: It is now therefore, for the better warrantise and direction of Our Posts, thought meete and conuenient, that the former Orders bee reuiued, and (according to the necessitie of the times) renewed and published in Our name in manner as followeth. 1. FIrst, euery Post receiuing a daily Fee, and entertained specially for the Packet, according to the proportion of his Wages by the day, shall keepe certaine Horses, to the number of two at the least, with furniture conuenient, and those alwayes to haue at hand in a readinesse to run with our Packets onely in Post, so soone as the same are brought to his hands. He shall haue also two Bags of Leather at the least, well lined with Bayes or Cotton, to cary the Packet in, and Hornes to sound and blow, a soft as he meets company, or foure times in euery mile. 2. EVery Post thus furnished, shall at all houres receiue and cary, or send away, all Packets or Letters brought vnto him, directed for Our speciall affaires, dated on the outside, with the time and place of their first deliuery, and subscribed by the hands of Our Principall Secreta∣ries, and Master & Comptroller generall of the Postes: and for matters of the Nauie, or to the Ma∣ritime Forts vpon the Sea coasts, or principall Port Townes, by Our Admirall of England: For matters of the Cinque Ports, by Our Warden: For matters of Scotland. by Our Treasurer and Secretarie of Scotland: And for Ireland, by Our Lieutenant there, Or addressed to them in the proper businesse of their places, or to the body of Our Councell, from what persons or places what∣soeuer: Of whose names, and addresse onely, the Postes shall take notice, according to the first In∣stitution, and originall vse of their seruice, and of none other. 3. EVery Post receiuing Our Packets, directed and subscribed as abouesaid, shall within one quarter of an houre at the most after they come to his hands, dispatch them away in Post, and shall runne therewith in Summer (that is, from the first of Aprill to the last of Sep∣tember) after seuen miles the houre: and in Winter (which shall be esteemed the rest of the yeere) after fiue miles the houre at the least, as the wayes afford and the weather fall out. 4. ANd that it may appeare from time to time (when, and as often as it shal be required) with what care and diligence the seruice is at all hands applied and performed, Cuery Post shall keepe a large and faire leger paper booke to enter Our Packets in, as they shall be brought vnto him, with the day of the moneth, houre of the day or night, that they came first to his handes, together with the name of him or them, by whom or vnto whom they were subscribed and directed, taking and entring onely such for Our Packets, as come warranted as aforesaid, and all others to passe as by-Letters. 5. LAstly, to the ende that the Postes generally may the better attend their seuerall Seruices, and performe their dueties in that behaife, Our pleasure is, that they and euery of them shall brooke and enioy the benefite of all former fauours allowed them, Namely, That they and their seruants be holden free and exempted from all Prests and attendances at Assises, Sessions, Inquests, and Musters. Signed by his Maiestie, and subscribed by Charles Stanhop Knight of the Bath, Lord Stanhop of Harington, Master and Comptroller generall of his Highnesse Postes. God saue the King. ❧ Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and IOHN BILL. Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. M.DC.XXI.
