a323b 99825584 29970
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Manner of the Behaviour OF THE Prisoners who received Sentence of Death, On Saturday the First of September, 1688. at the Sessions-House in the OLD-BAILEY: Of which Charles O Bryan and Daniel Carey were Executed at Tyburn on Friday the 7th of September, 1688. With a Relation of their several Facts for which they were Condemned, and what happened at the Place of EXECUTION. 'TIs frequently observ'd, and much to be deplored, that the many fatal Examples of this kind have not their Effects on hardned Sinners, (such as have sold themselves, as we may properly term it, to do Wicked∣ness in restraining them from following the footsteps of those that have suffered; neither, on the other hand, does the interposing Mercy of a Gra∣cious Prince, in saving the Lives of many from untimely Deaths, forfeited to Justice by the Crimes they have committed, work so sensibly upon these kind of Criminals, as to deter them from proceeding in dishonest ways, and break∣ing those Laws that ought to be the Rule and Boundary of their Actions, and by which they should square the course of their Lives, so as to live honestly in such Vocations or Callings, &c. as God has appointed or enabled them to subsist in and by. However, that we may not be wanting to forwarn such as are still encouraging themselves in the progress of Iniquity, we think it highly convenient to give a Relation of the Condemnation, manner of Behaviour, and Sufferings, &c. of the Persons who received Sentence at the Sessions holden at the Sessions-house in the Old-Bailey the First of this instant September, 1688. as also for the further satisfaction of those that are inquisitive after the Account that is ordinarily given upon the Execution of the Prisoners suffering at Tyburn, &c. Which Impartial Relation, Reader, take as followeth: At the Sessions holden for London and Middlesex, on the 31st of August, and the 1st of September, in the close of the said Sessions these Persons receiv'd Sen∣tence of Death, viz. John Prisley, for the Murther of Roger Page, late Master of the Spotted Dog in Goodmans fields in the Parish of White-Chappel, on the 6th of August, by gi∣ving him a mortal Wound on the left-side of the Belly, upon a Quarrel happen∣ing
between the Deceased, and one Thomas Yerard and Thomas Dawson not yet taken, whose part the Prisoner (accidentally coming by) took, and gave the De∣ceased the Wound, as it appeared in Court, without any manner of provocati∣on. When, after Sentence of Death received, as in case of Wilful Murther, (it being so found by the Jury) he was remanded back to Newgate, after having in vain begg'd Transportation, and pleaded he was a Young Man, in the prime of his Years and Strength, &c. Where being arrived, he betook himself to as much Retirement as possible the place would afford; and, upon the serious ad∣vice given him that he ought not to flatter himself with hopes of long Life, be∣came very pensive, not only praying by himself, but desiring the Prayers of such as came to visit him; imploring God's Mercy, and desiring that the innocent Blood that had been shed might not be laid to his charge; saying he had been well educated, and born of considerable Parents, but had not cordially hearken∣ed to those good Instructions they had given him, rather following his own Imaginations; for which, and other sins, he believ'd God had brought this Punishment upon him. And much in the same temper, as far as could be per∣ceived by those that visited him and attended upon him, he continued, dili∣gently enquiring after his future Safety. John George receiv'd Sentence in the close of the Sessions, as the former, for breaking the House of one Richard Higgens of the Parish of Acton in the Coun∣ty of Middlesex, and taking Goods and Moneys belonging to the said Higgens and one Edward Stephens, to the value of 10 l. on tho 17th of August last; plead∣ing only, that he bought the Goods in the Street, tho' it appear'd upon Evi∣dence in Court he was found in the House, and there apprehended. But be∣ing return'd to Newgate, to expect the Execution of the Sentence, he (tho' con∣cluded to be an old Ostender) began much to relent, and consider his Eternal Estate, as little hoping or expecting long to continue in this World, much list∣ening to those that came in charity to visit him and his Fellow-Convicts, seem∣ing desirous to be instructed, and confessing that giving himself up to bad Com∣pany, he had (to supply his Wants, occasion'd by extravagant Expences) pro∣ceeded to take unlawful Courses: but he hoped, if he might be spared, so to order the future business of his Life, as to make (in some measure) amends for the Injury he had done to sundry Persons, whom he forbore to name; but that, if it was his hard hap to fall by an untimely Death, he hop'd God would have Mercy upon his poor Soul, and not suffer That to miscarry; desiring often the Prayers of all good People, that by their Supplications on his behalf God would give him a true sense of his sins, and dispose his heart to sincere Repentance; and so continued at times to pray in publick, and by himself in private, as much as the convenience of the place would admit. Daniel Carey had Sentence of Death for the Wilful Murdering of Richard Welding on the 17th of July last upon Tower-hill, by giving him a Wound un∣der the left Breast of five Inches, whereof the said Welding then, or in a very short time after, dy'd. And tho' in Court he alledged the Witnesses were mistaken in the Man, and that there being others there, they might give the Wound above-mentioned; alledging likewise his Youth and Innocency: Yet in his retirement he appear'd much afflicted and concern'd at what had happen∣ed; hoping, and earnestly desiring, that God would not lay Blood to his Charge; and much bewail'd his misfortune for being present at this disastrous Accident, giving himself up very attentively to hear the Exhortations of such pious Divines and others as came to counsel him for his Immortal Welfare, and
advising all by his Example to keep out of Quarrellings, and brangling mat∣ters of that nature, thereby to prevent their falling into the like misfortune; hoping however, tho' he had liv'd a dissolute Life, that now his unfeigned Re∣pentance might find place for Mercy, &c. Charles O Bryan and William Godard received Sentence of Death for a Felony and Burglary, in breaking the House of Edward Weeks of Cony-Hatch in the County of Middlesex in the Night-time, and taking thence Goods and Money to the value of 30 l. in which Exploit one Jones (who was likewise with them in the Robbery) receiv'd a mortal Wound, of which he dy'd in Moors-Court in St. Martins in the Fields, they bringing him off at that time wounded, &c. And altho' upon Trial they denied the Fact; yet being returned to Newgate, with little hopes of being repriev'd, tho' they had earnestly implor'd Transportati∣on, a sense of their mis-spent Lives appear'd in their melancholly Deportment and Behaviour, much Dejectedness, &c. and made them, in spight of some lit∣tle resolution they strove to put upon it, to consider the nearness of their ap∣proaching Ends, as standing condemned by Law, &c. obliging them to a de∣sire of Repentance and Forgiveness of those sins that had brought them even upon the brink of a shameful Death, and earnestly attending the Exhortations of such as gave Them and their Fellow-Convicts serious Advice. John Pidgley was sentenc'd with the rest for stealing two Gueldings, value 14 l. on the 27th of July last, out of the Grounds of Edward Spear at Hammer∣smith, which he sold to one John Gerrard, who was tried with him, but acquit∣ted. He, as the rest, being return'd to Newgate, found the sense of approaching Death struck terror upon his Conscience, and greatly afflict him, insomuch that he became altogether restless and uneasie, till he had somewhat allay'd his la∣bouring mind by addressing himself to such as came to administer spiritual Con∣solation to ease his Oppressions, &c. He confessed himself a very vile Sinner, and that by giving himself up to Lewd Company he had been drawn into ma∣ny evil Practices, continuing very Penitent. Thus far having proceeded to give an Account of the particular Behaviours of these condemned Criminals, as far as was observed during their respite, we now pass to what was more general, viz. Upon their being return'd to Newgate afer Sentence, the next morning several persons uisited them, in order to pre∣pare their minds for a sincere Repentance, labouring earnestly to make them sensible of the great Crimes they had committed, and the danger they were in not only to lose a Temporal Life, as forfeited to the Justice of the Nation for the breach of the known Laws, but that which is Eternal, unless God's Anger by a speedy Repentance might be turned away, and his Mercy plead with his Justice on their behalf; laying before them how heinous a thing Sin is in the sight of God, especially Sins of such a Dye and Complexion as they stood no∣toriously guilty of: To which they most of them gave very serious attention, wishing, and heartily desiring, that Prayers might be put up for them, that God in his infinite Mercy would be pleased to have mercy upon their poor Souls, and give them a true sense of the wretched State and Condition where∣in they were. Thus being somewhat prepared for Holy Exercise, they retired to Prayers, and afterwards, in the Sermons preached on that Occasion, so many as were present were further exhorted to a serious Repentance, and highly to improve the little time they had, or could expect, on this side the Grave, by endeavour∣ing
to break the stoniness of their hearts, and shew themselves throughly sensi∣ble, by an unfeigned acknowledgment of their Crimes, whereby they had of∣fended God and Man in the highest Nature, some of them being of a Crimson Dye, as having dipped their hands in innocent Blood, and others in a manner no less heinous: Wherefore great Sins required great Repentance; and that such stains of Guilt could not be washed out without a thorough breaking and humbling under a true sense of them; and that they ought to employ all their power and strength to cry to God, who is the God of Mercies and Forgiveness, where the Sinner is truly penitent, and takes shame to himself. And further they were shewed the Nature of their Sins in sundry respects, and earnestly exhorted not to delay Repentance, by flattering themselves with hopes of a longer Life, of which they were so uncertain: Or, if it so fell out that they might be spared through the King's great Clemency and Goodness, yet how∣ever it was high time for them to turn from the evil of their ways, and become new Creatures, lest by continuing in a course of sinning a greater Evil should suddenly overtake them, or to this effect. And then proceeded to give them hopes of Salvation in the many gracious and favourable Promises made in the Gospel to penitent Sinners, tho' turning late from the paths of Iniquity, if the Repentance prov'd sincere and unfeigned, &c. The following days they were frequently visited, and supported under their Agony and Afflictions with cordial Advice, and seasonable Admonitions, to which they seemed to give extraordinary attention, with promise of obser∣vance and amendment. And now, whil'st these good Offices continued, and nothing but Death could be expected, seeing they were already Dead in Law, and nothing but the Execution of the Sentence remain'd to pass them from this World into Eternity: His Majesty's interposing Mercy stepped between, so that several of them were by his gracious Clemency Repriev'd, of which ha∣ving notice, they seemed much over-joy'd, that by the Goodness of their Com∣passionate Prince they were raised in a manner from Death (in the thoughts of which they were altogether swallowed up) to the prospect of a longer Life: however Three, viz. Daniel Carey, Charles O Bryan, and John Prisley, whose Crimes render'd them less fit Objects of such Clemency and Forbearance, on Friday-morning, after they had been pray'd with in the Prison, and exhorted in this their great Extremity to lay hold on Christ by Faith, and wholly rely on God's Mercy through the Merits of their Blessed Saviour, &c. were put into the Cart, and carried to Tyburn, the place of Execution; where being arrived, after the usual Ceremony, two (viz. O' Bryan and Carey) were Exe∣cuted according to Sentence; but Prisley obtain'd a Reprieve, and was brought back to Newgate. WITH ALLOWANCE. LONDON, Printed by D. Mallet, next Door to the Sign of the Star between Fleet-bridge and Bridewell-bridge. 1688.
