a399 11741646 48491
AN ACCOUNT Of the Taking of Captain Holland, Who (it's said) is the very Man by whose Hands was the late Earl of Essex Murthered. IT's now too notoriously known to the World to be denied, that they who were ad∣vanced for these several Years past into the highest Seats of Justice, have prophaned that great Name, Poysoned its Streams, and deceived the People whom they should have Inform'd, both by Vindicating the Authors of this Bloody Murther, from the Guilt and Suspicion of it, and by Defaming and Wounding the Memory of a most Noble, Innocent, and Guiltless Person (whose Spittle, some time before, they were Ambitious to lick up) with the Infamy of Fe lo de se, 'tis to them that the Enemies of Protestancy, and English Rights owe the Success of all these Attempts: And its they whom the Nati∣on ought to Accuse of being the Instruments of Betraying us to Popery and Slavery; and instead of detecting, they have became Advocates for Assassinates, and Concealers of Massacres, that we may even say with Jeremiah, Be astonished, O ye Heavens at this, and be ye borridly afraid. But that God who has said, There is nothing covered that shall not be Revealed; nor any thing hid which shall not be known or come abroad; even that God to whom Vengeance belongs, has by his good Providence, brought to light the very Villain (whom it's not to be doubted but will be proved) that Murthered the late Noble and Innocent Earl of ESSEX: This Monsters Name is Holland, and generally known by the Name of Captain Holland, a Creature of the Earl of Sunderlands, from whom he has had very great Rewards; and 'tis generally said, and I doubt not but will be proved, that he has received a Pension of Five Pounds per Week, for these several Years past, from the said Earl. This Holland is a bold daring resolute Man, has a very sharp Eye, and stern Coun∣tenance; he has been a Man of Intreague all his Life-time, and One who has been al∣ready Convicted of the greatest of Villanies: First, Of Counterfeiting and making False-Guinies. Secondly, In being a chief Actor in Cheating the Silk-Man of Law∣rence-Lane, by Insinuating to him, that he, with some others, had a Warrant from the Earl of Sunderland, to seize him for speaking Treasonable Words, from whom (on pretence of getting him off on the Account of his Interest with the said Earl) he got some Moneys down, and Bonds for Three Hundred Pounds; which afterwards being detected, his Accomplices were Exemplary Punished, but himself Pardoned. A Third time for Robbing Dr. Gattaker of Lime-street, by Debauching the Maid-Servant, with the As∣sistance of one Davis; for which, they all Three were Condemned at the Old Baily, and Davis and the Maid-Servant Executed, but our Noble Captain had his wonted good Fate of a Pardon, by the Interest of his Old Friend the Earl of Sunderland. Warrants having been given out, and Messengers in search for this Captain Hol∣land, he was at last (by the Indesatigable Industry of a Noble Lord) taken in a House about the middle of Essex-street, near St. Clement's-Church Yesterday Noon, where he remains till further Orders come (from those Honourable Committee of Peers, that take all the Examinations about the Earl of Essex's Murther) to what Prison he must be carried. LONDON, Printed for J. Bowers, 1689.
