A4233 R5888 12192027 55886
A DIALOGV (OR FAMILIAR DISCOURS and conference betweene the HƲSBANDMAN and FRƲIT-TREES; in his Nurseries, Orchards, and Gardens. Wherein are discovered many usefull, and profitable▪ Observa∣tions, and Experriments in Nature, in the Ordering of FRƲIT-TREES, for temporall profitt; Improving also the same to higher ends, and uses, in Spiritu∣all things, for the Good, and profitt of all; both in the Church, and of the World. Whereby the Wisdome, Power, Bounty, and goodnesse of God to his Glory▪ are clearely seen▪ and read, in this Volume of the Creatures; And all men instructed by thm, in their Duty towards God, in order to their Comfort, Edification, and Salvation▪ By RA: AƲSTEN; Practiser (50 years) in the Art of Planting FRƲIT-TREES. Cant. 2.3. As the Appletree among the Trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the Sonnes. I sate downe under his shaddow with great delight; And his Fruit was sweete to my tast. Hose. 12.10. I have used similitudes by the Ministrie of the Prophets. Aquin. Tunc homo creaturas interrogat; quando s dil¦genter considerat: sed tunc interrogatae respondent, cum ¦mo perspicit quod tanta ordinatio esse non possit, nisi ab ¦qua superiore sapientia dispensante: OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall. for Thomas Bowman 167
THE EPISTLE to the READER. GOD hath given to man two great Books, to read and study; viz: His workes, and his word; whereby we may come to know God, and learn our Duty to him. The Creatures of God do all of them speake out the Praises of God; and are not only Examples to us of Obedience, but also do call aloude unto Man, and instruct, and teach him, what he ought to do; And that as plainly and convincingly to the mind, and con∣science, as words do to the eare: The Prophet saith: Ps: 19.1, 2. &c. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament sheweth his handy worke: ver: 2. Day unto Day uttereth speech; and night unto night sheweth knowledge: ver: 3. There is no speech, nor Language,
Where their voice is not heard. ver. 4. Their line is gon out through all the Earth, and their words to the Ends of the world. The Apostle Paul recites words to the same purpose; Rom: 10:18: shewing that all men have in∣structions to know God, even by his works. Have they not heard (saith he) Yes verily, their sound went into all the Earth, and their words to the Ends of the world. We see here, inanimate creatures can speake to the praise of God, and instru∣ction of man: The excellencies, and in∣finite perfections of God, are plainly seen, and read perspeculum creaturarum; even in the Creatures which he hath made; And men that are illiterate, and can∣not read a line in any printed Book, may yet read distinctly, and plainly in this Book of the Creatures if they will but set their Reason and understanding on work, and learn their Language, and
the manner of Discourse with them, Inanimate creatures, such as are but bare. And naked substances without life, or sence, as the heavens, the Sun, Moon, and Starrs, yet even these do de∣clare knowledge, and wisdome; to Man: they have a speech, a voice; their words go the ends of the world; to every Nation, and Language; And men who have not the Scriptures, nor any other Books, or writings of men, they shall not be excused in their ignorance of God, and of their dutie to him; if they learne not from his creatures; if they understand not their speech, and Language, and learn not from them; And this is plain from Rom: 1, 20. St Paul speaking of the heathen, re∣proving them for their ignorance, and disobedience; he tells them, much of God may be seen, and known, in and by the Creatures: The invisible things of God, from the Creation of the world,
are clearly seen being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternall Power, and Godhead; so that they are left without excuse. The Attributes of God; (his wis∣dom, Power, goodnesse, love, and bounty, towards mankind) are clearly seene, read, and understood, by the things that he hath made. And let not men think, that because they are not Learn∣ed, in any School Learning, therefore they shall be excused. Though they are ignorant of God, and of their du∣ty to him: for the Prophet tells such what they shall find, if they are of the number of those sottish children, that have no understanding: he that made them will not have Mercy on them; and he that formed them will shew them no Favour: Isay 27:11: So that it highly con∣cernes every one to learn the Language of the Creatures; and how to conferre, and discourse with them for their profitt,
and edification: And among the Crea∣tures with Fruit-trees. the subject of the Ensuing Dialogue. Shall men plant Orchards, and Gar∣dens of Fruit-trees, and only take their Pleasures, and Profits from them, from year to year: This is no more than the Beasts, and the Birds do; They sitt under their shade in the heate of Som∣mer, and eat of their Fruits: The Swine gathers, and eates the Fruits that fall under the Trees, and goes his way, but understands not whence they are; but men that are endued with Reason, and understanding (especially if a Principle of supernaturall grace, and the Spirit of God, be dwelling, and ruling in them) must look higher, and make another use of Fruit-trees, than meerly for temporall Profit, and Plea∣sures: Men must discourse with Fruit-trees, having learned to understand their Language which though it be nor
Articulate, and distinct to the outward sence of hearing, in the sound of words, yet they speake plainly, and distinctly to the inward sence, the understanding: The soul hath its sences, as well as the body; the soul doth really hear, see &c. as well as the body: so that we may learn from Fruit-trees many good lessons, and usefull instructions; they being Creatures, that are alwaies speaking, and alwaies speake the truth, both for the glory of God, and the good of men; Every Creature speakes this aloude to every man, qui fecit me, propter te, fecit te, propter se: he that made me, for thee, made thee for himselfe: Mr Caryl in his exposition upon Job, Chap. 12. speakes much to this purpose: All Creatures, (as he there saies) have a teaching voyce; they read us divinity Le∣ctures of Divine Providence. Seculum, est Speculum: The world below is a
Glass, wherein we may see the world above, they who cannot read other Books, may yet run, and read this Book of the Creatures, written in great, and plain Letters, and Chara∣cters. Non est ullum animalculum tam exiguum in quo non plus discere possimus, quam in omnibus sculptis, pictis, aut simulachris, Lauac. The idle, slothfull man is sent to the Pismire, to learn and be instructed, Pro: 6.6. Go to the Ant thou sluggard, consider her wayes, and be wise, she getteth her meat in the Summer &c: such as provide not in summer, for Winter, in youth for old age, in this life for the next, are condemned by this little Creature; Deus maximus in minimis: God is seen in the least of his Crea∣tures: yea, go to the Oxe, and the Asse, thou brutish, sensual man, or wo∣man, consider, and learn of them: They know, and own, serve, and
obey, their Master, him that feedeth them; Isay: 1.3. The Oxe knoweth his owner and the Asse his Masters Crib; but Israel hath not known Me, saith the Lord. but thou (as thou wantest grace, so also thou wantest the good Nature, that these poor Creatures have, and shew forth to him that keeps them; Thou art fed, and clothed dayly, and hast all things convenient for life from the hand of God, and yet thou ow∣nest him not, but servest thy self, and rebellest against God: therefore these dull Beasts shall condemn thee. Let not men make light of these things (of learning from Fruit-trees, and other Creatures) they shall find one day, (and that shortly too) they shall be called to an Account; and be judg∣ed by the Creatures, as well as by the word: Therefore it concernes every one to learn their speech, and lan∣guage, and to be instructed thereby, in order to their own Duty, and the glory of God.
O the loud cry, and voyce of Na∣ure from these very Creatures, (of he infinite wisdome, Power, and bounty f God towards Man,) how is it heard, plainly, and distinctly, not only in the infinite number, and kinds of Fruit-trees, Flowers, and vegetables in Orchards, and Gardens, but also in e∣very individuall, and particular Tree: Consider only, but one large Apple∣ree; some of them bearing many Bushels of Fruits in one year; Every articular Fruit hath severall seeds, or ernels in it; and every seed (though any thousands from one Tree) hath e Nature of the whole Tree in it lf, and that exacty: Potentially, the whole tree; in that small substance; (many of them lesse then a graine of Wheat) it hath in it the innate, intrin∣sicall forme, and vertue of the VVhole Tree, that huge, and vast body that we see above ground, and will (if
sowen) produce the same in kind: And not only so, but likewise every small Twigg of the Tree, yea, the least bud of the least twigg hath also (virtually) the whole tree in it self, and produ∣ceth the same, if inoculated, according to Art. St Austen takes notice of these things and admires God in them; Gen: ad lit: ch 15. and exhorts all men to study them, and learn from them; Ex ipsis operi∣bus dei indagare conemur; consideremus ergo, cujuslibet Arboris pulcritudinem, in robore, ramis, frondibus, Pomis; &c. illud germen ex semine; in semine ergo illa omnia fuerunt primitus; non mole corporeae magnitudinis, sed vipotentiaque causaliter: in exiguo grano mirabilior prostantior que vis est, quia valuit adia∣cens humor commixtus terrae, quid enim ex arbore illâ, surgit, aut pendet, quod non ex quodam occulto Thesauro semi∣nis illius extractum atque depromptum est.
Job exhorts us to learn from these, and all Creatures; Chap. 12.7, 8.9. &c. Aske now the Beasts, and they shall teach thee, and the Foules of the Air and they shall tell thee: Or speake to the earth, and it shall teach thee; or (as it is translated) speake to every Twigg, or Tree that growes upon the Earth, and it shall teach thee; And the Fishes of the Sea, shall declare unto thee. Here we see, are many Masters, and Teachers, for the instruction of Man, in his duty to God; Christians that have not only Reason, but grace, may learn from Creatures that have neither Reason, nor sence; Grace in the heart of a Christian, improves common, earthly Objects, to spiritual uses, and holy Ends: it is (spiritually) the Phy∣losophers stone; that turnes Earth, into Heaven; Naturall Objects, into Spiri∣tual, As faith sees him that is invisible, and things that are not seen, so sence
shewes us him that is inisible, i. e. God in his workes. Being as a prospective Glasse through which we may see the lively species of infinit ex∣cellencies in God. First, All Creatures yeild ready Obe∣dience to God; for they obey the Law of their Creation: Fire, and Haile, Snow, and vapors, Stormy winds and Tem∣pests, fulfilling his word. Ps. 148.8. Secondly, And as Creatures teach us Obedience to God, in observing the Law of their Creation; so also they teach us dependance upon God: as we see Hose 2.21. God having betrothed Israel his people, in righteousnesse, in judgment, in loving kindnesse, in mercies, in Faith∣fulnesse, and that for ever; from that time all the Creatures do strive to do them good; but yet in a Chain of de¦pendance; Every one confessing their in¦ability, without help from God: Israel had need of the Creatures to nourish
them, They cry to God for Corne, VVine, and Oyle; These are ready, and willing to nourish Israel, but then the Earth must bring them forth, therefore these cry to the Earth, to give them rooting, and nourishment, the Earth would do this willingly, for Israels sake, but cannot, except the Heavens do water it, with Rain, and Dewes; there∣fore the Earth cryes to the Heavens, but the Heavens (though willing) can give no Rain, nor refreshing, until God command them to do it; therefore the Heavens cry unto God, that he would give them Commission to water the Earth: As we see: Hose: 2.2. I will hear (saith the Lord) I will hear the hea∣vens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corne, and the VVine, and the Oyle, and they shall heare Israel: So God commanding the hea∣vens, the heavens feed the Earth, and the Earth feeds the Corn, VVine, and Oyl, and these feed Israel.
The eyes of all Creatures waite up∣on God, and he giveth them their meate in due season: Ps. 145.15. he feedeth the young Ravens that call upon Him: Ps. 147.9. The Lyons roaring after their Prey, do seeke their Meate of God: So they all teach us the same Lesson of dependance upon God for all necessaries. The Apostle Paul shewes us, That there is somewhat even in inanimate Creatures, that puts forth an Act of Expectation, yea, of Earnest Expecta∣tion; for deliverace from the bon∣dage that the sin of man hath brought them under; Rom. 8.19. The earnest expectation of the Creature, waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God: and ver. 22. The whole Creation growneth, and travelleth in pain together until now. Thirdly: We may also learn this Lesson from the Creatures (even from irrationall, and lifelesse Creatures) not
only (as was said 1: Obedience to God, and 2: dependance upon him; but like∣wise 3ly. to desire, and long, for a full freedome, and deliverance from the bon∣dage of Corruption, and to attain the Glorious liberty of the sons of God; for shall inanimate Creatures do this; and shall not Rational, and Spiritual Christians do it, much more. Now if any one ask this Question; how may we speake to Fruit-trees, or any other Creatures that are without Reason or sence, that we may receive Instructions from them. This Question (long since) is answered by St Austen; 10: Book of his con∣fessions. I put the Question (saith he) to the Earth, and to the Sea; and to the rest of the Creatures; and they give me an Answer; Now if you would know what my Question was; It was the deep intention, and consideration, I had in my heart, about the Creatures; And would
you know what their Answer was; their Answer was that which I collected in my Meditations, from their several Natures, qualities, and properties. So that to confer, and discourse with Fruit-trees (as in the ensuing Dia∣lougue) and to receive insturctions from them, not only as to temporall Profits, but Spiritual also, it is, in a Ra∣tional, serious, and Spiritual man∣ner, to consider them, and dive, and search into their Natures, and Proper∣ties; as we may observe, and gather by Experience, from year, to year, con∣cerning them; which every Ratio∣nall man may do, more, or lesse; But yet the more knowledg, and Experi∣ence any man has, the better it is don; And then the making of right conclu∣sions, upon such Considerations, those are the Answeres, Teachings, or instru∣ctions of the Fruit-trees; so of all other Creatures, (as was said;) Job: 12.7.
aske the Beasts, and they shall teach thee; docebit te, unaquaque ex Bestiis docebit te. The Excellencies, Vertues, beauties and perfections that are in the Creatures do plainly shew forth, and manifest, the infinite Excellencies and perfections of God; his VVisdom, Power, Goodness, Beauty, Bounty &c. Now, when we diligently consider, and search out their Natures and Vertues, Beauties, and Properties, which God hath Stampt upon them, and put into them, and make right Conclusions, then we confer and discourse with them; The Crea∣tures discover the Attributes of God to the Eye, as his word does to the Ear, and both to the Mind. And this produceth (or should do) in every one, Praise, and Glory to God, wonder, and admiration of him; for that he is the Creator, and contriver of all these excel∣lent things: who being the Originall
and first Cause of all these wonderful, and excellent Creatures, so many, so good, so beautifull, so usefull, profi∣table, and pleasant, in the lives of men, it must needs be concluded, that he himself is much more so, in himselfe; yea, infinitely above, better, and ex∣ceeding them all, and consequently to be desired, and loved above them all. Aquin: Hujusmodi interrogatio est mentis ope∣ratio, qua creaturarum perfecti∣ones intuemur: Tunc homo Crea∣turas interrogat, quando eas diligenter considerat; sed tunc interrogate respon∣dent, cum homo prospicit quod tanta or∣dinatio esse non possit, nisi ab aliqua su∣periore sapientia dispensante. That is: When we seriously consider, the nature, and properties of inanimate creatures; then we aske Questions of them; and they being thus Questioned, they re∣turn an answer unto men, when we clearly perceive that their wonderfull
Natures, vertues, and properties, cannot be, but from the Power, and VVisdome of a superior Cause. Every created being, instructs us con∣cerning our Creator, of his wisdom, and goodnesse, and of our duty, and thank∣fulnesse we owe unto him; so that as many Creatures as are in the world, so many Teachers there are in the world: Therefore none shall be excused at the last day, for their ignorance of God; see∣ing we have not only the word of God, but all the Creatures of God to instruct us; concerning God and our duty to him. So then; with these breife instru∣ctions concerning discourse with Fruit-trees, I commit the Ensuing Dialogue to thy use, for thy profitt. Who am thy Friend to serve thee in love. RA: AVSTEN.
The Contents. Trees Speake to men. pag. 1. The Language of Fruit-trees. p 2 The Age of Fruit-trees. ibid. Mans fall, Restoring, and Establishing. p. 3 Section 2. Sympathy, and Antipathy in Vegetables. p. 4 Sympathy, and Antipathy of Plants, truly stated. p ib. Likenss of Natures accord best among men. p. 6 No attaining Communion with God, without a new Nature ib. No cordiall fellowship between Regenerate, and Ʋnregenerate persons. p. 7. Perception in Fruit-trees, in fled of sence. ib. Four distinct Rankes of Creatures, each Genus including many speties. p. 8 All Creatures are subservient one to another. p. 9 Section 3. The benefite of due Ordering of Fruit-trees. p. 16
God chastneth all his people; some more, some lesse, for their profit. p. 11. Section 4. Fruittrees beautiful objects. p. 13 Immoderate love to Creatures, dangerous ibid. Too much love to Creatures abates love to God. p. 14 Communion with Creatures calls for Commu∣nion with God. p. 15. Section 5. Profits, and Pleasures, by Fruit-trees. p. 16 Fruits of Trees, mans Food. ibid. Planting Fruit-trees commended by Antient, and late writers. p. 18 Section 6. Two things, (seeming) discouragements in Planting. p. 22. Vaine minds take up with present satisfacti∣ons. p. 23 Examples of the greatest persons in Plant∣ing. p. 23
Many Profits, and Pleasures in planting Fruit-trees. p. 27 Section 7. Great Trees in too fat soyle, bear not well. p. 29 Moderation is best. p. 29 A just Reprooff of the carnal, careless Gen∣trie. p. 30 Skilfull ordering of Fruit-trees produceth Fruitfulnesse. p. 31 Remove the Cause, and the effect ceaseth. p 32 A due commendation of the Pious, and Religi∣ous Gentry. ibid. Section 8. The voice of all Creatures to man. Fruit-trees, receive, and loose their beauty once a year. p. 35 The state of all things here below changeable. p. 36 Fruit-trees are pincht, and endure difficulties in winter. p. 37 Fruit-trees in the Spring revive. ibid. Some Christians go through great tribula∣tions. p. 38
The light of Gods Countenance refresheth the soul after darknesse. p. 41 Section 9. The Opinion about descention of Sap, exami∣ned. p. 41 No descention of Sap in Trees. p. 43 The Spirit, and nature of true Christians, tends upwards. p. 34 Section 10. Fruit-trees are prepared in Nurseries, to be transplanted. p. 45 Elder trees transplanted make room for the younger. p. 46 Some of the best kinds are to grow still in the Nursery p. 47 Nurseries of Materiall Fruit-trees are apt si∣militudes of Mystical Fruit-trees in Ʋni∣versities. ibid. The Spirit, and grace of God, is to be prefer∣ed before all Natural, and acquired abilities p. 48 Section 11. Some Fruits seem good to the Eye, but are bad to the tast. p. 50
Fruit-trees improved by ingrafting. p. 50 No works pleasing to God without sincerity. p. 51 Section 12. Mulberytrees called Sapientissima Arborum. p. 52 Mulberry-trees bud late, because of a tender nature. ibid. Some Christians are more valiant for Christ then others. p. 53 Section 13. Fruits ripen successively upon the same tree; others altogether. p. 54 The wisdom, and bounty of God in the ripening of Fruiis. p. 55 Section 14. South-Country trees prosper not in England. p. 56 Plant Fruit-trees fitt for the Country. ibid. Section 15. Redstreake trees formerly of little account. p. 57
Redstreake Apples best for Cider. p. 58 Comfort after trouble: joy after sorrow. ibid. Section 16. More planting of late years, then formerly p. 59 Reasons for much Planting of Fruit-trees. p. 60 Cider the most wholsome drink, especially of the bect Fruits. p. 60 Section 17. Fruit-trees shew forth the glory of God. p. 61 Fruit-trees are ingagements to obedience. p. 62 All men act according to their Natures. p. 63 Fruit-trees change not their Natures. ibid. All mankind have changed their Natures once; and some have a double change. p. 64 Section 18. Heat of the Sun needfull for Fruits. p. 65 Fruit-trees have a preception of the heate of the Sunn and are refreshed by it. ibid. Believers that walke closest with God, bring forth the best fruits. p. 66
Section 19. The Scripture saith Fruit-trees were from the beginning, and shall be to the End of the world. p. 67 The excellencies of all Creatures are united in God, and infinitely more then all. p. 67 The Excellencies, and vertues of the Creatures should leade us unto God, and there to rest. p. 68 Section 20. Young, small Trees: full of good Fruits. p. 68 God calls some of his people in childhood, and youth, others afterwards. p. 69 Section 21. Grosse ignorance reproved. p. 73 Most people are ignorant both of Gods word, and works. p. 74 Ʋnlearned men may read in the Book of the Creatures. Section 22. An invitation, and incouragement to a con∣ference with Fruit-trees. p. 76
Many things in Fruit-trees occasion admi∣ration. p. 77. 1. Tender Fruits, come forth with covers upon them: the more hardy, without: p. 77 Section 23. 2. Different substances made of one substance. p 79 Different Gifts, and Graces wrought by the same Spirit. ibid. Every gift ought to be improved for the pro∣fit of all. p. 80 Section 24. 3. Grafts and Buds, assimilate the Sap of the Stocks. p. 81 Section: 25. 4 Every small Bud contains the Nature of the whole Tree in it selfe. p. 83 5. The properties of a tree, are in every seed. p. 84 The same flower seed brings forth variety p. 85 6. Many kinds of Fruits upon one tree. p. 86
A DIALOGVE, (OR FAMILIAR DISCOURSE and conference) between the Husband∣man, and Fruittrees; in his Nurseries, Or∣chards, and Gardens. Trees speak to Men. HƲSBANDMAN: I have read in Learned and Godly mens workes and the Scriptures also declare as much; that yee Fruittrees can speake, and dis∣course with men, (though not with an arti∣culate distinct voice, and sound of words, to the outward sence of hearing, for that is pro∣per only to rationall Creatvres) Yet it is knowne yee can speake very intelligibly, and convincingly, to the minds, and conscien∣ces of men, And can Answere their Questions; and speak many things to their profit and edification; And that yee alwaies speake the very truth; and to the glory, and praise of God: What Language is it that yee speake,
is it English, or Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, or what other Language else, wherein yee dis∣course with men. The Language of Fruittrees. FRƲIT-TREES: We can speake all Languages; We can discourse with any Peo∣ple, or Nation, in any Language whatsoever; according as people please to discourse with us, so we Answer them; every man in his owne Language. HƲSBANDMAN: We in this Countrey, are Natives of England; we will therefore speake together in our English Tongue, for that we best understand; Tell me then first of all; Of what age are yee? of what duration? (I speake not of these individuall Trees here Planted, but of Fruittrees in generall.) How Long have yee been in the world? The Age of Fruittrees. FRƲITTREES: We are of a very Great Age; even from the beginning of the Creati∣on: which is now (according to common com∣putation) 5676. yeares or thereabouts: This thou maist understand by a Token that much concernes the; For we were present &
stood by, when thou, and thy wife, did both of you, transgresse the Command of our Creator, in the Garden of Eden, in that yee did eate of the Forbidden Fruit: Thou had'st liberty enough given thee, which was to Eate of all our Fruits, throughout the whole Garden; (Except only of one Tree, to try thy Obedience) and that as free∣ly as thou wouldest; why then didst thou breake the command of God; which we never yet did, nor ever shall; though we are much inferior to mankind. Mans fall, Restoring, and Establishing. HƲSBANDMAN: Herein yee speake the truth, and convincingly indeed; for so it was; which we must acknowledge to God, and be humbled for it; for it was a very great trans∣gression, we lost our glory, and our Happiness by it; but blessed be God for ever, for his free Grace, he hath shewed us a meanes, and way of recovery, to our former state of happinesse, which he did not to the Angels that sinned, but a little while before us; (God never spake one kind word to them since, nor ever will) O the justice, and mer∣cy of God: towards them justice: but to∣wards us Mercy, and free Grace; in our re∣storing
even all that he hath chosen: Yea, God hath not only restored, and recovered us out of our fallen state, but also hath so confirmed us in it; as that now we can ne∣ver fall from it any more; as we then did, But this is a Gloriouse mistery, discovered to us in the word of the Gospell of Christ; wherein yee have no skill, neither can yee speake, as to that matter. Section 2. Sympathy and Antipathy in Vegetables. HƲSBANDMAN: It hath been asserted by Learned men, That there is a sympathy, and Antipathy in Plants, Trees, and all Ve∣getables; some kinds will not thrive toge∣ther, which they impute to Antipathy; and some other kinds flourish, and prosper vi∣gorously, growing together, which they call Sympathy: or a good agreement one with another: What say yee of your selves, as to this matter. Sympathy, and Antipathy of Plants duly sta∣ted. We owne the Notion, if it be but rightly
understood and applyed; for there is such a contrariety, and heterogeneous quality in some trees, and other Vegetables; as men speake of, And also, a likenesse, and agreement in Nature, in some others, But it hath been much mistaken by some writers, who have said, That there is an Antipathy be∣tweene some Plants (as the Vine, and the Colewort) because they will not thrive to∣gether; but that is not an Antipathy; but rather a Sympathy: Lord Baron's Nat: Hist: pa: 101. Exp: 480. Because wee Vines love the same fatt, and fer∣till soyle, as the Colewort does; and thence it is that wee turne our Rootes from it, because it hath exhau∣sted the soile and made it barren; But there is a real Antipathy in Nature, between some trees, which are of Different species: & therefore they will never thrive together when joyned in Grafting. As the Apple-tree grafted upon a Peerestock; and so on the contrary; Also the Plum on the Cherry; and the Cherry on the Plum; They may grow 2. or 3. yeares but will never thrive to per∣fection; there is an Antipathy in Nature, and they reject each other; And therefore let men in grafting observe right species, and kinds in joyning us together; else no profit will accrue to the Husbandman.
Likenesse of Natures accord best among Men. HƲSBANDMAN: We see the same thing amongst men, and Women: There is a very great Antipathy, and contrariety in their Na∣tures one against another; an utter enmity in their Natures; Therefore it is necessary (in order to Communion, fellowship, and a∣greement of persons, and societies that they be of one, or alike Nature? But the highest, and greatest Antipathy, in the world, is that betweene the Holy Nature of God, and the corrupt nature of Man; No attay∣ning Com∣munion with God, without a New Na∣ture. There is no possibility of attai∣ning Communion and Fellowship with God, or to have any enjoy∣ment of God, here in this world, or hereafter in the life to come, without a change of Nature, The corrupt Nature of Man, is quite contrary to the Holy Nature of God; Therefore there must of necessity be a re∣newing in the spirit of our minds: a new Na∣ture, by ingrafting into Christ, that so there may be apertaking of the Image or Nature of the second Adam, in righteousness and true holinesse, as there is of the first Adam in sin, and corruption.
No fellowship betweene Regenerate and unre∣generate Persons. So neither can there be any cordial fel∣lowship, complacency or delight, betweene Regenerate, and unregenerate persons; be∣cause of this Antipathy, and contrariety in Na∣ture, what fellowship hath Christ with Beliall, or he that beleeveth with an infidell: There∣fore persons in their Marriage choice, had best consider, and make sure of this, in the first place: and make other considerations subservient, and subordinate thereunto. Quest: But how is this among Fruittrees, seeing yee are not sensible Creatures; but are in a rank, and degree below them. Perception in Fruittrees instead of sence. FRƲITTREES: It is true, we are not sensi∣ble Creatures; But yet we are living Creatures; And we have a Nature in us some what ana∣logous to sence; we have Perception, which is to us insteed of sence, whereby we know what is good for us, and what is hurtfull to us; and thereby we chuse the one, and reject the other, in some warme fertile soyles wee thrive much better than wee do in some cold, wett, bar∣ren
grounds; And so in respect of situation, either towards the Sun, or from it; in shady places. Four Distinct rancks of Creatures each Genus including many species. HƲSBANDMAN: I perceive then here∣by, That there is a vast difference among the Visible Creatures here upon earth; in their distinct and specisick Natures; wch may be distinguished into foure ranks, or degrees; every Genus, including divers perticuler, and distinct species; The first and lowest of all are those which are but only bare, and sim∣ple substances, without life; as Earth, wa∣ter, Stones, Mineralls,, and such like, the second sort are a degree above these, not only substances, but they have life also; as Trees, Flowers, Herbs: and all Vegetables; the third sort are a degree above them, which have not only life, but have also sence; as Beasts, Foules, Fishes, The fourth rank, and degree of Creatures, are above all these, which are not only substances, and have life, and sence, but also Reason, as Mankind in all Nations.
All Creatures are subservient one to another. And now as these Creatures are thus distinct in their degrees, one Genus higher then another; so by the Wisdome, providence, and appointment of God, they are usefull, and subservient, one to another, each kind in their distinct degrees the first, to the second; the second to the third, and the third to the fourth: The simple substan∣ces, Earth, water, &c. feed and nourish the flowers, herbs, and all Vegetables, and these nourish the Beasts, Foules, Fishes &c. And these feed, and nourish the highest Rank of visibles Creatures; all Mankind, that so he may serve, and glorifie God in, and by all these. Section 3. Culture of Fruittrees necessary. HƲSBANDMAN: Here are some Fruit-trees, which I have bestowed much labour and cost upon, in ordering of them, by dig∣ing about your Rootes, in manuring of them with good soyle: and the Branches by Pruning off the one halfe of them (being too
close, and too many; And also I have cut off the one halfe of your high; for yee were growen and aspired up, so high into the Aire, that the winds and Frosts (in the spring time especially) had more power upon you then upon low, spread trees; so that I hope my labour, hath not beene in vaine: How do yee find your selves, do yee perceive your selves any whit better, for all this labour, and time bestowed upon you. The benefit of due ordering Fruittrees. FRƲIT-TREES: We have a preception▪ that we grow more vigorously, and strong∣ly, then we did formerly; for we wer back bound, before; (a thick hard bark incompassing us) did very much obstruct▪ and hinder the assention of our sap) which now by thy ordering of us, is loosed; and we receive a more plentiful nourishmen by sap from the Earth, which feeds all ou branches; which before cutting aspired up into the Aire, but now spread round in a comly forme, and are full of good fruitts▪ as thou seest, And so we are every way much the better for all thy labours.
God chastneth all his People, some more, some lesse for their Profitt. HƲSBANDMAN: I see it is as yee say; And as these things are to be observed for our temporall profitt among fruittrees, so also they serve as a very apposite similitude to shaddow out a spirituall truth by way of analogie, and resemblance of Gods dealing with his people, his Misticall Fruittrees who, as a most wise, and carefull Husband∣man, seeing his Fruittrees beare good fruitts, he Prunes and orders them (some perticulars more especially, and that in some extraordinary manner) that they may bring forth more fruitts, and better then before. For some Christians after that they have attayned some good measures of Gifts, and Graces of the Spiritt, through the want of the exercise and improvement of them, and Christian watchfulnesse, they grow negli∣gent, and Proud and abate of that vigour of spiritt, zeale and love, that formerly they had; And therefore the Husbandman takes them in hand, and deales with them ac∣cording as the case requireth; He cuts off many of their branches, Ther exuberant
Vaine, carnall imaginations, thoughts, de∣sires, intentions, and contrivances) which rise up, and extend beyond due bounds, and brings them low, and humbles them greatly; Not only by many afflictions, troubles, and Distresses of Body, and spiritt, but also sometimes by withdrawing his, spirit, and permitting them to fall into some sinnes; so as to shame, and dishonour them; which workes more effectually for the cure of Pride and selfelove, then any other meanes can do: St. Austen hath a faying to this purpose: I dare affirme it (saith he) that it is profitable for a proud man to fall in to some scandalous sin, that by the shame of  he may be humbled: his meaning is not▪ that it should be any mans choice to sin▪ that he may be humbled; but that it is some¦times Gods way of cure to permitt it as t some men. A wise Physitian can so temper poyson▪ as to make it (with other ingredients procure, or preserve health: so that in a these things God is seene, and to be pra¦sed, and admired, in his dispensations to¦wards his people; and they to learne obe¦dience by the things that they suffer, an to be more thankfull and firutfull, in the hearts, and lives afterwards.
Section 4. Fruittrees Beautifull Objects. HƲSBANDMAN: It is a great pleasure, and delight to walk among you, so many beautifull Fruittrees; seeing yee grow so handsomely, and uniforme; yee grow in order, in straight lynes, every way; (look which way a man will) decent formes and order of things are pleasant to the Eye; as a Consort of Musick is to the Eare: And be∣sides; yee are more beautifull and delight∣some in your various coloured blossomes, leaves, and fruits, these even ravish the ences, with their delicate colours. smels, and tasts; all exceeding gratefull to the sences; and delightsome to the mind. Immoderate love to Creatures dangerous. FRƲITTREES: We owne what thou sayest to be true; We are indeed fine beau∣tifull Objects; and desireable good things, usefull, and profitable in the lives of men: But thou, and others had best take heed, and beware least yee love us too much; that yee set not your hearts upon us; for
Lalet anguis in herba, a serpent may be hid even amongst pleasant, and beautifull flowers; the old Serpent is still alive; that bitt, and stung thy first Parents; in the Gar∣den of Eden they setting their minds too much upon the beauty, and excellency o the Fruits that they saw: They saw that the Fruits were beautifull to the Eye, and good for food, and they took, and Eate o it: being seduced also by the subtilty o the Serpent; And thou maist be sure h hath not lost any of his Malice, Power,  Policy; but is watchfull day, and night▪ to do thee; and others mischeife. Too much love to Creatures, abates love to God HƲSBANDMAN: This is a good caution and to be heeded, and observed daily▪ For the Pleasures, and Profitts of the Crea¦tures do often stale away the minds, an affections even of good men; which abat the streame of their love to God: whic occasions (more, or lesse, sooner, or late▪ hastnings, and afflictions, from the hand  God; who cannot beare, that the hear of his people should be alienated from hi by any of his Creatures; Yet neverthele here is a lawfull use of these, and othe
Creatures, with Pleasure and delight, so it be within due bounds; But this delight in Fruit-trees in Orchards and Gardens (in a kind of Communion, and complacency with them) it shaddows out unto us a great, and singular mistery, and a priviledge of beleevers; the greatest on this side hea∣ven; that is; Communion, and Fel∣lowship with God, the enjoyment of him for ever. Communion with Crea∣tures calls for Commu∣nion with God. Sincere, and hum∣ble Christians know by experi∣ence, what it is to walke with God; in Fellowship with him; God doth gratiously condiscend to have Commu∣nion, and Fellowship with Man; with such as he hath Chosen to himselfe, and changed, sanctified and prepared, as Vessels of mer∣cy, for his owne use. And herein we need not restraine or ly∣mitt our love, and affections, as we ought to do towards the Creatures; all we have, or can let out, is too little, and small or this infinitely best Object of Love: Com∣munion with, and delight in all other Ob∣ects, must be subordinate unto this; for all the good, and desireablenesse of the Crea∣tures, are but so many Drops derived from his infinite Ocean, in his presence is the ulnesse of joy; at his right hand there
are pleasures for ever more. Section the 5. Many Profitts and pleasures by Fruittrees. HƲSBANDMAN: There hath been very much spoken by Auntient and late writers, about the Profitts, and Pleasures that are found in Orchards, and Gardens; And all people (generally) do much commend The worke of Planting Fruittrees, because of the Profitts, and Advantages that yearely do a∣rise from Fruittrees, Besides all the delight, and Pleasures super-added wherein do these Profitts, and Pleasures consist, tell us some particulars briefely. Fruits of Trees Mens food. FRƲITTREES: Thou knowest ov Fruits are usefull, and Profitable many waie in the lives of men: They are for food al the yeare long both for meate, and drink; i was the first Food given to man; and tha in his best state, and condition; even i Paradice, the most pleasant place upo the Earth; our Fruits were his appointe food, he might eate of all our Fruits; (on
Tree only excepted:) And Fruits of Trees have been mans food ever since, and so shall be to the end of the world. HƲSBANDMAN: It is true: the Fruits of Trees are good food, both for Man and Beast; which beeing well ripened, they may be used for wholesome food many waies; E∣specially made into Cider; the most whol∣some drink known in the Vinetum Britannicum by J. W: Gent: p. 18. world; and so accounted by Learned, and skilfull Physiti∣ans; and found so to be by long Experience, not of particular Persons only; but by severall Generations successively: in severall Countries, where it is temperately, and moderately used; as their common drink; which hath been (of late time more especially much see; Silva & Pomona, by Mr. Euelin. of the Royall Society. celebra∣ted, and commended, by ma∣ny worthy, and eminent per∣sons; upon good grounds, both of Reason, and Experience. As conducing (more then any other Liquors) to health, and long life; which are much in esteem among all peo∣ple.
Planting of Fruit-trees commended by Antient and late writers. Now because the Profitts, and advantages by Planting Fruit-trees are so many, and great, I think it not amisse to acquaint my friends here present, with the Praises, and Commendations that some Authors have given to this work and imployment of Planting Fruit∣trees, that they may be more in love with it, and more diligent in it, for their own Profitt, and for Posteritie also. Varro: Li. 1. Cap. 4. de re Rustica: hinc profectò Agricolae ad duas metas dirigere debent; ad utilitatem & voluptatem. Menander. Agricolarum vita voluptatem ca∣pit. Dum tristia spe futurorum so∣latur, est profecto virtutis & vitae Magister Ingenuae omnibus hominibus ager, Agricultura quid sit. Mihi vi∣detur nihil aliud esse Agricultu∣ram quam inspectâ Plantae Natu∣ra, & Caeli, & Terrae ei idoneum cultum tribuere, & (ut ita dicam) Caelum cum Terra maritare, vel societatem per∣quirere Caeli, & Terrae ad Arbores. O quam dulcissimum est fructus ex arbo∣ribus quas sevisti, inseruisti, & coluisti, propriis manibus colligere, & Amicis,
agnatisque jactabundus largiri &c. Virgil in Georg: O fortunatos nimium, bona si sua norint. Agricolas; quibus ipsa procul civilibus Armis, Fundit humo facilem victum justissima tellus. Aves canoros garrulae funduni sonos: Et semper Aures cantibus mulcent suis. Mira est, & in explicabilis horti commo∣ditas: nam si necessitatem considero, agri∣cultura tanto est humano generi emolu∣mento; ut eâ carere nullo modo possis; si utilitatem, inter primas, non postrema. Nec quaenam illi poterit comparari: si volupta∣tem dignitati commistam, ea est excellen∣tia &c. August: Quid enim hoc opere innocen∣tius vacantibus; & quid plenius magnâ con∣sideratione prudentibus; quid majus mi∣rabiliusque spectaculum est, qnam cum po∣sitis seminibus, Plantatis surculis, transla∣tis Arbusculis, insitis malleolis, tanquam interrogatur quaeque (vis Radicis & ger∣minis) quid possit, quidve non possit, unde possit, vnde non possit; cum rerum natura humana ratio quodammodo loqui potest, quid in ea valeat numerorum invisibilis in∣teriorque potentia; quid extrinsecus adhi∣bita diligentia, & in ipsa consideratione perspicere: quia neque qui plantat est a∣liquid,
neque qui rigat, sed Deus qui dat incrementum. Antient Authors define the chiefe part of Husbandry to be this: The Husband∣man ought to consider the Nature of the Trees which he is to Plant, and so to dis∣pose of them as they may have fitt soyle, and scituation, that they may have the in∣fluence of the Sunne; as much as may be; And there will arise great Profitts, and ad∣vantages: with Pleasure attending them; O how sweet (saith he) and pleasant is the Fruit that thou hast Planted with thine own hand; to eate thereof, and to distribute of the same to thy Friends, and acquaintance. They say the Profitts of Fruit-trees are wonderfull; and cannot be reckned up, there is no end of the Account; St. Austin accounts this an excellent im∣ployment; and worthy the esteem of the best men; having many deep misteries, & secrets of Nature, in it, to exercise, and imploy the understanding of the most eminent per∣sons; in considering the Nature of seeds sown, in Grafting young Twiggs; transplan∣ting Trees, and many other works about them, to consider and find out the Nature of these things; and to apply our selves ac∣cordingly:
but in all, to know, and con∣clude, That it is not he that Planteth, nor he that watereth, but God that giveth the increase. Mr Boulton (an eminent, godly Divine in his time) saies that Vinyards, Gardens, Or∣chards, and such inclosed Plotts, are the Stars, and Paradices of the Earth. And Sr. Fran: Ba: Essayes pa. 226. saies; Gardens are the purest of humane Pleasures, the greatest refreshments of the spi∣rits of man; without which Buil∣dings, and Pallaces, are but grosse handi-workes. Section 6. HƲSBANDMAN: Seeing it is manifest, and concluded by all men, that this work of Planting Fruit-trees, is very Profitable, and Pleasant, how comes it to passe, that so many men are yet negligent, and slothfull in the worke; Many young Gentlemen who have good estates in Lands, and might very much improve their Estates by Planting; yet are negligent, and all that can be said to encourage them to it will not prevaile to set them on worke; what may be the rea∣son of this grosse neglect; is their any fault,
or matter of discouragement arising from you that doth hinder them. Too things seeming discouragements in Plan∣ting. FRƲIT-TREES: There are indeed two things (especially) that may perhaps arise from us, (seemingly) as matters of discou∣ragement to some men; The one is, We cannot bring forth Fruits speedily, to any considerable profit; men must be content to stay, and waite certaine years, ere they can have any great profits from us, And sensuall men that are all for present Profitts, Pleasures, and satisfaction of their appe∣tites with present things, will not stay our time; which is necessary for our growth, and increase that we may bring forth store of good Fruits; for their Profitt. And likewise; The worke, and labour about us seems to be but a meane worke, Young proud Gentlemen think it a worke, and imployment much below them, to digg in the ground to set Trees; they ac∣count it too mechanicall, and therefore have a kind of disdaine of such an imploy∣ment, which too things often hinder some men from propagating of us; notwithstand∣ing
we are known to be so profitable. Vaine minds take up with present satisfaction. HƲSBANDMAN: It is true indeed some wild, lightheaded young Gentlemen that have good Estates, runne altogether after the satisfaction of their sensuall appetites, and desires, which they may have at present, and are impatient of delay; and so neglect, and undervalue, these profitts by the Planting of Fruit-trees; in regard (as yee have said) there must be a time of waiting patiently for Profitts by Planting; but yet the more wise; and sober Persons of the Gentry, who hearken to Reason more then Sence; are considerate, and are fully convinced of what hath beene said, concerning the great Profitts by Planting Fruit-trees, and other kinds of Trees; and accordingly are very diligent about the worke. Examples of the greatest persons in Planting. But as for that proud conceite of this worke being below them, and too Mechani∣call; let them but consider what was the worke of the first Man, and that in his state of happinesse. The worke appointed him by
God himselfe, was to dresse the Garden and to keep it; And let them consider also what Examples there are recorded of great per∣sons who imployd themselves, with great delight, in this work of Planting Fruit-trees: Kings, Emperours, and the greatest Powers, were not ashamed of it: but performed it with their own hands; Dioclesian Emperour of Roome, left his Empire, and betook him∣selfe to this implyment, in the later part of his life. Elizeus sportanus planted spati∣ouse, and large Orchards; and used therein to feast, and banquet with his children, and Friend: Ezra 1.2. &c. Cyrus King of Persia, (who had all the Kingdomes of the Earth given to him) was diligent, and most exact in this worke of Planting Fruit-trees; with his owne hand; as he himselfe acknow∣ledged; to Lysander, when he came to visit him. See his own words; as they are Re∣corded. Epistola alberti Lol ad herculem: Libid re Rustica: pag. 30. Cyrus minor Persarum Rex, vir ingenii excelsi, & rerum gestarum gloria celeberri∣mus, cum ad eum venisset Ly∣sander Lacedaemonius, & ipse summis vir∣tutibus pstans, eique dona nonnulla attu∣lisse, & ceteris rebus comis, & humanus erga ipsum fuerit; quodam vero die recre∣ationis,
caussa in quendam hortum magna ipsius industria undique conseptum, & sin∣gulari artificio consitum eum adduxit; Tum Lysander admiratus egregium omnium re∣rum ordinem, atque proceritates Arborum, illarumque in quincuncem directam seriem, & fructuum pulchritudinem, ac odorum, qui e floribus spirabant, suavitatem, dixisse fertur; Atqui Lysander, meo ingenio ista sunt elaborata; mei sunt ordines, Arbores∣que, & Plantae, aliaque quae ita miraris, mea manu sunt sara. Tum vicissim Lysandrum, ipsius comtem∣plantem purpuam, corporisque eleganti∣am, & ornatum persicum auro gemmisque praetiosissimis splendentem; respondisse; O Cyre, quam merio beatus ab omnibus per∣hiberis, cum excellenti fortunatua singula∣ris ranta conjuncta copulataque sit indu∣stria. So that such men as are so highly con∣ceited of themselves, to think this worke, and imployment about Fruit-trees, to be below them, are much mistaken, they need not be ashamed of it, more then their bet∣ters; Neither hath it beene the choice of some few Eminent persons only, but of very many as we find by Records in severall Au∣thors; see further.
Epistola alberti Lolii, ad herculem Li: de re Rust: Solemus autem circa Agri∣culturae tractationem; duos po∣tissimum fines considerare, uti∣litatem nimirum, quam continuo inde per∣cipere possumus, & venustate florum, ger∣minatione stirpium; proventu fructuum ca∣pere solemus. Et in qua ubi{que} magna copia bonarum, & fructuosarum Arborum sese of∣ferat. Nonnullos alios in medium adduce∣re qui amore rei Rusticae ita capti fuerunt, ut post habitis omnibus dignitatibus, Ma∣gistratibus, Regnis, Victoriis, & triumphis, ad Agriculturam se totos applicuerunt. Caelum nitescere, Arbores frondescere, Vites laetificas pampinis pubescere, Ramos Baccarum ubertate incurvescere, Segetes largiri fruges, florere omnia. Subsequitur postea aestas non solum flori∣bus, ut in primis sunt Lilia, Rosae, Violae hyacinthi, Caryophilli, & infiniti alii orna∣tur; sed etiam frugibus, fructibus, vuis, ani∣malibus, omnibusque rebus Caeteris ad vi∣tam nostram necessariis sustinendam abun∣dat. Certe si recte, & diligenter inquisiveris videbis profecto omnes studiosos, & litera¦tos homines, Ruris cesessu vehementer ses
oblectasse, illudque semper expecisse plu∣rimum. Nam praeter aerem liberum, & ju∣cundam viriditatem, quae plurimum ingeni∣um excitant, spiritus quoque inde recreari, & intelligentiam mirifice acui, certum est. O beata, & fincera vita: o suave, atque ho∣nestum ocium, & quasi omni negotio me∣lius. Agricultura sola est, cui ingenui, & ex∣cellentes viri admoveri debent; Quid datur a divis melius mortalibus aegris, Quam bona, quae pariunt passim letissima Rura, Hic hominum primi vitam incoluere beatam, Cum placidam nondum turbarent praelia pacem, Cum variis tellus redimitur floribus; & cum Arboribus viride redeunt per brachia frondes, Atque avium dulces cantus nemora avia complent, Tunc mecum, aut felix nusquam vitae genus ullum, Quo se mortales factant, aut hoc erit unum. Many Profitts and Pleasures in Planting Fruit-trees. Thus we see what the Ancient, and more recent writers (and those of Learning and Eminency in the world) have said, and e∣steemed of this worke of Planting Fruit-trees; both as to Profitts, and Pleasures in the lives of men; and how they have preferred it before other imployments; Therefore there is reason all men should have a good
esteeme of Fruit-trees, and of the works a∣bout them: especially seeing they are profi∣table not only as to Temporall Profitts in the lives of men, from the Cradle to the Grave, from the beginning of the world, to the end of it. But the same also ministring so many occasions, and helps in order to spi∣rituall advantages; as hath been shew'd; be∣ing Examples to us of Obedience to God, in that they keep the Lawes of their Creator inviolable; after their kinds; in observing the Course of Nature; from the beginning of the world, to the end of it, And conti∣nually speaking to us to do the same; Many advantages we have by them; with all Pleasures, and Delights superadded. So that such a worke, carries away the vote, and suf∣frage of all People, according to the Poet. Omne tulit punctum, qui misciuit utile dulci. Here are two of the most cogent Argu∣ments that prevaile with all men, Argu∣mentum ab utili. Et Argumentum a voluptate. Arguments from Profitts, and Arguments from Pleasures. Pleasure is call'd sal & condimentum vitae: the Salt that seasons all things to us: the Profitts are more because of the Pleasures, and the Pleasures are more because of the
Profitts. They being united together do commend, and set off each other; more then they would be single, and alone. Section 7. Great Trees in too fatt soyle Beare not well. HƲSBANDMAN: Here are a sort of Trees that grow in a very rich soyle, deepe, and fatt; and are faire, handsome, large, lovely Trees, as any I can see, but yet they do not answer these things in their Fruits: I expect they should bring me some Fruit, and profit better, and more then other Trees, that grow in a poore, leane soyl, and are but small Trees to these which are growne to a vast bignesse, and largnesse of body, and branches: I cannot be satisfied with such poore, and small returnes, from such great Trees, in such a rich and fertile soyle as they here grow in. Moderation is best. FRƲIT-TREES: There is good rea∣son we should bring forth good Fruits, and more then those Trees that grow in poore ground, but consider thou whether our un∣fruitfulnesse
be not occasioned by our too fatt, and Plentifull feeding; for thou know∣est that Repletion is an enemy to Generation, in all Creatures, according to their kinds, Men and Women that are too full fed, and grow grosse, and fatt, they seldome are fruit∣full; as others who are more moderate, and temperate; and this is our case; by reason of our too full, fatt feeding in this deepe, and fertile soyle, we grow great, and run out yeerely, in large shootes and broad leaves, but shall beare little Fruit while it is so with us. A just Reproofe of the Carnall Careless Gentry. HƲSBANDMAN: These things are true, and are usefull in their place, as to tempo∣rall Profitts, in the ordering of Fruit-trees; But we may learne hence a Lesson of high∣er concernment; it plainly shaddowes out unto us, that it is, too manifestly seene a∣mongst some great persons, the Gentry of this Nation; who being Trees planted (by Gods providence) in a rich, and fertile soyle; they grow very great in power, and dignity▪ swelled with high titles of honour, abundance of riches, and the best things the world affords▪ But as for Fruitfullnesse towards God, spi∣rituall
Fruits, they are very few, and small, amongst many of them, who live a most carnall, sensuall life, as if there were no life after this; feeding, pampering, and cherishing their bodies, while the poore soule is neglected, leane, and starven; And so ware out a few daies in promp, and pride; and in a moment goe downe from the stage of the world, into eternall woe, and destruction; O miserable life, that some of them live, even whilst they live most at ease, and in their pleasures: Is not he worthy to be accounted a foole, that will chuse and prefer, a painted bauble not worth 2d, before a rich Treasure, worth many Milli∣ans: Much more foolish are they who pre∣ferr a short momentany life of sensuall pleasures, before the pleasures and glory of Eternall life; Consider this yee that forgett God, least if yee neglect this day of grace, yee shortly prove these things to be true, by woofull experience, in reme∣diles Miseries. kilfull ordering of Fruittrees produceth Fruitfulnesse: HƲSBANDMAN: But yet I see some few of these great Trees, even in this rich soyle;
who by some skill, and extraordinary industry of the Husbandman; do bring forth very good- Fruits, and plentifully too; from yeare to yeare; how glad should I be, were yee all so Fruitfull; I should then have a greater revenue of Profitts yearely then I have. Remove the Cause and the Effect ceaseth. FRƲITTREES: Thou knowest by Experience, that immoderation and ex∣cesse in any thing is hurtfull, and dan∣gerouse; so when thou knowest the Cause of a mischiefe, or inconvenience, thou hast best remove it, if thou can'st; that so the effect also may cease; as this in Nature, so also in Morall, or Spirituall things sublatâ Causâ tollitur effectvs. HƲSBANDMAN: This also is of high∣er, and further use in reference to the great on's in the world; A due Commendation of the Pious, and Reli∣gious Gentrie. Although great Revenues, high Titles Dignities, Honours, Riches and Pleasures of the world, are great snares, and Tempta∣tions
unto those who have them; yet through the mighty, and powerfull opera∣tions of the spirit of God, in the carefull, and diligent use of the meanes of grace, which some of the great Persons do exercise themselves in; their minds and hearts are inlightned, and changed from a state of Nature, to a state of Grace; who are famous Examples unto others in their generations: and have a great influence upon all round about them; being Patterns of Piety, great Charity, and Vertue; And so are truly Noble, as being Borne from above; Sones and Daugh∣ters, to the Lord God Almighty. Though ac∣cording both to 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many wise men af∣ter the flesh; not many mighty, not many Noble, are called. Scripture, Experience, and Observation of inlightned, spirituall minds, the greatest part of such walke in the broad way, and enter into the wide gate that leadeth to destruction, the eyes of their minds being blinded, not only by Corruption, and Sathan (as all sorts by Na∣ture are,) but also dazelled by the glitte∣ring shew, and splendor of these Pompous; gaudy, Vanities, Profitts, and Pleasures, of this world; and so their state is thereby the more dangerous: Then what infinite grace is shewed forth in chusing, and calling
some of them; Notwithstanding these impe∣diments; and plucking them as Brands out of the Burning; making them as rich Dia∣monds, and Pearles, among Pebbles and com∣mon stones, These persons then lye under the greatest Bonds, and Obligations that can be to returne answerable Obedience, Duty, and Thankfullnesse unto God, for his rich▪ and free Grace to them in Jesus Christ▪ Not only in saving them from the wrath to come; but also estating them in an inheri∣tance, immortall, invisible, and that fadet not away, reserved in Heaven for them. Section 8. HƲSBANDMAN: Omnia forebunt▪ prospiciente Deo. Methinks yee swagger, and are very brave, this May-morning; i your beautifull blossomes, and green leaves; whence had yee all this Gallantrie▪ The Voice of all Creatures to Man. FRƲIT-TREES: It pleased our boun¦tifull Creator to bestow it upon us; but i is for thee, and for the sake of mankind▪ which ingageth thee, and all men to ac¦knowledge it; And to serve him, and prais him with more chearefullnesse: This is ou Language, and Lesson to all Men; which eve¦ry particuler tree among us, does dail
speake aloud: qui fecit me, propter te, fe∣cit te, propter se: He that made me, for thee, made thee for himselfe. HƲSBANDMAN: But I have seene you meanely clothed, sometimes in the yeare: I perceive yee change your Garments, now and then; have yee severall suits of Ap∣parell. Fruit-trees, receive, and loose their beauty once a yeare. FRƲIT-TREES: Yea; we are diversly clothed we weare out a new shuite every yeare; Our bountifull Lord, and Master puts upon us a fresh, new Garment every spring of the yeare; and we are very beau∣tifull to looke upon; all the spring, and Summer; with various coloured blossomes, leaves, and Fruits; but towards Autumne this brave clothing looseth its fresh colour, because the Sun (the efficient Cause of our Springing, growth, and flourishing) with∣draws from us, and is gone towards the South parts: And as cold weather coms on, these our beautifull Garments of Leaves, nd Fruits, fade, and fall from us, by lit∣le, and little, till we are quite Naked; and hen (for a season) we are in a melancholy posture.
The state of all things here below changeable. HƲSBANDMAN: Vicissitude and change, is the state of all visible Creatures: from Riches, to Poverty; from Poverty, to Riches; sometimes prosperity, sometimes adversity; sometimes health, sometimes sicknesse, some∣times honour, sometimes disgrace; good Re∣port and evill Report: turnes and changes of providence; which we ought to be fit∣ted for, (that in every state we may be therewith content) by getting a well groun∣ded confidence, and assurance of the love of God in Christ; which never changeth (as all created things do;) but is the same for e∣ver; without variablenesse, or shaddow of change. There is evidently, a very great change, and alteration concerning you; betweene Sommer, and Winter; (as hath been said) but how is it with you in the cold, sharp Winter, in frost, and snow, stormes of Haile, Raine, strong, and boisterouse Wind, and sometimes blasting, killing Winds; and Aires; have ye any reliefe or nourishment then to feed upon; how do yee to live, and hold out i the time of all these difficulties; yee shew forth no effects of life, either by growth¦buds,
blossomes or leaves; how do yee find your selves to be, during that sharp time. Fruit-trees are pincht, and endure difficulties in Winter. Fruit-trees in the spring revive. FRƲIT-TREES: It's true indeed: There is a very great alteration in us, betweene Sommer, and Winter; our beauty, and orna∣ments being taken from us; and we are left naked, and bare, and seem (during all that time) as if we were quite dead; so that some unskilfull persons judg us so to be indeed; yet we have a conserving sap, existing in us all that time, which keeps us alive; though we cannot exert it then, because the Sun (which is the efficient Cause of our growth) is at that time, farr remote from us: But when it returnes again in the spring time, and daily draws neerer to us, then by its warmth and influence, we begin to be a little refreshed: for though we have not sence, yet we have perception: which is to us insteed of sence: and we shew it by the effects; for thou seest we then begin to plump our buds, which by little, and little do open, and brake forth into Blossomes, Leaves, and shootes: And by degrees (as
the Sunne draws neerer, and neerer, and it's heare, and influence is stronger, and stronger upon us, we are more, and more refreshed by it, our blossome Buds turn into Fruits; and we shoote forth uigorously, and strongly, and bring forth Fruits, and flourish in our beauties all the Summer. Some Christians go through great tribulations. HƲSBANDMAN: These things we find to be so according to Nature; And it is a very proper, and apposite similitude of the state and condition of deseried soules; all along in Each particular: its one of those simi∣litudes that runs equatuor pedibus: it holds in all respects; for so it is with Christians: (but more especially with some perticular persons) one time or other in their life; they indure, and undergo hard, and diffi∣cult things; great affliction, Temptations, and Tribulations, which befall them, accor∣ding to the good pleasure of God, who or∣dereth, and overruleth all for their good, and profit: thereby purging out Corrupti∣ons, and trying their graces, to increase ho∣linesse; Ps: 84.11. for god himselfe, (who is a Sunn, and a shield to his people) doth not only withdraw from their spiritts
and hides his face, and so leaves them in darknesse, and they walk in darknesse: Children of Light walk in darknesse (some a shorter, some a longer time;) But also he permitts many outward troubles, afflicti∣ons and crosses to come upon them upon their Bodies, Names, Estates, Relations: Soule, and Body, all that concerns them; are over∣whelmed, overturned, broken, and de∣stroyed; as to sence, and appearance; both to themselves, and others, that behold them Job. 1, 2, 3. &c. And during this long night of darknesse; this hard, and sharpe Winter season, there is (as it were) a Death upon all they have, for he that is the life of the Soule, (as the Soule is of the Body) is gon, their beloved is gone; and hides himselfe: They seek him, but they cannot find him: Cant. 3 2. The Poore, and needy, seeke water and there is none: (Isay 41.17.) and their Tongue faileth for thirst, they cry after him, but he heareth not, and makes as though he would never heare; nor re∣gard them any more. The absence of this Sun makes all (with∣in, and without) darke; yea, more bitter then Death it selfe: And more then all this, the sence of the absence of God, and also the apprehensions of the losse of God, the irre∣coverable
losse of God, is the same (in some degree) with the Torments of Hell, Yea the worst, and greatest of the torments of the Damned. Paena damni; the paine of losse, is agreed by all Divines to be the greatest tor∣ment in Hell, worse then the paine of sence, that torments the Body (though that be in∣tollerable too) Reve. 7.14. Hose. 14.7. All these Tempta∣tions, and great Tribulations some deserted soules go through and in∣dure, in this sharp, Winter season; But when this Sunn returnes, and draws neere again, the Fruit-trees begin to revive, and spring, They revive as the Corne, and grow as the Vine, and shoote forth their Rootes as Le∣banon: Then the Figg-tree putteth forth her greene Figgs, and the Vine with the ten∣der Grapes, give a good smell: Cant. 2.13: When this Sunn of Righteousnesse ariseth upon the Soule, he refresheth▪ and re∣storeth comforts to those distres∣sed weary Soules; Isay. 57.18. which they are exceeding sensible of, and are (as it were) overjoy'd: As marriners at Sea when they are delive∣red from some Terrible Tempests, and Stormes, from which they were almost in dispaire to have escaped; yet with much a do comming saffe to Land, how are they
transported with joy, and gladnesse, for their safe ari∣vall at their desired Haven. The light of Gods Countenance re∣fresheth the Soule after darknesse. This deliverance from these spirituall stormes, and Tempests; (in this sharp, Winter season) is much more; Yea, more then can be expressed in words; or shaddowed out by any similitude: it is Joy unspeakable, and full of glory: Heb. 12.11. Then followes the peaceable Fruits of Righteousnesse, all the rest of the Sum∣mer of their life: with more light and Joy, then if they had never been in darknesse; Even as Fruit-trees after a long, cold sharpe Winter, when the warme spring comes on, and the heate of Summer followes, all flou∣rish in their beauties, and ornaments of Blossomes, Leaves, and Fruits. Section 9. The opinion about descension of Sap Examined. HƲSBANDMAN: Some learned men have thought, and asserted, that Sap in Fruit-trees doth descend (in Autumne) from the Branches to the Rootes; which going down of the Sap, causeth the Leaves and Fruits to fall off, and the Branches to cease
growing: And Wood-men, and many others, receive it, and hold it (as their common opinion) for an undoubted truth; What say yee of your selves, as to this matter. FRƲITTREES: If Learned men, and others, are of that opinion, they had best consider it againe; and looke better into the grounds of their opinion; secundae cogitationes meliores; for we deny the thing; Ther's no going down of any of our Sap: Na∣ture is wiser then so, to part with any Sap that it hath gotten: our Sap is our Life; it is our foode upon which we live, and in∣crease yearely, and by which we are inabled to bring forth Blossomes, Leaves, and Fruits, in Sommer yearely; how come we to be of this bulke, and bignesse (as thou seest) but by the assention of Sap, and the digesting, and assimulating of it; into our substance, of Wood, Barke, Leaves, Blossomes, and Fruits▪ we should be glad of moe Sap, if we could get it; but we will part with none downe againe; to our Roots; for our Rootes are better stored with Sap (all the yeare long) then we the branches. And besides this necessity of keeping it and impossibility of parting with it, the Naturall, and innate property of our Sap is alwaies to ascend; there is an active, ve∣getative
spirit in us, the Nature of which is alwaies to ascend, and according to the Law of our Nature, can do no otherwise; it being a tenuous, light Body, or substance, of a flammeous, and aerious Nature, whose appetite is alwaies upwards; according to the knowne Axiome, omne leve sursum; Nay more; should we part with any of our Sap downe againe, we should then fade, and de∣cay; our substance would be thereby, di∣minished; (that as we increase one part of the yeare by ascension of Sap, so we should also decrease another part of the yeare, by descension of Sap; and what then would be∣come of us; Therefore there is no such thing in Nature as descension of Sap in Trees. No descension of Sap in Fruit-trees. HƲSBANDMAN: I am perswaded as ye have said; That there is no such thing in Nature, as descension of Sap in Fruit-trees, and have severall Reasons against it, be∣sides what hath been said: For no Effect can be produced without a Cause; Now there is no Cause can be (so much as colorably) assigned, for such an Effect in Nature; There∣fore we conclude, there is no such thing; for Sap when it moves, alwaies ascends, ne∣ver
descends; If any man be yet unsatisfied concerning this, touching the descension of Sap in Trees, (it being deeply radicated in their minds, and an opinion of long stand∣ing,) he may receive further satisfaction concerning it, from six perticular Argu∣ments against it; grounded upon Reason, and Experience; set forth at large, in a little Booke intituled; a Treatise of Fruit-trees; by a Practiser in the Art of Planting Fruit-trees; pag. 191. 192. &c. As for Leaves of Trees falling in Autumne, and Rootes being better then (at that time) which some at∣tribute to the descending of Sap) the Cause is grosely mistaked; other Causes for those Effects, are easily assign'd: Leaves fall off because Sap (at that time) hath done as∣cending; and Rootes are best then, be∣cause no sap ascends from them, they are then fed; and will first be served: The Poet thought it an Excellent thing to find out the true Causes of things, when he said, felix qui potuit, rerum cognoscere Causas: The spirit ad Na∣ture of true Christi∣ans tend upwards. But besides the Temporall Profitts, and advantages that may arise from the know∣ledge of these things; we learne some lessons, and in∣structions for spirituall ad∣vantages:
If the innate spirit, and Sap in Fruit-trees is still aspiring, and ascending upwards, and never downwards unlesse for∣ced contrary to its Naturall propensity, This teacheth us, That so it should be with all Christians: Nay; so it is with such as are (not nominally only, but) Christians in∣deed; and in truth: Their spirituall Na∣ture aspires, and ascends upwards: the Di∣vine Nature, (whereof all beleevers are pertakers more, or lesse) does as Natural∣ly ascend, and raise, and draw the soule (in it's desires, affections, and operations) upwards Heavenwards, towards Christ, the life strength, and Treasure of true beleevers; as corrupt Na∣ture tends downwards; Earthwards, and to∣wards the Creatures: so that by this, Profes∣sors may try themselves, and come to know what Nature, or Principle dwells, and pre∣vailes in them: The Tree is knowne hy it's Fruits: Causes are knowne by their Effects: so also in this Case. Section 10. Fruit-trees prepared in Nurseries to be trans∣planted. HƲSBANDMAN: Here is a very large Nursery of Fruit-trees; some very young,
lately sping up; some of a middle size; and others very large faire Trees; and of all these, some are grafted, and some ungrafted; Methinks these that are of the biggest, and eldest sort, (being now prepared and grown large Trees) should be transplanted, and removed, out of the Nursery, some∣where abroad into severall Countries, in Orchards, Gardens, and Fields; that so they might have roome to spread, and en∣large themselves, and beare store of good Fruits, for the profit of many. Elder Trees transplanted make roome for the Younger. FRƲIT-TREES: Is true: These that are faire, large, goodly Trees▪ should be removed from the rest, of the younger sort; else we that are young, and comming up, are like to be oppressed by them, for we shall not have roome to grow, and enlarge; And besides; these great, large Trees, will reach, and in tangle one with another, and crosse, fret, and gall one another; And therefore it is very fit, and necessary, that they should be removed hence, for to that end they were planted here: And then o∣thers will come up in their roomes and in∣crease
as they have donne; and so succes∣sively) be removed where they may grow, and enlarge; and be profitable in their Fruits for many yeares. Some of the best kinds, are to grow still in the Nursery. HƲSBANDMAN: I know that the end of Planting a Nursery of Fruit-trees is to prepare them for transplanting elsewhere; But yet it is very convenient, and necessary too; that some of the best Trees (such as have the best properties in all respects) should remaine still in the Nursery where∣of to gather Grafts, and bring forth Fruits, in order to the preparation of the young, ungrafted Trees, that they also may be fit∣ted for transplantation in due time. Nurseries of Ma∣teriall Fruit-trees are apt similitudes of Misticall Fruit-trees in Vniversities And this (if it be well con¦sidered) is a very apposite Si∣militude of Ʋniversities, and so∣cieties of Learning; being Nur∣series of Misticall Fruit-trees; designed on purpose for instruction, and preparation of youth; that they may be Fruitfull Trees of the Lords Planting, and Grafting; to bring forth much good Fruit to the Husbandman, that he may be glori∣fied;
Isay. 61.3. And to this great end, every one concern'd should labour earnest∣ly, to be fitted, and prepared with Gifts, and Graces, Learning, and all endowments, and qualifications of the Mind: And having received Talents, then to improve, and im∣ploy them, for their Masters use, that so they may receive a reward. It is necessary (as was said) there should some of the chiefe, and Principall Fruit-trees, remaine in the Nursery for Governors and Tutors, in every society, to prepare the younger sort for transplantation, into severall parts for publique imployment, in the Church, and Common-wealth. The spirit, and Grace of God, is to be pre∣ferred, before all Naturall, and acqui∣red abilities. Now the maine, and chiefe thing to be laboured for, and most necessary to be ob∣tayned, is the Spirit, and Grace f God; humane Lear∣ning, and Naturall parts, and Abilities; im∣proved by Study, and industrie, are of sin∣guler use, and advantage; and all indea∣vors are diligently to be used for attain∣ment thereof; but these alone, are to short to ayme at, or attaine the highest end▪ the glory of God; For Man by Nature, ca have no higher End then himselfe: his ow intrests: As water, in its current, can rise
no higher (of it selfe) then the spring head: every thing acts according to its Nature, and can do no otherwise; Therefore a Principle of grace is absolutely necessary, This is (spiritually) the Philosophers Stone, that turnes all Naturall attainments▪ into Gold; it uses, and improves all to spirituall Ends, and uses: in order to the glory of God▪ so that we must get this, or we get Si Christum discis, satis est, si caetera nescis. Si Christum nescis nihil est, si caete∣ra discis. nothing: Every one should be of such a spirit as Luther, who prote∣sted Earnestly that God should not put him off with worldly things, or Naturall Gifts, here∣in we should be earnest with God, and take no nay; no denyall; Though we should aske temporall things conditional∣ly; (if it be the will of God to give them) yet we may, and ought, to aske spirituall things (which are olutely necessary) without condition: The Kingdme of heauen suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force: Mat. 11.12.
Section 11. Some Fruits seeme good to the Eye; but are bad to the Tast. HƲSBANDMAN: I observe many Trees in this Garden, which are faire large Trees to looke upon; they flourish yearely with broad greene Leaves, and beautifull blossomes, and spring up with large shootes; but they bring forth no good Fruits: some Fruits they bring forth, which are large in bulk, and substance, and have a faire, and beauti∣full colour, but their tast, and relish is nought; the Husbandman likes not their Tast; they are of a sower, sharpe, bitter relish: very un∣pleasant: If yee bring forth no better Fruit hereafter, yee shall be cut down and mad fuell for the fire:  should yee cumbe the ground. Fruit-trees improved by ingrafting. FRƲIT-TREES: We grow in a goo and fresh soyle, and are large in bulk, an substance, as other Trees, and we bea Fruits according to our Natures; but w were never ingrafted, as some other Tree
are, which grow by us; so that we growing still upon our own naturall, wild stocke, and Roote, we bring forth Fruit accordingly. And so are like to do, untill we have an al∣teration by ingrafting. No workes pleasing to God without sincerity. HƲSBANDMAN: Herein yee beare the likenesse, and resemblance of hypocrites in the Visible Church; who live amongst true beleevers; and make a faire shew, with an outward forme, and Profession of Religion, in all externall Duties; but because they are not sincere, and upright, have not the truth of grace, nor were ever really ingrafted in∣to Christ, but grow still upon the old stocke of corrupt Nature; thence it is, that their Fruits are nought, and unpleasant to God, the Husbandman; thogh they are never so faire, and beautifull on the outside, yet wan∣ting a good Tast; that is they have no good Ends in any thing they do; they make not the glory of God the chiefe, and maine End of that they do; for all men by Nature make themselves their End; and not the glory of God; and therefore they are not accepted of God: such had need to consider their state (whilst it is called to day) and see that they
rest not on this side an interest in Christ. Section 12. Mulberry-trees called Sapientissima Arborum. HƲSBANDMAN: Here are a certaine Number of Mulberri-trees in a row by them∣selves; which are a kind of Trees in great esteeme among men: in severall respects: your Leaves are the best foode for Silke∣wormes; And your Fruits are exceeding good to make Syrups, for divers uses which Apothecaries, and others do make yearely; And yee are called by some auncient Au∣thors (who write of Fruit-trees) Sapientis∣sima Arborum; How come yee to be wiser then other Trees; How are any Trees said to be wise, what say yee of your selves. FRƲIT-TREES: We owne no such E∣pithite as wise: we are no wiser then other Trees; but some men are pleased so to say of us, because we keepe in, and shew not our Buds, nor spring till late in the yeare; about the beginning of May; when all the cold frosty weather is gone, and past; But this is according to the course of Nature, (the Law of our Creation) which we, and all other Trees do constantly observe; And
in this is seehe the wisdome of our Creator, (who doth all things wisely) and hath made us so to do; Mulberry-trees bud late, be∣cause of a ten∣der Nature. For we are of a more weake, and tender Nature, then many other Fruit-trees are; which bud, and spring (it may be) 6 weeks, or two Months before us; as Cher∣rytrees, Plumtrees, and other Trees do; But if we should dare to peepe out, and ap∣peare so soone, we should not be able to beare it. HƲSBANDMAN: It is very certaine that there are diversities of Natures and pro∣perties among Fruit-trees (as all other Creatures) and therefore they must be planted, and ordered accordingly; some are so tender that they will not thrive; nor beare Fruits, but against a wall, and that upon the South-Sun too; and carefully, and tenderly ordered: others will grow, and beare well in the open Fields; notwithstand∣ing all cold, frosts, storms, and winds, that they meete with. some Christians are more valiant for Christ, then others. But this may be transferred to a higher use; And gives us to understand; That this is even so among spirituall Fruit-trees; Professing Christians; some are more hardy Souldiers, and more valiant
then others; And can stand out against, and encounter with, more, and greater dif∣ficulties, then others; (though true belee∣vers) can do: some have a great and strong faith: Mat. 15.28. O Woman great is thy faith: others have but a weake faith, O yee of little faith; Mat. 6 30. Some have great measures of the Spirit of God, light, wisdome, and knowledge; others are but Babes, and Children in understanding, and grace; some Christians have much love to Christ, and zeale for him; (as having the ma∣nifestations of his love more cleare, and evident to them, then some others have) some others Love but little, and all is weake in them, and so they can do but little, nor suffer for Christ; the moving Cause being but weake in them, the Effects are Answerable. Section 13. Fruits ripen successively upon the same Tree; others altogether. HƲSBANDMAN: I observe That some kinds of these Fruit-trees do bring forth their ripe fruits gradually, and successively; upon the same Tree, some of the Fruits are ripe, and ready to be gathered severall
weekes before the rest; as amongst Apre∣cotts, Peaches, Cherrys, and Plums, and such like Sommer Fruits; we find some Fruits ripe, whilst others on the same Tree, and same Bough, are yet hard, and greene: But some other kinds of Trees bring forth their Fruits ripe, and ready together all at one time, upon the same Tree; as Pippins, Peremains, and all Winter Fruits; What is the Reason of this variation in the ripening of the Fruits of Trees. The Wisdome and bounty of God in ripening of Fruits. FRƲITTREES: Thou maist herein see, and observe the Wisdome, bounty, and good∣nesse of our Creator; For if we that are Cher∣rytrees▪ Plumtrees, and such like sommer Fruits, should bring forth our Fruits all at once, there would be a glutt, of Fruits; And we should do more hurt, then good a∣mongst People; for we are no lasting Fruits; we cannot keepe (as thou knowest;) but should in a few daies rott upon thy hand; Therefore God gives our Fruits to thee successively; some one day, and some ano∣ther, as thou, and others may make use of them; for health, and Profitt; And as for
hard, Winter Fruits, they are ripe all of them together on the same Trees, that so they  gathered altogether, and laid up in ore, for use all the yeare long; And is th not the like Wisdome, bounty, and goodnesse, from God shewed to all people in this▪ as in the former▪ though each of them in different respects, as hath been said. Section 14. HƲSBANDMAN: Here are a sort of Trees that do not thrive, nor prosper, as other Trees do; what's the reason? seeing yee are as well planted, and preserved, as other Trees which grow neere unto you. FRƲIT-TREES: South Country trees, pper not in England. We are forreners; this is not our Native Country we were brought from beyond the Seas, from a warme Clymate; where we had a strong heate, and influence of the Sun; but we are here in a cold Country, and it agrees not with us, we shall never grow, nor prosper, nor bring forth Fruits to please thee, or for thy Profit. Plant Fruit-trees fitt for the Countrey. HƲSBANDMAN: I beleeve what ye say
to be true; Many Gentlemen of great esta∣tes, to please their minds, have sent for, and bought many rare Plants, and Trees, from forraine parts, out of the South-Countries, of France, Spaine, Italie, and other Sou∣therne Clymates and planted them here in England, severall degrees Northward; which though it will beare many kinds of good fruits to perfection, and ripenesse (such as are fitt for the Countries) yet it will not beare good Orringes, Lemons, Pomegrana∣tes, and such like Fruits of the South Coun∣tries; Therefore they had better bestow their cost, and paines about Fruit-trees that are knowne by long Experience to be profitable unto all that plant them. Section 15. Redstraketrees formerly of little Account. HƲSBANDMAN: Here are Redstrake∣trees full of lovely apples: are these the true Redstrakes that makes the rare Cider in Herefordshire, so much in esteeme a∣mongst all men, How come they to be so much in request now; its not long since they went by the name of Skidmores Crabs; was not that a disparagement to the Trees, and
Fruits; how come they now to be in so much request and esteeme every where. Redstrake apples best for Cider. FRƲIT-TREES: It's true; we grew, and bore Fruits for many yeares; and our Fruits were called Skidmores Crabs, and were very much undervalued; and in dis∣paragement for many yeares; but when our Natures were considered, and tryed; and men had Experience of us, our Fruitt was found to be better then any other sort of Fruit for Cider; and now we are every∣where cryed up, and in great esteeme a∣mongst all men. Comfort after trouble Joy after sorrow. HƲSBANDMAN: I am very glad to heare it: for the knowledge hereof is Profitable many waies; the consideration of this may be of an higher use, and shaddowes out un∣to us, a truth evident to Experience, th so it often happens to the people of God through his providence for their good▪ They may, and often fall under disgrace and reproch among many because of thei Sin, temptations, and afflictions, that God, fo
good Ends, permitts them to fall into; but yet upon their returne, and restoring, God in his own good time, brings them out of all their troubles; and disparagements; and makes them in esteeme more then o∣thers; which fell not as they did: The Pro∣digall is an instance herein; For when their Natures, and Fruits are knowne, and made manifest, he will get them praise, and fame, in every place, where they have beene put to shame. Zeph. 3.19. Section 16. More Planting of late yeares, then formerly. HƲSBANDMAN: It is observed by ma∣ny people, that there hath been much Planting of Fruit-trees of late yeares, more then formerly; Men have Planted more Fruit-trees within 30 or 40. yeares last past, then in severall hundreds of yeares in former ages; as is manifest by Orchards that are planted: What is the reason that Fruit-trees are so much in esteeme now, and of late time, more than in former times.
Reasons for much Planting of Fruit-trees FRƲITTREES: The Reason is e∣vident; Because men of late time have in∣quired, and made search into the Nature of our Fruits: And have found out the particuler Profitts, and advantages that come by us, in many respects; not only as to the sale f the Fruits to those that buy them; but also as to pleasant, and wholesome Foode, all the yeare long in the family; And particu∣lerly for Cider, which is of late time con∣cluded generally, to be the most wholesome liquor in the world; being found so to be by Experience: Not only preventing diseases, which other drinks do breed in the Body; but also cures many already contracted: And therefore no marvell Fruit-trees are in esteeme now, more then formerly. Cider; the most wholsome drink: especially of the best fruits. HƲSB: It is undoubtedly true; That Ci∣der in generall, is the most wholsome drink, in refference both to health, and Long life; though made of ordinary, and common Fruits. But there are certaine peculiar
Fruits (now or late time,) found out, and known, which make Cider far beyond, (and better, then) the common Cider: As the Redstrake, the double Red-redstrake; Gennet Moyles; and some other kinds that might be named: And so long as health and long life is in esteeme with men, so long will Cider be in esteeme also; as the cheif meanes to attaine these Ends; Learned, and judicious Physitians do also concurre therein, and commend syrupum de Pomis; vinum Pomaceum; vinum Britanicum &c: see London dispensatory; composed by a Col∣ledge of Physitians pa: 38: And a famous Physitian in his time gives it this commen∣dation: Julius Palma∣rius Lib: de Morois: p. 248. Pomaceum è succo Malorum dulci∣um, quae maturitatem consequta sunt; satis de faeatum, matu∣rum, tenue, Subflavum, melan∣cholicis adeo salubre est; & omne potionis ge∣mus bonitate vincat. Section: 17. Fruit-trees shew forth the glory of God. HƲSBANDMAN: I undestand that yee Fruit-trees are Creatures that God hath made to manifest, and shew forth his glo∣ry;
And that yee do it continually, ac∣cording to the Law of your Creation, The wisdome, Power, goodnesse, bounty, care, and love of God, towards man, is seen, and clearely manifest in you; evident to the Reason, and understanding of men: And therefore yee are worthy to be esteemed, and commended; and to be set before us as Examples, and incentives to the like Obedience: And there is reason we should exceed you in setting forth the glory of God, as much as we do in our Natures, we being created a higher rank of Creatures then yee; and for whose sake, & use, yee were created. FRƲIT-TREES: Fruit-trees are ingagements to Obedience. Thou hast said the truth: and therefore see thou do, and performe accordingly: And that in a due proportion too; answerable to thy de∣gree, as to thy created Nature above us; else we shall (one day,) be witnesses a∣gainst thee, for god, our Crea∣tor, as sure as we are now Ex∣amples, Motives, and Engage∣ments, to thee, of obedience to God; see that thou make the glory of God, the cheif End of thy life; in all the actions of thy life, as we do.
All men act according to their Natures. HƲSBANDMAN: This is indeed, the End of mans Creation; but men general∣ly by reason of the corruption of Nature in all mankind do make themselves the End of their living in the world: and all their thoughts words, motions and waies, in the world, is for selfe; that Idoll selfe is set up, and worshiped, by every man, and woman Naturally; untill God worke another Nature, and Principle; even a di∣vine, and spirituall Nature; his own Nature: And then we do as naturally worke and act for the glory of God, and his interests in the world, as before we did for our selves. Fruit-trees change not their Natures. FRƲIT-TREES. Thou tellest us now of a Mistery, we perceive not any such thing in our selves; as a change in our Na∣tures; what meanest thou by a change of Nature; we never changed our Natures, from the beginning of the world to this day; but have kept, and observed the Lawes of our Creation, without the
least violation; and so we shall do to the end of the World. All mankind have changed their Natures once and some have a double change. HƲSBANDMAN: Its true; yee never changed your Natures, wherein yee were first created; but all mankind have changed their Natures; and the natures of some have beene twice changed; since their first Creation: first in Paradice, even whilst yee stood by, and were witnesses, of that sad change; from a state of holinesse to a state of sin, and Corruption by that act of disobedi∣ence, in eating the forbidden Fruit, of one of the Trees in the same Garden, where∣in yee were planted; but the second change of our Nature, yee know nothing of; this is from that woefull state of corruption, and sin, to the state of grace, and Holinesse; This second change of our Nature is pe∣culiar only to, some particular persons who are called, and sanctified in due time (in their generations;) and at last Eternally saved;
Section 18. Heate of the Sun needfull for Fruits. HƲSBANDMAN: These Trees that grow most in the Sun, I see beare the best Fruits; those that grow much in the shade and have little Sunn, their Fruits are not halfe so good as the other, what say yee, is the Cause of such difference in the Fruits. Fruit-trees have a preception of the heate of the Sunn and are refreshed by it. FRƲIT-TREES: The Cause is plaine, and evident: We that grow in the Sun are exceedingly refreshed by it's heate, and in∣fluence, it is the efficient Cause of our life, and growth: For in the spring of the yeare we have a preception of its drawing nee∣rer, and neerer, every day towards us, which we are very glad of; and expresse the same in our budding, blossoming, and Fruitfulnesse; And our Fruits are also better ripened, and concocted by the heate of the Sun then those are which grow in the shade.
Beleevers that walke closest with God, bring forth the best Fruits. HƲSBANDMAN: This is plainly so; And it is true also in us; we that are Christians, and walke in the light of Gods Counte∣nance, such have the refreshing influence thereof, God is a Sun and shield to his peo∣ple: Ps: 84.11. And the neerer, and closer any beleevers walke with him, the more fruitfull they are; And the more sweet are all their Fruits. Section 19. HƲSBANDMAN: Here are multitudes of goodly Fruit-trees, And wee Experience that yee do yearely bring forth store of beautifull, and wholesome Fruits; for our profitt; how long are yee to continue with us, in your beauties, vertues, and profitts. FRƲIT-TREES. As we were from the Creation of the world; and served the first man; so shall we continue to the end of the world; for the use, and service of the last man,
The Scripture saith Fruit trees were from the beginning; and shall be to the End of the world. HƲSBANDMAN: I remember it is writ∣ten: God having created Adam, he put him into the Garden; after he had caused eve∣ry Tree, bringing Fruit after his kind to spring up out of the Earth, he gave the Fruit to Adam for food; And the Scripture also tells us, men shall be planting Fruit-trees, when Christ comes to Judgment: As is was in the daies of Noah: they Planted they Builded: Even so shall it be in the com∣ming of the Sonne of Man: Luke. 17.28. HƲSBANDMAM: But whence are all your vertues; your good, and usefull Pro∣perties in the lives of Men; What is the Primum mobile, the originall, and first Cause, of all excellencies, in you. The excellencies of all Creatures are united in God: and infinitely more then all: FRƲIT-TREES: These were given us by our wise and bountifull Lord, and Cre∣ator, who as he made all his Creatures, so also he gave to every individuall, their va∣rious,
distinct specificall properties, and Natures, as it pleased him. The good, and vertues of the Creatures should leade us unto God, and there to rest. HƲSBANDMAN: It is manifest then hereby that he is the Originall and fountaine of all the good things in the world, in and up∣on all the Creatures, in the Heavens, Earth, and waters; and all the Excellencies, and rare properties, of Beauty, sweetenesse, and goodnesse in any respect whatsoever, that is in any, or in all the Creatures, they are u∣nited in God the chiefe good: And with an in∣finitenesse above them all: And therefore from the sight of you, his Creatures, and in our desiring, and using of you, with your vertues, and properties, we should be drawn to God, and desire, and chuse him above a∣ny, or all his Creatures, as being the cheife good. Section 20. Young, small Trees: full of good Fruits. HƲSBANDMAN: Here are a number of Young, small Trees that I see are full of faire beautifull, and lovely Fruits; which is a very
rare sight to behold, though they are not above 3 or 4 yeares old, from their engraf∣ting, yet they beare more Fruits then o∣thers here (not farr from them,) that are three or fourscore yeares old, what is the reason hereof. FRƲIT-TREES: We were all of us in∣grafted whilst we were but young, and small Trees, with choice, and speciall Grafts, and therefore it is naturall to us to beare good Fruits early. HƲSBANDMAN: That is indeed accor∣ding to the will, and pleasure of the Hus∣bandman, if it seeme good unto him to graft some whilst young, others when grown up to a stronger body, and to let others a∣lone without grafting; who shall find fault with him, for using this his freedome, and liberty. And it is also manifest that it is e∣ven so amongst Christians: so God dealeth with them: God calls some of his people, in childhood, and youth: others afterwards. some he calls, and converts ear∣ly; even in their childhood, and youth, others in their middle age; some he calls the first houre of the day; some the Eleventh: and some the last houre, in elder age: But they who come to God in Childhood, and youth, have great, and many ad∣vantages of those who come afterwards. It
is Gods command that we should come to him, early, betime and soone as may be in Childhood, and youth: Ʋdum & molle∣lutum es; nunc, nunc properundus & acri; fiagendus sine fine roa Pers: sat. 3. Eccl: 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the daies of thy youth, while the evil daies come not; such as chuse rather to serve the de∣vill, and their owne lusts, in Childhood, and youth, and think to come to God after∣wards, in old age; let them hearken to what God hath said concerning such, Pro. 1.24. Because I have called, and yee refused; I have stretched out my Hand, and no man regar∣ded, &c. I will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your feare commeth. But such as begin to follow God betimes, early, in their childhood and youth, and to bring sorth good Fruit whilst they are young and of tender yeares, and give unto God▪ their spring time, their virgin yeares, they usually know more of the mind of God, and of the love of God, then others: And have greater evidences, and manifestations of the love, and favour of God then others have; they are usually, speciall, and remark∣able persons, above others; and receive more favours from God then others of his people do, who come not in to God so soone: We see instances of this in Scripture:
in Samuel the Prophet: who was called of a child: 1. Sam. 3. so the Prophet Jer: Ch 1.6. who was sanctified from the wombe: Jo∣seph: who (for bringing forth good Fruit, when he was but 17. yeares of age) was sold into Egipt by his brethren: what remark∣able favours did he receive from God, all his daies. Gen. 37.2. Obadiah, feared God from his youth: 1. Kings 18.12. a singular person in his time. The Prophet Daniell: began to feare God in his youth Dan. 1. And God shewed him miracles of his care, and Love: he had Learning, and wisdome, in all Visions, and dreames Dan. 1 17. besides the immediate comforts of the spirit of God, an Angell was sent with a spetiall message to him, to tell him he was greatly belov'd of God, And God wrought a Mira∣cle in preserving him from the Lyons: The Prophet David, of a Young Twigg was ingrafted into Christ, Psal. 71.5. Taught of God from his youth ver. 17. And who e∣ver had a greater testimony from God, then he: a Man after Gods own Heart. And who ever had clearer evidences of the love of God; (and consequently communion with God) than he. How great a Prophet was John the Bap∣tist, who was filled with the Holy Ghost,
and sanctified in the wombe: Luke. 1.15. The Apostle John, (called the beloved dis∣ciple,) began to follow Christ in his youth, and had intimations of Christs love, more then the rest of the Disciples; he leaned on his brest, and lay in his bosome: he had full assurance of the love of God to him: 1 Jo: 4.13.14. and Ch: 5.19.20. 1. Jo: 3.14.24. We know we are of God: We know we are in him: We know we are translated from Death to Life &c. And be∣sides all this: such as are Engrafted into Christ whilst they are young, and tender twiggs, they attaine unto large growths, and measures of grace; If one have but a small measure of grace, (but as a graine of Mursterdseed) if he begin with it betime, in his childhood, and youth; it will improve, and grow, in many yeares, to a large mea∣sure, and degree: their Brooke will become a River, and their River will become a Sea: Every Act of Grace, will add to the habite of grace: They shall proceede from strength, to strength, from Glory, to Glory, by the Spiritt of the Lord: 2 Cor. 3.18. Section 21. HƲSBANDMAN: Yee have many Visi∣tors,
frequently; have you this familiar discourse with every one, as we have at present, and as often as we are disposed. Grosse ignorance reproved. FRƲIT-TREES: Many people (of all sorts) come from time, to time, and walk among us, and look upon us, and commend us, for brave handsome Trees, lovely, and beautifull, especially when we are in our Gallantrie; full of beautifull blossoms and pleasant, wholsome Fruits; and some greedily pluck us, and tear us, and sometimes breake off some of our Branches, to get our Fruits; and so go their waies; But speake never a word to us; neither do they understand what we say to them, though we are continually speaking to men, and are never weary, of instructing, and teaching man his Duty towards God, our Creator; and also praising, and setting forth his glory; ac∣cording to the Law of our Creation; as thou knowest, and hast often witnessed the same on our behalfe.
Most people are ignorant, both of Gods word, and Works. HƲSBANDMAN: I believe what yee say to be true; People (for the greatest part of the world) are ignorant of God, of themselves, and of all his Creatures; as well as ignorant of the Scriptures; Though God hath given us two great Vo∣lumes or Books to read, and study; his word, and his Workes: yet people (ge∣nerally) are ignorant of both; sottish children (as the Prophet calls them) who have no understanding: wherefore he that made them, will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will shew them no fa∣vour: Isay 27.11. Tremble at this word, yee ignorant sot∣tish people; there is not any mercy for you, whilst yee remain ignorant of God, of your selves, of his word, and of his workes. Therefore learn, and be instructed, else ye shall surely Perish: the very Trees of the Garden, and all the Creatures of God, will witnesse against you.
Ʋnlearned men may read in the Booke of the Creatures. The illitterate man that knowes not a word, or a let∣ter in the Book, and thinks to be excused, because he is not learned; yet he shall find it otherwise, one day; For this Book, of the Creatures is open, and legible by all men; As St Paul said of the ignorant heathen Rom. 1. They shall be left with∣out excuse, Because the invisible things of God (his Attributes, his Wisdom, Power, and Goodnesse, his Love, Bounty, and Kind∣nesse to all) are clearly seen in the things that he hath made: Therefore it concerns men to learn the voice, and Language of the Creatures of God, (and among them the voice, and language of Fruit-trees) as well as of his Word, and to observe their Les∣sons and instructions; for the mind, and things of God are seen clearly in them, though not so clearly as in his word; But being joyned, and considered together, we may learn our Duty to God; And in the doing thereof, We shall be blessed of him.
Section 22. An invitation, and incouragement to a con∣ference with Fruit-trees. HƲSBANDMAN: Come my Friends let us walke into this pleasant Garden, and have some further Discourse with those innocent, harmlesse Companions, the Fruit-trees; they will bid us welcome, and are still ready, and at leasure to conferre with us, and will be sure to teach us one good Lesson or other, But We must not forget what hath been often said concern∣ing the way, and manner of their Discourse with Men; That it is not audible to the outward sence of hearing, in the sound of words: but alwaies to the inward sence, the mind, and understanding And thus they will Discourse with us as long as we please, And they always speake Rational∣ly, and Religiously; in every thing taking Gods part, speaking to his praise, and glory; and for the instruction of all men; both for our Temporall, and Spirituall Pro∣fitt. Here is a very large Garden, full of Faire, and beautifull Fruit-trees, where∣by
we have both Profitt, and Pleasure: but I have heard also there are many things a∣mongst you occasioning admiration in men; what things are they that may occasion admiration, what say yee of your selves. Many things in Fruit-trees occasion admi∣ration. FRƲIT-TREES: Thou maiest see ma∣ny things in the course of our Natures that may occasion admiration of the Wis∣dome, Power, and goodnesse of God; 1: if thou do but take Notice of our Originall: and first springing up, we then lying wrapt up in small seeds, each one no biger then a graine of Wheate, yet out of those came these huge, and vast bodies that thou seest here above Ground; each one according to its own Nature; every seed keeping (ex∣actly) its own kind, and Nature: though many sorts are sowen in one bed of Earth, and drawing the same juyce of the earth yet each seede retaines its owne Nature. Tender Fruits come forth with Covers upon them: the more hardy without. And secondly: If thou con∣sider the manner of bring∣ing forth our Fruits, (espe∣cially wee Aprecotts, Cher∣ries, Plumbs, and such as are
of the most tender kinds) our Fruits come forth with Coates and Garments upon their backs; being so tender, that (with∣out the same, they could not indure the common Aire: If thou observe thou maist see (in our knitting time) our infant Fruit within the Blossome, no bigger then a Pinns head; which increasing, by little, and little tears this Coate, or Garment, and throwes it off; being then hardy e∣nough to endure the Aire: and so we grow on to ripenesse. But we that are more strong, and hardy Fruits; (Apples, Peares &c:) have no such Coates, or Garments upon Us, when we are born, we are naked when we come first into the world; our Blossoms fall off from us, when first we begin to knit, and appear, and so we grow on to per∣fection. HƲSBANDMAN: I perceve then hereby, That that which some Learned Phyloso∣phers call the Wisdome of Nature, in take∣ing Care of it self in these things, is but the Course, and law of Nature: but is indeed the Wisdome of the God of Nature: who as he hath made all Creatures, so he knoweth perfectly their severall Natures; and ac∣cordingly provideth for them.
Section 23. HƲSBANDMAN: Well: This is consi∣derable in order to our admiration; But what other particulers can yee tell us of to the same purpose. Different substances made of one Substance. FRƲIT-TREES: Take notice of, and consider these particulers also; Will it not cause Admiration to see, and consider how many severall Substances are made of one Simple substance: For of the Sap of Trees is made the Barke, Wood, Pith, Leaves, Buds, Blossoms, Stalks, Fruit, and Seed: drawne from the same juyce of the Earth. Defferent Gifts and Graces, wrought by the same Spirit. This illustrates to us; that so it is in Spi∣rituall things: the paralell holds good, the Variety of Gifts, and Graces in bele∣vers, proceede from one and the self same Spirit; as we see 1 Cor. 12.4. There are di∣versities of Gifts, but the same Spirit: And diversities of Administrations, but the same Lord, and ver. 6 diversities of Operations, but it
is the same God that worketh all in all. To one is given the word of wisdome, to ano∣ther the word of knowledge; to another the Gifts of healing, to another the working of Miracles; to another Prophesie; to another discerning of Spirits; to another divers kinds of Tongues; to another the interpretation of Tongues. Every Gift ought to be im∣proved for the profitt of all. But all these worketh that one, and the selfe same spiritt; dividing to every man severally as he will: 1 Cor. 12.12. By all which we should learne to owne, and love one another; and to be usefull, and serviceable one to another; every one ac∣cording to the Gifts, and Talents which God hath given unto them; Let nor the Rich dis∣pise the Poore, nor the Poore envie the Rich; let not the wise, and Learned, dispise the meaner sort, who want what they them∣selves have, such may have one Gift, or o∣ther, which the wise, and Learned have not, which may be usefull to the body; let not the Eye say unto the Hand, I have no neede of thee; Nor the Head to the Feet, I have no need of you: for those Members of the body which seem more feeble are necessa∣ry; 1 Cor. 12.22. The variety of Gifts, Graces, and endow∣ments,
that men have, are wrought by the same spirit; and for whose Glory they are to be used, and improved, and for the Pro∣fitt of all. Section 24. HƲSBANDMAN: Proceede further, and tell us some other perticulars that may oc∣casion our admiration, in the knowledge of them; for we know the works of God are marvelous, and wonderfull, and many of them past finding out; and therefore God is to be admired in them. Grafts, and Buds, assimilate the Sap of the Stocks. FRƲIT-TREES: Consider this further, That Grafts, and Buds, set upon stocks, that are of wild kinds, of bitter, harsh, and sower kinds, these Grafts, and Buds, being of a sweete, and pleasant nature, and drawing, and feeding upon the sower Sap, of those wild stocks yet they do change, & alter this sower, and bitter Sap, (that they draw, and feede upon) into their own sweete, and pleasant Nature, and bring forth Fruits ac∣cording to their owne Natures; And the badnesse of the stocks cannot alter the goodnesse of the Grafts; but according to
the Law, and Course of Nature, (which all Vegetables do keepe from their first Crea∣tion they do convert all their Sap, and nou∣rishment which they draw, into their own properties, and bring forth Fruits accor∣dingly. And is not this a Marvelous thing, that a great and large stock (it may be 40. times and more, bigger then the Graft that's set upon it) should not be able to change the lit∣tle Graft, (or the Bud, that is much smaller) into it's owne kind, and Nature. This then must be concluded: That it is the innate, in∣trinsecall forme of the Graft, and Bud that maintaines, and keepes, inviolable that Law of Nature, that the God of Nature at first Creation fixed in every individuall. Who alone is to be Praised, and Admired in these, and all his workes. Section: 25. HƲSBANDMAN: What other perticu∣lars do yee discover in the processe of Na∣ture, wherein God is seene, and discovers his Wisdome, and infinite excellencies, that may occasion his Praise, and Admiration; when knowne and observed.
Every small Bud contains the Nature of the whole Tree in it selfe. FRƲIT-TREES: Know, and consider this further, That every small Branch or Twigg, upon the Trees, yea, the least Bud upon the least Graft, or Twigg; doth con∣taine in it the Nature and property of the whole Tree; Though one Tree have many Thousands of Buds upon it; yet every per∣ticular has virtually, or potentially, the whole Tree in it selfe: though the Bud he never so small, and the Tree never so great; This is evident by Inoculating the Buds of any Tree, continuall Experience proves they are the same, and bring forth the same Fruits, as the Tree from which they were taken. HƲSBANDMAN: I grant this is a truth, and apparent to continuall Experience from yeare to yeare, and is a thing to be much Admired, that all the Properties of a vast, huge Tree, should be united into so narrow a compass; as a small Bud, smaller then a Graine of Wheate; Nay more: The Nature, and propertie of a great Tree (though as bigg as 2. or 3. men can fathom, with their hands joynd'd,) does lye in the Roote of that small Bud; some of which are as small as a Pinns point; this is proved: by
Experience; Because when that small Roote happens to be left upon the wood, in ta∣king off the Bud to inocculate (as sometimes it is) such a Bud does not grow, nor spring in the least: the Principall part being left behind; which is analogous with the Roote of a Tree in Planting: without which it can∣not grow; And therefore such as under∣take this worke of Inoculating, looke well to this, that this small Roote of the Bud, be in it when it is set on the stock. The Properties of a Tree, are in every seede. And further: This is also true: and a thing to be considered, and admired, That as the Pro∣perties, and Vertues of the whole Tree are in e∣very Bud, so also they are in every seede, or kernell, that is in every one of the Fruits; that grow upon the Tree; But herein a Caution is to be observed; (which is not so in Buds, and Grafts, which alwaies bring forth the same in kind;) That is, The seeds, or kernells of any Tree sowen, will produce the same in kind, in this sence, that is; if we sow the seede of an Appletree, it will be of the same speties; it will bring forth Ap∣pletrees; so of the seede of Peretrees, or any other kind; But then these young Trees produced by the same seede, will yet bring forth variety; severall sorts of Apples, some
better, some worse; yet all of them Apples, of one sort or other; And in that perticu∣ler also it is the more Admirable, That the seede, or kernells being alike; from one, and the same Tree, should yee bring forth diffe∣rent sorts of Fruits; yet all of them Apples too; but different in kinds. The same flo∣wer seede brings forth variety. So also it is in the seedes of flo∣wers when sowen: e selfe same seede, brings forth different sorts of flowers; some double, some single, some one colour, some another: which is to be Admired, if considered: God in his infinite Bounty, and goodnesse gives us va∣riety of his good Creatures, as well for Pleasure, and delight, as for Necessity. And this should occasion his Praise, and Admi∣ration; and more chearefull Service, from us, who reape the benifitt, and comfort thereof. Section 25. HƲSBANDMAN: What other wonders in Nature are there, that we should take notice of, in your continuall course, and processe from yeare, to yeare, whereby you set forth the glory of the Creatour; that we may understand it, and Admire God in his workes: for the workes of the Lord are
great sought out of all them, that have plea∣sure therein Ps. 111.2, 3. His worke is ho∣nourable, and gloriouse: and Ver. 4. O come hither, and behold the workes of God, How wonderfull he is in his doings: He hath so done his Marvelous workes that they ought to be had in remembrance. FRƲIT-TREES: We discover many things to be taken notice of, and Admi∣red by all men; for the Eternall Power, and Wisdome, goodnesse, and bounty of God is seene in us, besides what has beene, or may be said, take notice of this further. Many kinds of Fruits up∣on one Tree. Upon one great Appletree, (or any other kind) may be grafted many kinds; great variety; according to the number of the boughes, and Branches, so many severall sorts may be grafted, Per∣haps 20. 30. 40. or more, severall sorts of Apples; may be Engrafted upon the same Tree, if men desire it, for a curiosity: some early kinds, some later: some of one shape and bignesse, some of another, the Grafts being variouse, (though they grow all upon one Tree, and feede upon one, and the selfe same Sap,) yet they will bring forth variety of Fruits, every Graft, after his owne kind. HƲSBANDMAN: I have seene variety
of Fruits upon one Tree, and many more kinds might have beene Grafted upon it, if men would, these severall sorts of Grafts brought forth variety of Fruits, e∣very Graft after his kind: And this proves that to be true which a Learned Sr: Fran: Bacon: Nat: Hist: pag. 100. Philosopher hath asserted; That Grafts Governe; all Grafts Rule, al∣though they are Engrafted upon a different stock, yet they convert that different Sap, which they feede upon, into their owne Natures, and bring forth Fruits accordingly. And this observation may be usefull, both for Profitt, and Pleasure; A man that hath but a small peece of ground for his Orchard, yet he may have variety of Fruits upon a few Trees; according to the bignesse, and largenesse of the Trees; so he may multiply his Grafts, of what kinds he thinks best. Si quid novisti restius istis; Candidus imperti: si non, his utere mecum. FINIS.
