B1967 13229486 98597
Mr. Royston, THIS inclosed Speech coming by accident to my hands, I take the Innocent free∣dom of presenting you with it, in order to its Publication; that I may upon this occasion, at once express my forwardness to serve you, and my just Respects unto that very Honourable Peer the Author of it, and those Worthy Mer∣chants to whom it was spoken. SIR,  I am Yours B. C. March 5. 1680.
A SPEECH Made by the Right Honourable GEORGE EARL of BERKELEY, TO THE LEVANT COMPANY AT THEIR ANNUAL ELECTION, February ix. MDCLXXX. His Lordship being Governour of that most Loyal Society. LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most Sacred Majesty, MDCLXXXI.
A SPEECH Made by the RIGHT HONOURABLE GEORGE EARL of BERKELEY, TO THE LEVANT Company at their Annual Election, February ix. 1680. GENTLEMEN, THis being the day of your Annual Election, I am come to wait on you to resign up my place of Governour into your hands: I am very sensi∣ble of your great Kindness to me,
and good opinion of me, in chusing me your Governour for Eight Years past, for which I return you my hearty thanks, and should be glad in return of all your favours, it were in my power to do good to every individual person of this Worthy Society. I have served you with all Faith∣fulness and Integrity, and shall ne∣ver be wearied nor discouraged from serving you so long as I live, whilst I believe my self capable, and you are pleased to think me so. I very much rejoyce my inter∣position with his Gracious Majesty, hath been so prevalent and success∣ful in your Concerns, that you have been left freer in the choice of your Embassador, than, I believe, you ever were before.
By this means you have pro∣ceeded to the Election of a The Right Honourable Iames Lord Chandois. Person of Honour and Integrity, a No∣bleman, so well qualified in all re∣spects to serve you, that we have rea∣son to hope we shall be safe under his Lordships wise Conduct of our Affairs, and that by Gods blessing he will be Instrumental to deliver us from our just fears, and from the un∣just pretensions and demands of so Insolent and Oppressive a Vizier. Gentlemen, I pray God to bless you in all your concerns at home and abroad, by Sea and by Land, and so unite our hearts in these too much divided times amongst Chri∣stians, that there may be no con∣test between us but this, How we should best express our selves good Protestant Subjects, good English∣men,
Honourable and fair dealing Traders, delighting to do our Duties in our Generation, by serving God, our King, (whom God in Mercy long, long preserve to Reign over us) and our Country. I have no more to say, but leave you to your free choice. His Lordship, my Lord of Berkeley, was the same day, being the 9th of February, again chosen Governour of the Turkey Company for the Year ensuing. His Excellency the Lord Chan∣dois, His Majesties Extraordinary Embassador for Constantinople, de∣parted from London, Monday, Fe∣bruary xxi. 1680. in order to his Voyage. THE END.
