B2434 13107356 97529
THE PSALMES OF DAVID IN MEETER: With the Prose interlined. By Mr. ZACHARY BOYD, Preacher of GODS Word. PSAL. 119. vers. 54. Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. PSAL. 34. vers. 2. Printed at GLASGOW, by the Heires of GEORGE ANDERSON, Anno, 1648.
To the right Reve∣rend, the faithfull Ministers of Gods Word, of Britain, and Ireland. RIGHT REVEREND. GRace be to you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. At the di∣rection of the Generall Assem∣bly at Edinburgh, Anno 1644. I put my hand to the work of the Psalmes▪ whereof I give to you now this last edition, The work is for the publike service of God in his Church, and it concerns you especial∣ly to endeavour by all meanes that this work may be done for the glory of God, and edification of his people, whose soules are committed to your charge. That this may be done worthily, diverse things in my udgement are required. First, That the interpretation approven, and received by our Church be not changed
in the verse, by any particular mans opini∣on; for the interpreters in some dark places differ in opinions concerning the sense: If the verse follow one interpretation, and the Text another, consider how impertinent that will bee. Secondly, That all dfficile words be shunned, by reason, that many people and children must sing that are unlearned. Thirdly, That, so far as is possible, no words of the Text be wanting, for in the Text there be no idle words or superfluities to be retrinched, as in mens discourse. Fourthly, If any words be added, that they be pertinent to make the sense clear▪ as we see in the Text some words added. which are printed in smaller letters. PSAL. 16. 2. PSAL. 27. 8. PSAL. 54. 17. &c. Fiftly, A speciall care would be had that the verse be very clear, and easie to be un∣derstood by the most ignorant, that unlear∣ned people and children may as Gods word directs, PSAL. 47. 7. Sing with understan∣ding, It is better pertinently to adde some words for explication, as we see done in th Text it self, then without them to leave the matter so obscure, that the people & children should sing they know not what:  Cor. 14
. I, said the Apostle, will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with understanding, and I will sing with the spirit, I will sing with the understanding also: This above all must be regarded, that the verse be very clear and easie to be understood: It is farre better without all controversie, that diverse words in a pertinent paraphrase be added, that people may understand what they sing, then to want one word of the Text, whereby the song is made obscure; The Apostle pre∣ferreth five words with understanding, to ten thousand obscure: 1 Cor. 14. 19. Saint PAUL is a great enemie to obscurity, and all faithfull Pastours must, and will set their face against it in all things that con∣cerne the soules that their Master hath bought with his bloud, and concredited to them: Let therefore all difficle words be shunned that are not in the Bible; as for the words of the Bible, all should under∣stand them. Sixthly, A speciall care would be had, that so far as may be, the words of the Text be not changed with any other, that those that have their Bibles before them may read the words of the text in the song▪ when other words are in the verse, the Text
seemeth uncouth to him that readeth or singeth: It greatly edifies when the words of the Song are the words of the Text; and this would be very carefully consider∣ed, and aimed at by all that meddle with the tryall of our labours, that most dili∣gently they compare the words of the verse with the words of the Text, that none thereof be wanting, nor any others put into their place, so far as is possible to do the same; the Text must be the only touch∣stone for tryall. Seventhly, He that medleth with such a work would have good understanding in the Hebrew, which is the Originall and foun∣taine; The want of this, or the not taking heed, hath made all English verse that I have seen, make a very great fault, in mis∣taking that which is said of God himself, in the PSAL. 82. 1. where it is said, God standeth in the congregation of the mighty, he judgeth among the gods; All the Psalmes in English verse that I have seen, by the migh∣ty, there understand mighty men, which is a very great mistake; the Originall He∣brew clearly lets us see, that it is God him∣self that is there called El: those be the words, Elohim nitsav bagnadath El, that is,
is Piseator in his version hath very well▪ Deus stat in coetu Dei, which he interpreteth thus, hoc est Deus stat in coetu suo, id est in coetu a se ordinato: Our English ver∣sion in this verse would be mended; where as it hth God standeth in the Assembly of th mighty, it were better and more clear to put God standeth in the Assembly of God▪ Now right Reverend, this is my last labour which I have set down with the Text interlined, that the judicious reader may▪ have under his eye both the Text and the verse, and may thē more easily confer them together, and discerne. I desire that no man esteem that in a mer∣cenary way I am seeking gain by those my la∣bours, though the work hath been both pain∣full and chargeable, I with a most willing mind offer all in a free-will offering to the Lord; seek gaines who will, I will have none, nor do I stand in need, praised bee the Lord: I hope the judicious Reader shall finde this last edition mended in many things; If any thing hath been observed by any in the former editions, let them consider if it bee mended in this last, which, as I have hitherto done, I sub∣mit
in all humlity to the judgement of my Brethren in the Ministry. The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: 1 Cor. 14. 32. From GLASGOW; the day 1648. Your humble servant in the LORD, M. ZACHARY BOYD.
THE PSALMES OF DAVID. PSALME I. BLest is the man that walketh not in the counsell of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornfull. BLest is the man that walks not in th'ungodlies counsell ill, Nor stands in sinners way, nor doth in scorners seat sit still. 2 But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law doth he meditate day and night. . But in the Law of him that is the Lord, is his delight, And in his Law he meditates both in the day and night.
3 And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; 3 And he shall be like to a tree that by the water springs Is planted▪ and that forth his fruit in his own season brings. His leafe also shall not wither, and whatso∣ever he doth shall prosper. 4 The ungodly are not so: but are like th chaffe which the winde driveth away. His leafe not wither shall, and what he doth shall prosper ay: 4 Th'ungodly are not so, but driv'n like chaffe by winde away. 5 Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgement, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous. 5▪ Therefore not in the judgement stand th' ungodly shall at all: Nor in the congregation of righteous, sinners shall. 6 For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous: but the way of the ungodly shall perish. 6 For well the Lord the way doth know of those that righteous be, But of ungodly men the way shall perish utterlie.
PSALME II. WHy do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? WHat is the cause that heathen men their rage do not restrain, And that the people do a thing imagine that is vain? 2 The Kings of the earth set themselves, nd the rulers take counsell together against he Lord, and against his Anointed, saying, 2 Kings of the earth do set themselves, and Rulers thereupon Gainst God together counsell take, and his Anointed One. 3 Let us break their bands asunder, and ast away their cords from us. 4 He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh▪ he Lord shall have them in derision. 3 Let us asunder break their bands, and cords cast from us all: 4 He that sits in the heav'n shall laugh, the Lord deride them shall. 5 Then shall hee speak unto them in his ath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. 6 Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill∣f Sion. 5. Then in his wrath hee'l speak to them, displeasd sore vex them will: 6 Yet have I set my King upon Sion my holy hill.
7 I will declare the decree; the Lord hath said un o me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. 7 Now the decree declare I will, the Lord hath said to me, Thou art mine only Son, this day I have begotten thee. 8 ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. 8 Ask me, and for thine heritage I'le heathen give to thee: The utmost parts of earth they shall for thy possession be. 9 Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron, thou shalt dash them in pieces like a  vessell. 9 Thou with a rod of iron them shalt break, and thou withall Like to a potters vessell halt them dash in peices small. 10 Be wise now therefore O ye Kings: be instructed▪ ye judges of the earth. 10 Now therefore O ye that are kings be wise in what ye do; And ye the Judges of the earth instructed be also.
11 Serve ye the Lord with fear and rejoy with trembling. 12 Kisse the Son least he be angry. 11 Serve ye the Lord with fear, and als rejoyce with trembling ye: 12 Do ye him kise that is the Son lest that he angry be. And ye perish from the way, when his wrah is kindled but a little: Blessed are all they that out their trust in him. And when his wrath but kindled is a little, from the way Y perish; but who in him trust most blessed are all they. PSAL. III. LOrd, how are they increased that trouble me▪ many are they that rise up against me. LORD, how are they increased thus that now doe trouble me? They who against me do rise up in number many be. 2 Many there be which say of my oul, There is no help for him in God. Sclh. 3 But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of mine head. Of my soul many say, for him in God's no help indeed. 3▪ But thou my shield and glory art, th uplifter of mine head.
4 I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy hill, Selah. 5 I laid me down and slept: I awaked, for the Lord sustained me. 4 With voice I cri'd to God; out of his holy hill heard he: 5 I laid me down and slept; I wak'd, for GOD sustained me. 6 I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set themselves against me round about. 6 I surely will not be afraid of thousands ten most stout Of people, that have set themselves against me round about. 7 Arise, O Lord, save me, O my God: for thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheek bone: thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly. 7 Arise, O Lord, save me, my God, for thou hast smitten all My foes on the cheek bone; thou hast th' ungodlies teeth broke small. 8 Salvation belongeth unto the Lord: thy blessing is upon thy people. Selah. 8 Now unto him that is the Lord belongs salvation, The blessing also which is thine thy▪ people is upon. Selah.
PSALME IV. HEar me when I call, O God of my righ∣teousnesse: thou hast enlarged me when I was in distresse, have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer. O Do thou hear me when I call God of my righteousnesse: Have mercy, hear my prayer, thou hast inlarg'd me in distresse. 2 O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? how long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasiug? Selah. 2 O sons of men, how long will ye my glory turn to shame? How long will ye love vanity, and leasing seek to frame? Selah. 3 But know that the Lord hath set apart him that is godly for himself: the Lord will hear when I call unto him. 3 But know that for himself the Lord him that is godly heer Hath set apart; the Lord when I unto him call will hear. 4 Stand in aw, and sinne not; commune with your own heart upon your bed, and  still. Selah. 4 Stand ye in aw, and do not sin, to commune have a will
With your own heart upon your bed, and be ye also still. Selah. 5 Offer the sacrifices of righteousnesse, and put your trust in the Lord. 5 The sacrifices offer up of righteousnesse that be, And into him that is the Lord, your confidence put ye. 6 There be many that say, Who will shew vs any good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. 6 Who will to us shew any good, there many be that say▪ Lord, of thy countenance the light lift up on us alway. 7 Thou hast put gladnesse in my heart, more then in the time that their corn, and their wine increased. 7 Thou hast in mercy gladnesse put into this heart of mine, More then in time increased were their corn and als their wine. 8 I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou Lord onely makest me dwell in safety. 8 I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep will also well, For thou Lord only makest me in safety for to dwell.
PSALME V. GIve ear to my words, O Lord, consider my meditation. 2 Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king  my God, for unto thee will I pray. GIve ear unto my words, O Lord, my meditation weigh, 2 Hear of my cry the voice, my King, my God, for I'le thee pray. 3 My voice shalt thou hear in the morning, O Lord, in the morning will I direct my pray∣er unto thee, and will look up. 3 My voice shalt thou at morning hear, at morning, Lord, will I My prayer unto the direct, and will look up on hye, 4 For thou art not a God that hath plea∣sure in wickednesse: neither shall evill dwell with thee. 4 For thou art not a God that pleasd with wickednesse can be: Nor any thing that evill is shall dwell at all with thee. 5 The foolish shall not stand in thy sight  thou hatest all workers of iniquity. 5 The foolish people in thy sight stand sted fast never shall, The workers of iniquitie thou surely hatest all.
6 Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor the bloudy and deceitfull man. 6 Thou shalt them that do leasing speak destroy for evermore, The bloudy and deceitfull man the Lord he will abhor. 7 But as for me, I will come into thy house, in the multitude of thy mercy, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple. 7 But in thy mercies multitude, thy house I will come near▪ Towards thy▪holy temple I will worship in thy fear. 8 Lead me, O Lord in thy righteousnesse, because of mine enemies, make thy way straight before my face. 8 Because of those mine enemies, Lord in thy righteousnesse Do thou me lead, do thou thy way make straight before my face. 9 For there is no faithfulnesse in their mouth, their inward part is very wickednesse: their throat is an open sepulchre, they flatter with their tongue. 9 For in their mouth's no faithfulnesse, their inward part's all wrong: Their throat's an open sepulchre, they flatter with their tongue.
10 Destroy thou them, O God, let them fast y their own counsels: cast them out in the mul∣titude of their transgressions, for they have rebel∣ed against thee. 10 Destroy thou them, O God, let them fall by their own counsell, Cast them out in their many sins for 'gainst thee they rebell. 11 But let all those that put their trust in thee, rejoice: let them ever shout for joy, because thou dfendest them, let them also that love thy Name, be joyfull in thee. 11 But let all joy that in thee trust, still shout for joy let them: For them thou sav'st; let them in thee rejoyce that love thy Name. 12 For thou, Lord, wilt blesse the righte∣ous: with favour wilt thou compasse him, as with a shield. 12 For thou him that is righteous to blesse, O Lord, wilt yeeld; With favour thou wilt compasse him about as with a shield. PSAL. VI. O LORD, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. O Lord, while thou in anger art, do thou rebuke me not:
O neither do thou chasten me in thy displeasure hot. 2 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak, O Lord, heal me, for my bones are vexed. 2 O Lord, because that I am weak, have mercie upon me, Heal me, O Lord, for that those bones of mine, now vexed be. 3 My soul is also sore vexed: but thou, O Lord, how long? 4 Returne, O Lord, deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake. 3 My soul als sore is vex'd, but Lord how long stay wilt thou make; 4 Returne, Lord, rid my soul, oh save me for thy mercies sake. 5 For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give thee thank▪s 5 For those that are in death, of thee do no remembrance have. Who is he that uuto thee shall give thanks within the grave? 6 I am weary with my groaning▪ all the night make I my el to swim: I water my couch with my tears. 6 I weary with my groaning am I all the night my bed
Make for to swim; I with my tears my couch have watered. 7 Mine eye is consumed because of grief: is waxeth old because of all mine enemies▪ 7 Because of grief that in me is, consumed is mine eye, t waxeth old because of all that enemies are to me. 8 Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity: for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping. 9 The Lord hath heard my supplication, 8 All workers of iniquity part from me, for the Lord Hath of my weeping heard the voice: 9 The Lord my prayer hath heard The Lord will receive my prayer. 10 Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return, and be ashamed suddenly. The Lord my prayer will receive, 10 Let enemies all to me Be sham'd, fore vex'd; let suddenly them turn and shamed be. PSAL. VII. O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust, save me from all them that persecute mee, and deliver me. O Thou that art the Lord my God, I put my trust in thee:
From all them that me persecute save and deliver me. 2 Lest he tear my soul like a Lion, ren∣ting it in pieces, while there is none to deliver. 2 Lest like a Lion he my soul tear, and in pieces small It rent; while to deliver me there is not one at all. 3 O Lord my God, if I have done this▪ if there be iniquity in my hands: 3 O Lord my God, if so be that this hath been done by me, Or if at all within my hands iniquity there be. 4 If I have rewarded evill unto him that was at peace with me, (yea, I have delivered him that without cause is mine enemie.) 4 If him that was a peace with me, I ill rewarded so, Yea, I have him delivered that's without cause my foe. 5 Let the enemie persecute my soul, and take it, yea, let him tread down my life upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. Selah. 5 Let th' enemie pursue my soul and take't, yea let him thrust
My life down on the earth, and lay mine honour in the oust. Selah. 6 Arise▪ O Lord, in thine anger lift up thy self because of the rage of mine enemies, and awake for me to the judgement that thou hast commanded. 6 Rise in thy wrath Lord lift thy self for my foes raging fast. And for me to the judgement wake that thou commanded hast. 7 So shall the congregation of the people compasse thee about: for their sakes therefore returne thou on high. 7 So of the people thee about the congregation Shall compasse; for their sakes therefore, do thou on high returne? 8 The Lord shall judge the people: judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousnesse, and according to mine integrity that is in me. 8 The Lord, he shall the people judge, a judge Lord to me be After my righteousnesse, and mine integritie in me. 9 O let the wickednesse of the wicked come  an end, but establish the just: for the righteous God trith the hearts and reins.
9 Oh let the wickeds malice end, but stablish stedfastly The just man; for the righteous God the hearts and reins doth try. 10 My defence is of God, which saveth the upright in heart 11 God judgeth the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day. 10 Or God which saves  right in heart is my defence alway: 11 The just God judgeth; with the bad God's angry every day. 12 If he turn not, he will wht his sword: he hath bent his bowe, and made it readie 12 If that he doth not turn again, his sword then whet will he, He hath his bow bent, and hath it made ready for to be. 13 He hath also prepared for him the instru∣ments of death: he ordaineth his arrows against the persecutors. 13 He hath also prepar'd for him the instruments of death, Against the persecutors he his arrows ord ineth. 14 Behold he travlleth with iniquitie, and hath conceived mischief, and brought forth∣falshood.
14 Behold, he with iniquitie doth travell as in birth, And he mischief conoeived hath, and falshood hath broughr forth. 15 He made a pit, and digged it, and is fal into the ditch which he made. 15 He made a pit, and digged it, and he a fall did take Ev'n into that same very ditch which he himself did make. 16 His mischief shall returne upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate. 16 Upon▪ his own head shall return mischief which is his own, His dealing that is violent shall on his pate come down. 17 I will praise the Lord accordng to his righteousnesse: and will sing praise to the Name of the Lord most High. 17 According to his righteousnesse the Lord now praise will I And will sing praise unto the Name of God that is most hye.
PSALME VIII. O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the earth who hast set thy glory above the heavens. O Lord, our Lord, how excellent in all the earth doth prove Thy name! who thy great glory hast. the heavens set above. 2 Out of the mouth of babes▪ and suckling hast thou ordained strength, because of thine ene∣mies, that thou mightest still the enemie and the avenger. 2 Thou hast ordain'd strength out of babe and sucklings mouths also, Because of thy foes that thou migh'st th'avnger still and foe. 3 When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon, and the stars which thou hast ordained; 3 When I thy heav'ns consider that work of thy fingers be The moon and likewise all the stars that were ordain'd by thee. 4 What is man that thou art mindfull of him? and the son of man that thou visitest him▪ 4 O what is man that thou of him should thus so mindfull be? And what mans son, that he should so be visited by thee?
5 For thou hast made him a little lower then the Angels: and hast crowned him with glory and honour. 5 For then the Angels thou hast him a little lower made: With glory and with honour als thou crowned hast his head. 6 Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands: thou hast put all things un∣der his feet. 6 Thou madst him have dominion ov'r the works of thy hand, Under his feet thou also hast put all things by command. 7 All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field. 8 The fowle of the air, and the fish of the sea, 7 All sheep and oxen, yea and als beasts of the field that be. 8 The fowle that is into the air and fishes of the sea. And whatsoever passeth thorow the pathes of the seas. 9 O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! And whatsoever through the paths doth of the seas passe forth. 9 O Lord our Lord, how excellent's thy Name in all the earth!
PSALME IX. I Will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: I will shew forth all thy marvellous works. WIth my whole heart I will, O Lord, give praises unto thee, Thy works all that are marvellous, shall be shown forth by me. 2 I will be glade and rejoice in thee: I will sing praises to thy Name, O thou most High. 2 I will be very glade, and als rejoice in thee will I, I will sing praise unto thy Name, O thou that art most hye. 3 When mine enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perish at thy presence. 4 For thou hast maintained my right and my cause: thou satest in the throne judging right. 3 When back my foes are turn'd, they'l fall, and perish at thy sight: 4 For thou my right and cause maintaindst, in throne satst judging right. 5 Thou hast rebuked the heathen, thou hast destroyed the wicked; thou hast put out their name for ever and ever. 5 The heathen thou rebuked hast, the wicked all about Thou hast destroy'd; thou hast their na for ever and ever put our.
6 O thou enemie, destructions are come to a perpetuall end: and thou hast destroyed Cities▪ their memoriall is perished with them. 6 O en'mie come destructions are to end perpetuall; Thou cities raz'd, perish'd with them▪ is their memoriall. 7 But the Lord shall endure for ever: he hath prepared his throne for judgement. 7 But he that is the Lord, he shall for evermore endure, He hath the throne that is his own prepar'd for judgement sure. 8 And he shall judge the world in righte∣ousnesse: he shall minister judgement to the People in uprightnesse. 8 And he the world all well shall judge▪ in perfect righteousnesse; He shall to people minister judgement in uprightnesse. 9 The Lord also will be a refuge for the op∣pressed: a refuge in times of trouble. 9 The Lord also will a refuge for the oppressed be: And in the times of trouble great be a refuge will he.
10 And they that know thy name, will put their trust in thee: for thou Lord, hast not for∣saken them that seek thee. 10 And they all that thy Name do know will trusting in thee be, For thou, Lord, not forsaken hast them that seek after thee. 11 Sing praises to the Lord, which dwelleth in Sion: declare among the people his doings. 11 Do ye Sing praises to the Lord, which doth in Sion dwell: Among them that the people are do ye his doings tell. 12 When he maketh inquisition for bloud▪ he remembreth them; he forgetteth not the cry of the humble. 12 When he makes inquisition▪ for bloud, he'le them remember; And he of them that humble are the cry forgetteth never. 13 Have mercie upon me, O Lord, consider my trouble, which I suffer of them that hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death: 13 Have mercie, Lord, my trouble weigh, which of them that me hate I suffer, thou that dost of death me lift up from the gate.
14 That I may shew forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Sion: I will re∣joyce in thy salvation. 14 That I in Sions daughters gates, the praise that's thine alone May all shew forth: I will rejoice in thy salvation. 15 The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net which they hid, is their own foot taken. 15 The heathen are sunk down into the pit that they did make▪ The net which they themselves did hide, their own foot it did take. 16 The Lord▪ is known by the judgement which he executeth: the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah. 16 By judgemeut which he executes, the Lord is known in this, Ev'n in the work of his own hand the wicked snared is. Selah. 17 Th wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God. 17 The wicked shall be into hell down turned from their seat, And also all the Nations that do the Lord forget.
18 For the needy shall not alway be forgotten▪ the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever. 18 For they that needy are shall not forgotten be alway, The expectation of the poor not perish shall foray. 19 Arise, O Lord▪ let not man prevaile▪ let the heathen be judged in thy sight. 20 Put them in fear, O Lord: that the na∣tions may know themselves to be but men. Selah▪ 19 Arise, Lord, let not man prevaile, judge heathens in thy sight: 20 That Nations may know themselves but men; Lord, them affright. Sclah▪ PSAL. X▪ WHy standest thou afar off, O Lord? why hidest thou thy self in times of trouble? WHy is it that thou now, O Lord, thus standest off afar, Why is it that thou hid'st thy self▪ when times of trouble are? 2 The wicked in his pride doth persecuie the poor: let them be taken in the devices that the have imagined. 2 The wicked in his pride the poor doth persecute, let them In their devices taken be that they themselves did frame.
3 For the wicked boasteth of his hearts de∣sire, and blesseth the covetous whom the Lord abhorreth. 3 For ev'n of his own hearts desire the wicked boasts, and more Him that is covetous he doth blesse whom the Lord doth abhor. 4 The wicked through the pride of his coun∣tenance will not seek after God: God is not i all his thoughts 4 The wicked man he through the pride of count'nance that is his Will not seek after God; the LORD in all his thoughts not is. 5 His wayes are alwayes grievous, thy judge∣ments are far above out of his sight: as for all his enemies he puffeth at them. 5 His wayes they alwayes grievous are, thy judgements where he goes Are far above out of his sight, he puffs at all his foes. 6. He hath said in his heart, I shall not be mo∣ved: for I shall never be in adversitie. 6 He hath this said within his heart, not moved be shall I, For I shall not at any time be in adversity.
7 His mouth is full of cursing, and deceit▪ and fraud under his tongue is mischief and vanity 7 Of cursing, fraud, and of deceit his mouth is full surely, And underneath his tongue there is mischief and vanity. 8 He sitteth in the lurking placos of the vil∣lages: in the secret places doth he murder the innocent: his eyes are privily set against the poor. 8 He lurking sits in villages: and secret places by Kills th'innocent: he 'gainst the poor his eyes sets privily. 9 He lieth in wait secretly as a lion in his den, he lieth in wait to catch the poor. he doth catch the poor when he draweth him into his net. 9 In's den he as a lion lyes secret, he lyes in wait To catch the poor, he poor doth catch when he him drawes in's net. 10 He croucheth and humbleth himself, th the poor may fall by his strong ones. 10 He croucheth down unto the ground, himself he humbleth all, That by those that his strong ones are, they that are poor may fall. 11 He hath said in his heart, God hath for∣gotten: he hideth his face▪ he will never see it.
11 That this the Lord forgotten hath said in his heart hath he, He hideth so his countenance, he will it never see. 12 Arise, O Lord, O God, lift up thin hand: forget not the humble. 12 O Lord, O GOD, do thou arise, thy hand do thou up set, And those in heart that humble are do thou not now forget. 13 Wherefore do the wicked contemn God  he hath said in his heart, Thou wilt not re∣quire it. 13 Wherefore doth he that wicked is GOD to contemn desire? He thus within his heart hath said, thou wilt it not require. 14 Thou hast seen it, for thou beholdest mis∣chief and spite to requite it with thy hand: the poor committeth himself unto thee: 14 Thou hast it seen, for spite mischief thou seest it to requite With thine own hand; the poor he doth himself to thee commit. Thou art the helper of the fatherlesse. 15 Break thou the arm of the wicked, and the evill man: seek out his wickednesse till tho finde none.
Of fatherlesse thou helper art, 15 of wicked and th'ill one Break thou the arme; his wickednesse seek out till thou finde none. 16 The Lord is King for ever and ever▪ the heathen are perished out of his land. 16 For ever and for ever als the Lord a King he is, The heathen they are perished out of the land that's his. 17 Lord, thou hast heard the desire of the humble: thou wilt prepare their heart, thou wile cause thine ear to hear: 17 O Lord of those that humble are thou the desire didst hear, Thou wilt prepare their hearts, and thou to hear wilt cause thine ear. 18 To judge the fatherlesse and the oppress  that the man of the earth may no more oppresse. 18 To judge him who opressed is, and that is fatherlesse, That he who is the man of earth may thus no more oppresse. PSAL. XI. IN the Lord put I my trust: how say ye to my soule, Flee as a bird to your mountain? I In the Lord do put my trust, how is it thus that ye
Unto my soul say, as a bird unto your mountain flee? 2 For lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon the string: that they way privily shoot at the upright in heart. 2 For lo, the wicked bend their bow, their arrow ready right Make on the string, to privily shoot at in heart th'upright. 3 If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? 3 If so be the foundations destroy'd be utterly, What can the man then do at all, that liveth righteously? 4 The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lords throne is in heaven: his eyes behold, his eye-lids try the children of men. 4 God in his holy Temple is, the Lords Throne is in heav'n: His eyes behold, his eye-lids try the children of all men. 5 The Lord tryeth the righteous; but the wicked, and him that loveth violence, his soul ateth. 5 The Lord doth try the righteous, but these that wioked prove:
His very soul doth hate, and him that violence doth love. 6 Upon the wicked he shall rain snares fir and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup. 6 Upon the wicked snares and fire, and brimstone rain shall he, And fearfull tempest, of their cup this shall the portion be. 7 For the righteous Lord loveth righteous∣nesse: his countenance doth behold the upright, 7 For that the righteous Lord he doth in righteousnesse delight: His countenance it doth behold the man that is upright. PSAL. XII. HElp Lord, for the godly man ceaseth: for the faithfull fail from among the children of men. HElp, LORD, for that the godly man doth cease at all to be, For from among the Sons of men the faithfull fail we see. 2 They speak vanity every one with his neighbour: with flattering lips, and with a double heart do they speak. 2 They with his neighbour every one do speak but vanity,
With flattring lips, and with a heart that's double speak do they. 3 The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips and the tongue that speaketh proud things. 4 Who have said, with our tongue will we prevaile, our lips are our own: who is Lord over us? 3 God all all flattering lips cut off, tongues that speak proud things thus: 4 We'le with our tongues prevail, our lips are ours, who's Lord ov'r us? 5 For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise (saith the Lord) I will set him in safety, from him that puffeth at him. 5 Now for th' oppression of the poor, and needies sighing still, I'le rise, saith God; from him that puffe▪ him safely set I will. 6 The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tryed in a furnace of earth, purified even times. 6 Pure words are the words of the Lord, as silver that is try'd Within a furnace made of earth there sev'n times purify'd. 7 Thou shalt keep them (O Lord) thou shalt preserve them from this generation for ever.
8 The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted. 7 Lord, from this race for ever them keep and preserve thou shalt: 8 On each side walk the wicked, when they vilest men exalt. PSAL. XIII. HOw long wilt thou forget me (O Lord) for ever? how long wilt thou hide thy face from me? HOw long, Lord, wilt thou me forget, for ever shall this be? How long time shall it be that thou wilt hide thy face from me? 2 How long shall I take counsell in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily? how long shall mine enemie be exalted over me? 2 How long take counsell in my soul shall I, and daily be In heart sad? how long shall my so exalted be ov'r me? 3 Consider, and hear me, O Lord my God▪ lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death. 3 Consider thou, O Lord my God, and hearken to me now: Lest that I sleep the sleep of death, mine eyes enlighten thou.
4 Lest mine enemie say, I have prevailed against him: and those that trouble me, rejoyce▪ when I am moved. 4 Lest I against him have prevail'd my foe say, and the same That do me trouble shoud rejoyce when as I moved am. 5 But I have trusted in thy mercy, my hea shall rejoyce in thy salvation. 5 But in thy mercy surely I have put my trust alone, My heart within me shall rejoyce in thy salvation. 6 I will sing unto the Lord, because he hath alt bountifully with me. 6 I will sing praise unto the Lord, and that because that he Most bountifully in all things hath ever dealt with me. PSAL. XIIII. THe fool hath said in his heart, There is n God, they are corrupt, they have done abomi∣nable works, there is none that doth good. THe fool he hath within his heart said, that God there is none; They are corrupt, their works are vile, that does good there's not one.
2 The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men; to see if there were any that did understand and seek God. 2 The Lord from heaven looked down on mens children; to see If any understood, and would of God the seekers be. 3 They are all gone aside, they are all toge∣ther become filthy: there is none that doth good no not one. 3 They all together filthy are, they all aside are gone, And there is none that doeth good, yea surely no not one. 4 Have all the workers of iniquity no know∣ledge? who eat up my people, as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord. 4 The workers of iniquity have they no knowledge all? Who eat my people up as bread, and on the Lord not call. 5 There were they in great fear; for God is in the generation of the righteous. 5 There were they all in a great fear, for the Lord God is he That in the generation is of those that righteous be.
6 You have shamed the counsell of the ▪ ecause the Lord is his refuge. 7 O that the salvation of Israel were come t of Sion! 6 The poors counsell you sham'd, because God's his refuge alone: 7 O that come out of Sion were Isral's salvation! When the Lord bringeth back the captivity of his people, Iacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glade. When of his people back the Lord▪ brings the captivitie, At that time Jacob shall rejoice and Israel glade shall be. PSAL. XV. LOrd, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? wh shall dwell in thy holy hill? LOrd, who within thy tabernacle shall have abiding still? Or who shall have his dwelling place within thy holy hill? 2 He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousnesse, and speaketh the truth in his heart. 2 The man that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousnesse; And as it is within his heart, the trueth he doth expresse.
3 He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor doth evill to his neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour. 3 He that backbites not with his tongue, nor doth his neighbour ill; Nor 'gainst his neighbour a reproach to take up hath a will. 4 In whose eyes a vile person is contemned: but he honoureth them that fear▪ the Lord▪ he that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not. 4 In whose eyes is a person vile contemn'd▪ but God who fear He honours them, and changeth not, though to his hurt he swear. 5 He that putteth not out his money to usury, nor taketh reward against the innocent: he that doth these things shall never be moved. 5 To usury puts not his coine, nor take reward will he 'Gainst th'innocent; who doth these things shall never moved be. PSAL. XV. PReserve me, O God: for in thee do I put my trust. 2 O my soul, thou hast said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord: my goodnesse extendeth no to thee. LOrd save me, for in thee I trust, 2 To God my soul in mee
Thou saidst, thou art my Lord, my good extendeth not to thee. 3 But to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my de∣light. 4 Their sorrow shall be multiplied that haste after another God: 3 To Saints on earth, to th'excellent, where my delight's all plac't: 4 Their sorrows shall be multipli'd 'another God that hast: Their drink offerings of bloud will I not off▪ nor take up their names into my lips. Their drink offerings that are of bloud I will not offer so, Nor yet will I their names at all take up my lips into. 5 The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot. 5 The Lord of mine inheritance, he is the portion And of my cup also; my lot thou dost maintain alone. 6 The lines are fallen unto me in pleasa places. yea, I have a goodly heritage. 6 In pleasant places are the lines now fallen unto me,
Yea I an heritage that is most goodly have from thee. 7 I will blesse the Lord, who hath given me counsell: my reins also instruct me in the night seasons. 7 I'le blesse the Lord, who unto me hath given counsell right, My reins me also do instruct in seasons of the night. 8 I have set the Lord alwayes before me▪ because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. 8 I have the Lord before me set alwayes, because that he Is present still at my right hand, I shall not moved be. 9 Therefore my heart is glade, and my glōry rejoiceth: my flesh also shall rest in hope. 9 Therefore my heart is in me glade, yea and my glory so Rojoiceth greatly, and my flesh in hope shall rest also. 10 For thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine holy One to see corruption. 10 For thou wilt not for ever leave my soul in hell to be; Nor suffer wilt thine holy One corruption to see.
11 Thou wilt shew me the path of life; in thy presence is fulnesse of joy at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. 11 Thou wilt me shew the path of life; in thy presence full store Of joy there is; at thy right hand arc pleasures evermore. PSAL. XVII. HEar the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry▪ give ear unto my prayer that goeth not out of fained lips. ATtend unto my cry, O Lord, and hear the right from me, My prayer hear that go'th not out of lips that fained be. 2 Let my sentence come forth from thy pre∣sence: let thine eyes behold the things that are equall. 2 And from thy presence do thou let my sentence forth proceed, And let thine eyes behold the things that equall are indeed. 3 Thou hast proved mine heart, thou hast vi∣sited me in the night, thou hast tried me, and shalt finde nothing: I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgresse. 3 Thou prov'dst my heart, thou visit'dst me and me in night didst try
And nothing findst, my mouth shall not transgresse, so purpose I. 4 Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips, I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer. 4 Concerning all the works of men, by thy lips words that be, Of the destroyer from the paths I have preserved me. 5 Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. 5 My goings every one do thou within thy paths hold up, That so the footsteps that are mine away may never slip. 6 I have called upon thee, for thou wilt hear me O God: incline thine ear unto me, and hear my speech. 6 I called have on thee, O God, for that thou wilt▪ me hear: Hear thou my speech, and unto me do thou incline thine ear. 7 Shew thy marvellous loving kindnesse, O thou that savest by thy right hand them which put their trust in thee, from those that rise up a∣gainst them. 7 Thy marv'lous loving kindnesse shew; thou that by thy right hand
Sav'st them that in thee trust, from those that up against them stand. 8 Keep me as the apple of the eye: hide me under the shaddow of thy wings. 8 O do thou me most safely keep, as th'apple of the eye, Under the shadow of thy wings most closely hide thou me. 9 From the wicked that oppresse me, from my deadly enemies, who compasse me about. 10 They are inclosed in their own fat▪ with their mouth they speak proudly. 9 From wicked that m'oppresse, who me compasse as deadly soes: 10 They with their mouth do proudly speak, their fat doth them inclose. 11 They have now compassed us in our steps: they have set their eyes bowing down to the earth. 11 Those men have us now in our steps compassed with deceit; And bowing down unto the earth their eyes thus have they set. 12 Like as a Lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young lion lurking in secret places.
12 Like as a very Lion that is greedy of his prey, A Lion young which lurking doth in secret places stay. 13 Arise, O Lord, disappoint him, cast him down: deliver my soul from the wicked which is thy sword: 13 Arise, and him do disappoint, and cast him down, O Lord, My soul do from the wicked man deliver, who's thy sword, 14 From men which are thy hand, O Lord, from the men of the world, which have their portion in this life: 14 From men which are thy hand, O Lord, from men that worldly be, Which in this life that present is their portion have from thee. And whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure: they are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes. Whose belly with thy treasure hid thou fillest of the best; They full of children, to their babes leave of their wealth the rest. 15 As for me, I will behold thy face in righ∣teousnesse: I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likenesse.
15 But as for me in righteousnesse I thine own face will see, Then with thy likenes when I wake I satisfi'd shall be. PSAL. XVIII. I Will love thee, O Lord, my strength. 2 The Lord is my rock, and my fortresse and my deliverer, O Lord, my strength, I will thee love, 2 my fortresse is the Lord, My rock, and he that doth to me deliverance afford. My God, my strength in whom I will trust, my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower. My God, my strength, in whom I'le trust, a buckler unto me, The horne of my salvation, and my high tower is he. 3 I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies. 3 Upon the Lord, who to be prais'd is worthy I will call, And so I shall then saved be from these mine enemies all. 4 The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made me afraid.
5 The sorrows of hell compassed me about: the snares of death prevented me. 4 Deaths sorrowes compast me, floods of ill men'fraid made me be, 5 Hels sorrows compast me about, deaths snares prevented me. 6 In my distresse I called upon the Lord, and cryed unto my God: he heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even unto his ears. 6 I cal'd on God in my distresse, to my God cryed I, He from his Temple heard my voice, to his ears came my cry. 7 Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundation also of the hils moved, and were shaken, because he was wroth. 7 Then shook the earth, and trembled all the hils foundation both Were mov'd, and als they shaken were, because that he was wroth, 8 There went up a smoake out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured, coals were kindled by it. 8 Out of his nostrils in that place, a smoak went up on hye And from his mouth a fire devour'd, coals kindled were thereby.
9 He bowed the heavens also and came down: and darkenesse was under his feet. 9 The Heavens also did he bow, and came down as was meet, And in that place a darknesse thick was underneath his feet. 10 And he rode upon a cherub, and did flie: yea, he did flie upon the wings of the winde. 10 And he upon a cherub rode, and also flie did he Yea of the winde upon the wings he did then swiftly flee. 11 He made darkenesse his secret place: his pavilion round about him, were dark waters, and thick clouds of the skies. 11 He darknesse made his secret place and his pavilion hye, About him round, were waters dark, and thick clouds of the sky. 12 At the brightnesse that was before him, his thick clouds passed, hait- stones and coals of fire. 12 By reason of the brightnesse which before him did appear, His clouds that were so thick did passe, hailstones and coals of fire, 13 The Lord also thundred in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice; hail stones and coals of fire.
13 The Lord He in the heav'ns also did thunder in his ire; And then the Highest gave his voice: hailstones and coales of fire. 14 Yea, he sent out his arrows and scattered them, and he shot out lightnings, and discomsi∣ted them. 14 Yea, he his arrows out did send, and he them scattered; And he his lightnings did shoot out and them discomfited. 15 Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the world were discove∣red: at thy rebuke, O▪ Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils. 15 The waters channels then were seen, the worlds foundations fast Discovered were at thy rebuke Lord, at thy nostrils blast. 16 He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters. 16 He from above then down did send, and also took he me And he me out of waters drew that very many be. 17 He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me: for they were too strong for me.
17 From him that was mine enemy strong me then delivered he, And from them als which did me hate that were too strong for me. 18 They prevented me in the day of my cala∣mity: but the Lord was my stay. 18 Of my calamity they did prevent me in the day But he that is the Lord himself unto me was a stay. 19 He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me, because he delighted in me. 19 He also a large place into me brought forth by his might, He did deliver me, because he did in me delight. 20 The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousnesse, according to the cleannesse of my hands hath he recompensed me. 20 According to my righteousnesse The Lord rewarded me: After the cleannesse of my hands me recompensd hath he. 21 For I have kept the wayes of the Lord and have not wickedly departed from my God. 21 For of the Lord I have the wayes well kept with all my heart,
And from my God I wickedly did not at all depart. 22 For all his judgements were before me: and I did not put away his statutes from me. 22 For all the judgements that are his before my face were they, And I the statutes that his are put not from me away. 23 I was also upright before him: and I kept my self from mine iniquity. 23 I also ever was upright and that ev'n him before, And I from mine iniquity did keep my self therefore. 24 Therefore hath the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousnesse, according to the cleannesse of my hands in his eye-sight. 24 Therefore God hath me recompensd according to my right: According to the cleannesse of my hands in his eye-sight▪ 25 With the mercifull thou wilt shew thy self mercifull: with an upright man thou wilt shew thy self upright. With mercifull thou wilt thy self shew mercifull to be, Thou wilt thee shew upright with him that is upright with thee.
26 With the pure thou wilt shew thy self pure, and with the froward thou wilt shew thy self froward. 26 Thou with the pure thy self wilt shew most pure in all thy wayes, And with the froward thou thy self, wilt froward shew likewise. 27 For thou wilt save the afflicted people: but wilt bring down high looks. 28 For thou wilt light my candle: the Lord my God will enlighten my darknesse. 27 For thou afflicted folk wilt save, but bring down looks of hight: 28 My lamp thou'lt light; the Lord my God will make my darknesse light. 29 For by thee I have run thorow a troup▪ and by my God have I leaped over a wall. 29 For it is by thee that I have run through a troup not small, And by my God also have I high leaped ov'r a wall. 30 As for God, his way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tried: he is a buckler to all those that trust in him. 30 As for God, perfect is his way, the Lords word it is tri'd; He to all those that trust in him a buckler doth abide.
31 For who is God, save the Lord? or wh is a rock save our God? 32 It is God that girdeth me with strength, and maketh my way perfect 31 For who's God save the Lord? or who saye our God rock can be? 32 It's God that makes my way perfect; and with strength girdeth me. 33 He maketh my feet like hinds feet, and setteth me upon my high places. 34 He teacheth my hands to war, so that a owe of steel is broken by mine arms. 33 Like Hindes he makes my feet, me sets on my high places well: 34 To war he taught my hands, mine arms do break a bow of steel. 35 Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation, and thy right hand hath holden me up, and thy gentlenes hath made me great. 35 The shield of thy salvation als to me is given from thee: Thy right hand up me held, and great thy gentlenesse made me. 36 Thou hast enlarged my steps under me; that my feet did not slip. 37 I have pursued mine enemies, and over∣taken them: 36 Thou under me my steps inlargdst that my feet slipt not then;
37 I have pursu'd mine enemies, and them have overtaen. Neither did I turn again till they w consumed. 38 I have wounded them that they were not able to rise, they are faln under my feet. I turn'd not till they were consum'd, 38 I wounded have them all, That they could not arise, they get under my feet a fall. 39 For thou hast girded me with strength unto the battell: thou hast subdued under m those that rose up against me. 39 For thou hast girded me with strength to battel'gainst my foes: Thou hast subdued under me. those that up'gainst me rose. 40 Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies: that I might destroy them that hate me. 40 Thou hast also the necks to me giv'n of mine enemies great, That by this meanes I might destroy all them that do me hate- 41 They cryed, but there was none to save them: even unto the Lord, but he answered them not.
41 They crl'd aloud; but there was none at all them for to save, Ev'n to the Lord, but unto them he then no answer gave. 42 Then did I beat them small as the dust before the winde: I did cast them out as the dirt in the streets. 42 Then as the dust before the wind I thus did beat them small, And as the dirt upon the streets I did cast out them all. 43 Thou hast delivered me from the stri∣vings of the people, and thou hast made me the head of the heathen: a people whom I have not known, shall serve me. 43 From peoples strivings thou me fredst, the heathens head thou me Hast made; a people shall me serve that not known to me be. 44 Assoon as they hear of me, they shall obey me: the stangers shall submit themselves unto me. 44 Assoon as they shall hear of me, they shall obey me all, The strangers unto me submit themselves most humbly shall. 45 The strangers shall fade away, and be afraid out of their close places.
45 Those that be strangers from the Lord, right soon shall fade away, And out of their close places all afraid then be shall they. 46 The Lord liveth, and blessed be my rock▪ and let the God of my salvation be exalted. 46 The Lord doth live, blest be the rock that doth belong to me, And let of my salvation the God exalted be. 47 It is God that avengeth me, and sub∣dueth the people under me. 48 He delivereth me from mine enemies: 47 God me avengeth, and subdues the people under me: 48 He doth deliver me from those that to me en'mies be: Yea, thou liftest me up above those that rise up against me: thou hast delivered me from the violent man. Above those that 'gainst me rise up yea, thou upliftest me, Thou also hast me from the man that violent is set free. 49 Therefore will I give thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the heathen, and fing praises vnto thy Name.
49 Therefore among the heathen I will thanks unto thee bring, And I unto thy Name, O Lord, will also praises sing. 50 Great deliverance giveth he to his king, and sheweth mercy to his anointed, to David and his seed for evermore. 50 He gives his King deliverance great: to his Anointed more, To David mercy shewes, and to his seed for evermore. PSAL. XIX. THe heavens declare the glory of God: and the firmament sheweth his handy work. THe glory of the mighty God the heavens do declare, The firmament doth also shew his handy-work so rare. 2 Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth▪ knowledge. 3 There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard. 2 Day utters speech to day, and night to night shewes knowledge heer: 3 There is no speech, no language is where men their voice not hear. 4 Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world: in them hath e set a tabernacle for the sun:
4 Their line's gone out through all the earth, and als their words do run Unto the worlds end, he in them a tent set for the Sun. 5 Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoyceth as a strong man to run a race. 5 Which as a bridgroom is that comes out of his chambers place: And as a man that strong is doth rejoyce to run a race. 6 His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends o  and their is nothing hid from the heat thereof. 6 From heaven's end is his going forth, and als his circuit Unto its end is; nothing is hid from thereof the heat. 7 The law of the Lord is perfect, conver∣ting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. 7 The Law of God it is perfect, converting souls likewise: The testimony of the Lord is sure, makes simple wise. 8 The statutes of the Lord are right, re∣joycing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure enlightning the eyes.
8 The statutes of the Lord are right, with joy the heart they please: The Lords commandement is pure inlightning als the eyes. 9 The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: the judgements of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether. 9 The fear of God the Lord is clean, enduring fast for ever, The judgements of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether. 10 More to be desired are they then gold, yea, then much fine gold, sweeter also then honey, and the honey combe. 10 Then gold, yea, much fine gold they more to be desired are; Then honey and the honey combe they are ev'n sweeter far. 11 Moreover by them is thy servant warned▪ and in keeping of them there is great reward▪ 11 Moreover thy servant by them is warn'd to have regard, And in the keeping of the same there is a great reward. 12 Who can understand his errours? cleanse thou me from secret faults. 13 Keep back thy servant also from pre∣sumptuous sins:
12 Who can is errours understand▪ from secret faults me cleanse: 13 Thy servant also do thou keep back from presumptuous sins. Let them not have dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression. And do thou not now let them have dominion over me, Then upright, innocent, I shall from great transgression be. 14 Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, bee acceptable in thy ight, O Lord my strength and my redeemer. 14 Let my mouths words, and of my heart the meditation ever Be acceptable in thy sight, Lord my Strength and Redeemer. PSAL. XX. THe Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the Name of the God of Iacob defend thee. THe Lord God hear thee in the day when he doth trouble send; And let his name that is the God of Iacob thee defend. 2 Send thee help from the Sanctuarie: and strengthen thee out out of Sion,
2 And from his holy Sanctuary a help send unto thee: And that out of Zion by him thou mayest strengthen'd be. 3 Remember all thy offerings, and accept the burnt sacrifice. Selah. 4 Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy counsell. 3 Thy offrings all remember, and burnt sacrifice accept▪ Selah. 4 Thy counsell all fulfill, and grant thee after thine own heart. 5 We will rejoice in thy salvation. and in the Name of our God we will set up our banners; the Lord fulfill all thy petitions. 5 In thy salvation wee'le rejoice. in our Gods Name we will Set up our banners, and the Lord thy prayers all fulfill▪ 6 Now know I, that the Lord saveth his. anointed; he will hear him from his holy heaven, with the saving strength of his right hand. 6 God his Anointed now I know saves, from his holy heav'n, Hee'le hear him, with the saving strength that's from his right hand giv'n. 7 Some trust in charets, and some in horses: but we will remember the Name of the Lord our God.
7 In charets some, and other some do trust in horses still, But we all of the Lord our God the Name remember will. 8 They are brought down and fallo: but we are risen, and stand upright. 9 Save, Lord, let the King hear us when we call. 8 They are brought down & fall'n, but we rise, and stand upright all: 9 Lord do thou save, and let the King us hear when we do call. PSAL. XXI. THe King shall joy in thy strength O Lord, and in thy salvation how greatly shall he re∣joice. THe king he in thy strength, O Lord, shall very joyfull be; And how in thy salvation greatly rejoice shall he? 2 Thou hast given him his hearts desire: and hast not witholden the request of his lips. Selah. 2 For of his own heart the desire unto him giv'n thou hast; And also hast not of his lips witholden the request. Selah.
3 For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodnesse: thou settest a crown of pure gold on his head 3 For thou with blessings him prevent'st of goodnesse that is great, And thou a crown of gold that's pure upon his head dost set. 4 He asked life of thee and thou gavest it him: even length of dayes for ever and ever. 4 He asked life of thee, and thou it unto him didst give: Ev'n length of dayes, that so he might for ever and ever live. 5 His glory is great in thy salvation: honour and majesty hast thou laid upon him. 5 The glory that is his is great in thy salvation: Honour and also majestie thou hast laid him upon. 6 For thou hast made him most blessed for ever: thou hast made him exceeding glade with thy countenance. 6 For thou even for evermore, most blessed hast him made And thou hast with thy countenance him made exceeding glade. 7 For the king trusteth in the Lord: and through the mercie of the most High. he shall not e moved.
7 For in the Lord the king doth trust, and through the mercy he Of him that is the Lord most high shall never moved be. 8 Thine hand shall finde out all thine ene∣mies, thy right hand shall finde out those that hate thee. 8 Thy hand it shall find out all those that to thee enmies be, Thy right hand it shall those find out that haters are of thee. 9 Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger: the Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath; and the fire shall devour them. 9 Thou as a fiery Ov'n in time of wrath shalt make them all, God shall them swallow in his wrath. the fire devour them shall. 10 Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men. 10 Thou shalt destroy from off the earth the fruit that doth belong Unto them, and the seed that's theirs from mens children among. 11 For they intended evill against thee: they imagined a mischievous device, which they were not able to performe.
11 For they'gainst thee intended ill: a mischievous devise They did imagine, but can not performe their enterprise. 12 Therefore shalt thou make them turn their back, when thou shalt make ready thine arrows upon thy strings, against the face of them. 12 Therefore shalt thou make them to turn their back when in that place Thou shalt thine arrows on thy strings make ready'gainst their face. 13 Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing, and praise thy power. 13 In thine own strength be thou, O Lord exalted highly still: So sing most thankfully will we, and praise thy power we will. PSAL. XXII. Mr. God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping me, and from words of my roaring. MY God, my God, why hast thou me forsaken? why so far Art thou from helping me, and from my words that roaring are? 2 O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hearest not; and in the night seasom, and am not silent.
2 In day time, O my God, I cry, but thou not hear'st the same▪ And in the season of the night, and I not silent am. 3 But thou art holy, O thou that inhabi∣test the praises of Israel 4 Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted, and thou didst deliver them. 3 But thou art holy, O thou that inhabit'st Israels praise: 4 Our fathers trusted thee, and thou them trusting didst release. 5 They cryed unto thee, and were delivered they trusted in thee, and were not confounded: 5 They cryed unto thee, and then they were deliv'red there; They did their trust into thee put, and not confounded were. 6 But I am a worm, and no man: a reproach of men, and despised of the people. 6 But as for me a worm I am, no man in any wise: Yea I of men am a reproach, whom people do despise. 7 All they that see me, laugh me to scorne: they shoot out the lips, they shake the head, saying▪
7 All they do laugh at me in scorn, that see me any way, They also do shoot out the lip, they shake the head; and say. 8 He trusted on the Lord, that he would de∣liver him: let him deliver him seeing he delighted in him. 8 He trusted on the Lord, that he would him deliver right; Let him deliver him, sith he had in him his delight. 9 But thou art he that took me out of the womb, thou didst make me hope, when I was upon my mothers breasts. 9 But thou art he that me out of the very wombe didst take; When I was on my mothers breasts to hope thou didst me make. 10 I was cast upon thee from the womb: tho art my God from my mothers belly. 10 When first I did come from the womb I was cast upon thee; And from my mothers belly thou a God art unto me. 11 Be not far from me, for trouble is neer; for there is none to help. 12 Many buls have compassed me: strong buls of Bashan have beset me round.
11 Be not far off, for grief is near, for none to help I get: 12 Buls many compast me, strong buls of Bashan round beset. 13 They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring lion. 13 And then together with their mouths upon me gaped they; Like to a Lion ravening, and roaring for his prey. 14 I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels. 14 Like water I'm powr'd out, my bones all out of joint do part: Amid my bowels like the wax so melted is my heart. 15 My strength is dried up like a potsherd▪ and my tongue cleaveth to my jaws; and thou hast brought me into the dust of death. 15 Like a potsheard my strength is dri'd, my tongue it cleaveth fast Unto my jaws; and to the dust of death me brought thou hast. 16 For dogs have compassed me: the assem∣bly of the wicked have inclosed me: they pierced my hands and my feet.
16 For dogs have compassd me about, the wicked that did meet In an assembly me inclosd, they pierc'd my hands and feet. 17 I may tell all my bones: they look and stare upon me. 18 They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture. 17 I may tell all my bones, they look and me do stare upon: 18 They 'mong them part my clothes, and lots do cast my vesture on. 19 But be not thou far from me, O Lord: O my strength hast thee to help me. 20 Deliver my soul from the sword: my darling from the power of the dog. 19 But be not far, Lord; O my strength, hast thee for help to me: 20 My soul from sword, from pow'r of dogs my darling do thou free. 21 Save me from the lions mouth: for thou hast heard me from the horns of the unicorns. 21 O do thou from the lions mouth to save me have regard: For from the horns of Unicorns by thee I have been heard. 22 I will declare thy Name unto my bre∣thren: in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee.
22 Thy Name declare I will unto those that my brethren be, Amid the congregation I will give praise to thee. 23 Ye that fear the Lord, praise him: all ye the seed of Iacob, glorifie him and fear him, all ye the seed of Israel. 23 Ye that the Lord do fear, him praise, ye seed of Jacob all Him glorifie and fear him ye the seed all of Isra'l. 24 For he hath not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted: neither hath he hid his face from him, but when he cried unto him he heard. 24 For he despisd not, nor abhor'd th'afflicteds misery: Nor hid his face from him, but heard when he to him did cry. 25 My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation: I will pay my vows before them that fear him. 25 In the great Congregation my praise shall be of thee: My vows before them that him fear shall payed be by me.
26 The meek shall eat and be satisfied: they shall praise the Lord that seek him, your hearts shall live for ever. 26 The meek shall eat, and satisfi'd shall be; they praise shall give Unto the Lord that him do seek; your heart for ay shall live. 27 All the ends of the world shall remember▪ and turn unto the Lord: and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee. 27 The worlds ends shall unto the Lord turn and remember all, All kindreds of the Nations before thee worship shall. 28 For the kingdome is the Lords: and he is the governour among the nations. 28 For unto him that is the Lord the kingdome doth belong▪ And he als is the governour the Nations among. 29 All they that be fat upon earth, shall eat, and worship: all they that go down to the dust, shall bow before him, 29 All they that fat be upon earth both eat and worship shall, And they that go down to the dust shall bow before him all.
And none can keep alive his own soul. 30 A seed shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation. None can his own soul keep alive, 30 A seed shall serve him so, It for a generation shall be counted God unto. 31 They shall come, and shall declare his righteousnesse unto a people that shall be borne, that he hath done this. 31 They shall come, and they shall declare the righteousnesse that's his, Unto a people to be born that he hath done all this. PSAL. XXIII. THe Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want, 2 He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters. THe Lord's my shepherd, I'le not want 2 He makes me down to ly, In pastures green, and he me doth lead the still waters by. 3 He restoreh my soul, he leadeth me in the paths of righteousnesse for his names sake. 3 My soul likewise he doth restore, and me to lead doth take Into the paths of righteousnesse, and that for his names sake.
4 Yea, though I walk thorow the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evill: for thou art with me: thy rod, and thy staff, they comfort me. 4 Though through the valley of deaths shade I walk, I'le fear no ill, Thou art with me; thy rod and staffe, they do me comfort still. 5 Thou preparest a table before me, in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil, my cup runneth over. 5 Thou set'st in presence of my foes a table me before, Mine head with oil thou dost anoint, my cup it runneth o're. 6 Surely goodnesse and mercie shall follow me all the dayes of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. 6 Goodnesse and mercy all the dayes of my life certainly Me follow shall, and in Gods house for ever dwell will I. PSAL. XXIV. THe earth is the Lords, and the fulnesse there∣of: the world, and they that dwell therein, 2 For he hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods. EArth and its fulnesse is the Lords, the world and who there dwell,
2 For it he founded on the seas, on floods it stablishd well. 3 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy place? Who is he that shall of the Lord ascend into the hill? And who is he that in his place that's holy shall stand still? 4 He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart who hath not lift up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. 4 He that clean hands hath and pure heart▪ and unto vainity Who hath not lifted up his soul, nor sworn deceitfully. 5 He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousnesse from the God of his salvation. 5 That man shall from the Lord receive a blessing him upon, And righteousnesse als from the God of his salvation. 6 This is the generation of them that seek▪ him: that seek thy face O Iacob. Selah. 6 This is the generation of them that in their place Do seek for him; that humbly do O Jacob seek thy face. Selah.
7 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the king of glory shall come in. 7 Ye gates lift up your heads, and ye doores everlasting all Be ye lift up, and then come in the king of glory shall. 8 Who is the King of glory? the Lord, strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battell. 8 Who is he that's of glory King? the Lord himself is this, Both strong and mighty, the Lord who in battell mighty is. 9 Lift up your heads, O ye gates: even lift them up, ye everlasting doors, and the king of glory shall come in. 9 Lift ye your heads up, O ye gates, doors everlasting all Ev'n lift them up, and then come in the king of glory shall. 10 Who is this king of glory? the Lord of hosts he is the king of glory. Selah. 10 But who of glory is this King? the Lord who hath as his Most mighty hostes, the same is he that King of glory is. Selah.
PSALME XXV. UNto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul. 2 O my God, I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed: let not mine enemies triumph over me. TO thee I lift my soul, O Lord, 2 My God I trust in thee, Let me not be asham'd; let not my foes triumph o're me. 3 Yea let none that wait on thee be ashamed: let them be ashamed which transgresse without cause. 3 Yea let thou none ashamed be that do wait upon thee: They which transgresse without a cause, let them ashamed be. 4 Shew me thy wayes, O Lord; teach me thy paths. 5 Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my salvation, on thee do I wait all the day. 4 Thy wayes Lord shew, teach me thy paths 5 lead in thy truth, teach me, For of my safety thou art God, all day I wait on thee. 6 Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses: for they have been ever of old.
6 Thy tender mercies, now, O Lord, do thou for me remember, And loving kindnesses, for they have been of old for ever. 7 Remember not the sins of my youth, not my transgressions: according to thy mercy re∣member thou me, for thy goodnesse sake, O LORD. 7 Let thou not of my youth the sins nor faults remembred be, In mercy for thy goodnesse sake, O Lord remember me. 8 Good and upright is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the way. 9 The meek will he guide in judgement: and the meek will he teach his way. 8 God's good, upright, he will therefore his way teach sinners still: 9 The meek in judgement he will guide, them teach his way he will. 10 All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth; unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies. 10 The paths all of the Lord our God both truth and mercy are To such as do his Cov'nant keep, and Testimonies rare▪
11 For thy Names sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity! for it is great. 11 Ev'n for the sake of thine own Name, O Lord, I thee intreat, To pardon mine iniquitie: for it is very great. 12 What man is he that feareth the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall chuse. 13 His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the earth. 12 What man fears God? him shall he teach the way to chuse in all, 13 His soul shall dwell at case, his seed the earth inherit shall. 14 The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him▪ and he will shew them his covenant. 14 The secret of the Lord is with all them that fear him still; And als the covenant that is his unto them shew he will. 15 Mine eyes are ever towards the Lord: for he shall pluck my feet out of the net. 15 Towards the Lord these eyes of mine continually are set, For he it is that now shall pluck my feet out of the net. 16 Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate and afflicted.
16 O do thou turn thee unto me, have mercy me upon, Because that I am desolate and in affliction. 17 The troubles of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my distresses. 18 Look upon mine affliction, and my pain, and forgive all my sins. 17 Inlarg'd are troubles of my heart, me from distresse relieve, 18 See mine affliction and my pain, and all my sins forgive. 19 Consider mine enemies: for they are many, and they hate me with cruel hatred. 19 Consider thou▪ mine enemies, for that in number great They are, and also they do me with cruel hatred hate. 20 O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee. 20 O do thou keep this soul of mine, and do deliver me, Let me not be asham'd, for I do put my trust in thee. 21 Let integrity and uprightnesse preserve me: for I wait on thee. 22 Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.
21 Let uprightnesse, integrity me keep who on thee wait, 22 Redeem thou Israel, O God, from all his troubles great. PSAL. XXVI. IUdge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine integritie: I have trusted also in the Lord, therefore I shall not slide. JUdge me, O Lord for walk'd I have in mine integrity, I trusted als have in the Lord, therefore slide shall not I. 2 Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try my reines and my heart. 3 For thy loving kindnesse is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy truth. 2 Lord me examine and me prove, my reines try and my heart: 3 For thy love is mine eyes before, I in thy truth have walk't. 4 I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers. 4 With persons that are vain I have not at in company. Nor with those that dissemblers are at all go in will I. 5 I have hated the congregation of evill doers: and will not sit with the wicked.
5 Of doers ill I hated have the congregation great, And with those that are wicked men, I in no place will sit. 6 I will wash my hands in innocency, so will I compasse thine altar, O Lord: 6 In innocency, Lord I will wash clean my hands, and so About the Altar that is thine I compassing will go. 7 That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works. 7 That with of thanksgiving the voice I so may publish well, And likewise I of all thy works that wondrous are may tell. 8 Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth. 8 The habitation of thy house, Lord, I have loved well▪ And also the most holy place where doth thine honour dwell. 9 Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men. 10 In whose hands is mischief, and their right hand is full of bribes. 9 With sinners gather not my soul, nor life with blood that spill:
10 In whose hand is mischief, and bribes ev'n their right hand doth fill. 11 But as for me, I will walk in mine inte∣grity: redeem me, and he mercifull unto me. 11 But as for me, I will walk on in mine integritie, Do thou redeem me, and be thou now mercifull to me. 12 My foot standeth in an even place: in the congregation will I blesse the Lord. 12 Into a place that even is my foot it standeth still: Within the congregations the Lord God blesse I will, PSAL. XXVII. THe Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? THe Lord is my salvation, and light, whom shall I fear? God's of my life the strength, of whom afraid shall I be heer! 2 When the wicked even mine enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stum∣bled and fell. 2 When wicked men mine enemies, and foes to me so fell,
Came me upon to eat my flesh, they stumbled and they fell. 3 Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear: though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident. 3 Though 'gainst me should encampe an host, my heart shall fear no wise, In this will I be confident, though 'gainst me war should rise. 4 One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek afer: that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the dayes of my life, 4 One thing I of the Lord desir'd, seek after that I will, That all dayes of my life I may dwell in the Lords house still. To behold the beauty of the Lord, and to en∣quire in his temple. There of the Lord for to behold the beauty with desire; And that within the Temple, I, that is his may enquire. 5 For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the secret of his tabernacle shal he hide me, he shall set me up upon a rock. 5 For he in his pavilion shall me hide in trouble great:
Hee'l hide me in his secret tent, hee'l on a rock me set. 6 And now shall my head be lifted up above ine enemies round about me: 6 And at this present time my head it shal uplifted be Above those men that round about are enemies to me. Therefore will I offer in his tabernacle sacri∣fices of joy: I will sing, yea I will sing praises unto the Lord. Therefore I in his Tabernacle will sacrifice afford Of joy, I will sing; yea, I will sing praises to the Lord. 7 Hear, O Lord when I cry with my voice: have mercy also upon me, and answer me. 8 When thou saidst, Seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord will I seek. 7 Lord, hear when with my voice I cry: me answer, grant me grace: 8 When thou saidst, Seek my face, my heart, said, Lord, I'l seek thy face. 9 Hide not thy face far from me, put not thy servant away in anger: thou hast been my help. 9 Far from me hide thou not thy face, put not away from thee Thy servant in thy wrath; thou hast a help been unto me.
Leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation. 10 When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take mee up. O God of my salvation, me leave not nor forsake: 10 When father, mother do me leave the Lord me up will take. 11 Teach me thy way, O Lord: and lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies. 11 The way that's thine do thou me teach O Lord, and lead thou me In a plain path, because of such as enemies to me be. 12 Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies: for falso witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breath out cruelty. 12 To my foes will give me not ov'r for witnesses that lye 'Gainst me are risen up, and such as breath out cruelty. 13 I had fainted, unlesse I had beleeved to see the goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the living. 13 I fainted had, unlesse that I believed had to see The Lords own goodnesse in the land of them that living be.
14 Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait I say on the Lord. 14 Wait on God, be of courage good, and he shall strength afford Unto thy heart: yea, do thou wait, I say, upon the Lord. PSAL. XXVIII. UNto thee will I cry, O Lord my rock, be not silent to me: lest if thou be silent to me, I be∣come like them that go down into the pit. O Lord, my rock, to thee I'le cry, not silent be to me; Lest I like men gone down to pit be, if thou silent be. 2 Hear the voice of my suplications, when I cry unto thee: when I lift up my hands toward thy holy Oracle. 2 Voice of my suplications hear when I unto thee cry, When to thy holy Oracle my hands I lift on hy. 3 Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity: which speak peace to their neighbours, but mischief is in their hearts. 3 With wicked men and doers ill draw thou me not apart,
Which peace unto their neighbour speak, but mischief's in their heart. 4 Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickednesse of their endeavours: give them after the work of their hands, render to them their desert. 4 Give them according to their deeds, and wickednes of heart, Give them after their handy work, them render their desert. 5 Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up. 5 Because Gods works they not regard, north operation all Of his own hands; he them destroy, and not build up he shall. 6 Blessed be the Lord, because he hath heard the voice of my supplications. 6 For ever blessed be the Lord, and that because that he Hath of the supplications the voice heard made by me. 7 The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart trusted in him, and I am helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth,
7 The Lord's my strength and shield, my heart it's trust upon him laid, And I am help'd; therefore my heart to joy is greatly made▪ And with my song will I praise him. 8 The Lord is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his anointed. And with my song him praise I will 8 The Lord their strength he is; And he the saving strength is of th' Anointed that is his. 9 Save thy people, and blesse thine inheritance feed them also, and lift them up for ever. 9 Thy people save and do thou blesse thine heritage together, Do thou them also feed, and the do thou lift up for ever PSAL. XXIX. GIve unto the Lord (O ye mighty) give un∣to the Lord glory and strength. UNto the Lord now do ye give, (O ye that mighty be) The glory and the strength also unto the Lord give ye. 2 Give unto the Lord the glory duc unto his Name: worship the Lord in the beauty of ho∣linesse.
2 Unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name afford, And in the beautie of holinesse, give worship to the Lord. 3 The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of glory thundereth, the Lord is upon many waters. 3 The voice of him that is the Lord is on the waters gone, The God of glory thundereth God's many waters on. 4 The voice of the Lord is powerfull: the voice of the Lord is full of majesty. 4 The voice of him is powerfull, that is the Lord most hy, The voice of him that is the Lord, is full of majesty. 5 The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedars: yea, the Lord breaketh the cedars of Lebanon. 5 Of the Almighty Lord the voice doth break the cedars tall, Yea of the Lebanon rhe Lord the cedars breaketh small. 6 He maketh them also to skip like a calf: Lebanon, and Sirion like a young unicorn. 6 He makes them also like a calf to skipe; ev'n Lebanon,
And like unto an Unicorh that's young, the Sirion. 7 The voice of the Lord devideth the flames of fire. 8 The voice of the Lord shaketh the wilder∣nesse; the Lord shaketh the wildernesse of Kadesh. 7 Gods voice divides the flames of fire, 8 Gods voice doth desert shake, And of Kadesh the wildernesse to shake the Lord doth make. 9 The voice of the Lor maketh the hindes to calve, and discovereth the forrests: and in his temple doth every one speak of his glory. 9 The Lord his voice makes Hinds to calve, discovereth forrests eke, And in his Temple every one doth of his glory speak. 10 The Lord sitteth upon the floud: yea, the Lord sitteth King for ever. 11 The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will blesse his people with peace. 10 The Lord sits on the flood, yea, God sits King for ever still: 1 The Lord will give his people strength, with peace God blesse them will.
PSALME XXX. I Will extoll thee, O Lord, for thou hast lifted me up, and hast not made my foes to rejoice over me. I Will extoll thee Lord, for thou up high hast lifted me, And not ov'r me hast made my foes rejoiced for to be. 2 O Lord my God, I cryed unto thee, and thou hast healed me. 2 O thou who art the Lord my God, I even unto thee On high my cry thus did lift up, and thou hast healed me. 3 O Lord, thou hast brought up my soul, from the grave: thou hast kept mee alive, that I should not go down to the pit. 3 O Lord thou art h that hath brought my soul up from the grave, That I to pit should not go down, thou me alive didst save. 4 Sing unto the Lord, (O ye saints of his) and give thanks at the remembrance of his ho∣linesse. 4 O ye that are the saints of his, sing ye unto the Lord: And thanks at the rembrance of his holinesse afford.
5 For his anger endureth but a moment, in his favour is life; weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning. 5 For but a moment lasts his wrath, life in his favour is, Endure may weeping for a night, at morne comes joy for this. 6 And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved. 7 Lord, by thy favour thou hast made my mountain to stand strong▪ 6 In my prosperity I said, I never mov'd shall be 7 Lord by thy favour thou madst stand, my mountain strong for me: 8 Thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled. I cried to thee, O Lord: and unto the Lord I made my supplication. 8 Thou hidst thy face, I troubled was, I unto thee did cry, O Lord: my supplication unto the Lord made I. 9 What profit is there in my bloud, when I go down to the pit? shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth? 9 What profit is there in my bloud, when I go down to pit?
Shall unto thee the dust give praise? thy truth declare shall it? 10 Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me Lord be thou my helper. 11 Thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing; thou hast put off my sackcloth, an girded me with gladnesse: 10 Lord hear, have mercy▪ Lord me help: 11 Thou turn'd for me my sadnesse To dancing; thou my sack put off, and girded me with gladnesse. 12 To the end that my glory may sing pra to thee, and not be silent: O Lord my God, will give thanks unto thee for ever. 12 That sing thy praise my glory may, and may not silent be: O Lord my GOD, I will give thanks for ever unto thee. PSAL. XXXI. IN thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, let mee never be ashamed: deliver me in thy righte∣ousnesse. IN thee, O Lord, I put my trust, sham'd let me never be: And in thy righteousnesse also do thou deliver me.
2 Bow down thine ear to me, deliver me speedily: be thou my strong rock, for an house of defence to save me. 2 Bow down thine ear to me, with speed let me deliverance have: For of defence, an house be thou my strong rock, me to save. 3 For thou art my rock and my fortresse, therefore for thy Names sake lead me, and guide me. 3 For thou art he whom I my rock and fortresse als do make, Therefore do thou me lead and guide ev'n for thine own names sake, 4 Pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my strength. 4 Do thou me pull out of the net, that they in any part So privily have laid for me, for that my strength thou art. 5 Into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. 5 Into thine hand I do commit my spirit which came from thee O Lord, who art the God of truth thou hast redeemed me. 6 I have hated them that regard lying vani∣ties, but I trust in the Lord.
6 I unto them have hatred born, who to regard accord The vanities that lying are, but I trust in the Lord. 7 I will be glade and rejoice in thy mercy for thou hast considered my trouble, thou ha known my soul in adversities: 7 I'le in thy mercy glade rejoice, for thou my miseries Considered hast, thou hast my soul known in adversities. 8 And hast not shut me up into the hand  the enemie: thou hast set my feet in a large room 8 And als into the enemies hand shut up thou hast not me, Thus by thee have my feet been set in a large room to be, 9 Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am  trouble: mine eye is consumed with grief, ye my soul and my belly. 9 O Lord for I in trouble am, have mercy upon me; Mine eye, my belly, yea my soul with grief consumed be. 10 For my life is spent with grief, and m years with sighing, my strength saileth, b∣cause of mine iniquitie, and my bones are cos∣umed.
10 For thus my life with grief is spent, my years als with my grones; My strength doth fail, and for my sin consumed are my bones. 11 I was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my neighbours, and a fear to mine acquaintance: they that did see me without fled from me. 11 'Mong all my foes reproach I was, 'mong neighbours speciallie, To mine acquaintance fear; without who saw me fled from me. 12 I am forgotten as a dead man out of minde; I am like a broken vessell. 12 I am forgotten as a man that out of minde is dead, And I like to a vessell am that broken is indeed. 13 For I have heard the slander of many▪ fear was on every side, while they took counsell together against me, they devised to take away my life. 13 For slanders I of many heard, fear compast me while they 'Gainst me took counsell, they devis'd to take my life away, 14 But I trusted in thee, O Lord: I said Thou art my God.
14 But as for me, O Lord, my trust upon thee then I laid, And unto me thou art a God unto thee then, I said: 15 My times are in thy hand: deliver mee from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that persecute me. 15 My times they are within thy hand: do thou deliver me Both from mine enemies hand, and them that persecute do me. 16 Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me for thy mercies sake 16 Thy countenance to shine do thou upon thy servant make, Unto me give salvation, for thine own mercies sake. 17 Let me not be ashamed, O Lord, for I have called upon thee: let the wicked be a∣shamed, and let them be silent in the grave. 17 Let me not be asham'd, O Lord, for on thee call'd I have; Let wicked men be sham'd, let them be silent in the grave. 18 Let the lying lips be put to silence: whic speak grievous things proudly and contemptu ously against the righteous.
18 The lying lips to silence put, which grievous things speak thus Both proudly and contemtuously against the righteous. 19 O how great is thy goodnesse, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee: which thou hast wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of mn! 19 How great's the goodnesse thou laid up hast for those that thee fear, And wrought for them that in thee trust before mens children heer! 20 Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man: thou shalt keep them secretly in a pavilion, from the strife of tongues. 20 In secret of thy presence thou shalt hide them from mans pride, From strife of tongues thou secretly shalt in a tent them hide. 21 Blessed be the Lord: for he hath shewed me his marvellous kindnesse in a strong citie. 21 For ever blessed be the Lord, for he to me so long Hath shew'd his kindnes marvellous within a city strong. 22 For I said in my haste, I am cut off fom before thine eyes: neverthelesse thou heardest
the voice of my supplications, when I cried unto thee. 22 For I said in my haste, cut off I'm from before thine eye, Yet thou heard'st of my prayer the voice when I to thee did cry. 23 O love the Lord all ye his saints: for the Lord preserveth the faithfull, and plentifully rewardeth the proud doer. 23 O love the Lord, all ye his Saints, for God the faithfull guards; And plentifully him that is the doer proud rewards. 25 Be of good courage and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord. 24 Be ye now of a courage good, and he shall strength afford, Unto your heart; even all ye that do hope in the Lord. PSAL. XXXII. BLessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. THe man is blessed unto whom in mercy is remitted All the transgression he hath done, whose sin is also covered. 2 Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity: and in whose spirit the is no guile,
2 The man is blessed unto whom the Lord iniquitie Imputeth not; and in whose sprite at all no guile there be. 3 When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long. 3 At what time I did silence keep, my bones that were once strong Ev'n through my roaring waxed old, and that all the day long. 4 For day and night thy hand was heavy up∣on me; my moisture is turned unto the drought of summer. Selah. 4 For both by night and day thy hand was heavy upon me, Which made into the summers drought my moisture turn'd to be. Selah. 5 I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: 5 To thee the sin that I had done acknowledge then I did, Likewise mine own iniuqitie from thee I have not hid. I said, I will confesse my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah. I my transgressions will confesse unto the Lord, said I▪
And then thou diddest of my sin forgive th'iniquity. Selah. 6 For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou mayest be found: surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh unto him. 6 For this in times thou may'st be found, each godly shall thee pray, Surely in flouds of waters great not near him come shall they. 7 Thou art my hiding place; thou shalt pre∣serve me from trouble, thou shalt compasse me about with songs of deliverance. Selah. 7 Thou art my hiding place, thou shalt from trouble keep me free: Thou with songs of deliverance about shalt compasse me. Selah. 8 I will iustruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go: I will guide the with mine eye. 8 I will instruct thee, and I will now teach thee in the way Which thou shalt go: I will also thee guide with mine own eye. 9 Be ye not as the horse or as the mule which have no understanding: whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, test they come neer to thee:
9 Be yee not as the horse, or as the mule which have no wit Whose mouth lest they come neer must be with bridle held and bit. 10 Many sorrows shall be to the wicked: but he that trusteth in the Lord, mercie shall com∣passe him about. 10 Unto the man that wicked is, much sorrows shall befall. But he that trusteth in the Lord, him mercy compasse shall 11 Be glade in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous: and shout for joy, all ye that are up∣right in heart. 11 Ye righteous in the Lord be glade, in him rejoice do ye; And do ye shout for joy, ye all in heart that upright be. PSAL. XXXIII. REjoice in the Lord, O ye righteous: for praise is comely for the upright. O Ye that righteous are rejoice, into the Lord of might; For praise it is a comely thing for them that are upright. 2 Praise the Lord with harp: sing unto him with the psaltery, and an instrument of ten strings.
2 Do ye the Lord praise with the harp▪ with psaltry to him sing, And also with an instrument that hath a tenfold string. 3 Sing unto him a new song: play skilfully with a loud noise. 4 For the word of the Lord is right: and all his works are done in truth. 3 Sing him a new song, skilfully do with a loud noise play: 4 For the Lords word is right; in truth his works all done are they. 5 He loveth righteousnesse and judgement: the earth is full of the goodnesse of the Lord. 5 Both righteousnesse and judgement als he loveth ever still, The goodnesse likewise of the Lord the earth each where doth fill. 6 By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. 6 Ev'n by the Lords most powerfull word the heav'ns created were, And by the breath of his own mouth all hosts of them each where. 7 e gathereth the waters of the sea together  eap▪ he layeth up the deepth in storehouses▪
7 He gathreth waters of the sea together as an heap, And as in store houses it were, he layeth up the deep. 8 Let all the earth fear the Lord: let all the inhabitants of the world stand in aw of him. 9 For he spake, and it was done: he com∣manded, and it stood fast. 8 Fear God all earth, in aw of him, let worlds all dwellers stand: 9 For he spake, it was done, and it stood fast at his command. 10 The Lord bringeth the counsell of the hea∣then to nought: he maketh the devices of the people of none effect. 10 The Lord to nought the counsell brings which heathen men project, Devices of the people he doth make of none effect. 11 The counsell of the Lord standeth for ever: the thoughts of his heart to all generations. 11 But yet the counsell of the Lord for ever standeth fast, And of his heart the thoughts unto all generations last. 12 Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord: and the people, whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance.
12 O blessed is the Nation whose God ev'n the Lord is; And people whom he chosen hath for heritage that's his. 13 The Lord looketh from heaven: he be∣holdeth all the sons of men. 14 From the place of his habitation he looketh upon all the inhabitants of the earth. 13 The Lord from heav'n looks, he beholds all sons of men right well: 14 He from his dwelling place looks on all that on earth do dwell. 15 He fashioneth their hearts alike: he con∣sidereth all their works. 15 The hearts of every one of them alike he he fashioneth; And all the works als that are theirs he well considereth. 16 There is no King saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not delivered by much strength. 16 There is no king whom of an hoast the multitude can save, And by much strength a mighty man can no deliv'rance have. 17 An horse is a vaine thing for safety: neither shall he deliver any by his great strength.
17 For mans safety, a thing most vain an horse is seen at length, Not any he deliver shall at all by h great strength. 18 Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them at fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy. 18 Behold the eye ev'n of the Lord on them that fear him is; And upon them that also hope in mercy that is his. 19 To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine. 20 Our soul waiteth for the Lord: he is our help and our shield. 19 From death to save their soul, and life to them in famine yeeld: 20 Our soul it waiteth for the Lord, he is our help and shield. 21 For our heart shall rejoice in him: be∣cause we have tusted in his holy Name. 22 Let thy mercy (O Lord) be upon us: according as we hope in thee. 21 Our heart in him shall joy, for trust in's holy Name did we 22 Lord let thy mercy be on us as we do hope in thee.
PSALME XXXIV. I Will blesse the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be in my mouth. 2 My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall hear thereof, and be glad. I 'Le blesse GOD all times, his praise still shall in my mouth be heer. 2 My soul in God shall boast, and glad the humble it shall hear, 3 O magnifie the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together. 4 I sought the Lord, and he heard me; and delivered me from all my fears. 3 O with me magnifie the Lord, his name exalt together: 4 I sought God, he did hear, and me from all my fears deliver. 5 They looked unto him and were lightened: and their faces were not ashamed. 6 This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him; and saved him out all his troubles, 5 They look'd to him, and lightned were, their faces were not shamed: 6 This poor man cri'd, God heard, and him from all his trouble saved. 7 The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them. 7 He that's the Angel of the Lord, encampeth round for ever
About all them that do him fear and he doth them deliver, 8 O taste and see that the Lord is good: bles∣sed is the man that trusteth in him. 9 O fear the Lord, ye his saints: for there is no want to them that fear him. 8 O taste and see, that God is good hee's blest that trusts him heer, 9 O ye his saints fear God: for they not want that do him fear. 10 The young lions do lack, and suffer hun∣ger: but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. 10 Young lions suffer hunger great, and they have lack of food: But they that seek the Lord shall not want any thing that's good. 11 Come ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 11 Ye who are children hither come, unto me give ye ear; I will give teaching unto you how ye the Lord shall fear. 12 What man is he that desireth life, and loveth many dayes, that he may see good? 12 What man is he that doth desire his life preserv'd to be
And also loveth many dayes that so he good may see? 13 Keep thy tongue from evill, and thy lips from speaking guile. 14 Depart from evill, and do good, seek peace and pursue it. 13 From ill thy tongue keep; with thy lips from speaking guile eschew, 14 Depart from evil, and do good, seek peace and it pursue. 15 The eyes of the Lord are upon the righ∣teous: and his ears are open unto their cry. 16 The face of the Lord is against them that do evill: 15 Gods eyes are on the just, his ears are open to their cry: 16 The face of God it is against them that do wickedly. To cut off the remembrance of them from the earth. 17 The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth, and delivereth them out of all their troubles. That he may from the earth cut off the remembrance they have, 17 The righteous cry, God heares, them doth from all their troubles save.
18 The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart: and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit. 19 Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord delivereth them out of them all. 18 God's neer to broken hearts, and saves such as have sprits contrite: 19 The just mans troubles many are, from all God doth him quite. 20 He keepeth all his bones: not one of them is broken. 21 Evill shall slay the wicked: and they that hate the righteous shall be desolate. 20 He keepeth all his bones, of them not broken there is one: 21 Ill shall the wicked slay; who hate the just, shall be undone. 22 The Lord redeemeth the soul of his ser∣vants: and none of them that trust in him shall be desolate. 22 Of his own servants all the Lord the soul redeemeth he, And none of them that trust in him as desolate shall be.
PSALME XXXV. PLead my cause (O Lord) with them that strive with me: fight against them that fight against me. 2 Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help. PLead, Lord, with them that strive, & fight gainst them that fight with me: 2 Do thou the shield and buckler take, stand up mine help to be. 3 Draw out also the spear and stop the way against them that persecute me: say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. 3 Draw out also the spear, and do against them stop the way That persecute me; to my soul I'm thy salvation say. 4 Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul: let them be turned back and brought to confusion that devise my hurt. 4 Let them confounded be that seek my soul, to shame them put; Brought to confusion let thou them turn back that plot my hurt. 5 Let them be as chaffe before the winde  and let the angel of the Lord chase them. 6 Let their way be dark and slippery, and let the angel of the Lord persecute them.
5 As chaffe before the wind be they them let Gods angel chase 6 Dark, slippery, be their way, let them Gods Angel drive apace. 7 For without cause have they hid for me their net in a pit, which without cause they have digged for my soul. 7 For without cause they for me have their net hid in a pit: Without a cause from me have they for my soul digged it. 8 Let destruction come upon him at unawars, and let his net that he hath hid, catch himself: into that very destruction let him fall. 8 Let ruine seize him unawars: his net he hid withall Let it him catch, and in the same destruction let him fall. 9 And my soul shall be joyfull in the Lord: it shall rejoice in his salvation. 10 All my bones shall say, Lord who is like unto thee; 9 In God my soul shall joy, and glad in his salvation be: 10 Thus all my bones shall say, O Lord, who is like unto thee. Which deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him, yea, the poor and the nedy from him that spoileth him?
Which dost the poor release from him that is for him too strong, Yea poor and needy from the man that spoiling doth him wrong. 11 False witnesses did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I knew not. 12 They rewarded me evill for good, to the spoiling of my soul. 11 False witnesses rose, to my charge things I not knew they laid: 12 To spoiling of my soul they me did ill for good reward. 13 But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosome. 13 With fast my soul then humbled I, my cloathing was of sack When they were sick, my prayer return'd to mine own bosome back. 14 I behaved my self as though he had been my friend or brother: I bowed down heavilie, as one that mourneth for his mother. 14 I did behave my self as he had been my friend or brother; I heavily bow'd down as one that mourneth for his mother.
15 But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together: yea, the abjects gathred themselves together against me, 15 But in my trouble they rejoic'd, gathring themselves together, The abjects yea together did themselves against me gather. And I knew it not, they did tear me, and ceased not. 16 With hypocriticall mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth. I it not knew, they did me tear, they would not ceasing be. 16 With mockers hypocrites in feasts they gnasht their teeth on me. 17 Lord, how long wilt thou look on? rescue my soul from their destructions, my darling from the lions. 17 O Lord how long wilt thou look on? my darling soul do thou From their destructions, and from the lions young rescue. 18 I will give thee thanks in the great congregation: I will praise thee among much people. 18 In the great Congregation I will give thanks to thee, Among much people there thou shalt be praised als by me.
19 Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me: neither let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause. 19 Let them not o're me joy that are mine enemies wrongfully: Nor who me hate without a cause let them wink with the eye. 20 For they speak not peace: but they devise deceitfull matters against them that are quiet in the land. 20 For peace at all they do not speak but they do take in hand Deceitfull matters' gainst them that are quiet in the land. 21 Yea, they opened their moutb wide a∣gainst me, and said, Aha, aha, our eye hath seen it. 22 This thou hast seen (O Lord) keep not silence: O Lord, be not far from me. 21 With mouths made wide they 'gainst me said, Ha, ha, our eye did see: 22 Lord thou this saw'st, not silence keep, LORD be not far from me. 23 Stir up thy self, and awake to my judge∣ment, even unto my cause my God and my LORD. 23 Stir up thy self, and do awake, me judgement to assord,
Ev'n to the cause that is mine own, my God and als my Lord. 24 Iudge me, O Lord my God, according to thy righteousnesse, and let them not rejoice over me. 24 O Lord my God do thou me judge after thy righteousnesse, And do thou not let them at all now over me rejoice. 25 Let them not say in their hearts, Ah, so would we have it: let them not say, We have swallowed him up. 25 Let them not in their hearts say, Ah, we would it so to be, Let them not have it for to say, him swallowed up have we. 26 Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together, that rejoice at mine hurt: let them be clothed with shame and dishonour, that magnifie themselves against me. 26 Sham'd and confounded be they all that joy my hurt to see, Let shame, dishonour cloth them that them 'gainst me magnifie. 27 Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favour my righteous cause: yea, let them say continually,
27 Let them for joy shout, and be glad, that favour lovingly My cause that righteous is, yea let them say continually, Let the Lord be magnified which hath plea sure in the prosperitie of his servant. Let him that is the mighty Lord, be magnified hye, Which a great pleasure hath in his servants prosperity. 28 And my tongue shall speak of thy righ∣teousnesse, and of thy praise all the day long. 28 And of the righteousnesse that's thine I shall speak with my tongue. And all the day long of the praise that doth to thee belong. PSAL. XXXVI. THe transgression of the wicked saith within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes. THe wicked mans transgression within my heart it sayes: That of the Lord there is no fear at all before his eyes. 2 For he flattereth himself in his own cyes, untill his iniquity be found to be hatefull. 2 For that even in his own eyes himself still flattereth he,
Untill that his iniquity be hatefull found to be. 3 The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he hath left off to be wise, and to doe good. 3 Words of his mouth are all deceit and als iniquity He to be wise, and to do good hath left off utterly. 4 He deviseth mischief upon his bed, he setteth himself in a way that is not good: he abhorreth not evill. 4 He doth on's bed mischief devise, himself he also still Sets in a way that is not good he not abhorreth ill. 5 Thy mercy (O Lord) is in the heavens: and thy faithfulnesse reacheth unto the clouds 5 O Lord the mercy that is thine is in the heavens hy, And so doth als thy faithfulnesse reach to the cloudy sky. 6 Thy righteousnesse is like the great mou∣tains; thy judgements are a great deep; O Lord, thou preservest man and beast. 6 Thy righteousnesse is like unto the mountains that are seep,
A great deep are thy judgements, Lord, thou man and beast dost keep. 7 How excellent is thy loving kindenesse, O God! therefore the children of men put their trust under the shaddow of thy wings. 7 How is thy loving kindenesse, Lord, excellent in all things! Therefore mens children put their trust in shaddow of thy wings. 8 They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatnesse of thy house: and thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. 8 They with the fatnesse of thy house well satisfi'd i all be: Thou shalt make them of rivers drink of pleasures come from thee. 9 For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light. 9 For that the fountain of all life is evermore with thee: And in the light which is thine own we clearly light shall see. 10 O continue thy loving kindenesse unto them that know thee: and thy righteousnesse to the upright in heart. 10 Thy loving kindenesse uuto them continue that thee know,
And to the men upright in heart thy righteousnesse allow. 11 Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of the wicked remove me, 11 Let not the foot of pride once come against me, me to move: Let not the hand of wicked men me from my place remove. 12 There are the workers of iniquity fallen: they are cast down, and shall not be able to rise. 12 The workers of iniquitie there fallen are; like wise They are cast down, and they shall not be able to arise. PSAL. XXXVII. FRet not thy self because af evill doers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity. FRet not thy self, because of those that evill doe wickedly, Nor be envious against them that work iniquity. 2 For they shall soon be cut▪ down like the grasse, and wither as the green herb. 2 For even like unto the grasse, soon be cut down shall they: And like unto the herb that's green, they wither shall away.
3 Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed. 3 Do thou thy trust put in the Lord, and do that which is good; And so shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily have food. 4 Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart. 5 Commit thy way unto the Lord: trust also in him, and he shall bring it to passe. 4 Delight thy self in God, hee'le give thy hearts desire to thee. 5 Thy way to God commit, him trust▪ it bring to passe shall he. 6 And he shall bring forth thy righteousnesse as the light, and thy judgement as the noon day. 6 And as the light thy righteousnesse he shall bring forth alway, And als the judgement that is thine like unto the noon-day. 7 Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently  him: fret not thy self because of him who prospe∣eth in his way, because of the man who bringe wicked devices to passe. 7 In God rest, patient for him wait, at mans way prospering
Fret not, nor at him who to passe devices ill doth bring. 8 Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thy self in any wise to doe evill 8 Do thou from anger cease, and wrath do thou forsake also, Fret not thy self in any wise that evill thou shouldst do. 9 For evill doers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inheri the earth. 9 For those that evill doers be shall be cut off in all; But those that wait upon the Lord the earth inherit shall. 10 For yet a little while and the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. 10 For yet a little while, and then the wicked shall not be: Thou diligently consider shalt his place; none shall it see. 11 But the meek shall inherit the earth▪ and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace. 11 But who are meek they shall the earth inherit heer by right,
And in the abundance of peace themselves they shall delight. 12 The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. 13 The Lord shall laugh at him: for he seeth that his day is coming. 12 The wicked plots against the just, on him doth gnash his teeth: 13 The Lord shall laugh at him; for that his day he coming seeth. 14 The wicked have drawn out the sword and have bent their bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation. 14 The wicked have drawn out the sword and bent their bow have they The poor and needy to cast down, and upright men to slay. 15 Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows shall be broken. 16 A little that a righteous man hath, is better then the riches of many wicked. 15 Their sword shall enter their own heart, broke shall their bows be then; 16 A just mans little is more then wealth of many wicked men. 17 For the arms of the wicked shall be bro∣ken: but the Lord upholdeth the righteous.
17 For of the wicked men the arms they shall be broken small: But he that is the mighty Lord upholds the righteous all. 18 The Lord knoweth the dayes of the up∣right: and their inheritance shall be for ever. 18 The dayes of those that are upright the Lord himself doth see; And the inheritance that's theirs it shall for ever be. 19 They shall not be ashamed in the evill time: and in the dayes of famine they shall be satisfied. 19 They shall not be asham'd when they the evill time do see; And in the dayes of famine they shall satisfied be. 20 But the wicked shall perish, and the ene∣mies of the Lord shall be as the fat of lambs: they shall consume: into smoak shall they con∣sume away. 20 But wicked men, and foes of God as lambs fat perish they; They shall consume, and into smoak they shall consume away. 21 The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again: but the righteous sheweth mercy, and giveth.
21 The wicked man he borroweth, and not again doth pay: But he that's righteous mercy shows, and giveth every way. 22 For such as be blessed of him, shall in∣herit the earth: and they that be cursed of him, shall be cut off. 22 For such as of him blessed be the earth inherit shall; And they that cursed be of him, shall be cut off in all. 23 The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord: and he delighteth in his way. 23 The steps of every man that's good are ordered aright Ev'n by the Lord himself, and he doth in his way delight. 24 Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down: for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. 24 Although he fall, yet shall he not be utterly down cast, For that the Lord him with his hand upholdeth ever fast. 25 I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.
25 I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not indeed The righteous forsaken seen, nor his seed begging bread. 26 He is ever mercifull, and lendeth: and his seed is blessed. 27 Depart from evill, and do good, and dwell for evermore. 26 Hee's ever mercifull and lends, his seed is blest therefore: 27 Depart from evill, and do good, and dwell for evermore. 28 For the Lord loveth judgement, and for∣saketh not his saints, they are preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off. 28 For God loves judgement, and his saints no way forsaketh he, Preserv'd still are▪ they, but cut off the wickeds seed shall be. 29 The righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever 30 The mouth of the righteous speaketh wis∣dome, and his tongue talketh of judgement. 29 The just inherit shall the land and ever therein dwell: 30 The righteous mans mouth wisedome speaks, his tongue doth judgement tell;
31 The law of his God is in his heart: non his steps shall slide. 32 The wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to stay him. 31 Within his heart is his Gods law, his steps slide not away, 32 The wicked doth the righteous watch, and seeketh him to slay. 33 The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged. 33 The Lord God will not in his hand thus leave him that i his: Nor yet for wicked him condemne when as he judged is. 34 Wait on the Lord and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the land? when the wicked  off, thou sha see it. 34 Wait on the Lord and keep his way, and he shall thee exalt, The land t'inherit;  cut off the wicked see thou shal▪ 35 I have seen the wicked in great power: and spreading himself like a green bay-tree. 36 Yet he passed away, and o, he was not: yea, I sought him▪ but he could not be found. 35 I saw the wicked great in power and spread like green bay tree, 36 He past, o was not, him I sought, but found he could not be.
37 Mark the perfect man, and behold the up∣right: for the end of that man is peace. 37 Mark thou the man that is perfect, and upright in his place, Do thou behold him, for the end of that man it is peace. 38 But the transgressours shall be destroyed together: the end of the wicked shall be cut off. 38 But those men that transgressours are shall be destroy'd together, The end of those that wicked be shall be cut off for ever. 39 But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord: he is their strength in the time of trouble. 39 But of the Lord salvation is of them that righteous be, And when the time of trouble is, their only strength is he. 40 And the Lord shall help them and deli∣ver them: he shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him. 40 God shall help and deliver them, from men that are unjust He shall deliver them, and save, because they in him trust.
PSALME XXXVIII. O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath: neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. IN thy great wrath, O thou my Lord, do thou rebuke me not, Nor do thou also chasten me, in thy displeasure hote. 2 For thine arrows stick ast in me: and thy hand presseth me sore. 2 For arrows that are thine do stick fast in me more and more; Yea and thy hand which heavy is me presseth very sore. 3 There is no soundnesse in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin. 3 No soundnesse by thing anger great, there is my flesh within▪ Nor in my bones is any rest by reason of my sin. 4 For mine iniquities are gone over mine head, and as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. 4 For mine iniquities they be mine head gone over far, And as a heavy burden they too heavy for me are. My wounds stink and are corrupt: be∣cause of my foolishnesse.
6 I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly: I go mourning all the day long. 5 My wounds do stink and are corrupt, it's for my folly so: 6 I'm troubled; I'm bow'd greatly down all day I mourning go, 7 For my loins are filled with a loathsome discase: and there is no soundnesse in my flesh. 7 For a disease doth fill my loines that very loathsome is, So that at all within my flesh no soundnesse is for this. 8 I am feeble and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietnesse of my heart. 8 I feeble am and broken sore; I have in this my smart Ev'n roared still by reason of disquietnesse of heart. 9 Lord, all my desire is before thee: and my groaning is not hid from thee. 10 My heart panteth, my strength faileth me: as for the light of mine eyes, it also is gone from me. 9 All my desire's before thee Lord, from thee not hid's my grone 10 My heart doth pant, my strength me fails mine eyes light's from me gone.
11 My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore: and my kinsmen stand afar off. 11 My lovers friends all from my sore aloof they standers are, And who are kinsmen unto me they do stand off afar. 12 They also that seek after my life, lay snares for me: and they that seek my hurt, speak mis∣chievous things, and imagine deceits all the day long. 12 Who seek my life lay snares for me, who seek my hurt ev'n they Mischievous things speak, and deceits imagine all the day. 13 But I as a deaf man, heard not: and I was as a dumb man that opneth not his mouth. 13 But as a man that deaf is, I heard not what they did call, And as one dumb I was, that his mouth op'neth not at all. 14 Thus I was as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs. 15 For in thee, O Lord, do I hope: thou wilt hear, O Lord my God. 14 Thus as one that not hears I was, whose mouth reproves no word: 15 For Lord in thee I hope, thou wilt me hear, O God, my Lord,
16 For I said, Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoyce over me: when my foot slippeth, they magnifie themselves against me. 16 For I said, Hear me, lest that they rejoice should over me; They'gainst me when my foot doth slip themselves do magnifie. 17 For I am ready to halt: and my sorrow is continually before me. 18 For I will declare mine iniquitie: I will be sorry for my sin. 17 For I am ready for to halt, my grief's before me still: 18 For I'le declare my fault, and for my sin be sorry will. 19 But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong; and they that hate me wrongfully, are multiplied. 19 But those that are mine enemies are strong, and lively yet; And they are likewise multipli'd that wrongfully me hate. 20 They also that render evill for good, are mine adversaries; because I follow the thing that good is. 20 They that for good do render ill, mine adversaries rude
They also are, because the thing I follow that is good. 21 Forsake me not, O Lord: O my God, be not far from me. 22 Make haste to help me, O Lord, my sal∣vation. 21 Forsake me not O Lord my God far off from me not be, 22 O thou Lord my Salvation, make haste for help to me. PSAL. XXXIX. I Said, I will take heed to my wayes, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle▪ while the wicked is before me. LEst with my tongue I sin, I said, I'le to my wayes look still, Before the wicked man my mouth with bridle keep I will. 2 I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even from good, and my sorrow was stirred. 2 I being made with silence dumbe, ev'n from good held my peace; And after that my sorrow thus was stirred in its place. 3 My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then spake I with my tongue.
3 My heart within me then was hot, while I was musing long The fire did burn, and then did I these words speak with my tongue, 4 Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my dayes, what it is: that I may know how frail I am▪ 4 Lord make me for to know mine end, and measure of my dayes, And what it is, that I may know how frail I am alwayes 5 Behold, thou hast made my dayes as an hand-breadth, and mine ago is as nothing before thee: verily every man at his best state is altoge∣ther vanity. Selah. 5 Lo thou my dayes as handbreadth madst, mine age before thine eye As nothing is: Sure man at's best is wholly vainity. Selah. 6 Surely every man walketh in a vain shew: surely they are disquieted in vain: he heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall gather them. 6 Each man sure walks in a vain shew, disquieted in vain: He heaps up riches, and not knows who gather shall that gain. 7 And now Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.
8 Deliver me from all my transgressions: make me not the reproach of the foolish. 7 And now, O Lord, what wait I for my hope it is in thee: 8 From all my sins me save; make not the fools reproach of me. 9 I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it. 10 Remove thy stroak away from me: I am consumed by the blow of thine hand. 9 I dumb my mouth not opened, because thou didst the same, 10 Remove thy stroke from me, consum'd by thy hands blow I am. 11 When thou with rebuke dost correct man for iniquity, thou makest his beautie to consume away like a moth: surely every man is vanitie. Selah. 11 When with rebukes thou dost correct man for iniquity; Thou wasts his beauty like a moath: sure each man's vainity. Selah. 12 Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry, hold not thy peace at my teares: 12 O Lord, do thou my prayer hear, and to my cry thine ears Do thou incline, and do not hold thy peace at those my tears;
For I am a stranger with thee, and a so∣journer, as all my fathers were. Because that I thus with thee am a stranger every where, And a sojourner am also as all my fathers were. 13 O spare me, that I may recover strength: before I go hence, and be no more. 13 O spare thou me, that I my strength recover may, before That I must go away from hence, and after be no more. PSAL. XL. I Waited patiently for the Lord, and he en∣clined unto me, and heard my cry. FOr him that is the only Lord I waited patiently, And unto me he did incline, and he did hear my cry. 2 He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings. 2 Up from a fearfull pit and clay that's miry brought he me, And set my feet upon a rock, my goings stablish'd he. 3 And he hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God: many shall see it, and fear, and trust in the Lord.
3 A new song in my mouth he put, our Gods praise to record, It many shall see, and shall fear, and shall trust in the Lord. 4 Blessed is that man that maketh the Lord his trust: and respecteth not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies. 4 That man is blessed that doth make the Lord his trust alwayes, And not respects the proud, nor such as turne aside to lyes. 5 Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonder∣full works which thou hast done, and thy thoughts which are to us-ward: 5 O Lord my God right many are the works that thou hast done Most wonderfull, and als thy thoughts which to us-ward are gone. They cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: if I would declare, and speak of them, they are more then can be numbred. In order none can reckon them to thee; if them declare I would, and speak of them, they moe then can be numbered are. 6 Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire, mine ears hast thou opened: burnt-offering and sin-offering hast thou not required.
6 Thou sacrifice and offering didst not at all desire, Mine ears thou peirc'dst, sin-offerings thou and burnt didst not require. 7 Then said I, Lo I come: in the volume of thy book it is written of me, 7 In that same very time I said, now lo I come to thee. Ev'n in the volume of thy book it written is of me. 8 I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea thy law is within my heart. 8 I take delight to do thy will O thou my God that art, Yea and the law that thou hast giv'n it is within my heart. 9 I have preached righteousnesse in the great congregation: lo, I have not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou knowest. 9 I righteousnesse have preached in the congregation great, Lo, I have not refrain'd my lips: O Lord thou knowest it. 10 I have not hid thy righteousnesse within my heart, I have declared thy faithfulnesse and  salvation: 10 Within my heart I not at all have hid thy righteousnesse,
I thy salvation have declar'd and als thy faithfulnsse. I have not concealed thy loving kindnesse, and thy truth from the great congregation. Thy kindnesse, which most loving is, concealed not have I Nor from the congregation great have hid thy verity. 11 Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord: letthy loving kindnesse and thy truth continually preserve me. 11 Thy tender mercies from me Lord, withold not, let me have Thy loving kindnesse, and thy truth for ever me to save. 12 For innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up: 12 For ills innumerable have me compassed about: My sins have taken hold on me, so can I not look out. They are mo then the hairs of mine head▪ therefore my heart faileth me. 13 Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me: O Lord; make haste to help me. My heart me fails, for then the hairs of mine head moe they be:
13 Be pleasd me to deliver, Lord, hast Lord for help to me. 14 Let them be ashamed and confounded to∣gether, that seek after my soul to destroy it: let them be driven backward and put to shame that wish me evill. 14 Sham'd and confounded be all they that seek my soul to kill; Let them be backward driv'n, and put to shame that wish me ill. 15 Let them be desolate for a reward of their shame, that say unto me, Aha, aha! 15 And of their shame for a reward let them be ev'ry way Most desolate, that un to me Aha, aha do say! 16 Let all those that seek thee, rejoice and be glade in thee: let such as love thy salvation▪ say coinually, the Lord e magnified. 16 Let those that do thee sek rejoice, and be all glade in thee: Let such as thy salvation love, say still; God magnisie. 17 But I am poor and nedy, yet the Lord thinketh upon me: thou art my help and my de∣iverer, make no tarrying, O my God.
17 But I'm poor, needy, yet the Lord of me a care doth take: My help thou and deliv'rer art, my God no tarrying make. PSAL. XLI. BLessed is he that considereth the poor: the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. HE is a blessed man that doth him that is poor consider, For when the time of trouble is the Lord will him deliver. 2 The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon earth; and thou will not deliver him unto the will of his enemies. 2 God will preserve and keep alive, and on earth blesse him still: And thou wilt not deliver him unto his en'mies will. 3 The Lord will strengthen him upon the be of languishing: thou wilt make all his bed in his sicknesse. 3 Upon the bed of languishing the Lord him strengthen shall, Thou also wilt the bed that's his make in his sicknesse all. 4 I said, Lord, be mercifull unto me  hea my so for I have sinned against thee.
4 I then, O Lord, unto thee said, be mercifull to me; And do thou heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee. 5 Mine enemies speak evill of me: when shall he die, and his name perish? 5 Those that mine enemies are, of me that speak evill are the same When shall he die and so away quite perish shall his Name? 6 And if he come to see me, he speaketh vanity: his heart gathereth iniquity to it sf when he goth abroad, he tellth it. 6 If me to see he comes, he speaks vain things; yea ev'n his heart Sin gathereth to it self, he't tels when he abroad doth part. 7 All that hate me, whisper together against me: against me do they devise my hurt. 7 Those that me hate do whisper all together against me. Against me also they devd what to my hurt can be. 8 An evill disease say they, cleaveth fast un∣to him: and now that he lieth, he shall rise up o more.
8 An ill disease, say they, doth cleave unto him fast, therefore And now that he in bed doth ly; he shall rise up no more. 9 Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lift up his heel against me. 9 Yea ev'n mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted well, Which of my bread did eat, hath up against me lift his heel. 10 But thou, O Lord, be mercifull unto me, and raise me up, that I may require them. 10 But thou, O Lord, be mercifull unto me ev'ry way, And do thou also raise me up that them requite I may. 11 By this I know that thou favourest me: because mine enemie doth not triumph over me. 11 By this assuredly I know I favour have of thee, Because he that mine en'mie is doth not triumph o're me. 12 And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity: and settest me before thy face for ever. 12 And as for me thou me upholdst in mine integrity
And thou before thy countenance setst me continually. 13 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from everlasting, and everlasting, Amen, and Amen. 13 From everlasting the Lord God of Isra'l blest by men And unto everlasting be; Amen, yea and Amen. PSAL. XLII. AS the hart panteth after the water brooks: so panteth my soul after thee, O God. EVen as the thirsty hart doth pant at water brooks to be, It is so that my soul O God still panteth after thee. 2 My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God? 2 My soul doth thirst for God, for God that's living evermore: When shall I come, that so I may appear my God before? 3 My tears have been my meat day and night: while they continually say unto me, Where is thy God? 3 My tears they have been unto me my meat both night and day.
While unto me continually where is thy God? they say. 4 When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me, for I had gone▪ with the multi∣tude, 4 My soul I do pour out in me when this I think upon, For with those of the multitude together had I gone. I went with them to the house of God; with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holie day. With them unto Gods house I went, with voice of praise and joy, Ev'n with a multitude of them that did keep holy day. 5 Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted in me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him or the help of his countenance. 5 O why art thou cast down my soul? what doth disquiet thee? In God hope, for I'le yet him praise, for his face helpeth me. 6 O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember thee from the land of Iordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill Missar.
6 My God, my soul's cast down in me, therefore thee minde I will, From Jordans and Hermonites land, and from the Missar hill. 7 Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy water spouts: all thy waves and thy billows are gone over me. 7 At of thy water-spouts the noise deep unto deep doth call, Thy billows and thy waves also, gone over me are all. 8 Yet the Lord will command his loving kindnesse in the day time, and in the night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life. 8 His loving kindnesse yet the Lord command will in the day: His song all ght shall be with me, to my lifes God I'le pray. 9 I will say unto God, My rock, why hast thou forgotten me? why go I mourning, because of the oppression of the enemy? 9 I unto God will say, My Rock, why me forgetst thou so? For th'enemies oppression why mourning do I go? 10 As with a sword in my bones, mine ene∣mies reproach me: while they say  unto me, Where is thy God?
10 As with a sword within my bones mine enemies me reproach, While unto me where's now thy God this is their daily speach. 11 Why art thou cast down, O my soul  and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. 11 Why art thou, O my soul, cast down? what doth disquiet thee? Trust God, I'le him yet praise; my GOD, and health of face is he. PSAL. XLIII. IUdge me, O God and plead my cause against an ungodly nation; O deliver me from the deceitfull and unjust man. AGainst th'ungodly nation, Lord, my cause plead, judge thou me: From th'unjust and deceitfull man let me deliv'red be. 2 For thou ar the God of my strength, why doest thou cast me off? why go I mourning, be∣cause of the oppression of the enemy? 2 For of my strength thou art the God, why me off casts thou so? For th'enemies oppression why mourning do I go?
3 O send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me, let them bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles. 3 O send thy light out, and thy truth, let them so lead me still And to thy Tabernacles bring, and to thy holy hill. 4 Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God m exceeding joy: yea, upon the harp will I praise thee, O God▪ my God. 4 Then will I to Gods altar go, to God my chiefest joy: Yea, God my God, thee for to praise my harp I will imploy. 5 Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. 5 Why art thou, O my soul, cast down? what doth disquiet thee? Trust God, I'le him yet praise; my GOD, and health of face is he. PSAL XLIIII. WE have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what work thou dist in their dayes, in the times of old. WE with our ears have heard, O God, our fathers have us told,
What work thou hast done in their dayes and in the times of old. 2 How thou didst drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them; how thou didst afflict the people, and cast them out. 2 How that thy hand drave heathen out and planted them thou hast, How thou the people didst afflict, and them thou out didst cast, 3 For they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own arme save them: 3 For they not in possession the land that now they have Did get by their own proper sword, nor did their arme them save: But thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou haddest a favour unto them. But thy right hand and thine own arme and light of face also, And that because thou haddest thus a favour them unto. 4 Thou art my King, O God: command de∣liverances▪ for Iacob. 5 Through thee will we push down our ene∣mies:
4 Thou art my king, for Jacob, Lord, deliv'rances command: 5 We will through thee push down all those that'gainst us enemies stand. Through thy Name will we tread them un∣der that rise up against us. 6. For I will not trust in my ow: neither shall my sword save me. We'le through thy Name tread under them that'gainst us risen have. 6 For I will not trust in my bow, nor shall my sword me save. 7 But thou hast saved us from our enemies, and hast put them to shame that hated us. 8 In God we oast all the day long: and praise thy Name for ever. Selah. 7 But from our foes thou hast us sav'd, and haters put to shame: 8 All the day long in God we boast, and ever praise thy Name. Selah. 9 But thou hast cast off, and put us to shame: and goest not forth with our armies. 9 But thou hast cast us off, and hast us put to shame also, And when our armies do go forth, thou dost not with them go▪
10 Thou makest us to turn back from▪ the nemie: and they which hate us, spoil for themselves. 10 From him that is the enemy thou makst us to turne back, And they likewise that do us hate, spoile for themselves do take. 11 Thou hast given us like sheep appointed for meat: and hast scattered us among the heathen. 11 Thou hast us given like to sheep for meat appointed thus, Among those that the heathen are thou hast now scattred us. 12 Thou ellest thy people for nought, and doest not increase thy wealth by their price. 12 The people that to thee belongs thou dost them sell for nought, And thou dost not increase thy wealth, by what their price hath brought▪ 13 Thou makest us a reproach to our neigh∣bours, a scorn and a derision to them that are round about us. 13 Unto our neighbours a reproach a scorn thou sest us out And a derision unto them that are us round about.
14 Thou makest us a by-word among the heathen: a shaking of the head among the people. 14 Thou among those that heathen are a by-word us dost make, They that the people are among at us the head do shake, 15 My confusion is continuallie before me, and the shame of my face hath covered me. 15 Before me my confusion it is continually, The shame also of my face, it hath me cov'red utterly. 16 For the voice of him that reproacheth, and blasphemeth: by reason of the enemie and avenger. 16 Ev'n for his voice that doth reproach and doth blaspheme also: By reason of the man that is th'avenger and the foe▪ 17 All this is come upon us: ye have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falslie in thy covenant. 17 All this is on us come, we yet have not forgotten thee; Yea, neither in thy covenant thus falsly dealt have we.
18 Our heart is not turned back: neitheir have our steps declined from thy way. 18 Our heart in all this time once back not turned is away, Nor have at all those steps of ours declined from thy way. 19 Though thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shad∣dow of death. 19 Though in the place where dragons are thou hast us broken sore, And also with the shaddow hast of death us cov'red o're. 20 If we have forgotten the Name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange god; 21 Shall not God search this out? for he knoweth the secrets of the heart. 20 If we Gods Name forgot, or to a strange God stretcht our hands, 21 Shall God not search this out? for he hearts secrets understands. 22 Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long: we are counted as sheep for the slaugh∣ter. 23 Awake, why slepest thou, O Lord  arise, ast us not off▪ for even.
22 Yea, for thee we all day are kill'd, counted as sheep for slaughter: 23 Awake, why sleepst thou, Lord, arise, cast us not off for ever. 24 Wherefore hidest thou thy face: and forgettest our affliction, and our oppression? 24 Wherefore thus hidest thou thy face and our affliction Why is it that thou dost forget, and our oppression? 25 For our soul is bowed to the dust; our belly cleaveth unto the earth. 26 Arise for our help, and redeem us for thy mercies sake. 25 For down to dust our soul is bow'd, to earth our belly cleaves, 26 Redeem us for thy mercies sake, and for our help arise. PSAL. XLV. MY heart is indiing a good matter: I speak of the things which I have made touching the king: my tongue is the pen of a readie vriter. MY heart a matter good indites I speak of things which then I of the King made; my tongue is a ready writers pen.
2 Thou art fairer then the children of men: grace is powred in thy lips: therefore God hath blessed thee for ever. 2 Thou fairer then mens children art, into thy lips in store Grace powred is, for ever God hath blessed thee therefore. 3 Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mightie: with thy glorie and thy majestie. 3 O thou that the most mighty art, thy sword gird on thy thigh: Both with the glory that is thine and with thy majestie. 4 And in thy majestie ride prosperouslie be∣cause of truth▪ and meeknesse▪ and righte∣ousnesse: and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things, 4 For truth, meeknesse, and righteousnesse, ride prosperously in state: Thy right hand shall thee teach the things that are of terrour great. 5 Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the kings enemies: whereby the people sall under thee. 5 Thine arrows sharp are in the heart of the kings en'mies all, Whereby these that the people are down under thee do fall.
6 Thy throne (O God) is for ever, and ever▪ the scepter of thy kingdome is a right scepter.I 6 For ever and for ever is. O God, thy throne of might, The scepter of thy kingdome is a scepter that is right. 7 Thou lovest righteousnesse, and hatest wic∣kednesse: therefore God, thy God, hath anoin∣ted thee with the oil of gladnesse above thy▪ fel∣lows. 7 Thou hat'st ill, and lov'st righteousnesse therefore God thy God he With oil of gladenesse did anoint above thy fellows thee. 8 All thy garments smell of myrrhe, and aloes, and cassia: out of thh ivorie palaces, whereby they have made thee glad. 8 Of Aloes. Cassia, Mirrhe to smell, thy garments all are made; Out of the yvory palaces, whereby they made thee glade. 9 Kings daughters were▪ among thy honou∣rable women: upon thy right hand did stand the queen in gold of Ophir. 9 Among thy women hon'rable kings daughters were at hand: Upon thy▪ right hand did the Queen in gold of Ophir stand.
10 Hearken (O daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear: forget also thine own people, and thy fathers house. 10 O daughter hear, consider thou and do thine ear incline, Forget also thy fathers house, and people that is thine. 11 So shall the King greatlie desire thy beau∣tie: for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him. 11 So shall thy beauty by the King desired greatly be; Therefore see that thou worship him, for thine own Lord is he. 12 'And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift, even the rich among the people shall intreat thy savour. 12 And there of Tyre the daughter shall be with a gift that's▪ great: Among the people ev'n the rich thy favour shall intreat. 13 The Kings daughter is all glorious with∣in: her clothing is of wrought gold. 13 The daughter of the king within all glorious is to see: Her clothings that she doth put on, of fine wrought gold they be,
14 She shall be brought unto the King in ra ment of needle work: the virgin her compani∣ons that follow her shall be brought unto thee. 14 In raiment she of needle work brought to the king shall be, Her fellow-virgins following her shall be brought unto thee. 15 With gladnesse and rejoycing shall they be brought: they shall enter into the Kings palace. 15 They shalbe brought with gladnes great and with rejoicing all. And in the palace of the king they also enter shall. 16 In stead of thy fathers shall be thy chil∣dren, whom thou mayest make Princes in all the earth. 16 In stead of those thy fathers shall thy children be to thee, Whom thou may'st so in all the earth make princes for to be. 17 I will make thy Name to be remembred in all generations: therefore shall the people praise thee for ever and ever. 17 In generations all I'le make thy name remembred be: Therefore for ever and for ay praise shall the people thee.
PSALME XLVI. GOd is our refuge and strength: a very pre∣sent help in trouble. 2 Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be reinoved: GOD's our refuge and strength, in straits a present help is he: 2 Therefore we will not fear although the earth removed be. And though the mountaines be carried into the midst of the sea. 3 Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Selah. Though hils in midst of sea be cast, 3 Though its waves roriug make, And troubled be, though mountains als with swelling thereof shake. Selah. 4 There is a river, the streames whereof shall make glad the citie of God: the holie place of the tabernacles of the most High. 4 There is a river streams whereof shall make GODS city glad, The holy place of the most High of tabernacles made. 5 God is in the midst of her: she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that right early.
5 GOD is within the midst of her, nothing shall make her move; The Lord a helper to her shall and that right early prove. 6 The heathen raged, the kingdomes were moved: he uttered his voice, the earth melted. 6 The heathen people raged all, the kingdomes moved were, His voice he also uttered, the earth it melted there. 7 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Iacob is our refuge. Selah▪ 8 Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he hath made in the earth. 7 The Lord of hosts he is with us, Jacobs God's our refuge. Selah. 8 Come see Gods works what on earth he made desolations huge. 9 He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth: he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder, he burneth the chariot in the fire. 9 He to earths end makes war to cease: he breaks the bow, and spear He cuts in sunder, he doth burn the chariot in the fire. 10 Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen, I wll be exalted in the earth.
10 Be still, and know that I am God, exalted be will I Among the heathen, in the earth I'le be exalted hy. 11 The Lord of hosts is with us▪ the God of Iacob is our refuge. Selah. 11 He that of armies is the Lord, with us remaineth thus: He that of Jacob is the God, is a refuge for us. Selah. PSAL. XLVII. OClap your hands (all ye people:) shout unto God with the voice of triumph. 2 For the Lord most high is terrible: he is a great King over all the earth. ALL people clap your hands, to God with voice of triumph shout: 2 For God most high is terrible great King all earth throughout▪ 3 He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet. 3 The heathen people under us subdue he surely shall, Beneath our feet he shall likewise bring down the nations all. 4 He shall chuse our inheritance for us▪ the excellencie of Iacob whom he loed. Selah.
4 Of our inheritance he shall for us the chuser prove, Of Jacob the excellency, whom he did dearly love. Selah. 5 God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet. 6 Sing praises to God, sing praises: sing praises unto our King, sing praises. 5 God's with a shout gone up, the Lord with trumpet sounding hie: 6 Sing praise to God, sing praise, sing praise praise to our King sing ye. 7 For God is the King of all the earth, sing ye praises with understanding. 7 Because that over all the earth the Lord he is the king; The praises that to him belong with understanding sing. 8 God reigneth over the heathen: God sitteth upon the throne of his holinesse. 9 The princes of the people are gathered to∣gether. 8 Ov'r heathen God reignes, on his thr one of holinesse sits he: 9 Together of the people all the Princs gath'red be. Even the people of the God of Abraham: for the  of the earth belong unto God: he is greatly exald.
Ev'n the same people of the God of Abraham that be, For sinelds of earth to God belong, exalted high is he. PSAL. XLVIII. GReat is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the mountain of his holinesse. THe Lord is great, and greatly he for to be praised is▪ In our Gods city, in the hill of his own holinesse. 2 Beautifull for situation, the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King. 2 For situation beautifull the joy of all the earth Mount Sion's, the Kings citie great is on the sides of north. 3 God is known in her palaces for a refuge. 4 For lo, the Kings were assembled: they passed by together. 3 God in her palaces is known for a refuge for ever: 4 For o the kings assembled werd, they passed by together. 5 They saw it, and so they marvelled, the were troubled, and hasted away.
6 Fear took hold upon them there, and pain, as of a woman in travell. 5 They saw it, so they marvelled, they troubled hast did make, 6 As of a woman travelling fear, pain there did them take. 7 Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an east-winde. 8 As we have heard, so have we scen in the city of the Lord of hosts, 7 With an Eastwind by thee the ships of Tarshish broken be: 8 In city of the Lord of hosts, we, as we heard, did see, In the city of our God: God will establish it for ever. Selah. 9 We have thought of thy loving kindnesse, O God, in the midst of thy Temple. In our Gods City: God himself for ay it stablish will: 9 We of thy loving kindnesse, Lord, thought in thy Temple still. 10 According to thy Name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the earth, thy right hand is full of righteousnesse. 10 According to thy Name O God ends of the earth untill,
So is thy praise; and righteousnesse, thy right hand it doth fill. 11 Let mount Sion rejoice, let the daughters of Iudah be glad, because of thy judgements. 11 Of Sion let the mount rejoice, and glade the daughters be Of Judah let, and that because of judgements done by thee. 12 Walk about Sion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof. 13 Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces; 12 Walk about Sion, compasse her, thereof the towers tell: 13 Consider ye her palaces, and mark her bulwarks well; That ye may tell it to the generations fol∣lowing. 14 For this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even unto death. To generations following that it so tell may yee. 14 For this God is our God for ay, our guide to death hee'l be. PSAL. XLIX. HEar this all ye people, give ear, all ye in∣habitants of the world: 2 Both low and high, rich and poor together.
HEar this all people, give ye ear all in the world that dwell: 2 Both low and high both rich and poor together▪ weigh this well. 3 My mouth shall speak of wisdome, and the meditation of my heart shall be of under∣standing. 3 My mouth of wisdome it shall speak, and of my heart in me The meditation wholly shall of understanding be. 4 I will inline mine ear to a parable, I will open my  dark saying upon the harp. 4 And I mine eare will now incline a parable unto, My saying dark I open will upon the harp also. 5 Wherefore should I fear in the dayes of evill, when the iniquity of my heels shall com∣passe me about? 5 Wherefore should I fear in the dayes of evill, as in doubt, When of my heeles th'iniquity shall compasse me about? 6 They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches:
6 They that here in their worldly wealth do wholly put their trust, And do themselves in multitude of their great riches boast. 7 None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him. 7 None of them all his brother can by any meanes redeem, Nor can he unto God at all a ransome give for him. 8 For the redemption of their soul is preci∣ous, and it ceaseth for ever. 9 That be should still live for ever, and not see corruption. 8 Their souls redemption precious for ay doth cease to be, 9 That he should still for ever live, and not corruption see. 10 For he seeth that wise men die, likewise the fool, and the brutish person perish, and leave their wealth to others. 10 For that wise men, likewise the fool do die, he doth perceive, And brutish persons perishing, their wealth to others leave. 11 Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling
places to all generations: they call their lands after their own names. 11 Their inward thought's that ay their house and dwelling places shall Last to all ages; they their lands by their own names do call. 12 Neverthelesse man being in honour abi∣deth not: he is like the beasts that perish. 13 This their ay is their folly; yet their po∣sterity approve their sayings. Selah. 12 Yet man in honour not abides: he's like the beasts that perish. 13 This their way is their folly; yet their race their sayings cherish. Selah. 14 Like sheep they are laid in the grave▪ death shall eed on them: and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning, 14 They in the grave like sheep are laid, death shall upon them feed, The upright shall dominion have ov're them in morning tide; And their beauty shall cousume in the grave from their dwelling. 15 But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave, for he shall receive me. Selah. Their beauty from their dwelling place consume shall in the grave.
15 But God from grave will save my soul, for he shall me receive 16 Be not thou afraid▪ when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased. 16 Be not afraid when one is made in riches plenteous, When every way increased is the glory of his house. 17 For when he dieth, he shall carry nothing away: his glory shall not descend after him. 17 For when he dies, he carry shall nothing away in end, His glory shall not any way then after him descend. 18 Though whiles be lived he blossed his soul and men will praise thee, when thou doest we to thy self. 18 Although whiles that he lived heer, his soul then blessed he▪ And when thou well dost to thy self, men will give praise to thee. 19 He shall go to the generations of his fa∣thers, they shall never see light. 20 Man that is in honour, and understand∣eth uot is like the peasts that perish. 19 He shall go to his fathers race, light never see they shall.
20 Man honour'd and not knows, is like the beasts that perish all. PSAL. L. THe mighty God, even the Lord hath spo∣ken, and called the earth, from the rising of the Sun, unto the going down thereof. THe mighty God the Lord hath spoke and call'd the earth anone, Ev'n from the rising of the sun unto his going down. 2 Out of Sion the perfection of beauty, God hath shined 2 From out of his own Sion hill where the perfection Of beauty is, the Lord himself hath shined us upon. 3 Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before him, and it shall very tempestuous round about him, 3 Our God shall come, and he shall not keep silence any more, A fire tempestuous round about before him shall devore. 4 He shall▪ call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people. 4 He to the Heavens from above, and to the earth shall call,
That he so may the judgement give unto his people all. 5 Gather my saints together unto me: those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. 5 Together to me gather now my saints on earth that be, Those that have made by sacrifice a Covenant with me. 6 And the heavens shall declare his righte∣ousnesse: for God is judge himself. Selah. 6 And so the righteousnesse that's his the heavens shall declare, Because that God himself is he by whom all judged are. Selah. 7 Hear, O my people, and I will speak O Israel, and I will testisie against thee: I am God, even thy God. 7 Hear, O my people, and I'le speak, and I will testify Against thee, O thou Israel, GOD, ev'n thy GOD am I. 8 I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices. or thy burnt-offerings to have been continu∣ally before me. 8 For sacrifice or offrings burnt I will not lesse or more Reprove thee, for continually to have been me before.
9 I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor hee goats out of thy folds. 10 For every beast of the forrest is mine and the cattell upon a thousand hils. 9 I'le take no bullock, nor hee goats from house nor folds of thine▪ 10 For beasts of forrest, cattell all on thousand hils are mine. 11 I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wilde beasts of the field are mine. 11 The fowls that on the mountains are are all unto me known; The wild beasts also of the field they likewise are mine own. 12 If I were hungry I would not tell thee, for the world is mine, and the fulnesse thereof. 12 If I were hungry I the same would not tell unto thee, For that the world and fulnesse all thereof belongs to me▪ 13 Will I eat the flesh of buls, or drink the blood of goats, 14 Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High. 13 Will I ev'n eat the flesh of buls? or goats blood drink will I; 14 Thanks offer unto God, and pay thy vows to the most Hy.
15 And call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. 15 And in the day of trouble great do thou upon me cry I thee deliver will; and then thou shalt me glorify. 16 But unto the wicked God saith, What st thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth. 16 But God unto the wicked saith, Why dost thou mention make Now of my laws? or in thy mouth shouldst thou my covenant take? 17 Seeing thou hatest instruction, and cast∣est my words behind thee. 17 Sith that thou from thy heart dost hate instruction for thy minde; And all the words that come from me thou castest thee behind. 18 When thou sawest a thief, then thou con∣sentedst with him, and hast been partaker with adulterers. 18 Then with a thief thou didst consent, when as thou him hadst seen, And also with adulterers a partaker hast been. 19 Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit.
20 Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother, thou slanderest thine owne mothers sonne. 19 Thou unto ill thy mouth dost give, thy tongue deceit doth frame, 20 Thou sit'st and'gainst thy brother speakst thy mothers sonne to shame. 21 These things hast thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. 21 These things thou didst▪ I silence kept like thee thou thought'st me right: I'le thee reprove, and will them set in order in thy sight. 22 Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you. 22 Now ye that do the Lord forget do ye this thing consider, Lest that I you in peices tear, and none be to deliver. 23 Whoso offereth praise, glorifieth me: and to him that ordereth his conversation aright will I shew the salvation of God. 23 Who offreth praise me glorifies; of God I the salvation Will shew to him that ordereth aright his conversation.
PSALME LI. HAve morcy upon me, O God. according to thy loving kindnesse, according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions. AFter thy loving kindnesse, Lord, have mercy me upon: After thy tender mercies great blot out my sins each on. 2 Wash me throughly from mine iniquitie, and cleanse me from my sin. 3 For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. 2 Me cleanse from sin and throughly wash from mine iniquity. 3 For still my sin is me before my faults acknowledge I. 4 Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou might∣est be justified when thou speakest, 4 'Gainst thee, thēe only have I sinn'd, this evill was by me Done in thy sight, that when thou speak'st thou justifi'd mightst be, And be clear when thou judgest. 5 Behold. I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. And be made clear when thou dost judge; 5 Lo in iniquitie
I shapen was, my mother als in sin conceived me. 6 Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdome. 6 Behold within the inward parts the truth desirest thou. And in the hidden part thou shalt me wisdome make to know. 7 Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow. 7 Do thou me with the hyssop purge, I shall be cleansed so: Do thou me wash and then I shall be whiter then the snow. 8 Make me to hear joy and gladnesse, that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice. 8 Of joy and gladnes do thou make me for to hear the voice, That so those bones of mine which thou hast broken may rejoice. 9 Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. 10 Create in me a clean heart, O God: and reew a right spirit within me.
9 All mine iniquities blot out, thy face hide from my sin. 10 Creat a clean heart, Lord renew a right sprit me within. 11 Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. 12 Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit. 11 Cast me not from thy face, nor take thy holy Sprit from me: 12 Restore me thy salvations joy, uphold with thy Sprit free. 13 Then will I teach transgressours thy wayes, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. 13 Then will I teach thy wayes unto such as transgressours be; And they that sinners are then shall converted be to thee. 14 Deliver me from blood guiltinesse, O God, thou God of my salvation: and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousnesse. 14 O God of my salvation God do from blood guiltinesse Me save; then shall my tongue aloud sing of thy righteousnesse. 15 O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise.
15 Those lips of mine by thee, O Lord, let them now opned be, And then my mouth it shall shew forth the praise that's due to thee. 16 For thou desirest not sacrifice, else would I give it: thou delightest not in burnt offering. 16 For thou desir'st not sacrifice, else would I give it right; Likewise thou in burnt offering hast not at all delight. 17 The sacrifices of God are a broken spi∣rit. a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise. 17 Of God the sacrifices are a broken sprit alwayes, A broken and a contrite heart, Lord, thou wilt not despise. 18 Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion: build thou the wals of Ierusalem. 18 In thy good pleasure do thou good unto thy Sion now, And of Jerusalem the walls again build up do thou. 19. Then shalt thou be pleased with the sa∣crifices of righteousnesse, with burnt-offering, and whole burnt-offering: then shall they offer bullocks upon thine altar.
19 Right sacrifices, offrings burnt with whole burnt offrings all, Then shall thee please; thine altars on they bullocks offer shall. PSAL. LII. WHy boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man? the goodnes of God endu∣reth continually. O Mighty man, why dost thou boast in mischief wickedly? The goodnesse of the Lord it doth endure continually. 2 Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs: like a ra∣sour working deceitfully. 2 Thy tongue that wicked is, mischiefs deviseth craftily, Ev'n like unto a rasour sharp, working deceitfully. 3 Thou lovest evill more then good: and lying rather then to speak righteousnesse. Selah. 3 Thou evill surely more dost love then good, which thou shouldst seek, And lying rather dost approve then righteousnesse to speak. Selah. 4 Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitfull tongue. 5 God shall likewise destroy thee for ever,
4 Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitfull tongue; 5 God shall likewise for ever thee destroy from men among. He shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living. Selah. He shall thee take away, and thee pluck from thy dwelling place; And from the land of living shall thee root out with disgrace. 6 The righteous also shall see and fear, and shall laugh at him. 7 Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength: 6 The righteous als shall see and fear, and at him laugh they shall: 7 Lo, this the man is that did not make God his strength at all. But trusted in the abundance of his riches, and strengthed himself in his wickednesse. But in the great abundance of his richesse trusted he, And he in his own wickednesse himself made strong to be. 8 But I am like a green olive-tree in the house of God: I trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever.
8 But I am in the house of God like a green olive tree; For ever and for ay my trust shall in Gods mercie bee. 9 I will praise thee for ever, because thou hast done it: and I will wait on thy Name, for it is good before thy saints. 9 Because that thou thus hast it done I'le praise thee evermore, And on thy name I'le wait, for it is good thy saints before. PSAL. LIII. THe fool hath said in his heart, There is no God: corrupt are they, and have done abominable iniquity: there is none that doth good. THe fool in's heart said there's no God, corrupt they all have done Iniquity abominable, that dorh good there is none 2 God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand; that did seek God. 2 God looked down from heay'n upon mens children, for to see If any understood, that would of God a seeker be.
3 Every one of them is gone back, they are altogether become filthy: there is none that doth good, no not one. 3 They altogether filthy are, each of them back is gone: Yea of them truely none there is that good doth, no not one. 4 Have the workers of iniquitie no know∣ledge▪ who eat up my people as they eat bread: they have not called upon God. 4 The workers of iniquity have they no knowledge all? Who eat my people up as bread: on God they do not call. 5 There were they in great fear, where no feat was: for God hath scattered the bones of him that encampeth against thee, 5 In that place were they in great fear where no feat seem'd to be, For God his bones hath scattered that encampeth against thee. Thoulhast put them to shme, because Go hath despised them. 6 O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! Because God hath despised them, thou them to shame hast put: 6 O that Isra'ls salvation of Sion were come out.
When God bringeth back the captivity of his people, Iacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad. When God shall back the bondage bring of his own people sad, Then Jacob greatly shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glade. PSAL LIIII. SAve me, O God, by thy Name, and iudge me by thy strength. 2 Hear my prayer, O God give ear to the words of my mouth. LOrd by thy Name do thou me save, judge by thy strength me heer, 2 My prayer, O God, hear, and unto words of my mouth give ear. 3. For strangers are risen up against me, and oppressours seek after my soul: they have not set God before them. Selah. 3 For'gainst me strangers risen are, and this my soul to get Oppressours seek; they God at all before them have not set. Selah. 4 Behold, God is mine helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul. 5 He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: cut them off in thy truth.
4 Lo, God's mine helper, God's with them that do my soul up put: 5 He to my foes shall ill reward, off in thy truth them cut. 6 I will freely sacrifice unto thee: I will praise thy Name, (O Lord) for it is good. 6 I freely now will unto thee a sacrifice afford, I will give praise unto thy Name, for it is good, O Lord. 7 For he hath delivered me out of all trou∣ble: and mine eye hath seen his desire upon mine enemies. 7 For he hath me delivered out of all miseries, And his desire mine eye hath seen upon mine enemies. PSAL. LV. GIve ear to my prayer, O God: and hide not thy self from my supplication. 2 Attend unto me, and hear me: I mourn in my complaint, and make a noise. MY prayer Lord hear, hide thee not from my supplications voice, 2 Atend me, hear, in my complaint I mourn and make a noise. 3 Because of the voice of the enemy; be∣cause of the oppression of the wicked: for they
cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate mee. 3 Because of th'enemies voice, and for th'ill mans oppression great: For on me they iniquity cast, and in wrath me hate, 4 My heart is sore pained within me: and the terrours of death are fallen upon me. 5 Fearfulnesse and trembling are come upon me, and horror hath overwhelmed me. 4 My heart sore pain'd within me is, deaths terrours on me fall's 5 Fear, tremblings on me come, and dread hath overwhelm'd me all. 6 And I said, O that I had wings like a dove: for then would I flee away, and be at rest. 6 And then I said, O like a Dove that I had wings for me, For then I hence would flee away, and I at rest would be. 7 Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wildernesse. Selah. 8 I would hasten my escape from the win∣dy storm and tempest. 7 Lo, then far off I wander would in wildernesse to be. Selah. 8 From windy storme and tempest I to scape would hasten me.
9 Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues: for I have seen violence and strife in the city. 9 Do thou destroy, O Lord, and do divide their tongues in twain, For violence and strife I have within the city seen. 10 Day and night they go about it upon the wals thereof; mischief also and sorrow are in the midst of it. 10 About it on the walls thereof they day and night do go, Mischief ev'n in the midst of it and sorrow are also. 11 Wickednesse is in the midst thereof: deceit and guil depart not from her streets. 12 For it was not an enemy that reproa∣ched me, then I could have born it: 11 Ill in its midst is; guile deceit from its streets do not go: 12 For not a foe did me reproach, I could have born it so, Neither was it he that hated me, that did magnifie himself against me, then I would have hid my self from him. Nor was it he that did me hate, that magnifie thus did Himself against me, then I would my self have from him hid.
13 But it was thou, a man, mine equall, my guide, and mine acquaintance. 14 We took sweet counsell together, and walked unto the house of God in company. 13 But thou a man mine equall, guide, mine acquaintance it was: 14 We join'd sweet counsell, to Gods house in comp'ny we did passe. 15 Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for wickednesse is in their dwellings, and among them. 14 Let death upon them seize, let them go quick down into hell: For wickednesse is them among and in the place they dwell. 16 As for me, I will call upon God: and the Lord shall save me 17 Evening, and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud: and he shall hear my voice. 16 On God I'le call, God will me, 17 At morne, noon, evening still, Both pray I will, and cry aloud, my voice then hear he will. 18 He hath delivered my soul in peace, from the battell that was against me: for there were many with me.
18 He hath my soul delivered, that it in peace might be From battell that against me was, for many were with me▪ 19 God shall hear and afflict them, even he that abideth of old, Selah: because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God. 19 God hear and them afflict shall he of old who hath abode, Because that they no changes have therefore they fear not God. 20 He hath put forth his hands against such as be at peace with him; he hath broken his co∣venant. 20 Gainst such he hath put forth his hands as at peace with him be, The covenant that he hath made now broken all hath he. 21 The words of his mouth were smoother then butter, but war was in his heart: his words were softer then oil. yet were they drawn swords. 21 Then butter smoother were his words but in his heart was war, His words were softer then the oil, and yet draw'n swords they are.
22 Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall never suffer the righ∣teous to be moved. 22 Upon the Lord thy burden cast, and thee sustain shall he: He surely never suffer shall the righteous mov'd to be. 23 But thou, O God, shalt bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloody and deceitfull men shall not live out half their dayes: but I will trust in thee. 23 Lord thou to deaths pit shalt them bring, deceitfull bloody men Shall not half of their dayes live out, but I'le trust in thee then. PSAL. LVI. BE mercifull unto me, O God, for man would swallow me up: he fighting daily oppresseth me. BE mercifull to me, O God, for man ould swallow me, While he doth daily'gainst me fight, me then oppresseth he. 2 Mine enemies would daily swallow me up: for they be many that fight against me, O thou most high. 2 They daily would me swallow up that enemies are to me;
For, O most high they that do fight against me many be. 3 What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee▪ 4 In God I will praise his word, in God I have put my trust, 3 What time I am afraid, on thee I trusting will rely. 4 In God I'le praise his word, in God my whole trust put have I. I will not fear what flesh can do unto me. 5 Every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me for evil. What flesh now can do unto me not fear at all I will; 5 Each day they wrest my words, their thoughts 'gainst me are all for ill. 6 They gather themselves together, they hide themselves, they mark my steps when they wait for my soul. 6 Themselves together gather they, they hide themselves in hate, They do my steps all mark, when as they for my soul lay wait. 7 Shall they escape by iniquity? in thine an∣ger cast down the people, O God. 7 Shall they ev'n by iniquitie away escape at last?
O Lord down in thine anger now do thou the people cast. 8 Thou tellest my wandrings, put thou my tears into thy bottle: are they not in thy book? 8 My wandrings all what they have been thou tellest at a look, Into thy bottel put my tears: are they not in thy book? 9 When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this I know, for God is for me. 10 In God will I praise his word: in the Lord will I praise his word. 9 My foes shall when I cry turn back: I know't; God's for me still: 10 In God his word I'le praise, his word praise in the Lord I will. 11 In God I have put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto me. 12 Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render praises unto thee. 11 I trust in God, not fear I will what man can do to me: 12 Thy vows upon me are, O God I'le render praise to thee. 13 For thou hast delivered my soul from death: wilt not thou deliver my feet from
falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living? 13 For thou hast freed my soul from death, from falls wilt thou not right My feet save, that I God before may walk in livings light. PSAL. LVII. BE mercifull unto me, O God, be mercifull un∣to me, for my soul trusteth in thee: BE mercifull to me, O God, be mercifull to me, And that because my soul it doth her trust put into thee. Yea in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge untill these calamities be over-past. Yea, in the shaddow of thy wings I'le my refuge make fast; Untill that those calamities be wholly overpast. 2 I will cry unto God most high: unto God hat persormeth all things for me. 2 Unto the Lord that is most high, my cry shall raised be: Ev'n unto God himself that doth performe all things for me. 3 He shall send from heaven, and save me from the reproch of him that would swallow
me up; Selah. God shall send forth his mer and his truth. From heaven he shall send, and me from his reproach defend, That me would swallow; God his truth, and mercie forth shall send. Selah. 4 My soul is among lions; and I lie even a mong thm that are set on fire, even the son of men whose teeth are spears and arrows, an their tongue a sharp sword. 4 'Mong lions is my soul, I ly men set on fire among, Mens sons, whose teeth are arrows, spears, and a sharp sword their tongue. 5 Be thou exalted, O God, above the hea∣vens: let thy glory be above all the earth. 5 Be thou exalted very high above the heav'ns O God: And, let thy glory be above ev'n all the earth abroad. 6 They have prepared a not for my steps,  soul is bowed down: they have digged a pit be∣fore me, into the midst whereof they are fall themselves. Selah. 6 They for my steps a net prepar'd, my soul is bow'd withall; They digged have, for me a pit and in its midst did fall. Selah.
7 My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise. 8 Awake up my glory, awake psaltry and harp: I my self will wake early. 7 My heart's Lord fixt, my heart is fixt, I'le praise and singing make: 8 My glorie wake, wake Psaltry, Harp, my self I'le early wake. 9 I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing unto thee among the nations. 10 For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds. 9 I'le praise thee, 'mong the people, Lord, 'mong Nations sing I will: 10 For unto heav'ns thy mercy's great, thy truth the clouds untill. 11 Be thou exalted, O God, above the hea∣vens: let thy glory be above all the earth▪ 11 Be thou exalted very high above the heav'ns O God, And let thy glory be above ev'n all the earth abroad▪ PSAL. LVIII. DO ye indeed speak righteousnesse, O congre∣gation? do ye judge uprightly▪ O sons of men? DO ye O congregation, indeed speak righteously?
O ye that are the sons of men do ye judge uprightly? 2 Yea, in heart ye work wickednesse: you weigh the violence of your hands in the earth. 2 Ye ev'n within your heart you do work wickednesse alway, And of your hands upon the earth the violence you weigh. 3 The wicked are estranged from the wom they go astray assoon as they be born, speaking lies. 3 The wicked they are from the womb estranged all from thee; They speaking lies do go astray as soon as born they be. 4 Their poison is like the poison of a serpent: they are like the deaf adder that stoppeth her ear: 4 Unto a serpents poison like their poison it is near; They like unto the adder are that deafe doth stop her ear. 5 Which will not hearken to the voice of charmers, charming never so wisely. 5 Which will not hearken to the voice of them they charmers see, Though never so wisely they appear in charming for to be.
6 Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth: break out the great teeth of the young lions, O Lord. 6 O God, in peices in their mouth break thou their teeth so strong, The great teeth break thou out, O Lord, of lions that are young. 7 Let them melt away as waters which run continually: when he bendeth his bow to shoo his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces. 7 Let them as waters melt away continually that flow, His arrows cut in peices when to shoot he bends his bow. 8 As a snail which melteth, let every one of them passe away: like the untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun. 8 As melts a snail, let ev'ry one of them so passe away, Like womans birth untimely, that the sun not see they may. 9 Before your pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as with a whirlewind, both living, and in his wrath. 9 Before your pots can feel the thornes them take away he shall, Both living and als in his wrath as with a whirlwinde all.
10 The righteous shall rejoice, when he se∣eth the vengeance, he shall wash his feet in the bloud of the wicked. 10 The righteous man he shall rejoice when he doth vengeance see, He shall his feet wash in the bloud of those that wicked be. 11 So that a man shall say, Verily, there is a reward for the righteous: verily, he is a God that judgeth in the earth. 11 So verily a man shall say the just rewarded be: Yea, verily that in the earth doth judge, a God is he. PSAL. LIX. DEliver me from mine enemies, O my God: defend me from them that rise up against mee. DEliver me O thou my God, from those mine enemies, And do thou me from them defend that up against me rise. 2 Deliver me from the workers of iniqui∣ty, and save me from bloody men. 2 From workers of iniquity do thou deliver me, And do thou me in safety keep from men that bloudy be.
3 For lo, they lie in wait for my soul: the mighty are gathered against me; not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord. 3 For lo, they for my soul ay wait, the mighty gathered be Against me Lord, not for my fault, nor any sin in me. 4 They run and prepare themselves without my fault▪ awake to help me, and behold. 4 They run and they without my fault prepare themselves so bold, Do thou awake, me for to help and do thou als behold. 5 Thou therefore, O Lord God of bosts the God of Israel, awake to visit all the heathen: be not mercifull to any wicked transgressours. Selah. 5 Lord God of hosts of Israel God to visit heathen lo Therefore awake; not merciful be ill transgressours to. 6 They return at evening: they make a noise like a dog and go round about the city. 6 They at the ev'ning do return, and make a noising sound▪ Like to a dog; and they do go about the city round.
7 Behold they belch out with their mouth, swords are in their lips: for who, say they, doth hear? 7 Behold they belch out with their mouth, within their lips are swords, For who is he, this do they say, that heareth these our words▪ 8 But thou; O Lord, shall laugh at them, thou shalt have all the heathen in derision. 9 Because of his strength will I wait upon thee; for God is my defence. 8 But thou O Lord shalt at them laugh, and scorne all heathen hence. 9 I for his strength will wait on thee for God is my defence. 10 The God of my mercy shall prevent me: God shall let me see my desire upon mine ene∣mies. 10 He of my mercy that is God shall me prevent anone; God shall let me lee my desire mine enemies upon. 11 Slay them not, lest my people forget: scat∣ter them by thy power, and bring them down, O Lord, our shield. 11 Not say them; lest my folk forget: them scatter by thy might, And thou O Lord, who art  hield them down bring from their height.
12 For the sin of their mouth, and the words of their lips, let them even be taken in their pride: and for cursing and lying which they speak. 12 For of their mouth the sin, and for words of their mouth not meek, Let them ev'n in their pride be ta'en who cursing lying speak. 13 Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be: and let them know that God ruleth in Iacob, unto the ends of the earth. Selah. 13 In wrath consume them, them consume that so they may not be, That to earths ends the Lord doth rule, in Jacob let them see. Selah. 15 And at evening let them eturn, and let them make a noise like a dog, and go round about the city. 14 At evening let thou them return, let them a noising sound Make like unto a dog, and go about the city round. 15 Let them wander up and down for meat: nd grudge if they be not satisfied. 15 And do thou let them up and down all wander for their meat, And grudge, if they not satisfi'd be with the thing they eat.
16 But I will sing of thy power; yea, I will sing aloud of thy mercy in the morning, for thou hast been my defence; and refuge in the day of my trouble. 16 But of thy pow'r yea mercy loud at morning sing I will: For my defence thou and refuge hast been in trouble still. 17 Vnto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for God is my defence, and the God of my mercy. 17 O thou who art my strength, I will unto thee sing for this; For God is my defence, and he God of my mercy is. PSAL. LX. O God, thou hast cast us off, thou hast scat∣tered us, thou hast been displeased, O tu thy self to us again. O God, thou now hast hast us off, thou hast us scattred ths: Displeased hast thou been, O turn thy self again to us. 2 Thou hast me the earth to tremble; thou hast broken it: hal the breaches thereo, for it shaketh. 3 The earth to tremble thou hast made, thou broken it did ake;
The breaches thereof do thou heal, because that it doth shake. 3 Thou hast shewed thy people hard things: thou hast made us to drink the wine of astonish∣ment. 3 Thou shewed hast hard things unto the people that is thine; And of astonishment thou hast made us to drink the wine. 4 Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee: that it may be displayed because of the truth. Selah. 4 Thou hast a banner giv'n to them that have the fear of thee, That it because ev'n of the trueth might o displayed be. Selah. 5 That thy beloved may be delivered, save with thy right hand, and hear me. 5 That those who thy beloved are delivered may be, Now with thy right hand do thou save, and hearken unto me. 6 God hath spoken in his holinesse, I will rejoice: I will divide Schechem, and mte ou the valley of Succoth. 6 God in his holinesse hath said, I joyfull will abide:
I Succoths valley will met out, and Shechem will divide. 7 Gilead is mine, and Manassh is mine, Ephraim also is the strength of my head, Iudah is my law-giver. 7 Mine Gilead, mine Manasses is. and Ephraim of my head He is the strength, and Judah als my Law-giver is made. 8 Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia triumph thou because of me. 8 Moab my washpot is, my shoe I'le out ov'r Edom cast: Philistia; because of me do thou triumph at last. 9 Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom? 9 O who is he that will me bring into the city strong? And who is he that now will me to Edom lead along? 10 Wilt not thou, O God, which hadest cast us off? and thou, O God, which didst not go out with our armies? 10 O God, which haddest us cast off, wilt thou the same not do?
And thou, O God, which diddest not out with our armies go? 11 Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man. 12 Through God we shall do valiantlie: for e it is that shall tread down our enemies. 11 Help us from trouble, for the help of man is vain in all: 12 Through God we shall do valiantly our foes tread down he shall. PSAL. LXI. HEar my cry, O God: attend unto my prayer. 2 From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed: O God, do thou now hear my cry, unto my prayer atend, 2 When my heart's overwhelm'd, I will cry to thee from earths end: Lead me to the rock that is higher then I. 3 For thou hast been a shelter for me, a strong tower from the enemie. Do thou me lead unto the rock that higher is then I▪ 3 For thou my shelter and strong tower wast from the enemy. 4 I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever: I rust in the covert of thy wings. Selah.
4 Within thy tabernacle I abide will ever still: Into the covert of thy wings my whole trust put I will. Selah. 5 For thou, O God, hast heard my vows: thou hast given me the heritage of those that fear thy Name. 5 Because that thou the vows O God, which I have made didst hear, Thou hast giv'n me the heritage of those thy Name that fear. 6 Thou wilt prolong the kings life: and his years as many generations. 6 The life of him that is the king thou surely wilt prolong, As many generations his years thou wilt make long. 7 He shall abide before God for ever▪ O pre∣pare mercy and truth, which may preserve him. 7 He shall have his abiding still before our God for ay, O mercy and als truth prepare, that him prserve they may: 8 So will I sing praise unto thy Name so ever, that I may dayly performe my vows. 8 So praises I unto thy Name will sing, and that for ay
That so the vows that I have made perform I daily may. PSAL LXII. TRuly my soul waiteth upon God: from him commeth my salvation. MY soul it truely in all things now waiteth God upon, Because that unto me from him comes my salvation. 2 He onely is my rock and my salvation he is my defence, I shall not be greatly moved 2 He only my salvation is, my rock also is he: Yea, he is my defence, I shall not greatly moved be. 3 How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be stain all of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence. 3 How long mischief against a man imagine thus will ye? Ye slain all, as a bowing wall, and tottring fence shall be. 4 They only consult to cast him down from his excellency, they delight in lies: they blesse with thier mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah. 4 They only plot to cast him down from his excellency,
They like in lies; with mouth they blesse, but they curse inwardly. Selah. 5 My soul, wait thou only upon God: for my expectation is from him. 5 O thou my soul, with patience wait only God upon, For that from him in all things is my expectation. 6 He onely is my rock and my salvation: he is my defence; I shall not be moved. 6 My rock and als salvation he only s to me; Unto me a defence he is; I shall not moved be. 7 In God is my salvation and my glory: the rock of my strength, and my refuge is in God. 7 My glory it is in the Lord, and my salvation, In God the rock is of my strength and my refuge alone. 8 Trust in him at all times, ye people▪ pour out your heart before him: God is a refuge for us. Selah. 8 Ye people at all times do ye your trust put in him thus, Your heart poure ye out him before, God's a refuge for us. Selah.
9 Surely men of low degree are vanitie, and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in the ballance they are altogether lighter then vanity. 9 Surely men low are vanity, men high they are a ly, In ballance laid they wholly are more light then vanity. 10 Trust not in oppression, become not vain in robbery: if riches increase, set not your heart upon them. 10 In robbry be not vain, and not trust in oppression, If that your richesse do increase, set not your heart there on. 11 God hath spoken once; twice have I heard this, that power belongeth unto God. 11 The Lord himself hath spoken once, yea twise heard have I this, That unto him that is our God great power belonging is. 12 Also unto thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy: for thou rendrest to every man according to his work. 12 So also mercy doth belong to thee, O Lord, alone, For thou according to his work dost render to each one.
PSALME LXIII. O God, thou art my God, earlie will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee, O God, thou art my God, thou shalt be early sought by me, My soul for thee doth greatly thirst, my flesh doth long for thee, In a dry and thirstie land where no water is: 2 To see thy power and thy glorie, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuarie. In a most dry and thirsty land, wherein no waters be. 2 To see thy glory, power, as I in Sanctuary thee did see. 3 Because thy loving kindnesse is better then life: my lips shall praise thee. 4 Thus will I blesse thee while I live: I will lift up my hands in thy Name. 3 Sith better is thy love then life, my lips they shall thee praise. 4 I'le while I live thee blesse; I will my hands in thy name raise. 5 My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatnesse: and my mouth shall praise thee with joyfull lips: 5 My soul shall as with marrow all and fatnesse filled be:
And so my mouth with joyfull lips shall praises give to thee▪ 6 When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night- watches. 6 When I laid down upon▪ my bed remember thee aright, And also on thee meditate in watches of the night. 7 Because thow hast been my help  therefore in he shaddow of thy wings will I rejoice. 8 My soul. followeth hard after thee; thy right hand upholdeth me. 7 In shaddow of thy wings I'le joy, for help'd I was by thee, 8 My soul on thee doth follow hard thy right hand holdeth me. 9 But those that seek my soul to destroy it, shall go into the lower parts of the earth. 10 They shall fall by the sword: they shall be a portion for foxes. 9 Who seek my soul to spill, go to earths lower parts shall they: 10 They by the sword shall fall, they shall for foxes be a prey. 11 But the king shall rejoice in God; every one that sweareth by him shall glory: but the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.
11 So shall the King in God rejoice, yea each one glory shall That by him swears: but stopt shall be the mouth of liars all. PSAL. LXIV. HEar my voice, O God, in my prayer: pre∣serve my life from fear of the enemie. O God when I my prayer make my voice then do thou hear; Of him that is the enemie preserve my life from fear. 2 Hide me from the secret counsell of the wicked: from the insurrection of the workers of iniquitie. 2 Me from their secret counsell hide, that do live wickedly From insurrection of the men that work iniquity. 3 Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words: 3 Who thus in rage do whet their tongues and that like unto swords And to shoot arrows▪ bend their bows ev'n their most bitter words. 4 That they may shoot in secret at the per∣fect: suddenly doe they shoot at him, and fear not.
4 That they in secret then may shoot at him that's perfect heer, They suddenly do shoot at him, and not at all do fear. 5 They encourage themselves in an evill mat∣ter: they commune of laying snarnes privily; they say, Who shall see them? 5 Themselves they in a matter ill encourage; and to lay Snares privily, they commune thus, who shall them see? they say. 6 They search out iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search: both the inward thoughts of every one of them, and the heart is deep. 6 They do search out iniquities accomplished they keep A diligent search; the inward thought and heart of each is deep. 7 But God shall shoot at them with an ar∣row, suddenly shall they be wounded. 8 So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves: all that see them shall flee away. 7 God shall an arrow at them shoot, and wound them suddenly: Their own tongue they'le make on them fall all that them see shall fly.
9 And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God: for they shall wiselie consi∣der of his doing. 9 And in great fear all men shall be, and shall Gods work declare, For wisely they consider shall what those his doings are. 10 The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him: and all the upright in heart shall glorie. 10 The righteous shall in God be glade, and in him trust they shall: And they that are upright in heart shall also glory all. PSAL. LXV. PRaise waiteth for thee, O God, in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be performed. 2 O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. PRaise for thee waits in Sion Lord: vows to thee paid shall be: 2 O thon that doest prayer hear, all flesh shall come to thee. 3 Iniquities prevail against me: as for o transgressions, thou shalt purge them away. 3 Iniquities they do prevaile against me every way; As for those our transgressions, thou shalt them purge away.
4 Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy courts: 4 The man is blest whom thou dost chuse, and whom thou causest well For to aproach to thee, that he within thy courts may dwell. We shall be satisfied with the goodnesse of thy house, even of thy holy temple. We with the goodnesse of thy house shall satisfied be. Ev'n of the Temple that is made a holy place for thee. 5 By terrible things in righteousnesse, wilt thou answer us, O God of our salvation: 5 Thou by the things in righteousnesse that terrible are done Wilt us an answer give, O God, of our salvation. Who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are afarre off upon the sea▪ Who art the confidence of all the ends of earth that be, And of them that afar off are upon the raging sea.
6 Which by his strength setteth fast the mountains, being girded with power. 7 Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waves, and the tumult of the people. 6 Which being girt with power sets fast by his own strength the hils; 7 Which noise of seas, noise of their waves, and peoples tumult stills. 8 They also that dwell in the uttermost parts, are afraid at thy tokens: thou makest the out∣goings of the morning and evening to rejoice. 8 Those in the utmost parts that dwell, als at thy tokens quake, Th'outgoing of the Morn and Ev'n thou to rejoice dost make. 9 Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatlie enrichest it with the river of God, which is full of water: thou preparest them corn, when thou hast so provided for it. 9 Thou visit'st earth and warrest it, mak'st greatly rich also With Gods full flood; thou corn prepar'st when thou provid'st it so. 10 Thou waterest the ridges thereof abun∣dantlie: thou setlest the furrows thereof, thou makest it soft with showres,
10 The ridges thou aboundantly thereof dost water oft, The furrows thereof setlest thou, with showrs thou mak'st it soft. Thou blessest the springing thereof. 11 Thou crownest the yeer with thy goodnesse, and thy paths drop fatnesse. The springing thereof thou dost blesse: 11 And with thy goodnesse crown Thou dost the year, and als thy steps, they fatnesse do drop down. 12 They drop upon the pastures of the wil∣dernesse; and the little hils rejoice on every side. 12 They do upon the pastures drop of wildernesse so wide, And then the hills that little are rejoice on ev'ry side. 13 The pastures are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are covered over with corn: they shout for joy, they also sing. 13 The pastures cloathed are with flocks, the valleys over so With corn are covered; they for joy do shout; they sing also. PSAL. LXVI. MAke a joyfull noise unto God, all ye lands.
2 Sing forth the honour of his Name: make his praise glorious▪ O All ye lands do unto God a noise that's joyfull raise: 2 Sing forth the honour of his Name, make glorious his praise. 3 Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy workes? through the greatnesse of thy pow or shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee. 3 Say unto God, how terrible art thou in works so great? Through thy great power thine en'mies shal themselves to thee submit. 4 All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee: they shall sing to thy Name. Selah. 4 Heere all the earths inhabitants shall worship to thee bring, And unto thee all sing they shall, they to thy name shall sing. Selah. 5 Come and see the works of God: he ∣errible in his doing toward the children  tmen. 5 Come ye, and see ye of the Lord the works done now and then, He in his doing terrible is to the sons of men.
6 He turned the sea into dry land, they went through the flood on foot, there did we rejoice in him. 6 Into dry land he turn'd the sea, and they who were his choice On foot went through the flood, and we did there in him rejoice. 7 He ruleth by his power for ever, his eyes behold the nations: let not the rebellious exalt themselves. Selah. 7 He by his power for ever rules, his eyes the Nations see: Let not those men themselves exalt that thus rebellious be. Selah. 8 O blesse our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard. 9 Which holdeth our soul in life, and suffe∣reth not our feet to be moved. 8 O blesse our God ye people all, his praise voice heard make ye, 9 Which holds our soul in life, and lets our feet not moved be. 10 For thou, O God, hast proved us: thou hast tried us, as silver is tried. 11 Thou broughtest us into the net: thou layedst affliction upon our loins. 10 For Lord, as silver's try'd thou hast prov'd and try'd us eachone,
11 Us in the net broughtst, on our loines thou laidst affliction. 12 Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads, we went through fire and through wa∣ter; but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place 12 Thou ov'r our heads caus'd men to ride, we through the fire did passe And water als; thou broughtst us out into a wealthy place. 13 I will go into thy house with burnt-offe∣rings: I will pay thee my vows. 14 Which my lips have uttered, and my mouth hath spoken, when I was in trouble. 13 I'le to thy house burnt-offrings bring, my vows I'le pay to thee: 14 Which my lips uttred, my mouth spake when trouble was on me. 15 I will offer unto thee, burnt sacrifices of fatlings, with the incense of rams: I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah. 15 Of fatlings sacrifices burnt to offer thee I'le take: Yea with rames incense, bullocks, goats an offring I will make. 16 Come and hear all ye that fear God; and I will declare what he hath done for my soul.
17 I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue. 16 All that fear God come hear I'le tell what he did sor my soul: 17 Unto him with my mouth I cri'd, my tongue did him extoll. 18 If I regard iniquitie in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. 19 But verilie God hath heard me: he hath attended to the voice of my prayer. 18 If in my heart I sin regard, the Lord will not me hear: 19 But truely God me heard, and to my prayers voice gave ear: 20 Blessed be God, which hath not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me. 20 O blessed be my God for ay, for that my prayer hee Not turned hath away, nor yet his mercy great from me. PSAL. LXVII. GOd be mercifull unto us, and blesse us: and cause his face to shine upon us. Selah. GOD unto us be mercifull, and do us also blesse, And cause now for to shine on us the brightnesse of his face. Selah.
2 That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all Nations. 2 That thus thy way upon the earth to all men may be knwon, And als among the nations all thy saving health be shown. 3 Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee. 4 O let the nations be glade, and sing for joy: 3 Let people praise thee, let thee praise the people all, O God: 4 O do thou let the Nations for joy sing and be glade: For thou shalt judge the people righteously, and govern the nations upon earth. Selah. 5 Let the people priase thee, O God: let all the people praise thee. For rightly thou shalt people judge, and nations rule on earth: 5 Let people praise thee Lord, and let them all thy praise shew forth. 6 Then shall the earth yeeld her encrease: and God, even our own God shall blesse us. 7 God shall blesse us, and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.
6 Earth then shall increase yeeld, and God our God shall blesse us all; 7 God shall us blesse, and of the earth the ends all fear him shall. PSAL. LXVIII. LEt God arise, let his enemies be scattered; let them also that hate him flee before him. LEt God arise, let those who are his enemies scattred be, And let them all that do him hate before him also flee. 2 As smoak is driven away, so drive them away: as wax melteth before the fire so let the wicked perish at the presence of God. 2 As smoak is driv'n, drive them away, as wax melts fire before, Let at Gods presence wicked men so perish evermore. 3 But let the righteous be glade: let them rejoice before God, yea let them exceedingly rejoice. 3 But let the righteous men be glade; before God by and by, Let them rejoice; yea let them all rejoice exceedingly, 4 Sing unto God, sing praises to his Name: extoll him that rideth upon the heavens, by his Name, IAH, and rejoice before him.
4 Sing to God, to his Name sing praise, extoll him with your voice That rides on heav'ns, by his Name JAH, before him als rejoice. 5 A father of the fatherlesse, and a Iudge of the widows is God in his holy habitation. 5 A father of the fatherlesse, and of the widows case The Lord he is a judge within his holy dwelling place. 6 God setteth the solitary in families: he bringeth out those which are bound with chains, but the rebellious dwell in a dry land. 6 The solitary in families God sets; those which are bound With chains brings out, but rebels all do dwell in a dry ground. 7 O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people: wh thou didst march through the wildernesse. Selah. 7 O God when as thou wentest forth before thy peoples face; And when thou of the wildernesse didst march through all the place. Selah 8 The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God, even Sinai it self was moved at the presence of GOD, the God of Israel.
8 The heav'ns did at Gods presence drop, the earth was shaken als Ev'n at Gods presence Israels God, the Sinai moved was. 9 Thou, O God, didst send a plentifull rain, whereby thou didst confirme thine inheritance, when it was weary. 9 O God, to thine inheritance thou sendst a plenteous rain, Whereby thou when it weary was didst it confirm again. 10 Thy congregation hath dwelt therein: thou, O God, hast prepared of thy goodnesse for the poor. 10 The congregation that is thine hath had its dwelling there: Of thine own goodnesse thou, O God, didst for the poor prepare. 11 The Lord gave the word: great was the companie of those that published it. 12 Kings of armies did flee apace: and she that tarried at home, divided the spoil. 11 God gave the word: the company that publish'd it was great: 12 Apace fled kings of hosts; and she that kept home, spoiles did part. 13 Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.
13 Though ye have lien among the pots, as Doves wings be shall ye With silver cov'rd, her feathers als with gold that yellow be. 14 When the Almightie scattered kings in it, it was as white as snow in Salmon. 15 The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan, an high hill, as the hill of Bashan. 14 It, when God in it scattred kings, as Salmons snow was white: 15 Gods hill is as the bashan hill as bash an hill in hight: 16 Why leap ye, ye high hils this is the hill which God desireth to dwell in, yea, the Lord will dwell in it for ever. 16 Why do ye leap ye hills so high? this is the only hill Where God desires to dwell; yea there the Lord dwell ever will. 17 The charets of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels: the Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the holy place. 17 Gods charets twenty thousand are, of Angels thousand strong: GOD in the holy place is as in Sinai them among.
18 Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivitie captive, thou hast received gifts for men: yea, for the rebellious also, 18 On high thou didst ascend, thou ledst captive captivity, Thou gifts receiv'dst for men, for them that liv'd rebelliously. That the Lord God might dwell among them. 19 Blessed be the Lord, who dailie loadeth us with benefites, even the God of our salva∣tion. Selah. That 'mong them, God the Lord might dwell 19 Blest be God who doth load Us daily with his benefites, ev'n our salvations God. Selah. 20 He that is our God, is the God of sal∣vation: and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death. 20 He of salvation is the God, that is our God so strong, And unto God the Lord from death the issues do belong. 21 But God shall wound the head of his enemies: and the hairie scalp of such a one as goeth on still in his trespasses. 21 But God his en'mies head shall wound; the hairie scalp also
Of such a one as doth still on in his trespasses go. 22 The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will bring my people again from the depths of the sea. 22 I will again, the Lord hath said, bring from the bashan hill, And from the deepths of sea again, my people bring I will. 23 That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and the tongue of thy dogs in the same. 23 That so thy foot may dipped be in bloud of all thy foes: And of thy dogs the tongue also in the same bloud of those. 24 They have seen thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, my King, in the san∣ctuarie. 24 O mighty God they have all seen thy goings that are hy, The going of my God my King within the Sanctuary. 25 The singers went before, the players on instruments followed after; amongst them were the damsels playing with timbrels. 25 Before went Singers, Players next on instruments made way,
Amongst them were the Damosels that did with timbrels play. 26 Blesse ye God in the congregations, even the Lord from the fountain of Israel. 26 Within the congregations God for to blesse accord, From Israels fountain do ye blesse ev'n him that is the Lord. 27 There is little Benjamin with their ru∣ler, the princes of Iudah, and their councell, the princes of Zebulun, and the princes of Naph∣tali. 27 With their head's little Benjamin, there Judahs Princes be, Their councell als, with Zebulons Princes of Naphtalli. 28 Thy God hath commanded thy steength: strengthen, O God, that which thou hast wrought for us. 29 Because of thy temple at Ierusalem, shall kings bring presents unto thee. 8 Thy God commands thy strength: make strong what thou wroughtst for us Lord, 29 At Salem for thy temple Kings shall presents thee afford. 30 Rebuke the companie of spear-men, the multitudde of the buls, with the calves of the
people, till every one submit himself with pieces of silver: scatter thou the people that delight in war. 30 The hosts of spear men, many buls with peoples calves reprove; Till all with▪ silver peece submit, folk scatter, war that love. 31 Princes shall come out of Egypt, Ethio∣pia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God. 31 Those that be Princes great shall then come out of Egypt lands, And Ethiopia unto God shall soon stretch out her hands. 32 Sing unto God, ye kingdomes of the earth: O sing praises unto the Lord. Selah. 32 Ye kingdomes that are of the earth do ye all songs afford, Unto the Lord; O praises now sing ye unto the Lord. 33 To him that rideth▪ upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old: lo, he doth send out his voice, and that a mightie voice. 33 To him on heav'ns of heav'ns that rides which he of old did choise, Lo, he his voice doth thence send out, and that a mighty voice.
34 Ascribe ye strength unto God: his ex∣cellency is over Israel, and his strength is in the clouds. 34 Strength unto God do ye ascribe, for his excellency O're Israel is, and als his strength is in the clouds most hy. 35 O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places▪ the God of Israel is he that giveth strength and power unto his people: blessed be God. 35 Thou from thy holy places Lord, art terrible to see: Hee's Israels God that gives his folk strength, power; God blessed be. PSAL. LXIX. SAve me, O God▪ for the waters are come in unto my soul. O. Thou who art my God, do thou salvation send to me▪ For that unto my very soul come in the waters be. 2 I sink in deep mire where there is no standing: I am come into the deep waters, where the flouds overflow me. 2 Into deep mire, I down do sink where there's no standing now, I am into deep waters come where floods me overflow.
3 I am weary of my crying, my thagat is dried: mine eyes fail, while I walt for my GOD. 3 I of my crying weary am and dryed is my throat, Mine eyes they also do me fail, while for my God I wait. 4. They that hate me without a cause, are moe then the hairs of mine head: 4 Those men that do without a cause unto me hatred bear, They then the the hairs upon my head in greater number are. They that would destroy me, being mine ene∣mies wrongfully, are mightie: then I restored that which I took not away. Who being mine en'mies wrongfully would me destroy, ev'n they Are mighty; then I that restord which I took not away. 5 O God, thou knowest my foolishnesse, and my sins are not hid from thee. 6 Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for my sake: 5 My folie, Lord, thou know'st, my sins they are not hid from thee: 6 Let none be sham'd that on thee wait Lord God of hosts for me,
Let not those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God of Israel. O thou the God of Israel, let those that undertake To seek for thee, not be at all confounded for my sake. 7 Because for thy sake I have born reproach: shame hath covered my face. 8 I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mothers children. 7▪ Because I bare reproach for thee, my face is cov'rd with shame: 8 Strange to my brethren, alient I to mothers children am. 9 For the zeal▪ of thine house hath eaten me up: and the reproaches of them that re∣proached thee, are fallen upon me. 9 For of the house that's thine the zeal it hath up eaten me; On me are their reproaches fall'n that have reproached thee. 10 When I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach. 11 I made sackcloth also my garment: and I became a proverb to them. 10 I wept, and vext my soul with fast reproached for the same;
11 I sackcloath als my garment made their porverb I became. 12 They that sit in the gate, speak against me: and I was the song of the drunkards. 12 The men that in the gate do sit do speak against me wrong, And I of those that drunkards are was made to be the song. 13 But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, O Lord, in an acceptable time: O God, in the multitude of thy mercie hear me, in the truth of thy salvation. 13 But in a time acceptable my pray'r Lord is to thee: In truth of thy salvation, Lord, and mercy great hear me. 14 Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink▪ let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters. 14 Deliver me out of the mire, and me from sinking keep: Save me from those that do me hate, and out of waters deep. 15 Let not the water flood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up, and let not the pit stut her mouth upon me. 15 Let not the water floud ov'rflow, nor deep let me devour:
And for to shut her mouth on me let not the pit have pow'r 16 Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kind∣nesse is good▪ turn unto me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies. 16 Do thou me hear, O Lord, ev'n for thy loving kindnesse good, Turn unto me according to thy mercies multitude. 17 And hide not thy face from thy servant▪ for I am in trouble: hear me speedilie. 18 Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it: deliver me because of mine enemies. 17 Thy face not from thy servant hide▪ in trouble: soon me hear. 18 Redeem and saue me from my foes, unto my soul draw near. 19 Thou hast known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonour; my adversaries are all before thee. 19 Thou my reproach & shame hast known and my dishonour more: Those that mine adversaries be are all now thee before. 20 Reproach hath broken my heart, and I am full of heavinesse: and I looked for some to take pitie, but there was none;
20 Reproach it broken hath my heart, I'm full of heavinesse: I look'd for some to pitie me, but none at all there was. And for comforters but I found none. 21 They gave me also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vineger to drink. And for comforters, but found none. 21 From them I did receive Gall for my meat, and viniger to drink in thirst they gave. 22 Let their table become a snare before them: and that which should have been for their welfare, let it become a trap. 22 Let their own table them before ev'n for a snare be seen, Let it become a trap which should have for their welfare been. 23 Let their eyes be darkned, that they see not: and make their loins continually to shake. 23 That they not see let thou their eyes be darkned by and by, And do thou also make their loins to shake continually. 24 Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathfull anger take hold of them. 24 Powre out thine indignatation upon them manifold.
And let thy wrathfull anger now of each of them take hold. 25 Let their habitation be desolate and  none dwell in their tents▪ 25 Let thou their habitation be desolate alway; And let thou none within their tents as in a dwelling stay. 26 For they persecute him whom thou hast smitten; and they talk to the grief of those whom thou hast wounded. 26 For they do persecute him whom thou smitten hast before, And they talk to the grief of those whom thou hast wounded sore. 27 Adde iniquitie unto their iniquitie, and let them not come into thy righteousnesse. 27 Adde thou iniquitie unto their former wickednesse, And let not such now come at all into thy righteousnesse. 28 Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the righ∣teous. 28 Out of the livings book let them be blotted out by thee;
And with those men that righteous are let them not written be. 29 But I am poor and sorrowfull: let thy salvation (O God) set me up on high. 30 I will praise the Name of God with a song, and will magnifie him with thanksgiving. 29 But Lord, poor sorrowfull I am, let thy health set me hy: 30 I with a song Gods Name will praise, with thanks him magnify. 31 This also shall please the Lord better then an ox, or bullock that hath horns and hoofs. 32 The humle shall see this, and be glad: and your hearts shall live that seek God. 31 Then bull or x with horns and hoofs this God more joy shall give, 32 The humble they this glade shall see, your hearts seek God and live. 33 For the Lord heareth the poor, and de∣spiseth not his prisoners. 34 Let the heaven and earth praise him, the seas, and everie thing that moveth therein. 33 For God the poor hears, and he not his prisoners doth despise, 34 Let heav'n, earth, seas, and every thing that therein moves him praise. 35 For God will save Sion, and will  the cities of Iudah, that they may dwell there,  have it in possession.
35 For God will Judahs cities build, and he will Sion save, That they may dwell therein, and so it in possession have. 36 The seed also of his servants shall inherit it: and they that love his Name, shall dwell therein. 36 Their seed that his own servants are, inherit shall the same, And therein they a dwelling place shall have that love his Name. PSAL LXX. MAke haste, O God, to delivr me, make haste to help me, O Lord. 2 Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul. HAste, Lord, make haste, Lord, me to help, and to deliver me: 2 Let them that for my soul do seek sham'd and confounded be Let them be turned back ward, and put to confusion, that desire my hurt. 3 Let them be turned back for a reward of their shame that say, Aha aha. Who wish my hurt,, turn'd back, and to confusion put be they; 3 Turn'd back for to reward their shame be they, A, , that say.
4 Let all those that seek thee, rejoice and be glad in thee: and let such as love thy salvation, say continually, Let God be magnified. 4 Let those all that thee seek rejoice, and als be glad in thee; Let such as love thy health, say still, God magnified be. 5 But I am poor and needie, make haste un∣to me, O God: thou art my help, and my deli∣verer, O Lord, make no tarrying. 5 But I both poor and needy am, make haste, O God, to me: My help thou and deliv'rer art, Lord, let no tarrying be. PSAL. LXXI. IN thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be put to confusion. O Thou who art my Lord alone, I put my trust in thee: Therefore unto confusion put let thou me never be. 2 Deliver me in thy righteousnesse, and cause me to escape: encline thine ear unto me, and save me. 2 Let thou me in thy righteousnesse from thee deliv'rance have:
Cause me escape, incline thine ear unto me, and me save. 3 Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continually resort: thou hast given com∣mandment to save me, for thou art my rock, and my fortresse. 3 Be thou my habitation strong where still I may resort: Thou gav'st commandment me to save who art my rock and fort. 4 Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the wicked, out of the hand of the unrigh∣teous and cruell man. 4 Do thou out of the wicked hand my God deliver me; Out of the hand of the unjust, and those that cruel be. 5 For thou art my hope, O Lord God▪ thou att my trust from my youth. 6 By thee have I been holden up from the womb: 5 For thou Lord God, my hope and trust art from my youth to me: 6 I still have from the very womb been holden up by thee, Thou art he that took me out of my mothers bowels, my praise shall be coutinually of thee.
That of my mothers bowels out me took, thou ev'n art he, My praises they shall be therefore continually of thee. 7 I am as a wonder unto many: but thou art my strong refuge. 8 Let my mouth be filled with thy praise, and with thy honour all the day. 7 To many as a wonder I'm, but thou my refuge strong, 8▪ Let with thy praise my mouth be fill'd▪ and honour all day long. 9 Cast me not off in the time of old age forsake me not when my strength faileth. 9 In time of old age let me not be then cast off by thee; Do thou me not forsake, when as my strength all faileth me. 10 For mine enemies speak against me: and they that lay wait for my soul, take counsell to∣gether, 10 For those that are mine enemies against me thus they spake, And they that for my soul lay wait, together counsell take. 11 Saying, God hath forsaken him: perse∣cute and take him, for there is none to deliver him.
11 God, say they, hath forsaken him, him persecute and take; For unto him there is none that deliverance can make. 12 O God, be not far from me: O my God▪ make haste for my help. 13 Let them be confounded and consumed, that are adversaries to my soul: 12 O God be thou not from me far my God hast help to me, 13 Let adversaries to my soul consum'd, confounded be. Let them he covered with reproath and disho∣nour, that seek my hurt. 14 But I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more. Let them dishonour and reproach that seek my soul cov'r o're: 14 But I will hope continually and praise thee more and more. 15 My mouth shall shew forth thy righteous∣nesse, and thy salvation all the day: for I know not the numbers thereof. 15 My mouth shall forth thy righteousnes and thy salvation show Ev'n all the day, for I thereof the numbers do not know.
16 I will go in the strength of the Lord God: I will make mention of thy righteousnesse, even of thine onely. 16 In strength of God that is the Lord I will be going still, Make mention of thy rightenesse, ev'n only thine I will. 17 O God, thou hast taught me from my youth: and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works. 17 O God, I even from my youth by thee so have been taught, And hitherto I have declar'd the wonders thou hast wrought. 18 Now also when I am old, and gray∣headed, O God, forsake me not: untill I have shewed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every one that is to come. 18 When I old and grayheaded am, Lord, me forsake not now, Till to this age thy strength and power to all to come I show. 19 Thy righteousnesse also, O God, is very high, who hast done great things: O God, who is like unto thee? 19 Thy righteousnesse, O God, also is very high to see,
Who hast so great things done: O God, who is like unto thee. 20 Thou which hast shewed me great and sore troubles, shalt quicken me again, and shalt bring me up again from the deepths of the earth. 20 Thou which hast troubles great and sore unto me shewed forth, Shalt quicken and bring me again, up from deepths of the earth. 21 Thou shalt increase my greatnesse, and comfort me on every side. 21 The greatnes that is mine thou shalt for to increase provide, And thou shalt also comfort give to me on ev'ry side. 22 I will also praise thee with the psaltery, even thy truth, O my God: unto thee will I sing with the harp, O thou holy One of Israel. 22 My God thee, ev'n thy truth I'le praise the psalterie upon, I with the harp will sing to thee, O Israels holy One. 23 My lips shall greatlie rejoice when I sing unto thee: and my soul which thou hast re∣deemed. 23 My lips they greatly shall rejoice when I sing unto thee,
And this my soul which thou hast made redeemed for to be. 24 My tongue also shall talk of thy righte∣ousnesse all the day long: for they are confoun∣ded, for they are brought unto shame, that seek my hurt. 24 My tongue als of thy righteousnesse shall talk all the day long, For they confounded are and sham'd, that seek to do me wrong. PSAL. LXXII. GIve the king thy judgements, O God, and thy righteousnesse unto the kings son. 2 He shall judge thy people with righteous∣nesse, and thy poor with judgement. THy judgement give the king, O God, his son thy righteousnesse: 2 with right he shall thy people judge, thy poor with uprightnes. 3 The mountains shall bring peace to the peo∣ple: and the little hils, by righteousnesse. 3 The mountains then they shall bring forth unto the people peace, And likewise shall the little hills, this do by righteousnesse. 4 He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressour.
4 Hee'l of the people judge the poor, he of the needy shall The children save, th'oppressour he shall break in pieces small. 5 They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout all generations. 5 Throughout all generations they shall thee fear most sure; As long as shall the Sun and Moon still in their course endure. 6 He shall come down like rain upon the mowen grasse: as showers that water the earth. 6 He shall most graciously come down like rain that's poured forth On the mown grasse, ev'n as the showrs that water all the earth. 7 In his dayes shall the righteous flourish: and abundance of peace so long as the Moon en∣dureth. 7 The righteous man he in his dayes on earth shall flourish sure, And abundance of peace so long as doth the Moon endure. 8 He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth. 8 From sea to sea dominion he shall have by his great worth,
And from the river als unto the ends of all the earth. 9 They that dwell in the wildernesse shall bow before him: and his enemies shall lick the dust. 9 They that dwell in the wildernesse shall bow before him thick, And those that are his enemies, the very dust shall lick. 10 The kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles shall bring presents: the kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts. 10 The Kings of Tarshish and of Isles shall bring him presents all, Both Shebas and the Sebas Kings gifts to him offer shall. 11 Yea, all kings shall fall down before him: and all nations shall serve him. 11 Yea, all that are appointed Kings before him down shall fall; And likewise all the Nations yeeld to him service shall. 12 For he shall deliver the needy when he cryeth: the poor also, and him that hath no helper. 12 For he the needy when he cryes deliver safely shall, The poor also, and him that heer no helper hath at all▪
13 He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy. 13 The man that poor and needy is he shall in merey spare, And also he shall save the souls of those that needy are. 14 He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence: and precious shall their bloud be in his sight. 14 Both from deceit and violence their soul redeem shall he, And also in his sight their bloud most precious shall be. 15 And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba: prayer also shall be made for him continually, and dayly shall he be praised. 15 To him shall Shebas gold be giv'n, and so then live shall he: For him als pray'r shall be made still, he daily prais'd shall be. 16 There shall be an handfull of corn in the earth upon the top of the mountains: 16 There shall of corn into the earth a little handfull ye, And that upon the very tops of mountains that are hye:
The fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and they of the city shall flourish like grasse of the earth. The fruit thereof like Lebanon shall shake, and flourish forth They of the city shall like grasse that is upon the earth. 17 His Name shall endure for ever: his Name shall be continued as long as the sun: and men shall be blessed in him; all nations shall call him blessed. 17 For ever shall his Name endure last as the Sun it shall, In him men shall be blest, and him all Nations blest shall call. 18 Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Is∣rael, who only doth wondrous things. 18 Now blessed be the Lord our God, the God of Israel, Who only doth the things perform in wonders that excell. 19 And blessed be his glorious Name for ever: and let the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen and Amen. 19 His glorious Name be blest for ay▪ and let the whole earth then So with his glory filled be: Amen, yea, and Amen.
PSALME LXXIII. TRuly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart. 2 But as for me, my feet were almost gone▪ my steps had well-nigh slipt. TRuely God's good t'Isra'l, to such, as clean in heart abide: 2 As for me, my feet neer were gone, my steps well nigh did slide, 3 For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperitie of the wicked. 3 For at those men that foolish are envious then was I, When I of them that wicked are saw the prosperity. 4 For there are no bands in their death, but their strength is firm. 5 They are not in trouble as other men: neither are they plagued like other men. 4 For in their death no bands there are but firm their strength is then, 5 Not troubled they, nor plagued are like unto other men. 6 Therefore pride compasseth them about as a chain: violence covereth them as a garment. 6 Therefore their pride, as doth a chain, them compasseth about, And as a garment violence doth cover them throughout.
7 Their eyes stand out with fatnes: they have more then heart could wish. 8 They are corrupt, and speak wickedly con∣cerning oppression: they speak lostily. 7 Their eyes stand out with fat, they have more then their heart could wish: 8 Corrupt they ewdly speak t'oppresse: their speach it loty is. 9 They set their mouth against the heavens; and their tongue walketh through the earth. 10 Therefore his people return hither: and waters of a full cup are wrung out to them. 9 They set their mouth against the heav'ns, through earth als walks their tongue: 10 Thus turns his people; from full cup to them are waters wrung. 11 And they say, How doth God know? and is there knowledge in the most High? 11 And thus they say, how doth at all God know things certainly? And is there knowledge to be had in him that's the most Hy? 12 Behold, these are the ungodly, who pros∣per in the world they increase in riches. 12 Behold those the ungodly are and prosper at their will Here in the world, they do also increase in riches still.
13 Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocency. 13 I verily my heart in vain have cleans'd as I perceive, And in mine innocencie als my hands I washed have. 14 For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastned every morning. 15 If I say, I will speak thus: bobold, I should offend against the generation of thy children. 14 For all day long I plagu'd have been, each morn I chastened was: 15 If thus I say I'le speak, lo I offend thy childrens race. 16 When I thought to know this, it was too painfull for me. 17 Untill I went into the sanctuarie of God, then understood I their end. 16 When I this thought to know, then it too painfull was for me: 17 Till to Gods Sanctuarie I went, then I their end did see. 18 Surely thou didst set them in slipperie places: thou castedst them down into destru∣ction. 19 In slippry places surely thou them diddest set not fast,
And thou into destruction them also down didst cast, 19 How are they brought into desolation as in a moment? they are utterly consumed with terrours. 19 How into desolation brought are in a moment they? With terrours they ev'n utterly consumed are away. 20 As a dream when one awaketh: so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt despise their image. 20 As is a dream when one awakes, even so, O Lord, likewise When thou awakest, thou of them the image shalt despise 21 Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins. 22 So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee. 21 Thus grieved was my heart in me, my reins were pricked sore: 22 So foolish I and ignorant a beast was thee before. 23 Neverthelesse I am continually with thee: thou hast holden me by my right hand. 23 Yet neverthelesse continually I present am with thee:
By my right hand thou hast, O Lord, most safely holden me. 24 Thou shalt guide me with thy counsell, and afterward receive me to glory. 24 Thou with the counsel that is thine a guide shalt mak me have, And afterward thou surely shalt to glory me receive. 25 Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. 25 Who is he whom in Heaven I do have but thee alone? And on the earth that I desire besides thee there is none. 26 My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strenth of my heart, and my portion for ever. 26 My flesh me faileth, and mine heart, but God the strength alone Is of my heart, and als for ay he is my portion. 27 For lo, they that are far from thee, shall perish: thou hast destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee. 27 For lo they that are far from thee most surely perish shall;
Them that a whooring from thee go thou hast destroyed all. 28 But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy works. 28 But it is good for me that I draw neer to God alway; In God the Lord I trust, that all thy works declare I may. PSAL. LXXIIII. O God, why hast thou cast us off for ever? why doth thine anger smoak against the sheep of thy pasture? O God why is it that thou hast cast off for ever us? Why smoaks thine anger 'gainst the sheep of thine own pasture thus? 2 Remember thy congregation which thou hast purchassed of old: 2 The congregation that is thine in thy remembrance hold, Which thou by thine almighty hand hast purchassed of old: The rod of thine inheritance which thou hast redeemed: this mount Sion wherein thou hast dwelt. The rod of thine inheritance which thou redeemed hast:
This mount of Sion wherein thou hast dwelt in time that's past. 3 Lift up thy feet unto the perpetuall desola∣tions: even all that the enemy hath done wic∣kedly in the sanctuary. 3 Thy feet to desolations lift that are perpetuall, That in the Sanctuary the foe hath wickedly done all. 4 Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy con∣gregations: they set up their ensignes for signes. 4 Amidst thy congregations thine enemies do roar; They also do set up for signes their ensignes in great store. 5 A man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick trees. 6 But now they break down the carved work thereof at once, with axes and hammers. 5 A man was famous as he had on trees lift axes thick: 6 But now at once with hammer ax it's carv'd work down they break. 7 They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down the dwelling place of thy Name to the ground. 7 They fire cast in the Sanctuary, and have defil'd the same
By casting down into the ground the dwelling of thy Name. 8 They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them together: they have burnt up all the syna∣gogues of God in the land. 8 Together them destroy let us they in their hearts did say, The synagogues of God burnt up all in the land have they. 9 We see not our signes, there is no more any prophet, neither is there among us any that knoweth how long. 9 Our signes at all we do not see, a prophet us among There is no more; nor any is that knoweth well how long. 10 O God, how long shall the adversary re∣proach? shall tho enemy blaspheme thy Name for ever? 10 How long shall th'adversarie thus, O God reproach with shame? Shall he that is the enemy for ay blaspheme thy Name? 11 Why withdrawest thou thine hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of thy bosom. 12 For God is my king of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth.
11 Thy hand right hand why drawest thou back? it from thy bosome pluck, 12 For God's my King of old, who doth on earth salvation work. 13 Thou didst divide the sea by thy strongth: thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters. 13 The sea thou madest by thy strength divided for to be, And in the waters broken were the Dragons heads by thee. 14 Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wildernesse. 14 The Leviathans heads thou brak'st in pieces, and didst give Him to be meat to people that in wildernesse did live. 15 Thou didst eleave the fountain and the oud: thou driest up mighty rivers. 16 The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou hast prepared the light and the sun. 15 Thou clav'st the fountains, and the food thou rivers dridst of might: 16 The day and night are thine, thou hast prepar'd the Sun and light. 17 Thou hast st all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer and winter.
17 The borders that are of the earth all have been set by thee, The summer and the winter both thou hast them made to be. 18 Remember this, that the enemie hath reproached, O Lord: and that the foolish people have blasphemed thy Name. 18 Lord, that the en'mie hath reproach'd remember thou this same, And that the foolish people als blasphemed have thy Name. 19 O deliver not the soul of thy turtle dove unto the multitude of the wicked: forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever. 19 Not to the wicked multitude thy Turtles soul deliver, The congregation of thy poor forget thou not for ever. 20 Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full of the habita∣tions of crueltie. 20 Unto the Covenant have respect, for habitations ill Of cruelty, the places dark that are on earth do fill. 21 O let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the poor and needy praise thy Name.
21 O let not the oppressed man return again with shame, Let him that poor and needy is give praise unto thy Name. 22 Arise, O God, plead thine own cause, re∣member how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily. 22 Do thou arise, of thine own cause O God the pleader be, Remember how the foolish man reprocheth daily thee. 23 Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up against thee, in∣creaseth continually. 23 Thine en'mies voice forget thou not: the tumult of those hy That up against thee rise, it doth increase continually. PSAL. LXXV. UNto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks: for that thy Name is neer, thy wondrous works declare. TO thee, O God, do we give thanks, we do give thanks to thee: For that thy wondrous works declare thy great name neer to be.
2 When I shall receive the congregation, I will judge uprightly. 3 The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I bear up the pillars of it. Selah. 2 When I th'assembly shall receive, I'le judge uprightly heer: 3 Earth and its dwellers all disolve, its pillars I up bear. 4 I said unto the fools, Deal not foolishly: and to the wicked, Lift not up thehorn. 4 Unto those that were fools I said, deal ye not foolishly; And unto those that wicked are, lift not the horn on hy. 5 Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck, 6 For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south. 5 On high lift not ye up your horn, with stiff neck speak not ye; 6For not from East, nor from the West, nor South promotionsbe. 7 But God is the Iudge: he putteth down one, and strteth up another. 8 For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red: 7 But God's the Judge, he down one puts, and sets another up,
8 For of the Lord within the hand of red wine is a cup. It is full of mixture and he poureth out of the same: but the dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out and drink them. It's full of mixture, he it powres, but so the wicked all That be on earth, the dregs thereof wring out, and drink them shall. 9 But I will declare for ever, I will sing praises to the God of Iacob. 10 All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off; but the horns of the righteous shall be exalted. 9 But I'le for ay declare; I will to Jacobs God sing praise; 10 The wickeds hornes I'le all cut off, but hornes of righteous raise▪ PSAL. LXXVI. IN Iudah is God known: his Name is great in Israel. 2 In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion. IN Judah God is known, great is his Name in Israel: 2 In Salem's als his Tabernacle, In Sion he doth dwell.
3 There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the battell. Selah. 4 Thou art more glorious and excellent then the mountains of prey. 3 There arrows of the bow he brake, the shield, sword, battell-ray, Selah. 4 More glorious thou and excellent art then the hills of prey. 5 The stout hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep, and none of the men of might have found their hands. 5 They that stout hearted were are spoil'd, their sleep they sleeped sound, And none of all the men of might at all their hands have found. 6 At thy rebuke, O God of Iacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a dead sleep. 6 O thou that God of Jacob art, at thy rebuke at last, Into a dead sleep both the horse and chariot are cast. 7 Thou, even thou art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry? 7 Thou, even thou, art he that should be feared with the heart, And who may stand into thy sight when once thou angry art?
8 Thou didst cause judgement to be heard from heaven: the earth feared and was still. 9 When God arose to judgement, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah. 8 From heav'n thou judgement caus'd be heard, earth feared and was still, 9 When God to save all meek of earth did judgement rise untill. Selah. 10 Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: and the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain. 10 Surely the very wrath of man, shall praise unto thee gain, And the remainder of the wrath thou shalt anone restrain. 11 Vow and pay unto the Lord your God: let all that be round about him bring presents un∣him that ought to be feared. 11 Vow to the Lord your God and pay: let to him presents bear All they that are him round about, whom all men ought to fear. 12 He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he s terrible to the kings of the earth. 2 The sprit of them that Princes are cut off by him shall be; nto the Kings upon the earth most terrible is he.
PSALME LXXVII. I Cried unto God with my voice: even unto God with my voice, and he gave ear unto me. UNto the Lord I with my voice, to God I cried have, Ev'n with my voice, and so an ear unto me then he gave. 2 In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord my sore ran in the night, and ceased not: m soul refused to be comforted. 2 In day of trouble God I sought; by night my sore in me Ran and not ceasd; my soul refus'd comforted for to be. 3 I remembred God, and was troubled: complained, and my spirit was overwhelme Selah. 3 In my remembrance God I had and troubled did remain: And overwhelmed was my sprit while I then did complain. Selah. 4 Thou holdest mine eyes waking: I am troubled that cannot speak. 5 I have considered the dayes of old, years of ancient times. 4 Thou waking holdst mine eyes, I not can speak I'm troubled so: 5 I have considered dayes of old, yeers of times long ago.
6 I call to remembrance my song in the night: I commune with mine own heart, and my spirit made diligent search. 6 In time of night I do my song unto remembrance call, I comune with my heart, my sprit made diligent search of all. 7 Will the Lord cast off for ever? and wi he be favourable no more? 8 Is his mercy clean gone for ever? doth his promise fail for evermore? 7 For ever will the Lord cast off and favour shew no more? 8 For ay clean is his mercy gone fails his word evermore? 9 Hath God forgotten to be gracious? hath he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Selah 9 Hath God for to be gracious forgotten altogether? Or hath he in his anger great shut up his mercies tender? Selah. 10 And I said, This is my infirmity: but I will remember the years of the right hand o I the most High. 10 Then said I my infirmity this is, but yet I still Of his right hand that is most high the yeers remember will.
11 I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will remember thy wonders of old. 11 The works that by the Lord are done I'le in remembrance hold; I surely will remember now thy wonders done of old. 12 I will meditate also of all thy works, and talk of thy doings. 13 Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a god as our God▪ 12 Of all thy works I'le meditate, and of thy doings talk▪ 13 What God so great as ours? O God, in Sanctuary thou dost walk. 14 Thou art the God that doest wonders thou hast declared thy strength among the people. 14 Yea thou art the Almighty God that doest wonders strong, Thy strength thou al declared hast the people all among. 15 Thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Iacob and Ioseph. Selah. 15 Thou hast thy people with thine arm redemption made to see, The sons of Jacob and als those that come of Joseph be. Selah.
16 The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee: they were afraid; the depths also were troubled. 16 The waters did thee see, O God, the waters saw thee there, They greatly were afraid also, the depths they troubled were. 17 The clouds poured out water▪ the skies sent out a sound, thine arrows also went abroad. 17 The clouds then water poured out, the skies a sound out sent; In a most fearfull way abroad thine arrows also went. 18 The voice of thy thunder was in the hea∣ven: the lightnings lightned the world, the earth trembled and shook. 18 Thy thunders voice was in the heav'n, the lightnings they did make The world all lightned for to be; the trembling earth did shake. 19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters: and thy footsteps are not known. 19 Thy way it is within the sea, the path that is thine own Is in the waters great, and there thy footsteps are not known.
20 Thou leddest thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. 20 By Moses thine own servants hand and Aarons hand also, Thou even like unto a flock thy people leddest so. PSAL. LXXVIII. GIve ear, O my people, to my law: encline your ears to the words of my mouth. O Ye my people, give ye ear unto the law that's mine, And of my mouth unto the words do ye your ears incline. 2 I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark sayings of old: 3 Which we have heard and known: and our fathers have told us. 2 My mouth shall speak a parable, and sayings dark of old: 3 Which we have heard and also known, and us our fathers told. 4 We will not hide them from their children, shewing to the generation to come the praises of the Lord, and his strength, and his wonderfull works that he hath done. 4 We from their race will not them hide, Gods praises making known
To age to come, and als his strength and wonders he hath done. 5 For he established a testimony in Iacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which he comman∣ded our fathers; that they should make them known to their children. 5 In Jacob he a testimonie did fix, and set a law In Isra'l, and our fathers bad them make their children know. 6 That the generation to come might know them, even the children which should be born: who should arise and declare them to their chil∣dren: 6 That them the generation that was to come might know, Sons to be born, who should arise and to their sons them show. 7 That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God: but keep his commandements: 7 That they in the almighty God their hope might only set, And his commandements might keep, and not Gods works forget. 8 And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn & rebellious generation, a generation that set not their
heart aright: and whose spirit was not sted. fast with God. 8 And might not as their fathers be, a stubborn rebel race; A race in heart not right, whose sprit with God not stedfait was. 9 The children of Ephraim being armed, and carrying bowes, turned back in the day of battell. 9 Then Ephraims children being arm'd, who to them bows did take, Did in the day of battell all together turn the back. 10 They kept not the covenant of God: and refused to walk in his law: 11 And forgat his works: and his wonders that he had shewed them. 10 Gods Covenant they not kept, and in his law refusd to go: 11 His works and wonders they forgat that he to them did show. 12 Marvellous things did he in the sight of their fathers: in the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan. 12 Things marvellous he in the sight did of their fathers yeeld, Within the bounds of Egypt land, within the Zoans field.
13. He divided the sea, and caused them to passe through: and he made the waters to stand as an heap. 13 He did divide the sea, and them causd to passe through the same; And he the waters made to stand, which as an heap became. 14 In the day time also he led them with a cloud: and all the night with a light of fire. 15 He clave the rocks in the wildernesse: and gave them drink as out of the great depths. 14 With cloud by day, with light of fire he all the night them led: 15 In Desert rocks he clave, as from great depths drink furnished. 16 He brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like rivers. 17 And they sinned yet more against him: by provoking the most High in the wildernesse. 16 Streams from the rock he brought, like flouds he waters caus'd run down: 17 Yet sinn'd they more, in Desert they provok'd the Higiest One. 18 And they tempted God in their heart, by asking meat for their lust. 19 Yea, they spake against God: they said, Can God furnish a table in the wildernesse?
18 And God they tempted in their heart for their lust asking meat: 19 Gainst God they spak, can God, they said, in desert table set? 20 Behold, he smote the rock, that the wa∣ters gushed out, and the streames overflowed: Can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people? 20 Lo, he the rock smot, waters gusht, the streams did overflow, Can he give bread als? Can he flesh provide his people now? 21 Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wroth: so a fire was kindled against Iacob, and anger also came up against Israel. 21 Therefore God heard this, and was wroth: a fire 'gainst Jacob so Was kindled, and'gainst Israel came anger up also. 22 Because they beleeved not in God: and trusted not in his salvation. 23 Though he had commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors of heaven. 22 For they believ'd not God, nor trust in his salvation laid: 23 Though clouds above he did command, and heav'ns doores opened.
24 And had rained down manna upon them to eat: and had given them of the corn of heaven: 25 Man did eat angels food: he sent them meat to the full. 24 And Manna rain'd on them, and gave them corn of heav'n to eat, 25 Man Angels food did eat; he them unto the full sent meat. 26 He caused an east-wind to blow in the heaven: and by his power brought in the south∣wind. 26 Then in the heaven he did cause an east wind for to blo: And by his power he did bring the south wind in also. 27 He rained flesh also upon them as dust: and feathered fowls like as the sand of the sea. 28 And he let it fall in the midst of their camp, round about their habitations. 27 On them als rain'd he flesh as dust fouls feathered as sea sand: 28 He let it fall amid their camp round where their dwellings stand. 29 So they did eat and were well filled, for he gave them their own desire. 30 They were not estranged from their lust.
29 So they did eat and were well fill'd, he gave them their desire: 30 And they from that were not estrang'd which their lust did require. But while their meat was yet in their mouths, 31 The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them: and smote down the chosen men of Israel. But while their meat was in their mouths, 31 Gods wrath came on them then▪ And slew their fattest, and smot down Israels chosen men. 32 For all this they sinned still: and be∣leeved not for his wondrous works. 33 Therefore their dayes did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble. 32 For all this sinn'd they still, and not believ'd his wonders then: 33 Therefore in vanity he consum'd their dayes, and years in pain. 34 When he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned, and enquired early af∣ter God. 34 But in the time that he them slew, they sought him with desire: And they return'd, and after God they early did enquire.
35 And they remembred that God was their rock: and the high God their redeemer. 35 And that their rock was God, they did remember by and by, And als that their redeemer was the God that is most y. 36 Neverthelesse, they did flatter him with their mouth: and they lied unto him with their tongues. 36 Yet for all this they with their mouth spake to him flattringly, And likewise also with their tongues they unto him didly. 37 For their heart was not right with him: neither were they stedfast in his covenant. 37 For their deceitfull heart with him in no way right was there, Nor yet they in his covenant together stedfast were. 38 But he being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not: yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath. 31 He mercifull their sin forgave and them he not destroy'd; Yea, oft his anger turn'd away, his wrath not at all imploy'd,
39 For he remembred that they were but flesh, a winde that passeth away and cometh not again. 39 For that they were but flesh he did in memory retain, A wind that passing is away and commeth not again. 40 How oft did they provoke him in the wil∣dernesse, and grieve him in the desert? 40 How oftentimes did they provoke him in the wildernesse? And in the Desert also him grieve by their wickednesse? 41 Yea, they turned back and tempted God, and limited the holy one of Israel. 41 Yea to their sins they turned back, and tempted God anone, And of Isra'l they limited him that's the Holy One. 42 They remembred not his , nor the day when he delivered them from the enemie: 42 They did not his almighty hand remember thankfully, Nor yet the day that he them all sav'd from the enemy. 43 How he had wrought his signes in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan.
43 How that he did within the land of Egypt also yeeld To work his signes, and wonders great within the Zoan field. 44 And had turned their rivers into bloud; and their flouds, that they could not drink. 44 And how he had their rivers all thus turned into blood; And that they could not drink, he did likewise with ev'ry flood. 45 He sent diverse sorts of flies among them, which devoured them: and frogs, which destroy∣ed them. 45 He diverse sorts of flies did send among them to devore▪ And frogs which did upon them there bring a destruction sore. 46 He gave also their increase unto the ca∣terpillar: and their labour unto the locust. 46 Unto the caterpillar then their increase for to have, And to the locust for to eat their labour als he gave. 47 He destroyed their vines with hail: and their Sycomore-trees with frost. 48 He gave up their cattell also to the hail: and their flocks to hot thunderbolts.
47 Their vines with hail, their sycomores he did destroy with frost: 48 Their beasts to hail he gave: their flocks hote thunder bolts did rost. 49 He cast upon them the fiercenesse of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and trouble: by sending evill angels among them. 49 Fierce anger, wrath, he on them cast, and indignation strong, And troubles als, by sending then ill angels them among. 50 He made a way to his anger, he spared not their soul from death: but gave their life over to the pestilence. 50 He to his wrath made way, he not from death their soul did spare, But he unto the pestilence their life gave over there. 51 And smote all the first born in Egypt: the chief of their strength in the tabernacles of Ham: 51 And he in Egypt land did smite the first born all that came; The chief of all their strength that were within the tents of Ham. 52 But made his own people to goe forth like sheep: and guided them in the wildernesse like a flock.
52 But his own people like to sheep he did make forth to go, And like a flock in wildernesse he them all guided so. 53 And he led them on safely, so that they feared not: but the sea overwhelmed their enemies. 53 And he them safely on did lead, so was no fear in them: But these that were their enemies the sea did overwhelm. 54 And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary; even to this mountain which his right hand had purchased. 54 And he of his own Sanctuarie them to the border led, Ev'n to his holy mountain which his right hand purchased. 55 He cast out the heathen also before them, and divided them an inheritance by line, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents. 55 Before them heathens he cast out, by line them did divide An heritage, and Israels Tribes made in their tents abide. 56 Yet they tempted and provoked the most high God: and kept not his testimonies.
56 Yet did they tempt the Lord most high, and him provoked still: His Testimonies that he gave to keep they had no will 57 But turned back, and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they were turned aside like a deceitfull bow. 57 But like their fathers turned back, and dealt unfaithfully; They like a bow were turn'd aside, that shoots deceitfully. 58 For they provoked him to anger with their high place: and moved him to jealousie with their graven images. 58 For unto anger they provokt him with their places hie: And with their graven images him mov'd to jealousie. 59 When God heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel: 60 So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shi∣loh: the tent which he placed among men. 59 When God this heard, he greatly wroth abhorred Israel then: 60 So that he Shilo's tent forsook, the tent he plac'd with men. 61 And delivered his strength into captivity: and his glory into the enemies hand.
61 And he his strength delivered into captivity, And he his glory gave into the hand of th'enemie. 62 He gave his people over also unto the sword: and was wroth with his inheritance. 62 He over his own people then did give the sword unto, And he with his inheritance was very wroth also. 63 The fire consumed their young men: and their maidens were not given to marriage. 64 Their Priests fell by the sword: and their widows made no lamentation. 63 The fire their young men did consume, their maids no mariage had: 64 Their priests did fall then by the sword, their wives no mourning made: 65 Then the Lord awaked as one out of p: and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine. 65 Then as one out of sleep the Lord did to awake incline, And like a mighty man that shouts by reason of his wine. 66 And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a perpetuall reproach.
66 And he then in the hinder parts did smite his en'mie all; Unto reproach he did them put that was perpetuall. 67 Moreover, he refused the tabernacle of Ioseph: and chose not the tribe of Ephraim. 68 But hose the tribe of Iudah: the mount Sion which he loved. 67 He Josephs tent refusd, and he not Ephraims tribe approv'd: 68 But he of Judah chose the tribe, mount Sion which he lov'd, 69 And he built his sanctuary like high pa∣laces: like the earth which he hath established for ever. 69 Like palaces he builded high his Sanctuarie to be, Like to the earth for evermore which stablished hath he. 70 He chose David also his servant, and took him from the sheep-folds: 70 Of David that his servant was, he also choise did make, And he him from the folds of sheep did by his favour take. 71 From following the ewes great with young, he brought him to feed Iacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.
71 Him from ews folowing great with young to feed he did advance His people Jacob, and Isra'l his own inheritance, 72 So hee fed them according to the integrity of his heart: and guided them by the skilful∣nesse of his hans. 72 So he them fed according to his hearts integritie, By of his hands the skilfullnesse, them also guided he. PSAL. LXXIX. O God, the heathen are come into thine inhe∣ritance, thy holy temple have they desiled, they have laid Ierusalem on heaps. LOrd heathens take thine heritage, desiled is by them Thy holy temple, they on heaps have laid Jerusalem. 2 The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the heaven: the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth. 2 The bodies of thy servants dead they have giv'n to be meat To fowls of heav'n; flesh of thy saints to beasts on earth to eat.
3 Their bloud have they shed like water round about Ierusalem: and there was none to bury them. 3 Their blood like water shed they have about Jerusalem, And then there was not one at all there for to bury them. 4 We are become a reproach to our neigh∣bours: a scorn and derision to them that are round about us. 4 Unto our neighbours a reproach at last become are we, A scorn derision unto them that round about us be, 5 How long, Lord, wilt thou be angry: for ever? shall thy jealousie burn like fire▪ 5 How long wilt thou be angry, Lord, for ever shall this e? Shall even like unto a fire, thus burn thy jealousie? 6 Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the kingdome that have not called upon thy Name. 6 Thy wrath out on the heathen powr that never have thee known, And on the kingdomes that thy Name not called have upon.
7 For they have devoured Iacob, and laid laid waste his dwelling place. 7 For those are they of Jacob that devoured have the race, And they have caused for to be laid wast his dwelling place. 8 O remember not against us former iniqui∣ties; let thy ender mercies speedily prevent us: for we are brought very low. 8 Against us mde not former sins, thy tender mercies now Let them prevent us speedily, for we're brought very low. 9 Help us; O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy Name: and deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy Names lake▪ 9 O God our saviour to us help for thy Names glory make: Deliver, purge away our sins ev'n for thine own Names sake. 10 Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? let him be known among the heathen in our sight by the revenging of the bloud of thy servants which is shed. 10 Why, where's their God, should heathen say? let him' mongst them be known, Ev'n by revenging in our sight the blood shed of thine own.
11 Let the sighing of the prisoner come be∣fore thee, according to the greatnes of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die. 11 According to thy power so great, let come before thine eye The prisoners sighs: preserve those that appointed are to dye. 12 And render unto our neighbours seven fold into their bosom, the reproach wherewith they have reproached thee, O Lord. 12 Into our neighbours bosome let so sev'n fold rendred be Their own reproach, wherewith, O Lord, they have reproached thee. 13 So we thy people, and sheep of thy pa∣sture, will give thee thanks for ever: we will shew forth thy praise to all generations. 13 So we thy folk and pasture sheep will thanks give to thee still, Unto all generations thy praise shew forth we will. PSAL. LXXX. GIve ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Ioseph like a flock, thou that dwel∣lest between the cherubims, shine forth. O Isra'ls sheepherd, give thou ear, that Joseph that is thine Leadst like a flock; that dwel'st between the Cherubims, forth shine.
2 Before Ephraim, and Benjamin, and Ma∣nasseh, stir up thy strength, and come and save us▪ 2 In Ephraims and Benjamins, and in Manasses sight O do thou come and us to save do thou stir up thy might. 3 Turn us again, O God: and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. 4 O Lord God of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the prayer of thy people. 3 Lord turn us, cause thy face to shine, and saved be shall we▪ 4 Gainst thy folks prayer, Lord God of hosts, how long wroth wilt thou be. 5 Thou feedest them with the bread of tears, and givest them tears to drink in great mea∣sure. 5 Thou with the bread that is of tear them feedest for their meat, And thou unto them tears dost give to drink in measure great. 6 Thou makest us a strife unto our neigh∣bours: and our enemies laugh among them∣selves. 6 Thou makest us a strife to be our neighbours all unto,
And those that are our en'mies laugh among themselves also. 7 Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved 7 O Lord, that art the God of hosts, turn us again to thee, Cause thou thy face to shine on us and we shall saved be: 8 Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt?  cast out the heathen, and planted it. 9 Thou preparedst room before it: and did, bcause it to take deep root and it filled the land. Thou plantd'st  vine from Egypt brought and cast out heathen men: 9 Thou room it mad'st, deep root it gav'st the land it filled then. 10 The hills were covered with the shadow of it: and the boughs thereof were like the good∣ly cedars. 11 She sent out her boughs unto the sea: and her branches unto the river. 10 Its shade the hills cov'rd, and its boughs were like the Cedars good. 11 Her boughs out to the sea she sent, her branches to the stood. 12 Why hast thou then broken down her
hedges: so that all they which passe by the way do pluck her. 13 The boar out of the wood doth waste it: and the wilde beast of the field doth devour it. 12 Why brakst thou down her hedge that all which passe by pluck her sore? 13 The Boar from wood it wasts, wilde beasts of field do it devore. 14 Return, we beseech thee, O God of hosts look down from heaven, and behold, and visit this vine: 14 O God of hosts, we thee beseech return thou unto thine: Look down from heaven, and behold, and visit thou thi vine. 15 And the vineyard which thy right hand hath planted▪ and the branch that thou madest strong for thy self. 15 And the vineyard which thy right hand hath planted us among, And als the branch that for thy self thou madest to be strong. 16 It is burnt with fire, and it is cut down: they perish at the rebuke of thy countenance. 16 It wholly is burnt up with fire, and als cut down is it, When by thy face they are rebuk'd, they then do perish quite.
17 Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: upon the son of man▪ whom thou madest strong for thy self. 17 Upon the man of thy right hand O let thy hand now be, On him that is the son of man whom thou madst strong for thee. 18 So will not we go back from thee: quic∣ken us, and we will call upon thy Name. 18 So will not we at any time go back from thee at all, O do thou quicken us, and wee upon thy Name will call. 19 Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts, cause thy face to shine and we shall be saved. 19 O Lord, who art the God of Hosts, turn us again to thee: Do thou thy face cause for to shine, and we shall saved be. PSAL. LXXXI. SIng aloud unto God our strength: make a joyfull noise unto the God of Iacob. 2 Take a psalm, and bring hither the tim∣brell: the pleasant harp with the psaltery. TO Jacobs God make joyfull noise, to God our strength loud sing: 2 Take psalme with psaltry, pleasant harp and timbrell hither bring.
3 Blow up the trumpet in the new moon: in the time appointed, on our solemn feast day. 3 Do ye blow up in the new moon, the trumpet for to play, Ev'n in the time appointed thus on our feast solemn day. 4 For this was a statute for Israel: and a law of the God of Iacob. 4 For this for Israel was made a statute to endure; Of him that God of Jacob is it was a law most sure. 5 This he ordained in Ioseph for a testimo∣ny, when he went out thorow the land of Egypt, where I heard a language, that I understood not. 5 This law in Joseph he ordain'd, when he through Egypt land out, where I a language heard I did not understand. 6 I removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands wore delivered▪ from the pots. 6 His shoulder from the burden great I then removed far: And also from the pots by me his hands deliv'red were.
7 Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee, I answered thee in the secret place of thun∣der▪ I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah. 7 Thou call'dst in trouble, I thee sav'd, in secret place of thunder I answer'd thee: I prov'd thee at of Meribah the water. Selah. 8 Hear, O my people, and I will testifie un∣to thee, O Israel, if thou wilt hearken unto me▪ 8 O thou my people, do thou hear, I'le testifie to thee▪ O Israel, if that thou wilt now hearken unto me. 9 There shall no strange God be in thee, nei∣ther shalt thou worship any strange god. 9 There shall not any god at all that strange is in thee be▪ Nor shall there any god that's strange be worshipped by thee. 10 I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. 10 I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of Egypt land: Thy mouth wide open thou, and I will fill it with my hand. 11 But my people would not hearken unto my voice: and Israel would none of me.
11 But yet my people to my voice would not obedient be; And they that are of Israel would then have none of me. 12 So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust: and they walked in their own counsels. 12 Unto the lust of their own heart I did them give up so, And after that in counsells they that were their own did go. 13 O that my people had hearkened unto me: and Israel had walked in my wayes▪ 13 O that my people unto me had hearkned in their dayes, And that the men of Israel had walked in my wayes. 14 I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries 14 I should have soon their enemies▪ subdu'd that them withstand, And against their adversaries I should have turnd my hand. 15 The haters of the Lord should have sub∣mitted themselves unto him: but their time should have endured for ever. 15 Who hate the Lord, should have them∣selves submitted him before:
But as for them, their time should have endur'd for evermore. 16 He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat: and with hony out of the rock should I have satisfied thee. 16 Them with the finest of the wheat fed also should have he; With honey from the rock I should have satisfied thee. PSAL. LXXXII. GOd standeth in the congregation of the migh∣tie: he judgeth among the gods. 2 How long will ye judge unjustly, and ac∣cept the persons of the wicked? Selah. IN Gods assembly God doth stand, among gods judgeth he: 2 How long accepting persons vile unjustly judge will ye? 3 Defend the poor and fatherlesse: do justice to the afflicted and needy. 3 Defend those whom poor in the land and fatherlesse ye see, Unto afflicted justice do, and those that needy be. 4 Deliver the poor and needy; rid them out of the hand of the wicked. 4 Deliver thou those that are poor, and in great need do stand;
Do thou them also safely rid out of the wickeds hand. 5 They know not, neither will they under∣stand, they walk on in darknesse: all the foun∣dations of the earth are out of course. 5 They know not, nor will understand, in darknesse they walk on; All the foundations of the earth out of their course are gone. 6 I have said, ye are gods: and all of you are children of the most High: 7 But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes. 6 I thus have said that ye are gods, the most Highs children all: 7 But ye shall die like men, and like one of the princes fall. 8 Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit all Nations 8 O God at last do thou arise, the earth to judgement call; For those that are the Nations thou shalt inherit all. PSAL. LXXXIII. KEep not thou silence, O God, hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God. 2 For lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lift up the head.
LOrd keep not silence, hold not peace, Lord, be not still in need: 2 For lo, thine en'mies tumult make, who hate thee lift the head! 3 They have taken crafty counsell against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. 3 Against thy people counsell they that crafty is did take, And they against thy hidden ones did consultations make. 4 They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation: that the name of Isra∣el may be no more in remembrance. 4 Come, let from being a Nation us cut them off, they said, That of Isra'l the name no more be in remembrance had. 5 For they have consulted together with one consent they are confederate against thee. 5 Together thus with one consent consulted have they all Confederate they also are against thee great and small. 6 The Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishma∣elites: of Moab, and the Hagarens. 6 Of Edom there the Tabernacles and Ishmaelites were so,
And those that were of Moab come with Hagarens also. 7 Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek: the Phistines, with the inhabitants of Tyre. 8 Assur also is joyned with them, they have holpen the children of Lot. Selah. 7 Gebal, Ammon, and Amalek, with Tyre, Philistines plot: 8 With them is Assur also join'd, they help'd the sons of Lot. 9 Do unto them as unto the Midianites: as to Sisera, as to Iabin at the brook of Kison: 10 Which perished at Endor: they became as dung for the earth. 9 Do to them as to Midlanites, Jabin at brook Kison: 10 And Sis'ra which at Endor fell: as dung they earth were on. 11 Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea, all their princes as Zebah, and as Zalmunna: 11 Like Oreb, and like Zeeb, make their nobles for to fall, Yea, as Zebah, and Zalmunna, make thou their Princes all. 12 Who said, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession.
13 O my God, make them like a wheel  the stubble before the winde. 12 Who said, let in possession us, to us Gods houses take, 13 My God them like a wheele, as straw before the winde them make. 14 As the fire burneth a wood: and as the flamme setteth the mountains on fir. 15 So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. 14 As fire burns wood, and as a flame on fire doth mountains set: 15 Them with thy tempest persecute, thy storm affright them let. 16 Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy Name, O Lord. 17 Let them be confounded and troubled for ever: yea, let them be put to shame and perish▪ 16 O Lord, with shame their faces fill that they may seek thy Name: 17 Confound and trouble them for ay: them perish cause with shame. 18 That men may know that thou, whose Name alone is IEHOVAH, art the most High over all the earth▪ 18 That men may know that thou, whose Name JEHOVAH is alone,
Art the most high, ev'n over all that are the earth upon. PSAL. LXXXIV. HOw amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! O How the tabernacles are that unto thee belong Most amiable, O thou that the Lord of Hosts art strong. 2 My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God. 2 My soul doth long, yea ev'n doth faint at the Lords courts to be: My flesh and heart it crieth out the living God to see. 3 Yea, the sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow a nest for her self, where she may lay her young: even thine altars, O Lord of hosts, my king and my God. 3 The sparrow house, the swallow nest found where her young to lay; Ev'n thine own Altars Lord of hosts my King and God alway. 4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still praising thee. Selah.
5 Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: in whose heart are the wayes of them: 4 Blest are they that dwell in thy house, they still will give thee praise. Selah. 5 Blest is the man whose strength's in thee in whose heart are their wayes. 6 Who passing through the valley of Baca, make it a well: the rain also filleth the pools. 7 The goe from strength to strength: every one of them in Zion appeareth before God. 6 Who passing Bacas vale, make wells, rain fills the pools also▪ 7 To God in Sion each one appeares, from strength to strength they go. 8 O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, O God of Iacob. Selah. 9 Behold, O God our shield: and look upon the face of thine anointed. 8 My prayer hear, Lord God of hosts, O Jacobs God give ear: Selah. 9 O God our shield look, see the face of thine Anointed dear. 10 For a day in thy courts is better then a thousand: I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickednesse. 10 For then a thousand better is one day thy courts within:
My Gods house door I'le rather keep then dwell tends of sin. 11. For the Lord God is a sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk up∣rightly. 11 For God the Lord's a Sun and shield, hee'l grace and glory give, No good thing hee'l withhold from them that uprightly do live. 12▪ O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusteth in thee. 12 O thou that art the Lord, by whom all hostes commanded be, That man he truely blessed . that puts his trust in thee. PSAL. LXXXV. LOrd, thou hast been favourable unto thy land: thou hast brought back the captivitie of Iacob. O Lord, thou hast unto thy land been fav'rable alway, Of Jacob now thou hast brought back the long captivity. 2 Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people: thou hast covered all their sin. Selah. 2 Th'iniquity ev'n of all those that thine own people be
Thou hast forgiv'n; their sin it hath all covred been by the. Selah▪ 3 Thou hast taken away all thy wrath: thou hast turned thy self from the fiercenesse of thine anger. 3 Thou likewise now hast taken all thy wrath away at last, From fiercenesse of thine anger great thy self thou turned hast. 4 Turn us, O God of our salvation: and cause thine anger towards us to cease. 4 O God of our salvation, turn us; let it thee please To cause thine anger that is great now towards us to cease. 5 Wilt thou be angry with us for ever? wilt thou draw out thy anger to all generations? 5 And wilt thou ev'n for evermore be angry so with us Wilt thou to generations all draw out thine anger thus? 6 Wilt thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in thee? 7 Shew us thy mercy, O Lord: and grant us thy salvation. 6 That in thee may thy folk rejoice, wilt thou not us revive?
7▪ O Lord thy mercy to us shew, us thy salvation give. 8 I will hear what God the Lord will speak▪ for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his saints:  let them not turn again to folly▪ 9 I'le hear what God the Lord will speak, hee'l to his people plain And saints speak peace, but let them not to foly turn again. 9▪ Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him: that glory may dwell in our land. 9 Most surely his salvation is nigh to them at hand, That do him▪ fear; that glory may so dwell within our land. 10 Mercy and truth are met together: righ∣teousnesse and peace have kissed each other. 10 Both mercy now and also truth are jointly met together, And righteousnesse and peace also have each one kissed other. 11 Truth shall spring out of the earth: and righteousnesse shall look down from heaven. 12 Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good: and our land shall yeeld her increase. 11 Truth from the earth springs, and from heav'n look down shall righteousnesse:
12 Yea, God shall give that which is good, our land shall yeeld increase, 13 Righteousnesse shall go before him: and shall set us in the way of his steps. 13 And righteousnesse it shall likewise before his presence go, And in the way of his own steps it shall us set also. PSAL. LXXXVI. BOw down thine ear, O Lord, hear me, for I am poor and needy. DO thou bow down thine ear, O Lord▪ hear thou me by and by, Because that I most needy am and very poor am I. 2 Preserve my soul, for I am holy: O thou my God, save thy servant that trusteth in thee. 2 Because I'm holy let my soul by thee preserved be, O thou my God, thy servant save that puts his trust in thee. 3 Be mercifull unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto thee daily. 4 Rejoyce the soul of thy servant: for unto thee (O Lord) do I lift up my soul. 3 Sith Lord I to thee daily cry, be mercifull to me:
4 Thy servants soul rejoice, for I do lift my soul to thee. 5 For thou, Lord, art good and, ready to forgive: and plenteous in mercy  alt them that call upon thee. 5 For thou, Lord, good, and to forgive art ready, and withall In mercy plenteous to all them that do upon thee call. 6 Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer▪ and attend to the voice of my supplications. 7 In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou wilt answer me. 6 Hear Lord my prayer, attend the voice of my requests to thee: 7 I'le on thee call in troublous day▪ for thou wilt answer me. 8 Among the gods there is none like unto thee (O Lord) neither are there any works like unto thy works: 8 Among the gods, Lord, there is none that like is unto thee: Yea, neither are there any works like to thy works that be. 9 All nations whom thou hast made, shall come and worship before thee, O Lord, and shall glorifie thy Name.
9 All nations whom thou hast made, shall come▪ Lord, and the same Before the worship shall, and they shall glorifie thy Name. 10 For thou art great, and dost wondrous things: thou art God alone. 10 For thou exceedingly art great, and by thee als are done Things that indeed most wondrous be, yea thou art God alone. 11 Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy Name. 11 Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth sincere, And do thou so unite my heart, that I thy Name may fear. 12 I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will glorifie thy Name for evermore. 12 O Lord my God with all my heart, praise to thee give will I, And I also for evermore thy Name will glorify. 13 For gerat is thy mercy toward me, and thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest hell. 13 For that thy mercy towards me in greatnes doth excell;
And thou my soul delivered hast from the lowest hell. 14 O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent men have sought af∣ter my soul: and have not set thee before them. 14 The proud'gainst me are risen, Lord, of men assemblies great Most violent sought my soul, and have not thee before them set. 15 But thou, O Lord, art a God full of com∣passion, and gracious: long suffering, and plen∣teous in mercy and truth. 15 But thou Lord of compassion full art God, and gracious, Long suffring, both in mercy great, in truth als plenteous. 16 O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy servant, and save the son of thy handmaid. 16 O do thou turn thy self to me, and on me mercy have: Unto thy servant give thy strength, son of thy handmaid save. 17 Shew me a token for good, that they which hate me, may see it, and be ashamed: be∣cause thou, Lord, hast holpen me, and comfor∣ted me.
17 For good to me a token shew, that who me hate may see, And be asham'd, because, Lord, thou didst help and comfort me. PSAL. LXXXVII. HIs foundation is in the holy mountains. 2 The Lord loveth the gates of Zion, more then all the dwellings of Iacob. IN mountains that most holy are is his foundation: 2 God more then Jacobs dwellings all the gates loves of Zion. 3 Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God Selah. 4 I will make mention of Rachab, and Ba∣bylon, to them that know me; 3 Of thee O city of our God things glorious spoken be: Selah. 4 I'le Babylon and Rachab name to them that do know me. Behold Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia, this man was born there. Behold ye Tyre and also those that of Philistia were▪ With those of Ethiopia this man he born was there. 5 And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the Highest himself shall establish her.
5 And of Zion it shall be said this, that man, born was there; And he that is the Highest one himself shall stablish her. 6 The Lord shall count them when he writeth up the people: that this man was born there. Selah. 7 As well the singers, as the players on in∣struments shall be there: all my springs are in thee. 6 When God the people writs, hee'l count this man there born to be: Selah. 7 With singers players on instruments my springs are all in thee. PSAL. LXXXVIII. O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee. 2 Let my prayer come before thee: incline thine ear unto my cry. LORD GOD, my Saviour, day and night before thee cry'd have I: 2 Before thee let my prayer come, give ear unto my cry. 3 For my soul is full of troubles: and my life draweth nigh unto the grave. 4 I am counted with thm that go down in∣to the pit: I am as a man that hath no strength.
3 For troubles great do fill my soul, my life drawes near the grave: 4 I'm counted with men down in pit, no strength at all I have. 5 Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou remembrest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand. 5 Among the dead free, like the slain, that in the grave do ly, Whom thou no more dost mind; and from thy hand cut off are they. 6 Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit in dark∣nesse, in the deeps. 7 Thy wrath lieth hard upon me: and thou hast afflicted me with all thy waves. Selah. 6 In darknes in the lowest pit in depths me laid thou hast, 7 Thy wrath lies hard on me, with all thy waves thou hast me prest. Selah. 8 Thou hast put away mine acquaintance far from me: thou hast made me an abomination un∣to them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth. 8 Thou mine acquaintan hast put far, abomination so Thou madst me to them, I'm shut up and forth I can not go.
9 Mine eye mourneth by reason of affliction: Lord, I have called daily upon thee: I have stretched out my hands unto thee. 9 By reason of affliction, Lord, mine eye it mourns in me, Upon thee daily have I call'd, and stretcht mine hands to thee. 10 Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead, shall the dead arise, and praise thee. Selah. 10 Wilt thou to those that now are dead shew wonders great that be? Or shall the dead arise again, and praise give unto thee? Selah. 11 Shall thy loving kindnesse be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulnesse in destruction? 11 Thy loving kindnesse shall it be declared in the grave? Or shall men in destruction thy faithfulnesse perceive? 12 Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousnesse in the land of forgetful∣nesse? 12 Shall thy great wonders in the dark, or yet thy righteousnesse Be known to them that in the land are of forgetfulnesse.
13 But unto thee have I cried, O Lord: and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee. 14 Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? 13 But Lord to thee I cri'd, at morn my prayer prevent shall thee: 14 Why dost thou Lord cast off my soul, and hidst thy face from me? 15 I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up: while I suffer thy terrours, I am distracted. 15 Afflicted and up from my youth I ready am to dy? While I thy terrours suffer thus, distracted then am I. 16 Thy fieree wrath goeth over me: thy ter∣rours have cut me off. 17 They came round about me like water: they compassed me about together. 16 Thy terrours they have cut me off, thy fierce wrath goes me over: 17 Like water they me round inclos'd, and compassd me together. 18 Lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darknes. 18 My lover and my friend also far hast thou put from me▪ And into darknes them likewise that mine acquaintance be.
PSALME LXXXIX. I Will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make known thy faith∣fulnesse to all generations. GOds mercies I wil sing for ay, and with my mouth I shall Thy faithfulnes make to be known to generations all. 2 For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever: thy faithfulnesse shalt thou establish in the very heavens. 2 For that still mercy shall be built, I did the same expresse, Establish in the very heav'ns thou shalt thy faithfulnesse, 3 I have made a covenant with my chosen: I have sworn unto David my servant. 3 I with him that's my chosen one a Covenant did make: I have to David sworn, whom I did for my servant take. 4 Thy seed will I establish for ever: and build up thy throne to all generations. Selah. 4 Thy seed establish sure I will for ever not to fall, And also will build up thy Throne to generations all. Selah.
5 And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Lord? thy faithfulnesse also in the congrega∣tion of the saints. 5 The praises of thy wonders, Lord, the heavens shall expresse, In congregations of the Saints also thy faithfulnesse, 6 For who in the heaven can be compared un∣to the Lord, who among the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the Lord. 5 For that to God can be compar'd in heaven who is he? And who among the Mighties sons to God can likened be? 7 God is greatly to be feared in the Assem∣bly of the saints: and to be had in reverence of all them that are about him. 7 In the assembly of the Saints God's greatly fear'd to be: Of all that are him round about he reverenc'd als should e. 8 O Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee, or to thy faithfulnesse round about thee? 8 Lord God of hosts, who is a Lord strong like to thee throughout Or yet unto thy faithfulnesse that is thee round about▪
9 Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest them. 9 The raging that is of thee sea thou rulest at thy will: When as the waves thereof arise, thou mak'st them to be still. 10 Thou hast broken Rachab in pieces, as one that is slain: thou hast scattered thine ene∣mies with thy strong arme. 10 Thou Rachab hast in pieces broke as one that hath been slain; By thy strong arme thine enemies do scattred all remain. 11 The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world and the fulnesse thereof, thou hast founded them. 11 The heav'ns are thine, thine is the earth, as for the world that be, And als the fulnes all thereof, they founded were by thee. 12 The north and the south▪ thou hast cre∣ated them: Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy Name. 12 The northern part and als the south thou hast created them, The Tabor and the Hermon hills rejoice shall in thy Name.
13 Thou hast a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand. 13 Thou hast an arm that mighty is thy hand in all the land It also is exceeding strong, and high is thy right hand. 14 Iustice and judgement are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and truth shall go before thy face. 14 Justice and judgement of thy Throne are made the dwelling place, Both mercy and the truth likewise, shall go before thy face. 15 Blessed is the people that know the joy∣full sound: they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance. 15 Blest is the people that doth know the joyfull sound aright, Of thine own countenance, O Lord, they shall walk in the light. 16 In thy Name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteousnesse shall they be exalted. 16 They in thy Name shall all the day for to rejoice agree, And in the righteousnes that's thine they shall exalted be. 17 For thou art the glory of their strength, and in thy favour our horn shall be exalted.
17 For of the strength that is in them thou art the glory all: And in thy favour high our horn exalted be it shall: 18 For the Lord is our defence: and the holy One of Israel is our King. 19 Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy One, 18 For God is our defence, our King is Israels holy One: 19 Unto thy holy One then thou didst speak in vision. And saidst, I have laid help upon one that is mighty: I have exalted one chosen out of the people. And thus thou saidst, I have laid help upon one that is strong, I also have exalted one from people chois'd among. 20 I have found David my servant: with my holy oyl have I anointed him. 20 I have found David out my self, a servant unto me, Him with my holy oyl I made anointed for to be. 21 With whom my hand shall be established: mine arme also shall strengthen him.
22 The enemy shall not exact upon him: nor the son of wickednesse afflict him. 21 With whom my hand shall stablisht be▪ mine arme shall make him strong: 22 On him the foe shall not exact, nor son of malice wrong. 23 And I will beat down his foes before his face: and plague them that hate him. 23 And  his foes before his face most fiercely down will beat: Yea, I will bring my plagues on them that in their heart him hate. 24 But my faithfulnesse and my mercy shall e with him: and in my Name shall his horn be exalted. 24 But with him shall my faithfulnesse, and als my mercy be, And in my name the horn that's his shall be exalted hie. 25 I will set his hand also in the sea: and his right hand in the rivers. 26 He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my salvation. 25 In sea his hand, and his right hand in rivers set will I, 26 My Father, God, Salvations rock thou art, hee'l to me cry.
27 Also I will make him my first-born: higher then the kings of the earth. 28 My mercy will I keep for him for ever∣more: and my covenant shall stand fast with him. 27 Him my first-born I'le higher make then Kings of all the land: 28 My mercy I'le still keep for him, my covenant fast shall stand. 29 His seed also will I make to endure for ever: and his throne as the dayes of heaven. 30 If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgements: 29 I'le als his seed make still endure, and as heav'ns dayes his throne: 30 But if his seed my law forsake, and judgements walk not on. 31 If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandements; 32 Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. 31 If they my statutes break, and not keep my commandements, 32 I'le visit then their sin with rods, their fault with chastisements. 33 Neverthelesse, my loving kindnesse will I not utterly take from him: nor suffer my faith∣fulnesse to fail.
33 Neverthelesse I not from him my loving kindnesse will Take utterly, nor suffer so my faithfulnesse to fail. 34 My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. 34 The Covenant that I have made I will not break to one; Nor will I alter once the thing out of my lips that's gone. 35 Once have I sworn by my holinesse, that I will not lie unto David. 35 Once even by my holinesse I sworn have solemnly, That unto David any way I would not make a ly. 36 His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me. 36 His blessed seed it shall endure and that for evermore, Yea and his throne as is the Sun, it shall be me before. 37 It shall be established for ever as the moon: and as a faithfull witnesse in heaven. Selah. 37 It as the Moon for evermore eablished stall be,
And as a faithfull witnesse als, within the heavens hie. Selah. 38 But thou hast cast off and abhorred: thou hast been wroth with thine anointed. 38 But thou displeased hast cast off, yea and abhorred both; With him that thine anointed is thou hast been very wroth. 39 Thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant: thou hast profaned his crown, by casting it to the ground. 39 Thou hast thy servants covenant made void for to be found, And thou his Crown profaned hast, by casting it to ground. 40 Thou hast broken down all his hedges: thou hast brought his strong holds to ruine. 41 All that passe by the way spoil him: he is a reproach to his neighbours. 40 Thou all his hedges hast broke down, his strong holds raz'd thou hast: 41 All that passe by the way him spoil, to neighbours he's a jest. 42 Thou hast set up the right hand of his ad∣versaries: thou hast made all his enemies to re∣joyce. 42 Thou hast of his adversaries the right hand set up hie,
And thou hast made his en'mies all rejoiced for to be. 43 Thou hast also turned the edge of his sword, and hast not made him to stand in the battell. 43 The edge thou also of his sword hast turned in his hand, And in the time of battel hast not made him for to stand. 44 Thou hast made his glory to cease: and cast his throne down to the ground. 45 The dayes of his youth hast thou shortned: thou hast covered him with shame. Selah. 44 His glory thou hast made to cease, to ground his throne hast cast, 45 Shortned his dayes of youth, and him with shame thou cov'red hast. Selah. 46 How long, Lord, wilt thou hide thy self for ever? shall thy wrath burn like fire? 46 How long, Lord, wilt thou hide thyself? for ever shall it be? And shall the wrath that in thee is like fire thus burn in thee? 47 Remember how short my time is: where∣fore hast thou made all men in vain. 47 Do thou remember how my time doth heer but short remain:
Yea, wherefore is it so that thou hast made all men in vain? 48 What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah. 48 What man is he that liveth heer, and death shall never see? His soul from power of the grave deliver then shall he? Selah. 49 Lord, where are thy former loving kind∣nesses, which thou swarest unto David in thy truth? 49 Where are thy former kindnesses most loving now, O Lord, Which unto David in thy truth thou swarest by thy word? 50 Remember (Lord) the reproach of thy servants: how I do bear in my bosome the reproach of all the mighty people. 50 O Lord, remember the reproach of us thy servants heer▪ How all the mighty folks reproach I in my bosome bear. 51 Wherewith thine enemies have reproach∣, O Lord, wherewith they have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed. 52 Blessed be the Lord for evermore, Amen and amen.
51 Wherewith thy soes reproach'd where∣of thine Anointed then 52 They steps reproach'd; Blest be the Lord with for ay; Amen, Amen. PSAL. XC. LOrd, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations. 2. Before the mountains were brought forth, LOrd, thou hast been our dwelling place in generations all▪ 2 Before that thou the mountains high to be brought forth didst call. Or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world: even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God. Or ever thou hadst form'd the earth, and all the world abroad, Ev'n thou from everlasting art to everlasting God. 3 Thou turnest man to destruction, and sayest, Return ye children of men. 3 Thou dost unto destruction man that is mortall turn, And unto them thou doest say, Ye sons of men return. 4 For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, when it is past. and as a watch in the night.
4 Because that ev'n a thousand yeers do seem but in thy sight As yesterdey when it is past, and as a watch in night. 5 Thou carriest them away as with a flood▪ they are as a sleep: in the morning they are like grasse which groweth up. 5 They are as sleep, as with a flood thou carriest them away; And in the morning like to grasse which groweth up are they. 6 In the morning it flourisheth, and grow∣eth up: in the evening it is cut down and wi∣thereth. 6 It in the morning groweth up, and then it : And in the ev'ning tide it is cut down, and withereth. 7 For we are consumed by thine anger: and by thy wrath are we troubled. 7 For we alwayes consumed are by anger that's in thee; And likewise by thy fearull wrath sore troubled all are wee. 8 Thou hast set our iniquities before thee: our secret sins in the light of thy countenance. 8 Before thee our iniquities were also set by thee,
In light ev'n of thy countenance our sins that secret be. 9 For all our dayes are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our yeers as a tale that is told. 9 For in thy wrath our dayes away are passd all to an end, And like unto a tale that's told so we our years do spend. 10 The dayes of our years are threescore yeers and ten, and if by reason of strength they be fourscore yeers: 10 The dayes of all our yeers threescore and ten years are, we see: And if by reason of great strength ev'n fourscore yeers they be; Yet is their strength labour and sorrow: for it is soon cut off, and we fly away. Yet is their strength both labour hard, and sorrow every way, For it is very soon cut of, and we do slie away. 11 Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. 12 So teach us to number our dayes, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdome. 11 Who of thine anger knows the power? thy wrath is as thy fear:
12 Teach us to count our dayes, t'apply our hearts to wisedome near. 13 Return (O Lord) how long? and let it pent thee concerning thy servants. 3 Do thou return to us, O Lord, how long to wrath so bent? Concerning those thy servants all now let it thee repent. 14 O satisfie us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice and be glad all our dayes. 14 O with the mercies that are thine us early satisfie, That we rejoice and glad also for all our dayes may be. 15 Make us glade according to the dayes wherein thou hast afflicted us: and the yeares wherein we have seen evill. 15 Make thou us glad according to the dayes we griev'd have been: And als according to the yeers wherein we ill have seen. 16 Let thy work appear unto thy servants: nd thy glorie unto their children. 17 And let the beautie of the Lord our God be upon us. 16 Thy servants and their children let thy work and glory see
17 And let ev'n of the Lord our God the beauty on us be. And establish thou the work of our hands upon us: yea, the work of our hands establish thou it. Do thou upon us of our hands the work establish now; Yea and the work that's of our hands establish it do thou. PSAL. XCI, HE that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. HE that doth in the secret place of the most high reside, Under the shade of him that is th' Almighty shall abide: 2 I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fotresse, my God, in him will I trust. 2 I of the Lord my God will say, He my refuge is still, He is my fortresse and my God, in him put trust I will. 3 Surely, he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noysome pestilence. 3 Assure e unto thee shall give deliverence,
Both from the fowlers snare, and from the noisome pestilence. 4 He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shal thou trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler. 4 He with his feathers cov'r thee shall, thy trust shall surely be Under his wings; a buckler shield his trueth shall be to thee. 5 Thou shalt not be afraid for the terrour by night; nor for the arrow that flieth by day; 5 Thou shalt in no way be afraid for terrour that's by night, Nor for the arrow that doth flye by day while it is light. 6 Nor for the pestilenco that walketh in darknesse; not for the destruction that wasteth at noonday. 6 Nor for the pestilence that walks in darknesse every way. Nor yet for the destruction that wasteth at noon day. 7 A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but it shall not come righhee. 7 A thousand at thy side shall fall, and also thousands ten
At thy right hand: but not at all it shall come nigh thee then. 8 Onely with thine eyes shalt thou behold: and see the reward of the wicked. 8 With thine own eyes thou only shalt behold this thing to be, And of the men that wicked are thou the reward shalt see. 9 Because thou hast made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most High, thy habi∣tation. 9 Because thou, which is my refuge, hast made the Lord alone, Yea ev'n him that is the most High thy habitation. 10 There shall no evill befall thee: neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. 11 For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy wayes. 10 No plague thy dwelling shal come neer, no ill shall thee befall: 11 For thee to keep in all thy wayes his Angels charge he shall. 12 They shall bear thee up in their hands: lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. 12 Up in their hands in dangers great they shall thee bear anone,
Lest thou should dash at unawars thy foot against a stone. 13 Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample underfeet. 13 Upon the Adder tread thou shalt, and on the Lion strong: The Dragon trample under feet thou shalt and lion yong. 14 Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he hath known my Name. 14 I him deliver will, because he set his love on me: I will him set on high because, that known my name hath he. 15 He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be with him in trouble, I will de∣liver him, and honour him. 15 Hee'l call on me, I'le answer him, I will in trouble still Be with him, I'le deliver him and honour him I will. 16 With long life will I satisfie him, and shw him my salvation. 16 Yea with a life that is prolong'd I will him satisfy,
And also my salvation unto him shew will I. PSAL. XCII. IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy Name, O most High: TO render thanks unto the Lord it is a comely thing, And to thy name O thou most High due praises for to sing. 2 To shew forth thy loving kindnesse in the morning: and thy faithfulnesse every night. 2 Thy loving kindnesse to ew forth ev'n in the morning light, And to declare the faithfulnesse that thine is ev'ry night. 3 Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the psaltery: upon the harp, with a solemn sound. 3 Upon an instrument that hath ten strings that do rebound, And also on the psalterie and harp with solemn sound. 4 For thou, Lord, hast made me glad through thy work: I will triumph in the works of thy hands.
4 For thou, O Lord, now through thy work hast made me to be glad: And in the works triumph I will which by thy hands were made. 5 O Lord, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep. 6 A brutish man knoweth not: neither doth a fool understand this. 5 Thy thoughts are very deep, how great are works done by thy hands? 6 A brutish man not knoweth this, a fool not understands. 7 When the wicked spring as the grasse, and when all the workers of iniquity doe flourish; 7 When as those that are wicked men as grasse do spring on hy, And when they also flourish all that work iniquity. It is that they shall be destroyed for ever. 8 But thou, Lord, art most high for ever∣more. It is that they for ever shall destroyed be therefore: 8 But thou O Lord, art the most high, and that for evermore. 9 For lo, thine enemies, O Lord, for lo, thine enemies shall perish: all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.
9 For lo thine en'mies Lord, For lo thine en'mies perish shall: The workers of iniquitie they shall be scattred all. 10 But my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I shall be anointed with fresh oil. 10 But like the horn of unicorne thou shalt my horn for me Exalt on high, and with fresh oyl I shall anointed be. 11 Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies, and mine ears shall hear my desire of the▪ wicked that rise up against me. 11 Mine eye shall also my desire see on mine enemies, Mine ear of ill men my desire shall hear that 'gainst me rise 12 The righteous shall flourish like the palm∣tree, he shall grow like the cedar in Lebanon. 12 The righteous like the palme tree then shall flourish forth anone, He shall like to the Cedar grow that is in Lebanon. 13 Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God. 13 They that within the Lord his house by him fast planted are,
Shall of our God within the courts for ever flourish fair. 14 They shall still bring forth fruit in old age: they shall be fat and flourishing: 14 And in old age most pleasant fruit they also forth shall bring, And furthermore they shall be fat and shall be flourishing. 15 To shew that the Lord is upright: he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousnesse in him. 15 To shew that upright is the Lord, he is a rock to me: And also no unrighteousnesse at all there in him be. PSAL. XCIII. THe Lord reigneth, he is clothed with maje∣sty: the Lord is clothed with strength, wherewith he hath girded himself: THe Lord doth reign, he cloathed is with Majestie throughout, The Lord is cloth'd with strength where∣with he girds himself about. The world also is established, that it cannot be moved. 2 Thy throne is established of old: thou art from everlasting.
The world is also stablished that it can not depart: 2 Of old thy throne is fix'd, and thou from everlasting art. 3 The flouds have lifted up, O Lord, the flouds have lifted up their voice: the flouds lift up their waves. 3 The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods they high their voice Have lifted up; the floods their waves do list up with a noise. 4 The Lord on high is mightier then the noise of many waters: yea, then the mighty waves of the sea. 4 Then many waters noise the Lord is mightier on hie, Yea more then the most mighty waves that are within the sea. 5 Thy testimonies are very sure: holinesse becometh thine house, O Lord, for ever. 5 The testimonies that are thine, are very sure together, And holinesse thy house, O Lord, becometh ev'n for ever. PSAL. XCIV. O Lord God to whom vengeince belongeth: O God to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thy self.
O Lord our God to whom belongs the vengeance as most due, O Lord to whom the vengeance is, thy self now do thou shew. 2 Lift up thy self thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the proud. 3 Lord, how long shall the wicked? how long shall the wicked triumph? 2 Lift up thy self Judge of the earth: reward the proud also. 3 How long, Lord shall ill men? How long shall ill men triumph so? 4 How long shall they utter, and speak hard things? and all the workers of iniquitie boast themselves? 4 How long time shall they utter thus, and speak things hard that be, And all those likewise boast themselves that work iniquitie? 5 They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage. 6 They slay the widow and the stranger: and murther the fatherlesse. 5 Lord, they in pieces break thy folk and heritage distresse: 6 The widow they and stranger slay, and murder fatherlesse.
7 Yet they say, The Lord shall not see: nei∣ther shall the God of Iacob regard it. 8 Understand, O ye brutish among the peo∣ple; and ye fools, when will ye be wise? 7 Yet God shall not regard, say they, nor Jacobs God it see: 8 Ye brutish people understand, fools when wise will ye be? 9 He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he not see? 9 Shall he that planted hath the ear not hear how all things be? And he that formed hath the eye shall he himself not see? 10 He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teacheth man knowledge,  not he know. 10 He that the heathen doth chastise, correct shall he not now? And he that knowledge teacheth man, shall he himself not know? 11 The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity. 12 Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord: and teachest out of thy law: 11 That thoughts of men are vanity the Lord himself he saw:
12 Blest is the man thou chastnest, Lord, and teachest from thy law. 13 That thou mayest give him rest from the days of adversity, untill the pit be digged for the wicked. 13 That thou mayst give him rest from days of great adversitie, Untill that for the wicked man the pit it digged be, 14 For the Lord will not cast off his people: neither will he forsake his inheritance. 14 For sure the Lord will not cast off those that his people be, Nor yet his own inheritance forsake at all will he. 15 But judgement shall return unto righte∣ousnesse: and all the upright in heart shall sol∣low it. 15 But judgement shall return again unto that which is right, And all shall follow after it that are in heart upright. 16 Who will rise up for me against the evill doers? or who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity? 16 Who will for me 'gainst them rise up that doers are of ill,
'Gainst them that work iniquity, who stand up for me will. 17 Unlesse the Lord had been my help: m soul had almost dwelt in silence. 17 Unlesse the Lord had been to me a help, as I have felt, My soul with trouble vexed had almost in silence dwelt. 18 When I said my foot slippeth: thy mer∣cie, O Lord, held me up. 19 In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. 18 When, Lord, I said, my foot doth slip, thy mercy held me right: 19 Thy comforts in my many thoughts they do my soul delight. 20 Shall the throne of iniquitie have follow∣ship with thee, which frames mischief by a law? 20 Shall thus of great iniquity the throne without all aw Have fellowship with thee, which frames mischief, ev'n by a law? 21 They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous: and condemn the in∣nocent bloud. 21 Themselves together gather they against the souls of men
That righteous are; and they the blood that's innocent condemne. 22 But the Lord is my defence: and my God is the rock of my refuge. 23 And he shall bring upon them their own iniuity. 22 But God is my defence, my God rock of refuge is hy, 23 And he upon them all shall bring their own iniquity. And shall cut them off in their own wicked∣nesse: yea, the Lord our God shall cut them off▪ And als in their own wickednesse he all cut off them all: Yea, he that is the Lord our God them so cut off he shall. PSAL. XCV. O Come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyfull noise to the rock of our salvation. COme let us sing unto the Lord, and let us make anone A joyfull noice unto the rock of our salvation. 2 Let us come before his presence with thanks∣giving: and make a joyfull noise unto him with Psalmes. 2 Let us before his presence come with thanksgiving, and take
Unto us Psalmes, that unto him we joyfull noise may make. 3 For the Lord is a great God: and a great king above all gods. 4 In his hands are the deep places of the earth: the strength of the hils is his also. 3 For God a great God, and great King above all gods he is, 4 The depths of earth are in his hand, strength als of hills is his. 5 The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry land. 6 O come, let us worship, and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our Maker. 5 The sea is his, hee't made, his hands the dry land formed well, 6 Come let us worship, let us bow, to God our Maker kneel. 7 For he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand: to day if ye will hear his voice. 7 For he's our God, the people we are of his pasture choise, And of his hand the sheep, if yee to day will hear his voice. 8 Harden not your heart, as in the provoca∣tion, and as in the day of temptation in the wildernesse:
8 Your hearts not harden ye, as in the provocation, And as in desert in the day of the temptation. 9 When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work. 10 Fourty yeers long was I grievd with this generation, 9 When me your fathers tempted prov'd, and als my work did see: 10 I with this race long fourty years was grieved made to be. And said, it is a people that do erre in their hearts: and they have not known my wayes. 11 Unto whom I sware in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest. I said, this people erres in heart, they have not known my way: 11 To whom I sware in wrath that in my rest not go should they. PSAL. XCVI. O Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord all the earth. 2 Sing unto the Lord, blesse his Name: shew forth his salvation from day to day. O Sing a new song to the Lord, to God sing all the earth:
2 To God sing, blesse his Name, his health from day to day shew forth. 3 Declare his glory among the heathen: his wonders among all people. 3 Among the heathen nations ye declare his glory all, His wonders likewise that he doth among the people all. 4 For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared above all gods. 4 For he that is the Lord is great, and greatly he for this Is to be praisd; above all gods he to be feared is. 5 For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the Lord made the heavens. 5 For all the gods of nations they do but idols prove: But by his mighty hand the Lord hath made the Heav'ns above. 6 Honour and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary. 6 Before him there is honour great, and also majesty, And strength, and likewise beauty rare are in his Sanctuary. 7 Give unto the Lord (O ye kindreds of the people) give unto the Lord glory and strength.
7 O kindreds of the people yee unto the Lord afford: Both glory and als strength do ye now give unto the Lord. 8 Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name: bring an offering, and come into his court. 8 Unto the Lord the glory give which to his Name is due: Come ye into his Courts, and do an offring bring with you. 9 O worship the Lord in the beauty of holi∣nesse: fear before him all the earth. 9 In beauty of his holinesse O do the Lord adore, Let all indwellers of the earth fear likewise him before. 10 Say among the heathen, that the Lord reigneth: the world also shall be established, that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people righteously. 10 Among the heathen say God reignes the world not mov'd to be Shall be establi'd; ighteously the people judge hall he. 11 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad: let the sea roar, and the ful∣nesse thereof.
11 O let the heavens all rejoice, and let the earth be glade, And with its fulnesse als the sea let it to roar be made. 12 Let the field be joyfull, and all that is therein: then shall all the trees of the wood re∣joice. 12 And let the field now joy full be, and all that is therein: Then shall the trees of all the wood for to rejoice begin. 13 Before the Lord, for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth: he shall judge the world with righteousnesse, and the people with his truth. 13 Before the Lord because he comes, he comes to judge the earth, He'le judge the world with righteousnes, and people with his truth. PSAL. XCVII. THe Lord reigneth, let the earth rejoice: let the multitude of Isles be glad thereof. THe Lord doth reign, let all the earth for to rejoice be made, And let the multitude of Isles thereof be very glade. 2 Clouds and darknesse are rounnd about him: righteousnesse and judgement are the ha∣bitation of his throne.
2 Clouds darknesse are him round about, and righteousnes that's his With judgement of his glorious throne, the habitation is. 3 A fire goeth before him, and burneth up his enemies round about. 4 His lightnings enlightned the world: the earth saw, and trembled. 3 Fire goes before him, and it round his foes to burn doth make: 4 His lightnings the world enlight'ned the earth did see and shake. 5 The hils melted like wax at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth. 5 The hils in presence of the Lord like wax they melted forth, Ev'n at the presence of the Lord, who ruleth all the earth. 6 The heavens declare his righteousnesse: and all the people see his glory. 6 The heavens they his righteousnesse most clearly do declare, And all the people als do see his glory every where. 7 Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast themselves of idols: worship him all ye gods.
7 All that serve graven images let them confounded be, That do themselves of idols boast: all gods him worship yee. 8 Sion heard, and was glad; and the daugh∣ters of Iudah rejoyced: because of thy judge∣ments, O Lord. 8 Then Sion heard, and als was glad of Judah with accord The daughters did rejoice, because of those thy judgements Lord. 9 For thou, O Lord, art high above all the earth: thou art exalted far above all gods. 9 For thou O Lord art high above all things on earth that are, Likewise above all other gods thou art exalted far. 10 Ye that love the Lord, hate evill; he preserveth the souls of his saints: he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked. 10 Hate evill ye that love the Lord, souls of his saints that be He doth preserve: from wickeds hands them all delivereth he. 11 Light is sown for the righteous: and gladnesse for the upright in heart. 11 For them that righteous are indeed, is sowne a joyfull light,
And gladenesse also for all those that are in heart upright. 12 Rejoyce in the Lord, ye righteous: and give thanks at the remembrance of his holinesse▪ 12 Do ye rejoice now in the Lord, ye men of righteousnesse, And thanks at the remembrance give of his own holinesse. PSAL. XCVIII. O Sing unto the Lord a new song, for he hath done marvellous things: his right hand and his holy arme hath gotten him the vi∣ctory. O Sing a new song to the Lord, for marvells he hath done, His right hand and his holy arme him victory hath won. 2 The Lord hath made known his salvation: his righteousnesse hath he openly shewed in the sight of the heahen. 9 The Lord he his salvation hath made for to be known, In heathens sight his righteousnesse he openly hath shown. 3 He hath remembred his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel: all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
3 To Isra'ls house of mercy he and truth hath mindfull been, Yea the salvation of our God all ends of earth have seen. 4 Make a joyfull noise unto the Lord, all the earth: make a loud noise, and rejoye, and sing praise. 4 O all the earth unto the Lord make ye a joyfull noise, And do ye make a noise aloud; sing praises and rejoice. 5 Sing unto the Lord with the harp: with the harp, and the voice of a psalm 6 With trumpets and with sound of cornet: make a joyfull noise before the Lord, the King. 5 With harp, with harp unto the Lord, with voice of psalmes sing: 6 With Cornets, Trumps make joyfull noise before the Lord, the King. 7 Let the sea roar, and the fulnesse thereof: the world and they that dwell therein. 8 Let the flouds clap their hands and the hils be ioyfull together. 7 The sea let and its fulnesse roar, the world and there that dwell: 8 Let floods clap hands, together let the hils in joy excell.
9 Before the Lord, for he cometh to judge the earth: with righteousnesse shall he judge the world: and the people with equity. 9 Before the Lord for earth to judge he commeth speedily, The world with justice, people als he'le judge with equity. PSAL. XCIX. THe Lord reigneth, let the people tremble▪ he sitteth between the cherubims, let the eorth be moved. THe Lord himself alone doth reign, let all the people quake: He sits between the cherubims, let all the earth now sake. 2 The Lord is great in Sion and he is high above all people. 3 Let them praise thy great and terrible Name: for it is holy. 2 The Lord's in Zion great, and is all people high above: 3 Thy dreadfull great Name let them praise for holy it doth prove. 4 The Kings strength also loveth judgement, thou dost establish equity: thou exutest judge∣ment and righteousnesse in Iacob. 4 The Kings strength als doth judgement love thou setlest uprightnesse:
In Jacob thou dost execute judgement and righteousnesse. 5 Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool: for he is holy. 5 Do ye exalt the Lord our God, at footstool that is his Do ye give worship unto him, for that he holy is. 6 Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his Name: they called upon the Lord, and he answered them. 6 With Moses, Aaron, 'mongst his Priests, Samuell 'mong them that call Upon his Name; they call'd on God, and them he answer'd all. 7 He spake unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept the testimonies, and the ordinance that he gave them. 7 He in the cloudy pillar spake unto them, and they have His Testimonies also kept and ord'nance e them gave. 8 Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God: thou wast a God that orgavest them, though thou tookest vengean of thir inventions. 8 Thou answerdst them, O Lord our God, God that them orgave,
Though thou of their inventions a vengeance then didst crave. 9 Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at  holy hill: for th Lord our God is holy. Do ye exalt the Lord our God, and at his holy hill Do ye him worship; for the Lord our God is holy still. PSAL. C. MAke a joyfull noise unto the Lord, all ye lands. 2. Serve the Lord with gladnesse: come be∣foro his presence with singing. O All ye lands, uno the Lord make ye a joyfull noise: 2 Serve God with gladnes, him before come ye with singing voice. 3 Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is he tha hath made us, and not we our selves: we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture. 3 Know ye the Lord that he is God, he made us and not wee; His people and the sheep likewise we of his pasture be. 4 Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise: be thankfull un∣to him, and blesse his Name.
4 Enter his gates with thanks, and in his courts his praise proclam̄e: Unto him also thankfull be, and dye blesse his Name. 5 For the Lord is good, his mercy is ever lasting: and his truth endureth to all gene rations. 5 For he that is the Lord is good▪ his mercy's eternall; And als his truth it doth endure to generations all. PSAL. CI. I Will sing of mercy and jugement: unto thee, O Lord, will I sing. 2 I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, OF mercy I'le and judgement sing, sing to thee, Lord, I will; 2 I in a perfect way my self behave will wisely still. O when wilt thou come unto me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. O when wilt thou come unto me? I will in every part Within the house that is mine own walk with a perite heart. 3 I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me.
3 I will not set before mine eyes the things that wicked be; I hate their work that turn aside it shall not cleave to me. 4 A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person. 4 A heart also that froward is shall far from me depart: And I will not a person know. that wicked is in heart. 5 Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I cut off: him that hath an high look, and a proud heart will I not suffer. 5 I'le him cut off that slandereth his neighbour privily, Whose look is high, and heart is proud not suffer him will I. 6 Mine eyes shall be upon the faithfull of the land, that they may dwell with me: he that walketh in a perfect way, hee shall serve me. 6 Upon the faithfull of the land mine eye shall be, that they May with me dwel; he serve me shall that walks in perfect way. 7 He that worketh deceit, shall not dwell within my house: he that telleth lies, shall not tarry in my sight.
7 He also that deceit doth work shall in my house not dwell. He shall not tarry in my sight that loveth lies to tell. 8 I will early destroy all the wicked of th land: that I may cut of all wicked doers fro the citie of the Lord. 8 Yea, all the wicked of the land destroy I early will, That from Gods city so I may cut off all doers ill. PSAL. CII, HEar my prayer, O Lord: and let my cry come unto thee. 2 Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble, O Lord my prayer do thou hear, let my cry come to thee: 2 In day when I in trouble am, hide not thy face from me. Encline thie ear unto me in the day when I call, answer me speedily. 3 For my dayes are consumed like smoak: and my bones are burnt as an hearth. Give ear to me; what day I call, with speed me answer make, 3 For as an hearth my bones are burnt my dayes consume like smoak.
4 My heart is smitten, and withered like grasse: so that I forget to at my bread. 4 My heart within m smitten is, and it is withered Like unto grasse: so that I do forget to eat my bread. 5 By reasons of the voice of my groaning' my ons clave to my skin. 6 I am like a pelican of the wildernesse: I am like an owl of the desert. 5 By reason of my groaning voice my bones cleave to my skin, 6 Like Pelican in wildernesse like owl I'm desert in. 7 I watch, ad am as a sparrow alone upon the house top. 7 Yea I do watch, and I am as a sparrow that alone With sorrow heavy sitteth the houses top upon. 8 Mine enemies reproach me all the day: and they that are mad against me, are sworn against me. 8 They all the day do me reproach that en'mies are to me, And they that are against me mad against me sworn they be.
9 For I have eaten ashes like bread: and mingled my drink with weeping. 9 For I the ashes eaten have as if they had been bread; And with my weeping in my drink I have a mingling made 10 Because of thine indignation and th wrath: for thou hast listed me up, and cast me down. 10 Because of wrath that in thee is and indignation: For first thou hast me lifted up and after cast me down. 11 My dayes are like a shadow, that decli∣neth: and I am withered like grasse. 11 My dayes like to a shadow are, that doth declining passe, And I likewise am withered ev'n like unto the grasse. 12 But thou, O Lord, shalt endure for ever: and thy remembrance unto all generations. 12 But thou, O Lord, for ever shalt endure, and als of thee Unto all generations shall the remembrance be. 13 Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion▪ for the time to favour her: yea, the st time is come.
13 Thou shalt arise, and mercy thou shalt have on Zion yet, For now the time to favour her yea come is the time set. 14 For thy servants take pleasure in her stones▪ and favour the dust thereof▪ 14 For in her stones thy servants all their pleasure now do take; Yea, and the very dust thereof they favour for her sake. 15 So the heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord: and all the Kings of the earth thy glory. 15 So of the Lord the heathen shall with rev'rence fear the Name, And to thy glory all the Kings of earth shall do the same. 16 When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory. 17 He will regard the prayer of the desti∣tute, and not despise their prayer. 16 When Zion up the Lord shall build, he'l in his glory rise: 17 The destitutes pray'r he'l regard, their pray'r he'le not despise. 18 This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people which shall be created, shall praise the Lord.
18 For generations yet to come this shall be written all, The folk that shall created be so praise the Lord they shall▪ 19 For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary: from heaven did the Lord behold the earth. 19 For he look'd down hath from the height of all his Sanctuary, The Lord the earth then did behold ev'n from the heavens hye. 20 To hear the groaning of the prisoner: to loose those that are appointed to death: 21 To declare the Name of the Lord in Zi∣on, and his praise in Ierusalem 5 10 To hear the prisoners groanes, to loose to death that ordain'd are. 21 Gods name in Zion, and his praise in Salem to declare. 22 When the people are gathered together: and the kingdomes to serve the Lord. 23 He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my dayes. 22 When people gather, God to serve and Kingdomes so likewise, 23 He weakned in the way my strength, he shortened my dayes.
24 I said, O my God take me not away in the middest of my dayes: thy yeers are through∣out all generations. 24 In middest of my dayes, I said, my God, not now away Do thou me take; thy yeers throughout all generations stay. 25 Of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the work of thy hands. 25 Of old thou the foundation of all the earth hast laid: And als the Heavens are the work which thine own hands have made. 26 They shall perish, but thou shalt endure, yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment: 26 Thou shalt for evermore endure, but they shall perish all, Yea, every one of them wax old ev'n as a garment shall, As a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed. 27 But thou art the same, and thy yoars shall have no end. Thou shalt them as a vesture change, and changed be they shall: 27 But thou the same art, and thy yeers shall have no end at all.
28 The children of thy servants shall con∣tinue: and their seed shall be established before thee. 28 They that the children are of those that servants are to thee Continue shall, their seed it shall before the establish'd be. PSAL. CIII. BLesse the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, blesse his holy Name. 2 Blesse the Lord, O my soul: and forget not all his benefits. BLesse God my soul, his holy Name blesse all that is in me: 2 Blesse God my soul, forget not all his benefites to thee. 3 Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who healeth all thy diseases. 3 Who all those thinc iniquities▪ forgiveth graciously, Who likewise thy diseases all doth heal most perfectly. 4 Who redeemeth thy life from destruction: who crowneth thee with loving kindnesse and tender mercies. 4 Who also doth redeem thy life ev'n from destruction,
Who doth with loving kindnesse thee and tender mercies crown. 5 Who satisfieth thy mouth with good things: so that thy youth is renued like the eagles. 5 Who with abundance of good things doth satisfie thy mouth: So that, ev'n as the Eagles is, renued is thy youth. 6 The Lord extcuteth righteousnesse and judgement for all that are oppressed. 7 He made known his wayes unto Moses: his acts unto the children of Israel. 6 For all oppressd God executs both right and judgement so: 7 His wayes to Moses, he his acts to Israels sons did tho. 8 The Lord is mercifull and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy. 8 The Lord is very mercifull, and he is gracious, He is als unto anger slow, in mercy plenteous. 9 He will not always chid: neither will be keep his anger for ever. 10 He hath not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.
9 He will not chid continually, nor keep his anger still: 10 He dealt not with us as we sin'd nor did reward our ill. 11 For as the heaven is high above the earth: so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. 11 For as the heaven very high above the earth is set, So toward them that do him fear his mercy it is great. 12 As far as the east is from the west: so far hath he removed our transgressions from us. 12 As far as from the western part the east remov'd we see, So far all our transgressions from us remov'd hath he. 13 Like as a father pitieth his children: so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. 13 Like as he that a father is his children pities heer, The Lord so likewise pities them that truely do him fear. 14 For he knoweth our frame, he remem∣breth we are dust. 15 As for man, his dayes are as grasse: as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth. 14 He doth remember we are dust, for he our frame doth know▪
15 Mans dayes are grasse, as flower of field ev'n he doth flourish so. 16 For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more. 16 For over it the winde doth passe, and it is gone therefore, And after that the place thereof shall know it then no more. 17 But the mercy of the Lord is from ever∣lasting to everlasting upon them that foar him: and his righteousnesse unto childrens children. 17 But on them all that do him fear Gods mercy ever is, And unto childrens children als the righteousnesse that's his. 18 To such as keep his covenant: and to those that remember his commandements to do them. 18 To such as keep his covenant, and also those unto; That alwayes his commandements remember them to do. 19 The Lord hath prepared his throne in the heavens: and his kingdome ruleth over all. 19 The Lord himself prepared hath up in the heav'ns his Throne;
The kingdome that to him belongs rules over all alone. 20 Blesse the Lord, ye his angels that excell in strength, that doc his commandements: heark∣ning unto the voice of his word. 20 His Angels that excell in strength, do yee now blesse the Lord, Who his commandements so do and hearken to his word. 21 Blesse ye the Lord, all ye his hosts: ye ministers of his that doc his pleasure. 21 O blesse the Lord all yee his hostes, do yee the same also, Ye that of his are ministers that his good pleasure do. 22 Blesse the Lord, all his works, in all places of his dominion: blesse the Lord, O my soul. 22 All ye his works in places all of his dominion, Blesse ye the Lord; O thou my soul blesse thou the Lord alone. PSAL. CIV. BLesse the Lord, O my soul, O Lord my God, thou art very great: thou art clothed with honour and majesty. BLesse God my soul, O Lord my God thou art exceeding great:
With honour and with majestie thou cloathed art in State. 2 Who coverest thy self with with light, as with a garment: who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain. 2 Who dost with light as with a robe thy self so cov'r about, Who like unto a curtain als the heavens stretchest out. 3 Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters, who maketh the clouds his charet, who walketh upon the wings of the winde. 3 Who of his chambers doth the beams within the waters lay, Who doth the clouds his chariot make, on wings of wind makes way. 4 Who maketh his angels spirits: his mi∣nisters a flaming fire. 5 Who laid the foundations of the earth: that it should not be removed for ever. 4 Who fiaming fire his Ministers, his Angels Sprits doth make: 5 Who earths foundation laid, that it from thence should never shake. 6 Thou coveredst it with the deeps, as with a garment: the waters stood above the mountains. 5 As with a garment with the deep then thou it all didst cover,
Above the mountains every one the waters they stood over. 7 At thy rebuke they fled: at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away. 7 While as by thee they were rebuk'd they fled without delay, And at thy thunders fearfull voice they hasted all away. 8 They goe up by the mountains: they goe down by the valleys, unto the place which thou hast founded for them. 8 They by the mountains do go up; they by the valley ground Go down into the very place, which thou for them didst found. 9 Thou hast set a bound that they may not passe over: that they turn not again to cover the earth. 9 Thou hast a bound set so, that they may not the same passe over, That hence forth they turn not again the earth all for to cover. 10 He sendeth the springs into the valeys which run among the hils. 11 They give drink to every beast of the field: the wilde asses quench their thirst. 10 To valleyes he sends springs, which run among the hills at list.
11 They drink give to each beast of field, wild asses quench their thirst. 12 By them shall the fowles of the heaven have their habitation, which sing among the branches. 12 The fouls that are of heaven there shall have by them along Their pleasant habitation, which branches sing among. 13 He watereth the hils from his chambers▪ the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works▪ 13 And from the chambers that are his hills by him watred be, The earth is satisfied with fruit of works that are from thee. 14 He causeth the grassè to grow for the cattell, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth: 14 He for the cattell causeth grasse, and herb als for to spring, For mans service, that forth he food out of the earth may bring. 15 And wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine: and bread which strengthneth mans heart. 15 And wine that maks mans heart be glade and oyl in every part
To make his face to shine, and bread which strengthneth a mans heart. 16 The trees of the Lord are full of sap: the cedars of Lebanon which he hath planted. 16 The trees that to the Lord belong they full of sap do stand; Of Lebanon the cedars which he planted with his hand. 17 Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the firre trees are her house, 17 Where make their nests wherein to sit the birds melodious, As for the stork, the firre-trees are appointed for her house. 18 The high hils are a refuge for the wilde goats, and the rocks for the conies. 19 He appointed the moon for seasons; the sun knoweth his going down. 18 Wild goats high hills have for refuge, for conies rocks are so: 19 The moon for seasons he appoints, the sun his fall doth know. 20 Thou makest darknesse, and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the forest doe creep forth. 21 The young lions roar after their prey: and seek their meat from God.
20 Thou darknesse mak'st, it's night, when beasts of forrests creep abroad: 21 The lions young roar for their prey, and seek their meat from God. 22 The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in their dens. 23 Man goeth forth unto his work, and to his labour untill the evening. 22 The sun doth rise, they gathred are, and down ly in their den: 23 Man to his work, and labour als goes forth untill the Ev'n. 24 O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdome hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches. 24 How manifold Lord are thy works? in wisdome wonderfull Thou evry one of them hast made, earth's of thy richesse full. 25 So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts. 25 So is this sea that's great and wide, wherein things creeping all For multitude are numberlesse, and beasts both great and small. 26 There go the ships , there is that Levia∣than, whom thou hast made to play therein.
27 These wait all upon thee that thou mayest give them their meat in due season. 26 There go the ships; thou madst therein that Leviath an play: 27 Those on thee wait all, that their meat in due time get they may. 28 That thou givest them they gather thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good. 28 That which thou givest unto them they gather for their food▪ Thy hand thou doest open thu, and they are fill'd with good. 29 Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled, thou takest away their breath, they die, and re∣turn to their dust. 29 Thou hidst thy face they troubled are, thou takst their breath away: They die, and after to their dust return again do they. 30 Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renuest the face of the earth. 30 Thou thine own spirit sendest forth, they are created now▪ And thou the face of all the earth dost after that renew. 31 The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his works. 31 The glory of the mighty Lord it shall endure for ever,
The Lord himself he shall rejoice in all his works together. 32 He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth▪ he toucheth the hils, and they smoak. 32 The earth below doth tremble all when he on it doth look, The mountains also he doth touch, and they together smoak. 33 I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live▪ I will sing praise to my God, while I have my being. 33 As long I to the Lord will sing as I shall life receive, Unto my God sing praise I will while I my being have. 34 My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord. 34 Of him my meditation shall sweet be unto me, Yea in himself that is the Lord I very glade will be. 35 Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more▪ blesse thou the Lord, O my soul, Praise ye the Lord. 35 Let sinners from the earth consume, no more let wicked be; O thou my soul, blesse thou the Lord, praise to the Lord give yee.
PSALME CV. O Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his Name: make known his deeds among the people. 2 Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous works. GIve thanks to God, call on his Name: his deeds to people tell: 2 Sing unto him, psalmes to him sing, talk of his wonders all. 3 Glory ye in his holy Name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord. 3 See that ye in his holy Name to glory do accord, And let the heart of every one rejoice that seek the Lord. 4 Seek the Lord and his strength: seek his face evermore. 4 The Lord Almighty and his strength seek ye in every place, See that also for evermore▪ ye humbly seek his face. 5 Remember his marvellous works that he hath done: his wonders, and the judgements of his mouth. 5 The marv'lous works that he hath done do ye remember now, His wonders and the judgements als which from his mouth did slow.
6 O ye seed of Abraham his servant: yee children of Iacob his chosen. 6 O ye that of Abraham good his servant are the seed, Ev'n ye that Jacobs children are▪ his chosen one indeed. 7 He is the Lord our God: and his judge∣ments are in all the earth. 7 Because he is the mighty Lord who onely is our God, The judgements that are his they are in all the earth abroad. 8 He hath remembred his covenant for ever: the word which he commanded to a thousand ge∣nerations. 8 His covenant he remembred hath for ever for to stand: To thousand generations the word he did command. 9 Which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac; 9 Which covenant himself he made with his own Abraham, And unto Isaac he likewise by oath made sure the same. 10 And confirmed the same unto Iacob for a law: and to Israel for an everlasting co∣venant:
10 And unto Jacob for a law the same he did confirme, To Israel for a covenant that's everlasting firme. 11 Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan: the lot of your inheritance. 11 He said, I of Canaan will the land give unto thee, That it of your inheritance the pleasant lot may be. 12 When they were but a few men in num∣ber: yea very few, and strangers in it. 12 When they thus but in number were a few distressed men▪ Yea very few, and yet this more but strangers in it then. 13 When they went from one nation to ano∣ther: from one kingdome to another people. 23 When as they from one nation another went unto; And to another people als did from one kingdom go. 14 He suffered no man to doe them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for their sakes: 14 By any man he suffred not them wronged for to be: Yea, for their sakes ev'n those that were great kings reproved he.
15 Saying, Touch not mine anointed: and doe my prophets no harm. 15 Then did he say, Touch ye not those that mine anointed be▪ Nor do the rophets any harm that do belong to me. 16 Moreover he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the whole stasse of bread. 16 Moreover he upon the land did for a famine call▪ And of their bread the stasse also in fury brake hee all. 17 He sent a man before them: even Io∣seph who was sold for a servant: 17 Before them he in favour sent a man them to uphold, Ev'n Joseph who to Ishmaelites was for a servant sold▪ 18 Whose feet they hurt with setters: he was laid in iron. 19 Untill the time that his word came: the word of the Lord tried him. 18 Whose feet they did with fetters hurt: in yron he did ly; 19 Untill the time that came his word, the Lords word did him try. 20 The King sent and loosed him: even the ruler of the people, and let him go free.
21 He made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance: 20 The King sent and him loos'd, ev'n him the peoples Prince set free: 21 Him ruler of his substance all, Lord of his house made he. 22 To binde his princes at his pleasure, and teach his senatours wisdom. 22 That he his princes bind with bonds at his good pleasure might, And those that were his senatours should wisdome teach aright▪ 23 Israel also came into Egypt, and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham. 23 The people  of Israel then into Egypt came: And Jacob likewise did sojourn within the land of Ham. 24 And he increased his people greatly, and made them stronger then their enemies. 24 And he his people greatly did increase their foes among, And more then all their enemies he did then make them strong. 25 He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtilly with his servants▪ 25 Their heart he turned for to hate those that his people were,
And also subtilly to deal with his own servants there. 26 He sent Moses his servant; and Aaron whom he had chosen 26 His faithfull servant Moses he unto them also sent, And likewise Aaron whom he then had chosen with him went. 27 They shewed his signes among them: and wonders in the land of Ham. 28 He sent darknes, and made it dark: and they rebelled not against his word. 27 'Mong them his signes and wonders they in Hams land did afford, 28 He darknesse sent and made it dark, they not contemn'd his word. 29 He turned their waters into blood▪ and slew their fish. 30 The land brought forth frogs in abun∣dance, in the chambers of their kings. 29 He turn'd their waters into bloud, their fish he slew in springs: 30 The land in plenty frogs brought forth in chambers of their Kings. 31 He spake, and there came divers sorts of flies: and lice in all their coasts.
31 He spake, and diverse sorts there came of flies, as mighty hosts, And by his finger lyce he made to swarm in all their costs. 32 He gave them hail for rains and flam∣ing fire in their land. 33 He smote their vines also and their fig∣trees: and brake the trees of their coasts. 32 He hail for rain, and flaming fire within their land did make: 33 Their vines and their fig-trees he smot, trees of their costs he brake. 34 He spake and the locusts came, and ca∣terpillars, and that without number: 35 And did eat up all the herbs in their land, and devoured the fruit of their ground. 34 He spake and catterpillars came locusts in number great 35 Ate in their land all herbs, and of their ground devour'd the fruit. 36 He smote also all the first-born in their land: the chief of all their strength. 36 He also did within their land in fury smite at length The first born of the man and beast the chief of all their strength.
37 He brought them forth also with silver and gold: and there was not one feeble person among their tribes. 37 With silver and with gold also he brought them forth along, And not one feeble person there was all their tribes among. 38 Egypt was glad when they departed: for the fear of them fell upon them. 39 He spread a cloud for a covering: and fire to give light in the night. 38 Egypt was glade when they did part, their fear did on them light: 39 He spread a cloud for covering, fire to give light by night. 40 The people asked, and he brought quails: and satisfied them with the bread af heaven. 40 The people asked, and he then brought quails abundantly, And he them all did with the bread of heaven satisfy. 41 He opened the rock, and the waters gushed out: they ran in the dry places like a river. 41 The rock he also opened, and waters gushed out, They like unto a river ran in places dry about.
42 For he remembred his holy promise: and Abraham his servant. 43 And he brought forth his people with joy: and his chosen with gladnesse: 42 For on his holy promise he, and's servant Abra'm thought: 43 With joy his folk, his chosen ones with gladnesse forth he brought. 44 And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the labour of the people. 44 And unto them he did the lands give of the heathen men, And what the peoples labour was they did inherit then. 45 That they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws. Praise ye the Lord. 45 That for the same they might observe the statuts of his word, And keep his laws giv'n unto them: praise give ye to the Lord. PSAL. CVI. PRaise ye the Lord; O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy en∣dureth for ever. PRaise ye the Lord, O give ye thanks unto the Lord together, For he is good; his mercy al endureth fast for ever.
2 Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? who can shew forth all his praise? 3 Blessed are they that keep judgement: and he that doth righteousnesse at all times. 2 Gods mighty acts who utter can, and shew forth all his praise? 3 They blessed are that judgement keep▪ and who doth righteousnesse: 4 Remember me, O Lord, with the favour that thou bearest unto thy people▪ O visit me with thy salvation▪ 4 Do thou remember me, O Lord, with favour thou dost bear Unto thy folk; and visit me with thy salvation near. 5 That I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladnesse of thy nation: that I may glory with thine inheritance: 5 That I thy chosens good may see in thy folks gladnesse glade, That I with thine inheritance to glory may be made. 6 We have sinned with our fathers: we have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly. 6 We with our fathers sinned have, we of iniquity Committed also have the works, we have done wickedly.
7 Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, they remembred not the multitude of thy mercies: 7 Our fathers they in Egypt not thy wonders understood, And they did not remember then thy mercies multitude. But provoked him at the sea▪ even at the Red sea. 8 Neverthelesse he saved them for his Names sake: that he might make his mighty power to be known. But him provok'd at sea, red sea 8 Yet for his Names sake he Them saved, that his mighty power he might make known to be. 9 He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them thorow the depths, as thorow the wildernesse. 9 The red sea als he did rebuke and it then dry was made, So he then through the depths as through the wildernesse them led. 10 And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them: and redeemed them from▪ the hand of the enemy. 10 And he them saved from the hand of him that hated them, And from▪ the enemies hand also he then did them redeem.
11 And the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them left. 12 Then beleeved they his words: they sang his praise. 11 Their foes the waters covered, of them left was not one▪ 12 Then they believed all his words, they sang his praise anone. 13 They soon forgat his works: they wai∣ted not for his counsell: 14 But lusted exceedingly in the wildernesse, and tempted God in the desert. 13 They soon forgate his works; they for his counsell not abode: 14 But lusted much in wildernesse, in desert tempted God. 15 And he gave them their request: but sent leannesse into their soul. 16 They envied Moses also in the camp: and Aaron the saint of the Lord. 15 He gave them their request, but to their soul he leannesse sent: 16 In Camp they Moses did envy, and Aaron the Lords Saint. 17 The earth opened, and swallowed up Da∣than: and covered the company of Abiram. 27 The earth below it opened, and Dathan by and by
Did swallow up, and covered Abirams company. 18 And a fire was kindled in their compa∣ny: the flamme burnt up the wicked. 18 And likewise in their company a fire was kindled then, The flame thereof that did break forth burnt up the wicked men. 19 They made a calf in Horeb: and wor∣shipped the molten image. 19 Upon the hill of Horeb als a golden calf they made, And to the image worship gave that there they molten had. 20 Thus they changed their glory into the si∣militude of an ox that eateth grasse. 20 Thus he that was their glory then by them there changed was Into the likenesse of an Ox that eateth up the grasse. 21 They forgat God their Saviour, which had done great things in Egypt: 21 They God their Saviour so forgat, which by his mighty hand Had in his favour to them done great things in Egypt land. 22 Wondrous works in the land of Ham: and terrible things in the Red sea.
22 Most wondrous works within the land of Ham performed he: And things that were most terrible even hard by the red sea▪ 23 Therefore he said, that he would destroy them; had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them. 23 Therefore he said, he would them slay, had Moses his choise one Not stood in breach, to turn his wrath from their destruction. 24 Yea they despised the pleasant land: they beleeved not his word: 25 But murmured in their tents: and heark∣ned not unto the voice of▪ the Lord. 24 Yea they despisde the pleasant land, they not believ'd his word: 25 But murmur'd in their tents, and not the voice heard of the Lord. 26 Therefore he lifted up his hand against them: to overthrow them in the wildernesse. 7 To overthrow their seed also among the na∣tions, and to scatter them in the lands. 26 Therefore in desert them to slay 'gainst them he lifts his hands: 27 'Mong nations to ov'rthrow their seed, and scatter in the lands.
28 They joyned themselves also unto Baal-Peor: and ate the sacrifices of the dead. 28 To Baal-Peor also they did joine themselves indeed, And sacrifices ate that were then offred to the dead. 29 Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions, and the plague brake in upon them. 29 Thus unto anger they him there provoked by the sin Of their own ill inventions: the plague on them brake in. 30 Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgement: and so the plague was stayed. 30 But Phinehas then there did stand up, and judgement he that day Did execute, and so at last the fearfull plague did stay. 31 And that was counted unto him for righ∣teousnesse▪ unto all generations for evermore. 31 And unto him for righteousnesse that counted was therefore: Yea, unto generations all, and that for evermore. 32 They angred him also at the waters of strife; so that it went ill with Moses for their sakes:
32 They at the waters als of strife then did him angry make, So that it there went very ill with Moses for their sake. 33 Because they provoked his spirit: so that he spake unadvisedly with his lips. 33 Because that they his Spirit thus provoked bitterly, So that he did then with his lips speak unadvisedly. 34 They did not destroy the nations, concer∣ning whom the Lord commanded them: 35 But were mingled among the heathen▪ and learned their works. 34 They as the Lord commanded them the Nations did not slay: 35 But 'mong the heathen mingled were and learned so their way. 36 And they served their idoles: which were a snare unto them. 37 Yee they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils. 36 And they their idols then did serve, which were to them a snare: 37 Yea they to devils did sacrifice their sons and daughters there. 38 And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan,
38 Bloud innocent, yea ev'n their Sons and daughters bloud they shed, Whom to Canaans idols they then sacrifices made. And the land was polluted with blood. 29 Thus were they defiled with their ow works, and went a whoring with their own in ventions. The land polluted was with blood: 39 Their works them did defile, And so they then a whooring went with their inventions vile. 40 Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people: insomuch that he ab∣horred his own inheritance. 40 Against his people kindled was the wrath of God therefore: In so much that he did his own inheritance abhorre. 41 And he gave them into the hand of the heathen, and they that hated them, ruled over them. 41 And he in wrath them gave into the hand of heathen men, And they that them did greatly hate them overruled then. 42 Their enemies also oppressed them: and they were brought into subjection under their
42 They that als were their enemies oppressd them in the land, And they into subjection were brought underneath their hand. 43 Many times did he deliver them: but they provoked him with their counsell, and were brought low for their iniquity. 43 He many times deliv'red them, but with their counsel they Did him provoke, and were brought low for their iniquity. 44 Neverthelesse, he regarded their affli∣ction, when he heard their cry. 45 And he remembred for them his cove∣nant: 44 Yet he their trouble did regard when as their cry he heard: 45 And he the cov'nant that was his for them remembered. And repented according to the multitude of his mercies. 46 He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them captives. After his mercies multitude 46 he did repent: And made Them to be piti'd of all that them captives carri'd had.
47 Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen, to give thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise. 47 O Lord our God do thou us save, from 'mong the heathen gather, To thank thy holy Name, and in thy praise triumph together. 48 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting: and let all the people, say, Amen. Praise ye the Lord. 48 From ever, and for ay the Lord Isra'ls God blessed be, Let all the people say Amen: praise to the Lord give yee. PSAL. CVII. O Give thanks unto the Lord for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever. 2 Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the enemy. THank God for he is good; for ay his mercy during stands: 2 Let Gods redeem'd say so, whom he redeem'd from th'enemies hands, 3 And gathered them out of the lands, from the east and from the west, from the north and from the south. 3 And he likewise out of the lands did gather them distrest,
From South and also from the North, from East and from the West. 4 They wandred in the wildernesse, in a so∣litary way: they found no city to dwell in. 4 They wandred in the wildernesse, a solitary way, They found no city there at all wherein then dwell could they. 5 Hungry and thirsty: their soul fain∣ted in them. 6 Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: and he delivered them out of their di∣stresses. 5 They hungry were, and thirsty als their soul did in them faint: 6 To God they cri'd in straits, who them help in distresses sent. 7 And he led them forth by the right way: that they might go to a city of habitation. 7 And by the way that right is he did lead them forth, that so They of an habitation might to a city go. 8 O that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and for his wonderfull works to the children of men. 8 Oh that men to the Lord would give praise for his goodnesse then,
And for his works so wonderfull unto the sons of men. 9 For he satisfieth the longing soul: and filleth the hungry soul with goodnesse. 9 For he the soul that longing is doth satisfie at will, And he the soul that hungry is doth with his goodnesse fill. 10 Such as sit in darknesse, and in the sha∣dow of death: being bound in affliction and ion: 10 Such as do into darknesse sit, and in deaths shade are found, Who being in affliction, and yron also bound. 11 Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsell of the most High: 11 Because against the words of God they thus rebelled then▪ And of him that is the most High the counsell did contemn. 12 Therefore he brought down their heart with labour: they sell down, and there was none to help. 12 Therefore with labour hard their heart he did bring down anone:
So by the same they down did fall, and there to help was none. 13 Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: and he saved them out of their di∣stresses. 13 Then in the time they troubled were they to the Lord did cry, And out of their distresses them he saved by and by. 14 He brought them out of darknesse and the shadow of death, and brake their bands in sunder. 14 Then did he out of darknesse them, and from deaths shadow take, The bands that were upon them laid in sunder all he brake. 15 O that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and for his wonderfull works to the children of men. 15 Oh that men to the Lord would give praise for his goodnesse then, And for his works so wonderfull unto the sons of men. 16 For he hath broken the gates of brasse and ut the bars of iron in sunder. 16 For he the gates that were of brasse hath broken, and withall
The barres that were of yron strong he cut in sunder all. 17 Fools because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted. 18 Their soul abhorreth all manner of mean and they draw neer unto the gates of death. 17 For their transgression and their sine fools are afflicted heer, 18 All manner of meats their soul abhors, they to deaths gates draw near. 19 Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble▪ he saveth them out of their distresses. 19 The in the time they troubled are they to the Lord do cry, And out of their distresses them he saveth by and by. 20 He sent his word, and healed them: and delivered them from their destructions. 20 Unto them he did send his word, and heal'd them altogether: And he from their destructions did also them diliver. 21 O that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and for his wonderfull works to the children of mem. 21 Oh that men to the Lord would give praise for his goodnesse then,
And for his works so wonderfull unto the sons of men. 22 And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanks∣giving: and declare his works with rejoycing. 22 Of thanks let them all sacrifice the sacrifices rare; And let them with rejoicing great the works of his declare. 23 They that go down to the sea in ships, and do businesse in great waters. 24 These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. 23 Who in great waters businesse do, and go in ships to sea, 24 Within the deep those of the Lord the works and wonders see. 25 For he commandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind: which lifteth up the waves thereof. 25 For he commandement doth give, and stormy wind doth raise, Which lifteth up with violence thereof the raging waves. 26 They mount up to the heaven: they go down again to the depths, their soul is melted because of trouble. 26 They to the heaven do mount up to depths go down again,
Their soul within them melted is, because of trouble then. 27 They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man: and are at their wits end. 28 Then they crie unto the Lord in their trouble: and he bringeth them out of their di∣stresses. 27 Like to one drunk, reel, stagger they, at their wits end they be: 28 Then they in trouble cry to God, them from distresse brings he. 29 He maketh the storm a calm: so that the waves thereof are still. 29 The raging storm to be a calm he maketh at his will. So that the waves thereof are made for to be alwayes still. 30 Then are they glad, because they be quiet▪ so he bringeth them unto their desired haven. 30 Then are they all made to be glade, because they quiet be: So unto their▪ desired hav'n them safely bringeth hee. 31 O that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and for his wonderfull works to the children of men. 31 Oh that men to the Lord would give praise for his goodnesse then,
And for his works so wonderfull unto the sons of men. 32 Let them exalt him also in the congregati∣on of the people, and praise him in the assem∣bly of the Elders. 32 In peoples congregation als let them exalt him farre, And in assembly give him praise of those that Elders are. 33 He turneth rivers into a wildernesse: and the water springs into dry ground. 34 A fruitfull land into barrennesse: for the wickednesse of them that dwell therein. 33 He to dry ground turns water springs, and flouds to wildernesse, 34 For sins of them that dwell therein fat land to barrennesse. 35 He turneth the wildernesse into a stan∣ding water: and dry ground into water∣springs. 5 Into a standing water all the wildernesse he brings: And he the ground that is most dry turnes into water springs. 36 And there he maketh the hungry to dwell: that they may prepare a city for habitation. 36 And there he makes the hungry dwel, that they a city there
Ev'n for a habitation may for themselves prepare. 37 And sowe the fields, and plant vine∣yards: which may yeeld fruits of increase. 37 And plant vineyards abundantly and also sow the field, Which may at last most plenteously the fruits of increase yeeld. 38 He blesseth them also, so that they are multiplied greatly: and suffereth not their cat∣tell to decrease. 38 He also blesseth them, so that they greatly do increase, And doth not suffer any way their cattell to decrease. 39 Again, they are minished and brought low through oppression, affliction, and sorrow. 39 Again they are diminished, and very low brought down, Through sorrow and affliction als, and great oppression. 40 He poureth contempt upon princes: and causeth them to wander in the wilderuesse where there is no way. 40 On princes he doth poure contempt, and causeth them that they Do wander in the wildernesse, wherein there is no way.
41 Yet setteth he the poor on high from af∣fliction, and maketh him familios like a look. 41 Yet he on high those that are poor doth set from miseries, And even like unto a flock he makes him families. 42 The righteous shall see it, and rejoice: and all iniquity shall stop her mouth. 42 They that are righteous shall rejoice, when they the same all see, And then of all iniquity the mouth shall stopped be. 43 Who so is wise and will observe those things: even they shall understand the loving kindnesse of the Lord. 43 Who so is wise and will observe those things how they befall, The loving kindnesse of the Lord well understand they hall. PSAL. CVIII. O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise, even with my glory. 2 Awake psaltery and harp: I my self will awake early. MY heart is fixt, I'le sing and praise, Lord, with my glory still: 2 Awake Harp, Psaltrie, I my self awake now early will.
3 I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people: and I will sing praises unto thee among the nations. 3 O Lord among the people I will praise unto thee bring, And I among the Nations will praises to thee sing. 4 For thy mercy is great above the heavens: and thy truth reacheth unto the clouds. 4 For great thy mercy is above the Heavens highest pitch, And ev'n unto the highest clouds thy truth doth also reach. 5 Be thou exalted, O God, above the hea∣vens: and thy glory above all the earth. 5 Above the Heavens, O our God, exalted high be thou, And let thy glory be above ev'n all the earth below. 6 That thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right hand, and answer me. 6 That those which thy beloved are delivered may be, O with thy right hand do thou save and answer give to me. 7 God hath spoken in his holinesse, I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem: and mete out the valley of Succoth.
7 God in his holinesse did speak, I joyfull will abide, I Succoths valley will met out, and Shechem will divide. 8 Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine, Ephra∣also is the strength of mine head: Iudah is my law-giver. 8 Mine Gilead, mine Manasses is the strength als of mine head Is Ephraim, and Judah he my law-giver is made. 9 Moab is my wash pot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe, over Philistia will I tri∣umph. 9 Moab my washpot is, I'le out my shoe ov'r Edom thro, And over all Philistia I will triumphing go. 10 Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom? 10 Who is he now that will me bring into the city strong? And into Edom who is he that will me lead along? 11 Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us off? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our hosts?
11 O God, thou who hast cast us off, wilt thou the same not do? And wilt not thou, ev'n thou, O God, forth with our armies go? 12 Give us help from trouble: for vain i the help of man. 13 Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our enemies. 12 Do thou from trouble give us help, for mans help vain is all: 13 Through God we shall do valiantly our foes tread down he shall. PSAL. CIX. HOld not thy peace, O God of my praise. 2 For the mouth of the wicked, HOld not thy peace, O thou that art the God of all my praise: 2 For that the mouth of them that are most wicked in their wayes, And the mouth of the deceitfull are opened against me, they have spoken against me with a lying tongue. And of deceitfull men the mouths against me op'ned be, They with a tongue that lying is have spoken against me.
3 They compassed me about also with words of hatred: and fought against me without a cause. 3 They also compassd me about with words from hatred brought, And without any cause from me against me then they fought. 4 For my love they are my adversaries: but I give my self unto prayer. 5 And they have rewarded me evill for good, and hatred for my love. 4 They for my love mine enemies are, but I to pray'r me move: 5 They me rewarded ill for good, and hatred for my love. 6 Set thou a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at his right hand. 7 When he shall be judged, let him be con∣demned: and let his prayer become si. 6 At his right hand let Satan stand, the wicked set him over: 7 Let him condemn'd be when he's judg'd, let sin become his prayer. 8 Let his dayes be few: and let another take his office. 9 Let his children be fatherlesse; and his wife a widow.
8 Few be his dayes, another then let thou his office take: 9 Let fatherlesse his children be, his wife a widow make. 10 Let his children be continually vaga∣bonds, and beg: let them seek their bread also out of their desolate places. 10 His children still as vagabonds a begging let them go, Let from their places desolate them seek their bread also. 11 Let the extortioner catch all that he hath: and let the stranger spoil his labour. 11 Let also the extortioner catch all that's on his soile, And let those that are strangers come and all his labour spoile. 12 Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to favour his fa∣therlesse children: 12 Let mercy none at all extend unto him in distresse: Nor any let to favour be his children fatherlesse. 13 Let his posterity be cut off, and in the generation following let their name be blotted out.
13 And let thou his posterity be all cut off about, And in the following age let then their name be bloted out. 14 Let the iniquity of his fathers be remem∣bred with the Lord, and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out. 14 O let his fathers wickednesse with God remembred be, And let not als his mothers sin be blotted out by thee. 15 Let them be before the Lord continually▪ that he may cut off the memory of them from the earth. 15 Let them all be before the Lord, and that continually, That he of them may from the earth cut of the memory. 16 Because that he remembred not to shew mercy, but persecuted the poor and needy man, that he might even slay the broken in heart. 16 Because that he remembred not his mercy to impart, But did poor needy persecute, to slay the broken in heart. 17 As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him▪ as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him.
17 As he also did cursing love so let it to him go: As blessing was not his delight far from him be it so. 18 As he clothed himself with cursing, like as with his garment: so let it come into his bow∣els like water, 18 As he himself with cursing cloth'd as with his garment, so Into his very bowels down like water let it go, And like oyl into his bones. 19 Let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him: and for a girdle wherewith he is girded continually. And like the oile into his bones: 19 As garments let it be Which covere him, for girdle als wherewith still girded's he. 20 Let this be the reward of mine adversa∣ries from the Lord: and of them that speak evil against my soul. 20 Let this of mine adversaries from God be the reward, And of them that against my soul speak ill without regard. 21 But do thou for me, O God the Lord, for
thy names sake: because thy mercy is good, deli∣ver thou me. 21 But do thou for thine own names sake, O God the Lord for me: Because that good thy mercy is, let me delivered be. 22 For I am poor and needy; and my heart is wounded within me. 22 For I am in a poor estate, and in a needy case: My heart it also wounded is within me in its place. 23 I am gone like the shadow when it decli∣neth, I am tossed up and down as the locust. 2 Like as a shade when it declines, so likewise am I gone, And as the locust also I am tossed up and down. 24 My knees are weak through fasting; and my flesh faileth of fatnesse. 25 I became also a reproach unto them: when they looked upon me, they shaked their heads. 24 My flesh of fatnesse faileth all, my knees through fast are weak: 25 I their reproach became; they look'd, and on me heads did shake.
26 Help me, O Lord my God: O save me according to thy mercy. 27 That they may know that this is thy hand, that thou Lord hast done it. 26 Help me O Lord my God; O save in mercy me anone; 27 That they may know this is thy hand, and that thou hast it done. 28 Let them curse, but blesse thou: when they arise, let them be ashamed, but let thy servant rejoyce. 28 Them let thou curse, but do thou blesse: and when they do arise Let them ashamed be; but let thy servant then rejoice. 29 Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with their own confusion as with a mantle. 29 Let all my foes be cloth'd with shame and let themselves them cover Ev'n with their own confusion as with a mantle over. 30 I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth: yea I will praise him among the mul∣titude. 30 I greatly with my mouth now will give praise unto the Lord, Yea, I among the multitude will praise to him afford.
31 For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor: to save him from those that condemn his soul. 31 For he shall stand at the right hand of him that poore is then, That he may him preserve from those that do his soul condemn. PSAL. CX. THe Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, untill I make thine enemies thy footstool. THe Lord hath said unto my Lord, seat at my right hand take, Untill that those thine enemies thy footstool I do make. 2 The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. 2 The Lord he of thy strength the rod send out of Zion shall: Do thou rule even in the midst of those thine enemies all. 3 Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holinesse from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth. 3 In the day of thy power shall be thy people willing fast:
In holy beauties from mornes wombe dew of thy youth thou hast. 4 The Lord hath sworn, and will not re∣pent, Thou art a priest for ever, after the or∣der of Melchisedek. 4 The Lord himself thus hath he sworn and will repent him never, Of order of Melchisedeck thou art a priest for ever. 5 The Lord at thy right hand shall strike thorow kings in the day of his wrath. 6 He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies; 5 At thy right hand in day of wrath God strike through Kings he will, 6 Among the heathen he shall judge, the place with dead hee'le sill. He shall wound the heads over many countries. 7 He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up the head. He'le wound the heads of those that are set many countries o're, 7 He'l in the way drink of the brook, he'le lift the head therefore, PSAL. CXI. PRaise ye the Lord, I will praise the Lord with my whole heart: in the assemblie of the upright, and in the congregation.
PRaise ye the Lord; with all my heart I'le praise the Lord alone In assembly of upright men and congregation. 2 The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. 3 His work is honourable and glorious: and his righteousnesse endureth for ever. 2 Gods works are great, sought out of all that therein have their pleasure, 3 His work is glorious, hon'rable, his justice lasts for ever. 4 He hath made his wonderfull works to be remembred: the Lord is gracious and full of compassion. 4 He wonderfull his works hath made to be remembred on, The Lord is gracious, and he is full of compassion. 5 He hath given meat unto them that fear im: he will be ever mindfull of his covenant. 5 Unto them all that do him fear meat also giv'n hath he, And mindfull of his Covenant he evermore will be. 6 He hath shewed his people the power of his works, that he may give them the heritage of the heathen.
6 He to his people of his works hath shew'd the power large, That of the heathen he may give to them the heritage. 7 The works of his hands are verity and judgement: all his commandements are sure. 8 They stand fast for ever and ever: and are done in truth and uprightnesse. 7 Works of his hands, truth, judgement are, all's sure he doth command: 8 They done in truth and uprightnesse for ever fast do stand. 9 He sent redemption unto his people, he hath commanded his covenant for ever: holy and re∣verend is his Name. 9 He sent redemption to his folk the Covenant of his He did command for ay; his Name holy and reverend is. 10 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdome, a good understanding have all they hat do his commandments; his praise en∣dureth for ever. 10 Gods fear wisdomes beginning is; good understanding they Have all that his commandements do: his praise endures for ay.
PRaise ye the Lord, blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, that delighteth greatly in his commandements. PRaise ye the Lord, blest is the man that fears the Lord aright, That doth in his commandements greatly himself delight. 2 His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the upright shall be blessed. 2 His seed shall surely mighty be ev'n all the earth upon, Of all the upright blessd shall be the generation. 3 Wealth and riches shall be in his house: and his righteousnesse endureth for ever. 3 And there shall be within his house both wealth and richesse sure; Yea and the righteousnesse that's his for ever doth endure. 4 Vnto the upright there ariseth light in the darknesse: he is gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous. 4 In darknesse there ariseth light to them that upright be, Full of compassion, gracious and righteous is he. 5 A good man sheweth favour and lendeth; be will guide his affairs with discretion.
5 A good man he doth favour shew, and also he doth lend, He with discretion his affairs will guide unto the end. 6 Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in overlasting remembrance. 6 Assuredly for evermore not moved be shall he, In everlasting remembrance the righteous shall be. 7 He shall not be afraid of evill tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. 7 He shall not be afraid of what ill tidings can afford, His heart within him fixed is by trusting in the Lord. 8 His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, untill he see his desire upon his ene∣mies. 8 His heart it is established, he not afraid shall be, Untill upon his enemies that his desire he see. 9 He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor: his righteousnesse endureth for ever: his horn shall be exalted with honour.
9 He hath dispersd and giv'n to poor, his righteousnesse for ever Endureth fast; his horn it shall exalted be with honour. 10 The wicked shall see it, and e grieved; he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away: the desire of the wicked shall perish. 10 The wicked greived shall it see, his teeth he gnashing all Shall melt away; and the desire of ill men perish shall. PSAL. CXIII. PRaise ye the Lord. Praise, O ye servants of the Lord: praise the Name of the Lord. 2 Blessed be the Name of the Lord: from this time forth and for evermore. PRaise God, O ye Gods servants praise, the Name of God praise ye: 2 From this time forth the Name of God for ever blessed be. 3 From the rising of the sun unto the go∣ing down of the same: the Lords Name is to be praised. 3 Ev'n from the rising of the sun unto his going down, The Name of him that is the Lord must praisd be with renown.
4 The Lord is high above all nations: and his glory above the heavens. 4 The Lord above all Nations exalted high doth prove, The glory that to him belongs the heavens is above. 5 Who is like unto the Lord our God: who dwelleth on high: 6 Who humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the earth? 5 To God our Lord that dwels on high O who is like in worth: 6 Himself that humbleth to behold things in the heav'n and earth? 7 He raiseth up the poor out of the dust: and lifteth the needy out of the dunghill▪ 8 That he may set him with Princes: even with the Princes of his people. 7 From dust he doth the poor raise up from dunghill needy lift: 8 That he with Princes, princes of his people may him set. 9 He maketh the barren woman to keep house; to be a joyfull mother of children: Praise ye the Lord. 9 The barren woman to keep house he maketh, and to be
A mother of her children glade; praise to the Lord give yee. PSAL. CXIV. WHen Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Iacob from a people of strange language: WHen those that were of Israel went out of Egypt there; And Jacobs house a people from that of strange language were. 2 Iudah was his sanctuary: and Israel his dominion. 3 The sea saw it, and fled: Iordan was driven back. 2 His Sanctuary Judah was, his Kingdome was Isra'l. 3 The sea it saw, and it did flee, driv'n back was Jordan all. 4 The mountains skipped like rams: and the little hils like lambs. 5 What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fled∣dest, thou Iordan, that thou wast driven back? 4 Like rams the mountains, little hills like lambs did skipping make: 5 Why fledst thou sea? thou Jordan als that thou wast driven back. 6 Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams: and ye little hils like lambs?
6 And likewise ye the mountains high that ye did skip like rams? And ye the hills that little are like to the younger lambs? 7 Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the God of Iacob: 7 Now at the presence of the Lord earth tremble thou for fear: Yea at the presence of the God of Jacob to him dear. 8 Which turned the rock into a standing wa∣ter: the flint into a fountain of waters. 8 Which into waters turn'd the rock there standing like a lake, And in the flint a fountain fair of waters then did make. PSAL. CXV. NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory: for thy mercy, and for thy truths sake. NOt to us Lord, not unto us, but do thou glory take Unto thy Name, both for thy truth and for thy mercies sake. 2 Wherefore should the heathen say: Where is now their God? 3 But our God is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he pleased.
2 Wherefore should thus the heathen say, where is their God now gone? But in the heavens is our God, he what he pleas'd hath done. 4 Their idols are silver and gold: the work of mens hands. 5 They have mouths, but they speak not▪ eyes have they, but they see not. 4 Their idols silver are and gold, works of mens hands they be: 5 Mouths have they, but they do not speak, eyes have they but not see. 6 They have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they smell not. 7 They have hands but they handle not: feet have they, but they walk not: neither speak they through their throat. 6 Ears have they but hear not, they have a nose but smell they not: 7 Their hands not handle, feet not walk, nor speak they through their throat. 8 They that make them, are like unto them: so is every one that trusteth in them. 9 O Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their help and their shield. 8 They that them make are like to them, who trust in them, so be;
9 O Isra'l trust thou in the Lord, their help and shield is he. 10 O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord▪ he is their help and their sheild. 11 Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield. 10 O Aarons house trust in the Lord; their help and shield is he, 11 Ye that fear God trust in the Lord, their help and shield is he. 12 The Lord hath been mindfull of us, he will blesse us, he will blesse the house of Israel: he will blesse the house of Aaron. 12 The Lord of us hath mindfull been, yea he will blesse us still, He will blesse Isra'ls house, the house of Aaron blesse he will. 13 He will blesse them that fear the Lord▪ both small and great. 14 The Lord shall increase you more and more: you, and your children. 13 He will them blesse that fear the Lord, and that both great and small: 14 The Lord increase you more and more you and your children shall. 15 You are blessed of the Lord: which made heaven and earth.
16 The heaven, even the heavens are the Lords: but the earth hath he given to the chil∣dren of men. 5 You of the Lord all blessed are, which made the earth and heav'n: 6 The heav'n, the heav'ns are Gods, but he earth to mens sons hath giv'n. 17 The dead praise not the Lord: neither any that go down into silence. 18 But we will blesse the Lord, from this time forth and for overmore. Praise the Lord. 17 The dead, nor who to silence go Gods praise do not record▪ 18 But henceforth and for evermore wee'le blesse God; praise the Lord. PSAL. CXVI. I Love the Lord because he hath heard my voice, and my supplications. 2 Because he hath enclined his ear unto me: therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. I Love the Lord, because my voice, and prayers heard hath he: 2 I while I live will call on him who bow'd his ear to me. 3 The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell got hold upon me: I found trouble and sorrow.
3 The sorrows that I had of death encompassed me round; And on me pains of hell got hold, I trouble sorrow found. 4 Then called I upon the Name of the Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul. 4 Upon the Name then of the Lord I called in this speech: Do thou deliver this my soul, O Lord, I thee beseech. 5 Gracious is the Lord, and righteous: yea, our God is mercifull. 6 The Lord preserveth the simple: I was brought low, and he helped me. 5 God gracious and righteous is, yea mercifull's our Lord▪ 6 God saves the simple; he to me brought low, did help afford. 7 Return unto thy rest, O my soul: for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee. 7 Do thou return unto thy rest O thou my soul in me, For bountifully hath the Lord in all things dealt with thee▪ 8 For thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling.
For this my soul it was from death delivered by thee, Mine eyes from tears, and als my feet from falling thou didst free. 9 I will walk before the Lord, in the land of the living. 10 I beleeved, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted. 9 I in the land of living men will walk the Lord before: 10 I did believe, therefore I spake: I was afflicted sore. 11 I said in my hast; All men are liers. 12 What shall I render unto the Lord▪ for all his benefites towards me? 11 When I was in my haste, I said, that all men liers be; 12 What shall I render God for all his benefites to me? 13 I will take the cup of salvation: and call upon the Name of the Lord. 14 I will pay my vows unto the Lord: now in the presence of all his people. 13 I'le of salvation take the cup, on Gods Name will I call: 14 I'le pay my vows now to the Lord before his people all:
15 Precious in the sight of the Lord: is the death of his saints. 16 O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid: thou hast loosed my bonds. 15 In Gods sight his Saints death is dear: 16 Lord I'm thy servant fast, Thy servant I'm, thy handmaids son▪ my bonds thou loosed hast. 17 I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanks∣giving: and will call upon the Name of the Lord. 18 I will pay my vows unto the Lord▪ now in the presence of all his people. 17 I'le give thee sacrifice of thanks, and on Gods Name will call: 18 I'le to the Lord now pay my vows before his people all. 19 In the courts of the Lords house▪ in the midst of thee, O Ierusalem. Praise yee the Lord. 19 Within the courts of Gods own house within the midst of thee, O city of Jerusalem praise to the Lord give yee.
PSALME CXVII. O Praise the Lord, all ye nations: praise him, all ye people. O Give ye praise unto the Lord, ye nations all that be: And also ye the people all, unto him praise give ye. 2 For his mercifull kindnesse is great to∣wards us: and the trueth of the Lord endureth for ever. Praise ye the Lord. 2 For great's his kindnesse mercifull he doth to us afford, The Lord his truth for ever lasts, O do ye praise the Lord. PSAL. CXVIII. O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: because his mercy endureth for ever. 2 Let Israel now say: that his mercy endu∣reth for ever. O Thank the Lord, for he is good his mercy lasts for ay: 2 That still his mercy doth endure let Israel now say. 3 Let the house of Aaron now say: that his mercy endureth for ever. 4 Let them now that fear the Lord, say: that his mercy endureth for ever.
3 And that for ay his mercy lasts, let Aarons house now say: 4 Let them now say that fear the Lord, his mercy lasts for ay. 5 I called upon the Lord in distresse: the Lord answered me, and set me in a large place. 5 I called then upon the Lord when I was in distresse: The Lord to me an answer gave and he inlarg'd my place. 6 The Lord is on my side, I will not fear; what can man doe unto me? 6 The Lord himself is on my side, no fear in me shall be: What thing is it that any man can now do unto me? 7 The Lord taketh my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me. 7 The Lord doth take my part with them that help give unto me, Therefore upon them that me hate I my desire shall see. 8 It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put confidence in man. 9 It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put confidence in princes.
8 It's better God to trust then put in man our confidence: It better is to trust in God then trust in any Prince. 10 All nations compassed me about: but in the Name of the Lord will I destroy them. 10 All nations have round about encompassed me still, But in the Name of God the Lord destroy them all I will. 11 They compassed me about, yea, they com∣passed me about: but in the Name of the Lord I will destroy them. 11 They compassd me about, yea me about compassed they, But in the name of God the Lord I will them all destroy. 12 They compassed me about like bees, they are quenched as the fire of thorns: for in the Name of the Lord I will destroy them. 12 Like bees they compast me about, as fire of thornes so they Are quenched now; for I them all in Gods name will destroy. 13 Thou hast thrust sore at me, that I might fall: but the Lord helped me.
14 The Lord is my strength and song, and is become my salvation. 13 That I might fall thou sore didst thrust, but then God helped me: 14 God my salvation is become, my strength and song is he. 15 The voice of rejoicing and salvation i in the tabernacles of the righteous: the right hand of the Lord doth valiantly. 15 In tabernacles of the just of safety and of joy The voice it is; for the right hand of God doth valiantly. 16 The right hand of the Lord is exalted the right hand of the Lord doth valiantly. 16 The right hand surely of the Lord exalted is on hy, The right hand of the mighty Lord doth very valiantly. 17 I shall not die, but live: and declare  works of the Lord. 18 The Lord hath chastned me sore: but  hath not given me over unto death. 17 I shall not die, but live, and shall the works of God discover: 18 The Lord he hath me chastned sore, but not to death giv'n over.
19 Open to me the gates of righteousnesse: will go into them, and I will praise the Lord. 9 Do ye make open unto me the gates of righteousnesse, And I will enter into them, and I the Lord will praise. 20 This gate of the Lord: into which the righteous shall enter. 21 I will praise thee, for thou hast heard me: and art become my salvation. 20 This is the gate of God, in which the righteous enter shall: 21 I'le praise thee for thou hast me heard, and art my safety all. 22 The stone which the builders refused is become the head-stone of the corner. 23 This is the Lords doing: it is marvel∣lous in our eyes. 22 The stone's become head corner stone, which builders did refuse: 23 This is the doing of the Lord, in our eyes marvellous. 24 This is the day which the Lord hath made: we will rejoice and be glad in it. 25 Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity.
24 This is the day the Lord hath made, we'le joy and glad in't be. 25 Now save I pray thee, Lord, I pray send now prosperitie. 26 Blessed be he that cometh in the Name of the Lord: we have blessed you out of the house of the Lord. 26 He that comes in the Name of God, O blessed let him be, Out of the house that is the Lords, you blessed all have we. 27 God is the Lord▪ which hath shewed  light, binde the sacrifice with cords, even unto the hors of the altar. 27 God is the Lord which unto us his light hath shewed so, Bind ye the sacrifice with cords, ev'n altars horns unto. 28 Thou art my God, and I will praise thee thou art my God, I will exalt thee. 29 O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever. 28 Thou art my God I'le thee exalt, my God thee praise I will▪ 29 O thank the Lord for he is good, his mercy lasteth still.
PSALME CXIX. Aleph▪ BLessed are the undefiled in the way▪ who walk in the law of the Lord, 2 Blessed are they that keep his testimonies▪ and that seek him with the whole heart. BLest are the undefil'd in way, who from Gods law not part: 2 And blest that keep his lawes, and him do seek with all the heart. 3 They also do no iniquity: they walk in his wayes. 4 Thou hast commanded us to keep thy pre∣cepts diligently. 3 They in his wayes do walk, they als do no iniquity, 4 Thou hast commanded us to keep thy preceps diligently. 5 O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes! 6 Then shall I not be ashamed: when I have respect unto all thy commandments. 5 O that thy statutes for to keep thou wouldst my wayes direct: 6 Then shall I not be sham'd when I thy precepts all respect. 7 I will praise thee with uprightnesse of heart: when I shall have learned thy righteous judge∣ments.
8 I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly. 7 With upright heart I'le praise, when learn'd thy judgements right have I: 8 I will thy statuts keep; O not forsake me utterly. Beth. 9 Wherewithall shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heeed thereto according to thy word. 9 Wherewithall shall a man that's young his way well cleanse indeed? According to thy holy Word by thereto taking heed. 10 With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy commandments. 10 With all my heart I have thee sought, O let me not that so From these commandements of thine I should a wandring go. 11 Thy word have I hid in my heart: that I might not sin against thee. 12 Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thy statutes. 11 I in my heart thy word have hid, lest sin I should 'gainst thee: 12 O thou the Lord, thou blessed art, thy statuts teach thou me.
13 With my lips have I declared all the judge∣ments of thy mouth. 14 I have rejoyced in the way of thy testi∣monies: as much as in all riches. 13 The judgements of thy mouth eachone my lips declared have: 14 Much joy thy testimonies way as richesse all me gave. 15 I will meditate in thy precepts: and have respect unto thy wayes. 16 I will delight my self in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word. 15 I'le in thy precepts meditate, and will thy wayes respect: 16 I'le in thy statuts me delight, thy word I'le not forget. Gimel. 17 Deal bountifully with thy servant: that I may live, and keep thy word. 17 With him now that thy servant is deal bountifully, Lord, That so I may be made to live and for to keep thy word. 18 Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law. 19 I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy commandments from me.
18 Mine eyes unclose that of thy law the wonders I may see: 19 I in the earth a stranger am, hide not thy laws from me. 20 My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgements at all times. 20 My soul it doth within me break ev'n for the longing great That to the judgements that are thine at all times is in it. 21 Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed: which do erre from thy commande∣ments. 22 Remove from me reproach and contempt: for I have kept thy testimonies. 21 Thou hast rebuk'd the cursed proud which from thy precepts erre: 22 From me, for I thy lawes have keept, reproach, contempt, put far. 23 Princes also did sit, and speak against me: but thy servant did meditate in thy sta∣tutes. 23 The Princes they did sit also and speak against me ill, But meditate thy servant did upon thy statuts still. 24 Thy testimonies also are my delight: and my counsellers.
24 The chief delight of all my heart thy testimonies be And they, what ev'r I have to do, are counsellers to me. Daleth. 25 My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou me according to thy word. 26 I have declared my wayes, and thou heardest me: teach me thy statutes. 25 My soul to dust cleaves, quicken me according to thy word. 26 My wayes I shew'd, and me thou heardst: teach me thy statutes, Lord. 27 Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talk of thy wondrous works. 27 Make me to understand the way of those thy precepts all, So of thy workes that wondrous are with knowledge talk I shall. 28 My soul melteth away for heavinesse: strengthen thou me according unto thy word. 28 My troubled soul doth melt away, for heavinesse, O Lord, In mercy do thou strengthen me, according to thy word. 29 Remove from me the way of lying; and grant me thy law graciously.
29 From me the way of lying all removed let it be, And graciously thy holy law do thou grant unto me. 30 I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgements have I laid before me. 30 The way that is of truth I have now chosen by and by; And all the judgements that are thine before me laid have I. 31 I have stuck unto thy testimonies, O Lord, put me not to shame. 32 I will run the way of thy command∣ments: when thou shalt enlarge my heart. 31 I to thy testimonies stuck, let shame not make me smart, 32 Thy precepts way I'le run, when as thou shalt enlarge my heart. He. 33 Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy sta∣tutes: and I shall keep it unto the end. 33 Lord, of thy statutes teach thou me the way thou dost intend; And I shall then most carefully it keep unto the end. 34 Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law: yea I shall observe it with my whole heart.
34 Give understanding unto me, and I in every part Shall keep thy law; yea it I shall observe with all my heart. 35 Make me to goe in the path of thy com∣mandments: for therein do I delight. 36 Incline my heart unto thy testimonies: and not to covetousnesse. 35 Make me go in thy precepts path, for I delight therein: 36 My heart unto thy testimonies and not to greed incline. 37 Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity▪ and quicken thou me in thy way. 38 Stablish thy word unto thy servant: who is devoted to thy fear. 37 From foly turn mine eyes, and in thy way me quicken heer: 38 Thy word make to thy servant sure devoted to thy fear. 39 Turn away my reproach which I fear: for thy judgements are good. 40 Behold, I have longed after thy precepts, quicken me in thy righteousnesse. 39 My fear'd reproch turn thou away for good thy judgements be: 40 Lo for thy precepts I have long'd, in justice quicken me.
Vau. 41 Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation, according to thy word. 41 And do thou let thy mercies als come unto me, O Lord, Ev'n the salvation that is thine, according to thy word. 42 So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me: for I trust in thy word: 42 So shall I have wherewith I may an answer well afford Unto him that reproacheth me: for I trust in thy word. 43 And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have hoped in thy judgements. 43 The word of truth out of my mouth take thou not utterly, For in the judgements that are thine my hope it doth rely. 44 So shall I keep thy law continually: for ever and ever. 45 And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts. 44 So I'le for ever and ever keep thy law continually: 45 Because that I thy precepts seek I'le walk at liberty.
46 I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and will not be ashamed. 47 And I will delight my self in thy com∣mandements which I have loved. 46 I'le not be sham'd when of thy laws to Kings I mention make▪ 47 In thy commands which I have lov'd, I my delight will take. 48 My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandements which I have loved: and I will meditate in thy statutes. 48 To thy belov'd commandements my hands lift up I will, And I will also meditate upon thy statutes still. Zain. 49 Remember the word unto thy servant: upon which thou hast caused me to hope. 49 Remember on the word thou didst unto thy servant say, Upon the which thou hast in hope me caused for to stay. 50 This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word hath quickned me. 50 This is in mine affliction my comfort made to be, For thine own word that lively is hath surely quickned me.
51 The proud have had me greatlie in deri∣sion: yet have I not declined from thy law. 51 Me greatly in derision have had the proud in minde: Yet I for that have not at all once from thy law declin'd. 52 I remembred thy judgements of old, O Lord: and have comforted my self. 52 The judgemēts which are thine, O Lord, which thou of old us gave I did remember, and my self comforted so I have. 53 Horrour hath taken hold upon me, be∣cause of the wicked that forsake thy law. 54 Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. 53 Because ill men forsake thy law, much horrour did me take: 54 In house of this my pilgrimage thy laws my songs I make. 55 I have remembred thy Name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy law. 56 This I had: because I kept thy pre∣cepts. 55 Thy Name by night remembred I thy law was kept by me: 56 Because I did thy precepts keep I this have had from thee.
Cheth. 57 Thou art my portion, O Lord: I have said that I would keep thy words. 57 Thou surely art my portion which I have choic'd, O Lord, I have with great assurance said, that I would keep thy word. 58 I intreated thy favour with my whole heart: be mercifull unto me according to thy word. 58 With all my heart I did intreat the favour that's in thee, Do thou according to thy word be mercifull to me. 59 I thought on my ways: and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. 60 I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments. 59 My feet unto thy lawes I turn'd, I thought upon my way: 60 To keep thy precepts I made hast, and did not then delay. 61 The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy law. 62 At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee: because of thy righteous judgements. 61 The wicked bands have robbed me, I not forgot thy lawes:
62 To rise at midnight thee to thank, thy judgements right me cause: 63 I am a companion of all them that fear thee: and of them that keep thy precepts. 64 The earth▪ O Lord, to full of thy mercie: teach me thy statutes. 63 I am companion of all that thee fear and keep thy word▪ 64 The earth is of thy mercy full, thy statutes teach me, Lord. Toth. 65 Thou hast dealt well with thy servant, O Lord, according unto thy word. 66 Teach me good judgement and knowledge: for I have beleeved thy commandments. 65 Thou well hast with thy servant dealt after thy word O Lord: 66 Me judgement good & knowledge teach for I believe thy word. 67 Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now have I kept thy word. 68 Thou art good, and doest good: teach me thy statutes▪ 67 Ere I afflicted was I stray'd, but now thy word I keep: 68 Thou both art good and doest good, teach me thy statutes deep.
69 The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts with my whole heart. 69 The proud they forged have a ly against me for my smart, But I the precepts giv'n by thee will keep with all my heart. 70 Their heart is as fat as grease: but I delight in thy law. 71 It is good for me that I have been affli∣cted: that I might learn thy statutes. 70 Their heart as fat as grease it is, I in thy law delight: 71 It's good that I afflicted was, that learn thy lawes I might. 72 The law of thy mouth is better unto me, then thousands of gold and silver. 72 The law that cometh from thy mouth is better unto me Then of both gold and silver als the many thousands be. Jod. 73 Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me: give me understanding that I may learn thy commandements. 73 Thy hands me made & fashion'd have, do thou now unto me Give understanding that I may learn precepts giv'n by thee.
74 They that fear thee will be glade when they see me: because I have hoped in thy word. 74 They that thee fear when they me see, will be with one accord Exceeding glade, because that I have hoped in thy word. 75 I know, O Lord, that thy judgements are right: and that thou in faithfulnesse hast afflicted me. 75 That very right thy judgements are, O Lord, I well do know, And that thou in thy faithfulnesse afflicted hast me now. 76 Let I pray thee, thy mercifull kindnesse be for my comfort: according to thy word unto thy servant. 76 O let thy kindnesse mercifull be for my comfort Lord, I thee do pray; according as thy servant hath thy word. 77 Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my delight. 77 Thy tender mercies unto me let come, that in thy sight I so may live, for that thy law is onely my delight. 78 Let the proud be ashamed, for they dealt perversly with me without a cause: but I will meditate in thy precepts.
78 O let the proud ashamed be, for they without a cause Have most perversly dealt with me; but muse I'le in thy lawes. 79 Let those that fear thee turn unto me: and those that have known thy testimonies. 80 Let my heart be sound in thy statutes: that I be not ashamed. 79 Who fear thee and have known thy laws let them turn unto me: 80 Sound in thy statuts make my heart, that I asham'd not be. Caph. 81 My soul fainteth for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word. 82 Mine eyes fail for thy word: saying, When wilt thou comfort me? 81 My soul for thy salvation faints, I hope in words from thee: 82 Mine eyes fail for thy word; I say, when wilt thou comfort me? 83 For I am become like a bottle in the smoak: yet do I not forget thy statutes. 83 For like a bottell I'm become that in the smoke is set, Yet I the statutes that are thine do not at all forget.
84 How many are the dayes of thy servant? when wilt thou execute judgement on them that persecute me? 84 How many are thy servants dayes? when wilt thou execute The judgement on those wicked men that do me peresecute? 85 The proud have digged pits for me: which are not after thy law. 85 They that are proud have digged pits for me therein to draw, Which things are not in any way according to thy law. 86 All thy commandments are faithfull: they persecute me wrongfullie; help thou me. 86 All thy commandements also for ever faithfull be; They wrongfully me persecute, help give thou unto me. 87 They had almost consumed me upon earth: but I forsook not thy precepts. 87 They had almost in fury great consumed me on earth, But I did not at all forsake thy precepts of great worth. 88 Quicken me after thy loving kindnesse: so shall I keep the testimonte of thy mouth.
88 After thy loving kindnesse, Lord, do thou now quicken me, The testimony of thy mouth so by mee kept shall be. Lamed. 89 For ever, O Lord, thy word is setled in heaven. 90 Thy faithfulnesse is unto all generations: 89 Thy word for ever is, O Lord, in heaven setled fast: 90 Unto all generations thy faithfulnesse doth last. Thou hast established the earth, and it abideth. 91 They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all are thy servants. The earth thou hast established, and it abides by thee: 91 This day they last as thou ordain'd, for all thy servants be. 92 Unlesse thy law had been my delights: I should then have perished in mine affliction. 92 Unlesse the law that thou hast giv'n had been my whole delight, I in my great affliction should then have perish'd quite. 93 I will never forget thy precepts: for with them thou hast quickned me.
94 I am thine, save me: for I have soug thy precepts. 63 Thy precepts I will ne're forget, for they have quickned me, 94 I'm thine, me save, for I have sought the precepts giv'n by thee. 95 The wicked have waited for me to d stroy me: but I will consider thy testemonies. 95 The wicked for me waited have me to destroy for ever: But I thy testimonies will most carefully consider. 96 I have seen an end of all perfection but thy commandement is exceeding broad. 96 An end of all perfection heer have I seen, O God, But as for thy commandement it is exceeding broad. Mem. 97 O how love I thy law! it is my medi∣tation all the day. 97 O how do I most dearly love the law that's from thee gone, Ev'n all the day long it is made my meditation. 98 Thou through thy commandements ha made me wiser then mine enemies: for they  ever with me.
98 Through thy commandements thou hast me wiser made to be Then those that are mine enemies for they are still with me. 99 I have more understanding then all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my meditation. 99 Then all my teachers now I have more understanding far, For that my meditations thy Testimonies are. 100 I understand more then the ancients: because I keep thy precepts. 101 I have refrained my feet from every evill way: that I may keep thy word. 100 Then th' Ancients more I know, be∣cause I keep thy precepts way 101 I from ill wayes my feet refrain'd that keep thy word I may. 102 I have not departed from thy judgements for thou hast taught me. 102 I from the judgements that are thine yet never did depart, For thou by them in mercy hast me taught within my heart. 103 How sweet are thy words unto my tast! yea, sweeter then hony to my mouth.
103 O how unto my tast are sweet the words that come from thee: Yea then the hony to my mouth they sweeter are to me. 104 Through thy precepts I get understand∣ing: therefore I hate every false way. 104 I through the precepts giv'n by thee do understanding get, Therefore I ev'ry way that's false with all my heart do hate. Nun. 105 Thy word is a lamp unto my feet: and a light unto my path, 106 I have sworn, and I will perform it: that I will keep thy righteous judgements. 105 Thy word is to my feet a lamp, and to my path a light: 106 I sware, and I will it perform, to keep thy judgements right. 107 I am afflicted very much: quicken O Lord, according unto thy word. 107 I am, yea even very much afflicted now, O Lord In mercy do thou quicken me, according to thy word. 108 Accept, I beseech thee, the free-will offrings of my mouth, O Lord and teach me the judgements.
108 The free-will offrings of my mouth accept I thee beseech, And do thou also me O Lord thy judgements clearly teach. 109 My soul is continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law. 110 The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I erred not from thy precepts. 109 My soul is ever in my hand thy law I not forgot: 110 Ill men for me laid snares, yet from thy precepts err'd I not. 111 Thy testimonies have I taken as an he∣ritage for ever: for they are the rejoicing of my heart. 111 For ever as an heritage thy testimonies part I taken have, for that they are rejoicing of my heart. 112 I have enclined my heart to perform thy statutes alway, even unto the end. 112 I carefully inclined have my heart for to attend, That I thy statutes might performe alway ev'n to the end. Samech. 113 I hate vain thoughts: but thy law do I love.
114 Thou art my hiding place, and my shield: I hope in thy word. 113 Thoughts that are vain I do them hate but love thy law O Lord: 114 Thou arr my hiding place and shield, my hope is in thy word. 115 Depart from me, ye evill doers: for I will keep the commandements of my God. 115 Do ye depart from me all ye that doers are of ill, For the commandements of my God to keep shall be my will. 116 Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be ashamed of my hope. 116 According to thy word that I may live uphold thou me: And let me not of this my hope at all ashamed be. 117 Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect unto thy statutes continually. 117 Do thou me with thy hand hold up and safe then be shall I, And to thy statuts I will have respect continually. 118 Thou hast trodden down all them that
erre from thy statutes: for their deceit is falshood. 118 Them all that from thy statuts erre thou hast trod down for this, For the deceit that is in them it only falshood is. 119 Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like drosse: therefore I love thy testi∣monies. 119 Thou all the wicked of the earth like drosse dost far remove: Therefore thy Testimonies all with all my heart I love. 120 My flesh trembleth for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy judgements. 120 This flesh of mine doth tremble all and that for fear of thee; Thy judgements which most dreadfull are make me afraid to be. Ain. 121 I have done judgement and justice: leave me not to mine oppressors. 121 I justice and right judgement als have done to evry one: To those that mine oppressours are leave thou me not alone. 122 Be suretie for thy servant for good: let not the proud oppresse me.
123 Mine eyes fall for thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousnesse. 122 Thy servants surety be for good let proud me not oppresse. 123 Mine eyes for thy salvation fail and word of righteousnesse. 124 Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercie, and teach me thy statutes. 125 I am thy servant, give me understand∣ing: that I may know thy testimonies. 124 In mercy with thy servant deal, thy statuts teach me now: 125 I am thy servant, wisdom give that I thy lawes may know; 126 It is time for thee, Lord, to work: for they have made voide thy law. 127 Therefore I love thy commandments: above gold, yea, above fine gold. 126 It's time thou work Lord, for they have made void the law that's thine: 127 Therefore thy precepts more I love then gold, yea gold most fine. 128 Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right: and I hate every false way. 128 Therefore concerning all things I esteem thy precepts great
All to be right, and every way that false is I do hate. Pe. 129 Thy testimonies are wonderfull: there∣fore doth my soul keep them. 129 The testimonies that are thine most wonderfull they are; My soul therefore it ever doth observe them all with care. 130 The entrance of thy words giveth light: it giveth understanding unto the simple. 131 I opened my mouth, and panted; for I longed for thy commandments. 130 The entrance of thy word gives light, makes simple understand, 131 My mouth I opned, and did pant▪ I long'd for thy command: 132 Look thou upon me, and be mercifull unto me: as thou usest to do unto those that love thy Name. 132 Look thou on me, and mercifull do thou unto me prove, As thou in use art for to do to those thy name that love. 133 Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquitie have dominion over me. 133 O let thou in thy holy word my steps well ordred be▪
Let no iniquity at all, dominion have ov're me. 134 Deliver me from the oppression of man; so will I keep thy precepts. 135 Make thy face to shine upon thy servant and teach me thy statutes. 134 From mans oppression save thou me: so keep thy lawes I will: 135 Thy face make on thy servant shine, teach me thy statuts still. 136 Rivers of waters run down mine eyes: because they keep not thy law. 136 Of waters rivers down mine eyes do run, because I saw, That they that wickedly are set keep not thy holy law. Tsadi. 137 Righteous art thou, O Lord: and up∣right are thy judgements. 138 Thy testimonies that thou hast com∣manded, are righteous: and very faithfull. 137 Lord thou art righteous, upright are the judgements given by thee: 138 The Testimonies thou command'st right and most faithfull be. 139 My zeal hath consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words
139 The zeal that is within my heart it hath consumed me, Because that by mine enemies thy words forgotten be. 140 Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loveth it. 141 I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts. 140 Thy word's most pure, on it therefore thy servants love is set: 141 Small and despis'd I am, yet I thy precepts not forget. 142 Thy righteousnesse is an everlasting righteousnesse: and thy law is the truth. 142 An everlasting righteousnesse thy righteousnesse is sure, The law also that thou hast giv'n the very truth is pure, 243 Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy commandments are my delight. 143 Much trouble and als anguish great have taken hold on me: And yet those thy commandements to me delights they be. 144 The righteousnesse of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me understanding, and I shall live.
144 Thy testimonies righteousnesse is everlasting all. Give understanding unto me, and so then live I shall. Koph. 145 I cried with my whole heart: hear me, O Lord, I will keep thy statutes, 146 I cried unto thee, save me, and I shall keep thy testimonies. 145 With my whole heart, Lord hear, Icri'd thy statutes keep I will: 146 I cri'd to thee, save me; I'le keep thy testimonies still. 147 I prevented the dawning of the mor∣ning, and cried: I hoped in thy word. 147 I of the morning did prevent the dawning, and did cry; And in the word that is from thee my hope it did rely. 148 Mine eyes prevent the night watches: at I might meditate in thy word. 148 Mine eyes do timeously prevent the watches of the night, That in thy word with all my heart then meditate I might. 149 Hear my voice according unto thy loving kindnesse: O Lord, quicken me according to  judgement.
149 After thy loving kindnesse let my voice be heard by thee, According to thy judgements Lord do thou now quicken me. 150 They draw nigh that follow after mis∣chief: they are far from thy law. 151 Thou art neer, O Lord: all thy com∣mandments are truth. 150 Who follow mischief they draw nigh, they from thy lawes are far: 151 But thou art near Lord, and the truth all thy comandements are. 152 Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old: that thou hast founded them for ever. 152 As for thy testimonies all of old this have I tri'd That thou hast surely founded them for ever to abide. Resh. 153 Consider mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law. 153 Consider mine affliction and so deliver me, For I do not forget the law which hath been giv'n by thee. 154 Plead my cause, and deliver me: quic∣ken me according to thy word.
155 Salvation is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy statutes. 154 After thy word deliver me, me quicken, plead my cause: 155 Salvation's from the wicked far, for they seek not thy lawes. 156 Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord: quicken me according to thy judgements. 156 Thy mercies that most tender are, they great in number be, According to thy judgements all do thou, Lord, quicken me. 157 Many are my persecutors and mine enemies: yet do I not decline from thy testi∣monies. 157 My persecutors many are, and enemies that are mine, Yet from thy testimonies all I do not now decline. 158 I behold the transgressours, and was greived: because they kept not thy word. 159 Consider how I love thy precepts: quicken me, O Lord, according to thy loving kindnesse. 158 I saw transgressours, and was griev'd, for they not keept thy word; 159 See how thy lawes I love, as thou art kind, me quicken Lord.
160 Thy word is true from the beginning: and every one of thy righteous judgements en∣dureth for ever. 160 From the beginning of all things thy word the trueth is pure, Thy righteous judgements ev'ry one for ever do endure. Schin. 161 Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart standeth in aw of thy word. 161 The princes did me persecute when as no cause they saw, But of the word that from thee is my heart doth stand in aw. 162 I rejoice at thy word: as one that find∣eth great spoil. 163 I hate and abhor lying, : but thy law do I love. 162  at thy word rejoice, as one that findeth spoil that's great▪ 163 Thy law I love, but lying all I do abhor and hate. 164 Seven times a day do  praise thee: be∣cause of thy righteous judgements. 165 Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shall offend them.
164 Sev▪n times a day I do thee praise who dost right judgement send: 165 Great peace have they which love thy law, nothing shall them offend. 166 Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation: and done thy commandments. 167 My soul hath kept thy testimonies: and I love them exceedingly. 166 I hop'd for thy salvation, Lord, thy precepts done have I: 167 My soul hath kept thy lawes, and them I love exceedingly. 168 I have kept thy precepts and thy testi∣monies: for all my wayes are before thee. 168 Thy testimonies I have kept and als thy precepts more, For all my wayes wherein I walk are ever theebefore. Tau. 169 Let my cry come neer before thee, O Lord: give me understanding according to thy word. 169 Before thee let my cry come near O thou who art my Lord: Give understanding unto me according to thy word. 170 Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy word.
171 My lips shall utter praise: when thou hast taught me thy statutes. 170 Let my request before thee come, after thy word me raise: 171 When thou thy statutes hast me taught my lips shall utter praise. 172 My tongue shall speak of thy word: for all thy commandments are righteousnesse. 172 My tongue of thy most blessed word the speaches shall expresse, For all those thy commandements they are ev'n righteousnesse. 173 Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy precepts. 174 I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord: and thy law is my delight. 173 Now let thine hand give help to me, who choosd thy precepts right: 174 I long'd for rhy salvation, Lord; thy law is my delight. 175 Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: and let thy judgements help me. 175 O let my soul live, and it shall give praises unto thee, And let thy judgements for a help be also unto me. 176 I have gone astray like a lost sheep,
seek thy servant: for I do not forget thy com∣mandements. 176 I like a sheep that's lost have stray'd, seek me thy servant yet, For those commandements of thine I do not now forget. PSAL. CXX. IN my distresse I cried unto the Lord: and he heard me. 2 Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips and from a deceitfull tongue. UNto the Lord in my distresse I cri'd, and he me heard: 2 From lying lips, deceitfull tongues my soul Lord do thou guard: 3 What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue? 4 Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of Iuniper. 3 What shall be giv'n thee? Or what shall be done false tongue to thee? 4 Sharp arrows of the strong, with coals of Juniper that be: 5 Wo is me, that I sojourn in Mesech: that I dwell in the tents of Kedar. 5 Now wo is me that I sojourn in Mesech thus so long, That I do dwell within the tents to Kedar that belong.
6 My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace. 7 I am for peace: but when I speak, they are for war. 6 My soul it hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace so far: 7 I am for peace; but when I speak, they ever are for war. PSAL. CXXI. I Will lift mine eyes unto the hills: from whence cometh my help. 2 My help cometh from the Lord: which made heaven and earth. UP to the hils I'le lift mine eyes from whence my help comes forth, 2 My help it cometh from the Lord which heaven made and earth. 3 He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keepeth thee will not slumber. 4 Behold, he that keepeth Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep. 3 Thy foot he'l not let move; he will not slumber that thee keeps, 4 Behold he that keeps Israel he slumbers not, nor sleeps. 5 The Lord is thy keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. 6 The Sun shall not smite thee by day: nor the Moon by night.
5 The Lord thee keeps; on thy right hand the Lord thy shade is right: 6 The Sun shall not thee smite by day, nor yet the Moon by night. 7 The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil, he shall preserve thy soul. 8 The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in: from this time forth, and even for evermore. 7 The Lord shall keep thy soul, he shall preserve thee from all ill: 8 The Lord thy going out and in, keep henceforth ever will. PSAL. CXXII. I Was glade when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. I Was most glade when as that they unto me said, this word, Let us now go into the house of him that is the Lord. 2 Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Ierusalem. 3 Ierusalem is builded as a city, that is compact together. 2 Jerusalem our feet shall stand within thy gates for ever: 3 Jeruslem's as a city built that is compact together.
4 Whether the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel: to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord. 4 Yea whether all the tribes go up tribes which the Lord doth claime, To Israels testimony there to thank the Lord his Name. 5 For there are set thrones of judgement: the thrones of the house of David. 5 For in that place are set the thrones of judgement righteous, Yea even the most glorious thrones of David his own house. 6 Pray for the peace of Ierusalem: they shall prosper that love thee. 7 Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. 6 Pray for peace of Jerusalem, who love thee prosper shall: 7 In palaces prosperity, peace be within thy wall. 8 For my brethren and companions sakes: I will now say, Peace be within thee. 9 Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy good. For brethren and companions mine peace be in thee I'le speak: 9 For the house of the Lord our God thy good now I will seek.
PSALME CXXIII. UNto thee lift I up mine yes: thou that dwellest in the heavens. 2 Behold, as the eyes of servants look un∣to the hand of their masters, TO thee I lift mine eyes, O thou that in the heav'ns dost dwell: 2 Behold as servants eyes unto their masters hands look well, And as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistresse: so our eyes waite upon the Lord our God, untill that he have mercy upon us. As maidens eyes her mistresse hand so our eyes also thus Wait on the Lord our God, till he have mercy upon us. 3 Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are exceedingly filled with con∣tempt. 3 Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy us upon; For with contempt exceedingly wee fill'd are evry one. 4 Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease: and with the contempt of the proud. 4 Our soul it is exceedingly fill'd with the scorning leud
Of men at ease; and with contempt of them that are so proud. PSAL. CXXIV. IF it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, now may Israel say. 2 If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, when men rose up against us. IF God had not been on our side, may Israel now say, If God had not been our side when men rose us to slay. 3 Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. 4 Then the waters had overwhelmed us; the stream had gone over our soul. 3 They had us swallowed quick, when as 'gainst us their wrath was kindled, 4 Then overwhelm'd us waters had; the stream our soul had covered. 5 Then the proud waters had gone over our soul. 6 Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us as a prey to their teeth. 5 Then likewise waters that are proud gone ov're our soul had they: 6 Blest be the Lord who to their teeth not gave us as a prey.
7 Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the snare is broken, and we are escaped. 7 Our soul's escaped as a bird out of the foulers snare▪ The snare in peices broken is; and we escaped are. 8 Our help is in the Name of the Lord: who made heaven and earth. 8 In the Name of the Lord it is from whence we have our aid: Who both the heavens that are high, and als the earth hath made. PSAL. CXXV. THey that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever. THey in the Lord that put their trust shall be as Zion hill, Which thence can not removed be, but it abideth still. 2 As the mountains are round about Ieru∣salem, so the Lord is round about his people, from henceforth even for ever. 2 As round about Jerusalem the mountains are together, So from henceforth about thy folk the Lord is ev'n for ever.
3 For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous: lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity. 3 For on the righteous lot the rod of wicked shall not ly, Lest that the righteous forth their hands put to iniquity. 4 Do good, O Lord, unto those that be good: and to them that are upright in their hearts. 4 Do good, O Lord unto all those that good are in thy sight; And unto evry one of them that are in heart upright. 5 As for such as turn aside unto their crook∣ed wayes, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel. 5 As for such as do turn aside unto their crooked way, With ill men forth God shall them lead; on Israel peace shall stay. PSAL. CXXVI. WHen the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion: we were like them that dream. WHen as Zions captivity the Lord did turn again, At that time we were like to them that in a dream remain.
2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: then said they among the heathen, The Lord hath done great things for them. 2 Our mouth with laughter, and our tongue with singing fild was then: They'mong the heathen said; great things God hath done for those men. 3. The Lord hath done great things for us; whereof we are glade. 4 Turn again our captivity, O Lord: as the streams in the south. 3 The Lord hath great things done for us whereof we glade remain: 4 O Lord turn our captivity as streams in south again. 5 They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. 6 He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtlesse come again with rojoicing: bringing his sheaves with him. 5 Who sow in tears shall reap in joy, 6 Who weeps and goeth forth Seed precious bearing, sure shall turn and bring his sheaves with mirth. PSAL. CXXVII. EXcept the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the city, the watch-man waketh but in vain.
EXcept the Lord do build the house, who build in vain take pain: Except the Lord the city keep, the watchman wakes in vain. 2 It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows: for so he giv∣eth his beloved sleep. 2 Early to rise for you it's vain, and late up sitting keep, And sorrows bread eat; for so he gives his Beloved sleep. 3 Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his reward. 4 As arrowes are in the hand of a mighty man: so are children of the youth. 3 Lo, children are Gods heritage▪ wombs fruit his gift also: 4 As arrows in a strong mans hand sons of the youth are so▪ 5 Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them, they shall not▪be ashamed: but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate. 5 Who hath his quiver full of them a happy man is he, With th'enemies in the gate they'le speak they not asham'd shall be.
PSALME CXXVIII. BLessed is every one that feareth the Lord: that walketh in his wayes. AMong the people evry one is surely blest alwayes, That from his heart doth fear the Lord, that walketh in his wayes. 2 For thou shalt at the labour of thine hands: happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee. 2 For ev'n the labour of thy hands by thee shall eaten be, Thou shalt be happy, and it shall be also well with thee. 3 Thy wife shall be as a fruitfull vine by the sides of thine house, thy children like olive plants: round about thy table. 3 Thy wife shall as a fruitfull vine by thy house sides be found, Thy children like the Olive plants about thy table round. 4 Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed, that seareth the Lord. 5 The Lord shall blesse thee out of Zion: 4 Behold the man that fears the Lord, he thus shall blessed be: 5 The Lord shall out of Zion send his blessings unto thee.
And thou shalt see the good of Ierusalem all he dayes of thy life. 6 Yea, thou shalt see thy childrens children: nd peace upon Israel. Thou of thy life shall all the dayes see Jerusalems well: Thy childrens children thou shalt see, and peace on Israel. PSAL. CXXIX. MAny a time have they afflicted me from my youth: may Israel now say. 2 Many a time have they afflicted me from y youth: yet have they not prevailed against me▪ OFt from my youth, may Israel say, with grief they me assail'd: Oft from my youth they troubled me, yet'gainst me not prevail'd. 3 The plowers plowed upon my back: they ade long their surrows. 4 The Lord is righteous: he hath cut asun∣r the cords of the wicked. Upon my back the plowers plow'd▪ they furrows long did make: The Lord is just, asunder he cords of the wicked brake. 5 Let them all be confounded and turned ck that hate Zion.
6 Let them be as the grasse upon the house tops: which withereth afore it groweth up. 5 Let them confounded and turn'd back all be that Zion hate: 6 As on house tops the grasse  grown, so withred be them let. 7 Wherewith the mower filleth not his hand▪ nor he that bindeth sheaves, his bosome. 7 Wherewith the mower doth not ill at any time his hand, Nor yet he that doth binde the sheaves his bosome on the land. 8 Neither do they which go by, say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you: we blesse you in the Name of the Lord. 8 Nor do they say, which do go by, Gods blessing on you be, In his own name that is the Lord now blesse you all do wee. PSAL. CXXX. OUt of the depths have I cried unto thee O Lord. 2 Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my supplications. LOrd from the depths I to thee cry'd, 2 Lord hear the voice from me, Let to my supplications voice thine ears attentive be.
3 If thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand? 4 But there is forgivenesse with thee: that thou mayest be feared. 3 Lord, who shall stand, if thou, O Lord, shouldst mark iniquities? 4 But that thou mayest feared be, forgivenesse with thee is. 5 I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait: and in his word do I hope. 6 My soul waiteth for the Lord, more then they that watch for the morning: 5▪ I wait for God, my soul doth wait, and I▪hope in his word: 6 More then they that for morning watch my soul waits for the Lord; I say, more then they that watch for the morning. 7 ▪Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercie: I say, yea more then they that watch the morning for to see: 7 Let Israel hope in God, for with the Lord there mercies be: And with him is plenteous redemption. 8 And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities. And also is redemption most plenteous with him,
And from all his iniquities he Israel shall redeem. PSAL. CXXXI. LOrd, my heart is not haughty, nor mine  loty▪ neither do I exercise my selfin gre matters, or in things too high for me. MIne heart, O Lord, not haughtie is, mine eyes not loty be; I meddle not in matters great, or things too high for me. 2 Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a child that is weaned of his mother: 2 Surely my self I have behav'd, and quieted in this, Most like unto a childe that of his mother weaned is. My soul is even as a weaned child. 3 Let Israel hope in the Lord, from hence∣forth and for ever. My soul's ev'n as a weaned child, 3 Let Israel altogether Put all their hope into the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. PSAL. CXXXII. LOrd, remember David, and all his affli∣ctions.
2 How he sware unto the Lord, and vowe unto the mighte God of Iacob; DAvid and his afflictions all, O Lord remember thou: 2 How to God, Jacobs mighty God he sware and made a vow. 3 Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house: nor go up into my bed▪ 4 I will not give sleep to mine eyes: or slum∣ber to my eye-lids, 3 Sure to my house tent I'le not come, nor to my bed up go, 4 Sleep to mine eyes, or mine eye-lids I'le slumber not give to. 5 Untill I finde out a place for the Lord▪ an habitation for the mighty God of Iacob. 5 Untill that I do for the Lord a place to make abode Find out, an habitation for Jacobs mighty God. 6 Lo we heard of it at Ephrata: we found it in the fields of the wood. 6 Lo at the place of Ephrata, of it we understood, And we did find it in the fields that were within the wood. 7 We will go into his tabernacles: we will worship at his footstool.
8 Arise, O Lord, into thy rest: thou, and the ark of thy strength. 7 We at his footstool worship will, we to his tents will go: 8 Thou Lord, and of thy strength the ark arise thy rest into. 9 Let thy priests be clothed with righteous∣nesse: and let thy saints shout for joy. 9 Let thou thy priests with righteousnesse, be clothed all about: And let all them that are thy saints for joy most gladly shout. 10 For thy servant Davids sake: turn not away the face of thine anointed. 10 Of thine Anointed let the face away not turned be: And that for Davids sake who is a servant unto thee. 11 The Lord hath sworn in truth unto Da∣vid, he will not turn from it: of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne. 11 God hath to David sworn in truth, not turn he will from it, The fruit I'le of thy body make upon thy Throne to sit. 12 If thy children will keep my covenant an my testimonie, that I shall teach them: their
children also shall sit upon thy throne for ever∣more. 12 My covenant if thy children keep and law I teach them all, Upon thy Throne for ever sit their children also shall. 13 For the Lord hath chosen Zion: he hath desired it for his habitation. 14 This is my rest for ever, heere will I dwell, for I have desired it. 13 For God of Zion hath made choise, to dwell there he requir'd: 14 This still my rest is, heer I'le dwell for I have it desir'd. 15 I will abundantly blesse her provision: I will satisfie her poor with bread. 15 I will blesse her provision and that abundantly, And those that are her poor I will with bread all satisfy. 16 I will also clothe her priests with salva∣tion: and her saints shall shout aloud for joy. 16 I with salvation will also her priests all cloath about; And these that are her Saints likewise for joy aloud shall shout.
17 There will I make the horn of ▪David to bud: I have ordained a lamp for mine anoin∣ted. 17 There I the horn of David will make for to bud anone: A lamp I there ordained have for mine Anointed one. 18 His enemies will I clothe with shame: but upon himself shall his crown flourish. 18 Those who to him are enemies I'le cloath with shame eachone, But yet the crown that is his own himself shall flourish on. PSAL. CXXXIII. BEhold how good and how pleasant it is: for brethren to dwell together in amity. BEhold how good a thing it is, how pleasant must it be, For Brethren thus together heer to dwell in unitie. 2 It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aa∣rons beard: that went down to the skirts of his garments. 2 Like precious ointment on the head it's that the beard ran on, Ev'n Aarons beard that to the skirts went of his garments down.
3 As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing: even life for evermore. 3 As Hermons dew, as dew which down the Zions hills ran o're, For there the blessing God commands, ev'n life for evermore. PSAL. CXXXIIII. BEhold, blesse ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord: which by night stand in the house of the Lord. BEhold, blesse ye the Lord, all ye that serve the Lord aright, Ye who of him that is the Lord stand in the house by night. 2. Lift up your hands in the sanctuary: and blesse the Lord. 3 The Lord that made heaven and earth: blesse thee out of Sion. 2 Your hands lift in the Sanctuary, and there the Lord blesse ye: 3 The Lord that heaven made and earth, blesse out of Zion thee. PSAL. CXXXV. PRaise the Lord, praise ye the Name of the Lord: praise him, O ye servants of the LORD.
2 Ye that stand in the house of the Lord: in the courts of the house of our God. PRaise God, ye servants of the Lord, praise Gods name praise him ye: 2▪ Who in Gods house stand; in the courts of our Gods house that be. 3 Praise the Lord, for the Lord is good: sing praises unto his Name, for it is pleasant. 3 Praise ye the Lord, for God is good, and praises do ye sing Unto his Name, and that because it is a pleasant thing. 4 For the Lord hath chosen Iacob unto him∣self: and Israel for his peculiar treasure. 5 For I know that the Lord is great: and that our Lord is above all gods. 4 For God chus'd Jacob to himself his treasure is Isra'l: 5 For God I know is great: our Lord he gods above is all. 6 Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth: in the seas, and all deep plates. 6 What thing soev'r the Lord did please, that in the heav'n did he And in the earth, in seas, and all deep places that there be.
7 He causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth, he maketh lightnings for the rain: he bringeth the wind out of his treasuries. 7 He from the ends of earth doth cause the vapours to ascend, For rain he lightnings makes, he doth winds from his treasures send. 8 Who smote the first-born of Egypt: both of man and beast. 9 who sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt: 8 Who smote of Egypt the first born of man and beast that be: 9 Who wonders signes O Egypsent into the midst of thee. Upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants. 10 Who smote great nations: and slew mighty kings: And also upon Pharao and all his servants there, 10 Who smot great Nations, and slew the Kings that mighty were. 11 Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan: and all the kingdomes of Canaan, 11 Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og of Bashan king: And all the kingdomes wherein did those of Canaan reigne.
12 And gave their land for an heritage: an heritage unto Israel his people. 12 And for a pleasant heritage, he with a liberall hand An heritage to Israel his people, gave their land▪ 13 Thy Name, O Lord, endureth for ever: and thy memoriall, O Lord, throughout all generations. 13 For ever, Lord, thy Name endures, and thy memoriall, It surely is, O Lord, throughout the generations all. 14 For the Lord will judge his people: and he will repent himself concerning his servants. 14 For he that is the mighty Lord, will judge his people still, Concerning those that do him serve repent himself he will: 15 The idols of the heathen are silver and gold: the work of mens hands. 16 They have mouths but they speak not: eyes have they, but they see not. 15 The heathens idols, silver, gold, works of mens hands they be: 16 They mouths have, but they do not speak eyes have they, but not see.
17 They have ears, but they hear not: nei∣ther is there any breath in their mouths. 18 They that make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusteth in them. 17 Ears have they, but they do not hear; no breath their mouthes hath past: 18 They that them make are like to them so all that in them trust. 19 Blesse the Lord, O house of Israel; blesse the Lord, O house of Aaron. 20 Blesse the Lord, O house of Levi: ye that fear the Lord, blesse the Lord. 19 O house of Israel blesse the Lord, blesse God, O Aarons house: 20 O house of Levi blesse the Lord, ye that fear God him blesse. 21 Blessed be the Lord out of Zion: which dwelleth at Ierusalem. Praise ye the Lord. 21 Out of the hill of Zion now the Lord God blessed be, Which dwelleth at Jerusalem, praise to the Lord give ye. PSAL. CXXXVI. O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever. 2 O give thanks unto the God of gods: for his mercy endureth for euer. O Thanks give to the Lord, For he is good surely▪
2 To God of gods accord To give thanks chearfully, For his mercy Which is most sure, Doth still endure Eternally. 3 O give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for ever. 4 To him who alone doth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for ever. 3 Unto the Lord of lords Give hearty thanks anone: 4 To him who by his words Great wonders doth alone, For his mercy, &c. 5 To him that by wisdome made the heavens: for his mercy endureth for ever. 6 To him that stretched out the earth above the waters: for his mercy endureth for ever. 5 To him that as ye see Heav'ns made by's wisdome move: 6 And stretch'd the earth to be The waters great above, For his mercy, &c. 7 To him that made great lights: for his mercy endureth for ever. 8 The Sun to rule by day: for his mercy en∣dureth for ever.
7 To him that by his might Made great lights shine alway, 8 The Sun that is most bright For to bear rule by day, For his mercy, &c. 9 The Moon and Stars to rule by night: for his mercy endureth for ever. 9 The Moon he made also, And glistring Stars with light, In their right course to go, To rule the darkest night, For his mercy, &c. 10 To him that smote Egypt in their first∣born: for his mercy endureth for ever. 10 To him that mighty smot Egypt a land forlorn, Who by his anger hote Did kill all their first born. For his mercy, &c. 11 And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endureth for ever. 12 With a strong hand, and with a stretch∣ed-out arm: for his mercy endureth for ever. 11 And brought out from that land His Isra'l without harme, 12 With a most mighty hand And with a stretch'd out arme, For his mercy, &c.
13 To him which diuided the Red sea into parts: for his mercy endureth for ever 14 And made Israel to passe thorow the midst of it, for his mercy endureth for evr. 13 To him which did divide The red Sea into two, 14 And did his Israel guide Ev'n through its midst also, For his mercy, &c. 15 But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red-sea: for his mercy endureth for ever. 15 But overthrew Pharo By his arme that is hie, And his great host also In midst of the red Sea. For his mercy, &c. 16 To him which led his people thorow the wildernesse: for his mercy endureth for ever. 16 To him which did indeed His people in distresse, In his great mercie lead Ev'n through the wildernesse, For his mercy, &c. 17 To him which smote great kings: for his mercy endureth for ever. 18 And slew famous kings, for his mercy endureth for ever. 17 To him which also smot The Kings of greatnesse rare
18 And slew in anger hot Kings that most famous were For his mercy, &c. 19 Sihon king of the Amorites for his mer∣cy endureth for ever. 20 And Og the king of Bashan, for his mercy endureth for ever. 19 Ev'n Sihon that did reign The Amorites among, 20 And Og to whom as King The Bashan did belong. For his mercy, &c. 21 And gave their land for an heritage: for his mercy endureth for ever. 22 Even an heritage unto Israel his ser∣vant: for his mercy endureth for ever. 21 An heritage to be Their land he also gave, 22 An heritage gave he For Israel to have, For his mercy, &c. 23 Who remembred us in our low estate: for his mercy endureth for ever. 24 And hath redeemed us from our ene∣mies: for his mercy endureth for ever. 23 Who in our low estate Remembred us alone:
24 And from our foes debate Redeemed us each one, For his mercy, &c. 25 Who giveth food to all flesh: for his mercy endureth for ever. 26 O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his endureth for ever. 25 Who gives food liberally To all flesh morn and ev'n: 26 O thanks give chearfully, Unto the God of heav'n. For his mercy Which is most sure, Doth still endure Eternally. Another of the same. GIve thanks to God for he is good, For his mercie endures for ay, 2 O to the God of gods give thanks For his mercy endures for ay. 3  give thanks unto the Lord of lords, For his mercy endures for ay, 4 Who doth wonders great alone, For his mercy endures for ay. 5 To him that heav'ns by wisdome made, For his mercy endures for ay, 6 Who 'bove the waters stretch'd▪ the earth For his mercy endures for ay:
7 To him that made the lights so great, For his mercy endures for ay: 8 The Sun also to rule by day, For his mercy endures for ay. 9 The Moon and Stars to rule by night, For his mercy endures for ay: 10 That Egypt smot in their first-born, For his mercy endures for ay: 11 And Isra'l out from 'mong them brought, For his mercy endures for ay: 12 With a strong hand, & stretch't out arme, For his mercy endures for ay. 13 Who red Sea did divide in parts, For his mercy endures for ay: 14 And through its midst made Israel passe, For his mercy endures for ay: 15 Pharo and's host drown'd in red Sea, For his mercy endures for ay. 16 Through desert who his people led, For his mercy endures for ay: 17 To him who the great Kings did smite, For his mercy endures for ay. 18 And slew the Kings that famous were, For his mercie endures for ay: 19 Sihon King of the Amorites, For his mercy endures for ay. 20 And Og that was of Bashan King, For his mercy endures, for ay:
21 And gave their land for heritage, For his mercy endures for ay; 22 His servant Isra'ls heritage. For his mercy endures for ay: 23 Who in low state remembred us, For his mercy endures for ay: 24 And from our foes hath us redeem'd, For his mercy endures for ay. 25 Who giveth food unto all flesh, For his mercy endures for ay: 26 O give thanks to the God of heaven, For his mercy endures for ay. PSAL. CXXXVII. BY the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down. yea, we wept: when we remembred Zion. OF Babylon the rivers by there sat we down together: Yea, we did weep, when as we there on Zion did remember. 2 We hanged our harps upon the willows, in the midst thereof. 3 For there they that caried us away cap∣tive, required of us a song, 2 In midst there of the willowes on our harps we hanged thus. 3 For they that there us captives led, requir'd a song of us.
And they that wasted us, required of us mirth: saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion. And they also that wasted us requir'd us mirth to bring; They said to us, one of the songs of Zion to us sing. 4 How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land? 5 If I forget thee, O Ierusalem: let my right hand forget her cunning. 4 O how the Lords song shall we sing thus in a strange land set? 5 Let my right hand forget her skill, if Salem I forget. 6 If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof my mouth; if I prefer not Ierusalem above my chief joy. 6 If I forget thee let my tongue from my mouths roof not move, If I Jeruslem not prefer my chiefest joy above. 7 Remember, O Lord, the children of E∣dom, in the day of Ierusalem: who said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof. 7 Remember Edoms children, Lord, in Jerusalems day▪ Who ev'n to its foundation rase, rase it, then did say.
8 O daughter of Babylon, who art to be de∣stroyed, happy shall he be that rewardeth thee, as thou hast served us. 8 O daughter thou of Babylon, who art destroyd to be, Who thee rewards as thou us serv'd, most happy be shall he. 9 Happy shall he be that taketh and dash∣eth thy little ones against the stones. 9 Yea happy surely shall he be that those thy little ones Doth to him take, and also them doth dash against the stones. PSAL. CXXXVIII. I Will praise thee with my whole heart: be∣fore the gods will I sing praise to thee. 2 I will worship towards thy holy temple, BEfore the gods with all my heart I'le praise, sing praise to thee: 2 Towards thy holy Temple thou shalt by me worship'd be; And praise thy Name, for thy loving kindnesse, and for thy truth: for thou hast magnified thy word above all thy Name. I'le praise thy Name both for thy truth, thy kindnesse, and thy love, For thou hast magnifi'd thy word ev'n all thy Name above.
3 In the day when I cried, thou answe∣redst me; and strengthnedst me with strength in my soul. 3 Thou in the day when I did cry, an answer gav'st to me, And thou with strength within my soul didst make me strong to be. 4 All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord: when they hear the words of thy mouth. 5 Yea, they shall sing in the wayes of the Lord: for great is the glory of the Lord. 4 When all earths Kings Lord of thy mouth hear words, they shall thee praise: 5 Yea in the Lords wayes shall they sing, for great Gods glory is. 6 Though the Lord be high, yet hath he re∣spect unto the lowly: but the proud he knoweth afar off. 6 Though that the Lord be high, yet he to them that lowly are Hath a respect; but who are proud he knoweth them afar. 7 Though I wal in the midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me, thou shalt stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies; and thy right hand shall save me.
7 Though I in midst of trouble walk, I from thee life shall have: 'Gainst my foes wrath thou'lt stretch thy hand thy right hand shall me save▪ 8 The Lord will perfect that which concer∣neth me: thy mercy, O Lord, endureth for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands. 8 God will perfite what me concerns, for ay thy mercy stands, O Lord, do thou not now forsake the works of thine own hands. PSAL. CXXXIX. O Lord, thou hast searched me, and known me. 2 Thou knowest my down sitting, and mine up-rising: thou understandest my thought a∣far off. O Lord, thou hast me search'd & known: 2 Thou understandst what are My sitting down, and rising up: thou know'st my thought afarre. 3 Thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my wayes. 3 My path thou and my lying down compassest in each part; And likewise thou with all my wayes right well acquainted art.
4 For there is not a word in my tongue: but lo, O Lord, thou knowest it altogether. 4 For in my tongue while I do speak there is not any word But lo it altogether is unto thee known, O Lord. 5 Thou hast beset me behinde and before: and laid thine hand upon me. 6 Such knowledge is too wonderfull for me: it is high, I cannot attain unto it. 5 Thou me besetst behind, before, and laidst thine hand on me, 6 Such knowledge is for me too strange, it to attain's too hie. 7 Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? 7 O whether from thy sprit shall I go there hid for to be? Or from thy presence me to save, O whether shall I flee? 8 If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if▪ I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. 8 If I ascend up into heav'n, thou there art as else where; If I do make my bed in hell, behold thou als art there.
9 If I take the wings of the morning: and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea: 10 Even there shall thy hand lead me: and thy right hand shall hold me. 9 If mornings wings I take and dwell in utmost parts of sea: 10 There even shall thy hand me lead, thy right hand shall hold me. 11 If I say, Surely the darknesse shall co∣ver me: even the night shall be light about mee. 11 If I should say the darknesse shall then surely cover me, Ev'n then the very night it self shall light about me be. 12 Yea the darknesse hideth not from thee, but the night shineth as the day: the darknesse and the light are both alike to thee. 12 Yea darknesse hideth not from thee, as day so shines the night; Unto thee also are alike both darknesse and the light. 13 For thou hast possessed my reins: thou hast covered me in my mothers womb. 13 For those my reins that in me are possessed were by thee, And thou within my mothers womb hast also cov'red me.
14 I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, marvellous are thy works▪ and that my soul knoweth right well. 14 I will thee praise, for fearfully, and strangely made I am, Thy works are marv'lous, and my soul right well doth know the same. 15 My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret: and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. 15 My substance was not hid from thee, when as in secret I Was made, and in earths lowest parts was wrought then curiously. 16 Thine eyes did see my substance, yet be∣ing unperfite, and in thy book all my members were written, 16 Thine eyes did all my substance see, yet being unperfite, And als within thy book thou didst these all my members write: Which in continuance were fashioned: when as yet there was none of them. Which after in continuance were fashion'd ev'ry one, When as that any being had yet of them there was none.
17 How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God: how great is the sum of them? 17 O God, how also precious are ever unto me The thoughts thou hast; how great likewise the summe of them now be? 18 If I should count them, they are moo in number then the sand: when I awake I am still with thee. 18 If I should count them, then the sand they mo in number be▪ And whensoever I awake then I am still with thee. 19 Surely thou wilt slay the wicked, O God: depart from me therefore, ye bloudy men. 19 O God, thou wilt them surely slay that wicked be in heart, Therefore ye that are bloody men, do ye from me depart. 20 For they speak against thee wickedly, and thine enemies take thy Name in vain. 20 For they against thee wickedly do speak with great disdain, And they that are thine enemies do take thy Name in vain. 21 Do not I hate them, O Lord: that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee?
21 O Lord all them that do thee hate do I not hate likewise? And am I not als griev'd with those that up against thee rise? 22 I hate them with perfect hatred; I count them mine enemies. 23 Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts: 22 With perfect hatred I them hate, my foes I count them so: 23 Lord search me, know my heart, me try, my thoughts all do thou know. 24 And see if there be any wicked way in me: and lead me in the way everlasting. 24 And see if any wicked way at all there in me be, And in the everlasting way a leader be to me. PSAL. CXL. DEliver me, O Lord, from the evill man: preserve me from the violent man. DEliver me, Lord, from the man that unto ill is bent, And me preserve thou from the man that is so violent. 2 Which imagine mischiefs in their heart: continually are they gathered together for war.
2 Which thus within their heart mischiefes imagining still are: Together are they gathered coutinually for war. 3 They have sharpned their tongues like a serpent: adders poison is under their lips. Selah. 3 And thus they sharpned have their tongues as doth a serpent his, Under their lips of Adders als the deadly poison is. Selah. 4 Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the wicked, preserve me from the violent man: who have purposed to overthrow my goings. 4 Lord keep me from the wickeds hands, from violent men me save, Who wholly for to overthrow my goings purpos'd have. 5 The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords, they have spread a net by the way side: they have set grins for me. Selah. 5 The proud for me a snare and cords have hid, and they a net Have by the way side spread also, they grins have for me set. Selah. 6 I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my supplications, O Lord. 6 Then I did say unto the Lord, thou art a God to me;
Let thou my supplications voice be heard, O Lord, by thee. 7 O God the Lord, the strength of my sal∣vation: thou hast covered my head in the day of battell. 7 O God the Lord, who art the strength of my salvation, A covering in the battell day my head thou hast put on. 8 Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked: further not his wicked device, lest they exalt themselves. Selah. 8 Of him that's wicked the desires, O Lord, not grant thou shalt, Not further thou his ill device, left they themselves exalt. Selah. 9 As for the head of those that compasse me about: let the mischief of their own lips cover them. 9 As for the head of all those men about that compasse me, Let with mischief of their own lips themselves all covred be. 10 Let burning coals fall upon them, let them be cast into the fire: into deep pits, that they rise not up again. 10 Let burning coals upon them fall, let them be cast likewise.
Into the fire, into deep pits, that they again not rise. 11 Let not an evill speaker be established in the earth, evil shall hunt the violent man to over∣throw him. 11 Let not an evill speaker be on earth establish'd now, Evill shall hunt the violent man, him for to overthrow. 12 I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted: and the right of the poor. 12 I know that he that is the Lord maintain will by his might The cause of the afflicted man and of the poore the ight. 13 Surely the righteous shall give thanks un∣to thy Name: the upright shall dwell in thy presence. 13 The righteous men unto thy Name give thanks shall surely all, And they also that are upright dwell in thy presence shall. PSAL. CXLI. LOrd I cry unto thee, make haste unto me: give ear unto my voice when I cry unto thee. UNto thee do I cry, O Lord, do thou make hast to me,
Give thou an ear unto my voice when I cry unto thee. 2 Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense; and the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice. 2 Let thou my prayer be set foorth as incense before thee, As evening sacrifice so let my hands uplifting be. 3 Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth: keep the door of my lips. 3 O thou the Lord now do thou set a watch my mouth before, And of my lips I thee beseech that thou wouldst keep the door. 4 Incline not my heart to any evill thing, to practise wicked works, with men that work ini∣quity: and let me not eat of their dainties. 4 My heart incline not unto ill, ill works let me not treat With men that work iniquity, nor of their dainties eat. 5 Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindnesse: and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil, 5 But let the righteous man me smite it shall a kindnesse be:
Let him reprove, it shall be as excellent oil to me, Which shall not break my head: for yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities. Which shall not break my head at all, for yet also by me For them in their calamities my prayer it shall be. 6 When their judges are overthrown in stoy places, they shall hear my words, for they are sweet. 6 When as their Judges overthrown in stony places meet, They surely then shall hear my words, for they are very sweet. 7 Our bones are scattered at the graves mouth▪ as when one cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth. 7 Ev'n at graves mouth our very bones they scattred are each one, As when one cutteth, and doth cleave the wood the earth upon. 8 But mine eyes are unto thee, O God the Lord: in thee is my trust, leave not my soul destitute. 8 But, O thou, who art God the Lord▪ mine eyes unto thee be▪
My soul leave thou not destitute, my trust it is in thee. 9 Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, and the grins of the workers of iniquity. 10 Let the wicked fall into their own nets: whilest that I withall escape. 9 Keep me from snares they laid for me and from ill workers trap, 10 In their own nets let wicked fall whilst I withall escape. PSAL. CXLII. I Cried unto the Lord with my voice: with my voice unto the Lord did I make my supplica∣tion. I Unto him that is the Lord, thus with my voice did cry, My supplication with my voice unto the Lord made I. 2 I poured out my complaint before him: I shewed before him my trouble. 2 Before him then I my complaints did poure out in great store, And what to me a trouble was I shewed him before. 3 When my spirit was overwhelmed with∣in me, then thou knewest my path: in the way
wherein I walked have they privily laid a snare for me. 3 When in me was ov'rwhelm'd my sprit, my path was known to thee: They snares in wayes wherein I walk'd laid privily for me. 4 I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know me, refuge failed me: no man cared for my soul. 4 On my right hand I look'd, and saw, but none at all was there That would me know, refuge me fail'd: none for my soul did care. 5 I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said, Thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of the living. 5 I unto thee, O Lord, did cry, I said unto thee then My portion and refuge thou art in land of living men. 6 Attend unto my cry, for I am brought ve∣ry low, deliver me from my persecutors for they are stronger then I. 6 Sith that I am brought very low, attend unto my cry: Me from my persecutors save, who stronger are then I. 7 Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy Name: the righteous shall compasse
me about: for thou shalt deal bountifullie with me. 7 That I thy Name may praise, bring thou my soul from prison free, The just me'l compasse, for thou shalt deal bounteously with me. PSAL. CXLIII. HEar my prayer, O Lord, give ear to my sup∣plications: in thy faithfulnesse answer me, and in thy righteousnesse. LOrd hear my prayer, my sutes hear thou and in thy faithfullnesse An answer give thou unto me, and in thy righteousnesse. 2 And enter not into judgement with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. 2 In judgement enter not with him that servant is to thee, For justified in thy sight no living man shall be. 3 For the enemy hath persecuted my soul, he hath smitten my life down to the ground: he hath made me to dwell in darknesse, as those that have been long dead. 3 For th en'mie hath my soul pursu'd, my life to ground hath tread, He hath me made in darknesse dwell, as those that long were dead.
4 Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me: my heart within me is desolate. 4 My spirit therefore me within is overwhelm'd by this, This heart of mine within me als all desolate it is. 5 I remember the dayes of old, I meditate on all thy works: I muse on the work of thy hands. 5 The dayes of old remember I, to meditate I use, On all thy workes; yea on the work done by thy hands I muse. 6 I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul thirsteth after thee, as a thirsty land. Selah. 6 I unto thee stretch forth my hands, my soul that is in me, Most like unto a thirsty land, still thirsteth after thee. Selah. 7 Hear me speedily, O Lord, my spirit fai∣leth, hide not thy face from me: lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit. 7 Lord, hear with speed, my spirit doth fail, hide not thy face from me, Lest like to them that do go down into the pit I be. 8 Cause me to hear thy loving kindnesse in the morning, for in thee do I trust, cause me to know the way wherein I should walk:
8 Cause me at morn thy kindnesse hear for in thee trust I doe, Cause thou me for to know the way wherein that I should go. For I lift up my soul unto thee. 9 Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: I flee unto thee to hide me. For I to thee lift up my soul, 9 O Lord deliver me From those mine enemies; me to hide I doe flee unto thee. 10 Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God, thy spirit is good: lead me into the land of uprightnesse. 10 Teach me to do thy will, for that thou art my God indeed: Thy sprit is good; into the land of uprightnesse me lead. 11 Quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake: for thy righteousnesse sake bring my soul out of trouble. 11 O for the sake of thine own Name, Lord, do thou quicken me, And do thou for thy righteousnes my soul from trouble free. 12 And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict my soul: for I am thy servant.
14 And of thy mercy cut thou off mine enemies, and the same Destroy all that afflict my soul, for I thy servant am. PSAL. CXLIV. BLessed be the Lord my strength, which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight. O Blessed ever be the Lord who is my strength alight, Which unto warre doth teach my hands, and fingers for to fight. 2 My goodnesse, and my fortresse, my high tower, and my deliverer, my shield, and he in whom I trust: who subdueth my people under mee. 2 My goodnesse, fortresse, shield, high tower, my saviour als, and he In whom I trust; who doth subdue my people under me. 3 Lord, what is man that thou takest know∣ledge of him: or the son of man, that thou ma∣kest account of him? 3 Lord, what is man that thou of him thus doest knowledge take? Or yet the son of man, that thou of him account dost make?
4 Man is like to vanity: his dayes are as a shadow that passeth away. 5 Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall smoak. 4 Man is like vanity; his dayes as shadows passe away. 5 Lord bow thy heavens, do thou come down, hils touch, and smoak shall they. 6 Cast forth lightning, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows, and destroy them. 6 Do thou thy lightnings bright cast forth, by scattring them annoy: Thine arrows also shoot thou out, and do thou them destroy. 7 Send thine hand from above, rid me and deliver me out of great waters: from the hand of strange children. 7 Do thou thy hand send from above, rid and deliver me Out of great waters; from the hands of children strange that be. 8 Whose mouth speaketh vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of falshood. 8 Whose mouth doth utter words which are but words of vanity, And their right hand a right hand is of falsehood utterly.
9 I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: upon a psaltery, and an instrument of ten strings will I sing praises unto thee. 9 A new song Lord, I'le to thee sing upon a Psalterie: On instrument that hath ten strings I'le praises sing to thee. 10 It is he that giveth salvation unto kings: who delivereth David his servant from the hurt∣full sword. 10 It's he that doth salvation unto great Kings afford, And who his servant David als saves from the hurtfull sword. 11 Rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose mouth speaketh vani∣ty: and their right hand is a right hand of falshood. 11 Rid, save me from strange childrens hands, whose mouth speaks vanity, And their right hand a right hand is of falsehood utterly. 12 That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth: that our daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude of a palace. 12 That as the plants our sons may be in youth grown up that are,
Our daughters as the corner stones, drest like a palace rare. 13 That our garners may be full, affor∣ding all manner of store: that our sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets, 13 That full our garners may afford all manner of store for meat, That thousands forth our sheep may bring, ten thousands in our street. 14 That our oxen may be strong to labour; that there be no breaking in, nor going out: that there be no complaining in our streets. 14 Our oxen be to labour strong, that no inbreaking be, Nor going out, and that our streets be of complaining free. 15 Happy is that people that is in such a case: yea happy is that people, whose God is the Lord. 15 That people happy is, that is in such a case restord, Yea happy is that people all whose God is ev'n the Lord. PSAL. CXLV. I Will extoll thee, my God, O king: and I will blesse thy Name for ever and ever:
2 Every day will I blesse thee: and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever. I'Le thee extoll my▪ God and King, and blesse thy Name alwayes, 2 Each day I will thee blesse, and will thy Name for ever praise. 3 Great is the Lord, and greatly to bee praised: and his greatnesse is unsearchable. 3 Great is the Lord, and greatly he is to be prais'd in this, The greatnesse als that is in him, unsearchable it is. 4 One generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts. 4 One generation shall praise thy works unto another: And clearly also shall declare thy mighty acts together. 5 I will speak of the glorious honour of thy majestie: and of thy wondrous works. 5 The honour of thy majesty that glorious is in thee, I'le of it speak, and of thy works that very wondrous be. 6 And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts: and I will declare thy greatnesse. 6 Men of the might of all thy acts that very dreadfull are,
Shall utter speaches; and I will thy greatnesse so declare. 7 They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodnesse: and shall sing of thy righte∣ousnesse. 7 They utter shall abundantly the memorie to all Of thy great goodnesse, yea and sing thy righteousnesse they shall. 8 The Lord is gracious and full of com∣passion: slow to anger, and of great mercy. 8 Full of compassion, gracious the Lord is unto his, He is als unto anger slow, of mercy great he is. 9 The Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works. 6 The Lord our God he unto all his goodnesse doth declare, And over all the workes he doth his tender mercies are. 10 All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord: and thy saints shall blesse thee. 11 They shall speak of the glory of thy king∣dome: and talk of thy power. 10 Thee all thy workes shall praise, O Lord, thy Saints shall blesse thee all:
11 Thy kingdomes glory tell shall they, talk of thy power they shall. 12 To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts: and the glorious majestie of his kingdome. 12 To make known to the sonnes of men his acts that mighty be, And of the kingdome that is his the glorious majestie. 13 Thy kingdome is an everlasting king∣dome: and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations. 13 Thy kingdome it a kingdome is that's everlasting sure, And thy dominion throughout all ages doth endure. 14 The Lord upholdeth all that fall: and raiseth up all those that be bowed down. 14 He that is the Almighty Lord upholdeth all that fall, And those that low be bowed down up high he raiseth all. 15 The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou givest them their meat in due season. 15 The eyes of all things evry where they do upon thee waite, And in the season that is due thou givest them their meat.
16 Thou openest thine hand: and satis∣fiest the desire of every living thing. 16 Thy hand thou dost it open make and also liberally, Thou the desire of evry thing that lives dost satisfy. 17 The Lord is righteous in all his wayes: and holy in all his works. 18 The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him: to all that call upon him in truth. 17 The Lord in all his wayes is just, in his workes holy all▪ 18 God near is all that call on him, in trueth that on him call. 19 He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and will save them. 19 And the desire fulfill he will of them that do him fear He will them save, he will also unto their cry give eare. 20 The Lord preserveth all them that love him: but all the wicked will he destroy. 20 The Lord to all that do him love will a preserver be, But as for those that wicked are, them all destroy will he.
21 My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh blesse his holy Name for ever and ever. 21 The praise of him that is the Lord, my mouth it shall proclame: And let all flesh for ever and ever, so blesse his holy Name. PSAL. CXLVI. PRaise ye the Lord: praise the Lord, O my soul. 2 While I live will I praise the Lord: I will sing praises unto my God, while I have any being. PRaise God; the Lord praise, O my soul: 2 I'le praise God while I live: While I have being, to my God in songs I'le praises give. 3 Put not your trust in Princes: nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help. 3 See that ye do not put your trust in Princes, nor for this In him that is the son of man in whom no help there is. 4 His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth: in that very day his thoughts perish. 4 His breath goes forth, and after he returneth to his clay,
The thoughts of his do perish all in that same very day. 5 Happy is he that hath the God of Iacob for his help: whose hope is in the Lord his God. 5 He happy is that hath the God of Jacob to afford Unto him help; whose stedfast hope is in his God the Lord. 6 Which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein is: which keepeth truth for ever. 6 Which made the Heaven and the earth the sea, and whatsoever Within the same hath its abode, which keepeth trueth for ever. 7 Which executeth judgement for the oppressed, which giveth food to the hungry: the Lord oseth the prisoners. 7 Which judgement executs for such, as that oppressed be, Who gives unto the hungry food: God sets the prisoners free. 8 The Lord openeth the eyes of the blind, the Lord raiseth them that are bowed down: the Lord loveth the righteous. 8 Eyes of the blind God openeth, the Lord he raiseth thus
Them that are greatly bowed down, God loves the righteous. 9 The Lord preserveth the strangers, he re∣lieveth the fatherlesse and widow: but the way of the wicked he turneth upside down. 9 God strangers keeps, he widows helps and fatherlesse that be: But of the wicked men the way upside down turneth he. 10 The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord. 10 The Lord he shall for ever reign, O Zion, even he Thy God to generations all: praise to the Lord give ye. PSAL. CXLVII. PRaise ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises unto our God: for it is pleasant, and praise is comely. PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good praise to our God to sing: For it is pleasant, and also praise is a comely thing. 2 The Lord doth build up▪ Ierusalem: he gathereth together the outcasts of Israel. 3 He healeth the broken in heart: and bin∣deth up their wounds.
2 God builds Jerus'lem, and th'out casts gathreth of Israel: 3 Their wounds he bindeth up, and he the broken in heart doth heal. 4 He telleth the number of the stars: he calleth them all by their names. 5 Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite. 4 He tels the number of the Stars, them all by names doth call, 5 Great is our Lord, and of great power his knowledge passeth all: 6 The Lord lifteth up the meek; he casteth the wicked down to the ground. 7 Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving: sing praise upon the harp unto our God. 6 God up the meek lifts, he to ground casts those that wicked be: 7 With thanks to God sing, on the harp praise to our God sing ye. 8 Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth: who maketh grasse to grow upon the mountains. 8 Who cover doth the heav'n with clouds who for the earth below Prepareth rain; who maketh grasse upon the mountains grow.
9 He giveth to the beast his food: and to the young ravens which cry. 10 He delighteth not in the strength of the horse: he taketh not pleasure in the legs of  man. 9 He giveth to the beast his food, and to young rav'ns which cry: 10 He not delights in strength of horse, mans legs he cares not by. 11 The Lord taketh pleasure in them th fear him: in those that hope in his mercy. 11 But in all them that do him fear the Lord doth pleasure take, In them that to his mercy do in hope themselves betake. 12 Praise the Lord, O Ierusalem: praise thy God, O Zion. 13 For he hath strengthned the bars of th gates: he hath blessed thy children within thee. 12 The Lord praise, O Jerusalem, thy God O Zion praise, 13 For thy gates barres he did make strong and thy sonnes in thee blesse: 14 He maketh peace in thy borders: a silleth thee with the finest of the wheat. 15 He sendeth forth his commandement  on earth: his word runneth very swiftly.
14 He in thy costs makes peace, he thee with finest wheat doth fill. 15 He his commands sends forth on earth, his word runs swiftly still. 16 He giveth snow like wooll: he scatte∣reth the hoar frost like ashes. 17 He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold? 16 Hoare frosts like ashes scattreth he, like wooll gives snow on land: 17 Like morsells forth his yce he casts, who in his cold can stand. 18 He sendeth out his word, and melteth them: he causeth his wind to blow, and the wa∣ters flow. 18 He sends his word and melteth them, and also for to blow wind he causeth by his might, and then the waters flow. 19 He sheweth his word unto Iacob: his statutes and his judgements unto Israel. 19 Unto his servant Jacob he his word so doth reveal, His statuts and his judgements both, unto his Israel. 20 He hath not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgements, they have not known them. Praise ye the Lord.
20 He not with any Nation to deal so did accord, And they his judgements have not known, O do ye praise the Lord. PSAL. CXLVIII. PRaise ye the Lord, Praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise him in the heights. UNto the Lord do ye give praise, give ye unto the Lord Praise from the heavens▪ in the hights praise unto him afford. 2 Praise ye him all his angels: praise ye him all his hosts. 3 Praise ye him sun and moon: praise him all ye stars of light. 2 All ye his Angels praise ye him, his hosts all praise him ye: 3 Praise him ye Sun and Moon: praise him all stars of light that be. 4 Praise him ye heaven of heavens: and e waters that be above the heavens▪ 5 Let them praise the Name of the Lord: for he commanded, and they were created. 4 Praise him ye heav'n of heav'ns, ye floods above the heav'ns that are: 5 Let them Gods Name praise, for he bad, and they created were.
6 He hath also established them for ever and ever: he hath made a decree which shall not passe. 6 For ever and for ever als them shablished hath he; And which for ever shall not passe he hath made a decree. 7 Praise the Lord from the earth: ye dra∣gons and all deeps. 8 Fire and hail, snow and vapour: stormy wind fulfilling his word. 7 Ye dragons, and als ye all deeps praise from the earth the Lord: 8 Fire, hail, snow, vapour, stormy wind fulfilling all his word. 9 Mountains and all hills: fruitfull trees and all cedars. 10 Beasts and all cattell: creeping things and flying fowl. 9 All hils and mountains, fruitfull trees, and all ye cedars hye; 10 Beasts and all cattel, creeping things, and ye the fowls that fly. 11 Kings of the earth and all people: princes and all judges of the earth. 12 Both young men and maidens: old men and children.
11 Kings of the earth, all people, als princes, earths judges all: 12 Ye young men and ye maidens both, old men and children small. 13 Let them praise the Name of the Lord, for his Name alone is excellent: his glory is above the earth and heaven. 13 Let them Gods Name praise, for his Name is excellent alone; His glory is above the earth, and heaven also gone. 14 He also exalteth the horn of his people, the praise of all his saints: even of the children of Israel, a people neer unto him. Praise ye the Lord. 14 His peoples horn, of all his saints the praise, exalteth he; A people near him, Israels sons: praise to the Lord give ye. PSAL. CXLIX. PRaise ye the Lord: sing unto the Lord a new song: and his praise in the congrega∣tion of saints. PRaise ye the Lord, and a new song sing ye the Lord unto, And in the congregation of Saints his praise also.
2 Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of Zion be joyfull in their king. 2 Let Israel in him rejoice, who by his might him made, Let them that Zions children are in their own King be glade. 3 Let them praise his Name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with the timbrell and harp. 3 O in the dance unto his Name let them all praises bring, Let them with timbrell, and with harp unto him praises sing. 4 For the Lord taketh pleasure in his people: he will beautifie thee meek with salvation. 4 For God in those doth pleasure take that his own people be, The meek with his salvation als beautifie will he. 5 Let the saints be joyfull in glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds. 5 O let all those that are the saints in glory great rejoice, And let them also on their beds aloud sing with their voice. 6 Let the high praises of God be in their mouth: and a two-edged sword in their hand.
6 And let there be with in their mouth high praises of the Lord, And let there so be in their hand a sharp two edged sword. 7 To execute vengeance upon the heathen: and punishments upon the people. 8 To bind their kings with chaines, and their wobles with fetters of iron. 7 To punish people, t'execute vengeance the heathen on: 8 Their kings with chains, their nobles als to bind with bands of iron. 9 To execute upon them the judgement writ∣ten: This honour have all his saints. Praise ye the Lord. 9 On them judgement to execute that's written in his word, This honour have all Saints of his, praise give ye to the Lord. PSAL. CL. PRaise ye the Lord. Praise God in his san∣ctuary: praise him in the firmament of his power. PRaise ye the Lord▪ praise God within his Sanctuary he, Unto him in the firmament of his pow'r praise give ye.
2 Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his excellent greatnesse. 2 And for his acts that mighty are praise unto him expresse, Do ye him praise according to his excellent greatnesse. 3 Praise him with the sound of the trum∣pet: praise him with the psalterie and harp. 4 Praise him with the timbrell and dance: praise him with stringed instruments and or∣gans. 3 With trumpets sound him praise; him praise with harp and psaltere: 4 With timbrel, dance, string'd instruments and organs praise him yee. 5 Praise him upon the loud cymbals: praise him upon the high sounding cymbals. 6 Let every thing that hath breath praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord. 5 Praise him on cymbals loud, him praise on cymbals sounding hie: 6 Let each thing breathing praise the Lord: praise to the Lord give yee. FINIS.
THE SONGS OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT IN MEETER: By M. ZACHARY BOYD Preacher of Gods Word. EPHES. 5. 18. 19. Be ye filled with the Spirit, &c. Speaking to your selves in Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spirituall Songs, singing and ma∣king melody in your heart to the Lord. GLASGOW, Printed by the Heires of GEORGE ANDERSON. Anno 1648.
The Songs of the Old and New Testament. THe Song of Songs, 1 The Song of Moses at the red Sea. 2 The song of Moses a little before his death 3 The song of Deborah. 4 The song of Hannah. 5 Davids lamentations for Saul and Ionathan. 6 The song of David at the promise of Messias. 7 The song of Isaiah concerning the vineyard. 8 Isaiahs song of thanks for Gods mercies. 9 Isaiahs song inciing to confidence in God. 10 The song of Hezekiah. 11 The Lamentations of Ieremiah. 12 The song of Ionah. 13 The song of Habakkuk. 14 The song of Marie. 15 The song of Zacharies. 16 The song of Simeon. 17
To the right Reve∣rend, the faithfull Ministers of GODS Word of the Church of Scotland. RIGHT REVEREND, IT pleased You in the Generall Assem∣bly last, at Edinburgh, Anno 1647. to take to your consideration, the great utility the Church of GOD may have by the Songs contained in holy Scriptures; After due deliberation, it pleased You to ordain that I should labour in that work▪ In obedience unto You, I have endeavoured to come as neer to the Text as was possible for me to do; And those my labours I in all humility
offer to be considered, by the most learned and most judicious Brethren, that the Church having the use thereof, may in obedience to the Apostles precept Ephes. 5. 18. in Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spirituall Songs, make melody in their heart to the Lord, whom I intreat in all humility to direct You in all things by his holy Spirit; So I re∣main From Glasgow, the 27 of February, 1648. Your humble servant in the LORD, M. ZACHARY BOYD.
THE SONG OF Solomon made in praise of Christ, and his Church. CHAPTER I. The Church speaketh to Christ. LEt him kisse me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better then wine. LEt him with kisses of his mouth to kisse me now incline, For sure thy love farre better is then is the finest wine. 2 Because of the savour of thy good oynt∣ments, thy name is as oyntment powred forth, therefore do the virgins love thee. 2 Because that of thine ointments ood the savour sweet doth prove, Thy Name as ointment forth is powr'd thee therefore virgins love. 3 Draw me, we will run after thee: the King hath brought me into his chambers: 3 Do thou me draw and then anone we after thee will run: The King himself he hath me now his chambers brought within.
We will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more then wine: the upright love thee. We'l in thee glade be and rejoice, thy love also will wee Remeber more then finest wine, the upright do love thee. 4 I am black, but comely, (O ye daughters of Ierusalem) as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon. 4 O Salems▪ daughters black I am, but yet a comely one As tents of Kedar, and ev'n as curtains of Solomon. 5 Look not upon me because I am black, be∣cause the Sun hath looked upon me. 5 Upon me look not ye, because I black do seem to be, Because the Sun hath with his beames long looked upon me. My mothers children were angry with mee, they made me the keeper of the vineyards, but mine own vineyard have. I not kept. My mothers children wroth with me the vineyards keeper made, But I my self have not at all so kept mine own vineyard.
6 Tell me (O thou whom my soul loveth) where thou feedest, where thou makest thy flock to rest at noon: 6 O thou, whom dearly loves my soul, I pray thee tell me soon Where thou dost feed, and where thou makst thy flock to rest at noon. For why should I be as one that turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions? For why▪ should I be any▪ way▪ as one that turnes aside By flocks of thy companions where ev'r they do abide? CHRIST. 7 If thou know not, (O thou fairest among women) go thy way forth by the footsteps▪ of▪ the flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds tents. 7 O fairest one if thou not know, by the flocks footsteps go, And do thou feed thy kids beside the shepherds tents also. 8 I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaohs charlots▪ 8 My love unto a company I have compared thee, Of horses in the chariots that for King Pharo be.
9 Thy cheeks are comely with rows of jew∣els, thy neck with chains of gold. 10 We will make thee borders of gold with studs of silver. 9 With jewell rows thy cheeks are fair, with chaines of gold thy neck: 10 Of gold we borders will thee make which silver studs do deek. The Church. 11 While the king sitteth at his table, my spikenard sendeth forth the smell thereof. 12 A bundle of myrrhe is my welbeloved un∣to me; 11 While at his table sits the King my spiknard sends it smell: 12 Of mirrhe a bundle unto me is my beloved well. He shall ly all night betwixt my breasts. 13 My beloved is unto me, as a cluster of Camphire, in the vineyards of Engedi. Betwixt my breasts hee'le lie all night 13 My welbelov'd's to me As of Engedies vineyards rare, the Camphires clusters be: CHRIST. 14 Behold▪ thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair, thou hast doves eyes.
14 O do behold, most fair thou art ev'n thou my love so rare, Behold of Doves the eyes thou hast, and thou art very fair. The Church. 15 Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea pleasant: also our bed is green. 16 The beams of our house are cedar, and our rafters of fire. 15 Lo, pleasant fair thou art my love, green also is our bed: 16 Beams of our house they cedars are, of firre our rafters made. CHAPTER II. CHRIST. I Am the rose of Sharon, and the lilly of the valleyes. 2 As the lilly among thornes, so is my love among the daughters. I'M Sharons rose, the lilly als that valleyes growes along: As lillies among thornes, my love so daughters is among. The Church. 3 As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons. 3 As the apple tree among the trees is of the wood so throng,
So likewise my Beloved is▪ the sons of men among. I sate down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. Under his shadow I sate down with great delight there plac't, And there his fruit which pleasant is was sweet unto my taste. 4 He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was love. 4 Unto the house of banqueting▪ to come he did me move: His banner that was over me was altogether love. 5 Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples; for I am sick of love. 6 His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth embrace me. 5 Me sick of love with flagons stay, with apples me solace: 6 Under my head his left hand is, his right me doth embrace. 7 I charge you, O▪ ye daughters of Ieru∣salem, by the Roes, and by the Hinds of the field▪ that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he please. 7 By Roes, field Hindes, O Salems maids, I charge you that ye cease
o stir or yet at all awake my love, untill he please. 8 The voice of my beloved! behold, he co∣th leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon e hils. The voice of my Belov'd! behold! he cometh thus anone pon the mountains leaping high and skipping hills upon. 9 My beloved is like a roe, or a young hart: hold, he standeth behinde our wall, he looketh rth at the windows, shewing himself through e lattesse. He's like a Roe or Hart that's young, he stands behind our wall, t windowes he looks forth, himself he shews through lattesse all. 10 My beloved spake, and said unto me, se up my love, my faire one, and come away. 11 For lo, the winter is past, the raine is over d gone. Then my Belov'd said, Rise my love, away come my fair▪ One: For lo the winter it is past, the rain is ov'r and gone. 12 The flowers appear on the earth, the time the singing of birds is come, and the voice of  turtle is heard in our land.
12 The flowers upon the earth appear, of singing of the bird The time is come; the Turtles voice within our land is heard. 13 The fig-tree putteth forth her green figs and the vines with the tender grape give a good smell. Arise, my love, my faire one, and come away. 13 The fig tree her green figs puts forth, vines with grapes tender they Do sweetly smell; arise my love my fair one come away. CHRIST. 14 O my dove that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs, 14 O thou my dove that art ev'n now in clifts within the rock, Within the secret places of the staires where thou dost lurk. Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy counte∣nance is comely. Let thou me see thy countenance, thy voice let thou me hear, For sweet thy voice is, and also thy countenance is clear. 15 Take us the Foxes, the little foxes that spoile the vines: for our vines have tender grapes.
15 Do ye for us the foxes take, foxes that little be That spoile the vines, for tender grapes our vines have, as ye see. The Church. 16 My beloved is mine, and I am his: he edeth among the lillies. 16 My Welbeloved sure is mine, and I am his indeed, among the lillies smelling sweet he pleasantly doth feed. 17 Untill the day break▪ and the shadowes e away: turn my beloved, and be thou like a oe, or a young Hart, upon the mountains of ether. 17 Untill day break and shads flee hence, turn my belov'd, and be Thou like a Roe, or Hart that's young on Bethers mountains hie. CHAPTER III. BY night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but I found n not. BY night I did upon my bed him seek with all my minde hom my soul loveth; I him sought, but him I did not find.
2 I will rise now, and go about the citie in the streets, and in the broad wayes I will seek him whom my Soul loveth: 2 I will now rise, and in the streets about the city move, And in the broad wayes I will seek him whom my soul doth love. I sought him, but I found him not. 3 The watchmen that goe about the city found mee: to whom I said, Saw ye him whom my Soul loveth. I sought him, but I found him not, 3 The Cities watchmen me Did find; I said then did ye him whom my soul loveth see? 4 It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my Soul loveth; 4 It but a little was that I from them did passe away, But I him whom my soul doth love did find without delay: I held him, and would not let him goe, untill I had brought him into my mothers house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me. I held and would not let him go, untill that by me he Was to her house and chamber brought that had conceived me.
5 I charge you, O ye daughters of Ierusa∣lem, by the Roes, and by the Hindes of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till hee please. 5 O Salems daughters I you charge by Roes, field Hindes ye cease To stir or yet for to awake my love untill he please. 6 Who is this that cometh out of the wil∣dernesse like pillars of smoake, perfumed with myrrhe and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant. 6 Of smoak like pillars who is this that comes from wildernesse, Perfum'd with frankincense and mirrhe, all merchands powders als. 7 Behold his bed, which is Solomons: three∣score valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel. 7 Behold, his bed is Solomons, threescore men valiant all About it are, of those that are the valiant of Isra'l. 8 They all hold swords, being expert in war, Every man hath his sword upon his thigh, be∣cause of fear in the night. 8 Expert in war, they all do hold swords in their hands most bright,
ach man his sword hath on his thigh, because of fear by night. 9 King Solomon made himself a charet o the wood of Lebanon. 10 He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold, 9 Of Lebanons wood Solomon himself a charet made; 10 It's pillars made of silver were, with gold the bottome laid: The covering of it of purple, the midst there∣of being paved with love, for the daughters of Ierusalem. The cov'ring of it purple was, the midst of it for them Was pav'd with love, that daughters were of his Jerusalem. 11 Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon, 11 O ye that Zions daughters are do ye go forth anone, And do ye with great reverence behold king Solomon. With the crown wherewith his mother crow∣ned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladnesse of his heart. With crown wherewith his mother him crown'd in his spousals day,
And in the day his heart was fill'd with gladenesse ev'ry way. CHAPTER IV. CHRIST. BEhold, thou art faire, my love, behold thou art faire, thou hast doves eyes within thy locks: BEhold my love thou art most fair, behold fair is thy skin, The pure and christ eyes of the Dove thou hast thy locks-within: Thy haire is as a flock of goats, that appeare from mount Gilead. Thy haire that is upon thy head, is also very near Like to a flock of goats that from mount Gilead do appear. 2 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, that are even shorn which came up from the washing, whereof every one beare twins, and none is barreu among them. 2 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, even shorn from washing gone, Whereof each one bare twins, and them among is barren none. 3 Thy lips are like a threed of scarlet, and thy speach is comely: thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks.
3 Thy speach is comely, and thy lips like scarlet threed we see, Within thy locks thy temples like piece of pomgranats be. 4 Thy neck is like the tower of David, buil∣ded for an armory, whereon there hang a thou∣sand bucklers, all shields of mighty men. 4 Thy neck is like King Davids tower, built for an armorie, Whereon a thousand bucklers hang, mens shields that mighty be. 5 Thy two breasts are like two young Roes that are twins, which feed among the lillies. 5 Thy breasts in number two are like unto two Roes indeed That young are, and are also twins which 'mong the lillies feed. 6 Untill the day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the monntaine of myrrhe, and to the hill of frankincense. 6 Untill the day most clearly break and shaddows flee from hence; I'le get me to thee mounts of Myrrhe, and hill of frankincense. 7 Thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee. 8 Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon:
7 Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot at all in thee: 8 Spouse come with me from Lebanon from Lebanon with me. Look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the Lyons dens, from the mountains of the Leopards. Look from the tops of Amana, Shenir and Hermon hie, From Lions dens, from mountaines great where Leopards there be. 9 Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, thou hast ravished my heart, with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. 9 My heart thou ravish'd, sister, spouse, my heart thou in effect Hast ravish'd with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. 10 How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse, how much better is thy love then wine? and the smell of thine oyntments then all spices. 10 How fair's thy love, my sister spouse? how better much then wine Is this thy love! thine ointments smell more then all spices fine! 11 Thy lips, O my spouse drop as the hon
comb, hony and milk are under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Le∣banon. 11 Thy lips, Spouse, drop as hony comb, the honey milk excell Under thy tongue; as Lebanon thy garments they do smell. 12 A garden inclosed is my sister, my spouse: a spring shut up, a fountain sealed. 12 My sister spouse a garden is, which is inclosed well, A spring shut up, a fountain als whereon is set a seal. 13 Thy plants are an orchard of Pomegra∣nates, with pleasant fruits, Camphire, with Spikenard. 13 Thy plants an orchard are also ev'n of pomegranates rare, With pleasant fruits, the Camphire sweet and Spiknard likewise are: 14 Spikenard and Saffron, Calamus and Cy∣namon, with all trees of frankincense, Myrrhe, and Aloes, with all the chief spices: 14 Spiknard, Saffron, and Calamus, and Cynamon with all, Trees of frankincense, Aloes, Mirrhe, all spices principall.
15 A fountaine of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon. 15 A fountain for to water well the gardens all anone: A well of living waters als and streames from Lebanon. The Church. 16 Awake, O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out; 16 O north wind, do thou now awake, and come thou south about, Upon my garden blow, that so its spices may flow out: Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits. Let him that my beloved is come to his garden sweet, That he his fruits that pleasant are may with contentment eat. CHAPTER V. CHRIST. I Am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my Myrrhe with my spice, MY sister and my spouse, I am my garden come into, I carefully have gathered my mirrhe and spice also.
I have eaten my hony comb with my honey, I have drunk my wine with my milk: eat, O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O be∣loved! I hony comb with hony ate, my wine, milk, drunk have I, Eat, O ye friends, drink O Belov'd; yea, drink abundantly. The Church. 2 I sleep, but mine heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that knocketh, saying, 2 I sleep securely but my heart doth wake both night and day, It is the voice of my Belov'd that knocking thus doth say, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. My Sister, Love, Dove, undefil'd, now open to me right, For filled is my head with dew, my locks with drops of night. 3 I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? 3 I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on a while? I washed also have my feet how shall I them defile?
4 My beloved put in his hand by the hole o the door, and my bowels were moved for him. 4 By of the door the hole his hand my Welbelov'd put in, And for him then my bowels all were moved me within. 5 I rose up to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with Myrrhe, and my fingers with sweet smelling Myrrhe, upon the handles of the lock. 5 To open to my love I rose, my hands with myrrhe did drop, My fingers with sweet smelling myrrhe on handles of the lock. 6 I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone: 6 To my Belov'd I op'ned then, but my Belov'd alone Withdrawn himself had farre away, and from the door was gone: My soul failed: when he spake I sought him but I could not finde him: I called him, but he gave me no answer. My soul it failed when he spake, I after him did crave, But could not find him, I him call'd, but he no answer gave.
7 The watchmen that went about the citie▪ found me, they smote mee, they wounded me▪ the keepers of the walls took away my vaile from me. 7 The cities watchmen found me then, me smot, me wounded they, The keepers of the wals▪ they took my vail from me away. 8 I charge you, O daughters of Ierusalem, if ye finde my beloved, that ye tell him, that I am sick of love. 8 O daughters of Jerusalem I charge you from above, If my Belov'd ye find, that yee him tell, I'm sick of love. The Daughters of Ierusalem. 9 What is thy beloved more then another beloved, O thou fairest among women? what is thy beloved more then another beloved, that thou dost so charge us? 9 O fairest, among women thou what's thy Beloved▪more? What is he more then others are, that thou dost charge so sore? The Church. 10 My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand. 11 His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushie and black as a raven.
10 Both white and rudy's my Belov'd, chief among thousands ten: 11 His head's as gold, his bushy locks are black as is a rav'n. His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, washed with milk and fit∣ly set. 12 His eyes are as the eyes of doves that by the rivers sit, They washed also are with milk and they are fitly set. 13 His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his lips like lillies, dropping sweet smelling myrrhe. 13 His cheeks are as the spices bed, as flowers that sweet excell, His lips like lillies droping Myrrhe, that hath the sweetest smell. 14 His hands are as gold rings set with the▪ Berill: His belly is as bright ivory, overlaid with Saphires. 14 His hands as gold rings als are set with Berill richly made, His belly as bright ivory is with Saphires overlaid. 15 His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his countenance is as Leba∣non, excellent as the Cedars.
15 His legs like Marble pillars are, on fine gold sockets set; His count'nance is as Lebanon, as Cedars passing great. 16 His mouth is most sweet: yea, he is alto∣gether lovely: This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Ierusalem. 16 Most sweet his mouth is, yea he is most lovely altogether: This my Belov'd, and this my Friend is, O thou Salems daughter. CHAPTER VI. The Daughters of Ierusalem. WHether is thy beloved gone? O thou fai∣rest among women, whether is thy belo∣ved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee. O Whither's thy Beloved gone, of women all most fair? O whither turn'd, that we with thee may seek him, now declare? The Church. 2 My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather lillies. 2 Into his garden my Belov'd to beds of spices rare,
To feed in gardens is gone down to gather lillies there. 3 I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine: he feedeth among the lillies. 3 My Welbeloveds I am all, and my Belov'd indeed Is likewise mine: and now he doth among the lillies feed. CHRIST. 4 Thou art beautifull, O my love as Tirzah▪ comely as Ierusalem, terrible as an army with banners. 4 My love as Tirza beautifull as Salem comely so Thou art; as one host terrible that doth with banners go. 5 Turne away thine eyes from me for they have overcome me: thy hair is as a flock of goats that appear from Gilead. 5▪ From me thine eyes turn thou away, for they me overcome, Thy hair is as a flock of goats from Gilead that do come. 6 Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing, whereof every one bea∣reth twins, and there is not one barren among them.
6 Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep, which go from washing throng: Each one bears twins and there is not one barren them among. 7 As a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples within thy locks. 7 The temples also of thine head within thy locks that ly, As of a pomegranate a pece do seem right pleasantly. 8 There are threescore Queens, and foure∣score Concubines, and Virgins without num∣ber. 8 Though threescore of fair queens there be, and concubines fourscore, And virgins als them to attend, ev'n without number more. 9 My dove, my undefiled is but one▪ she is the only one of her mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her: 9 My Dove my undefild's but one, she of her mother are Is th' onely one, and she the choise is of her that her bare. The daughters saw her, and blessed her▪ yea, the Queens and the Concubines and they praised her.
The daughters of the land her saw, and blessed her likewise, Yea ev'n the Queens and Concubines and they als did her praise. 10 Who is she that looketh foorth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners? 10 Who's she as morning that looks forth, fair as the Moon, and clear As is the sun, and armies as that dreadfull banners bear. 11 I went down into the garden of nuts, to see the fruits of the valley, and to see whether the vine flourished, and the pomegranates budded. 11 I down to the Nut-garden went the valleys fruits to see: To see if vines were flourh'd, and pomegranates budded be. 12 Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of Amminadab. 12 Or ever then I was aware, my soul it at the last Like charets of Aminadab made me to make great hast. 13 Return, return, O Shulamite, return, re∣turn, that we may look upon thee:
13 Return, return O Shulamite, return, return to me: That we with gladnesse great of heart may so now look on thee▪ What will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two armies. What will ye in the Shulamite with great contentment see? Ev'n such a sight as if it were two Armies companie. CHAPTER VII. HOw beautifull are thy feet with shooes, O Princes daughter, the joynts of thy things are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cun∣ning work-man. HOw beatifull thy feet with shoes O Princes daughter are! Joints of thy things are jewels like wrought by a work-man rare. 2. Thy navell is like a round goblet, which wanteth not licour: thy belly is like an heap of wheat, set about with lillies. 2 Thy navel's like a goblet round, which liquor wanteth not▪ Thy belly's like an heap of wheat, with lillies set about. 3 Thy two breasts are like two young Roes, that are twins.
4 Thy neck is as a tower of ivory: thine eyes like the fish pooles in Heshbon, by the gate of Bathrabbim: 3 Thy breasts are like two twin young Roes: 4 As ivory tower is set Thy neck, thine eyes like Heshbons pools hard by Bathrabbims gate. Thy nose is as the towre of Lebanon, which looketh toward Damascus. Thy nose it is ev'n like the towre that is in Lebanon, Which toward all the city of Damascus looketh down. 5 Thine head upon thee is like Carmell, and the haire of thine head like purple, the King is held in the galleries. 5 Thy head on thee is Carmel like, als of thine head the hair Is Purple like, the King is held in galleries most rare. 6 How faire, and how pleasant art thou, O Love, for delights! 7 This thy stature is like to a palme tree, and thy breasts to clusters of grapes. 6 O love how art thou for delights both pleasant and how fair! Thy stature's like palme trees, thy breasts they like grapes clusters are.
8 I said, I will go up to the palme tree, I will take hold of the boughs thereof, 8 I did then say that I go up unto the palme tree wold, Yea of the boughs thereof I will with all my force take hold. Now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine, and the smell of thy nose like apples. Now also shall thy breasts all be as clusters of the vine, And of thy nose the pleasant smell like apples that are fine. 9 And the roofe of thy mouth like the best wine for my beloved, that goeth down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep, to speak. 9 Roof of thy mouth like best wine is that sweetly down doth go For my Belov'd, and sleepers lips doth cause to speak also. The Church. 10 I am my beloveds, and his desire is to∣wards me. 11 Come my beloved, let us go forth into the field: 10 I my Beloveds am, and his desire is towarde me,
11 Come my Belov'd, unto the field, let us forth going be, Let us lodge in the villages. 12 Let us get up early to the vineyards, let us see if the vine flourtsh, Let us lodge in the villages: 12 Up early get to be At vineyards, if so that the vines do flourish let us see: Whether the tender grapesappear, and the pomegranates bud forth: there will I give thee my loves. Ev'n whether tender grapes appear, and pomegranates bud forth, There surely will I give to thee my loves of greatest worth. 13 The mandraks give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old which I have laid up for thee, O my loved. 3 The mandrakes smell, and at our gates all pleasant fruits there be, Both new and old, which I laid up, O my Belov'd for thee▪
CHAPTER VIII. The believing Iews. O That thou wert as my brother that sucked the breasts of my mother, when I should find thee without, O That thou as my brother wert that of my mother kind Did suck the breasts, even at what time I thee without should find. I would kisse thee, yet I should not be de∣spised. 2 I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mothers house, who would instruct me: I would thee kisse, yet not be loth'd 2 Yea I would thee conduct, And bring thee to my mothers house who would me there instruct. I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my pomegranate. 3 His left hand should be under my head: nd his right hand should embrace me. would thee cause drink spiced wine of my pomegranats juice: 3 Under my head his left hand laid, his right should me embrace. 4 I charge you, O daughters of Ierusalem, hat ye stirre not up, nor awake my love untill e please.
4 O daughters of Jerusalem, I charge you that you cease To stir up or awake my love, and that untill he please. CHRIST. 5 Who is this that cometh up from the wil∣dernesse, leaning upon her beloved? 5 Who is this from the wildernesse that comes up by and by? And thus on her Beloved One doth leaning still rely? I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy mother brought thee forth, there she brought thee foorth that bare thee. Under the aple tree I thee did raise up being there, Thy mother there thee did bring forth, she brought forth that thee bare. Iewish Church. 6 Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arme: For love is strong as death, jealousie is cruell as the grave: 6 Me as a seal upon thine heart as seal on arme m'ingrave: For love's as death▪ strong, jealousie is cruell as the grave. The coals thereof are coals of fire, which hath a most vehement flame.
7 Many waters cannot quench love, neithe can the flouds drown it: The coals thereof are coals of fire, which hath a vehement flame: 7 The waters great, love can not quench nor floods can drown the same. If a man would give all the substance of  house for love, It would utterly be contemned If of his house the substance all a man for love to buy Would gladely give, yet would it be contemned utterly. 8 We have a little sister, and she hath  breasts, what shall we do for our sister, in i day when she shall be spoken for? 8 We have a little sister, which no breasts hath lesse or more, What shall we for her do the day she shall be spoken for? CHRIST. 9 If she be a wall, we will build upon her palace of silver: and if she be a door, we wi inclose her with boards of Cedar. 9 If she a wall be, we'l on her a palace build of silver; If she a door be, we her will inclose with boards of Cedar.
The Church. 10 I am a wall, and my breasts like towers▪ then was I in his eyes as one that found favour. 10 I am a wall, my breasts they are like towrs upon the ground, Then was I in his eyes as one that had his favour found. CHRIST. 11 Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon, he let out the vineyard unto keepers: 11 At Baal-Hamon a vineyard king Solomon had set; The vineyard unto keepers he for profite out had let. Every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of silver. Of those his servants evry one for the fruit of the vine A thousand pieces was to bring of silver that was fine. 12 My vineyard which is mine, is before me: thou (O Solomon) must have a thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred. 12 My vineyard mine before me is, thou must O Solomon A thousand have; who keep its fruits two hundred live upon,
13 Thou that dwellest in the gardens, th companions hearken to thy voice, cause me  hear it. 13 O thou that in the gardens fair most pleasantly dost dwell, Companions hearken to thy voice, cause me to hear it well. The Church. 14 Make haste, my beloved, and be thou lik to a Roe, or to a young Hart, upon the mountain of spices. 14 Make hast my Welbelov'd, and be thou like unto a Ro, Or unto a young Hart that doth on hills of spices go. The Song of Moses at the Red Sea, after God had drowned Pharao and his whole hoast. EXODUS 15. 1. I Will sing unto the Lord, for he hath trium phed gloriously; the horse and his rider ha he thrown into the sea. I To the Lord will sing, for he triumph'd hath gloriously; The horse he and his rider als hath thrown into the sea. 2 The Lord is my strength and song, and h is become my salvation: he is my God, and I wi prepare him an habitation;
The Lord my strength is and my song, and he is my salvation, He is my God, and I'le prepare for him an habitation. My fathers God, and I will exalt him. 3 The Lord is a man of war: the Lord is is Name. He is my fathers God, and I will high exalt his fame: The Lord he is a man of warre, JEHOVAH is his Name. 4 Pharaohs chariots and his host hath he cast nto the sea: his chosen captains also are drown∣ed in the Red sea. 4 He Pharos charets and his hoast hath cast into the sea: Now in the red sea also drown'd his chosen captains be. 5 The depths have covered them, they sank nto the bottome as a stone. 5 The fearfull depths they likewise have, them covered eachone, nto the bottom headlongs they then sank as doth a stone. 6 Thy right hand, O Lord is become glori∣us in power; thy right hand, O Lord, hath dash∣ed in pieces the enemy.
6 Thy right hand Lord it is become in power glorious all, Thy right hand Lord the enemy hath dash'd in pieces small. 7 And in the greatnesse of thine excellencie thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thee; thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consu∣med them as stubble. 7 Who'gainst thee rose them thou ov'rthrew, in great excellency, Thy wrath thou sentest forth which them consum'd as stubble dry. 8 And with the blast of thy nostrils, the wa∣ters were gathered together: the floods stood up∣right as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea. 8 The waters at thy nostrils blast, together gathred were: Floods stood as heaps, in heart of sea, the depths congeal'd were there. 9 The enemy said, I will pursue, I will over∣take, I will divide the spoile: my lust shall be sa∣tisfied upon them: 9 The en'my said, I will pursue, I'le overtake anone, I'le part the spoile; my lust shall be them satisfi'd upon;
I will draw my sword, my hand shall de∣stroy them. 10 Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sank as lead in the mighty waters. I'le draw my sword, my hand it shall destroy them all indeed: 10 Thy wind blew, seas them cov they in great waters sank as lead: 11 Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst he gods? who is like thee, glorious in holinesse, fearfull in praises, doing wonders? 11 Who's like thee Lord among the gods who's like thee glorious In holinesse, fearfull in praise and doing wonders thus? 12 Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them. 13 Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed: 12 Thy right hand then thou stretched out, earth swallow'd them at last. 13 In mercy thou the folk ledst forth which thou redeemed hast: Thou hast guided them in thy strength unto hy holy habitation 14 The people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of Palestina.
Thou hast them to thy holy house in thy strength guided well. 14 Men shall hear, fear, grief shall them seiz in Palestine that dwell: 15 Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed: the mighty men of Moah trembling shall take hold upon them: all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away. 15 The Dukes of Edom then amaz'd, strong Moab trembling shall On them take hold, the Cananites they melt away shall all. 16 Fear and dread shall fall upon them, by the greatnes of thine arm they shall be as still as a stone, till thy people passe over, 16 By greatnesse of thine arm strong fear, dread, shall on them fall, They shall be still ev'n as a stone till passe thy people all. O Lord, till the people passe over, which thou hast purchased. O Lord till that the people do passe ov're with great renown, Which thou by thine Almighty hand hast purchas'd as thine own. 17 Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in.
17 In hill of thine inheritance Lord thou shalt bring them well, And plant them in the place which thou hast made for them to dwell. In the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established. 18 The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. O Lord ev'n in the Sanctuary which thy hand stablish'dall: 18 The Lord for ever and also for ever reigne he shall. 19 For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots, and with his horsemen into the sea, and the Lord brought again the waters of the sea, upon them: 19 For Pharos horse with charets went and horsmen in the sea, The Lord again sea waters brought upon them fearfully. But the children of Israel went on dry land in the midst of the sea. But those that were the children then of Israel by discent, They in the midst of all the sea on dry land safely went.
The Song of Moses a little before his death. DEUT. 32. The Preface. GIve ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth. O Ye the heavens that are high do ye to me give ear, The words that from my mouth proceed O earth now do thou hear. 2 My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showres upon the grasse. 2 My doctrine as the rain shall drop, my speach as dew shall passe, As small rain on the tender herb, and showrs upon the grasse. 3 Because I will publish the name of the Lord: ascribe ye greatnesse unto our God. 3 Because I surely publish will the Name of God the Lord, Ye greatnesse to our God therefore ascribe with one accord. The first Part. 4 He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his wayes are judgement: a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he.
4 He is the rock, his work's persite, his wayes all judgement be; A God of truth, void of all sin, most just and right is he. 5 They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his children: they are a perverse and crooked generation. 5 Their spot is not his childrens spot, themselves corrupt'd they far, A crooked generation and a perverse they are. 6 Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? is not he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and established thee? 6 Unwise people, do ye requite the Lord thus? Is not he Thy father, buyer? Hath he not made and establish'd thee? 7 Remember the dayes of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee, thy elders, and they will tell thee. 7 Remember ye the dayes of old, yeers past consider well; Thy father ask, he will thee shew, thy Elders will thee tell.
8 When the most high divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, 8 When the most High to Nations did th'inheritance divide, When he the sons of Adam all did separate beside, He set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel. He by his wisedome set the bounds then of the people all, According to the number of the children of Isra'l. 9 For the Lords portion is his people: Iacob is the lot of his inheritance. 9 For to his portion hath the Lord his people without blot: And of his own inheritance his Jacob is the lot. 10 He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wildernesse: he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye. 10 In wildernesse he found them, in wast howling desert dry: He led, instructed, and them kept as th'aple of his eye.
11 As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, ta∣keth them, beareth them on her wings. 11 As th'Eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttreth her young upon, Her wings doth spread, and taketh them, and beareth them thereon. 12 So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god with him. 12 So by his might the Lord alone did lead him carefully, And no strange god there was at all with him in company. 13 He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields, and he made him to suck hony out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock. 13 On earths high place he made him ride, fields increase for to eat, From flinty rocks he made him suck the oyl and honey sweet. 14 Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of lambs and rams of the breed of Bashan, 14 Of Kine the butter, and of sheep the milk, for them in need, With fat of lambs, and also rams, that were of Bashans breed.
And goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat, and thou didst drink the pure bloud of the grape. He gave them goats, with Kidneys fat of wheat that was right good, And thou also ev'n of the grape didst drink the purest blood. The second Part. 15 But Iesurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, 15 But Jesurun then waxed fat, and he did also kick: Thou waxed art exceeding fat, thou art grown very thick, Thou art covered with fatnesse; then he for∣sook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation. With fatnesse thou art cov'rd, he then GOD which him made forsook, And he of his salvations rock light estimation took. 16 They provocked him to jealousie with strange gods, with abominations provoked they him to anger. 16 They him provok'd to jealousie with strange gods evry way, Him with abominations to wrath provoked they.
17 They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew not▪ to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not. 17 To dev'ls not God they sacrific'd, to gods whom they not knew, New gods whom not your fathers fear'd, that were come up of new. 18 Of the rock that begat thee thou art un∣mindfull, and hast forgotten God that formed thee. 18 Thou art unmindfull of the rock which once thee did beget, And God himself that formed thee thou likewise didst forget. The third Part. 19 And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provocking of his sons, and of his daughters. 19 And when the Lord it saw, he did abhor them evry one, Because of the provoking great of daughter and of son. 20 And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be: for they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith. 20 He said, I'le hide from them my face, and I their end will see:
For they a very froward race, and faithlesse children be. 21 They have moved me to jealousie with that which is not God, they have provoked me to anger with their vanities: 21 With that which is not God they have me mov'd to jealousie, To anger they have me provok'd, ev'n with their vanitie. And I will move them to jealousie with those which are not a people, I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation. And I'le them move to jealousie with such as are no flock, Them with a foolish nation to anger I'le provoke. 22 For a fire is kindled in my anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains. 22 For fire is kindled in my wrath, it burns to lowest hell, Earths increase, hills foundations consume and fire it shall. ▪23 I will heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon them. 23 Upon them likewise great mischiefes most surely heap I will,
And in mine anger I will spend on them mine arrows ill. 24 They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and with bitter de∣struction: 24 They shall be altogether burnt with pain of hunger great, And with destruction bitter als▪ devour'd with burning heat: I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poyson of serpents of the dust. I also will the teeth of beasts upon them fiercely thrust, Ev'n with the poison that is of the serpents of the dust. 25 The sword without, and terrour within, shall destroy both the young man and the virgin, the suckling also with the man of gray hairs. 25 The sword without, terrour within, the young man shall destroy, The virgin, and the suckling als with him whose haires are gray. 26 I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men: 26 I said, that into corners I would them all scatter then,
I would make their remembrance als to cease from among men: 27 Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely, 27 Yea were it not I fear'd the wrath of th'enemy they have, And lest that their adversaries should strangely them behave, And lest they should say, Our hand is high, and the Lord hath not done all this. And lest that they with hauty heart should say these words an one: Our hand now high is, and the Lord this work all hath not done. 28 For they are a nation void of counsell, neither is there any understanding in them. 29 O that they were wise, that they under∣stood this, that they would consider their latter end. 28 For of counsell a Nation void they are, nothing know they, 29 O that they wise this understood, and their last end would weigh. 30 How should one chase a thousand▪ and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up?
30 How should but one a thousand chase, and two chase thousands ten: Except their Rock thus had them sold, and them shut up had then. 31 For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges. 31 For in no way the rock that's theirs as our Rock mighty is, Our enemies themselves they are the judges ev'n of this. 32 For their vine is of the vine of Sodom▪ and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter. 32 Of Sodoms vine and Gomors fields, their vine is surely all, Their clusters they most bitter are, their grapes are grapes of gall. 33 Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruell venime of aspes. 34 Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? 33 Their wine of dragons poison is, of asps the venim strong: 34 Is not this laid in store with me my treasures seal'd among? The fourth Part. 35 To me belongeth vengeance, and re∣compence, their foot shall slide in due time:
35 Vengeance to me and recompence belongeth for their crime: Their foot shall slide assuredly in due appointed time. For the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste. The day of their calamity it is now near at hand, And things that shall upon them come make hast, and shall not stand. 36 For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants; when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, or left. 36 For God shall his own people judge, and for his saints repent, When none shut up or left he sees but that their power is spent. 37 And he shall say, where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted. 37 And he in his great wrath shall say, where are their gods now gone? Their stable rock in whom they all did put their trust alone. 38 Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink-offerings? let them rise up and help you, and be your pro∣tection.
38 Which fat ate of their sacrifice, and drank drink offrings wine: Let them rise up now and you help, as your protection fine. 39 See now that I, even I am he, and there is no god with me: I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: 39 See now that I am he, ev'n I, no god there is with me: I kill, and make alive; I wound, and als make whole to be. Neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand. 40 For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever. Nor is there any now that can out of my hand deliver: 40 For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever. 41 If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgement; I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me. 41 If hold my hand on judgement take, and glittring sword I whet, I'le render vengeance to my foes, and pay those that me hate.
42 I will make mine arrows drunk with blood (and my sword shall devour flesh) 42 I also those mine arrows will make drunk with blood therefore, The flesh of all mine enemies my sword it shall devore. And that with the blood of the slain▪ and of the captives, from the beginning of revenges vpon the enemy. With blood of those that have been slain and those that captives ly: From the beginning of revenge upon the enemy. 43 Rejoice, O ye nations with his people: for he will avenge the bloud of his servants, 43 Rejoice ye nations with his folk, for he who doth not change, Will of his servants all the blood in his own time avenge. And will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be mercifull unto his land, and to his people. And will to his adversaries a vengeance render full, And to his people and his land he will be mercifull.
The Song of Deborah, and Barak, after the vi∣ctory against the army of Iabin King of Ca∣naan; who reigned in Hazor, whose captaine was Sisera, whose head was cut off by Ia∣hell, the wise of Heber. JUDGES 5. vers. 2. PRaise ye the LORD for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly offered themselves: FOr the avenging of Israel praise ye the Lord most hy, When as the people offered themselves most willingly. 3 Hear, O ye kings, give ear, O ye princes; I, even I will sing unto the Lord, I will sing praise to the Lord God of Israel. 3 Hear O ye Kings, ye Princes als give ear, I, ev'n I will Sing to the Lord, to Israels God I will sing praises still. 4 Lord when thou wentedst out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water. 4 Lord when thou wentest out of Seir, and march'd from Edom field,
The earth did tremble, heav'ns did drop, the clouds did water yeeld. 5 The mountaines melted from before the Lord, even that Sinai from before the Lord God of Israel. 5 The mountains melted from before the Lord God Eternell, Ev'n that Sinai from God before, the God of Israel. 6 In the dayes of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the dayes of Iael▪ the high-wayes were un∣occupied, and the travellers walked through by∣wayes. 6 In dayes of Shamgar Anaths son of Jael in the dayes, The high wayes were unoccupi'd men travell'd through bywayes. 7 The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, untill that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel. 7 They ceas'd that dwelt in villages, in Israel they did cease, Till I Deborah in Isra'l a mother rose for peace. 8 They chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield or spear seen among fourty thousand in Israel?
8 They chose new gods, war seizd their gates was there a shield or spear? That fourty thousand men among in Israel did appear. 9 My heart is toward the Governours of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the people: Blesse ye the Lord. 9 My heart's to Israels governours who t'offer did accord Themselves 'mong people willingly, O do ye blesse the Lord. 10 Speak ye that ride on white asses, ye that it in judgement, and walk by the way. 10 Ye that do ride on asses white do ye together say; Ye that do in the judgement sit and walk als by the way. 11 They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places of drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord, 11 Who sav'd are from the archers noise where they did water draw, There shall they of the Lord rehearse the righteous acts and law. Even the righteous acts towards the inha∣bitants of his villages in Israel: then shall the people of the Lord go down to the gates.
The righteous acts in Israel in villages there done: Then shall the people of the Lord unto the gates go down. 12 Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, utter a song, arise Barak, and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam. 12 Wake, wake, wake, wake, Deborah sing, thou Barak rise anone, Thy captive lead captivity thou Abinoams son. 13 Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles among the people: the Lord made me have dominion over the mighty. 13 Him that remains dominion then he ov'r the Nobles gave 'Mong people; God dominion made me ov'r the mighty have. 14 Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek, after thee Benjamin, among thy people: 14 Of Ephraim 'gainst Amalek there was a worthy root: And after thee, was Benjamin, among thy people great. Out of Machir came down governours, and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer.
And out of Machir als came down thy Governours, and then They did come out of Zebulon that handle writers pen. 15 And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah: even Issachar, 15 And the most mightie Princes there of Issachar that day, Were with Deborah in the field, ev'n Issachar I say, And also Barak, he was sent on foot into the valley: for the divisions of Reuben, there were great thoughts of heart. Als Barack to the valley sent on foot, did soon depart: For Reuben his divisions there were great thoughts of heart. 16 Why abodest thou among the sheep folds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? for the di∣visions of Reuben, there were great searchings of heart. 16 Why in sheepfolds abodest thou to hear flocks bleet apart? For Reuben his divisions were searchings great of heart. 17 Gilead abode beyond Iordan: ad why did Dan remain in ships? Asher continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches.
17 Beyond the Jordan Gilead 'bod, why Dan in ships remain'd; Asher continu'd on sea shore, within his breaches train'd, 18 Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death, in the high places of the field. 18 Then Zebulon and Naphtali were people that did yeeld Their lives to jeopard unto death, in high parts of the field, 19 The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo, they took no gain of money. 19 Kings came and fought, in Taanah fought the Kings of Canaan then They by Megiddos waters fought, of money took no gain. 20 They fought from heaven, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera. 20 Together against Sisera they fought from heavens hy, The Stars als in their courses all did fight then by and by. 21 The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon: O my soul, thou hast troden down strength.
21 The river Kishon, Kishon old away them sweept eachone, O thou my soul thou surely hast, great strength now troden down. 22 Then were the horse hoofs broken, by the meanes of the pransings, the pransings of their mighty ones. 22 Then were the hoofs of horses strong all broken with their bones, Ev'n by the meanes of pransings▪ great, pransings of mighty ones. 23 Curse ye Meroz, (said the angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof: 23 Curse ye the men of Meros all, said th' Angel of the Lord: Curse yoth 'inhabitans thereof most bitterly by word; Because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty. Because that they came not all their help for to afford Unto the Lord, 'gainst mighty men they did not help the Lord. 24 Blessed above women shall Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above women in the tent.
24 Jael of Heber Kenite wife 'bove women blest shall be, Above all women in the tent a blessing shall she see. 25 He asked water, and she gave him milk, she brought forth butter in a lordly dish. 25 He water asked, and she gave him milk of sweet relish, She also to him butter brought forth in a lordly dish. 26 She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmens hammer: and with the hammer she smot Sisera, 26 Her right hand to the hammer there unto the nail she put Her hand, and with the hammer then there Sisera she smot: She smot of his head, when she had pierced and stricken through his temples. When she th through his temples both had stricken in great speed, And pierced him▪ thereafter she did there smite off his head. 27 At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell; where he bowed, there he fell down dead▪ 27 He at her feet did bow, he fell, and he lay down anone,
He at her feet bow'd, fell, where bow'd, there he ev'n dead fell down. 28 The mother of Sisera looked out at a win∣dow, and cried through the lattesse, why is his chariot so long in coming? 28 Then Sis'ras mother looked out at windows, and did cry Through lattesse, what can be the cause his charets thus do stay? Why tary the wheels of his chariots? 29 Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to her self, Why tary thus his charet wheels? 29 Her ladies wife did say, Yea the unto her self return'd an answer on this way, 30 Have they not sped? have they not di∣vided the prey, to every man a damsell or two? 30 Have they not sped? and have they not the wealthy prey also Divided unto evry man a damosell or two? To Sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needle work, To Sisera a prey that they of diverse colours make, Of diverse colours ev'n a prey that is of needle work.
Of divers colours of needle-work on both sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoil? Of diverse colours on both sides of needle work they make, Which for the neck of them is meet, that thus the spoile do take. 31 So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord: but let them that love him, be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. 31 Lord let thy foes so perish all; but who him love upright, Let them be as the Sun, when as he forth goth in his might. The Song of Hannah, which she sang to God when she had born Samuel, af∣ter long barrennesse.1 SAM. 2. vers. 1. MY heart rejoiceth in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord, my mouth is en∣larged over mine enemies: because I rejoice in thy salvotion. MY heart in God doth joy, in God my horn's rais'd: ov're my foes My mouth inlarged is, for I do in thy health rejoice.
2 There is none holy as the Lord: for there is none beside thee: neither is there any rock like our God. 2 There is none holy as the Lord, for none is thee beside: Nor is there any rock that doth like to our God abide. 3 Talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogancie come out of your mouth: 3 See that henceforth ye do no more exceeding proudly talk, Nor let your tongue within your mouth with arrogancy walk. For the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. Because the Lord he is a God of knowledge as we see, And by him in a ballance just all actions weighed be. 4 The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled, are girt with strength. 4 The bows ev'n of the mighty men are broken all at length, And they that stumbled here and there are well now girt with strength. 5 They that were full, have hired out them∣selves for bread, and they that were hungry, ceased:
5 They that very full now have hir'd out themselves for bread, And they that also hungry were, did cease from having need▪ So that the barren hath born seve, and she that hath many children, is waxed feeble. So that she that still barren was, hath born sev'n great and small, And she that many children hath is waxed feeble all. 6 The Lord killeth, and maketh alive, he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up. 6 The Lord almighty doth both kill and als alive doth save, He bringeth up, and likewise he brings down unto the grave. 7 The Lord maketh poor, and maketh rich he bringeth low, and lifteth up. 7 The Lord is he that maketh poore and also maketh rich, He bringeth very low, and he up lifteth to a pitch. 8 He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the begger from the dunghill, to set them among princes, 8 He raiseth from the dust the poore, the begger from dunghill▪
He lifteth up, them for to set among the Princes still. And to make them inherit the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the Lords, and e hath set the world upon them. Of glorys Throne to make them heires, for that the Lords alone Of earth the pillars are, and he the world set them upon. 9 He will keep the feet of his saints, and the icked shall bee silent in darknesse; for by rength shall no man prevail. He of his saints will keep the feet, the wicked all at length n dark shall silent be, for none prevaile shall by his strength. 10 The adversaries of the Lord shall be bro∣en to pieces: out of heaven shall he thunder pon them: 0 The Lords adversaries they shall in pieces broken be, Out of the heaven upon them a thundring make shall he. The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, nd he shall give strength unto his king, and ex∣ the horn of his anointed.
Ends of the earth the Lord shall judge, and strength give to his King, The horn of his Anointed One he shall exalt to reign. The lamentations of David for the death of Saul and Ionathan, slaine upon the mountain of Gilboah. 2 SAM. 1. vers. 19. THe beauty of Israel is slain upon thy hi places: how are the mighty fallen. OF Israel is the beauty slain upon thy places hy, How is it that thy mighty men are fallen shamefully! 2 Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in th streets of Askelon: lest the daughters of th Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the un circumcised triumph. 2 Tell't not in Gath nor Askelon, lest Philistines rejoice, Lest daughters of th'uncircumcisde triumph with shouting voice. 3 Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be  dew, neither let there be rain upon you, nor fields of offerings: 3 Ye of Gilboah mountains high O let there be no dew,
Let neither fields of offerings, nor rain be upon you, For there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil. For of the mighty is the shield, there cast away as vile, The shield of Saul as he had not, anointed been with oil. 4 From the bloud of the slain, from the fa of the mighty, the bow of Ionathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty. 4 From bloud of slain, from mighties fate the bow of Jonathan▪ Did not turn back, the sword of Saul return'd not empty than. 5 Saul and Ionathan were lovely and plea∣sant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided. 5 Saul, Jonathan, both lovely were and pleasant in their lives, And in their death at last they not divided were likewise. They were swifter then eagles, they were stronger then lions. Then Eagles that are swift in flight they were both swifter far,
Yea they both stronger were also then fiercest lions are. 6 To daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your ap∣parell. 6 Ye Israels daughters, weep ov'r Saul who with delights eachone In scarlet cloth'd, who ornaments of gold your clothes put on. 7 How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battell! O Ionathan, thou wast slaine in thine igh places. 7 How in midst of the battell do the mighty fallen ly! O Jonathan thou wast ev'n slain upon thy places hy. 8 I am distressed for thee, my brother Io∣nathan: very pleasant hast thou been unto me: 8 My brother Jonathan, I am distressed sore for thee, For very pleasant thou hast been at all times unto me: Thy love to me was wonderfull, passing the love of women. 9 How are the mighty fallen, and the wea∣pons of war perished.
Thy love to me was wonderfull, all womens love it past: 9 How fell the mighty, and of warre were all the weapons lost! The Song of David, which he sang to give thanks after that Nathan had promised him benefits and blessings, but chiefly the Messias to come of his seed.  SAM. 7. vers. 18. WHo am I, O Lord God? and what is my house, that thou hast brought mee hitherto? O Lord my God, now who am I that thou on me hast thought? What is my house that thou in love me hitherto hast brought? 2 And this was yet a small thing in thy fight, O Lord God; but thou hast spoken also of thy servans house for a great while to come, 2 And this O Lord God in thy sight, a small thing was in summe; But of thy servants house thou spak'st for a great while to come. And is this the manner of man, O Lord God? 3 And what can David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord God, knowest thy servant▪
Lord God, is this the maner of man? 3 What David more thee to Can say? for thou O Lord my God dost me thy servant kno. 4 For thy words sake, and according to thine own heart hast thou done all these great things; to make thy servant know them. 4 For thy words sake, according to thine own heart hast thou done All those great things, for them to make unto thy servant known. 5 Wherefore thou art great, O Lord God: for there is none like thee, neither is there any god beside thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears. 5 Thou Lord art great, like thee is none, no God is thee beside, According to all things that wee with our own ears have tri'd. 6 And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, 6 And what one Nation in the earth doth like thy people seem, Like Israel whom to himself, God went for to redeem, And to make him a name, and to do for you great things, and terrible for thy land,
Ev'n for a people, and a Name to make him, and to do For you great things and terrible, for this thy land also, Before thy people which thou redeemdst to thee from Egypt, from the nations and their gods? Before thy people which thou hast▪ redeemed unto thee From Egypt, from the Nations, and these their gods that be. 7 For thou hast confirmed to thy self thy people Israel to be a people unto thee for ever▪ and thou, Lord, art become their God. 7 For to thy self thou Isra'l hast confirm'd to thee for ay A people; and thou art, O Lord, become their God alway. 8 And now, O Lord God, the word that thou hast spoken concerning thy servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do as thou hast said. 8 What of thy servant and his house thou Lord hast spoken now, Do as thou saidst, and so for ay establish it do thou. 9 And let thy name be magnified for ever,
saying; The Lord of hosts is the God over Israel: 9 And let thy Name that's glorious be magnifi'd for ay, The Lord of hosts he is the God that's over Israel, say; And let the house of thy servant David bee established before thee. 10 For thou, O Lord of hosts, God of Is∣rael, hast revealed to thy servant, Let Davids house thy servant be before thee stablish'd well: 10 Thou Lord of hosts, Israls God didst to thy servant reveal; Saying; I will build thee an house: therefore bath thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee. Thou said'st I will thee build an house, therefore thy servant hee Hath in his heart found for to pray this prayer unto thee. 11 And now, O Lord God, thou art that God, and thy words be true, and thou hast promised this goodnesse unto thy servant. 11 And now, O Lord, that God thou art, thy words are very true, And thou this goodnesse promisde hast unto thy servant now.
12 Therefore now let it please thee to blesse e house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before thee: 12 Therefore be pleased for to blesse thy servants house alway, That it may so continue still before thee fast for ay. For thou O Lord God, hast spoken it, and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for ever. For thou Lord, God hast spoken it, with blessings come from thee O do thou let thy servants house for ever blessed be. The Song of Isaiah, concerning the vineyard, wherein Gods people is reproved for their barrennesse in good works, notwithstanding of all the paines were taken by the Prophets. ISAIAH 5. vers. 1. NOw will I sing to my welbeloved, a song, of my beloved touching his vineyard: my welbeloved hath a vineyard in a very fruit∣full hill. TO my Beloved of his vine a song now sing I will: My Welbelov'd a vineyard hath in a most fruitfull hill.
2 And he fenced it, and gathered our the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it. 2 He did it fence, and gathered our the stones thereof eachone, He planted it with choicest vine, a tower he built thereon. And also made a wine-presse therein: and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wilde grapes. Hee a vine-presse made als therein, and look'd it should bring forth Good grapes; but forth at last it brought wild grapes of nothing worth. 3 And now; O inhabitants of Ierusalem, and men of Iudah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard. 3 And now, O ye inhabitants of Salem, and als ye Of Judah men, judge, I you pray, 'twixt my vineyard and me. 4 What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wilde grapes? 4 What could I my vineyard unto do more then I have done?
Wherefore when for good grapes I look'd, did wild grapes grow thereon? 5 And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard, I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up: 5 And now go to; I'le tell you what I'le to my vineyard do, I'le take away its hedge, and it shall be up eaten so: And break down the wall thereof, and it shall be troden down. 6 And I will lay it waste: it shall not bee pruned, nor digged, And I'le break down the wall thereof, and it trode down shall be: 6 I'le lay it wast, none pruned shall nor yet it digged see, But there shall come up briers and thorns: I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. But briars and thornes there shall come up: I also will anone Command the clouds that they no rain shall rain the same upon. 7 For the vineyard of the Lord of hoasts is the house of Israel, and the men of Iudah his pleasant plant.
7 For vineyard of the Lord of hosts the house of Israel is, The men of Judah also are the plasant plant of his. And he looked for judgement, but behold op∣pression; for righteousnesse, but behold a cry. And he did then for judgement look, but lo oppression hard; For rigtheousnesse, but O behold, a cry then there was heard. A Song of thanks for the mercies of God. ISA. 12. vers. 1. O Lord, I will praise thee, though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me. I Will thee praise, O Lord, though thou with me most angry wast, Thine anger turned is away, thou me comforted hast. 2 Behold, God is my salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord I E∣HOVAH is my strength and my song, he also is become my salvation. 2 Behold, God's my salvation. I'le trust, and will not fear For Lord Jovah's my strength and song, he's my salvation near.
3 Therefore with joy shall ye draw water ut of the wells of salvation. 4 And in that day shall ye say, 3 Therefore yee of salvation, with joy shall in that day, Out of the wells draw water als, 4 Ye in that day shall say, Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted. Praise ye the Lord, call on his Name, the doings that are his Shew to his people, mention make that's Name exalted is. 5 Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things: this is known in all the earth. 5 Do ye now sing unto the Lord; because that he hath done The things that be most excellent; this in all earth is known. 6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the holy one of Israel in the midst of thee. 6 Of Zion thou inhabitant, cry out, and shouting be: For of Isral the holy One is great in midst of thee,
A Song inciting to confidence in GOD. Isa. 26. vers. 1. WE have a strong city, salvation will God appoint for wals and bulwarks. WEE have a city that is strong, the Lord salvation so Hee will appoint for mighty wals and bulwarks strong also. 2 Open ye the gates, that the righteous na∣tion which keepeth the truth may enter in. 2 O open ye the gates, that so the righteous Nation Which constantly the trueth doth keep may enter in anone. 3 Thou wil keep him in perfect peace, whose minde is stayed on thee: because he trusteth in thee. 3 Assuredly thou wilt him keep in perfect peace to be, Whose minde is still upon thee staid, because he trusts in thee. 4 Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord IEHOVAH is everlasting strength. 4 For ever trust ye in the Lord, for ye shal feel at length, That in the Lord JEHOVAH is an everlasting strength.
5 For he bringeth down them that dwell on high, the loftie city he layeth it low, he layeth it ow, even to the ground, he bringeth it even to he dust. 5 For dwellers high he doth bring down, the city proud layes low, He layes it low, to ground it brings ev'n to the dust below. 6 The foot shall tread it down, even the feet f the poore, and the steps of the needy. 7 The way of the just is uprightnesse: thou ost upright, dost weigh the path of the just. The foot, poors feet and needies steps shall tread it in the way: Upright's the justs way, thou upright, the just mans path dost weigh. 8 Yea in the way of thy judgements, O Lord, ave we waited for thee; the desire of our soul to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. Yea in thy judgements way, O Lord, we waited have for thee, Our soules desires unto thy Name, and thy remembrance be. 9 With my soul have I desired thee in the ght, yea with my spirit within me will I seek e early. I with my soul desired have thee in the time of hight,
Yea with my spirit within me I will seek thee early right: For when thy judgements are in the ear the inhabitants of the world will learn right ousnesse. For when the judgements that thou sends upon the earth do presse, Then all the worlds inhabitants will learn thy righteousnesse. 10 Let favour be shewed to the wicked, y will he not learn righteousnesse▪ 10 Let unto him that wicked is be favour shew'd not small▪ Yet for the same he righteousnesse will not then learn at all: In the land of uprightnesse will he deal  justly, and will not behold the majesty of  LORD. Ev'n in the land of uprightnesse he will unjustly deal, And of the Lord the Majesty behold no way he will. 11 Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, t will not see: but they shall see, and be asham for their envie at the people, 11 Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they
hall see, and be asham'd, because the people they envy. Yea the fire of thine enemies shall devour them. 12 Lord, thou wilt or dain peace for us: for ou also hast wrought all our works in us. ea them thy foes fire shall devore, 12 Lord thou wilt ordain thus irm peace for us, for thou als hast wrought all our works in us. 13 O Lord our God, other lords besides ee have had dominion over us: but by thee ly will we make mention of thy name. Lord God, besides thee other gods ov'r us dominion had: ea only of thy Name, by thee will mention to be made. 14▪ They are dead, they shall not live; they e deceased, they shall not rise: Henceforth these wicked shall not live who are now dead and slain, last they all deceased are, they shal not rise again. Therefore hast thou visited and destroyed em, and made all their memorie to perish. herefore thou hast them visited, and them destroyd alway, nd als hast made their memorie to perish quite away.
15 Thou hast increased the nation, O Lord thou hast increased the nation, thou art glorified; thou hadst removed it far unto all the ends of the earth. 15 Thou hast increas'd the nation, Lord, thou hast increas'd its worth, Thou'rt glorifi'd; thou it remov'd farre to all ends of earth. 16 Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. 16 Lord, when they were in trouble they did visite thee anone, They prayers powred out when was thy chastning them upon. 17 Like as a woman with childe that draw∣eth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and cryeth out in her pangs; so have we been in th sight, O Lord. 17 As she that is with child drawes near to her deliverie; In pain is, and cryes in her pangs, so in thy sight were we. 18 We have been with childe, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind, 18 We surely all have been with child, we in great pain of mind Have all been, we have as it were brought forth the very wind:
We have not wrought any deliverance in the arth, neither have the inhabitants of the world allen. We have not a deliverance wrought on earth, as we perceive, Nor yet the worlds inhabitants at all down fallen have. 19 Thy dead men shall live, together with y dead body shall they arise: 9 Thy men that dead are they shall live together well they all ith my dead bodie ev'n revive, and als arise they shall: Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust: for thy ew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall st out the dead. wake, sing ye in dust that dwell, as dew of herbes indeed o is thy dew, and als the earth shall cast out all her dead. Come, my people, enter thou into thy cham∣rs, and shut thy doores about thee: hide thy f as it were for a little moment, untill the dignation be overpast. My people, to thy chambers come doors shut about thee fast, thou thee for a moment hide, till wrath be overpast.
21 For behold, the Lord cometh out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquitie: 21 For lo, the Lord out of his place doth come most speedilie To punish earths inhabitants, for their iniquitie. The earth also shall disclose her bloud, and shall no more cover her slain. The earth shall als disclose the blood, that in it did remain, And shall no more the means afford, to cover close her slain. The Song of Hezekiah, after God had healed him of his sicknesse. &c. ISA. 38. vers. 10. I Said in the cutting off of my dayes, I shall g to the gates of the grave: I am deprived o the residue of my years. IN cutting off my dayes I said, to gates of grave I'le go: Of those my yeers the residue I am deprived so. 2 I said, I shall not see the Lord, even th Lord in the land of the living: I shall behol man no more with the inhabitants of the world. 2 In livings land the Lord, the Lord, I said, I shall not see:
I shall no more see man with those on earth that dwellers be. 3 Mine age is departed, and is removed from me, as a shepheards tent: I have cut off like a weaver my life: 3 Departed is mine age, and is remov'd from me with strife As shepherds tents; I weaver like have thus cut off my life. He will cut me of with pining sicknesse: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me. That I may wholly be cut off, hee'le pining sicknesse send, From day ev'n unto night wilt thou so of me make an end. 4 I reckoned till morning, that as a lion so will he break all my bones: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me. 4 I reck'ned untill morn, that as a lion so will he Break all my bones; from day to night thou'lt make an end of me. 5 Like a cran or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove, 5 Ev'n like a cran in my distresse, or as a swallow sad So did I chatter: as a dove a heavy mourning had.
Mine eyes fail with looking upward: O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me. Mine eyes they long with looking up now very failed be, O Lord, I am oppressed sore, do undertake for me. 6 What shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath done it: I shall go softly all my years in the bitternesse of my soul. 6 What shall I say? He spoken hath, and als hath done no lesse, I shall go softly all my years in my souls bitternesse. 7 O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit: so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live. 7 Lord by those things men live, in them my spirit life doth take, And so thou wilt recover me, and me to live wilt make. 8 Behold, for peace I had great bitternesse; but thou hast in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption: 8 O do behold, how for my peace I had great bitternesse, But thou in love hast sav'd my soul from pit of rottennesse. For thou hast cast all my sins behinde thy
9 For the grave cannot praise thee, death can not celebrate thee: they that go down into the it cannot hope▪ for thy truth. My sins thou cast behind thy back: 9 For neither grave nor death Can praise thee, they that go to pit cannot hope for thy truth. 10 The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: the father to the children shall make known thy truth. 10 The living, yea the living shall thee praise, as I this day: The father to the children shall make known thy truth alway. 11 The Lord was readie to save me: there∣fore we will sing my songs to the stringed instru∣ments, all the dayes of our life, in the house of the LORD. 11 The Lord was ready me to save, wee'l while we live accord My songs to stringed instruments in the house of the Lord.
THE LAMENTATIONS OF IEREMIAH. CHAPTER. 1. HOw doth the city sit solitaty, that was full of people? how is she become as a wi∣dow? HOw is it that the City doth sit solitary still? How is she as a Widow now, that people much did fill? She that was great among the nations, and princesse among the provinces, how is she become tributarie. She that among the Nations was great, and Princesse made▪ Among Provinces, how is she thus tributary treade? 2 She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheecks: among all her lovers she hath none to comfort her, 2 She weepeth very sore by night, and on her cheeks are tears; Mong all her Lovers she hath none for comfort in her fears. All her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her enemies. 3 Iudah is gone into captivity, because of af∣fliction,
Her friends all have dealt treacherously with her, and turn'd her foes; Judah's gone to captivity, because of many woes; And because of great servitude: she dwel∣th among the heathen, she findeth no rest: all er persecutors overtook her between the straits. And for the servitude that's great: 'mong heathen she doth dwell, he findes no rest, her took in straits her persecutors fell. 4 The wayes of Zion do mourn, because none me to the solemne feasts: all her gates are esolate: The wayes of Zion they do mourn, because there is none that Come to the solemn feasts, yea all her gates are desolate. Her priests sigh, her virgins are afflicted, d she is in bitternesse. er Priests they in great trouble sigh, her Virgins more and lesse re grievously afflicted all, and she's in bitternes. 5 Her adversaries are the chief, her enemies sper: for the Lord hath afflicted her. These that are her adversaries, the chief above her be;
Her enemies prosper, for the Lord afflicted her hath he. For the multitude of her transgressions, her children are gone into captivity before the enemie. And also for the multitude of her transgressions hye, Her children before th'en'my are gone in captivity. 6 And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed: her princes are become like harts that finde no pasture, 6 From her that Zions daughter is, the beauty all is gone, Her Princes are become like Harts, that pasture do finde none. And they are gone without strength before the pursuer. 7 Ierusalem remembred in the dayes of her affliction. Before the fierce pursuer they without all strength are gone. 7 Salem remembred in the dayes of her affliction, And of her miseries, all her pleasant things that she had in the dayes of old, And in time of her miseries things pleasant to behold,
That she had in possession ev'n in the dayes of old, When her people fell into the hand of the enemie, and none did help her, the adversaries saw her, and did mock at her sabbaths. When fell in hands of enemies the people of her stock, And none her helpt, the foes it saw, and did her Sabbaths mock. 8 Ierusalem hath grievously sinned: there∣fore she is removed: all that honoured her, de∣spise her, 8 Jerusalem sinn'd greivously, she is remov'd therfore: They all together her despise, that honourd her before: Because they have seen her nakednesse: yea, she sigheth and turneth backward. Because that they her nakednes have seen while she did mourn, Yea, she doth sigh most heavily, and backward als doth turn: 9 Her filthinesse is in her skirts, she remem∣breth not her last end, therefore she came downe wonderfully: 9 Her filthines is in her skirts, her last end she not on
At all remembreth, therfore she came wonderfully down. She had no comforter: O Lord, behold my affliction: for the enemie hath magnified himself. No comforter she had; O Lord, see my affliction, For that the enemy himself hath magnifi'd alone. 10 The adversary hath spread out his hand upon all her pleasant things: for she hath seen 10 The adversary hath spread out his hand on what had been All her things pleasant on the earth, for she hath clearly seen That the heathen entred into her Sanctuary, whom thou didst command that they should not enter into thy congregation. That heathen men had thus into her Sanctuary gone, Whom thou wouldst not to enter in thy Congregation. 11 All her people sigh, they seek bread, they have given their pleasant things for meat to re∣lieve the soul: 11 Her people sigh, they all seek bread, and also they did give
Their things that pleasant are for meat, their soul for to relieve. See, O Lord, and consider, for I am become ile. 12 Is it nothing to you, all ye that passe by? behold and see, See Lord: consider, for I'm vile, 2 Is it nothing to you All passers by? See and also this well consider now, If there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord hath afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger. If any sorrow be like mine done to me, ev'ry way Wherewith the Lord afflicted me in his fierce angers day. 13 From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevaileth against them: 13 He from above into my bones sent fire me to assail, And it in a most fearfull way against them doth prevail: He hath spread a net for my feet, he hath turned me back: he hath made me desolate, and aint all the day. He turnd me back, and for my feet a net spread in the way;
He hath als made me desolate, and faint ev'n all the day. 14 The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand: they are wreathed, and come up upon my nock: 14 The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand alone, They wreathed are, and also they come up my neck upon: He hath made my strength to fall, the Lord hath delivered me into their hands, from whom I am not able to rise up. He hath my strength made for to fall, the Lord hath me likewise Delivered into their hands from whom I cannot rise. 15 The Lord hath troden under foot all my mighty men in the midst of me: he hath called an assembly against me, 15 God under foot in midst of me hath trod my mighties all, In midst of me; he against me did an assemblie call To crush my young men: the Lord hath troden the virgin, the daughter of Iudah, as in a wine-presse. So for to crush my young men all, the Lord hath with distresse
The virgin Judahs daughter trode, ev'n as in a wine-presse. 16 For these things I weep, mine eye, mine eye runneth down with water, because the com∣forter that should relieve my soul, is far from me: 16 For this I weep, with water down mine eye doth run, mine eye, For the comforter that my soul should save, is farre from me: My children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed. 17 Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her: Because the enemy prevail'd my sonnes are spoil'd eachorre▪ 17 Zion she spreadeth forth her hands, to comfort her there's none, The Lord hath commanded concerning Iacob, that his adversaries should be round about him: Ierusalem is as a menstruous woman among them. Concerning Jacob God ordaind his foes about him round; Among them is Jerus'lem as a menstruous woman found. 18 The Lord is righteous, for I have rebel∣ed against his commandment: hear I pray you, ll people, and behold my sorrow:
18 The Lord is righteous, for I have rebell'd against his will: I pray you people all to hear. and see my sorrow still: My virgins and my young men are gone into captivity. 19 I called for my lovers but they deceived me; My Virgins and my young Men are gone in captivitie▪ 19 I for my lovers then did call, but they deceived me. My priests and mine elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought their meat to re∣lieve their souls. My Priests, yea and mine Elders als then up the ghost did give, While meat they in the city sought their souls for to relieve. 20 Behold, O Lord, for I am in distresse; my bowels are troubled; mine heart is turned within me, for I have grievously rebelled: 20 See Lord, my bowels troubled are, for in distresse am I: Mine heart's turn'd in me, for I have rebelled grievously, Abroad the sword bereaveth, at home there is as death.
21 They have heard that I sigh, there is none to comfort me: Abroad the sword bereaves, at home there is as death we see: 21 They have all heard that I do sigh there's none to comfort me: All mine enemies have heard of my trouble, they are glad that thou hast done it▪ thou wilt bring the day that thou hast called, Mine en'mies all my trouble heard, that thou the same hast done They are right glade; thou'lt bring the day that thou hast cald anone, And they shall be like unto me. 22 Let all their wickednesse come before thee, And they shall be like unto me: 22 Do thou now let therefore Ev'n all their grievous wickednes come clearly thee before. And do thou unto them as thou hast done unto me for all my transgressions, for my sigh are many and my heart is aint. As thou to me for all my faults hast done, do them unto, For now my sighs they many are, my heart is faint also.
CHAPTER II. HOw hath the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beautie of Israel, HOw Zions daughter hath the Lord cov'rd with a cloud in wrath? And unto earth from heav'n cast down Israels beauty hath? And remembred not his footstool in the day of his anger▪ 2 The Lord swallowed up the habitations of Iacob: And in the day of's wrath did not to minde his footstool call? 2 The Lord the habitations hath of Jacob swallow'd all, And hath not pitied: he hath thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the daughter of Iudah: And he them hath not pitied: he in his wrath so sad Thrown down by force hath the strong holds that Judahs daughter had: He hath brought them down to the ground: he hath polluted the kingdome and the princes thereof.
He by his might unto the ground hath made them all to fall: The kingdom he polluted hath, and Princes thereof all, 3 He hath cut off in his fierce anger all the horn of Israel: he hath drawn back his right hand from before the enemie, 3 Of Isra'l all the horn cut off in his fierce wrath hath he, He hath drawn back his right hand from before the enemie: And he burned against Iacob like a flaming fire which devoureth round about. 4 He hath bent his bow like an enemie: 'Gainst Jacob he like flaming fire did burn which wasts about: 4 He hath his bow bent, like unto an enemy most stout. He stood with his right hand as an adversary, and slew all that were pleasant to the eye, in the tabernacle of the daughter of Zion: As an adversarie he stood, what pleasant was to th'eye With his right hand within the tent of Zion all slew he: He poured out his furie like fire. 5 The Lord was as an enemie: he hath
swallowed up Israel, he hath swallowed up all her palaces: His fury he powr'd out like fire, 5 God was as enemy: He swallow'd Isra'l, he devour'd he palaces so hy: He hath destroyed his strong holds, and hath increased in the daughter of Iudah mourning and lamentation. His strong holds he destroyed hath, and hath increasde anone In Judahs daughter mourning great, and lamentation. 6 And he hatth violently taken away his ta∣bernacle, as if it were of a garden, he hath de∣stroyed his places of the assembly: 5 He violently remov'd his tent, as't of a garden were, He of th'assembly hath destroyd the places that are there: The Lord hath caused the solemne feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and hath de∣spised in the indignation of his anger the king and the priest. God causd in Zion solemn feasts and sabbaths be forgot, In his wraths indignation he King, Priest, regarded not.
7 The Lord hath cast off his alter: he hath abhorred his sanctuarie: he hath given up in∣to the hand of the enemie the walls of her pa∣laces; 7 The Lord his altar hath cast off, and loth'd his Sanctuary: Her palace wals he in the hand gave of the enemy, They have made a noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day of a solemn feast. Within the house that is the Lords a noise als made have they, As if it for a solemn feast had been a joyfull day. 8 The Lord hath purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion; he hath stretched out a line: he hath not withdrawn his hand from destroying: 8 The Lord hath purposd to destroy his Zions daughters wall He stretch'd a line, he not withdrew his hand from wasting all. Therefore he made the rampart and the wall to lament, they languished together. 9 Her gaes are sunk into the ground; Therefore he made the rampart so and wall for to lament; They languished together then; 9 Her gates to ground they went▪
He hath destroyed and broken her bars; her king and her princes are among the Gentiles; the law is no more, He hath destroyd, and broke her bars, her King and Princes thus, Among the Gentiles scattered are, the law no more's for us. Her prophets also finde no vision from the LORD. 10 The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground and keep silence: Her Prophets also from the Lord at all no vision found, 10 Of Zions daughter th'elders als sit silent on the ground; They have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded themselves with sackcloth▪ In this their grief they have cast up the dust their heads upon, And they themselves have also girt with sackcloth evry one; The virgins of Ierusalem hang down their heads to the ground. 11 Mine eyes do fail with tears; my bowels are troubled; And Salems virgins hang their heads down to the ground right farre,
11 Mine eyes they now do fail with tears: my bowels troubled are, My liver is poured upon the earth, for the de∣struction of the daughter of my people, because e children and the sucklings swoon in the reets of the city. ly liver is powr'd on the earth for the destruction Of people mine, because in streets young children sucklings swoon. 12 They say to their mothers, Where is corn nd wine? when they swooned as the wounded in e streets of the city, 12 They to their mothers said, Where is corn, wine for to be found? When as within the cities streets as wounded men they swoon'd, When their soul was poured out into their mothers bosome. v'n at the same time when their soul the city all throughout to their mothers bosome was with sorrow powred out. 13 What thing shall I take to witnesse for ce? what thing shall I liken to thee? O ughter of Ierusalem?
13 What thing for thee to witnesse now shall taken be by me? O Salems daughter what shall I now liken unto thee? What shall I equall to thee, that I may com∣fort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? for breach is great like the sea; O Virgin Zions daughter dear that I may comfort thee, What shall I equall thee unto? thy breach great's like the sea. Who can heal thee? 14 Thy prophets have seen vain and fo things for thee, Who is he that well can thee heal? 14 Thy prophets they have seen Such things for thee as meerly vain and foolish als have been, And they have not discovered thiue iniqui urn away thy captivity; but have seen for false burdens, and causes of banishment. Thy sin they not discovered, thy thrall to turn away But burdens false, of banishment the causes seen have they. 15 All that passe by, clap their han thee; they hisse and wag their head at the d∣ter of Ierusalem, saying, Is this the city,
15 All that passe by clap hands at thee they hisse and wag their head At Salems daughter, saying thus, is this the town indeed, That men call the perfection of beautie, the joy of the whole earth? 16 All thine enemies have opened their mouth against thee: they hisse and gnash the teeth: That men beauties perfection call of the whole earth the joy, 16 'Gainst thee thy foes their mouth make wide, hisse, gnash their teeth do they: They say, We have swallowed her up: certain∣ly this is the day that we looked for: we have found, we have seen it. They say we have her swallow'd up this surely is the day We looked for; we have it found, we have it seen alway. 17 The Lord hath done that which he had devised: he hath fulfilled his word that he had commanded in the dayes of old: 17 The Lord hath done what he devisd, fulfill'd he hath by sword, That in the dayes that were of old he did command by word.
He hath thrown down, and hath not pitied and he hath caused thine enemies to rejoice ove thee, he hath set up the horn of thine adversarie He down did throw and piti'd not, he causd thine enemies To joy ov'r thee, the horn he raisd of thine adversaries. 18 Their heart cried unto the Lord, O wa of the daughter of Zion, let tears run down lik a river day and night: 18 Their heart did cry unto the Lord, O Zions daughters wall, Let tears down still both day and night ev'n like a river fall. Give thy self no rest, let not the apple o thine eyes cease. 19 Arise, cry out in the night: Give to thy self no rest, let not cease th'apple of thine eye 19 Do thou arise, and in the night cease thou not out to cry: In the beginning of the watches powre o thine heart like water before the face of the Lord See that in the beginning of the watches thou powre out Thine heart before the face of God, like water round about.
Lift up thy hands towards him, for the life of thy young children, that faint for hunger in the top of every street. Thy hand to him lift for the life of thy young children all: That in the top of every street for hunger fainting fall. 20 Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom thou hast done this: shall the women eat their uit, and children of a span long? o Lo▪ Lord, consider to whom thou hast done this us among: O shall the women eat their fruit and babes of a span long? Shall the Priest and the Prophet be slain in e sanctuary of the Lord. 21 The young and the old lie on the ground  the streets: hall Priest and Prophet thus be slain in Gods own Sanctuary? 21 The young and old both on the ground within the streets do ly: My virgins and my young men are fallen by e sword: thou hast slain them in the day of y anger, thou hast killed and not pitied. ly Virgins, young men fell by sword, thou hast them slain at last, v'n in the day of thy fierce wrath thou kill'd, not piti'd hast.
22 Thou hast called as in a solemn day my terrours round about, so that in the day of the Lords anger none escaped 22 Thou hast as in a solemn day my terrours round about Call'd so, that in Gods day of wrath none hath escaped out, Nor remained: those that I have swadled and brought up, hath mine enemy consumed. Nor yet remained hath alive. those that I swadled have, And als brought up, mine enemy consum'd hath in the grave. CHAPTER III. I Am the man that hath seen affliction by the rod of his wrath. 2 He hath led me and brought me into dark∣nesse, but not into light. I Am the man that greef hath seen by rod of his own wrath. 2 Now into darknesse, not to light me led, and brought he hath. 3 Surely against me is he turned, he turneth his hand against me all the day. 3 Surely against me ev'ry where he turned is alway: He in his wrath doth turn his hand against me all the day.
4 My flesh and my skin hath he made old, he th broken my bones. 5 He hath builded against me, and compas∣ me with gall and travell. My flesh and skin he hath made old, and bones hath broken small: He 'gainst me built, and compast me with travel and with gall. 6 He hath set me in dark places, as they  be dead of old. 7 He hath hedged me about, that I cannot  out: he hath made my chain heavie. He hath me in dark places set, as who of old be dead: He hedg'd me, out I can not get, my chain he heavy made. 8 Also when I cry and shout, he shutteth out y prayer. 9 He hath enclosed my wayes with hewe tone: he hath made my paths crooked. 8 When also I do cry and shout, my prayer out shuts he: 9 He with hew'n stone my wayes enclosd, my paths made crook'd to be. 10 He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, and as a lion in secret places. 10 He was unto me as a Bear, that lying is in wait,
And as a lion that is in the places most secret. 11 He hath turned aside my wayes, and pulled me in pieces: he hath made me desolate. 11 He turned hath aside my wayes, and also more then that He hath me pull'd in pieces all, he made me desolate. 12 He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow. 13 He hath caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my reins. 12 He bent his bow, he as a mark for th'arrow set me so. 13 He hath his quivers arrowes causd to pierce my reins into. 14 I was a derision to all my people, and their song all the day. 15 He hath filled me with bitternesse, he hath made me drunken with wormwood. 14 I to my people scorn, and song all day was made to be: 15 He hath me fil'd with bitternesse, with wormwood drunk made he. 16 He hath also broken my teeth with gra∣vell stones, he hath covered me with ashes. 16 He also broken hath my teeth with gravell stones in wrath,
And likewise in his rage he me with ashes cov'red hath. 17 And thou hast removed my soul far off from peace: I forgat prosperitie. 18 And I said, My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. 17 I good forgat, my soul thou hast from peace removed far: 18 I said that from the Lord my strength and hope als perish'd are. 19 Remembring mine affliction and my mi∣serie, the wormwood and the gall. 20 My soul hath them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me. 19 Remembring mine affliction, gall, wormwood, miserie; 20 My soul doth still remember them, and humbled is in me. 21 This I recall to my minde, therefore have I hope. 22 It is of the Lords mercie that we are not consumed, 21 This I do to my minde recall, therefore I hope in thee, 22 It's of the mercies of the Lord wee not consumed be, Because his compassions fail not. 32 They are new every morning: great is thy faithfulnesse.
Because that his compassions fail not in any ase: 23 They evry morning still are new, great is thy faithfulnesse. 24 The Lord is my portion, saith my soul, therefore will I hope in him. 25 The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that seeketh him. 24 The Lord's my portion, saith my soul, I'le hope in him therefore: 25 God's good to them that wait for him to soules that him adore. 26 It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. 26 It's good that both a man should hope, and also quietly For the salvation of the Lord wait on continually. 27 It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth. 28 He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, be∣cause he hath born it upon him. 27 It's good in's youth man bear the yoke, 28 He sitteth so alone, And silence keepes, because that he hath born it him upon. 29 He putteth his mouth in the dust: if so e there may be hope▪
30 He giveth his cheek to him that smiteth im, he is filled full with reproach. 29 His mouth he putteth in the dust, if so there hope may be: 30 He to the smiter▪ gives his cheek, fill'd with reproach is he, 31 For the Lord will not cast off for ever. 32 But though he cause grief, yet will he ve compassion according to the multitude of his ercies. 31 For God for ay will not cast off: 32 Though greef he cause, yet good He'le pitie have according to his mercies multitude. 33 For he doth not afflict willingly; nor rieve the children of men. 34 To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth, 33 For willingly he not afflicts, nor doth mens children grieve: 34 Under his feet all prisoners to crush on earth that live. 35 To turn aside the right of a man before he face of the most high. 36 To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord pproveth not. 35 To turn aside mans right before the face of the most Hye,
36 God to subvert man in his cause approves not willingly. 37 Who is he that saith, and it cometh to passe, when the Lord commandeth it not. 37 Who is he that saith, and it then to passe comes in the land, When as the Lord in any way did not the same command? 38 Out of the mouth of the most high pro∣ceedeth not evil and good▪ 39 Wherefore doth a living man complain, 38 Out of the most Highs mouth doth not both good and ill proceed, 39 Wherefore thus doth a living man complain in any need? A man for the punishment of his sins? 40 Let us search and try our wayes, and turn again to the Lord. A man for his sins punishment▪ 40 Let us to search attain And try our wayes, and to the Lord let us now turn again. 41 Let us lift our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens. 42 We have transgressed and have rebelled, thou hast not pardoned.
41 Let us lift up our heart and hands to God in heav'n at last: 42 We have transgressed and rebel'd and thou not pardon'd hast. 43 Thou hast covered with anger, and per∣secuted us: thou hast slain, thou hast not pitied. 43 Thou persecuted hast, and us with anger cov'rd at last, Thou hast us by our enemies slain. and thou not pitied hast. 44 Thou hast covered thy self with a cloud that our prayer should not passe through. 45 Thou hast made us as the off-scouring and refuse in the midst of the people. 44 Thou with a cloud thee cov'rd, that through our suit passe should not thus. 45 Th'off-scouring and refuse thou madst in midst of people us. 46 All our enemies have opened their mouths against us. 47 Fear and a snare is come upon us, desolation and destruction. 46 Against us opned have their mouths our enemies eachone: 47 Destruction, desolation, fear, and snares come us upon. 48 Mine eye runneth down with rivers of
water, for the destruction of the daughter of my people. 48 With rivers ev'n of water great still runneth down mine eye, Ev'n for destruction that doth on my peoples daughter ly. 49 Mine eye trickleth down and ceaseth not, without any intermission: 50 Till the Lord look down, and behold from heaven. 49 Mine eye down trickleth, without cease or intermission: 50 Till that the Lord from Heav'n behold, and us look down upon. 51 Mine eye affecteth mine heart, because of all the daughters of my citie. 52 Mine enemies chased me sore like a bird, without cause. 51 Mine eye affects▪ my heart, ev'n for my cities daughters all: 52 Me without cause sore chas'd my foes like to a bird that's small. 53 They have cut of my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon me. 54 Waters flowed over mine head , then I said, I am cut off. 53 In dungeon they cut off my life, and cast on me a stone;
54 The waters ov'r my head did flow, I said, cut off I'm gone. 55 I called upon thy name, O Lord, out of the low dungeon. 56 Thou hast heard my voice, hide not thine ear at my breathing, at my cry. 55 Out of the dungeon low, O Lord, on thy Name called I, 56 Thou heardst my voice, hide not thine ear while I do breath and cry. 57 Thou drewest near in the day that I cal∣led upon thee: thou saidst. Fear not. 58 O Lord, thou hast pleaded the causes of my soul, thou hast redeemed my lise. 57 Thou near drewst when I call'd on thee, thou saidst, Let fear be past, 58 Thou pleadst the causes of my soul, my life redeem'd thou hast. 59 O Lord, thou hast seen my wrong, judge thou my cause. 60 Thou hast seen all their vengeance , and all their imaginations against me. 59 O Lord, do thou now judge my cause my wrong all seene thou hast, 60 Thou their imaginations sawst and vengeance 'gainst me 61 Thou hast heard their reproach, O Lord, and all their imaginations against me.
61 Thou hast most clearly heard, O Lord, how their reproach did fall, And their imaginations that were against me all. 62 The lips of those that rose up against me and their device against me all the day. 62 The lips of those that up did rise against me evry way, And their device mischievous all against me all the day. 63 Behold their sitting down and their rising up, I am their musick. 63 Behold their sitting down, and als their rising up for ill: I in this case most surely am become their musick still. 64 Render unto them a recompense, O Lord, according to the work of their hands. 64 Unto them in thy fury great O thou, the mighty Lord, According to their handy work a recompence afford, 65 Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse un∣to them. 66 Persecute and destroy them in anger, from under the heavens of the Lord. 65 Unto them sorrow give of heart, thy curse unto them render,
66 From under the Lords heav'ns destroy, them persecute in anger. CHAPTER IV. HOw is the gold become dim! how is the most fine gold changed! the stones of the sanctuary are poured out in the top of every street. HOw is the gold thus dim become? how's fine gold changed farre? The temples stones out in the top of each street powred are. 2 The precious sons of Zion, compareable to fine gold, how are they esteemed to earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter! 2 The precious sons of Sion like to fine gold in the lands, How are they as earths pitchers thought the work of potters hands? 3 Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones: the daughter of my people is become cruell, like the ostriches in the wildernesse. 3 Sea monsters ev'n draw out the breasts their young ones suck to give, My people's fierce like ostritches in wildernesse that live. 4 The tongue of the sucking childe cleaveth  the roof of his mouth for thirst: the young
children ask bread, and no man breaketh it un∣to them. 4 The sucking childe his tongue for thirst to his mouths roof cleaves so, The children young ask bread, and none it breaketh them unto. 5 They that did feed delicately, are desolate in the streets: they that were brought up in scar∣let, embrace dunghils. 5 They that did delicatly feed in streets are desolate? They that in scarlet were brought up dunghills embrace for that: 6 For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people, is greater then the pu∣nishment of the sin of Sodom, 6 Of sins my peoples daughter did the punishment is more Then of the sin of Sodome was the punishment before. That was overthrown as in a moment, and no hands stayed on her. 7 Her Nazarites were purer then snow, they were whiter then milk, That in a moment was ov'rthrown, no hands did stay on her; 7 Her Nazarites more pure then snow, then milk they whiter were.
They were more rudy in body then rubies, their polishing was of saphire. 8 Their visage is blacker then a coal: they are not known in the streets: Then rubies they more rudy were, as polish'd saphire drawn: 8 Their visage blacker's then a coal, in streets they are not known. Their skin cleaveth to their bones: it is wi∣thered, it is become like a stick. 9 They that be slain with the sword, are bet∣ter then they that be slain with hunger: Their skin it cleaveth to their bones, it like a stick doth wither: 9 The slain with sword are better then they that be slain with hunger. For these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the field. For piece and piece those pine away, before to death they yeeld, They stricken through are for the want of fruits that fill the field. 10 The hands of the pitifull women have sod∣den their own children, they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people. 10 The hands of women pitifull their children sodden have, My folk in their destruction for meat them did receive.
11 The Lord hath accomplished his fury, he hath poured out his fierce anger, and hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured the foundations thereof. 11 His fury God accomplish'd hath, his wrath he out did powre; In Zion he put fire which there its ground-works did devoure. 12 The kings of the earth, and all the inha∣bitants of the world would not▪ have beleeved, that the adversary and the enemie should have entred into the gates of Ierusalem. 12 Kings of the earth and dwellers in the world would not believe, That th' en'mie into Salems gates to enter should get leave. 13 For the sins of her prophets , and the iniquities of her priests, that have shed the bloud of the just in the midst of her; 13 For sins of all her prophets vile and priests iniquities, That of the just have shed the blood in midst of her that lyes. 14 They have wandred as blinde men in the streets, they have polluted themselves with bloud, so that men could not touch their garments.
14 As blind they wandred in the streets, themselves polluted much They have with blood, ev'n so that men could not their garments touch. 15 They cryed unto them, Depart ye , it is unclean, depart, depart, touch not, when they fled away and wandred: 15 They cried unto them, Depart, unclean it is, we say, Depart, depart, touch not, when thus they wandring fled away: They said among the heathen, they shall no more sojourn there. 16 The anger of the Lord hath divided them, They said among the heathen, there no more sojourn they shall. 16 The anger of the mighty Lord divided hath them all. He will no more regard them: they respected not the persons of the priests, they favoured not the elders. Hee'l have no more regard to them: of priests the persons they Respected not, they favoured not the elders any way. 17 As for us, our eyes as yet failed sor our
vain help: in our watching we have watched for a nation that could not save us. 17 For us, our eyes for our vain help as yet they failed have, We in our watching watched for a Nation could not save. 18 They hunt our steps that we cannot go in our streets: our end is near, our dayes are ful∣filled, for our end is come. 18 They hunt our steps, that we can not go in our streets ov'rcome, Our end is near, our dayes fulfill'd are, for our end is come. 19 Our persecutors are swifter then the eagles of the heaven▪ they pursued us upon the moun∣tains, they laid wait for us in the wildernes. 19 Our persecutors swifter are then heavens Eagles, thus On hils they us pursu'd, and wait in desert laid for us. 20 The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits, of whom we said, 20 Likewise of our nostrils the breath th'Anointed of the Lord, Was apprehended in their pits of whom we said this word,
Under his shadow we shall live among the heathen. 21 Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of E∣dom, that dwellest in the land of Uz. Under his haddow we shall live among the heathen thus, 21 Rejoice, O Eoms daughter that dwell'st in the land of Uz. The cup also shall passe through unto thee: thou shalt be drunken, and shalt make thy self naked. The cup also shall passe ev'n through till it come unto thee: Thou shalt thy self all naked make, and thou shalt drunken be. 22 The punishment of thine iniquitie is ac∣complished, O daughter of Zion, he will no more cary thee away into captivity. 22 The punishment accomplish'd is of thine iniquitie, O Zions daughter he'le no more as captive cary thee. He will visit thine iniquitie, O daughter of Edom, he will discover thy sins. O thou that Edoms daughter art he surely visit still Wilt thine iniquity, and he thy sins discover will.
CHAPTER V. REmember, O Lord, what is come upon us: consider and behold our reproch. REmember now, O Lord our God, what is come us upon, Consider also our reproch, and it behold anone. 2 Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to alients. 3 We are Orphans and fatherlesse, our mo∣thers are as widows. 2 To strangers turnd's our heritage, our house to aliants far: 3 We Orphans are and Fatherlesse, our mothers widows are. 4 We have drunken our water for money, our wood is sold unto us. 5 Our necks are under persecution: we la∣bour and have no rest. 4 For money we our water drink, our wood is sold to us: 5 Our necks under affliction are we restlesse labour thus. 6 We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread. 6 We unto the Egyptians have giv'n the hand in need,
And to th'Assyrians, for to be but satisfi'd with bread. 7 Our fathers have sinned and are not, and e have born their iniquities. 8 Servants have ruled over us: there is one that doth deliver us out of their hand. Sinn'd have our fathers, and are not, and born their sins we have, Ov'r us rul'd servants, and none doth out of their hand us save. 9 We gat our bread with the perill of our es, because of the sword of the wildernesse. With perill of our lives we gat our bread in great distresse, ecause of the most bloody sword that was in wildernesse. 10 Our skin was black like an oven, because the terrible famine. 11 They ravished the women in Zion , and maids in the cities of Iudah. Our skin for famine terrible like as ae ov'n was black, They Zions women, Judahs maids by ravishing did take. 12 Princes are hanged up by their hand: the es of elders were not honoured.
12 Up by their hand most cruelly the Princes hang'd are there, The faces of the Elders als by no man honourd were 13 They took the young men to grindo, and the children fell under the wood. 14 The elders have ceased from the gate, th young men from their musick. 13 They took the young men for to grind▪ boyes under wood did fall, 14 The Elders ceased from the gate, from musick young men all. 15 The joy of our heart is ceased, our dau is turned into mourning. 16 The crown is fallen from our head:  unto us that we have sinned. 15 Joy of our heart it ceased is, our dance to mourning's turned, 16 The crown is fallen from our head, woe's us that we have sinned. 17 For this our heart is fa, for these thing our eyes are dim. 18 Because of the mountain of Zion, which desolate, the foxes walk upon it. 17 For this our heart is saint, our  are dim for things so done▪ 18 For Zions hill that's desolate, it foxes walk upon.
19 Thou, O Lord, remainest for ever: thy∣rone from generation to generation. 9 Thou who art the most mighty Lord remainst for ever fast: Thy Throne from generation doth to generation last. 20 Wherefore dost thou forget us for ever, nd forsake us so long time? 21 Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we ll be turned: 0 Why us forgetst thou still and als so long forsak'st us all: Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and turned be we shall: Renew our dayes as of old. 22 But thou hast utterly rejected us: thou art y wroth against us. n as of old renew our dayes: 22 But utterly thou both ist us rejected, and thou art with us exceeding wroth. The Song of Ionah, for his deliverance out of the belly of the Whale. Jonah. 2. vers. 2. Cryed by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell d I , and thou heardest my voice.
BY reason of my trouble I to God who heard me cry'd, Out of hells belly did I cry, thou heardst my voice I try'd. 2 For thou hadst cast me into the deep, in  midst of the seas, and the flouds compassed me bout, all thy billows and thy waves passed over 2 For thou hadst cast me in the deep, in midst ev'n of the sea, Floods compassde me, thy billows all and waves past over me. 3 Then I said, I am cast out of thy  yet I will look again toward thy holy temple. 3 Then said I, I out of thy sight am cast with great disdain, Yet to thy holy temple I at last will look again. 4 The waters compassed me about eve the soul: the depth closed me round about, weeds were wrapt about my head. 4 The waters compassde me about ev'n to the soul indeed, The depth me closd about, and weeds were wrapt about my head. 5 I went down to the bottoms of the m∣tains; the earth with her bars was about for ever:
Ev'n to the bottomes I went down of mountains high that be, ikewise the earth was with her barres for ever about me. Yet hast thou brought up my life from corru∣ion, O Lord my God. et thou who art the Lord my God, now by thy power alone ly life in danger great hast brought up from corruption. 6 When my soul fainted within me, I re∣mbred the Lord, and my prayer came in unto e, in thine holy temple. The Lord I did remember when my soul did faint in me, to thy holy Temple came my prayer unto thee. 7 They that observe lying vanities, forsake ir own mercy. They that do lying vanities observe in any way. The mercy then that is their own they do forsake alway. 8 But I will sacrifice unto thee with the ice of thanksgiving, I will pay that that I have wed: salvation is of the Lord. But I to thee with voice of thanks will sacrifice afford,
I will what I have vowed pay; salvation's of the Lord. The Song and prayer of Habbakkuk, upon Sigionoth. HABAK. 3. vers. 2. I Have heard thy speach and was afraid,: O Lord, revive thy work in the midst of the years in the midst of the years make known; in wra remember mercie. I Heard thy speach, and was afraid, in midst of years on earth, Revive thy work, Lord make it known on mercy think in wrath. 2 God came from Teman, and the holy o from mount Paran. Selah. His glorie cover the heavens, and the earth was full of his prais 2 From Teman and from Paran moun came God the holy One, Selah. His glory cov'rd the heavens, his praise fill'd all the earth anone, 3 And his brightnes was as the light, he h horns coming out of his hand, and there wa the biding of his power. 3 His brightnesse als was as the light, out of his hand moreover He horns had comming, and there was the hiding of his power.
4 Before him went the pestilence, and burn∣ing coals went forth at his feet. 5 He stood and measured the earth: 4 Before him went the pest, and coals went burning from his feet; 5 He stood and also measured the earth as was most meet: He beheld and drove asunder the nations, and the everlasting mountains were scattered, the per∣petuall hills did bowe: his wayes are ever∣lasting. He look'd and sunder nations drove, old mountains scattred were, The hills perpetuall did bowe, his wayes eternall are. 6 I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble. 6 The tents of Cushan I did see under affliction; The curtains of the Midian land did tremble evry one. 7 Was the Lord displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against the rivers? 7 Was the displeasure of the Lord made 'gainst the rivers fall? Or was thine anger that is great against the rivers all?
Was thy wrath against the sea, that tho didst ride upon thine horses, and thy chariots o salvation? Or was thy wrath against the sea that thou didst ride upon▪ Thine horses and the chariots of thy salvation? 8 Thy bow was made quite naked, accor∣ding to the oaths of the tribes, even thy word, Selah. Thou didst cleave the earth with rivers. 8 Thy bow was made quite naked as thou oaths to tribes didst give, Ev'n thine own word; thou also didst the earth with rivers cleave. 9 The mountains saw thee, and they trem∣bled; the overflowing of the water passed by: the deep uttered his voice, and lift up his hands on high. 9 The hils thee saw, and trembled all, great waters passed by, The deep his voice did utter then, and lift his hands on hy. 10 The Sun and Moon stood still in their habitations: at the light of thine arrows they went, and at the shining of thy glittering spear, 10 The Sun and Moon stood where they dwelt, of those thine arrows clear▪
They at the sight went, and the shine of thy most glittring spear. 11 Thou didst march through the land in in∣dignation, thou didst thresh the heathen in anger. 11 Thou in thine indignation through all the land didst presse, And als the heathen people thou didst in thine anger thresh. 12 Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with thine anointed, 12 Thou of thy people wentest forth for the salvation: Yea ev'n for the salvation great with thine Anointed One, Thou woundest the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah. Out of the house of wicked men thou diddest wound the head, Discov'ring the foundation unto the neck with speed. Selah. 13 Thou didst strike through with his staves the head of his villages: they came out as a whirlewinde to scatter me: 13 Thou through his village heads didst strike with staves of his that be,
They as a whirlewind did come out, and that to scatter me: Their rejoycing was as to devour the poor secretly. 14 Thou didst walk through the sea with thine horses through the heap of great waters. Their joy it was as to devore the poor man secretlie: 14 Through heaps of water great thou walkst with horses through the sea. 15 When I heard, my belly trembled: my lips quivered at the voice: rottennes entred into my bones, 15 My belly trembled when I heard▪ and at the voice anone My lips did quiver, rottenesse did enter in my bone: And I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when he cometh up unto the people, he will invade them with his troups. I trembled in my self, that I might rest in dayes most sad, When he up to the people comes with troups he'le them invade. 16 Although the fig-tree shall not blossom▪ neither▪ shall fruit be in the vines, the labour of the olive shall fail,
16 Though that the fig-tree blossome not nor fruit in vines shall be, The labour of the olive fat shall fail as all shall soe. And the fields shall yeeld no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: The fields shall not yeeld any meat, the flock als from the fold Shall be cut off, there shall no herd in stals be young or old. 17 Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. 17 Yet I in him will now rejoice who is the Lord alone, I also joy will in the God of my salvation. 18 The Lord God is my strength, and he will make my feet like hindes feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. 18 The Lord my God hs is my strength, he'le make my feet to be Like feet of Hindes, he'le make me walk upon my places hie.
The Song of Mary, after Elizabeth told her that at her salutation the child in her womb leaped for joy. Luk. 1. 46. MY soul doth magnifie the Lord, 2 And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour. MY soul now with all gladnesse fill'd the Lord doth magnifie, 2 My sprit rejoiced hath in God a Saviour for me. 3 For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: for behold, from henceforth all ge∣nerations shall call me blessed. 3 For of his handmaid he did so regard the state so small, For lo, all generations me from henceforth blest shall call. 4 For he that is mighty hath done to me great things, and holy is his name. 5 And his mercy is on them that fear him, from generation to generation. 4 He mighty did great things to me, and holy is his Name: 5 They that him fear from race to race, his mercie have on them. 6 He hath shewed strength with his arm, he hath scattered the proud, in the inmagination of their hearts.
6 He with his arme hath shewed strength, the proud he in all parts In the imagination hath scattered of their hearts. 7 He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree. 7 He hath put down ev'n from their seats those that most mighty be, And also he exalted hath them of a low degree. 8 He hath filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he hath sent empty away. 8 Them that are hungry he hath fill'd with good things evry way, And those that rich are also he hath empty sent away. 9 He hath holpen his servant Israel, in re∣membrance of his mercy. 10 As he spake to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever. 9 He helpt his servant Israel, he mercy did remember, 10 As he unto our fathers spake; t'Abr'am and's seed for ever.
The Song of Zacharias after he had been nine moneths dumb for not believing the angel Gabriel. Luk. 1. vers. 68. BLessed be the Lord God of Israel, for be hath visited and redeemed his people, THe Lord the God of Israel for ever blessed be, For that his people visited and als redeem'd hath he. 2. And hath raised up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of his servant David. 2 And of salvation he for us hath raised up on hy A glorious horn in Davids house, who serv'd him faithfully. 3 As he spake by the mouth of his holy pro∣phets, which have been since the world began. 3 As by the mouth of those that were his holy prophets than, Which have among his people been ev'n since the world began. 4 That we should be saved from our ene∣mies, and from the hand of all that ha us. 4 That from those that our enemies are we should be saved heer; And likewise from the hand of all that hatred to us bear.
5 To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant. 5 The mercies promisd to perform unto our fathers ever, And als his holy Covenant made with them to remember. 6 The oath which he sware to our father Abraham, 7 That he would grant unto us, that we be∣ing delivered out of the hands of our enemies, 6 The oath which unto Abraham our father then he sware▪ 7 That he would grant that we from those sav'd that our enemies are, Might serve him without fear. 8 In holinesse and righteousnesse before him, all the dayes of our life. Without all fear so might him serve, 8 In holinesse alwayes And righteousnesse before him als of our life all the dayes 9 And thou childe shalt he called the prophet of the Highest: for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his wayes; 9 And thou O child shalt called be the Highests prophet rare. For thou before the Lord shalt go, his wayes for to prepare.
10 To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the remission of their sins. 10 That so he might the knowledge give of his salvation Unto his people, by their sins most free remission. 11 Through the tender mercie of our God; whereby the day-spring from on high hath vi∣sited us, 11 Ev'n through the mercy of our God that tender is, whereby Us on the earth hath visited the DAY-SPRING from on hy. 12 To give light to them that sit in dark∣nesse, and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace. 12 To light them that in darknesse sit, and in death shade abide, Into the way of holy peace our feet there for to guide. The Song of SIMEON. Luke 2. vers. 29. LOrd now lettest thou thy servant depart i peace, according to thy word. NOw in thy mercy lettest thou thine own servant O Lord
At last by death in peace depart, according to thy word. 2 For mine eyes have seen thy salvation: 3 Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people, 2 For thy salvation mine eyes have seen for great and small, 3 Which thou prepared hast before the face of people all. 4 A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israle. A precious light to lighten all the Gentiles far and neer, And als the glory of Isra'l that is thy people dear. FINIS.
Georgii Buchanani hymnus Matutinus ad Christum. PRoles parentis optimi, Et par parenti maximo, De luce verâ vera lux; Verusque de Deo Deus: En nox recessit jam nitet Aurora luce praeviâ Coelum solumque purpurans: Et clausa tenebris detegens; Sed fuscat ignorantiae Caligo nostra pectora, Et nubilis erroribus Mens penè cedit obruta. Exurge sol purissime, Diemque d mundo suum: Nostram{que} noctem illuminans Erroris umbram discute. Dissolve frigus horridum, Arvumque nostri pectoris, Calore lampadis tuae, Humore purganoxio: Ut irrigetur coelitus Roris beati nectare, Et centuplo cum foenore Coeleste semen proferat.
A Morning Hymne for CHRIST. ODay spring from on hy Cause passe away our night, Clear first our morning sky, And after shine thou bright: 2 Of lights thou art the Light Of righteousnesse the Sun, Thy beams they are most bright, Through all the world they run▪ 3 The day thou hast begun, Thou wilt it clearer make, Wee hope to see this Sun High in our Zodiack. 4 And there he beames shall shake, Of a most golden how, Which fading flowrs shall make Their colours to renew. 5 O make thy morning dew
To fall without all cease, Do thou such favour shew As unto Gideons fleece. 6 O do thou never cease, To make that dew to fall The dew of grace and peace, And joyes celestiall. 7 This morning we do call Upon thy Name divine, That thou among us all Cause thine Aurora shine. 8 Let shadows all decline And wholly passe away, That light which is divine. May bring to us our day. 9 A day to shine for ay, A day that is most bright; A day that never may Be follow'd with a night. 10 O of all lights the light, The light that is most true, Now banih thou our night, And still our light renew. 11 Thy face now to us shew, O Son of God most dear, O Morning Star most true Make thou our darknesse clear. 12 Nothing at all is heer
That with thee can compare, unto us draw near, And us thy children spare. 13 Thy mercies they are rare If they were understood, Wrath due to us thou bare And for us shed thy blood. 14 Like beasts they are most rude, Whom reason cannot move; Who do not for thy good Thee most entirely love. 15 Make us mind things above, Ev'n things that most excell, Of thine untainted love Give us the sacred seal. 16 In mercy with us deale, And all our sins remove, Thy self to us reveale, And this our song approve, 17 Us in thy mercy move To walk still in thy way First make us sick of love, And then with flagons stay. 18 Let us not go astray To wander far from thee, Thou art the onely way To joyes that lasting be, 19 O that we light could see.
That shineth in thy face, So at the last should we To glory go from grace; 20 Within thy sacred place, Is only true content, Where God's seen face to face Above the firmament. 21 O that our hours were spent Among the sons of men, To praise th'Omnipotent! Amen, yea, and Amen. FINIS.
