B4372 11937463 51220
THE SUCCESSES OF OUR Cheshire Forces: As they came related By Sir William Breretons own Pen, to a Minister of note and eminency in the City. In which Victory we may observe; 1. Courage borne up, against the greatest discouragements. 2. Though the ingagement was fierce, yet the rage of the de∣vourer was far beneath the mercy of our Deliverer, who gave them so great a victory without the loss of a man. 3. The Victory was received by them, as it ought to be read by us, not without spirits raised high in thankfulness. To which is added, Late good newes from Lancashire, of the taking of an hundred and forty horse and their riders neere Latham House. Published according to Order. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill, at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1644.
The Successes of our Cheshire Forces▪ as they came related by Sir William Breretons owne Pen, to a Minister of note and emi∣nencie in the Citie. SIR, AS you have been frequent in your ad∣dresses to God in our behalfe, so you may look upon a wonderfull and extraordina∣ry deliverance and victory, as a returne of your prayers, for which I desire such re∣turne of thanks may be made, as shall be thought fit for so great a mercy, which God gave us upon munday morning, being August 26th 1644. Upon Saturday evening intelligence came to Namptwich of the enemies passing by us towards the King, and quartering a∣bout Whit church, whereof I met with the news at my com∣ming out of Lancashire that day, where I had leave to meet Sir John Meldrum, and the Lancashire Gentlemen: And my Horse were not (since they had the fight at Tarvin) returned hither, but were quartered about Middlewich. Two or three of our Troops came not in, which made the assault the heavier upon the rest; which together with some seven Companies of foote (whereof three or foure
were of my owne Regiment, one of Collonell Brookes, and the rest of Collonell Duckenfeilds Regiment) mar∣ched out of Namptwich upon Sabbath day in the evening about six of the clocke, and came to Malpasse, the next morning about spring of the day, where my Troope char∣ged the Enemy three or foure times, the other Troopes which followed, not being able to come up in the narrow lanes. The Enemy were judged to be about fortie Colours, and betwixt two thousand and three thousand in number: The Commanders thereof being many of them Papists, (for this was the remainder of the Earle of Newcastles Ar∣my sometimes commanded by Goring) did fight and come on very gallantly, but their Leaders never went backe againe. There was in the Front of my Troope divers Of∣ficers, who behaved themselves very gallantly, as Lievte∣nant Collonell Jones, Captaine Zanchy, Captaine Finch, Captaine Church, Lievtenant Burroughs, and divers others. When wee came to the top of the hill, they discovered the Enemy to stand in six or seven severall bodies, or divisi∣ons, in very good order. But before this time wee had kil∣led divers of their Colonells, and great Officers. It was not thought fit to pursue any further, wee having beaten two strong parties of them, and followed them through Malpasse Towne: Nor was it safe to engage an handfull against so great a number; And we could not retreate without apparent danger to have lost all: Therefore it was resolved that wee should stand in the mouth of the lane till the foote came up to relieve them, which were com∣manded by Major Lanchane, and Lievtenant Collonell Venables, which was accordingly done: But before the foote came up, our Horse were very much spent, having
received three or foure fresh charges, by severall fresh Brigades or Divisions, wherein was neither man, nor one foote of ground lost, but rather gained every charge; And when the foote came up, they performed very good execu∣tion; yet were they all in danger to be surrounded by the Enemy, who as they were sufficiently strong, so they wan∣ted not opportunitie when God delivered up so many of their Commanders into our hands, which were killed, wounded, and taken prisoners, as will appeare by the in∣closed. Their common Souldiers upon the losse of so many of their Commanders retreated, and wee were not able to pursue them farre; But had wee had five hundred Horse, we might (by Gods blessing) have wholly destroyed this Army; whereof there may be still about two thousand remaining, which with the addition of Sir William Vaug∣hans Regiment, and Collonell Trevers, and the remainder of the Princes Regiment of Horse, they cannot be but a∣bove three thousand strong. They were then upon their march towards Shrewsbury, and so to the King; but fled backe towards Chester; where they could not be admitted, but were looked upon very scornefully, because they were beaten backe with so inconsiderable a number, which they exceeded above ten to one. The enemy being still an overmatch for us, it is not im∣probable they may force their passage to joyn with the Kings Army; therefore it were much to be desired that what horse and foot is intended us might be speeded unto these parts. It is uncertain where the Prince is, but some say he is gone towards Shrewsbury, some say towards the King, but it is not known to very many in Chester. Liev∣tenant Colonel Jones, Captain Zanchy, Captain Finch,
Captain Church, and others, shewed much courage and re∣solution, in standing so valiantly, not shrinking a foot at severall charges by the enemy, which did so much amaze the enemy, as that some of them swore; They were De∣vils and not men. Hereof I desire God may have the glo∣ry: I have no more to adde, but with my respects to you, desiring the continuance of your prayers, subscribe my selfe Your assured friend, Will: Brereton. The Postscript. BY Letters from Colonel Haughton I am informed, that the Lancashire horse are drawn neere to Lever∣pool, and have blocked up the town by land, as our Ships have done by Sea; and that they have lately taken a party of horse out of the town, whence there come divers, both horse and foot-men, to submit themselves; and it is hoped before long, the town may be gained, and the sooner, were it not (as is conceived) that the English and Townesmen were over-ruled by the Irish souldiers. A List of prisoners taken by the Cheshire Forces for the Parliament at Malpass, Aug. 26. 1644. I. MAjor Cromwel, who commanded as Major to the Duke of Yorks Regiment of horse.
II. Major Maxie, Major of Sr. Charles Lucas his Re∣giment, of which Regiment there is no field Commander left; Sir Charles himself (who was Lievtenant Generall to the Prince) being taken at York, and his Lievtenant Colonel also. III. Major Cranthorn of Col. Foriers Regiment (for∣merly Claverings Regiment) who contended to be Lievte∣nant Colonel of that Regiment, and lead up the same as Major. IV. Captain Thomas Clavering, brother to Colonel Clavering of the North, who is dead at Kendall. V. Captain Barker, and Lievtenant Mountan, with some other inferiour Officers, and about twenty common sou∣diers. The two Majors and the Lievtenant are dange∣rously wounded. At the same time there were slain Col. Conyers, Col. Baynes, Major Heskitch, and 'tis said three other Majors, and other Officers about forty: others say an hundred slain more. Sir Marmaduke Langdale, as is reported by a Trumpeter, (whom he sent to Mr. Brereton for a List of prisoners) is wounded in the back, so is Captain Harris, and both lie wounded at Chester; but on our part wee lost not one man, neither taken nor killed, nor any dangerously wounded. Lievtenant Col. Jones, (who behaved himself most gallantly) being shot in the thigh, but I hope but slightly, and some other Officers and souldiers of Sir Wil∣liam Breretons owne Troope (wo were in the van) very sleightly wounded. August 29. By intelligence from Chester, we are infor∣med, that there is one Major and one Captain dead and yet unburied.
By Letters newly come out of Lancashire, from, and to persons of quallity, it is certified, that our forces being to pass by Latham House, and Ambuscado of horse was placed neer the said House, and being discovered by the shooting off of a pistoll, our men encompassed them, and took an hundred and forty horse and their riders; and that Lever∣poole is besieged by Sea and by Land. FINIS.
