B811 11914844 50922
A Woollen Shroud, OR LEARN TO DYE. To be Given at BURIALS. By C. B. A. Æ. LXX. N. XXIII. LONDON, Printed for John Barksdale at the sign of the Five Bells in New-street near Shooe-Lane, 1679.
I. PArt, Containing certain Rules. II. Cautions, or Warnings. III. The Four last things, Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell. IV. Ejaculations out of the Psalms. V. Comfortable Notes for Afflicted, and Sick Persons. VI. Some Apostolical Exhortations. VII. Short Prayers gathered out of the Church Book.
A WOOLLEN SHROUD, OR LEARN TO DYE. In Seven Parts, to be read every Week. The First Part, Containing certain Rules. I. AN Holy Life is the best preparation for a happy Death. Heb. 12.14. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Heb. 5.9. Jesus Christ is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all that obey him. II. The beginning of a Holy Life is true Repentance. Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be Convert∣ed, that your sins may be blotted out. Mat. 3.2. Amend your Lives for the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand. III. It is God's will and command that we should Repent. Ezek. 18.30, 31. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions. For why will ye dye? Acts 17.30. God commandeth all men every where to Repent. IV. God doth really and truly desire our Salvation. Ezek. 33.11. As I live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure in the Death of the wicked: but that the
wicked turn from his evil way and live. Mat. 23. How often (saith Christ) would I have gathered ye, and ye would not. 1 Tim. 2.4. God will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth. V. God gave his only Son for all the World. John 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son; that whosoever believeth in him might not perish but have everlasting life. John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of the World. 1 John 2.2. Jesus Christ the righteous is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World. VI. Christ came to call Sinners to Repentance, and Salva∣tion. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Luke 9.56. The Son of man is not come to destroy mens lives but to Save them. VII. The Ministers of Christ are Preachers of Repentance. Luke 24.47. Repentance and Remission of sin should be Preached in his name among all Nations. 2 Cor. 5.18. Christ hath given unto us the Ministry of reconciliation. 20. We pray you in Christs stead, be ye reconciled unto God. VIII. Above all knowledg, desire and labor to know Jesus Christ. Phil. 3.8. I count all things but loss for the excel∣lency of the knowledg of Jesus Christ my Lord. Eph. 1.17. I pray that God may give unto you the Spirit and revelation for the acknowledgment of Christ. 2 Pet. 3.10. Grow in Grace, and in the knowledg of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. IX. Look upon Christ as the best example to be followed. Mat. 11.29. Learn of me for I am meek and low∣ly in heart. 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me even as I also am of Christ. 1 Pet. 2.21. Christ suffered
for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps. X. Often meditate on the Sufferings of Christ our Lord, and on his Resurrection. Rom 8.74. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that dyed: yea rather that is risen again. Rom. 4.25. Who was delivered for our Offences, and raised again for our justification. 2 Tim. 2.8. Remember that Jesus Christ was raised from the dead. XI. Think oft upon the happiness of such as dye in the favor of Christ. Philip. 1.21. To me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. 23. Having a desire to depart and to be with Christ. Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord. XII. Think upon Eternity. 2 Cor. 4.18. The things which are seen are Tem∣poral: but the things which are not seen are Eternal. Mat. 25.46. The unrighteous shall go away into ever∣lasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal. The Second Part, Containing Cautions or Warnings. I. AGainst idleness and neglect of Duty, and of the works of our Calling. 2 Thes. 3.12. Such as walk disorderly working not at all, but are busie bodies, we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work and eat their own Bread. 1 Thess. 5.14. Warn them that are unruly or disorderly. 2 Thess 3.10. This we commanded you; that if any would not work, neither should he eat. 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every one abide in the same calling wherein he is called. II. Against negligence in coming to Church, to Prayers and Sermons.
Ps. 122.1. I was gald when they said unto me, let us go into the House of the Lord. Ps. 84.1. O how amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of Hoasts! Blessed are they that dwell in thy House: they shall be still praising thee. Mat. 21.13. My house shall be called the house of Prayer. Mark 4.24. Take heed what you hear. Luke 8.18. Take heed how ye hear. Luke 11.28. Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. Heb. 10.25. Not forsaking the as∣sembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is. Jam. 1.21, 22. Receive with meekness the ingrafted word which is able to Save your Souls. But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, de∣ceiving your own Souls. III. Against coldness in coming to the Holy Communion. 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of Blessing which we Bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? 1 Cor. 11.24. This do in re∣membrance of me. 28. But let a man examin himself; and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that Cup. IV. Against irreverence in the Worship of God. Ps. 95.6. O come let us Worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. Luke 22.41. Our Lord kneeled down and prayed. Acts 20.36. Paul kneeled down and prayed with them all. Heb. 12.28. Serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. V. Against disobedience to Governors in the Church and State. Rom. 13.1. Let every soul be subject unto the high∣er powers. 1 Pet. 2.13. Whether it be to the King as Suppream, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him. Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your Souls. Luke 10.16. He that heareth you, heareth me: and he that despiseth you despiseth me: and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me.
VI. Against Excess and abuse of Gods good Gifts. Rom. 13. ult. Make not provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof. 1 Cor 6.10. Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Phil. 4.5.—Let your moderation be known unto all men. VII. Against procrastination and delay of our Repentance. Esay 55.6. Seek the Lord while he may be found: call upon him while he is near. 2 Cor. 6.2. Now is the day of Salvation. Mat. 25.10. The Door was shut. Luke 19.42. Now they are hid from thine Eyes. VIII. Against unmindsulness of our Frailty and Misery. Gen. 18.27. I am but Dust and Ashes. Job 14.1. Man is of few days, and full of trouble. Rev. 3.17. Thou knowest not, that thou art wretched, and miser∣able, and poor, and blind, and naked. IX. Against unmercifulness to the Poor and Needy. Ps. 41.1. Blessed is he that considereth the poor and needy: the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. Mat. 25.45. In as much as ye did it not to one of these, ye did it not unto me. Heb. 13.16. To do good and to distribute, forget not: for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. X. Against Covetcousness and desire of Riches. Prov. 30.8. Give me neither Poverty nor Riches: Feed me with food convenient for me. 1 Tim. 6.10. The love of money is the root of all Evil. XI. Against Impatience and Discontent. 1 Sam. 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seem∣eth him good in his Eyes. 1 Tim. 6.8. And having food and rayment, let us be therewith content. XII. Against forgetfulness of our End and Departure hence. Jam. 4.14. What is your Life? It is even a vapor, that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away. Ps. 90.12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom.
The Third part touching the four last things, De, Judgment, Heaven and Hell. I. Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to dy: But after this the Judgment. II. Eccle. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the Earth as it was: And the Spirit shall return unto God who gave it. III. Ps. 49. Wise men also dy and perish toge∣ther, as well as the ignorant and foolish: And leave their riches for others. IV. Jam. 2.13. He shall have judgment without mercy that shewed no mercy. V. 2. Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive according to that he hath done, whether it be good or evil. VI. Acts. 17.31. God hath appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath Ordained. VII. Rom. 2.6. &c. God will render to every man according to his deeds: To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor and immortality; eternal life. But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness; indignation and wrath. Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that doth evil. But glory, honor and peace, to every man that work∣eth good. For there is no respect of persons with God. VIII. Math. 25.34. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand; Come ye blessed of my Fa∣ther, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. IX. Matth. 25.41. Then shall he also say unto them on his left hand: Depart from me ye cursed, into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
X. 2. Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that sin∣ned, but cast them to Hell, and delivered them into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment. XI. Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life; and so that day come upon you unawares. XII. Phil. 3.20.21. Our Conversation is in hea∣ven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall change our Vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his Glorious Body. The fourth part, containing Ejaculations out of the Psalms. I. Psalm 6.1. O Lord rebuke me not in thine Anger. 7.1. O Lord my God in thee do I put my trust. 10.1. Why standest thou so far off, O Lord. II. Ps. 13.1. How long wilt thou forget me O Lord? for ever? 16.1. Preserve me O Lord; for in thee do I put my trust. 17.8. Hide me under the shadow of thy wings. III. Ps. 22.1. My God, my God, why hast thou for∣saken me? 22.11. Be not far from me for trouble is near. 25.1. Unto thee O Lord do I lift up my soul. IV. Ps. 25.4. Shew me thy wayes, O Lord; teach me thy paths. 25.18. Look upon my affliction and forgive all my sins. 25.20. O Keep my soul and deliver me. V. Ps. 26.8. Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house. 27.1. The Lord is my light and my salvation. 28.9. Save thy people and bless thine inheritance. VI. Ps. 29. The Lord will bless his people with peace. 30.12. My God I will give thanks unto thee for ever.
31.5. Into thy hands I commit my spirit. VII. Ps. 31.7. I will be glad and rejoyce in thy mercy. 31.16. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant. 31.21. O how great is thy goodness which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee! VIII. Ps. 31.23. O Love the Lord all ye his saints. 32.11. Be glad in the Lord and rejoyce ye righteous. 33.12. Blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord. IX. Ps. 33.18. Behold the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him. 34.8. O taste and see, that the Lord is good. 36.9. With thee is the fountain of life; and in thy light shall we see light. X. Ps. 37.3. Trust in the Lord, and do good. 38.15. In thee O Lord, do I hope. 38.22. Make hast to help me O Lord my Salvation. XI. Ps. 39.4. Lord make me know my End. 40.8. I delight to do thy will O my God. 40. O Lord make hast to help me. XII. Ps. 42.5. Why art thou cast down O my soul? put thy trust in God. 43.3. Lord send out thy light and thy truth. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth, that I desire in comparison of thee. The fifth part, containing some comfortable notes for afflicted and sick persons. I. IF we consider from what fatherly love Afflictions come, how they are not only moderated but sweet∣ned and sanctified in the issue to us; how can it but mi∣nister matter of comfort to us in the greatest seeming discomforts? II. What unthankfulness is it, to think so much upon two or three crosses, and to forget a hundred blessings? III. A growing and fruitful Christian is always a com∣fortable Christian. The Oyle of grace bring forth the
Oyle of gladness. Christ is first a King of Righteousness and then a King of Peace. IV. A Christian overcomes by patience: Christ's victory was upon the Cross. V. Search the Scriptures and turn the promises into prayers, and press God for the performance of them. VI. As Christ was a man of sorrows, so are his mem∣bers predestinate to a conformity with him in suffering. VII. A Christian is a man of another world, and here from home; which he would forget, if he were not exercised here, and would take his passage for his Country. VIII. Often we discomfort our selves by false reason∣ings; as that we have no grace when we feel none: feel∣ing is not always a fit rule to judge our tales by: Or, that God hath rejected us, because we are crossed in outward things; when as this issues from his wisdom and love. IX. If there be a neglect of growing in holiness, the soul will never be soundly quiet: where there is not a pure conscience there is not a pacified conscience. X. So much as we are quiet and cheerful upon good grounds, so much we live, and are as it were in heaven. XI. The life of a Christian should be a medication, how to unloose his affections from inferior things: He will easily dye, that is dead before in affection. XII. In extremity of body, the sickness may be such, as all that we can perform to God is a quiet submission, and a desire to be carried unto Christ by prayers of o∣thers. The sixth part, presenting some Apostolical Ex∣hortations. I. S. Paul 1. Tim. 2.1. I exhort that first of all, sup∣plications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men.
II. Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another dayly, while it is called, to day: lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. III. Heb. 10.24.25. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works: Exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see the day ap∣proaching. IV. Phil. 2.1.2. If there be any consolation in Christ, If any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies; Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one mind. 5. Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus. V. Heb. 12.5.6. Have ye forgotten the exhortation, which speaketh unto you, as unto children; my son des∣pise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. VI. 1. Thes. 4.1. We beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk, so ye would abound more and more. 3. For this is the will of God, even your sanctification. 11. That ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you. VII. 1. Thes. 5.14.15. Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men. See that none render evil for evil unto any man: but ever follow that which is good, both among your sevles and to all men. VIII. Gal. 6.9.10. Let us not be weary in well do∣ing, for in due time we shall reap, if we faint not. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the houshold of Faith. IX. S. James, 5.8.9. Be patient, brethren, stablish your heart for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh,
grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be con∣demned; behold the judge standeth before the door. X. Jam. 5.13.14. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any sick among you? Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him. XI. Jam. 5.16 Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another that ye may be healed. The fervent prayer of a righteous man prevaileth much. XII. S. Peter, 1.4.7.8.9. The end of all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. And above all things have fervent charity among your selves: for charity shall cover the multitude of sins. Use hospitality one to another without grudging. The seventh part, short prayers gathered out of the Church-book. I. O Lord God, our heavenly Father, who art the gi∣ver of all goodness, I humbly beseech thee send thy grace unto me, and to all people, that we may wor∣ship thee, serve thee, and obey thee, as we ought to do: send us all things that be needful both for our souls and bodies. Be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins: Be pleased to save us and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily; to keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death. And this, O Father, I trust thou wilt do, of thy mercy and goodness, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And there∣fore I say Amen, so be it. II. I humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon my infirmities, and for the glory of thy name, turn from me all those evils, that I most justly have de∣served: and grant that in all my troubles I may put my whole trust in thy mercy, through our only Mediator Je∣sus Christ. Amen. III. Lord Jesus, grant me in this world the knowledg of thy truth, and in the world to come life everlasting, Amen.
IV. Father of all mercies, I bless thee for my creation and preservation: but above all for thine inestimable love in my redemption by thy Son Jesus Christ, for the means of grace and the hope of glo∣ry, through the same Jesus Christ, my only Lord and Saviour. Amen. V. Almighty God raise me up to the life of grace, that when my Lord shall come in his glory to judge both the quick and the dead, I may rise to the life im∣mortal through him who liveth and reigneth now and for ever. Amen. VI. Grant, O blessed Lord, that I may so hear, read, mark, and understand the Scriptures, that by pati∣ence and comfort of thy holy word, I may embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou hast given us in our Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. VII. Most Gracious God, create and make in me a new and contrite heart, that worthily lamenting my sins, I may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect re∣mission and forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. VIII. Lord give me grace to use such abstinence, that my Flesh being subdued to the Spirit, I may ever obey thy Godly motions, to thy honor and glory, through Jesus Christ. Amen. IX. Almighty God, mercifully grant, that I may follow the examples of our Saviours patience, and be made partaker of his resurrection, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. X. Merciful God receive my supplication for all e∣states of men in thy holy Church, that every member of the same in his vocation and ministry, may truly and Godly serve thee through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. XI. Lord increase in me Faith, hope, and charity, and that I may obtain that which thou dost promise, make me
to love that which thou dost command, through Jesus Christ. Amen. XII. O Lord look down from Heaven, behold, visit, and relieve thy poor Servant: Look upon me with the eyes of thy mercy: give me comfort and sure confidence in thee; defend me from the danger of the enemy, and keep me in perpetual peace and safety, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. Amen. FINIS.
