C1081 T191267 8882448 41988
The CASE of the Glass-makers in and about the City of London. I. THE Glass Manufacture is very beneficial and advantagious to this Nation, and might be much more improv'd, if suf∣ficiently encourag'd, and much greater Quantities exported, if Fo∣reigners were not enabled to undersell us in Foreign Markets; which they can do, not only from the high Duties on Salt Petre, Berilla, Foreign Ashes, and other Materials used in the said Manufacture,N.B. Saltpetre is double the Value in Lon∣don to what it is in Hol∣land. but from the Difference between the Duties on our own Coals brought Coastwise, particularly into the Port of London, and on those exported abroad.   s. d. The several Duties on Coals spent at London, amount to per Chaldron 9 2 The Duty on Coals exported, (if laid on London Mea∣sure) is but per Chaldr. 3 0 The Difference in favour of Foreigners, is per Caldr. 6 2 Which considering the great Quantity of Coals spent in the working of a small Quantity of Glass, makes a very great Difference in the Value of it when wrought. II. Besides the Advantage given to Foreigners, by furnishing them with Materials for underworking us at cheaper Prices than to our Natives; the Duties on Exportation of British Glass is a great Hin∣drance to its being exported abroad, whilst the French King, for the enabling his Subjects to afford their Glass cheap, gives to the Manu∣facturers thereof their Fewel gratis. III. As there are continually new Manufactures of Glass setting up in the Northern Parts of Europe, particularly Muscovy, Hamburgh, Prussia, &c. it is necessary also to regulate the Duties on Foreign Glass imported, so as that Foreigners may not be enabled to undersell us at home as well as abroad, which would be the total Ruin of the Ma∣nufacture. IV. The Duties now laid on the Importation of Foreign Glass are some of them too low, particularly those on Normandy or Crown Glass, which as the Duties now stand would in Time of Peace be imported cheaper from France than our own Crown Glass can be afforded at; and others of them, particularly all Looking-glass Plates of above 12 Inches in Length (which was the largest Size known when the Act of Tonnage and Poundage passed) pay Duties ad valorem, which is to be proved by the Oaths of the Importers; and there are but too many instances to prove, that such Oaths are little regarded, whereby the Intent of the Duties will be lost. Whereas were the low Duties advanc'd, and the Duties now laid ad Valorem put upon the Measure and Size, ac∣cording to which the Value of Glass Plates is settled, the same would effectually prevent any Collusion or Avoidance of the Duties. The Glass-makers therefore humbly pray the Honourable House of Com∣mons to give them such Relief in the Duties abovementioned, as they shall think most proper for the Encouragement of so useful a Manufacture.
THE CASE OF THE Glass-makers, Relating to the Duties on COALS, and on GLASS Ex∣ported and Imported.
