C4027 19329228 108638
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the Diocess of CHICHESTER, In the First Episcopal Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in God, PETER, by Divine Permission, Lord Bishop of Chichester. In the Second Year of his Consecration. LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, 1670.
The Tenour of the Oath to be administred to the Church-Wardens and Side-men. YOU shall Swear diligently to En∣quire, and true Presentment make, of every person now or lately of your Parish, which hath made any default or offence enquirable by the King's Laws Ecclesiastical, and become known unto you: For your direction wherein, you shall duly consider all and every of these Articles given you in charge; and neither present, nor spare to present any for fa∣vour or malice, hope of reward, or fear of displeasure: So help you God.
Concerning Religion, and the Government of the Church established in this Realm. IMprimis. Is there any in your Parish, who are guilty of Atheistical or blasphemous Speeches against the Majesty of Almighty God, or Scoffers of Religion,Artic. 1.2, 3, &c. n the Soul's future Immortal state? Is there any guilty of Speeches of Infidelity against the faith of our Lord Iesus Christ? Any who in their communication, or otherwise, defend the Sociman, or Arrian Heresie, denying the Eternal Godhead of the Lord Iesus, or Pelagian, denying the necesity of Grace, and of Baptism for the washing away of Original Sin? II. Is there any one that doth affirm or teach (and who is he) that the Holy Scripture doth not contain all things neces∣sary to Salvation? or,Artic. 8. that what is contain'd in the thrée Créeds ought not throughly to be receiv'd and believed, or that the Church hath not Authority in Controversies of faith? III.Can. 3. Is there any in your Parish that doth affirm and teach that the Church of England by law established, is not a true and Apostolical Church▪ and a true member of the Catholick Church, having in her ll things necessary to Salvation? Or is there any that dth ffirm and teach that the xxxix Articles agreed upon by the Arch▪Bshops and Bishops of both Pro∣vinces,Can. 5. and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, A D. 1562, are in any part erroneous, or supersti∣tious, or such as may not with a good conscience be subscribed unto? IV. Is there any in your Prish that doth affirm and teach,Can. 4. that the form of God's Wrship in the Church of England established by law, and contain'd in the book of Common-Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments▪ is a corrupt Po∣pish, or any way superstitious or unlawful Worship of God, or
containeth any thing in it that is repugnant to Scripture; or to the Doctrine and Worship in the Catholick or Primitiv Church? V. Is there any that doth affirm or teach (and who is he) that Baptism of Infants according to the Church of England is un∣lawful or unnecessary, or better to be delayed, or not appointed for the Remission of Sins,Galat. 3. Rubrick after Baptism or that it may be repeated, or that Infants duly baptized according to the hurch's Order, and dying before they commit ctual stre not saved, everlastingly through God's grace given thm in Baptis? VI. Is there any who doth affirm or teach that the Kng's, Majesty hath not the same Prerogaive in Cuses Esist∣cal,Can. 1 & 2. which we see hath been given lwaies to ll gody Princes by God himself both among the Iews, and in the Christian Church?Art. 37. Or that doth any way deny or impugn the King's Majesty's Royal Authority or Supremacy in Cuse Ecclesi∣astical in this Realm? Or who denies that within his Maie∣stie's Realms of England, Scotland, and , and all other his Dominions and Countries▪ our Lord the King is the high∣est Power under God, to whom the chief Gvernment of all Estates whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil in ll Causes doth appertain without any subjection due from Him or his Subjects to any foreign Iurisdiction? VII. Is there any who doth affirm and teach (and who is he) that the Government of the Church of  under his Ma∣jesty by Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Deans, Arch-Decons, or other chief Ministers bearing office in the same,Can. 7. or that the forms or manner of Ordaining and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons established by law contains any thing that is Antichristin,Can. 8. or repugnant to the ord of God, or to the practice of the Catholick Church? Or tht perss so or∣dained Bishops Priests or Decons he not sfficent exter∣nal calling, or that they ought not to be  truly Bi∣shops, Priests, or Deacons till they hve some other external calling unto those divine Offices? or  teaches that those three Holy Orders above have not ben ever in Christ's Church even from the Apostles time? VIII. Is there any in your Pih (nd who is h) that by separation of himself from the Church, or by joyning himself
to Convonticles breaks the Communion of the Church of England, or accounts of others as prophane,Can. 9. and none of the godly, for their orderly conforming themselves to the Church of England as established by law? Or that any combining them∣selves in Assemblies or Congregtions of the King's born Subjects within this Land, other then such as by the laws of this Land are held and allowed may truly take unto themselves the name of another purer Church, or of the Church of Eng∣land? IX. Is there any who doth affirm and teach (and who is he) that the Rites and Ceremonies,Can. 6. and the Rules of the Chuch of England by law established, are Antichristian, supestitious, or frivolous; Or any way unlawful or burdensome, or such as may not be subscrib'd unto, and practis'd with a good conscence,Can. 10. or that the Church hath no power to decrée any such Rites and Ceremonies? Concerning the Clergy▪ their Duty and Office. I. IS the Parson,Act. of Unifor. Car. II. 14. Uicar (or also Curate) in holy Orders by Episcopal Ordination, a Prist ordained according to the laws of the Church of England▪ hath he béen legally institu∣ted and inducted into his Benefice, or is he known or suspected to have obtaind his Parsonage or Uicaridge by any Symonia∣cal Contract? II. Did he within two Months after his Induction publick∣ly in your Church or Chappel upon som Sunday or Holy-day in the time of Dvine Srvice openly read the xxxix.Ibid. Arti∣cles established by Authorit in this Church, A.D. 1562; and then profess and publish his assent, and subscribe his name thereto in the presence of the Church Wrdens? Do you not know, or have you not ear that n his reading, or pretending to read those xxxix Articles, he pssed over some one or more of them, or some part of one or more, and what part of the Arti∣cles was it that he left uread▪ Di your Prson▪ Uicar or Curate upon some Lord-dy before he Feast of St. rtholo∣mew, A.D. 1662, or some Lord-day within two Months after
Sis Induction, solemnly read in your Church or Chappel both Morning and Evening Prayer, as it is appointed in the book Common-Prayer by law established? And did he after such reading, publickly before the Congregation declare his un∣eigned assent and consent to the use of all things in the said book contained, as is prescribed in the Act of Parliament late∣ly made for the Uniformity of publick Prayers? And did he within thrée Months after the said Feast of St. Bartholomew 1662, or within three Months after his Induction into your Church or Chappel, publickly upon some Lords-day in your Parish-Church read a Certificate under the hand and seal of the Arch-Bishop, Bishop or Ordinary of the Diocess, That he the said Parson, Uicar or Curate, did before his admission to be incumbent, subscribe a declaration of the unlawfulness to take up arms against the King, of his conforming to the Li∣turgy of this Church, and of his disavowing the unlawful Oath commonly call'd, The Solemn League and Covenant, ac∣cording as is prescribed in the aforesaid Act for Uniformity? Act of Parlia∣ment. Can. 47.48.III. Or after his lawful Entrance is your Pason or Uicar resident upon his benefice: or if his residence be legally dis∣pensd with, is his place supplied by a Curate allowed by the Bishops, and a licensed Precer, and constntly resident a∣mongst you? and what yearly Stipend doth your Minister al∣lew him? And if your Prson or Uicar be both resident him∣self and keep a Curate, doth he notwithstanding himself, at least once a Month, openly read Common-Prayer in your Church or Chppel, and (if there be occsion) administer each Sacrament in such order, manner and form as is prescribed in the Liturgy and Canons of this Church? IV. Having both lawful Entrance and Residence among you; is he (your Parson, Uicar, or also Curate) of blameless Conversation, the Husband of one Wife, sober, grave, not dou∣ble tongu'd, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre, ruling his Children,1 Tim. 3. and his own house well, sound in faith, in chariy, in patience? Or on the contrary, is he a frequenter of Tverns or Ale-houses,Can. 75, a common Gmester a prophane or ob∣scene jester, a swearer, railer, scoffer, or qurreller? Doth he set Neighbours at vriance one with another? Doth he fmi∣liarly converse with persons Excommunicate, ungodly or vici∣ous?
Doth he resort to suspected and infamous houses? Or is he himself vehemently suspected of Incontinency, with any person within or without your Parish? Or doth your Curate or Minister lodg or board at any Tavern, Inn, Ale-house, or house of any ill report? V. Doth your Minister or Curate plainly, audibly, distinctly, and reverently read the Divine Service of Morning and Evening-Prayer, without any diminution, addition,Act of Unior. Rubric. or alte∣ration, upon all Sundays and Holy-days, not omitting also o∣ther days appointed by the book of Common-Prayer as fit and usual times,Can. 14. Can. 15. as Wednesdays and Fridays (with the Litanies added) and the Eves of every Sunday and Holy-day, with Em∣ber and Rogation days? And moreover, when he is at home, and not otherwise reasonably hindred himself,Rubrick after Preface. or not able to get two or three gathered together, doth he every day say Divine Ser∣vice Morning and Ebening in the Parish-Church, where he ministers, and cause a Bell to be toll'd thereunto, that the Peo∣ple may come to hear Gods Word, and to pray with him? VI. Doth your Minister reverently and publickly,Rubrick at the Font only, administer the Holy Sacrament of Baptism? Or doth he refuse or delay to Christen any child that is brought to him to Church on any Sunday or Holy-day,Can. 68. Rubr. of Baptism knowledg thereof being given to him over Night, or in the Morning before Mor∣ning-Prayer, or neglect to perswade all those who have the use of Reason, and are still unbaptiz'd (having been seduced by Anbpists) to come to Holy Baptism, and doth he take care for their Baptism as in the Common-Prayer-book is prescri∣bed?Can. 29.30. Or doth he refuse or neglect at any time to sign the child baptized with the sign of the Cross;Rubric. or doth he admit such to be God-fathers or God-mothers who are either the Parents or who have not themselves receiv'd the Holy Communion? VII. Doth your Minister duly and reverently administer the Holy Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ our Lord so often, at least, and at such times,Rubr. Can. 21. as every Parishioner may Commuicate at the least three times in every year in publick, whereof the Feast of Easter to be one? And doth he reverently and carefully in all things obseve all the Chur∣ches Order in the Celebration? Dth he give warning pub∣lickly in the Church at Morning-Prayer the Sunday beforeCan. 22.
for the better preparation of his Parishioners? And do such as purpose to Communicate, signifie their Names at least some time the day before? and when he seeth the People neg∣ligent to come to the Communion,Rbick doth he use the Churches se∣cond Exhortation? and when there is no Communion, doth your Minister every Sunday and Holy-day throughut the year red the Communion Service, so much of it as is appointed to be read by the Book of -Prayer▪ and a the place ap∣pne▪ theeb▪ professng his and the Churches rediness to the ore frequent Celebrtion of th Holy Eucharist, if Com∣munis  of wanting? VII Doth your Minister wittingly admit to the receiving the Holy Communion,Rubr. any one such who is known to live in open and notorious sin without repentance? or that hs wrong∣ed his Neighbour by word or deed,Can. 26. so as tht the Congregation is thereby offended, or such betwixt whom he perceives malice or hatred to reign, and will not be reduc'd by him to a recon∣cilement, or to any who refuse to be present at the other pub∣lick Prayers of the Church or to any tht be common or noto∣rious depravers of the Book of Common-Prayer, or of any thing contained in the xxxix Articles; or in the Book of Or∣daining Bishops, Priests, and Deacons or to any that has spoken against his Majesties Supream Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, except such persons do acknowledg to the Mini∣ster, before you the Church-Wardens that he is sorry for the same, and promise under his hand (if he can write) or other∣wise by word of mouth, that he will do so no more? Or lastly, to any that refuse to receive the said Holy Communion knéel∣ing, and of all such persons by him put from the communion, doth he give an account to his Ordinary according to Law?Can. 27. IX. Doth he at the Celebration of the Holy Communion in the due places appointed by the Liturgy, take the Paten into his hands, and break the bread, and lay his hand upon all the bread, and take the cup into his hand, and lay his hand upon every Uessel in which there is any Wine to be consecrated?Rubr. and when that which is consecrated is spent, doth he communi∣cate any persons without consecrating more according to the form prescribed, and doth he severally deliver the Bread and Wine to every Communicant;Rubr. and at his delivering the same,
doth he rehearse,Can. 21. the whole form prescribed in the Communi∣on-book, saying, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, &c. And The Blood o ou Lord Jesus Christ which washed, &c Or doth he use only some part thereof as he listeth himself? and when all hve communicated doth he cover wht remineth of the Con∣secrated Elements wih a fair Linnen-cloth? and what re∣mains is it reverently eaten and drunken by some of the Com∣municants within your Curch? X I ny person sik or in health (especially before the Re∣cving th Holy Communion fiding his conscience troubled with any wighty mtters,. Ex∣hort. to Con. m. doth for the quieting of his consci∣ence, and for fuher comfort and counsel, unburden his con∣science to his Priest or Minister; doth then the said Priest or Minister upon special confession of his sins made (to make which lo h is by the Minister to be moved) upon his repen∣tance administer unto him absolution, together with Ghostly counsel and advice? and have you ever heard that the said Priest or Minister hah reveal'd or made known at any time to any person whatsoever directly or indirectly any crime or of∣fence confessed to him in secret by any such Penitents whatso∣soever (except they be such crimes as by the Laws of this Realm for the publick concern,Can. 1131. Ex∣hort. for the Comm. in the Rubr. of the Visi∣tation of the sick. & Can. the Life of the said Priest may and ought to be called in question for concealing of them?) II. Is you Minister  liensed Preacher, by the Bishop, or either of the two Universities? and if so, doth he then con∣stantly,  unless in case of sickness▪ necessary absence, or o∣ther reasonabl impedment himself preach in your Church or Chappel, or in some other near adjoyning, one Sermon every Lords-day? or in such cases of impediment, doth he pro∣cure some lawful Minister and licensed Preacher, to read Prayes and to prech one Sermon and to peform other Mi∣nisterial Duties each such Day besides the Fst of Christs Nativity, Passion,Can. 45.46.49.47. and Ascension at the least▪ or if no Ser∣mon be, take care that one of the Homie set forth by Authori∣ty, be there read by a Priest or Deacon lawfully ordained on every Sunday, and Holy-day in the Year? hath he in his own Sermons at any time or in other Discourse (as you know or have heard of) preached or maintain'd any unsound Hereti∣cal, Seditios, or Schismatical Doctrine so far as you can
judg? or spoken ought privately in contempt of Religion, or that Religion or any part of it, which he by his office in this Church professeth? XII. Doth he or any other admitted to preach in your Church, omit before his Sermon or Homily briefly to move and exhort the people in the form laid down in the 55th Canon, or to the same effect, (declaring for whom, and for what mercies they are to pray,Can. 55. and to give God thanks) to joyn with him finally in Prayer for all those mercies in that most Holy and Compre∣hensible Prayer of our Lord? XIII. Doth your Minister diligently catechize the Youth of your Prish every Sunday and Holy-day by way of Questi∣on and Answer,Rubric. according to the Church's publick Catechism, or also further instruct them in the sense thereof, as he shall think fit, and this after the second lesson openly in the Church? Doth he by this and all other good mens and admonitions, pre∣pare and procure them (as occasion is offer'd devoutly to come and seek to be confirmed by the Bishop; and himself either bring or send in writiting under his hand the names of all such persons in his Parish, as he shall find by his Examinati∣on fit to be presented to the Bishop, humbly to seek and ask that benefit of Confirmation? XIV. Doth your Minister endeavour privately to reclaim & re∣duce all Popish Recusants, & all Sectaries in your Parish to the Communion in the publick and established Worship of God in this Church?Can. 66. Is he also ready to visit the sick? And doth he call upon them to receive the holy Sacrament in their sick∣ness?Can, 67. Rubic. And doth he administer it to them? And is he also ready to baptize Infants in danger of death▪ Is any Infant or more aged person in the Parish yet unbaptized by his default? Have those Children that have been baptized in private houses by your Minister or other lawul Minister, afterwards been brought into the Church and the Order of the Church con∣cerning them, there duly observed? XV. Hath your Minister, or any other, baptized Children, churched any Women,Rubric. or ministred the holy Communion in any private house, (where they have any Church or Chappel in the Parish) otherwise then by Law is allowed in cases of necessity?
XVI. Doth your Minister on the three Rgation days before the Feast of the holy Ascension, go in pemulation of the Circuit of the Parish? And when he so goeth, do he admonish the people to give thanks to God, in the beholding of his be∣nefits, for the encrease and abundance of his  upon the face of the Earth? And when there appears any ear of scarci∣ty, to pray to God for his mercy and favo unto the Lnd, going into the Church with them, and reading the Litany and one part of one of the Homiles, set forth and appointed for that purpose of the Rogations? XVII. Doth he bid or observe the Holy-days▪Can. 22. and Fasting-days, and days of Abstinence, and other solemn days for which particular Services are appointed, as they occur or return from time to time,Can 64. Rubric. giving notice to the Parishonrs of every of the same in the Church, in the time of Divine Service, the Sunday next before? XVIII. Doth your Minister always at the reading or cele∣brating any divine office, constantly wear the Surplice and other Scholastical Habit, according to his degree if he be a Grduate, and without a Hod (only instead thereof a Tipet of black Stuff, not Silk being permitted him) if he be no Graduate? And doth he wear his Hair of a moderate and come∣ly length? Is his usual Apparel decent in fashion and in co∣lour, such as in enjoyn'd him by the Canons of the Church? XIX. Doth he in the presence f the Church-wardens, write and record in your Register Book, the Names and Sirnames of all persons baptiz'd, mrried, and buried in your Parish from time to time, yearly transmitting a Copy of those Chri∣stenings, Marrying, and Buyings, subscribed with his own the Church-wardens or Overseers names into the Bishops and Registry? XX. Doth your Minister permit any strange Ministers to preach in your Church who is not sufficiently licensed and Authorizd thereto? XXI. Doth your Parson, Uar, or Curate celebrate Ma∣trimony betwixt any persons without the Banes of Matrimo∣ny first pubished on three several Sundays or Holy-days in the Parish Church or Chappel where the said Parties dwell,Can. 62. or at the time by Law prohibited, without special Faculty or
License in either case, granted by lawful Authority? Or doth h celebrate the same in any other place than in the Church? or in the Church at any other time, then between the hours of eight and twelve in the forenoon? Or betwixt such persons as are prohibited by the Laws of God. expressed in the Table of Marriage; or under the Age of One and twenty years▪ withut the consent of their Parents or of thir Guardians and Gover∣nours (if their Parents be ded) signified unto him? XXII. Or have any any such Licenses as above mention'd, that you know of,Can. 103 & Con¦stitt. 1597. Tit. d. Mode∣randis indul∣gentiis. been granted by any under the Iurisdiction of this Diocss, for the Celebrtion of Matrimony, until it do appear to the person himself, who is judg in these cases, by the Oths of two sufficient witnesses, one of them known to the Iudg, or to some person, whom the Iudg dares trust in this particular, That the express consent of the Parents or Pa∣rent (if one be dead) or Guardian or Guardins of the Par∣ties, is thereunto had and obtain', and until one of the Parties to be married have pesonally sworn, that he believeth there is no let or impediment of Pre-contract, Kindred or Alliance, nor any other lawful cause, nor any suit commenced in any Ecclesiastical Court to bar or hinder the proceeding of the said Matrimony? XXIII. Hath your Minister admitted any Women begot∣ten withChid in Adultery or Fornication, to be churched with∣out license from the Ordinary? XXIV. Doth your Minister serve more than one Church or Chappel in distinct Parishes on one day?Can. 48. Can. 15.71. if so, how fr distant are those Churches or Chappels which he so serveth? XXV. Doth your Parson Uicar or Curate (if commanded by the Ordinary) openly some Sunday denounce and declare for to Excommunicate all such as stand Excommunicate by the Law of the Church,Can. 65. that others may be admonished to re∣frain their Company? hath he sid Divine Service whilst he knew such Excommunicate persons to have been in the Church? or admitted such to the Communion whilst they stood so excommunicate.
XXVI. Doth your Parson, Uicar,Can. 68. or Curate (having con∣venient notice given) delay or refuse to bury any that are brought to the Church or Church-yard according to the form prescrib'd in the Book of Common-Prayer except such as die unbaptized, Excommunicate  Excommunicationepunc; and no man able to testifie their Repentance, or have lid violent hands upon themselves?) XXVII. Doth your Minister in the Parish Church or Chap∣pel where he hath charge, read the Book of Canns and Constitutions, agréed on at the Synod holden at London A.D. 1603, once every year upon some Sundays or Holy-days, in the afternoon before Divine Service, and doth he so divide the same, as the one half may be read one day, and the other half the other day? XXVIII. Is any Lecture preachd in your Church?Can. 53, 54. is he or are they who preach it, Licensed so to do by the Bishop? Doth every such one, before his Lecture either read the whole publick Service himself appointed for that day by the Church in his Surplice, or at least be present at the whole reading thereof? and is he in all respects conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? Or doth he any way en∣devour to bring the Parson or Uicar of the place into disre∣pute with his Parishioners? XXIX. Doth every one abide in his own calling whereunto he is called?Can. 76. viz. Doth any Lay-man that is not duly ordain'd openly read Common-Prayer, or execute any Ministerial duty in your Church? Or is there any Clergy-man, viz. in Holy Orders who doth voluntarily relinquish those his Orders, and use himself as a Lay-man only without taking any care of the Church of God?
Concerning the Parihioners. I HAve you any  or person living in your Parish tha to you  live not as becomes a Christian, according to his  and vow made in his Baptism; viz. de  worldy ,Tit. 2. living soby, jstly and god II.  in your Parish who wilfully absent them∣selves  Chuch or Chpel either at Morning or  upn Sndays and other days ppointed by ?1  cap. 2. Or who come late to the Chrch or  bfore Service be done, and the blessing  upn ny Holy-days imploy themselves in thei  labour, or apply or permit their ser∣vants so to  in  of uget necessity, as may be in Havest? have you any that upon such days kéep open shops or sell wares especially in time of Divine Service? Or have you any Uintuers, Inn-keeprs, or other Uictuallers, or selers of Bée or Ale, that permit any on such days to tipple or game in their houses, or upon any pretence whatsoever, (except in some necessity as of sickness) to remain in their houses in the time of Divie Service, or Sermon, forenoon, or afternoon, upon those dys? or any tht will come to hear Smons but will not come to Common-Prayer and Worship of G appointed in this Church? III A there any in your Parish of years of undestanding that remain unbaptiz'd,Rbr. of Bptim or any that refuse to send their Infants to be bpizd publickly in the Church (except in cases of ne∣cessiy) or in such cases do they procure them to be bptiz'd at home in due manner according to the order of the Church of England?. Or any persons that being unconfirmed are not brough o confirmation, or being of years, neglect themselves to seek it upon pretence of having receiv'd the Communion, or Orders, or upon any other pretence whatsever? Or are there any that being Sixteen years of Age, do not receive the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist three times in the year,Cn. 112
(whereof Ester to be one?) Or that doth forsake their own Parish-Church to receive elsewhere?Can. 51. Or are there any mar∣ryed Women, who after their delivery from the Pai and Pe∣ril of Child-bearing, refuse in convenient time to return a pub∣blick Thansgiving to God, according to the Order o the Church? Or are there any that refuse to bury their dd accor∣ding to the Rites of the Church? IV. Do any in your Parish entertain in their house any So∣joun, common Guests, or other persons, who euse to re∣quent Divine Service, or receive the Holy Communion as a∣foresaid, and what are the names, qualities, and conditions of such Sjournrs? V. Do any refuse to be uncovered during the ie of Divine Service, or devutly to kneel wen by the Common-Prayer-book they are commnded so to do? or to stand up,Can. 18. at the Glory be to the Father, &c. and at the Cds and Holy Gspl, and to make answer at all the  appointed by the the said Book, and due reverence, when the Nme of ou Lord Jesus is mentioned? And say the Cred and the Lor's  in a loud voyce with the Minister▪  in the time of Divine Service behave themselves  walking, talking,Cn 111 whis∣pering, laughing▪ or sleepi▪ VI. Do any persons  into your Church in time of Divine , or dth any other person disturb your Ministe doing  part of his Ministerial Of∣fice? or  challenge one another▪ or fight in the Church or  Or are any Plays, Feasts Drin∣kings  in your Church or Church-yard?Cn. 59. VII Do an  n you Prish egles to use  or other Persons living in their  yet learn't the Church's Catechism, to  come to Church on Sundays & Holy-days  by their Minister and instrute therein? any in your Parish, Master or Svnt,Cn. 10 115 ,  Man or Woman, that live in Adultery,  hving married within the degrees prh∣ied  in a Table set orth by Authority) Or  you  togther in your Parish as man & wie, wh  in make known, when, where, or by whom they were
Married? Or any that being lawfully Married do yet live a∣sunder wihou separation in due form of Law? Or hve you any Bwd, Entertainers or concealers of incontinent per∣sons, or any common Drunkards Eortioners, Swearers, Railers, Rvilers, common Slanderes of their Neighbours, fithy and lascivious talkers, or which hve sollicited any per∣son to unchastity? or any which have used any Charmes, In∣chantments▪ or consulttins of these call'd Wizards, or cun∣ning men and Sorcrie, such s ae not made Felony by the Laws of this Realm? or wich hve committed perjury in any Ecclesistical Curt ? Can. 114IX. Are there any Recusants in your Parish or other Schis∣matically affectd h kep in their houses any that take upon them to be spiritual guides and iust uters, or any Schoolma∣ster in their Family which come nt to Church to hear Divine Sevice, and to receive the Holy Cmmnion? or that labour to seduce and wthdraw others within, or without the Family, from the Religion in ths Church estblished▪ or any in your Parish that retain, sell, or disperse any Popish books or wri∣tings, or other books or writings of ny Sectaries touching the Religion, State, or Government Ecclsistical of this King∣dom of England, or books of Heresie? X. Have you any in your Parish that are suspected to be Ana-Baptists, Familists, Librtins Brownists, Qukers, Independents, or Presbyterian opposers of the Episopl Government. Can. 92.XI. Are there any in your Parish that do to your knowledg, or as you hve heard, with-hold the stock of the Church, or any part thereof, or any goods or legacies, or other things given to pious and charitable uses, any prvisioe for frée Schools, Ams-houses or Hospitals (such as are not of his Mjesties Foundtion or Patronge) employed otherwise than according to the intent of their several foudations? Are there any Tstments or Wills by any concel'd or improv'd, or any Goods unadministred by lawful Authority? Can. 112 114 Rubrick ater Comm.XII Hve you any in your Prish that refuse to pay their duty for ster offrings to your Minister or  rekon with him then, or tha refuse to contribute and  Rate cssed uon them for the repair of your Church or Chpl▪ or for the providing of such Books, Furniture, or necessary Orna∣ments
as are requisite for the performance of any of the Di∣vine Offices there? XIII. Do you know of any person in your Parish having the Presentation or gift of any Ecclesistical Benefice, who hath presented a Minister to it upon any Bargain, either for Money, or Pension, or Lease, or reserve of Tythes, or Glebe, or any part thereof, or upon any other Symonacal contract whatsoever? Concerning Church-Wardens, Side-men, Parish-Clarks and Sextons. I. ARe the Church-Wardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen, and sworn?Cn. 89. Have the last Church-War∣dens given up their Accounts before the Minister and Parishi∣oners, delivering up also the money remaining in your hands,Cn. 90. and other things of right belonging to your Church or Chap∣pel? and is the sme delivered to you by bill indented? II. Doth any person or persons trouble or molest you the Church-Wardens for presenting any offenders in any of the premises,Cn. 115 or for performing the duty that lies upon you in ex∣ecuting any part of your office, and who are they that do so mo∣lest and trouble you? III. Do you the Church-Wardens against every Commu∣nion provide a sufficient quantity of fine white bread,Rubr. Can. 20. and good and wholsome Wine for the number of the Communi∣cants? and do you bring he Wine so provided in a cle and swéet standing Flagon of Pewter, or other purer Metal. IV. Do you suffer the Table for the Holy Communion to be applied at any time, to any prophane r comon use, as of writing, setting dead Corps upon it at Funerals, or others in the Church to sit upon it, or irreverently to make it a place to lay their arms or hats upon it? V. Do you the Church-Wardens note them that come late to Church after Divine Service is begun, or depart before it be ended?Act. 1.  Eliz. and do you take diligent notice of the absent and (by
Warrant desir'd from some of the Iustices of peace) according as by law you are directed, do you leve by way of distress from every person of the Parish that doth not resort to your Parish-Church or Chappel on every Sunday and Holy-day (having no lwful or reasonable excuse to be absent) the summ of 12 d. for every Sunday or Holy-day in which he is so absent? and do you distribute the several summs so levied to the poor of your Pa∣rish according to the law in that case provided? and before you present any for such default, do you first seriously admonish them? VI. Do you suffer none in time of Divine Service to stand idle,Can. 90. or talk together in the Church-porch, or to walk in the Church or Church-yard, nor children playing or crying in or about the Church? nor suffer any to bring Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds into the Church to the disturbance of the Congrega∣tion? VII. Are the Side-men duly chosen? do they assist the Church-Wardens in the executing their Office? and do they joyn with them in framing Presentments? VIII. Have you a Parish Clark aged 20 years at the least, chosen by your Minister, of honest life and conversation, and sufficiently able to perform his duty in reading,Can. 91. writing, and singing? and doth he duly attend the Minister in all Divine Offices at the Church? doth be kéep clean the Church, and carefully look to it, and to the Books? and is he pay'd the an∣cient and usual wages as hath been accustomed? IX. Doth your Clark, or your Sexton (if there be any such in your Parish) diligently look to the doors of the Church that they be locked and opened at due times, and the Bells toll'd and rung at the due and accustomed hours before the beginning of Morning and Evening Service, that the People may be warned and invited; to come to the Church? and when any person is passing out of this life, doth he upon notice given thereof, toll a Bell as hath been accustomed, that evout and charitable persons may thereby be warned to recommend the Soul of the dying person to the grace,Can. 67. mercy, and peace of God Almighty? X. Do they at the instance of any, make any grave in any part of the Church (except in such Isles where some person hath pro∣priety) wthout the express consent of your Minister.
Concerning Churches, and their Possessions, Orna∣ments, Utensils, and other Necessaries to the same belonging. I. IS your Church or Chappel kept in good repair? are the roofs, the walls, the floors, windows, seats and doors,Can. 15 well maintained? & is your Porch and Steeple in good repair, and Bels kept in good order by the care and oversight of the Church-Wardens at the charge of all persons occupying any Lads or Tenements within your Parish, as well out-dwellers as Inhabitants, rating all proportionably for the Lands and Te∣nements they occupy therein? And is your Church or Chappel∣yard sufficiently fenced with walls, rails, or pales, as hath been accustomed, and that by the moneys cessed upon Lands and Tenements in your Parish as aforesaid, except you have a spe∣cial custom otherwise directing you? II. Are there any Isles adjoining to your Church or Chan∣cel which time out of mind have been repair'd by the owners of any Mssage in your Parish? if so do the owners thereof re∣pair the same? III. Is the Chancel of the Church sufficiently repair'd and beautifid by the Minister or other person to whom that doth belong? IV. Is there any in your Parish that hath converted to his own, or to any common secular use, any Timber, Wood, Stone, or other Materials belonging to any Church or Chappel, Par∣songe or Uicaridge house, or out-houses thereof? V. Have you in your Church a decent Font of stone for the Administration of Holy Baptism, and the same set in the anci∣ent and usual place appointed for it; and have you in the Chan∣cell a decent Table for the Celebration of the Holy Commu∣nion, and for the Communion-service, and a Carpet of silk or other decent stuff, to lie continually upon th Tble, during the time of Divine Service, and a fair linnen cloth to lay on the same, at the time of the Holy Communion? and have you
i fair Communion Cup of Silver, with a Cover, a Plate, and a Flagon of Pewter, or purer Metal, the one to place the Bread on, the other to bring the Wine into the Holy Ta∣ble, and a fair linnen cloth for covering the Consecrated Ele∣ments? Have you in your Church or Chappel a convenient rea∣ding Seat or Pew, erected for your Minister wherein to read the dayly Morning and Evening Service, as also a decent Pulpit set in a convenient place for the preaching of God's Word. VI. Have you belonging to the Church or Chappel a perfect Bible of the largest Uolumn,Can. of the last Translation allowed by Authority? Have you two Books of Common-Prayer set forth according to the last Act of Parliament for the Uniformity of publick Prayers? And are both also of the largest Uolumn, fair∣ly bound, one for the Minister, and another for the Clark, to use at the celebration of all Divine Offices? the Book of Ho∣milies, the Book of Canons and Constitutions made in the Synod held at London 1603, a Table of Degrees in marriage prohibited, set forth by Authority, A. D. 1563; a Parchment Register-book, to register the several Christenings, Marri∣ages, and Buryings within the Parish? Have you a Book to set down the names of such Strangers as preach in your Church? and another Book wherein to write down and keep the Accounts of the Church-Wardens, and an Inventory of all things provided and belonging to your Church? Have any other Books, as the Works of Bishop Jewel, Erasmus his Paraphrase upon the Gospel, or any other good Books been car∣ried out of the Church, into any mans private House, Or been ls? Can, 82VII. Are the ten Commandments and chosen Sentences of Scripture, or the Lords Pryer and others set up in your Church or Chappel, as the Canon does require? Can.VII. Have you a large and decent Surplice, one, or more, for the Ministr to wear at all times of his publick Ministra∣tin? And have you a Hod or Typet for your Minister to wear over his Surplice, if he be a Graduate? IX Hve you in your Church or Chappel a strong Chest  three Lok and Keys for the Alms of the poor, and a hole therefore in the upper part thereof? and is one of those Keys in the custody of the Parson, Uicar, or Curate? And have you
one other convenient Chest, for keeping the Books and Fur∣niture belonging to the Church; and a Bier with a Herse∣cloth for the burial of the dead? X. Have any trees been cut down, growing in the Church-yard or fences thereof, and by whom, and for what use was it done? what private doors are made into the Church-yard, whereby Nusances are committed, and by whom were those doors made? Is any Encroachment made upon that ground? XI. Have you any Lands or Tenements given or belonging to the repairing of your Church? what is the quantity and value thereof, and in whose possession are they? XII. When any of those things mentioned in the 6, 7, 8 or 9. Articles above are wanting, are they provided by the Church-Wardens, at the charge only of the Inhabitants of the Parish, according to each Inhabitants personal State, and not other∣wise? And do you the Church Wardens when you make a Rate for the same, and also for the buying of Bread and Wine for Communions, and for the expences of your selves and Side∣men at Uisitations, and to pay for scouring your Plate, and washing the Surplice and Communion clothes, and if you have not a Custom to the contrary) to pay your Parish Clark his ancient Wages; When you mke, I say at any time such a Rate, or a Rate according to the first Article for the repair of your Church, do you give publick notice in the Church to the Parishioners of the time and place of your making them, and also of the time and place when and where your Rate shall be ffer'd to be confirmed by your Ordinary? that the Ob∣jectios of any may be heard, before they be by the Ordinary ratified? XII. Is the House of your Parson Uicar, or Curate, with all the out houses thereto belonging, kept in good and sufficient repair? or have any of the said houses or out-houses been pull'd down without License from the Ordinary? and by whom? Hath any person  upon any Orchad, Garden, Yard, or  belonging to your Parsonage or Uicaridghouse, or fed any tree thereon growing? XV  of the ancient Globe Lands belonging to your Ministrs, been taken awy, or exchanged for other Lands, wiout the free consent of the Patron Incumbent, and License
from the Ordinary? And have you a perfect terrier of all Glebe-Lands, Maddows, Gardens, Orchads, Stocks, Implements, Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage,Can. 87. or Ui∣caridg? as also, a Note of such Pensions, Rate-tithes, and Portions of Tithes (or other yearly profits either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? and finding no such terier, do you the Church-Wardens and Side-men, together with your Minister and others of your Parish, make a ter∣rier of the Premises in Parchment, subscribed and signed by you to be kept by your Minister, and a Copy thereof subscrib'd and sign' sent into the Bishops Registry? XV. Are the Bones of them tht hve been buried in your Church or Church-yard kept decently, interred there, or laid up in some it place as beseemeth Christians? and is the whole consecrated ground kept free from Swine and other filth and annoyance, as becomes a place so dedicated? Concerning School-Masters, Physicians, Chy∣rurgeons and Midwives. Can. 77.79.I. DO any in your Parish teach or instruct Youth in any pub∣lick School, or private House, without License from his Ordinary? and doth he cause his Scholars on Sundys and Holy-days to resort to Church, to hear Divine Service, Ser∣mons and Catechize? and does he see that they behave them∣selves there orderly and reverently? and doth he himself teach them the Catechism set forth by Authority? and is he deligent to bring them up in the fear of God, in good learning, and manners? II. Do any in your Parish practise Physick or Surgery without a License from the Bishop himself if at home, or in his absence by the Ordinary upon the place? Are your Mid∣wives also licensed by the Ordinary?
Touching Publick Ecclesiastical Officers of the whole Diocess (within the Bishops Visiration.) I. ARe there any Ecclesiastical Officers (within the Bishops Uisitation) any Advocate, Register, Proctor, Clerk, Apparitor, or other Minister belonging to the Ecclesiastical Court, that takes and exacts any extraordinary or greater fees then are due and accustomed? II. Hath any Apparitor taken Reward or Fee to excuse any ap∣pearance before the Ecclesiastical Court? or hath the Register-sped any Act, or dismissed any person detected without the know∣ledg and actual consent of the Iudg? Are any gifts or rewards taken by any for perverting justice. III. Hath ay person within your Parish paid or promised any summ of Money, or other reward for commuation of Penance for any crime of Ecclesiastical Cognisance? If so, how hath the same been disposed of, to pious and charitable uses (as far as you know?) FINIS.
An Advertisement to the Church-War∣dens, and Side-men, and Minister. IF you know of any other Default or Crime of Ec∣clesiastical Cognizance, you are to present the same. The Minister of every Parish, may joyn in Pre∣sentment with the Church-Wardens and Side-men, and if they be not faithful in their Care to admonish and pre∣sent, then the Parsons or Vicars, or in their absence, the Curates (being the persons that should principally have care of suppressing of sin and impieties in their Parishes) may, and may find themselves in conscience obliged to present especially the greater Crimes, and whatsoever in their conscience they know needeth reformation in their Parish,Can 113 as they tender the good of the Souls of their Pa∣rish; Forsomuch as in both the Church-Wardens, with the Sidemen and the Minister, the true discharge of the duty of presenting is one chief means apppointed where∣by publick Disorders, Sins, and Offences against God, may be reformed and punished; so that their wilful refu∣sing to make true presentment, leaves the unreformed Vices of the Nation at the Doors of such Officers, and for which they are to answer to Almighty God, and the sworn-men also to the King in his Ecclesiastical Courts.
