C5355 R20679 12259397 57778
Divine SONGS and MEDITACIONS Composed By An Collins. LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop. Anno Dom. 1653
To the Reader Christian Reader, I inform you, that by divine Pro∣vidence, I have been restrained from bodily employments, su∣ting with my disposicion, which enforced me to a retired Course of life; Wherin it pleased God to give me such inlargednesse of mind, and activity of spirit, so that this seeming desolate condicion, proved to me most delightfull: To be breif, I became affected to Poetry, insomuch that I pro∣ceeded to practise the same; and though the helps I had therein were small, yet the thing it self appeared unto me so amiable, as that it enflamed my faculties, to put forth themselvs, in a practise so pleasing. Now the furtherances I had herein, was what I could gather (by the benifit of hea∣ring,) at first from prophane Histories; which gave not that satisfactory content∣ment, before mencioned, but it was the ma¦nifestacion of Divine Truth, or rather the Truth it self, that redu my mind to
peacefull temper, and spirituall calmnesse, taking up my thoughts for Theologicall employments. Witnesse hereof, this Discourse, Songs and Meditacions, following; which I have set forth (as I trust) for the benfit, and comfort of others, Cheifly for those Christians who are of disconsolat Spirits, who may perceive herein, the Faithfull∣nesse, Love, & Tender Compassionatnesse of God to his people, in that according to his gracious Promise, He doth not leave nor forsake them. Heb. 13.5. But causeth all things to work for theyr good. Rom. 8.28. This I doubt not, but most Saints in som measure, do experimentally know, there∣fore I will not seek by argument, to prove a thing so perspicuous. And now (Cour∣teous Reader) I have delivered unto you, what I intended, onely it remaines that I tell you, That with my Labours, you have my Prayers to God through Jesus Christ; whose I am, and in him, Yours, in all Christian affection AN COLLINS.
The Preface. BEing through weakness to the house confin'd, My mentall powers seeming long to sleep, were summond up, by want of wakeing mind Their wonted course of exercise to keep, And nt to waste themselves in slumber deep; Though no work can bee so from error kept But some aginst it boldly wll except: Yet sith it was my morning exercise The fruit of intellectuals to vent, In Songs or counterfets of Poesies, And haveing therein found no small content, To keep that course my thoughts are therfore bent, And rather former workes to vindicate Than any new concepcion to relate. Our glorious God his creatures weaknesse sees, And therefore deales with them accordingly, Giveing the meanes of knowledg by degrees, Vnfoulding more and more the Mystery, And opening the Seales successively,Rev. 6. So of his goodnesse gives forth demonstracions, To his Elect in divers Dispensacions.
In legall wise hee did himself expresse To be the only Lord Omnipotent A just avenger of all wickednesse, A jelous God in power emminent, Which terror workes, and pale astonishment; Sith plagues for sin are holden forth thereby, But with no strength to crush inniquity. Now with the Law the Gospell oft appeares, But under vailes, perspicuous unto fw Who were as those which of good tydings heares, Rejoyceing much at the report or show Of that the Saints now by poessing know; Oft spake the Prophets Evangelicall, Whose words like kindly drops of rain did fall. But when the plenerie of time was come The springs of grace their plesant streams out deald Felicitie did evidence on her some Salvacion and the way thereto reveald, Who wounded were in spirit, might be heald; Here God declares the Beauties of his Face. Great Love, rich Mercy, free Eternall Grace. This time was when the Sonne of Righteousnesse His Luster in the world began to spread, Which more and more to his he doth expresse n tearms so large that they that run may read, And to himselfe he doth the weaker lead; e to his bosum will his Lambs collect, nd getly those that feeble are direct.Isa. 40.11
And so in them a life of grace instill Wherey they shall be able to obay All Gospell precepts suing with his will, And that without regard of srvill pay, But with free hearts, where Christ alone doth sway Causing the apprehensions of his love, To gender love, which still doth active prove. Where Christ thus ruleth, I suppose remaines No heart that hankers after Novlities Whose ground is but the Scum of fothy braines Perhaps extracted from old Heresies, New form'd with Glosses to deceive the eyes Of those who like to Children, do incline To every new device that seemes to shine. I am perswaded they that relish right, The Dainties of Religion, Food dvine, Have therby such a permanent delight, And of best Treasures, such a lasting mne, As that their hearts to change do not cline, I therfore think theyr tastes of Truth is ill, Who Truths profession quickly alter will. I speak not this to manifest desght To tru Religions growth or augmentacion, Nor do J take offence of greater Lght Which brings probatum est or commendacion From Truth it selfe, having therto relacion, But rather with the Saints I doe rejoyce, When God appeares to his in Gospel voyce.
Now touching that I hasten to expresse Concerning these, the ofspring of my mind, Who though they here appeare in homly dresse And as they are my works, I do not find But ranked with others, they may go behind, Yet for theyr matter, I suppose they bee Not worthlesse quite, whilst they with Truth agree. Indeed I grant that sounder judgments may (Directed by a greater Light) declare The ground of Truth more in a Gospel-way, But who time past with present will compare Shall find more mysteries unfolded are, So that they may who have right informacion More plainly shew the path-way to Salvacion. Yet this cannot prevayl to hinder me From publishing those Truths I do intend, As strong perfumes will not concealed be, And who esteemes the favours of a Freind, So little, as in silence let them end, Nor will I therfore only keep in thought, But tell what God still for my Soule hath wrought. VVhen Clouds of Melancholy over-cast My heart, sustaining heavinesse therby, But long that sad condicion would not last For soon the Spring of Light would blessedly Send forth a beam, for helps discovery, Then dark discomforts would give place to joy, Which not the World could give or quite destroy.
So sorrow serv'd but as springing raine To ripen fruits, indowments of the minde, VVho thereby did abillitie attaine To send forth flowers, of so rare a kinde, VVhich wither not by force of un or VVinde: Retining vertue in their operacions, VVhich are the matter o those Meditacions. From whence if evill matter be extracted Tis only by a ider generacion, Whose natures are of vennom so compacted, As that their touch occasions depravacion Though lighting in the fragrantest plantacion: Let such conceale the evill hence they pluck And not disgorg themselves of what they suck. So shall they not the humble sort offend Who like the Bee, by natures secret act Convert to sweetnesse, fit for some good end That which they from small things of worth extract, Wisely supplying every place that lackt, By helping to discover what was meant Where they perceive there is a good intent. So trusting that the only Sov'rain Power Which in this work alwaies assisted mee, Will still remain its firme defensive Tower, From spite of enemies the same to free And make it useful in some sort to bee, That Rock I trust on whom I doe depend, Will his and all their works for him defend.
The Discourse. YOu that indeared are to pietie, And of a gracious disposicion are, Delighting greatly in sinceritie As your respects to godly ones declare; For whose society you only care: Dain to survay her works that worthlesse seem, To such as honnest meanings dis-esteem. But those that in my love I have preferd Before all creaturs in this world beside, Me works, I hope, will never dis-regard, Though some defects herein may be espide; Which those that have their judgments rectifide: Can but discern, yet not with scornfull eye, As their mild censures cheefly testifie. Vnto the publick view of every one I did not purpose these my lines to send, Which for my private use were made alone: Or as I said, if any pious friend Will once vouchsafe to read them to the end: Let such conceive if error here they find, Twas want of Art, not true intent of mind.
Some may desirous bee to understand What moved mee, who unkilfull am herein, To meddle with, and thus to take in hand, That which I cannot well, end or begin; But such may first resolve themselves herein, If they consider, tis not want of skill, Thats more blame worthy, than want of good will 1 Then know, I cheefly aim that this should bee Vnto the praise of Gods most blessed name, For by the mouths of sucking babes doth he, Reveal his power, and immortall fame;Psal. 8. Permitting Children to extall the same: When those that were profound, and worldly wise In ignominious sort did him dispise. 2 Next in respect of that I have receiv'd Is nothing to that some have, I do confesse, Yet he to whom one Tallent was bequeath'd, Was cald to strict account, nevertheless; As well as he that many did possess,Mat. 25. From which I gather, they have no excuse, Which of ability will make no use. 3 Moreover this is thirdly in respect Of some neare Kindred, who survive mee may, The which perhaps do better works neglect, Yet this, they may be pleased to survay Through willingnesse to heare what I could say, VVhereby they may bee haply drawn to look, And read the Scriptures touched in this book.
4 And lastly in regard of any one, VVho may by accident hereafter find, This, though to them the Auther bee unknown, Yet seeing here, the image of her mind; They may conjecture how she was inclin'd: And further note, that God doth Grace bestow, Vpon his servants, though hee keeps them low. Even in my Cradle did my Crosses breed, And so grew up with me, unto this day, Whereof variety of Cares proceed, Which of my selfe, I never could alay, Nor yet their multiplying brood destray, For one distemper could no sooner dy, But many others would his roome supply, Yea like the messengers of Iob, they hast, One cme; before another can be gon, Al mocions of delight were soon defast, Finding no matter for to feed upon, They quickly were disperced every one, Whereat my minde it self, would much torment, Vpon the rack of estless discontent. The summers day, though chearfull in it selfe, Was wearisom, and tedious, unto me, As those that comfort lack, content or health, To credit this may soon'st perswaded be, For by experience truth hereof they see. Now if the summers day, cause no delight. How irksome think you was the winters night.
'Twere to no end, but altogether vain, My several crosses namely to express, To rub the scar would but encrease the pain, And words of pitty would no griefe release, But rather aggrevate my heaviness, Who ever chose my crosses to conseale Till to my griefe they would themselves reveale So (to be briefe) I spent my infantcy, And part of freshet yeares, as hath been sayd Partaking then of nothing cheerfully Being through failty apt to be affraid, And likely still distempered or dimad, Through present sece of some calamity, Or preconceipt of future msery. But as the longest wnter hath an end So did this fruitlesse discotnt ere, And God in mercy me refreshng end, whereby I learn'd h  godnesse to admire, And also larger bessings to desire; For those that one, ae  grace ndeed, Will thirst for more and ae it till they peed. But that I may proceed Me all, When first e et ee wne ngs o my mnde, Began to ete and e e with al No more to bee  with every winde It such a peng exercie did finde, Which was  Wo day, The e e o Heaeng shou d o it onvay.
But liveing where profanenesse did abound, VVhere little goodnesse might be seen or heard; Those consolacions, could be but unsound Haveing to godlinesse no great regard: Because that of the means I was debard, Through ignorance of better exercise I then delighted plesant histories Whereof the most part were but fain'd I knew Which not-with-standing I no whit dispised, Imagining although they were not true, They were convenient being moralized; Such vanities I then too highly prised: But when profane discourses pleasd mee best Obscenities I allwaies did detest. But all this while, the sumes of vanities Did interpose betwen my soules week sight, And heavenly blisse, devine felicities; Vntill that morning starr so matchlesse bright The Sun of righteousnesse reveald his light Vnto my soule, which sweet refreshings brings, Because he coms with healing in his wings, Whose blessed beames my mind eradiates And makes it sensible of pietie,Mal 4 2 And so by consequence communicates Celestiall health to ev'ry faculty: Expeling palpable obscurity; Which made my soule uncapable of grace, Which now she much desires for to imbrace.
Perceiving well that nothing can afford Her either finall rest, or full content, But saveing Graces, and Gods holy word, Which is a means those Graces to augment; VVith Praier, and the blessed Sacrament: VVhich means with reverence my soul affects And former pleasing vanities rejects. Together with unnecesary griefe, VVhose ill effects can hardly bee exprest, For certainly it argues unbeleife Which hinders many from eternall rest, who do not seek in time to be redrest;Heb. 3.19 Therefore I would establish inward peace, How-ever out-ward crosses doe increase. If cross disgrace or dismall accident, Indignity or loss, befalleth mee, Immediatly distempers to prevent, I cald to mind how all things orderd bee, Appointed, and disposed, as we see. By Gods most gracious providence, which is, I am perswaded, for the good of his. Yet am I not so firm I must confess But many times discomforts will intru'd, VVhich oft prevailes to hinder quietness, And by that means, some sorrows are re'd: VVhich hope will help mee quickly to excl'd▪ So though distress contin for a night,Psal. 30. Yet joy returneth by the morning light.
VVih confidence these favours will increase My soule hath recolected all her powers, To praise the auther of this blissfull peace, VVhich no untimely crosse event devouers; So permanent are the celestiall Flowers: Those graces which are ever converset, VVhere holyness combinds with true content. O! what trancendant ravishing delights VVhat bliss unspeakable they doe poesse, VVhose merth to holy praises them excites, And cheers them to go on, in godlynesse, The very quintisence of happinesse, As is attainable, or may be had In this life present, which were elce but bad. There is a kind of counterset content, VVherwith some are deceivd, tis to be feard, VVho think they need not sorrow, or lament, Being to sensuall plesures so indeard; VVhose minds are stupid, & their concience ceard Elce might th y see all Eathly delectacion, To be but vanity, and hearts vexacion.Eccl. 2. To lightning, carnall merth we may compare, For as a flash it hastes and soon is gon, Foretelling of a Thunder clap of care, It also blastes the hear it lighteth on; Makes it to goodnesse, senceless as a ston; Disabling every part, and aulty, Of soul and body unto piety.
But sacred joy i like the Sunnes clear light, VVhich my with clouds, be sometimes overcast, Ye breaks it forth anon, and shine more bright, VVhose lively force continually doth last; And shews most Orient, when a storm is past: So true delight may bee eclips'd we see, But quite extingusht, can it never bee. So now I will go on with my Discourse, VVhen knowledg, plefant to my soul became, Unto Gods word, I often had recoure, Being informed rightly that the same; VVould bee as fuell to enc eace the fl me Of holy Zeal, which must with knowledg dwell, For without other, neither can do well,Rom. 10 Then sought I carefully to understand, The grounds of true Religon, which impart Divine Discreshion, which goes far beyand, All civill polcy or humane Art; VVich sacred principles I got by heart: VVhich much enabled me to appreh nd, The ece of that whereto I shall attend. First touching God, there is one God I know, who hath his being of himself alone,Rom. 1.20. The foutan whence al ream of goodnesse flow But body ps, or passions hath be none:Ia. 1 7 And such Diety ee is but one;1 Cor. 8.4. Eternal, Infinie, ne i ee,1 Iohn. 5.7. One pct Essen  Persons Three.
The first whereof for order, is the Father, The Glorious Fountain of the Trinity, Having his being, nor begining neither Of no one but himselfe, undoubtedly; Begets his Sonne, from all eternity, And with his Sonne, the Holy-Ghost forth sends From ever-lasting which for aye extends. The Sonne, the second Glorious person is, For Power, Substance, and Eternity, Alone as is the Father, who it is, Of whom he hath his being, too, only; Yea the whole being of his Father, by A Sacred and Eternall Genneracion, A mistrey past all imaginacion.Jsaiah. 53.8 In Trinity the Holy-Ghost is third, Proceeding and so sent forth equally,Iohn. 15.7. Both from the father & the son, or word,Iohn. 1.1 Being of their Power, Substance, Magisty; And thus distinguished are the Trinity: By whom were all things made, that ever were, And by whose Providence preserved are. VVhat hath been sayd of God shall now suffice, Of whom I frame no Image in my mind, But I conceive him by his properties, Hee is incomprehensible I find; Filling all places, in no place confind; I will therefore his wondrous works admire, Not vainly after secret things inquire.
Next unto God, my selfe I sought to know, A thing not so facile, as some suppose, But that I may the faster forward goe, I leave to speak, what may bee said of those, And haste to that I purpose to disclose: VVhich being well considered may convert, To lowest thoughts, the proudest haughty heart. Touching my selfe and others I conceive, That all men are by nature dead in sin,Eph. 2.1. And Sathans slaves; not able to receive, The things of God, which brings true comfort in: Good accions still they faile in managing; But apt they are to every vanity, As vowed servants to inniquity. Doe but observe the carnallist how he Neglects all calings, fitt to be profest, Waits all occasions, ill implyd to be, Consumes his wealth, deprives himself of rest; To please that darling sinn that likes him best: Iudg what a hellish bondage he is in, That's Sathans slave, and servant unto sin; As all men in the state of nature be, And have been ever since mans wofull fall, Who was created first, from bondage free, Untill by sinn he thrust himself in thrall; By whose transgression we were stained all, Not only all men but all parts of man, Corrupted was: since sin to reign began.
The Soul who did her makers Image bear, Which made her amiable fair and bright, Right Orient and illustrious to appear, To his omniscient eye and pure sight, Who doth the inward Purity delight, Lost all her beauty, once so excellent, As soon as unto sinn she did consent. The eye of understanding was so bleared, That no spirituall thing it could behold, The will corrupted, and the concience ceared, And all th'affections were to goodness cold, But hot to evill, not to be contrould; The members of the body then proceeds As instruments to execute bad deeds. But see what was the consequence of this, The curse of God which did the fault ensue, Thus man by sin deprived was of biss, The thoughts hereof might cause us to eschew That bitter root whence all our sorrows grew: Sickness of body, and distresse of mind, With all afflictions layd upon mankind. Whether in body goods or name it be, And which is woc, the soues perplexity, Whose concience is awake, from deadnesse free When she considers what felicity, She hath exchang'd for endlesse misery; Can but torment her selfe with bootlesse care, Fore-see-ing that her pains eternall are.
If this be so, the vilest liveing creature Is in a better case then man; for why? When this life ends with such by course of nature, There with is ended all his misery; But man tormented is eternally; Twere so, but that our God we gracious find, Who sent a Saviour to restore mankind. The second person of the Trinity,Iohn. 1.1 The only Son of God omnipotent, Who being God from all eternity, To take our nature freely did assent,Heb. 2.16. With all afflictons thereto insident: In all things, like to other men was he, Save that from sins he still remained free. So that two whole and perfect natures were, In the same person joyned really. And neither of them both, confounded are, Nor doh the Humane of it selfe rely; But it subsisteth in the Deity, Nor can these natures seperated be, Both perfect God, and perfect man was he. This much touching our Saviours person; Now, His Offices we ought to know likewise, And what he hath performd for us, and how He freed us from the foresaid miseries, And how Gods dreadfull wrath he satisfies; His Offices shall briefly named be, A Priest, a Prophet, and a King, is he.
A Priest, for that he hath for mans transgression Full satisfaction made to God the father,Heb. 7.15. And likewise makes continuall intercession For those who to his fould he means to gather; Or to eternall heavenly mancions, rather: The means wherby Gods wrath he satisfies, Was his obedience and his sacrifice. The Law of God he perfectly fulfild, VVith full obedience and integrity, As God had pre-ordained, then did he yeild A painfull ignominious death to dy, The wrath of God appeased was thereby, Which in full measure came upon him then, Even what was due unto the sins of men. A Prophet to instruct his Church he is, Which doth him honour by sinceare profession, His Spirit qualifies the hearts of his, And makes them pliable to such profession, His word doth take when grace shall have possession, For by the word no good efect is wrought But where the heart is by Gods spirit taught. Our Saviour is a King undoubtedly, Although he seemes to have no Kingdoms here, Yet in their hearts he means to Glorify, A Kingdome he erects of grace, and there Hee raignes, and by his spirit rule doth beare, But here appears his machlesse dignity Hee King of Glory is Eternally.
For when he by his death had finished The work of our redemcion, freed from paines, He took his body that before was dead, With all that to a perfect man pertaines; With which he gloriously ascends and reignes: At the right hand of God he doth remain Vntill to Iudgment he returns again. Christs sufferings are sufficient for to free, All men from wo and endlesse misery,2 Thes. 3.2 But all men have not faith, and therfore be, Vnlikely to have benefit thereby, For it is Faith with which we must apply, The merrits of our blessed Redeemer And to our selves each in particuler. Faith is a Grace which doth the soul refine, Wrought by the Holy-Ghost in contrite hearts, And grounded on Gods Promises divine, Things superexcellent this same imparts, To those that have it planted in their hearts: But ere this faith is wrought, the heart must be, Made capable of it, in some degree. First God doth take the hammer of his Law, And breaks the heart which he for Grace will fit Then the seduced soul is brought in aw, And doth immediatly it selfe submitt, When sight of sinne, and sorrowing for it, Hath wrought humility, a vertu rare VVhich truly doth the soul for Grace prepare.
The Law of God is most exact and pure Requireing of us perfect holinesse,Psal. 19.1. To which is life eternall prmis'd sure, But curses unto them that it transgresse, Whether by frailty or by wilfullnesse; Though none but Christ, and Adam ere his fall Could keep this Law, yet it may profit all. For here we may perceive how much we fail, VVithall what danger we incur thereby, Then if we can our own deects bewail, We may for sucour to our Saiour fly, Whose Righteousnesse will all our wants supply: Then here are Rules set down for Gods Elect Whereby they wil their course of life direct. This Law by Gods most skilfull Hand was wrot, And placed in two Tables orderly, Shewing what's to be done, and what is not; Withall what good or evill coms thereby, In Ten Commandements so distinctly, Wherewith as with a Touch stone try we may, How we offend our God, or him obay. 1 They sin against the first who think or say, As doth the fool, there is no God at all, So they that through profanenesse disobay, And want of knowledg is a breach not small, Who loves or fears a creature most of all, And puts trust therein and seeks there to Makes that their God, and so break this they do.
2 The second violated is by those That Images erect, or them adore, By such also who in devocion goes To Saint or Angell, succor to implore, VVho set by superstisious Reliques store, And worship God after mens fantasies, And not as he commands, breaks this likewise 3 When those that seem religious prove profane Gods name is much dishonoured therby; Even so likewise their error is the same, Who use his word, or works, or Titles high, For evill ends, or elce unreverently: By witchcraft, cursing, swearing, blasphemy, This violated is undoubtedly. 4 Whoso by preparation doth not fit Himselfe to keep the Sabbath, breaks the same, As those that holy exercise omit, Or come thereto only for fear of blame, Nor have delight or profit by the same; So it is broke by carnall recreations, By worldly works, by speech, or cogitacions. 5 When that inferiors disobedient are, Vngratefull, stubborn, saucy, impudent, Fayling in reverence, love, respective care, To their superiors, hating Government, Such grosly break this Fift Commandement: As those superiors whose bad Disciplin Or ill example, makes inferiors sin.
6 This is transgrest by murther, or debate, By being mindfull of revenge likewise, By sinfull anger, envy, malice, hare; By vexing words, and scornfull mockeries, Which are occasions of etreamities, Distresse of mind, heart-griefe, perplexity, And life hath often prejudice thereby, 7 All thoughts impure this Cōmandment breaks, So lewd pastimes, light gesture, wanton lookes, Wearing apparell contrary to Sex, Ill company, vain alk, lacivious books, An all that may enice like baites or hooks, To Fornication or Adultery, VVhich breakes this Precept most apparently. 8 This is transgrest by any kind of stealing, By coveting our nighbours goods also, By fraud oppression, or deceitful dealing, By nt disposing well of that we ow, Refusing honet works to undergoe, By being not content with our estate, Not helping those we should commiserate. 9 This violated is by false witnesse bearing, Likewise by any Lie we brek the ame, By raiseing false reports, or gladly hearing Ill of our nighbour, touching his good name, By not maintaining his deserved fame, By speaking truth of him maliciously And not exhorting him in secresie.
10 This is transgrest by lusts, and mocions vain Though we thereto give no consent at all,Ro. 7.7 As the rebellion of the flesh, or stain And blot, we have by sinne Originall, Corrupsion of our nature we it call; From which because that no one can be free, Then all transgressors of the Law must be. Who by the morrall Law beholds his sin And sees withall ther's left him no defence, To sorrow therefore now he doth begin, His Conscience being toucht with lively sence Of Gods displeasure for his great offence, Dispairing of salvation, in respect Of ought that by himselfe he can effect. The curse contain'd in this exquiset Law, Doth work this sorrow so effectually, For truly he alone is brought in aw, Whose Conscience is inform'd of this hereby; Who breaks but one commandement only In all his life, and that in coggitacion, Is not-with-standing subject to damnacion. Thus when the heart is fitted and prepard, The seeds of Faith foth-with are cast therein, VVhich in their orders briefly are declard: The first is when one wearied under sinne, To feel the wiaght thereof doth now begin And thereupon acknowledgeth with speed That of a Saviour much he stands in need;
The second is a vehement desire, Or ardent longing to participate Of Christ, and eke his benifits entire And nothing else can this desire abate, Consume o limit, quench or mittigate: As doth the Hart the water brook desire, So humble Souls a Saviour doth require. The third i flying to the Throne of grace, Even from the sentence of the Law so strict, Which doth profane security deface, Becase that thereby the Conscience is prict, Which doth the humble man for good afflict By shewing such the danger of their case, And for a euer, sending them to grace. Now this is done by fervent supplications, By constant prayer, most prevailing known, xprest with hearty strong ejacculacions, For Gods especiall grace in him alone, In the forgivenesse of his sins each one; And in his prayer, persevear will hee Vntil the thing peticion'd, granted bee. Then God, as he hath promised, will prove Propicious to the sinner penitent, And let him feel th'assurance of his Love, His Favour, Grace, and Mercy Excellent The which in Christ, appears most emminent: A livly Faith this full assurance is, Wr  by Gods Spirit, in the hearts of his.
But there are divers measures or degrees Of Saving Faith, the least whereof is this, When he that hath a humble Spirit sees He cannot feel, his Faith so little is, As yet the full assurance, inward bliss, Of the forgivenesse of his sinnes so free, Yet pardonable findeth them to bee. And therefore prayeth they may be pardoned, And with his heart the same of God requires, Recals himself, as formerly misled, Giveing no rest unto his large desires, His Soul it faints not, nor his Spirit tires, Although he be delayd yet still he praies, On God he waites, and for an answer staies. That such a man hath Faith it doth appeare For these desires doe plainly testifie, He hath the Spirit of his Saviour dear, For tis his speciall work or property, To stir up longings after purity: Now where his Spirit is there Christ resides, And where Christ dwels is true Faith though weak abides Of saveing Faith the largest quantity, Is when a man comes on in Faith untill, He finds the full assurance happily Of Gods free mercy, favour, and good will, To him in Christ, which doth his joy fulfill: Finding he hath obtained free remission, And that he's safe in Gods divine tuision.
This full assurance of his grace and love, The Lord vouchsafes his servants true who he, Doth for their inward sanctity approve, VVhose outward doeings also righteous be, For such alone the evidence may see, Of his inheritance, true happinesse, VVhich for Christs merits sake they shall possesse. A Christian in his insantcy in grace Finds not this full assurance usually, Vntill he hath been practis'd for a space By sound Repentance with Sincerity: And finds Gods Love to him aundantly Then shall his soul this full perswasion see, VVhich is the strength of Faith or highest degree. By Faith in Christ much profit we do gain, For thereby only are we justifide, At peace with God free from eternall pain, And thereby only are we sanctifide, VVhere faith is, by those friuts, it may be tride: True faith being by friuts discovered A barren faith must deeds be false and dead. Now to be justifide, is to be freed, From gilt and punishment of sin likewise, To be accepted as for just indeed, VVith God, whose grace it is that justifies; And not our works, as vainly some surmise: But that we may still orderly proceed, It followeth next how we from sin are freed.
The sins of those that God will justifie, Were by Chris sufferings so abolished. As that they canot hurt them finally, VVere they as Scarlet or the Crimson ed They shall be wite as Snow and clared,Esay 16.16 Even by Christs Blood, the w to free was sp n The faithfull, from deserved punishent. Now comes to b considered how tey may VVih God, for Perfect just, accepted be, VVho of them-selves by nature (truth to say) Are in no part from sinnes corruption free, How such are tane for just, here may we see, Christs righteousnesse is theirs, by impcion, And so esteem'd by gracious accpacion. The true beleevers benifits are great, VVh ch they by beig justfi poesse For such shall stand be ore Gods judgment seat, As worthy of Eternal Happinesse, Even by the merits of Christs Righteusnesse, For of themselves, they cannot merit ought, Who are not able to think one good thought. Then far from doing any work whereby They might deserve Salvation on their part, For God whose only perfect purity, Will fnd in our best works no true disart, But rather matter of our endlesse smart: For in Christs Blood the Saints wch are most dear Must wash their Robes before they can be clear.
Though by good works we do not gain Salvacion Yet these good Duties that our God requires, We must perform in thi our conversacion, With all our might, endevours, and desires, Before this short uncertain time expires, And at perfection must we allwaies aime, Though in this life we reach not to the same. For he that by his Faith is justifide, It followeth also necessarily, That such by Faith are likwise Sanctifide, Corrupcion of our naure is thereby Disabled so, as that inniquty No longer rules, being by grace subdude, Whereby the heart to goodnesse is renude. Corrupcion of our nature purged is, By vertue of Christs Precious Blood only Which when by Saving Faith applyed is, Serves as a corrasive to mortifie And kill the power of inniquity, Whence tis that those who Sanctified bee, From sins dominion, happily are free. The other pat of true Sanctificacion, Is life or quickenning to holinesse, And may therefore be called reovacion, Like a Restorative it doth redresse, And him revive, that is dead in trespasse; Tis by the power of Christs Resurrection, That we are rais'd from sinne to such perfection.
Sanctificacion must be then entire, Not for the present, perfect in degree, Yet in respect of parts and true desire, Each part and power Sanctified must bee, Although no part from all Corruption's free; Yet every power must with goodnesse sute, Though in this life no part be absolute, Like as a Child new born without defect, A perfect man he may be sayd to bee, Because his body's perfect, in respect Of parts, though not in stature or degree Of grouth, untill of perfect age he bee; So have the faithfull imperfections some, Till to a perfect age in Christ they come. The graces of the Spirit will appeare, And spring up in his heart thats Sanctifide, And these the fruits of Righteousnesse will beare Which in his conversacion are discride, These graces hath he that is Sanctifide, A detestacion of inniquity, And love to goodnesse, Zeale and Purity, Whereof Repentance blessedly proceeds, Which is endeavour, purpose or intent To leave all sin which causefull sorrows breeds And not to give allowance or consent To break Gods Law, or least Commandment: But ever walk exactly there-unto, Though to the flesh it seemes too much to doe.
So that continuall combates will arise, Between Gods image, on the soul renewde, And Sathans image, greatest contraries Which ever seek each other to exclude, Though in the end the worst shall be subdude: Yet in this life it wil in no wise yeeld; Against whose force, Faith is the only sheild. Now when a man hah got the victory, In such a conflict or extream temptacion He sees Gods love to him abundantly, By reason of his speciall conservacion, VVhich of his favou is a demonstracion; Now this increaseth peace of conscience most Together with joy in the Holy-Ghost. But if the wicked do so far prevaile, By Gods permssion by some provocacion To over-come the faithfull being fraile, And subject to be snar'd with temptacion When not suspecting such abominacion; But this their fall i through infirmity VVho shall not be forsaken utterly. For soon a Godly sorrow will arise And over-flow the eart of such a one, Which blessedly the same so mollifies, That it relents for having so mis-gone Which godly griefe or sorrow is all one For haveing so displeased God by sinne, Who hath to him a loveing Father been.
Yea he for this abhors himselfe as vile Acknowledging his execrable case, Till he be reconsil'd to God, that while Himselfe by lowest thoughts he doth abase, As far unworthy to find any grace; Yet cries to God in this humiliacion For the return of wonted consolacion. And when he hath attain'd recovery, The breach without delay he fortifies With stronger resolucion manfully, And with a Watch impregnable likewise, Against assaults of this his enimies, And all assaies of their re-entery Through which so many perish finally. This much touching the ground of Truth I hold, VVhich sith at first they rectified my mind, I will not cast them off, as worn and old, Nor will be so alone to them confind As not admit of things of higher kind; But will as God shall light dispence to mee, (By ayd divine) walk up to each degree.
A Song expressing their happinesse who have Communion with Christ. WHen scorched with distracting care, My minde findes out a shade Which fruitlesse Trees, false fear, dispair And melancoly made, Where neither bird did sing Nor fragrant flowers spring, Nor any plant of use: No sound of happynesse. Had there at all ingresse, Such comforts to produce, But Sorrow there frequents, The Nurce of Discontents, And Murmering her Mayd Whose harsh unpleasant noise All mentall fruits destroyes Whereby delight's convayd. Whereof my judgment being certifide My mind from thence did move, For her concepcion so to provide, That it might not abortive prove, VVhich fruit to signifie It was conceaved by Most true intelligence Of this sweet truth divine
Who formed thee is thine,Esay. 54.5. Whence sprang this inference; He too, thats Lord of all Will thee beloved call, Though all else prove unkind; Then chearfull may I sing Sith I enjoy the Sp ing, Though Sesterns dry I find. For in our Vnion with the Lord alone, Consists our happinesse. Certainly such who are with Christ at one He leaves not comfortlesse, But come to them he will Their Souls with joy to fill, And them to Fortifie Their works to undergo And beare their Crosse also, VVith much alacrity: VVho his assisting grace Do feelingly imbrace, VVith confidence may say, Through Christ that strengthens me No thing so hard I see But what perform I may.Phil 4.14 But when the Soul no help can see Through sins interposicion, Then quite forlorn that while is she, Bewailling her condicion; In which deplored case
Now such a Soul hath space, To think how she delayd Her Saviour to admit Who shu'd to her for it, And to this purpose sayd, Open to me my Love, My Sister, and my Dove,Can. 5. My Locks with dew wet are Yet she remissive grew, Till he himselfe with-drew Before she was aware. But tasting once how sweet he is, And smelling his perfumes, Long can she not his presence misse, But griefe her strainth consumes: For when he visits one He cometh not alone, But brings abundant grace True Light, and Holynesse And Spirit to expresse Ones wants in every case; For as he wisedome is, So is he unto his VVisedome and Purity,1 Cor. 1.30 Which when he seemes to hide, The oul missing her guide, Must needs confused lie. Then let them know, that would enjoy The firme fruition,
Of his Sweet presence, he will stay With single hearts alone, Who [ u] their former mate, Doe quie extrmnate: With all things tha defie They that are Christs, truly, The Flesh do Crucifie With its affections vile Then grounds of truth are sought New Principles are wrought Of grae and holinesse,Gal. 5. Which plantings of the heart Will spring in every part, And so it selfe expresse. Then shall the Soul like morning bright Vnto her Lord appeare,Can. 6.1 And as the Moone when full of Light So fayr is she and cleare, With that nherent grace Tha s darted from the Face Of Christ, that Sunne divine, Which hath a puging power Corruption to devour, And Conscience to refine; Per ection thu begun As pure as the Sunne, The Soul shall be likewise With that great Blessednesse, Imputed Righteoussenesse Which freely Justifies.
They that are thus compleat with Grace And know that they are so, For Glory must set Sayle apace Whilst wind doth fitly blow, Now is the tide of Love. Now doth the Angell move; If that there be defect That Soul which sin doth wound, Here now is healing sound, If she no time neglect; To whom shall be reveald What erst hath been conceald, When brought unto that Light, Which in the Soul doth shine When he thats most divine, Declares his presence bright. Then he will his beloved shew The reason wherefore she Is seated in a place so low, Not from all troubles free; And wherefore they do thrive That wicked works contrive; Christ telleth his also For who as friends he takes He of his Councell makes, And they shall secrets know:Iohn 15.15 Such need not pine with cares Seeing all things are theirs, If they are Christs indeed;Cor. 3.21. Therefore let such confesse
They are not comfortlesse, Nor left in time of Need. A Song shewing the Mercies of God to his people, by interlacing cordiall Com∣forts with fatherly Chastisments. AS in the time of Winter The Earth doth fruitlesse and barren lie, Till the Sun his course doth run Through Aries, Taurus, Gemini; Then he repayres what Cold did decay, Drawing superfluous moistures away, And by his luster, together with showers, The Earth becoms fruitful & plesant with flowers That what in winter seemed dead. There by the Sun is life discovered. So though that in the Winter Of sharp Afflictions, fruits seem to dy, And for that space, the life of Grace Remayneth in the Root only; Yet when the Son of Righteousnesse clear Shall make Summer with us, our spirits to chear, Warming our hearts with the sense of his favour, Then must our flowers of piety favour, And then the fruits of righteousnesse We to the glory of God must expresse.
And as when Nigh  paed, The Sun ascending our Hemisphear, Ill fumes devouers, and opes the powers Which in our bodies are, and there He drawes out the spirits of moving and sence As from the center, to the circumference; So that the exterior parts are delighted, And unto motion and action excited, And hence it is that with more delight We undergo labor by day then by night. So though a Night of Sorrows May stay proceedings in piety Yet shall our light like morning bright Arise out of obscurity, Then when the Sun that never declines Shall open the faculties of our mindes, Stirring up in them that spirituall mocion Whereby we make towards God with devocion When kindled by his influence Our Sacrifice is as pleasing incense. Now when we feel Gods favour And the communion with him we have, Alone we may admit of joy As having found what most we crave, Store must we gather while such gleams do last Against our tryalls sharp winterly blasts So dispairacion shall swallow us never, Who know where God once loves, there he loves ever Though sence of it oft wanting is Yet still Gods mercies continue with his.
So soon as we discover Our souls benummed in such a case, We may not stay, without delay W must approach the Throne of Grace, First taking words to our selves to declare How dead to goodnesse by nature we are, Then seeking by him who for us did merit To be enliv'd by his quickening Spirit, Whose flame doth light our Spark of Grace, Whereby we may behold his pleased face. From whencc come beams of comfort, The chiefest matter of tru Content, Who tast and see, how sweet they be, Perceive they are most excellent, Being a glimce of his presence so bright, Who dwelleth in unapproachable light: Whoso hath happily thi mercy attayned, Earnest of blessednesse endlesse hath gayned, Where happinesse doth not decay There Spring is eternall, and endlesse is day. A Song declaring that a Christian may finde tru Love only where tru Grace is. NO Knot of Friendship long can hold Save that which Grace hath ty'd, For other causes prove but cold VVhen their effects are try'd;
For God who loveth unity Doth cause the onely union, Which makes them of one Family Of one mind and communion. Commocions will be in that place, VVhere are such contraries, As is inniquity and grace, The greatest enimies, Whom sin doth rule shee doth command To hold stiff opposicion Gainst grace and all the faithfull band Which are in her tuision. This is the cause of home debates, And much domestick woes, That one may find his houshold mates To be his greatest foes, That with the Wolfe the Lamb may bide As free from molestacion, As Saints with sinners, who reside In the same habitacion. By reason of the Enmity Between the womans Seed And mans infernall enimy, The Serpent and his breed, The link of consanguinity Could hold true freindship never, Neither hath neare affinity United freinds for ever.
For scoffing Ishmael will scorn His onely true born brother: Rebeckahs sonns together born Contend with one another, No bond of nature is so strong To cause their hearts to tarry In unity, who do belong To masters so contrary. The wicked ordinarily Gods dearest children hate, And therfore seek (though groundlesly) Their credits to abate, And though their words and works do show No colour of offences Yet are their hearts most (they trow) For all their good pretences. And those that strongest grace attain, Whereby sin is vanquished, By Sathan and his cursed train Are most contraried; Because by such the Serpent feeles, His head to be most bruised, He turnes and catches at their heeles, By whom he is so used. His agents he doth instigate, To vex, oppose, and fret, To slander and calumniate, Those that have scap't his net,
Who servants are so diligent, That like to Kain their father They whose works are most excellent They mischiefe will the rather. Yet there are of the gracelesse crew Who for some private ends Have sided with prefessors tru As truly pious friends, But to the times of worldly peace Their friendship was confined. Which when some crosses caus'd to cease The thred of league untwined. Such friends unto the Swallow may Be fitly likened, Who all the plesant Summer stay But are in Winter fled: They cannot 'bide their freind to see, In any kind of trouble, So pittyfull (forsooth) they bee That have the art to double. Such will be any thing for one Who hath of nothing need, Their freindship stands in word alone, And none at all in deed, How open mouth'd so e're they are, They bee as closely handed, Who will (they know) their service spare, They're his to be commanded.
Therefore let no true hearted one Releife at need expect, From opposits to vertue known, Who can him not afect: For his internall ornaments, Will ever lovely make him Though all things pleasing outward sence Should utterly forsake him. In choise of Freinds let such therefore Prefer the godly wise, To whom he may impart the store That in his bosome lies: And let hm not perniciously Communicate his favours, To all alike indifferently, Which shewes a mind that wavers. Gods children to each other should Most open hearted bee; Who by the same precepts are rul'd, And in one Faith agree, VVho shall in true felicity, Where nothing shall offend them Together dwell eternally, To which I do commend them.
A Song demonstrating The vanities of Earthly things. SHall Sadnesse perswade me never to sing But leave unto Syrens that excellent thing, No that may not be, for truely I find, The sanguin complexion to mirth is enclin'd. Moreover, they may who righteousnesse love, Be soberly merry, and sorrows remove, They only have right to rejoycing allwaies Whose joy may be mixed with prayer and praise. Wherefore rejoyceth the epicure? As though his fadeing delights would endure, VVhereas they are ended, as soon as begun, For all things are vanity under the Sun. Riches and Honour, Fame and Promocion, Idols, to whom the most do their devocion; How fadeing they are, I need not to show, For this by experience, too many doe know. They that delight in costly attire, If they can compasse the things they desire, Have onely obtained, what sin first procured, And many to folly are therby alured.
Learning is sure an excellent thing, From whence all Arts and Sciences spring, Yet is it not from vanity free, For many great Scholars prophane often be. Whoso hath studied Geometry, Or gained experience in Geography, By tedious labour much knowledg may gain, Yet in the conclusion, hee'l find all is vain. He that hath studied Astronomy, Though his meditacion ascend to the Sky He may mis of heaven and heavenly blis, If that he can practise no studdy but this, But they that delight in Divinity, And to be exquisit in Theology, Much heavenly comfort in this life may gain, And when it is ended their joyes shall remain. VVhat should I speak more of vanities, To use many words when few may suffice, It argueth folly, therfore I have don, Concluding, all's vanity under the Sun.
A Song manifesting The Saints eternall Happinesse SOund is the Minde Which doth that Hope possesse Whose object is Eternall joy Or Heavens Happinesse; Such healthfull hearts Their spirits doe sustain, In thinking on the Rest which for Gods peeple doth remain, A Treasure inaccessible, Or Everlasting Life, A blessed State which never shall be cumbered with strife Salvacion With endlesse Glory cleare,Heb. 4.6 2 Tim. 2.10 And each good thing to be desir'd Are in their Fountain there; Flowers are here, Together with the weeds Exposed to all kinde of stormes, Which much confusion breeds: Some for weaknesse are dismaid, And some are comfortlesse, ecause of some defect of sence, Or want of comlinesse.
Grant some may have Proporcion so compleat, That correspondency o parts Declares Perfections seat Yet doub les uch Then buthen have also By reason of their travell which They needs must undergo, For in every calling is A tedious wearinesse Which whoso folowe carefully Is driven to confesse Further suppose One might be freed from all Afflictions which externall are, Or crosses corporall Yet if the soule Be sencible of sin It cannot be but such will have Enough to do within: For to Preserve the heart and waies From being over grown With fruits of that contagious seed That's in our nature sown. Doubting some times The Soul with anguish tires, Who must anon encounter with inordinate desires:
Lust oft prevailes, And then the consequence, Will be a great ecclips of grace, And losse of comfort sence, In striving to ecover peace, The soule is oft opprest. As he that's conscious of his sin, Hath here but little rest. From all those woes And many more that bee, T e Sant that finisht hath his course Shall be for ever free, And likewise have For ever to posesse A most exquisit Diadem, The Crown of righteousnesse,2. Tim. 4.8. Of that divine inheritance Which fadeth not away,1. Pet. 1.5. They shall be really posest, And ever it enj y. Bodies which here Are matter thick and grosse, Attaining to thi happinesse, Are freed from their drosse: And as the Sunn Appeares in brightest Sky,Mat. 13.43. So every body glorifi'd Shall be for clarity,
And likewise be impassible, Unapable of pain Having agility to move. VVhose vigour shall remain. Glorified Soules, Are fild with all delight, Because the spring of Buy is The object of their sight: Also they have, (Their joy to amplify) Immediat sweet cmmunion with The blessed Trinity. Which satisfies the appetite, Which else were empty still, Because no finite c mfort can Content the mind and will. Briefly a word O place and company Which Saints in G oy shall enioy, The place is heavenly Ierusalem,Heb. 12. The citty of the Lord: Discover'd by such precious things As pleasure most affo d,Rev. 21. The consorts, Angells numberlesse, The whole Assembly Of Saints,Heb. 12. who shall for ever dwell With Christ Eternally.
VVhy hath the Lord For his, such Ioyes prepar'd Because their pacient sufferings He richly will reward, This light distresse Which for a moment dures An excellent eternall waight Of Glory his procures,2 Cor. 4.17 But our afflictions merit not This Glory that exceeds But it as Gods all other gifts,Rom. 8.18. Of his free-Love proceeds.Rom. 6.23. Now they that have This Hope of Heaven sure, Shew it by striving to be cleane As Christ our Lord is pure,1 Iohn: 3.3. Also they take Their croses chearfully Because a substance they expect, Eternall heavenly,Heb. 10.34. To which my Soule aspired still And cannot setled be, Till shee returns againe to him That gave her unto me.Ecl 12.7.
A Song exciting to spirituall Alacrity. DIscomforts will the hear contract And joy will cause it to dilate; That every part its part may act, A heart enlarg'd must animate. Unfruitfull ones therfore they are That planted be in sorrows shade, Sith by the blasts of cloudy care They are unfit for action made. The ill effects of fruitlesse greife Are in this place no further shown, Because the meanes of true releife Is mo e convenient to be known. Now he in whom all fullnesse dwels All good and meanes of good must bee,Col. 1 9. His presence Sathans rule expells And doth rom Legall terror free.Gal. 3.13. So that their Soules which are so blessed His sacred presence to enioy, Can never be so much distressed But consolacion find they may.
Having a hiding place secure,Isay. 32.1.2 And covert from the stormy wind, And streames of water perfect pure To viviy and cheare the mind. If scorched with afflictions heat They to their shady rock may fly, And be in safties bosome seat And lap of true felicity. Where are delights Angelicall, The quintisence of all good things, Refined wine to cheare withall And food which life eternall brings. Which though the Saints by faith posesse, Doe not suppose it solace give, But truly reall happinesse, As they that feele alone beleeve. Who thence abundant strength collect, In all condicions to support, No  oubles can them much deject, Who have this soules defensive Fort. Suppose temptacion sift them sore, Sufficient grace will them releive,2 Cor. 12.9. And make their Faith appeare the more, Which will to them the Conquest give.
Or be their Scourge some outward Crosse, As causlesse hate, or poverty, Decay of parts, disease, or losse Of Credit, Freinds, or Liberty. Nay were their state compos'd of woes, In whom the Morning Star doth shine, Whose lively luster will disclose, To his a heritage divine, Which he of Love did them procure, With freedom, not to Adam dain'd To tast the Tree of Life most pure, Whereby the soule alone's sustain'd The sence of Love-Eternall, doth, with Love, Obedience still produce, Which active is, and passive both, So suffrings are of speciall use. Bearing the soule with joy and peace, Through true beleeving, evermore, Whose sweet contentments take encrease, From heavens never-fayling store.
Another Song exciting to spiri∣tuall Mirth. THe Winter being over In order comes the Spring, hich doth green Hearbs discover nd cause the Birds to sing; he Night also expired, hen comes the Morning bright, hich is so much desired all that love the Light; his may learn hen that mourn put their Griefe to flight. e Spring succeedeth Winter, d Day must follow Night. e therefore that sustaineth ffliction or Distresse, hich ev'ry member paineth, nd findeth no relesse; t such therefore despaire not, at on firm Hope depend ose Griefes immortall are not, d therefore must have end: ey that faint h complaint
Therefore are too blame, They ad to their afflictions, And amplify the same. For if they could with patience A while posesse the minde, By nward Consolacions They might refreshing finde, To sweeten all their Crosses That litile time they 'dure; So might they gain by losses, And sharp would sweet procure; Bu if the minde Be inclinde To Vnquietnesse That only may be called The worst of all Distresse. He that is melancolly Detesting all Delight, His Wits by sottish Folly Are ruinated quite: Sad Discontent and Murmors To him are insident, Were he posest of Honors, He could not be content: Sparks of joy Fly away, Floods of Cares arise. And all delightfull Mocions In the concepcion dies.
But those that are contented However things doe fall, Much Anguish is prevented, And they soon freed from all; They finish all their Labours With much felicity, Theyr joy in Troubles savours Of perfect Piety, Chearfulnesse Doth expresse A setled pious minde Which is not prone to grudging From murmoring refinde. Lascivious joy I prayse not, Neither do it allow, For where the same decayes not No branch of peace can grow; For why, it is sinister As is excessive Griefe, And doth the Heart sequester From all good: to be briefe, Vain Delight Passeth quite The bounds of modesty, And makes one apt to nothing But sensuality.
This Song sheweth that God is the strength of his People, whence they have support and comfort. MY straying thoughts, reduced stay, And so a while retired, Such observacions to survay VVhich memory hath registred, That were not in oblivion dead. In which reveiw of mentall store, One note affordeth comforts best, Cheifly to be preferd therfore, As in a Cabinet or Chest One jewell may exceed the rest. God is the Rock of his Elect In whom his grace is incoate, This note, my soule did most affect, It doth such power intimate To comfort and corroberate. God is a Rock first in respect He shadows his from hurtfull heat, Then in regard he doth protect His servants still from dangers great And so their enimies defeat.
In some dry desart Lands (they say) Are mighty Rocks, which shadow make, Where passengers that go that way, May rest, and so refreshing take, Their sweltish Wearinesse to slake. So in this world such violent Occasions, find we still to mourn, That scorching heat of Discontent VVould all into combustion turn And soon our soules with anguish burn, Did not our Rock preserve us still, Whose Spirit, ours animates, That wind that bloweth where it will Sweetly our soules refrigerates,Iohn. 3.8 And so distructive heat abates. From ths our Rock proceeds likewise, To  streames, which graciously Releives the oule which scorched lies, Through sence of Gods displeasure high, Due to her for inniquity. So this our Rock refreshing yeelds, To those that unto him adhere, Whom likewise mightily he sheilds, So that they need not faint nor fear Though all the world against them were.
Because he is their strength and tower, Whose power none can equalize, VVhich onely gives the use of power Which justly he o them denies, Who would against his servants rise. Not by selfe power nor by might, But by Gods spirit certainly,Zach. 4. Men compasse and attain their right, For what art thou O mountain high! Thou shalt with valleys, even ly. Happy was Israell, and why, Jehovah was his Rock alone,Deu. 33.29. The Sword of his Excellency, His sheild of Glory mighty known, In saving those that are his own. Experience of all ages shewes, Tha such could never be dismayd Who did by Faith on God repose, Confessing him their onely ayd, Such were alone in safty stayd. One may have freinds, who have a will To further his felicity, And yet be wanting to him still, Because of imbecility, In power and ability.
But whom the Lord is pleas'd to save, uch he is able to defend, is grace and might no limmits have, And therefore can to all extend Who doe or shall on him depend. Nor stands he therefore surely, Whose Freinds most powerfull appeare, Because of mutabillity o which all mortalls subject are, Whose favours run now here, now there. ut in our Rock and mighty Fort, f change no shadow doth remain, is favours he doth not Transport s trifles movable and vain, is Love alone is lasting gain. herfore my soule do thou depend, pon that Rock which will not move, hen all created help shall end hy Rock impregnable will prove, hom still embrace with ardent Love. Another Song. THe Winter of my infancy being over-past hen supposed, suddenly the Spring would hast Which useth every thing to cheare ith invitacion to recreacion is time of yeare.
The Sun sends forth his radient beames to warmthe ground The drops distil, between the gleams delights abound, Ver brings her mate the flowery Queen, The Groves shee dresses, her Art expresses On every Green. But in my Spring it was not so, but contrary, For no delightfull flowers grew to please the eye, No hopefull bud, nor fruitfull bough, No moderat showers which causeth flowers To spring and grow. My Aprill was exceeding dry, therfore unkind; Whence tis that small utility I look to find, For when that Aprill is so dry, (As hath been spoken) it doth betoken Much scarcity. Thus is my Spring now almost past in heavinesse The Sky of pleasure's over-cast with sad distresse For by a comfortlesse Eclips, Disconsolation and sore vexacion, My blossom nips. Yet as a garden is my mind enclosed fast Being to safety so confind from storm and blast Apt to produce a fruit most rare, That is not common with every woman That fruitfull are. A Love of goodnesse is the cheifest plant therin The second is, (for to be briefe) Dislike to sin,
These grow in spight of misery, Which Grace doth nourish and cause to flourish Continually. But evill mocions, currupt seeds, fall here also when of springs prophanesse as do weeds where flowers grow VVhich must supplanted be with speed These weeds of Error, Distrust and Terror, Lest woe succeed So shall they not molest, the plants before exprest Which countervails these outward wants, & purchase est Whih more commodious is for me Then outward pleasures or earthly treasures Enjoyd would be. My little Hopes of worldly Gain I fret not at, As yet I do this Hope retain; though Spring be lat Perhaps my Sommer-age may be, Not prejudiciall, but benificiall n g for me. Admit th worst it be not so, but stormy too, Ile learn my selfe to undergo more then I doe And still content my self with this Sweet Meditacion and Contemplacion O heavenly b is, VVhich for the Saints reserved is who persevere In Piety and Holynesse, and godly Feare, The pleasures of which blis divine Neither Logician nor Rhetorician
Another Song. HAving restrained Discontent, The onely Foe to Health and Witt, I sought by all meanes to prevent The causes wh c did nourish it. Knowing that they who are judicious Have alwaies held it most perncious. Looking to outward things, I found Not that which Sorrow might abate, But rather cause them to abound Then any Greife to mtigate Which made me seek by supplicacion Internall Peace and Consolacion Calling to mind their wretchednesse That seem to be in happy case Having externall happinesse But therewithall no inward grace; Nor are their minds with knowdg poll sht In such all vertues are abot For where the mind's obscure and dark Thre is no vertu resident, Of goodnesse there remaines no spark Distrustfullnesse doth there frequent For Ignorance the cause of error May also be the cause of terror
As doth the Sun-beames beutify The Sky, which else doth dim appeare So Knowledg doth exquisitly The Mind adorn, delight and cleare Which otherwise is most obcure, Full of enormities impure. So that their Soules polluted are That live in blockish Ignorance, Which doth their miseries declare And argues plainly that their wants More hurtfull are then outward Crosses Infirmities, Reproach, or Losses. Where saving Knowledg doth abide, The peace of Conscience also dwels And many Vertues more beside Which all obsurdities expels, And fils the Soule with joy Celestiall That shee regards not things Terrestiall. Sith then the Graces of the Mind Exceeds all outward Happinesse, What sweet Contentment do they find Who are admitted to possesse Such machlesse Pearles, so may we call them: For Precious is the least of all them. VVhich when I well considered My greife for outward crosses ceast, Being not much discouraged
Although afflictions still encreast, Knowing right well that Tribulacion No token is of Reprobacion. Another Song. EXcessive worldy Greife the Soule devouers And spoyles the activnesse of all the Powers, Through indposing them to exercise What shuld demonstrate their abilities, By practicll improvment of the same Unto the Glory of the givers name. Though Envy wait to blast the Blossoms green O any Ve tu soon as they are seen, Yet none may therfore just ocasion take To shun wha Vertu manifest should make, For like the Sun shall Vertu be beheld VVhen Clouds of Envy shal be quie dispeld; Though there be some o no dia at all Who no degree in worth can lower fall. Prefer'd before the Verteous whom they taunt Onely because of some apparent want, Which is as if a Weed withou defect Before the Damask Rose should have respect,
Because the Rose a leafe or two hath lost, And this the Weed of all his parts can boast; Or elce as if a monstrous Clout should be Prefer'd before the purest Lawn to see, Because the Lawn hath spots and this the Clout Is equally polluted thoroughout Therefore let such whose vertu favours merits, Shew their divinly magnanimious spirits By disregarding such their approbacion Who have the worthlesse most in estimacion, For who loves God above all things, not one Who understands not that in him alone All causes that may move affection are, Glimpses wherof his creatures doe declare, This being so, who can be troubled When as his gifts are undervalued, Seeing the giver of all things likewise For want o knowledg many underprise.
A Song composed in time of the Civill Warr, when the wicked did much insult over the godly. VVIth Sibells I cannot Devine Of future things to treat, Nor with Parnassus Virgins Nine Compose in Poëms neat Such mentall mocions which are free Concepcions of the mind, Which notwithstanding will not be To thoughts alone confind. With Deborah twere joy to sing When that the Land hath Rest, And when that Truth shall freshly spring, Which seemeth now deceast, But some may waiting for the same Go on in expectacion Till quick conceipt be out of frame, Or till Lifes expiracion. Therefore who can, and will not speak Betimes in Truths defence, Seeing her Foes their malice wreak, And some with smooth pretence
And colours which although they glose Yet being not ingraind, In time they shall their luster lose As cloth most foully staind. See how the Foes of Truth devise Her followers to defame. First by Aspersions false and Lies To kill them in good Name; Yet here they will in no wise cease But Sathans course they take To spoyl their Goods and Wealths increase, And so at Life they make. Such with the Devill further go The Soule to circumvent In that they seeds of Error sow And to false Worships tempt, And Scriptures falsly they apply Their Errors to maintain, Opposing Truth implicitly The greater side to gain. And to bind Soul and Body both To Sathans service sure Therto they many ty by Oath, Or cause them to endure The Losse of lightsom Liberty And suffer Confiscacion, A multitude they force therby To hazard their Salvacion.
Another sort of Enimies To Lady Verity, Are such who no Religion prise, But Carnall Liberty Is that for which they doe contest And venture Life and State, Spurning at all good meanes exprest, The force of Vice to bate. Yet these are they, as some conceit, Who must again reduce, And all things set in order strait Disjoynted by abuse, And wakeing witts may think no lesse if Fiends and Furies fell, May be supposd to have successe Disorders to expell. How-ever Truth to fade appeare, Yet can shee never fall, Her Freinds have no abiding here, And may seem wasted all; Yet shall a holy Seed remain The Truth to vindicate, Who will the wrongeds Right regain And Order elevate. VVhat time Promocion, Wealth, and Peace, The Owners shall enjoy, Whose Light shall as the Sun encrease Unto the perfect Day
Then shall the Earth with blessings flow, And Knowledg shall abound. The Cause that's now derided so, Shall then most just be found. Prophanesse must be fully grown, And such as it defend Must be ruind or overthrown, And to their place defend, The Sonns of strie their force must cease, Having fulfild their crime, And then the Son of wished peace Our Horizon will clime. That there are such auspicious dayes To come, we may not doubt, Because the Gospels splendant rayes Must shine the Word throughout: By Iewes the Faith shall be embrac't The Man of Sin must fall, New Babell shall be quite defac't With her devices all. Then Truth will spread and high appeare, As grain when weed ae gon, Which may the Sains afflicted cheare Oft thinking hereupon; Sith they hav union with that sort To whom all good is ty'd They can in no wise want support Though most severely try'd.
Another Song TIme past we understood by story The strength of Sin a Land to waste, Now God to manifest his Glory. The truth hereof did let us taste, For many years, this Land appears Of usefull things the Nursery, Refresht and fenc'd with unity. But that which crown'd each other Blessing Was evidence of Truth Divine, The Word of Grace such Light expressing, Which in some prudent Hearts did shine, Whose Flame inclines those noble minds To stop the Course of Prophanacion And so make way for Reformacion. But He that watcheth to devour, This their intent did soon discry, For which he strait improves his power This worthy work to nullify With Sophistry and Tiranny, His agents he forthwith did fill Who gladly execute his will. And first they prove by Elocution And Hellish Logick to traduce Those that would put in execucion, Restraint of every known abuse;
hey seperate and 'sturb the State, nd would all Order overthrow, he better sort were charged so. ch false Reports did fill all places, orrting some of each degree, whom the highest Title graces rom hearing slanders was not free, hich Scruple bred, and put the Head ith primest members so at bate hich did the Body dislocate. Lying Spirit mis-informed common peeple, who suppose things went on to be reformed ey should their ancient Customs lose, d beside to courses ty'd hich they nor yet their Fathers knew, d so be wrapt in fangles new. eat multitudes therefore were joyned Sathans plyant instruments, ith mallice, ignorance combined, d both at Truth their fury vents; st Piety as Enimy ey persecute, oppose, revile, en Freind as well as Foe they spoyle. e beuty of the Land's abollisht, h Fabericks by Art contriv'd, many of them quite demollisht, many of their homes depriv'd
Some mourn for freinds untimely ends, And some for necessaries saint, With which they parted by constraint. But from those storms hath God preserved A people to record his praise, Who sith they were therefore reserved Must to the heigth their Spirits raise To magnify his lenity, Who safely brought them through the fire To let them see their hearts desire Which many faithfull ones deceased With teares desired to behold, Which is the Light of Truth professed Without obscuring shaddowes old, When spirits free, not tyed shall be To frozen Forms long since compos'd, When lesser knowledg was disclos'd. VVho are preserv'd from foes outragious, Noteing the Lords unfound-out wayes, Should strive to leave to after-ages Some memorandums of his praise, That others may admiring say Unsearchable his judgments are, As do his works alwayes declare.
Meditacions The first Meditacion. THe Morning is at hand, my Soule awake, Rise from the sleep of dull security; Now is the time, anon 'twill be to late, Now hast thou golden opportunity For to behold thy naturall estate And to repent and be regenerate. Delay no longer though the Flesh thee tell, Tis time enough hereafter to repent, Strive earnestly such mocions to expell, Remember this try courage to augment The first fruits God requir'd for sacrifice, The later he esteemed of no price. First let's behold our natural estate How dangerous and damnable it is, And thereupon grow to exceeding hate With that which is the onely cause of this; The which is Sin, yea Disobedience Even that which was our first parents offence.
The reasonable Soule undoubtedly Created was at first free from offence, In Wisdom, Holinesse, and Purity, It did resemble th Divine Essence, Which being lost, the Soule of man became Like to the Serpent, causer of the same. The Understanding Will, Affections cleare, Each part of Soule and Body instantly Losing their purity, corrupted were Throughout as by a loathsom Leprocy The rayes o Vrtu were extinguisht quite And Vice usurpeth rule with force and might. This sudden change from sanctitude to sin Could but prognosticat a fearfull end, Immediatly the dollour did begin, The Curse that was pronounc'd, none might defend, Which Curse is in this life a part o some, The fulnesse thereof in the life to come. The Curse that to the Body common is The sence of Hunger, Thirst, of Sicknes, Pain: The Soules Callamities exceedeth this, A Tast of Hell, shee often doth sustain, Rebukes of Conscience, threatning plagues for sin, A world of Torments oft shee hath within.
Unlesse the Conscience dead and seared be, Then runs the soule in errors manifold, Her danger deep shee can in no wise see, And therefore unto every sin is bold, The Conscience sleeps, the Soule is dead in sin, Nere thinks of Hell untill shee comes therein. Thus is the Conscience of the Reprobate, Either accusing unto desperacion, Or elce benummed, cannot instigate Nor put the Soule in mind of reformacion; Both work for ill unto the castaway, Though here they spent their time in mirth and play. Yet can they have no sound contentment here, In midst of laughter oft the heart is sad: This world is full of woe & hellish feare And yeelds forth nothing long to make us glad As they that in the state of nature dy Passe but from misery to misery. Consider this my soule, yet not despaire, To comfort thee again let this suffice, There is a Well of grace, whereto repaire, First wash away thy foul enormities With teares proceeding from a contrite heart, With thy beloved sins thou must depart.
Inordinate affections, and thy Will, And carnall wisdom, must thou mortify, For why, they are corrupt, prophane and ill, And prone to nothing but impiety, Yet shalt thou not their nature quite deface, Their ruines must renewed be by grace. If that thou canst unfainedly repent, With hatred therunto thy sins confesse, And not because thou fearest punishment But that therby thou didst Gods Laws transgress Resolving henceforth to be circumspect, Desiring God to frame thy wayes direct. Each member of thy body thou dost guide, Then exercise them in Gods service most Let every part be throughly sanctifide As a meer Temple for the Holy Ghost; Sin must not in our mortall bodies raign It must expelled be although with pain Thou must not willingly one sin detain, For so thou mayst debarred be of blis, Grace with inniquity will not remain, Twixt Christ and Belial no communion is, Therefore be carefull every sin to fly, And see thou persevere in piety.
So mayst thou be perswaded certainly, Th Cure shall in no wise endanger thee, Although the body suffer misery Yet from these ond death thou shalt be free; They that are called here to Holinesse Are sure elected to eternall blisse. A Taste of blessednesse here shalt thou say, Thy Coscienc shall be at Tranquility, And in the Lie o com thou shalt enjoy The sweet fruii n of the Trinity, Society with Saints then shalt thou have, Which in this life thou didst so often crave. Let this then stir thee up to purity, Newnesse of life, and speedy Conversion, To Holinesse and to integrity, Make conscience of impure thoughts unknown Pray in the Spirit with sweet Contemplacion Be vigilant for to avoid Temptacion.
The Preamble. Amid the Oceon of Adversity, Neare whelmed in the Waves of sore Vexaion, Tormented with the Floods of Misery, And almost in the Gulfe of Despairacion, Neare destitute of Comfort, full of Woes, This was her Case that did the same compose: At length Jehovah by his power divine, This great tempestious Storm did mittigate. And cause the Son of Righteousnesse to shine Ʋpon his Child that seemed desolate, Who was refreshed, and that immediatly, And Sing as follows with alacrity. The second Meditacion. THe storm of Anguish being over-blown, To praise Gods mercies now I may have space, For that I was not finally orethrown, But was supported by his speciall grace; The Firmament his glory doth declare,Psal. 19.1 Yet over all his works, his mercies are.Psal, 145.9 The Contemplacion of his mercies sweet, Hath rav shed my Soule with such delight Who to lament erst while was onely meet, Doth now determine to put griefe to flight, Being perswaded, hereupon doth rest, Shee shall not be forsaken though distrest.
Gods Favour toward me is hereby proved, For that he hath not quite dejected me; VVhy then, though c ostes be not yet removed Yet so seasoned with pacience they be, As they excite me unto godlinesse, The onely way to endlesse happinesse. Wch earthly muckworms can in no wise know Being of the Holy Spirit destitute, They savour onely earthly things below; Who shall with them of saving Grace dispute, Shall find them capable of nothing lesse Though Christianity they do professe. Let Esaus porcion fall unto these men, The Fatnesse of the Earth let them possesse No other thing they can desire then, Having no taste of Heavens happinesse, They care not for Gods Countenance so bright, Their Corn and Wine and Oyle is their delight. To compasse this and such like is their care, But having past the period of their dayes, Bereft of all but miseries they are, Their weet delight with mortall life decayes, But godlinesse is certainly great gain,. Tim. 6.6 Immortall blisse they have, who it retain. They that are godly and regnerate, Endu'd with saving Knowledg, Faith, and Love, When they a future blisse premeditate,
It doth all bitter passion quite remove; Though oft they feel the wnt of outward things Their heavenly meditacions, comfort brings. They never can be quite disconsolate, Because they have the onely Comforter Which doth their minds alway illuminate, And make them fleshly p easures much abhorr, For by their inward light they plainly ee How vain all transitory pleasures bee. Moreover, if they be not only voyd Of earthly pleasures and commodities, But oftentimes be greivously an oyd With sudry kinds of great Calammities, Whether it be in Body, Goods, or Name, With pacience they undergo the same. And why? because they know and be aware That all things wok together for the best, To them that love the Lord and ca led are,Ro. 8 28. According to his purpose, therefore blest Doubtlesse they be, his knowledg that obtain, No Losse may countervail their blessed Gain. Which makes them neither murmor not repine When God is pleasd with Crosses them to try, who out of darknesse caused light to shine.2 Cor 4.6. Can raise them Comfort out of Misery They know right well and therefore are content To beare with pacience any Chastisment.
This difference is betwixt the good and bad; When as for sin the godly scourged are, And godly Sorrow moves them to be sad, These speeches or the like they will declare: O will the Lord absent himselfe for ever? Will he vouchsafe his mercy to me never? VVhat is the cause I am afflicted so? The cause is evident I do perceive. My Sins have drawn upon me all this woe, The which I must confesse and also leave, Then shall I mercy find undoubtedly,Pro. 28.13. And otherwise no true prosperity. Whilst sin hath rule in me, in vain I pray, Or if my Soule inniquity affects, If this be true, as tis, I boldly say, The prayer of the wicked, God rejects;Pro. 15, 8. If in my heart I wickednesse regard How can I hope my prayer shall be heard.Psal. 66 If I repent, here may I Comfort gather, Though in my prayers there be weaknesse much Christ siteth at the right hand of his Father To intercede and make request for such,Rom. 8.33 Who have attained to sincerity, Though somthing hindered by infirmity. I will forthwith abandon and repent, Not onely palpable inniquities, But also all alowance or consent
To sinfull mocions or infirmities; And when my heart and wayes reformed be, God will with-hold nothig that's good from me So may I with the Psalmist truly say,Psal. 84. Tis good for me that I ave been afflicted, Before I troubled was, I went astray,Psal 119 But now to godlinesse I am ad cted; If in Gods Lawes I had not took delight, I in my troubles should have perisht quite. Such gracious speeches usually proceed From such a Spirit that is Sanctifide, Who strives to know his own defects and need And also seekes to have his wants supplide; But certainly the wicked do not so As do their speeches and distempers show. At every crosse they murmor, vex and fret, And in their pssion often will they ay, How am I with Calamities best! I think they will mee utterly destray, The cause hereof I can in no wise know But that the Destinies will have it so Unfortunate am I and quite forlorn, Oh what disastrous Chance befalleth me! Vnder some hurtfull Plannet I was born That will (I think) my Confusion be, And there are many wickeder then I Who never knew the like adversity.
These words do breifly show a carnall mind Polluted and corrupt with Ignorance, Where godly Wisdom never yet hath shin'd For that they talk of Destiny or Chance; For if Gods Power never can abate, He can dispose of that he did crate If God alone the True Almighty be As we beleive, acknowledg, and confesse, Then supream Governor likewise is he Disposing all things, be they more or lesse; The eyes of God in every place do see The good and bad, and what their actions bee. The thought hereof sufficeth to abate My heavinesse in great'st extremity, When Grace unto my Soul did intimate That nothing comes by Chance or Destiny, But that my God and Saviour knowes of all That either hath or shall to me befall VVho can his servants from all troubles free And would I know my Crosses all prevent, But that he knowes them to be good for me Therefore I am resolv'd to be content, For though I meet with many Contradictions Yet Grace doth alwayes sweeten my Afflictions.
The third Meditacion. FAint not my Soule, but wait thou on the Lord Though he a while his answer may suspend, Yet know (according to his blessed word) He will vouchsafe refreshing in the end, Yea though he seem for to withdraw his grace, And doth not alwaies show his pleasing face. As by the Sun, though not still shining bright, We do enjoy no small Commodity, Whilst that the day is govern'd by his Light, And other works of Nature testify His wonderfull and rare Effects alwayes, Though often vayled be his shining rayes. So it is no small mercy, though we see Gods Countenance not alwaies shining bright, That by the same our minds enlightned be, And our affections guided by that Light, And whilst the winter-fruits as it were we find In Pacience, Sufferings, and Peace of mind. Then let it not be told in Ashkelon, Neither in Gath let it be published, That those that seek the Lord and him alone In any case should be discouraged, Lest it rejoyce the wicked this to see, Who think the wayes of grace unpleasant be.
Where as they are most pleasant, sweet, and fair Yeilding delights which onely satisfy Our minds, which else transported are with care And rstlesse wandrings continually, But those that do no taste hereof attain Seek rather for content in pleasures vain. When Kain had lost the happy harmony, He by a peace ull Conscience might enjoy His nepew ball then most skillfully Invented Musik, thereby to convey Unto the outward eare some melody, But no true joy come; to the heart thereby. For it is onely a Certificate Brought by Gods Spirit from the Throne of Grace That may delight the Soule Regenerate, Which certifies her of her happy case, That shee's already in a gracious state, Which will in endlesse glory consummate. Again, the blessed Soule may take delight, To think on Sions great prosperity, In that the Gospell long hath shined bright, Sustaining no Eclips by Heresy, So that the meanes of knowledg is so free, Gods Worship rightly may performed be. If then my Soule, the Lord thy Porcion be Delight'st his Word and sacred Covenants Wherby his Graces are conveyed to thee, As Earnests of divine inheritance,
And which may cause tru comfort to abound Thy Lot is fallen in a plasant ground, Then let not any trouble thee dismay Seeing the Light of Grace to thee hath shon The sable Weed of Sadnesse lay away, And put the Garment of alvacion on. With chearfullnesse, Gods blessings entertain Let not the object of thy mirth be vain, Which as a Cloud would stop the influence Of that true Light that doth the Soule refine And prediposeth it through lively sence To that eternall brightnesse most divine; Then cheifly to admit that joy, accord, Which commeth by the Favour of the Lord. God's Favour ever highly estimate, As the prime motive of tru happinesse, VVhereof, since that thou didst participate, In Life or Death, feare no kind of distresse; VVhen humane help sha l fayl thee utterly Then is Gods saving opportunity. Deadnesse of spirit that thou mayst avoyd, The lively means of godlynesse embrace, And cease not seeking though thou be delayd, But wait till God do manifest his grace, For thy deliverance, prefix no day, But paciently the Lords due leisure stay.
The fourth Meditacion. ALas my Soule, oft have I sought thy Peace, But still I find the contrary encrease, Thou being of a froward disposicion, Perceivest not thy mercyfull Physician Doth give thee forhy health these strong purgacions So may we call out daily molestacions, VVhich how to beare, that thou mayst understand Take heed of two extreams under Gods hand, The one is, too light takeing thy Distresse, The other's, hopelesse Greife or Pensivenesse; Between these two, observe with heedfull eye A middle course or mediocrity; Consider for the first, if one correct His Child, who seemeth it to disrespect, VVarding the blow or setting light therby, How is he beat again deservedly; So if that thou should'st seem to disregard, The Chastisments of God, or seek to ward The same by wayes or meanes impenitent, How just shall God renew thy punishment: If Physick for our Bodies health be tane, VVe hinder not the working of the same, Strong Physick if it purge not, putrifies, And more augments then heales our malladies, And as is syd, our manifold Temptacions, Are nothing but thy scouring Purgacions,
VVherin a dram too much, hath not admission, Confected by so Skilfull a Physician VVho will not have their bitternesse abated, Till thy ill humors be evacuated; Then loose it down for thy Humilliacion, And hinder not its kindly Opperacion, As thou mayst by untimely voyding it By vain contentments, which thou mayst admit, VVhich makes us drive repentant thoughts away, And so put far from us the Evill day; But that content which is by such meanes got Is like cold water, tane in fevers hot, VVhich for the present, though it seem to ease, Yet after it encreaseth the disease; But thou dost rather unto Grief incline, At Crosses therfore, subject to repine, Supposing oft, thy present troubles are Intolerable, and thy bane declare; VVhilst thou for this, thy selfe dost maserate Dispair unto thee doth intimate, That none hath been afflicted like to thee, Unparaleld thy visitacions bee; The by-waies being thus discovered, Endeavour in the right way to be led, With tru Repentance, hope of pardon joine, Deny thy selfe, and trust for help divine, Seek first with God in Christ to be at peace, Who onely can thy Tribulacion cease, For he that laid the Rod (affliction) on, The power hath to pull it off alone;
Twere but in vain for one that were in debt, To see the Officers a discharg to get, Till with his Creditor he doth agree He cannot walk out of his danger free; So vain are they, which think their course is sure, When in the use of meanes they rest secure, Whereas if God his blessing doth restrain VVe by the creature can no help attain: Though it hath pleased God out of his grace, Naturall caues over things to place. Yet keeps he to himselfe, (blest be his name) The staffe and operacion of the same; Then do not think my Soule to find redresse By meanes of Freinds, or by self Skilfulnesse, But rather all created helps deny, Save as they serve for God to work thereby: Now forasmuch as God is just alone, Know, without cause he hath afflicted none, Sith without doubt, his wayes so equall be, For som great fault he thus correcteth thee, Therfore to lowest thoughts thy self retire, To seek the cause that moved God to ire. Which when thou findest, whatsoere it be As thy right hand or eye so dear to thee, Resolve for ever to abandon it, Be watchfull lest the same thou recommit, Renew thy Covenant with God, and vow In the remainder of thy dayes, that thou Wilt walk before him with an upright heart If for that end his grace be on thy part,
If when hereto thou dost thy forces try, In them thou find a disability, Then look to Christ, who doth thy weaknesse veiw And of compassion will thy strength renew, From him alone thou myst that grace derive Which like a Cordial or Restorative, Will strengthen and repair thy faculties, Which else are dead to holy exercise, Twill make thy Understanding apprehend God as a Father, who in Love doth send Correction to his Children when they stray, When without check the wicked take their sway; This grace once tasted, so affects the will, As it forsaketh that which cannot fill; The well of living waters, to frequent, Can onely fill the Soule with tru content; The memory it doth corroberate, To keep a store, the Soule to animate, Gods precious promises the treasures be, Which memory reserves to comfort thee; The over-flowings of this grace divine To goodnesse the affections will encline, Turning the hasty current of thy love From things below, unto those things above, Seeing it is the grace of Christ alone, Which makes the Soule to be with God at one, Endeavour for it, give thy selfe no rest, Till feelingly thereof thou be possest.
The fifth Meditacion. SUch is the force of each created thing, That it no solid happinesse can bring, Which to our minds may give contentments sound For like as Noahs Dove no succour found, Till shee return'd to him that sent her out, Just so the Soule in vain may seek about, For rest or satisfaction any where, Save in his presence, who hath sent her here. Gods omnipresence I do not deny, Yet to the Faithfull he doth spec'ally, Alone his gracious presence evidence, VVho seeing all true blessings flow from thence, Are troubled onely when he hides his Face, Desiring still to apprehend his Grace, This Grace of God is taken diversly And first it doth his Favour signify, That independent Love of his so free, Which mov'd him to his mercyfull Decree, His Merum beneplacitum it is That's motive of all good conferd on his: The fruits of this his Love or Favour deare, Are likewise called Graces every where, Election and Redempcion, graces are, And these his Favour cheifly do declare.
Faith, Hope, Repentance, Knowledg, and the rest, Which do the new Creac'on manifest, Now these are counted Grace habituall. And lastly, this the Grace of God we call, His actuall Assistance on our side, VVherby we overcome when we are tride; How ever then the word is understood Grace is the cheif desirable good. Tis Summum bonum; is it so? for why? Because without it no Prosperity, Or earthly Honours, in the high'st degree, Can make one truly happy sayd to be, For as we might their miseries condole Who should inhabit neare the Northern-Pole, Though Moon & Stars may there apear most bright Yet while the Sun is absent, still tis night, And therfore barren, cold, and comfortlesse, Vnfit for humane creatures to possesse: More fruitlesse, empty comfort is the Mind, Who finds the Sun of Righteousnesse declind, Yea, though all earthly glories should unite Their pomp and splendor, to give such delight, Yet could they no more sound contentment bring Then Star-light can make grasse or flowers spring; But in that happy Soule that apprehends His Loving kindnesse, (which the Life transcends) There is no lack of any thing that may Felicity or tru delight convey; As whilst the Sun is in our Hemisphere, We find no want of Moon nor Star-light cleare,
So where the Fountain of tru Light displayes Hnes, there is no need of borrow'd joyes, For wre he is who made all things of nought, Te  presence still resh joyes are wrought Nor ed he elp to mke a happy one, Sith all pefection is in him alone, Grant thn hi Grac is most to be desir'd And nothig else to be so much requir'd; But here a carnall crew are to be blam'd, By whom the Grace of God so much is nam'd Who are experienc'd in nothing lesse As do their course and practises expesse, For though they say the Grace of God's worth all Yet will they hazzard i for Trifles small, Heref they'll put you out of all suspicion VVhen Gods Grace coms with mens in competicion For holy duties lightly such neglects, Whereby Gods Love is felt with its effects, The favour of a mortall man to gain Though but a shew thereof he do attain, And that perhaps for some employment base VVhich one cannot perform and keep tru Grace, Therefore tis probable, how ere they prate, Gods Grace they value at too low a rate For to be purchast by them, sith they leave Their hold of it, a shaddow to receave; But they that do in truth of heart professe That they have found this Pearle of Blessednesse Will not adventure it for any thing, Whatever good it promiseth to bring,
Because they know the choisest quintesence Of earthly pleasures greatest confluence, Cannot procure that sweet blissefull peace Which from Gods Favour ever takes encrease; Yet many times it comes to passe we see, Tat those who have tru grace so senslesse be Of it, that they in seasons of distresse, Abundance of impacience do expresse, But tis their sin, and brings an ill report Upon their cheifest Comfort, Strength, and Fort; Such therefore should endeavour paciently, To beare whatever crosse upon themly, And that by strength of this consideracion Tha they have need of this theyr tribulacion It may be to mind them of some offence Which they committed have (perhaps) long since Yet they remaine unhumbled for it,1 Pet 1.6. Or elce (may be) some Duty they omit, In which remissive course they will remain, Till with a Rod they be brought home again; Or if they would consider how they prove The Lords great Pacience towards them, and Love In wayting for theyr turning to his wayes, They would not think so greivous of delayes, Of restitucion to that solace sound, VVhich in the sence of Grace is ever found, VVhich whoso will in Heart and Life preserve, These following directions must observe; The first is, to purge out inniquities VVith all that might offend Gods puer eyes,
The next is, to have Faith in Christ, and Love Of God, and that which he doth best approve; Humility must likewise have a place In them that will be sure of tru Grace,Iam. 4.6 Then there must be sincear Obedience To all Jehovah's just Commandements, For God will manifest himself to those, Who by Obedience, Love to him disclose.Ioh. 14 Now lastly, that which fits one to embrace The sence of God's exceeding Love and Grace Is skilfulnesse in that most blessed Art Of walking with the Lord with upright heart, That is to manage all things heedfully, As in the veiw of Gods omniscient eye, And so, by consequence, by Faith to joyne In union with the Trinity divine; This is the very life of happynesse, Which one may feel far better then expresse: But lest whilst being wrapt above my sphere, ith sweetnesse of the Theame, I should appeare Quite to forget the nature of a Song, nd to some this might seem over-long, y thoughts theyr workings, speedily suspends, nd at this time my Meditacion ends. Finis.
Verses on the twelvth Chapter of Ecclesiastes. ALl Earthly Glories to theyr periods post, As those that do possesse them may behod, Who therfore should not be at too much cost With that which fades so soon, dies & growes old But rather minde him in their youthfull dayes, Who can give glory which shall last alwayes. Ere Light of Sun or Moon or Stars expire, Before the outward sence eclipsed be, VVhich doth direct the heart for to admire These works of God which obvious are to see, The Fabrick of the Earth, the Heavens high, Are to the mind discoverd by the eye. Again, before the strong men, low shall bow, And they that keep the house shall tremble sore Ere natures force be spent, or quite out-flow; And wonted courage shall be found no more, VVhen weaknesse shall each part emasculae And make the stoutest heart effeminate.
Moreover, ere the grinders shall be few VVhich for concoction doth the food prepare, And Dames of musick shall be brought so low That for their melody none much shall care; Harsh and unpleasant, then the voyce shall bee The breast being not from obstructions free. Also before that, causlesse feares arise, By reason of much imbecility, Conceit of harmes will in the way surprise Such feeble ones, which would from shadowes fly VVhen chilling Frost of sad decrepid age, The force of vitall vigour shall aswage. The Almond Tree shall blossoms then declare, Gray hairs presage to them the end is nigh, Naturall heat havin no more repaire, Desires fayle, as flames wanting fuell, dy, Noting remayning whey strength s suppli'd The marrow wasted, and the moysture dri'd. And ere the ler cod e loose and weak, Before the ven be stopt, and sinews shrink And  or Picher break, e  for want of spirit shrink The e whereas he animals reside, Now full of maadies, and upyfide.
The Body thus out-worn and quite decayd, The dust returneth to the Earth again; To God who gave it, is the Soul convayd VVho doth with it as be did preodain, How ever som to vent their falacy Conclude the Soul doth with the Body dy. VVhich if were truth why did our Saviour say? Feare him not which the Body kils alone,Mat 10 And hath no might the Soul for to destray, If with the one the other must be gone; But that they may declare impostors skill Twixt Soul and Spirit they distinguish wi l. The Soul (say they) doth with the Body dy, Then there's a third part which they Spirit call, VVho doth return to God immediatly Leaving the Dead till judgment generall, And then returning breathing doth infuse In Soul and Body, wherby life ensus. For which they have no Sripture (I suppose) Save what they wrest unto theyr own Perdicion, As this, where 'tis said, the word with power goes Twixt Soul & Spirit by divine commission Twixt joynts and marow it doth penetrate,Hb. 4.12. Seeing all secrets, heart can meditate.
The joynts and marrow of the Body be Not sev'rall species, but of kind the same, The Body to support, each part agree, And ev'ry member hath its sev'rall name; So Soul and Spirit is one entire thing, Immortall by the vertu of its Spring. More texts of Scripture these Deceivers wrest, Which should be answered, Truth for to defend; But seeing here I have so long digrest, What I begun, I hasten now to end, Which is to stir up youth their God to mind, Before effects of evill dayes they find All here is vanity the Preacher sayes, Yea use of many books are wearisome, If cheifly don for self-respect or prayse It doubtlesse will to such a snare become: Of all the matter, then the End let's hear, Keep Gods commandements with son-like fear, FINIS.
