C5506 11880482 50308
A Continuation of M. JOHN-AMOS-COMENIVS School-Endeavours. OR A Summary Delineation of Dr. CYPRIAN KINNER Silesian His Thoughts concerning Education: OR The Way and Method of Teaching. Exposed to the ingenuous and free Censure of all Piously-learned men. The which shal shortly be seconded with an Elucidarium or Commen∣tary to open the Sense of whatsoever is herein contained, chiefly of what is paradoxall and obscure, (if any such shall appear to be.) Together with an Advice how these Thoughts may be succesfully put in Practice. Translated out of the Original Latine, trans∣mitted to Sam. Hartlib: and by him published, and in the name of many very Godly and Learned Men, recom∣mended to the serious Consideration, and liberall Assistance, of such, as are willing to favour the Reformation of all Christian Churches and Common-wealths: but more especially the Good and Happines of these United Kingdoms. Published by Authority. Printed for R L. in Monks-well street.
A Brief Information concerning Doctor Kinner and his Ʋndertakings. WHen we look upon the ways of most men now adays we see, that although many have a spe∣ciall esteem of Learning, and cry it up highly in those who have attain'd thereunto: yet few there are that have any great Zeal to propa∣gate it unto others: and of those few whose affections may lye somewhat that way, in a whole Age, hardly shall wee find one or two, who are willing to neglect themselves to doe service unto others, or casting themselves upon Divine Providence, to postpose wholy their private and single Interests, unto the Publike Good of many, therefore when it pleaseth God to raise up and put forth such Publike Spirits, as sometimes he doth offer, for a blessing to the Society of Mankinde; all others, that have any true love to Vertue, and esteem of Learning, or with Uprightness favour Pub∣like Enterprizes: should appear on their behalf, to give them that encouragement, which may bring the Works whereunto God hath fitted them, unto some perfection. For hereunto God doth call us, by the offer of such opportunities, namely, that in the Communion of Saints we should appeare for the advancement of his Kingdome, that the things, which neither we nor any one can do by himself a∣lone, all of us according to our ability, should joyntly promote, as members of each other; to shew that we have a love to the Body of Christ, and would gladly be helpers unto the Truth, and the mani∣festation of the Glory of our God therein. Such an opportunity is
now afforded unto us in the Person of one Doctor Cyprian Kinner, a Man of singularly eminent gracious and naturall Parts, and of a very Publike Spirit, who by birth being of very honest parents, and well educated in Silesia, hath had from his youth, a speciall inclinati∣on to advance that part of Learning, which is the foundation of all the rest, and without which all the other parts will be obstructed and remain imperfect both in Church and Common-wealth; that is, the right Education of Children, to bring their Scholasticall Studies un∣to some regular course and perfection. A Work which every where to the great prejudice of Christianity, and the whole state of Hu∣mane Felicity, is much neglected, which for this very cause ought so much the more to be minded by generous and noble Spirits, who seek not themselves, but the Glory of God in all their wayes. And although at first, the aforesaid Doctor Kinner, did meet with the or∣dinary difficulties, which attend Publike Undertakings; namely, little encouragement from any; and no support for livelihood in fol∣lowing these Studies; Yet he left not off his Designe to prosecute the same; but that he might have a subsistence with more comfort then by the way of Schooling could be obtained: he did betake him∣self unto the Studies of Law and Physick, which ordinarily in those Parts, yield a plentifull livelihood unto those that follow them. And having soon by the eminencie and vigour of his naturall abilities, made himself perfect therein, he took the Degree of Doctor in both those Faculties, and in processe of time through Gods blessing upon him in those ways; hee was in great esteem amongst all that knew him: and especially honoured by the Duke of Brieg and Lignits, who made him one of his Privy Counsellors: and by his favour and his own merits having married a Lady of great wealth: he did reas∣sume his Designe of advancing the Reformation of Schools, and the Education of Children, and having an Extraordinary Zeal for that publike Work: he did set apart of his Ladies estate, with her con∣sent, the sum of 12000 Rixdollers (which doth amount to more then 2000 and 600 li. sterling) which was dedicated to entertaine a Correspondency with Learned men on that subject, & to ripen and
pubish his Thoughts to the World concerning the same, but hee had not been long upon that course, when it pleased God to dis∣appoint those purposes, by the comming in of the Imperiall Army into Silesia, by whose cruelty he being dispoiled of his whole estate, was drivn out of his Countrey into exile with his Lady, and Fami∣ly where he hath wrestled many yeers with the difficulties incident to that state: hardly maintaining himself, sometimes by being em∣ploy'd in Civill Affaires, sometimes by applying himself unto the practice of Physick. Amongst other places he did passe sometime of his Exile in Transylvania and Hungaria; where his acquaintance with Master Alstedius, and Master Bisterfeld, and other Learned men of chief note, and his constant Zeal to promote the Reformation of Schooling; did cause many upon the report of their esteeme of his thoughts & endevours on that subject, to take speciall notice of him; and amongst others M. Comenius (who was by the liberality of a pri∣vate Gentleman maintain'd, and set apart to further the same De∣signe) having gotten information of him: and what his inclinations and abilities were to be helpfull in the work, which he had in hand, did invite him to come unto him in Prussia, that they might joyne their thoughts and endevours together for the Advancement of their Common Aimes: which Doctor Kinner did readily condescend un∣to, and after a yeare or two, when by their mutuall communications and joint labours, they had ripened severall matters (which will shortly come to light) Master Comenius was called away by the Mo∣ravian-Bohemian Church at Lesno, where now he is, and Doctor Kinner being taken off from his private way of subsistence, and en∣gaged upon the Object of his publike thoughts, is left alone in Prus∣sia at Dantzick, to depend upon Providence. Whiles Mr. Comenius was with him he had a share in that which was allowed unto him for his maintenance, but he now being gone, Doctor Kinner is left in a great straight; On the one side, his zealous affection and love to so necessary a Work, wherein he hath made so great progresses, draws him to apply himself wholly unto it; on the other side, his want of necessary means to subsist, and to be able to publish that which he
already hath done, doth draw him from it to employ himselfe to other private employments. Between these two extremities, not knowing what the Providence of God will finde out and ordain for him, he hath cast himselfe upon it, and offering his endeavours before all to the publike, hee hath engaged himselfe by a Vow unto God (which is the strongest assu∣rance he can give of his faithfulnes) to dedicate his whole time to the prosecuting of the Designe, whereof the Summary is herewith ad∣joyned; if God will be pleased to continue, for a yeare or two, his life, and procure him assistance therein; which desire of his doth de∣serve so much the more encouragement from all such as love to have a hand in publike works of so great use and importance, by how much it is modest and reasonable, for he wisheth onely for subsistence, so long till the Commentary or some larger Exposition of the Heads of matters contained in the Summary can be published, that the Godly∣wise who favour such Publike Enterprizes, may be able to judge how serviceable his Worke and Abilities may be to the ways of Reformation, and whether or no the rest of his life should not be set apart for the full accomplishment thereof. If this much onely at first may be obteined by the publike heartednesse of such which wish well to the advancement of Gods glory, and are not unwilling to contribute some liberall help which they can spare towards the most likely and effectuall wayes, which as yet have been offered for the right framing of Childrens studies to the readie attainment of vertue and knowledge. If (I say) this way be obtained, it will be a great advantage unto a further propagation of Christs Kingdom, and a speciall comfort in these evill times, unto faithfull souls that shall not withdraw their hands from giving assistance thereunto, for they shall have a share in the honour of repairing the Walls of our desolate Jerusalem, and be registred amongst those that have laid the foundations of many Generations.
The Summary Delineation of Doctor CYPRIAN KINNER, To the Courteous READER. HOw these Aphorisms cōcerning the Method of Instruction were begotten in me, thou shalt shortly know, when they shall again be expo∣sed to thy View in a new habit, and cleered of all strangenesse, obscurity, and Impossibi∣lity by a peculiar Commentary or Elucida∣rium. There (Thou Reader that lovest the studie of Education whosoever thou art) shalt be inform'd of that, and many other things besides, and shalt be also entreated to give thy free Censure upon them. The Reason why I forestall with this apart, the Edition of those other things, is, That (forasmuch as the Commentary when perfected will be of a larger Bulke then I hoped, and hath also met with unexpected hinderances) I might in the meane time have Copies to communicate to such Friends as desired them, and that this, (how little soever it be) may by giving thee notice of the Designe, by little and little prepar thee for a more mature Censure thereupon. For having once published the said Commentary it is not my Intention to attempt any thing else of this Nature, till I shall be confirmed by the Votes of Piously-learned men, that it will be worth the while to proceed. For whatsoever I have done, must according to it's deserts either stand or full, yea perish, by the Censure of such persons. But be pleased to understand these few things before-hand, viz. that the drift of my Invention for Teachiug is, That all Things Necessary to
be known may be instilled into Learners without the troublesome getting of things by heart, without the usuall confused multitude of Books, and without the ill Custome of Dictations, by the only meer help of sensible Objects, and by Talk, and Exercise both serious and by way of sport and pastime, with so much firmnesse (as I believe) that nothing thereof shall easily be forgotten, with that soundnesse and certainty, that no man shall easily refuse it, and in that fulnesse and plenty that nothing either neces∣sary or usefull (especially of Things Domestick and Usefull) can be fur∣ther desired, Moreover, with that simplicity and plainnese, that all A∣ges, Wits, Dispositions and Sects may be indifferently admitted unto this Method. For it propoundeth nothing, but what every man may with his owne Senses truly and properly conceive as an Ens or a Thing in being; and apprehend it as true, by his own Mother knowledge, aud also by In∣bred Instinct, desire it as Good. The Convenience, Possibility, and every Processe of this Method, I shall as shortly as I said before, more fully represent in that Elucidarium or Commentary. In the mean time these lines I hope may suffice, to the more apprehen∣sive Judges of things, and such as are pleased, with a succinct, com∣pleat brevity. For those men understanding beyond what they read, will looking through the whole Designe, easily see what is behinde, and with∣out any difficulty, know the Lion by this print of his Paw. Farewell.
In the name of GOD. IN my way of Teaching School, I aime at three Marks Piety, Learning, and Civill Prudence. 2 To the hitting of each Mark (or obtaining of each end) I assigne certain steps, to every step, certain tasks, each of which task's, comprehends certain lessons. I in∣tend also herewithall a Directory how to order the Formes in my Schools, how to speak to my Scholars in each lesson, and how to fa∣cilitate the Impression or Remembrance of them. 3 For the Implantation of Piety, I make three steps. viz. The taking Men off from the love of the World, Resignation of their own love, and exercise in the love of God. 4 Under the love of the World are contained Pleasure, Riches and Honour, under Self-love, Wisdom, Strength and Life: under the love of God, Faith, Hope, and Obedience. 5 My Scholars therefore by and by after their first admittance must be taught, led and accustomed to avoid the former, to disesteem the other, and to make much of the latter. In the practice whereof the degrees thereof being still observed, they are to be held and kept, not only, during the whole course of their Instruction; but their whole life also. 6 Towards the obtaining of Learning. I appoint three steps; viz. three for the knowledge of Things, three for the framing of Words, and three for directiou of the Thoughts and Conceptions of the minde. 7 Having first ranked all Things into proper Classes I teach their Marks or Signatures, their Frame or Structure, with their Vertues and Operations that every Novice-learner may understand what
every Thing is, what they contain, and what they do, (that is where∣unto they serve.) 8 Having taught to pronounce the words first in the Mother tongue signifying each Thing, I shew next how to shape the Chara∣cter or Letter signifying those words, then their setting together so as to make a compleat Language, and lastly, the use of this language towards the learning of any other. That the Learner hereby may know, how to communicate his Thoughts to the absent, and par∣take of theirs, and to draw out of both Ancient and Modern Au∣thors, whatsoever of humane and divine knowledge is contain'd in their writings. 9 Touching the Conceptions of the minde (Which are to be know∣ingly applyed to Things) I teach how to guide the proceedings of the Invention, Judgement upon, and Order of them; That my Au∣ditors may know how to finde out unknown Things, to distinguish the doubtfull, and to put in order the confused and distracted. 10 In the first step or degree to learning (as I said before) I ex∣pound the Marks or Signatures of Things, first naming them when brought to our sight in our Mother tongue, then describing the out∣ward habit as well totall as particular of each, and that by its three∣fold accidents: Lastly, teaching them to apprehend them distinctly, by some one or more differentiall characters. 11 I shew Naturall Things in the living book of Nature; Things Artificiall in the Shops and Work-houses of their Makers, & both of them in the Repositories of their figures, & representatiōs wch belong to our School, where I shew them either living or carved, (yet as neere the life as may be) or at least painted. As for Things Divine (so many of them as are expedient to be known) I fetch them, and explain there of out of Holy Scripture. Lastly, I compare the Marks of one Thing with those of another, shewing what Things do alto∣gether, what do more or lesse according to some particular respects, and what do not at all agree in their said marks or signatures. So as their outward likeness or unlikeness, may be more cleerly knowne, may stick more fast in the memory, and that the way may be laid, to
look into the conformity and deformity of their fabrick or structure. 13 In the second step, I explicate the frame and structure of Things, and first Analytically, or by taking them in pieces, wherein I divide them (first known by their outward Marks) into their Inte∣gral parts, as also Things naturall into their parts, Essentiall and Acci∣dentall; So that in the former, the Artifice of their Mechanicall connexion, and in the other the proportion of Elements mixt, wher∣of they are made, and so the very ground and species of their outward Marks, may be set before our Eyes and the causes of their subsist∣ance durability and operations, may be rightly rendred. 14 Then Synthetically or by way of Composition, where I shew to the very eye how Nature, Art and God himself, produce their works (each of them his own) by designing them, doing and undo∣ing them, that the Learner may know how to imitate, make or change any thing, that is lawfull, profitable or necessary. 15 At length Syncritically, or by comparing the structure of Things together, and shewing what Things doe agree, either in their, Active or Passive Principles, or in their Organicall parts, either throughout, partly, or not at all, so that there inward likenesse, or unlikeness may appeare also, and the way laid by these structures of Things to know their Vertues, as before by the Signatures to know their Structure. 16 In the third step I teach the Vertues and operative Faculties of Things, and first of all I teach in generall, how by their signature and structure (found out as before and considered together) to know their strength and powers (viz: of Things Naturall, as they are quick∣ned by such or such a spirit, of Things Artificiall, as they are so or so used, by the work-men; of Things Divine as they are thus or thus applied by men) as also the motions, arising from their said Powers, their effects from their Motions, and lastly their Uses and service in the world. 17 Then I expound in speciall what effects all things worke up∣on their Countercopy Man in particular, who is the Ruler, Conque∣ror, and Moderator of them all, and how they conduce either to Food
or Medicine, to Clothing or Housing or to Delight or Information. 18 Then in a yet more especiall manner, I shew how that Man and only him, containes within himself, the vertue of all other things in the world, and that he is furnished with various abilities, to understand, imitate or change any of them, so that he is a true Mi∣crocosme, and an expresse Image of the Macrocosme, yea of God the Creator himselfe. 19 In the fourth step I teach the way of representing by Chara∣cters, the words of our Mother tongue, and how to pronounce them, so represented, teaching my Scholars how first to fashion lines, whereof afterwards letters are made, then the whole letters themselves, lastly, syllables arising from the composition of letters, and then they are to pronounce, or sound those letters and syllables, and to find them up and down, in books of severall prints, always proceeding from the more simple and easie lines, letters and syllables, by the more compounded, to the most compound, and complexed of all. 20 Then I set my Scholars so long exercised in spelling, till they can do it extempore, to write and pronounce whole words, still obser∣ving the former graduall way of proceeding from the most Sim∣ple to the most Compound; and I make them dwell so long upon this Exercise, till they can readily read and write any word not only by copying it, but without any Copy by heart also. 21 And because Arithmeticall cyphers are numbring words I teach to write and to pronounce them also, and to tell the valew of many of them, placed in a certaine order, which we call Numeration. 22 In the fift step I teach how to draw all these words so known a part, into a compleat language, either to be written or spoken, and that materially, formally, or contextually, by putting all words of a kind into Classes by themselves, then he wing those Classes til they become fit to lye in a well ordered fabrick, and lastly, by erecting an Edifice of these so prepared materials. 23 For the materiall constitution I have designed an Exemplary Dictionary, wherein are first placed all words Radicall, whether de∣clinable
or not, as also additionall particles, whether to be joyned, either before or behind with any of them. This I intend shall be done Parissyllabically, so as all the Monosylables shall goe before the by syllables, or words of two syllables follow, and after them the trisyllables if any be. Among the declinable, the Nounes shall lead the Van, the Verbes be in the middle and the particles partaking of both, bring up the Reare. Moreover, of the declinables, those of the same declension shall stand by themselves in order, according to the divers prerogatives of their Terminations, Genders and other re∣lations. 24 After this I lay down Rules how almost an innumerable num∣ber of words may be derived from and compounded out of the pri∣mitive and simple: so far as to reach and expresse all Things and Con∣ceptions, and how their Radicall signification, may be fitted to them: lastly, how these derivatives may be disposed in Classes answerable to their primitives, for the future use of declining them. 25 For the forming and setting together of words I intend a Gra∣maticall Directory, wherein I expound by short exemplified Rules, every tribe in the Classes of my Dictionary, and also the differences and other accidents of all words, whether declinable or undecli∣nable and additionall, or under one, shewing how each tribe of de∣clinables (whether Nouns, Verbs or Particles of this or that Classis (each according to his kind) ought to be declined, how they ought to be joined together, to make up a Phrase, how out of Phrases Senten∣ces, of Sentences periods, and of periods Sections ought to be com∣posed, and that either in proper aequivocall or figurative expressions, as may be most for the embellishing of the context. For the con∣textual Constitution I intend an historical Text or Discourse, where∣in I present all the words, aswell primitive as derivative of an whole language, with all the ways of declining, connecting and transnomi∣nating them, under the form of one continued History or Discourse. That all the Reall Tasks for Exercises from the beginning hitherto scatteringly set down, may be repeated, together with a true under∣standing of the co-ordination of the Things ranked in each Classis.
Having always an eye to the gradation, proportion & accurate choice of Sentences, Periods and the style it self, so as the first part of the said Discourse may consist of short Sentences and Periods, and be written in a low and proper style, the next part of Sentences, &c. neither very short nor very long, but between both, and in a mean style, but that the third may be of more full Sentences, and in a style more sublime and flourishing. 26 In the next step I teach the use of the Mother-tongue, in order to the obtaining of more Languages, shewing how the Mother-tongue of each Nation, (which whether wee will or no, doth use to obtrude it selfe upon us) as a Mistris and Law-giver in the terming of others) may be made the rule and guide to perfect a∣ny forreign tongue, so that the emulation now among them may thereby cease, to make them all able to expresse any Thing or Thought, and lastly, to learn them all speedily, shewing how easie it is to one that knoweth his own tongue, the terms of Art belonging to all (as what a Radicall word is, what a Derivative or Compound, what a Termination, Declension, Syntaxis, and what a Phrase, Sen∣tence, Period, &c. are) to learn any other Language whatsoever, and what devise in particular this may be done upon the Latine tongue, and consequently upon other learned and popular Languages, in pre∣sent esteem. 27 To these purposes therefore (premising information and instru∣ctions both by speech and writing, wheresoever they are needfull) I fit the same Instruments. viz. a Dictionary, Directory, and Dis∣course, the first in the course and order of the same Classes, the second of the same kinde of Rules, the third of the same words, setting the Latine first, and those of other Languages afterwards; and if there be any Idiome, or property in any of them, them, which my Rules will not beare, as in deriving, declining or connecting them, &c. I note them all along by way of Exception or Observation, instilling any Language by this way of paralleling or comparing them, even ten times more easily then otherwise. 28 In the seventh step I exercise my Auditors about Thoughts,
shewing how they ought to enquire after a Thing unknown whether it be or not, To search after it, if it lie hid, where it is, or where it is not? and if it be not as yet, then to finde out the Means, that it may eitherbe, or be in a possibility of being. 29 For the eight step, I employ them upon Thoughts or Concep∣tions Judicative, teaching them how they ought to examine a Thing of whose existence, and being they are already satisfied, that is, how they ought to approve of it, or disallow; Enquiring what is it, or is not; as well in it selfe, as in relation to other Things. Also why or how the same is or is not, that which it seems to be, and so whether it be true or false. Then enquiring what that Thing contains, or whether it contains nothing, and why and how it contains, that it doth contain. More∣over whether it doth or acteth or not, whether it suffereth or not, and consequently whether it be simply honest, or necessary profitable or pleasant, possible and easie, to be desired and done. Or on the contrary whether it be dishonest or needlesse, unprofitable or un∣pleasant, impossible or difficult, and so to be avoided or neglected. Then lastly, whether yea or no, and in what part and regard, a Thing, containeth any other thing more or lesser whether it so doth or suffereth not. And so whether in respect to another Thing it be more or lesse honest, profitable, pleasant, possible, easie, to be desired, or practised, or the contrary of all or any of these particulars. 30 In the ninth step I verse them in Thoughts Ordinative, for the orderly Disposing and Methodizing of Things, Teaching what is to be first or last thought, said, or written, of any thing. If any thing shall occur that is confused, how it ought to be reduced into order; In speciall in what course those Inventive and Judicative Thoughts, ought with discretion to be brought into the form, either of an E∣pistle, Discourse or Oration, of a Disputation, Consultation, or Sy∣steem, or entire Body of an Art or Science, and that in such a Me∣thod, as the nature of the thing requires; whether Analyticall, Syn∣theticall, or according to the Modern Authours Syncriticall. 31 And that there may appear a notable proof or example of this
tripartite Method, and all the Exercises of Learning, Reall, Verball and Notionall, may be viewed together at one cast of the eye, wee shall represent the Concords and disagreements, and other relations of all the Things, which we have considered apart in their differen∣ces in three continued Columns running parallel, or side by side from top to bottom both by first and second notions, and consequently in their terins of Art. Shewing how all Naturall Things do like a Tree concur and meet in the root, and partake all of the same sap, and do differ from each other, onely as boughes spreading severall ways, and consequently that they were all at first, and may yet be made by one generall I∣dea: and furthermore that Artificials, and even Things Mysticall themselves, may likewise be squared by the same Rule. And if there appeare any difference in particulars of this or that Classis; we shew that it either proceedeth from the different concurrence of substan∣tiall principles, or from a different fashion of the Organs; or from a different intention of the Agent, and so that there is nothing seen in Things naturall, whereunto there may not be found some one or more of Things Artificiall and Mysticall to answer, or if not, such as yet are found that such ought by their track to be sought after. 32 In which harmonicall One-triple, viz. Naturall, Artifi∣ciall, Mysticall Systeem, or Body, all Arts and Sciences that ever were yet invented, or shall ever be hereafter, are as (to their generall Idea's) implicitly imbosomed, and may be explicitly inserted and subordinated thereunto, that it may appeare, which are Parent, and which coozen Faculties, which of them spring from others, & which have the same common Originals; which exceed in perfection, worth and dignity; how many and what in quality, may yet be invented, and according to what speciall Idea's, they ought to be ordered and distributed; to make the Analogy or Corresponden∣cy of naturall Operations compleat and perfect. 33 Towards the acquisition of Civill Prudence, there are also three steps, a comely carriage in outward Manners, a choice of a fit course of private life, and the skill of duly managing a publike Office
or Employment, if any such shall be offered. In all and each of which things my Scholars are to be thoroughly instructed. 34 Their Manners or Carriage ought to be neat, comly & grave, as well in their countenance and gestures as in their speech, which are to be diversified according to Age, Sex, Way of life, publike Charge, Deserts and Relations to Superiours, Equals and Inferiours. 35 Their Way of life ought be accommodated and fitted to their Genius and disposition, and sometimes to occasions of the Com∣mon-wealth, and when publike Exigence requires it, let there be heed taken in the choice of Ministers. For Mercury is not made out of eve∣ry Block. 36 The execution of a Publike Office (whether it be for teaching either in the School or Church, or in taking care of the Affaires and Health of other men, or in defending their lives and estates in Courts of Justice, or Equity) ought to be dextrous and expeditious, faithfull and conscientious, cleer of Ignorance, Deceit, or any other faults whatsoever. FINIS.
Doctor Cyprian Kinner's Vow to the Almighty GOD, sent from Dantzick the fift of Aug. 1648, to Samuel Hartlib. Translated out of the Originall Latine. TO thee (Eternall God) that first inspired mee with these Thoughts concerning the Education of Youth, do I again most humbly resigne them (imperfect though they be) as the free gifts of thy holy Spirit. Thou that searchest the heart and reins, knowest how much I desire they should be perfected, and what with ardent zeal I endeavour the Refor∣mation of all these School-Disorders. But it is not hid from thee, that I want means answerable to my desires, being now a Sojourner in a strange Land, without estate or subsistance, which the barbarisme of Souldiers by thy permission, hath depriv'd me of, and to this houre detain from me. Thou know'st also that for this whole yeere last past, I have laboured to obtaiu a poore subsistence, whereby I might finish but a bare Elucidarium or Commentary. O pitty Youth miserably brought up in Schools, which the bloud of thy Son hath redeem'd, and stir up some one that may sound∣ly and Christianly lead them in the ways (especially) of true Piety, good Letters, and sober Prudence, least that innocent part of thy flock may be any further sednc'd and led away. And eternally blesse those few (whose Names are best known unto thee) their children and childrens children, that have any way been pleased to accept and favour my weak endevours. But for me doe as it seemeth good in thine own eyes. And that I may re∣assume and compleat my former Thoughts, let the beams of thy Wisdom shine upon me, and by thy Power raise up for me such Patrons, as my weaknesse alone could never else have procured. If thou wilt not, thy will be done.
AN ADVERTISEMENT to the Noble and Generous Lovers of LEARNING. IF any such (after the favorable perusal of this generall Draught and Information) shall be desirous to be more fully informed, concerning either those Works of Master Comenius, which are to be published, or Doctor Kinner's further Vndertakings and continuation of them; as also how their assistance & favours may be best con∣veighed vnto the aforesaid Doctors hands, they may please to send or repair to Master Hartlib's House in the great open Court in Dukes-Place, and satisfaction shal be given to all their desires.
