C6196 12847693 94469
A COPPY OF 1. The letter sent by the Queenes Majestie concerning the collection of the Recusants Mony for the Scottish Warre, Apr. 17. 1639. 2. The Letter sent by Sir Kenelme Digby and Mr. Mountague concerning the Contri∣bution. 3. The Letter sent by those assembled in London, to every shire. 4. The names of the Collectors in each County in England and Wales. AND 5. The Message sent from the Queenes Majestie to the house of Com∣mons by Master Comptroller the 5. of Febr. 1639. Printed at London in the yeare of the disco∣very of Plots, 1641.
Henrette Marie. R. WEe have so good a beliefe of the loy∣altie and affection of his Majesties Catholique Subjects, as we doubt not but upon this occasion, that hath called his Majesty into the Nor∣therne parts for the defence of his Honour and do∣minions, they will expresse themselves so affected as we have alwayes represented them to his Ma∣jesty; So in this common consent, which hath appeared in the Nobilitie, Iudges, Gentry and others, to forward his Majesties service by their persons and states, we have made no difficulty to answer for the same correspondency in his Catho∣lique Subjects, as Catholiques: Notwithstanding they all have already concurred to this his Majesties service, according to the qualities whereof they are, when others of the same quality were called upon. For wee beleeve that it became us, who have beene so often interested in the sollicitation of their benefits, to shew our selves now in the per∣swasion of their gratitudes. Therefore having al∣ready by his Majesty by other meanes recommen∣ded to them this earnest desire of ours to assist and serve his Majesty, by some considerable summe of money, freely and cheerefully presented: Wee
have thought fit (to the end that this our desire, may be the more publique and the more authori∣zed) hereby to give you Commission and directi∣on to distribute Coppies under your hand of this testification thereof, unto those that have met in London by our direction, about this businesse: And unto the severall Collectors of every County. And as wee presume the summe they will raise will not be unworthy our presenting to the King; so shall we be very sensible of it, as a particuler respect to our selves, and will indeavour in the, most efficatious manner wee can to improve the merit of it, and to remove any apprehension of prejudice, that any (who shall imploy themselves towards the successe of this businesse) may con∣ceive; by this they may be assured that wee will secure them from all such objected inconvenien∣ces: And we are very confident that this our first recommendation will be so complyed with all, as may not onely afford us particular satisfaction, but also, facilitation towards their owne advan∣tages. Given under our Signet at White-Hall this 17. of Aprill, 1639.
Sir Kenelme Digby and Mr. Mountagues Letter concerning the contribution. IT is sufficient already knowne to every one, the extraordinary Graces and Protections we owe the Queenes Majestie, to whose favourable inter∣cession wee must ascribe the happy moderation we live under; So as we doubt not, but an occasion of the expression of our gratitudes will joyfully bee imbraced by every Body; which the present estate of his Majesties affayres, doth now offer us. We have already by our former letters indeavored to prepare you to a cheerefull assistance of his Ma∣jestie in his declared journey to the Northerne parts, for the securing of his Kingdome, and such other purposes as his Royall wisedome shall re∣solve of: That so you may really demonstrate your selves as good Subjects, as God and nature requires of you. Now her Majestie hath beene gratiously pleased to recommend unto us the ex∣pressions of our duties, and zeale to his Majesties service, by some considerable gift from the Ca∣tholiques. And to remove all scruples (that even well affected persons may meete with) she under∣takes to secure us, and all that shall imploy them∣selves in this businesse, from any inconvenience, that may bee suspected by their or our forward∣nesse and declaration in this kind. It will easily appeare to every body how much it imports us, in our sence of her Majesties desires to presse every body to straine himselfe even to his best abilities in this proposition, since by it wee shall certainly
preserve her graciousnesse to us, and give good Characters of our devotion to the King and State; of whose benignitie wee have all reason to give testimonies, and to indeavour to produce argu∣ments for the prosecution and increase of it. Now for the best expedition of this businesse (which is the chiefe circumstance that importeth in it) we have thought fit to recommend it to your nominations of such persons as shall in your opi∣nions be agreed of for the ablest and best disposed in every severall County, not onely to sollicite, but to collect such voluntary contributions, as every bodies conscience and duty shall proffer: And we shall desire you to give us an account of what acceptation his friends, which wee cannot but expect very successefull, and answerable to the forwardnesse we meete with here about Lon∣don, for which wee shall offer up our prayer to God. W. Mountague. Ke. Digby.
The Coppy of the Letter sent by those Assembled in London, to every Shire. THe inclosed Advices and motives being so ample, as you will perceive by perusing them, it will not be needefull that we enlarge our selves upon any particulers concerning the con∣duct of the businesse, which they direct the way in. This therefore serveth onely to convey them to you, (as we are intreated by those that have met here, and have undertaken to doe) and desire you to repaire immediatly unto those persons to whom they be directed, and to deliver the same un∣to them in the name of all the Noble men and Gentry (together with our selves) assembled here at London by the Queenes commandement to set forward this worke. And wee pray you assure them in the most efficacious manner you can (in∣gaging all our credits for the trust thereof) that it is the sence of us all both Ecclesiasticall and lay persons, that besides the discharging of their and our duties to God and the King, it mainely im∣porteth the good of Catholiques to have their businesse take good successe. Therefore intreate them to deale actively and efficaciously and spee∣dily according to these advices and motives. Wee are so well perswaded of their devotion to put forward so pious a worke, that we doubt not but they will be as well satisfied in the needefulnesse
of the thing, and bee as ready to imploy them∣selves in it, receiving the assurance thereof, and perswasions thereunto, onely from our hands, as if they came by all the most formall wayes that can be imagined; which in a businesse of this na∣ture cannot be expected. And although the Ad∣vises and motives be directed only to lay Gentle∣men yet we desire you, (& have answered for you) that you will imploy your selves and all those that depend on you, sincerely to sollicite & dispose all their mindes that you have relation unto, as powerfully as you can, to contribute cheerefully and bountifully upon this occasion; which is the first that ever we laboured in of this kind, so wee hope in God it will bee the last: there being no probability of so pressing and urgent a necessitie to occurre any more. London Aprill, 1639. Yours, &c.
The names of the Collectors for ga∣thering the Recusants money. Bedfordshire. Mr. Church, Sir Robert Charnock, Mr. Robert Hewet. Barkeshire. Mr. Anthony Inglefield, Mr. Tir∣rell. Buckinghamshi. Mr. Robert Dormer, Sir Edward Manfield, Mr. Throgmorton, Mr. Bringhurst. Cambridgshire. Mr. Hon. Huddlestone, M. Charles Paryes, Mr. Barker. Cheshire. Mr. Bidulph of Bidulph, Sir Wil∣liam Massey, Mr. William Stantey, Mr. lames Poole. Cornewall. Mr. Victor, Mr. Burlacey, Mr. Tre∣vilian. Cumberland. Sir Francis Howard, Mr. Ioseph Porter. Darbyshire. Sir Francis Willoughby, Mr. Aere of Hassop Mr. Poole of Spinckill. Devonshire. Sir. Sir Edward Carey, Mr. Berry, Mr. Anthony Gifford, Dr. Chiche∣ster. Dorsetshire. Mr. George Penny the elder, Mr. George Arundell, Mr. Webbe of Lanford, Mr. Wells of Purbecke. Durham. Sir Ralph Conniers, Mr. George Collingwood, Mr. Edward Smith. Essex. Mr. William Peters, Mr. Thomas Wright, Mr. Richard White.
Glocestershire. Sir Iohn Winter, Mr. Wakeman, Mr. Benedict Hall, Mr. Atkinson. Hertfordshire.— Huntingtonshi. Mr. Price of Washingley, Sir Tho. Shirley, Mr. Tho. Cotton. Herefordshire. Mr. William Bodenhum, Sir Iohn Wigmore, Mr. William Moore of Burrop, Mr. Iohn Harp. Hampshire. M. Iohn Arundell, Mr. George Pen∣ny the younger, Mr. William Owen. Kent. Mr. Benjamin Wyborne, Mr. Cle∣ment Finch, Mr. . Lancashire. Mr. Bradshaw, Sir Cecill Crayford, Sir William Gerrard, Mr. Molineaux of the wood, Mr. Townley of Town∣ley, Mr. Anderton of Lostock. Lecetershire. Sir Francis Englefield, Mr. Golding. Lincolnshire. Mr. Anthony Mounson, Sir Iohn Thymbleby, Mr. Robert Constable. London and Middlesex. Mr. Cape, Mr. Thomas Rox, Mr. Becket, Mr. Richard Betham, Mr. Ed∣ward Harpe, Mr. Morgan, Mr. Iohn Chapperley, Dr. Kirton. Norfolke. Mr. Everard, Mr. Charles Walgrave, Sir Hen. Beddingfield, Mr. William Paston. Northamptonsh. Sir William Saunders, Mr. Iohn Poulton. Nottinghamsh. Mr. Thomas Smith the elder, Mr. Thomas Smith the younger. Northumberla. Sir William Fenwicke, Mr. Hagger∣ston,
Mr. Withrington, Sir Edward Ratliffe. Oxfordshire. Sir Richard Farmer of Kiddington, Mr. Will. Stone, Mr. Ralph Sheldon. Rutlandshire. Mr. Nicolas Cripps, Mr. William Andrewes, Mr. Alcock, Mr. Iames Digby. Shropshire. Sir Basill Brooke, Mr. Plowden, Mr. Iohn Harrington. Sommersetsh. Mr. Rayno, Mr. Iohn Ewnis the elder. Staffordshire. Mr. Brooke of Lapley, Mr. Stamford of Perry Hall, Mr. Phillip Draycot. Surrey. Mr. Edw. Cotton, Sir Rich. Weston. Sussex. Sir Iohn Shelley, Sir Iohn Carroll. Suffolke. Sir Francis Monnocke, Sir Roger Martin, Sir Edward Sylyard, Mr. Tho. Beddingfield of Beddingfield. Warwickshi. Mr. Anthony Dormer Mr. Thomas Morgan, Mr. William Sheldon, Mr. Rich. Middlemore. Wiltshire. Mr. William Arundell, the Lord Bal∣timore, Mr. Edward Stilling. Worcestershi. Mr. William Abingdon, Mr. Willi∣am Sheldon. Westmerland. Mr. Anthony Ducket, Mr. Iohn Leyborne, Mr. Fleming. Yorkeshire. East Riding. The Lord Dunbarre, Mr. Brigham, Mr. Longdaill. West Riding. Baronet Vavasar, Baro∣net Gascoigne, Mr. Thomas Wa∣terton, Mr. Phillip Hungate. North Riding. Mr. Craythorne the
younger, the Lord Fairfax, Mr. An∣thony Mennell, Mr. Laurence Sare. Isleof Wight.— Anglesey.— Brecknockt. Mr. Winter, Mr. Bevan, Mr. Maddock. Carnarvon. Mr. Lewis. Caermarden. Mr. Towley. Cardigan. Mr. Lewis. Glamorgan. Mr. Turbervile the younger. Denbigh. Mr. Richard Floyd, Mr. Crew. Flintsh. Sir Iohn Connoway, Mr. Pennat. Monmouth. Sir Charles Sommerset, Mr. Morgan of Lantarnam, Mr. Morgan of Itton. Mountgomery. Sir Piercy Herbert. Merioneth.— Pembrookesh. Mr. Towley of Arnostill. Radnorshi. Mr. Thomas Crowther.
A Message sent from the Queenes Majesty to the House of Com∣mons by Mr. Comptroller, Febr. 5. 1640. THat her Majesty hath beene ready to use her best endeavour for the remooving of all mis∣understanding betweene the King and King∣dome. That at the request of the Lords who petitio∣ned the King for a Parliament, her Majesty at that time writ effectually to the King, and sent a gen∣tleman expressely to perswade the King to the holding of a Parliament. That shee hath since beene most willing to doe all good offices betweene the King and his peo∣ple, which is not unknowne to divers of the Lords, and so shall ever continue to doe as judge∣ing it the onely way of happinesse to the King, her selfe, and Kingdome. That all things bee justly setled betweene the King and his people . That her Majestie having taken a knowledge that having one sent to her from the Pope is di∣stastefull to the Kingdome, she is desirous to give satisfaction to the Parliament within convenient time she will remove him out of the Kingdome. That understanding like wise that exception hath beene taken to the great resort to her Chap∣pell
at Denmarke house she will be carefull not to exceede that which is convehient and necessary for the exercise of her Religion. She further taketh notice that the Parliament is not satisfied with the manner of raysing money for the assistance of the King in his journey to the North, in the yeare 1639. at her intreaty from the Catholiques, she was moved there unto meerely out of her deare and tender affection to the King, and the example of other his Majesties subjects▪ she seeing the like forwardnesse would not but ex∣presse her forwardnesse to the assistance of the King. If any thing be illegall, she was ignorant of the Law, and was carried therein onely out of a great desire to be assisting to the King in so pressing an occasion but promiseth to be more cautious here∣after, not to doe any thing but what may stand with the established lawes of the Kingdome. Her Majestie being desirous to employ her owne power to unite the King and people and de∣sireth the Parliament to looke-forwards and passe by such mistakes and errors of her servants as may be formerly, and this your respect shee promiseth shall be repayd with all the good offices shee can doe to the house, which you shall finde with reall effects as often as there shall be occasion. FINIS.
