C6230 19525804 108982
The manner of the discovering the KING at Southwell, on Tuesday the 5. of April, 1646. who is now in the Parliaments Quarters be∣fore Newarke. Banbury taken in, with the Ordnance, Armes, and Ammunition. AND The Treaty with Sir Charles Compton from OXFORD. ALSO The Copie of Sir Thomas Fairfax's Proclamation, commanded to be read in all Churches neere Oxford. AND The Copie of the Summons sent to LUDLOW, and the Governours Answer: And a Copie of Colonel Birch his Letter. These are commanded to be printed by the Originall papers, and published according to Order of Parliament. LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop and J. Coe. 1646.
The manner of discovering the King at Southwel on Tuesday the 5. of April, 1646. who is now in the Parliaments Quarters be∣fore Newark. ON Tuesday the fifth of April, 1646. Ge∣nerall Leven having notice of the Kings being at Southwell in Nottingham shire, with the French Agent in the Scots Quarters, ac∣quainted the English Commissioners there∣with, by two Commissioners sent for that purpose; As also that he had way-laid the town in severall places, that so His Majestie might not go away: the Commissioners of both Kingdomes sent up to London to ac∣quaint the Parliament of England therewith, and to know their pleasures therein; this it as hoped, will be the sudden peace of these Kingdomes, which God grant.
Colonell Birch his Letter. SIR, In order to that Command, which the Right Honourable, the Committee of both Kingdoms were pleased to entrust me with, I have laid close siege to Ludlow; and doubt not, but to give such an account of it, considering the shortnesse of the time I have been before it, and the strength of the place, may be expected from me; whose endeavours are ambitious in nothing more then to serve the Publique, and really manifest my self Your most thankfull, and obleidged Servant, J. BIRCH. Colonell Birch his Summons to Ludlow Castle. GEntlemen, It is far from my desire to be an occasion of shedding of blood or ruining the estates of any▪ And for that I conceive your es are sensible of the danger of both, in case we proceed on without restraint of that violence which the Souldiers will be ready to execute (which I hope you will joyn with me to prevent) I have thought good out of my reall affection unto, and earnest desire of your preservation, To let you know, that it is yet in your power to prevent your own totall ruine,
and in my power to grant you such tearmes, as may be honourable to the Military part, and profitable to those who have other reso∣lutions then to live by their swords. And that which makes me confident that you cannot reject this opportunity, is, That if you shall, you are so farre from doing that, which otherwise in honour you are bound, that in this case (which you are not ignorant of) you make your selves, and all others who shall put themselves un∣der your protection, uncapable of any thing but extremity; there being neither any visible force in the Field, nor any Garrison un∣besieged, which can yeeld you the least hopes of reliefe. I need not tell you of Exeter, Barnstable, the Mount, and sundry other places of strength, maintained by men of honour, who have conceived it prudence (and not without good reason) to make those places happy by tearmes of honour, which they knew they must make miserable by refusing the opportunity offered. For an example of the latter you need not seek far to find those who have not onely to their great dishonour destroyed utterly those under their prote∣ction, but have now thankfully within few dayes embraced such tearmes, as that their lives are at the Parliaments mercy: Their owne unadvisednesse having been such, that they had very neere made the Besiegers uncapable of granting them that. And if you shal not now yeeld unto this Summons, which in the name of both Houses of Parliament I send you, for the delivery of this Towne and Castle of Ludlow unto me, for them who have found it neces∣sary for the good of His Majesty and Kingdome, to command the same, but shall make me by your delay (which is the best you can promise) also by a superiour command uncapable of giving you that which now I offer, and that all kind of misery follow which the sword necessarily brings with it, I beseech you impute it not to him, who willingly shall approve himselfe From my Leaguer this 2. of April, 1646. Your very loving friend, J. Birch. Gentlemen, the weightnesse of this businesse is such, that I con∣ceive it will require some time of consultation; and I am loth to debar you of that, or any thing else that may tend to your safety; therefore it shall content me to receive your Answer to morrow by 12. of the Clock: And in the meane time, if you desire it, all
acts of Hostility shall be forborne on the behalf of J. B. For Sir Mich: Woodhouse, Governour of the Towne and Castle of Ludlow, and the Bailiffes and Aldermen of the same Towne. The Governours Answer. Sir, I Received yours, directed to many, but finding my selfe particularly entrusted by His Majesties Com∣mission in what you demand, I returne this to your severall Objections. As for the avoiding of blood-shed, or ruine of any, I shall ever endeavour it, so farre as my condition affords in discharge of that trust reposed in me, and shall be assenting to what may procure the same, as befits the loyalty of a subject, and faith of a Soldier, resolving to sacrifice all, rather then to violate either, but shall willingly embrace any generall preser∣vation. Sir, you seeme to be carefull of us in this Gar∣rison, but in following this your advice, I and the rest shall forfeit more then we can regaine; but your civi∣lity obliges, wherein a souldier may requite, I cannot admit of your severall reasons for delivery of this place, neither are the actions of others cited by you, without farther consideration, any warrantable presi∣dent at all for me. As for the tearmes that others have had which you call Honourable, I cannot find any at all Honourable for me, at this present, without receiving His Majesties Command for what I act. Indeed I wonder this Garrison should be demanded of me, for I have been certainly informed that His Majesty hath made a free offer of it himselfe to the Parliament, and in delivering of it, I might prevent His Majesties inten∣tion, and prejudice you, for doubtlesse it should be
more acceptable from the Master, then the Servant; As for any under my protection, I shall endeavour their pre∣servation as my own, and what ruine or extreamity shall happen, doubtlesse it will be imputed to the Actors of it: As for your Summons to this Town and Castle, I cannot assent unto it, neither with my allegeance, or honour of a Souldier, in the condition I am now in to resist you; but to shew my self willing to avoid the appearance of ruine, which must necessarily fall upon many, if extreamity be made choice of, I shal willingly condescend to what may avoid it, as befits a Souldier, and shall if you condescend unto it send two Gentlemen to the King to know his pleasure, which I conceive will be the easiest way for both Parties. Sir, to this I desire your answer, and rest Ludlow Castle, May 2. 1646. Your humble Servant, M. WOODHOUSE. Postcript. Sir, I desire that this Trumpeter upon the delivery of the Letter, may be returned, and I shall be ready to receive your Answer, when you shall be pleased to send it. For Colonell Iohn Birc these, SIR, On Friday the 1. of this instant May, the Gene∣rall faced Oxford within musket shot of the works; the Enemy onely looked on us: that night the Gen. quartered at Garsington, on Saturday the 2. the Generall marched to Heddington, within a mile of Oxford, which for ought I know, will be the place for the Head-quarters, till Ox∣ford be surrendred, or taken by storm: we have set out se∣verall Posts, viz. at Heddingon, two Regiments, the Ge∣neralls and Col. Overtons: At Marston two Regiments, Major Gen. Sippons, and Col. Harlowes: At Cowly two Regiments, Sir Hardresse VVallers, and Col. Her∣berts. The Train of Artillery is at Elisfield. Prince Ru∣pert
sent a Letter to Col. Trever, to have liberty for him∣self and others to be admitted to passe forth, for their li∣berty and safety, as many as can steal away. The Lord St. Paul, the Lord Storton, the Lady Digby, and the Coun∣tesse of Hartford, and others of quality would fain come in; but the Generall will treat only for the surrender, and all together, where His Mjsty is, neither we, nor the Souldiery in Oxford can ll. Last VVednesday they kept a Fast in Oxford, and then the Priests told them in their Pulpits, that the King is gone to London; but their eyes being opened by a few dayes experience, I beleive they will be willing to surrender Oxford. The Generall hath sent Col. VVeldens Forces to block up VValling∣ford on the one side, as the Forces from Reading & Hen∣ley do it on the other: On Sunday the third of this in∣stant, we took some Packets that came from London di∣rected to the King, and others. This day a great part of the Enemies Foot came over the Bridge, and made a flourish on this side the River; but we no sooner began to move, but they immediatly vanished: we are raising a VVork within musket shot of the Enemies VVorks of Oxford, they have shot two pieces at us, but done us no harme at all▪ Sir Marmaduke Roydon the Governour of Farring∣don is dead. I have sent you here inclosed, the Copy of a Proclamation that was published in all the adjacent Pa∣rishes neer Oxford, by order from the Generall. Your Servant, W. T. Heddington the 4 of May, 1646. Sir Charles Compton hath come from Oxford to treat with the Generall for Sir VVilliam Compton a∣bout Bnbury, and agreed, that it shall be surrendred, with all the Ordnance, Armes, and Ammunition, to Colonell VVhaley for the use of the Parliament.
By Sir Thomas Fairfax, Knight, Commander in Chiefe of the Parliaments Forces. VVHereas I have appointed a free Market to be kept every day in the weeke (the Lords day excepted) at the Leaguer before Oxford: I doe therefore hereby strictly Charge and Com∣mand all and every the Inhabitants of the Countyes of Oxford and Berks within two miles of the said Leaguer to provide and bring in or cause to be brought into the head quarters in the way of a free market, competent provisions of Corne, Flesh, Cheese, Bread, But∣ter, Hay, Oates, Beanes, and all other kind of Victualls, provisions, and other necessaries for the use of the Army, for which they shall receive ready money, and herein I expect their ready conformity, as they tender the service of the State, and will answer the contrary at their perill. And for their better encouragement, I do hereby strictly charge and command all Officers and soldiers, and other persons whatsoever, that they do not presume upon any pretence whatsoever, to stop, seize, impresse or take away any of the horses, cattle, or goods, passing or re∣passing, to and from the said market, upon pain of death without mercy, and touching the regulating of the sail market, and for the preventing of disorder therein, I do by these presents prohibit all fore∣stalling, and retailing in the same: commanding that no souldier, or other person or persons whatsoever, presume to buy, or cause to be bought, any provisions, or things whatsoever, comming towards the said market to be sould there, before the same be in the head quar∣ters, to be sould in the open market, upon the forfeiture of the value of the goods so by him or them bought, and suffer punishment, as by the Councell of War. Given under my hand and seale, at Heddington this 4. day of May, 1646. T. FAIRFAX. FINIS.
