C6742 13103586 97447
AN EXPEDIENT For Taking away all IMPOSITIONS, AND For Raising a REVENƲE without TAXES. HUMBLY PRESENTED His most Excellent MAJESTY King Charles the II. By Francis Cradocke Merchant. LONDON, Printed for Henry Seile, Stationer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1660.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty: HOw unfit and unworthy a choice I have made of my self, to ap∣pear in a work of this nature, mine own Reason, though ex∣ceeding weak, hath sufficiently resolved me: And notwithstanding Opinion better than Truth can travel the world without a Pasport, where there are as many internal forms of Minds, as external figures of Men; yet my hopes are, that by publish∣ing the honour done by Your Royal Per∣usal to the Manuscript, before it saw the Presse, and recommending the same to Your Majesties most honourable Privy Council, this may obtain the favour of their Debate, and receive the better common ac∣ceptation. I have had it under my consideration about four years, (and thought it a jewel un∣fit
to cast before such Governours:) What esteem it will receive by others I cannot promise to my self, my ambition in it is to serve my Sovereign Lord and Countrey, whereunto I am more obliged than many others, in that Your Majesty hath dealt so bountifully by, Dread Sovereign, Your Majesties Most thankful Subject and Servant, FRAN. CRADOCKE.
AN EXPEDIENT For taking away all Impositions, and raising a Revenue without TAXES, By Erecting Bankes for the Encourage∣ment of TRADE. I Expect so little credit will be given the Ti∣tle, that, should I be large on the Subject, I question whether it would be esteemed worth perusal: And having propounded so great ad∣vantage by erecting Banks, I conceive it proper first to give You some hints of the nature of them. A Banke is a certain number of sufficient men of Credit and Estates joyned together in a stock, as it were for keeping seve∣ral mens Cash in one Treasury, and letting out imaginary mo∣ney at Interest, for 3. or more in the hundred per annum, to Trades-men or others, that agree with them for the same, and making payment thereof by Assignation, passing each mans Ac∣compt from one to another, yet paying little money: Inso∣much; that if a Merchant or other person want money, if he hath or can procure credit in Banke, he may make as good pay∣ment by Assignment in Banke without it: As for Example, the said Merchant buyes Cloth of a Clothier for 100l. value more or less, and goes with him to the Banke, where he is Debtor for so much as he takes up, and the Clothier is made Creditor for so much as he sold his Goods for to the said Merchant: Then
such Clothier having occasion to pay money to a Stapler or Wool-monger for wool bought, the said Clothier is made De∣bitor, and the Wool-monger Creditor upon account, the said Wool-monger buyes wool from a Countrey Farmer, for so much money more or less, so the Wool-monger is made Deb∣tor and the Farmer Creditor; the Farmer must pay Rent to his Landlord, and is likewise made Debtor and his Landlord Creditor; the said Landlord for his occasions buyes goods of a Mercer, Grocer, Vintner, or the like, or from all, then he is made Debtor, and such Mercer or other Trades-man Creditor; then peradventure such Mercer or other Trades-man buyes goods from the same Merchant that took up the first credit in Banke, and stands yet Debtor there, but upon sale of his goods to the Mercer or other Trades-man, both clears their accounts in Banke. And so in all Trades, as occasion presents. These Bankes in the several parts of Europe where erected, being so held by Merchants and others, joyned together in a stock, and credited by the monies brought in thereunto (which money for the most part there remaining, and payments being made upon the credit thereof by assignment in Banke as afore∣said) might as well be done here onely upon the credits of Landed men, whereof they have few in Holland, and in other parts, lying convenient for Trade; where Land is, the Own∣ers thereof are seldome found to be Merchants: So that Eng∣land (if but sensible of it) hath an advantage of all parts in the world, as lying in the centre of the Trade of Europe, enjoying safe and commodious Harbours, wanting few necessaries, no Lands nor persons naturally inclined to Trade, if not discou∣raged by great Customes, Excise, and the abuses in Collecting it, and by the want of stock, or a supply thereof at reasonable Interest. To free England of these inconveniencies, and supply it with a stock for Trade, as great as shall be requisite, without bring∣ing in more Bullion, it may be done three manner of wayes, never yet practised in Europe, and the whole profits thereof (which will be considerable) be also converted to His Majesties Revenue for defraying the publique charge of his Kingdom, in case His Majesty and Parliament shall think fit to erect either
of these following kind of Bankes, for the accommodation of Trade, in the most proper places of England; assigning to each a proportionable division of the Countrey adjoyning, where all mens Estates in lands, houses or rents, either for Lease of years, Lives or in Fee,This may be done, so as all fraudulent Conveyances may be pretended, and yet no mans Estate be discovered more than at present: For if the propriety be found to be in A by the Register, its no matter though B be the true proprietor, for then A can wrong none but B, who hath intrusted him; or if B be doubtful to trust A, and yet desire to conceal his Estate, which he cannot well do without him, B himself may own the Estate, and allow A to enter a Morgage to (or near) the va∣lue, and take his defeizance for the same: so that in this case A cannot cheat B if he would, nor either of them any other, though both should combine therein. may be registred; as also all morgages, claims or other interests pretended thereunto, with morgages or pur∣chases at any time to be made thereupon. That the said places for Bankes being established, Estates re∣gistred, and a Survey taken of such Estates, whereby the value may not be entred above its real worth. Any persons may be ad∣mitted to have credit in Banke, for any summe safely to be lent under the value of his Estate, without other security or ceremo∣ny of Conveyances,This Survey may be taken by a Jury in every Parish, and delivered to the Sheriff of the County, or at the Banke upon Oath, and will be done with a small charge to His Majesty, and in little time. than the hand and consent of such person as is the proprietor, he paying Interest for the same at 4. per cent. per ann. quarterly into the said Office. First then, to effect the end aforesaid, it may be done with∣out money, by a Law enjoyning all payments to be made in Banke of any summe above 20l. sterling, for all lands, goods and merchandizes sold whatsoever, which is done voluntary in other parts, where Bankes are erected by almost all persons, who find both ease and accommodation thereby, and the Bankes here (like those in forreign parts) will be and serve as a general or National Cashkeeper of all mens moneys and accounts, trans∣ferring them from one person and Countrey to another with much facility, not onely preventing the danger of Robbery, but the trouble of counting, and loss in receiving clipt and bad mo∣ney, which is the cause that payments made in Banke are ge∣nerally esteemed better than in specie by ten shillings in an hun∣dred
pound;At first erect∣ing Bankes in Holland, all local payments were enjoyned to be made in this manner, but the ease and accommodation being found thereby, it became a most voluntary act, as it doth at this day continue, to the great enriching that Countrey. which would have the like esteem in England, were Bankes once erected. The second Expedient is, without any Imposition, leaving all persons free to take or make payment, either in Banke, or by money in specie; which will, I presume, bring in the same ad∣vantage to His Majesties Revenue; but not properly be erected without two millions of money; but if once setled would out of the same produce a million per annum profit, and stand alwayes as a constant increasing Revenue: For, by computation there is yearly paid in England for Interest Bortomree, and other kinds of Usury, two millions; for which should all Usurers call in their principal, it would amount unto thirty five millions; when there hath been but twenty two millions coyned in Eng∣land in and since the Reign of King Edward the Sixt▪ both in Gold and Silver, which, I presume, is at least one half exported, whorded up, or melted down; and allowing the Usurous pro∣priety to be the moyetie in all Coyn passing from one hand to another, it must necessarily follow, that all the said great Reve∣nue is brought into them by five millions and an, half real ster∣ling money; which is no Paradox, considering that all monies, though passing but through the hands of Usurers, doth yield to each of them the full yearly Interest; which may by done for one and the same summe of monies ten times in twelve mo∣neths; moreover by the money brought into Banke,The two Mil∣lions herein mentioned, is intended for the payment of all such as desire their money out of Banke, for its presum'd such there will be, and such a Banke as this must have money alwayes ready; for the being punctual in payment will so creditifie Banke, that most will keep their Cash therein for their own advantage. (which under the setled Government of so hopeful a Prince will be un∣doubtedly most that shall be imployed in Trade) why may not His Majesty make a profit thereof as well as the States of Ho∣land, which doth let out the same at Interest, as they have done great summes in England, and yet support a much greater Bank without Land upon their credits onely, it being generally con∣ceived that they have not at any time in ready Cash the tenth part of what the Banke stands Debtor for to private persons, although they abound in money for want of Land to purchase.
The third is such a Bank as may conveniently be erected both of money and credit with a less summe, setting Interest at such differing rates, as in time may invite all men to esteem credit as good as money, which is accounted better in forreign parts, as in truth it is, though seemingly otherwise; which disparity will be at all times reconciled by an Exchange or kind of Broker∣age, like that of Plate and Black-money, where currant; which several kinds of Bankes having no President, I shall not presume to prefer either as most proper,In this way the Banke will not be preju∣diced for want of money, but be supplied with Bills, which may be a Sovereign stamp be allowed to pass in a City or County instead of money, and be returned within a year, so that by setting a lower Interest thereon, will cause it to be equal in esteem with real money. but submit them all with confi∣dence, that the worst of them will prove of great use and advan∣tage to England, if once erected. That all Merchants that have no Estates real in Lands or Lea∣ses as aforesaid, may also have credit in Banke, upon depositing any Goods (not perishable) of an equivalent value in his Maje∣sties Ware-house, in every Port or other place where such Bank shall be erected; and that any person having monies in Cash or in Bank in one place, desiring to have it transferred for his ac∣commodation, and to have it again either in Cash or in Banke in another, may be accommodated, allowing onely 10s. for e∣very hundred pounds so exchanged or remitted. That every the aforesaid Bankes may furnish another petty Banke (or Mount) of Charity with a competent stock, to lend any summe under ten pounds upon Pawns at a reasonable Inter∣est, for the accommodation of poor people and others desiring the same. And that the persons put in to govern in these Banks may have the management of all other publick receipts with∣in their several districts, which will lessen the publick charge: And if such Banks are found to be advantageous, others may be also erected in Scotland and Ireland in like manner,The foundati∣of these Banks being Land, will be estee∣med (as in truth they are) the most secure in Europe, for that every Creditor will be sure of land in case the Bank should fail of money, and neither His Majesty nor Officer will be Intrusted, but the Estate of one man Debtor to another. for the accommodation of those there resident, as well as others li∣ving in England and trading thither.
The advantages which either of these Bankes by an ingenious ma∣nagement will bring into his Majesties Revenue. By the help of these Banks his Majesty or Kingdom shall have credit at any time (wanting monies) either in England or in for∣reign parts, for a million, without engaging private persons for the same. It will adde to the reputation and honour of this Kingdom, and render it more it esteem with forreign States and Princes, by so much as the Trade and wealth of England will thereby in∣crease, and consequently the strength at Sea by the many ships which will be more imployed. It will bring into his Majesties Revenue all the Interest mo∣ney paid in England, and money paid on Bottomree to Scriveners and others, which at 6 per cent. amounts unto by computation yearly two millions; and when to be had at 4 per cent. will be one million three hundred and thirty thousand pounds per ann. It will also bring in a profit by the persons that now deal for time, who will then get credit in Banke, and pay ready money for their Commodities, which by computation are now bought upon credit to the value of five millions yearly, the Interest whereof at 4 per cent. will amount unto two hundred thousand pounds per ann. Moreover, all Merchants that usually keep unvendible goods by them, as a dead stock upon their hands, will take up credit in Banke thereupon for continuing their Trade, of which goods there is by a like computation at all times remaining as a Drug on the hands of Merchants the value of four millions, which at 4 per cent. is one hundred and sixty thousand pounds per ann. Also when there is a certain conveyance by Exchange of mo∣ney (or by imaginary money) from one place to another at so easie a rate as 10s. for an hundred pounds, no person will then adven∣ture to carry any summe considerable, though but a dayes journy, considering the having it in Banke will be esteemed worth so much in the hundred, the profit of which remittances cannot amount unto lesse yearly than thirty thousand pounds. By the petty Bankes to be erected, when money will be had at
easie rates, and without charge or trouble of Bonds and personal security, the numerous (though small summes) to be taken up, will, I presume, yeeld profit to Bank ten thousand pound per ann. The Revenue estimated that this will bring in to His Maje∣sties Revenue is one million seven hundred and thirty thousand pounds per ann. which will not cost in managing twenty thou∣sand pounds per ann. which is four times as much as is made of Customs and Excise of goods brought into and exported from England: Besides this Kingdom will so flourish under a free Trade, that it will soon become the Mart or Emporium of Eu∣rope for all forreign commerce. And this Revenue being sup∣ported by Trade, and a supporter of Trades will by an ingenious management accordingly be improved. The benefit to the Subjects. By registering all Estates, every mans title will appear in real∣lity what it is, and many controversies and suits in Law be pre∣vented. It will very much advance the price of Land, and preserve many Families from being ruined by the extortion of Usurers, and yet make the Usurers gainers also. The Nation may be degrees (as the Revenue doth increase) be eased of all Taxes, at least Excise may forthwith be taken a∣way from all Forreign goods, and Custom also where is found a burthen on Trade, if this Revenue (or profit of these Bankes) doth amount unto but the one sixt part of the summe eimated; so that England will flourish under a free Trade, to he encou∣ragement of Merchandizing, the building of Shipping, and sup∣port of Navigation. By the benefits of Bankes most ingenious men will be furni∣shed with stock to trade at small Interest, and honest and able men be supported in their credits. It will make English Merchants capable to engross the com∣modities of another Countrey, and withhold it from others, as the Dutch do at present from us by the help of their Bankes. It will procure English Merchants credit in forreign parts, or in forreign Bankes to buy any commodity there without money,
as well or better than with money, and upon as good terms at the Hollander or any others. By taking away the duties from forreign Goods brought into England, we may (by a prudent management) get the Duties ta∣ken off from English Manufactures in forreign parts, and by that means under-sell all others, which the Hollander will not be able to prevent nor obtain themselves. It will in fine increase Trade, Trade will increase wealth, wealth and Trade will encourage our native manufacture, and all will imploy the poor, and I doubt not but in few years it will make England the Staple of Commerce, as Holland is at present. I have not given so plain a demonstration, nor reasons on the particulars of either of these Banks, as the subject indeed more proper for debate, and sufficient for a large Volume, requires; nei∣ther have I spoken any thing in defence of the many Objections which may seem to arise and Eclipse the utility thereof, presu∣ming that no rational person will prejudge therein, till I have had command to answer his Objections, which I doubt not but to be satisfactory in, humbly conceiving that what I have in short hinted at, will be understood and amplified by the more ingenuous: I shall therefore conclude it with saying, that were this manner of Banking practicable in Holland, or that if the Hollander were possessed of England, they would by this means soon become Masters of all the Trade in the World. Other necessary heads to be considered for the encrease of Trade, and encouragement of Navigation. I presume, none will deny but that Trade ought to be conside∣red, as well with respect had to publick as private interest; and therefore, I hope I shall be held excused for my Opinion, in hold∣ing that Forraigners ought to have the like priviledges with Na∣tives, both Trading in English shipping, which I conceive to be the best Expedient to make Exports of England, exceed the Imports, without which this Kingdom cannot be richer then it is, and since every particular will in some measure be con∣cerned within the general good of Trade, I shall presume to hint how far, (and with what restraint) it ought to be encouraged.
First, for Exportation of our native Commodities, such as Lead, Tin, Wax, &c. of little or no workmanship; England cannot be too liberal in, nor grant too many immunities and pri∣viledges, (though to her very Enemies) that may encourage the sending out of all Manufactures perfectly wrought up and Fa∣bricated: regard being had to Wools, Timber and Leather, which in no respects ought to be Exported. Secondly, for Importing of forraign Goods, such as Linnen, Sugars, Raw-silk, &c. which we stand in need of. It ought not neither to be discouraged by Impositions, though otherwise it be proper, to lay convenient duties on such Commodities Im∣ported, as obstruct the sale of our own Manufactures; whereby to hold a Ballance in Trade without prohibiting forraign Goods, which if we once do, other Nations will do the like by us; and so obstruct our Trade in General. Thirdly, for Transportation of such forraign Commodities, as are first Imported, (if done in English shipping) it will prove a great help to the over-Ballance of Trade, and therefore ought to have the like due encouragement with a reasonable respect shewn to forraign Vessels, though not equal to our own. In all which three respects, England might have advantage of all the World, and by industry (under good Lawes) soon be∣come the Mart of Europe, by reason of its scituation surround∣ed by the Sea; the safeness of her harbours and superfluities of sundry Commodities which other Nations stand in need of, which would be the sooner effected, were these ten particulars observed, there being many others also worthy, which I omit at present. 1. By Imposing all duties to be paid alike, upon all Goods, by all persons, the difference to be only upon Commodities Imported or Exported in forraign Bottoms, (viz.) ships not built in England, and failed by English Marriners. 2. By permitting all people of forraign Nations to Live, Pur∣chase and Trade freely amongst us, whereby most of them will soon become profitable Natives, and bestow their wealth brought hither or here gotten, in Lands for their posterity; which the present Lawes of England compels them to Export, to the great inriching of forraign parts, and impoverishing of this Nation.
3. By using all waies of encouragement to advance the Fish∣ing imployment, and His Majesties assuming His Prerogative of being Lord of the Brittish Ocean, which by the most ancient prescription ever belonged as Rightly due to the Kings of Eng∣land; so that by prohibiting others to Fish on our Coast, and im∣proving the same to this Nation, it will soon become of more worth to England, then the West Indies are to the Kingdom of Spain. 4. By encouraging new Manufactures and profitable inventi∣ons with due rewards and priviledges, which will bring artificers from forraign parts, and in time (by industry) make all Arts com∣mon amongst us; wherein we come much short of other Coun∣tries, to the disadvantage of our own. 5. By erecting a standing Committee of Trade, whose corre∣spondencie should reach over all Trading parts of the World; the effect whereof will not only inable them the better to contain the improvement of Trade here: but also to prevent many in∣conveniences that have late fallen on England by the undermi∣ning actings of forraign Nations, who have robbed us both of our Money and Trade, for want of a timely remedy. 6. By Conituting a Court of Merchants, where all Mer∣chants and Merchant-like causes and differences may be Sum∣marily decided. 7. By using meanes to encrease the general stock of England, either in raising the value of money for incouraging it to be Im∣ported, (which I will not much commend) but rather do incou∣rage the supplying it imaginary upon the Credit of Lands, to passe in payment by assignment in Bank as aforesaid, one of which is absolutely necessary in order to the increase of Trade in this Kingdom. 8. By taking way Excise from all Imported Goods, or at least forthwith to produce the same under the management of the customs whereby to take off the superfluous number of offences,) it being but a small advance to the revenue, and an intollerable burhen on Trade, in the way its now managed. 9. By lightning the duty of customs, especially on Goods Exported and Manufactured here in England, and so regulating the Book of Rates made for payment thereof; that in few or
no particulars the Rates exceed what is paid for the like Com¦modities in Holland. 10. By granting a free Transportation of forraign Commodi∣ties with little or no customs detained for the same, whereby Goods here Imported may go out without being loaded with impositions, and find a market in forraign parts to the same ad∣vantage, which will make England the Magazen or store-house of Europe. Each of these ten particulars deserves to be more amply set forth, but I have been short in this as in the former, submititing it also to the ingenious Reader to Paraphrase thereon, taking only to set forth how much the putting them in use will de∣crease the Revenue. There being nothing in this whole discourse that reflects on the Revenue, but the taking away Excise from forraign Goods usually amounting to 175000l. per annum, and the granting a free Transportation thereof, 19000l. per annum, which is in all 194000l. per annum, which doth cost in managing 35000l. per annum, so the real decrease is but 159000l. yearly, which I am bold to affirm puts the whole Nation to as much Charge, by the trouble and other inconveniences of keeping a greater number of servants to attend the several Offices; the fetching of Tickets, and the interruption of the (too many) Excise Officers in the improper manner its now collected, which summe so expended would be otherwise imployed in Trade; and His Majesty, I presume, might have as much advantage by a reasonable Cu∣stom out of the returns made thereof, which would be then re∣ally paid, for that none will hazard their Goods, but all make due entries; so that the continuing those Duties fills the Chests in the Exchequer, as water doth a vessel, being poured in at the Specket whilst it runs out at the Bung.
POSTSCRIPT. I Have late published some few lines, touching regulating the Custom and Excise, wherein I did set forth that two hundred thousand pounds per annum, hath for many yeares been visibly lost for want of a better method in the collecting thereof: I presume to say, I can give a plain demonstration wherein its lost, and how it may be remedied. It is also proper for the consideration of His Ma∣jesties most Honourable Privy Counsel, unto whom I most humbly submit, &c. FINIS.
