C7501 08647945 41525
In Effigiem Nicholai Culpeper Equitis. The shaddow of that Body heer you find Which serves but as a case to hold his mind, His Intellectuall part be pleas'd to looke In lively lines described in the Booke. Crofs sculpsit
THE English Physitian: OR An Astrologo-Physical Discourse of the Vulgar Herbs of this Nation. Being a Compleat Method of Physick, whereby a man may preserve his Body in Health; or cure himself, being sick, for three pence charge, with such things only as grow in England, they being most fit for English Bodies. Herein is also shewed, 1. The way of making Plaisters, Oyntments, Oyls, Pultis∣ses, Syrups, Decoctions, Julips, or Waters, of all sorts of Physical Herbs, That you may have them readie for your use at all times of the yeer. 2. What Planet governeth every Herb or Tree (used in Physick) that groweth in England. 3. The Time of gathering all Herbs, both Vulgarly, and Astrologically. 4. The Way of drying and keeping the Herbs all the yeer. 5. The Way of keeping their Juyces ready for use at all times. 6. The Way of making and keeping all kind of useful Compounds made of Herbs. 7. The way of mixing Medicines according to Cause and and Mixture of the Disease, and Part of the Body Afflicted. By Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physick and Astrologie. LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1652.
TO THE READDR. Courteous Reader, ARISTOTLE, in his Metaphysicks writing of the Nature of Man, hit the Nail on the Head when he said, That Man is naturally enclined to, and desirous of Know∣ledg: and indeed it is palpable and apparent, that as Pride is the first visible sin in a child, whereby we may gather that it was the first sin of Adam; so Knowledg being the first Vertue a Child minds, as is apparent to them that do but with the eye of Reason heed their actions even whilst they are ve∣ry yong, even before they are a yeer old, even by natural instinct, whereby a man may more than guess that Knowledg was the greatest loss, or at least one of the greatest we lost by the fall of Adam: Know∣ledg, saith Aristotle, is in Prosperity an Ornament, in Adversity a Refuge; and truly there is almost no greater enemy to Knowledg in the world than Pride and Covetousness: Excellently said, Juvenal, Sat. 7. Scire volunt omnes, mercedem solvere nemo. Alhtough all men, in Knowledg take delight, Yet they love money better, that's the spight. And again, some men are so damnable proud and envious withal, that they would have no body know any thing but themselves; the one I hope will shortly learn better manners, and the other be a bur∣den too heavy for the Earth long to bear. The Subject which I here fixed my thoughts upon is not only the Description and Nature of Herbs, which had it been all, I had autho∣rity sufficient to bear me out in it, for Solomon employed part of that wisdom he asked, and received of God in searching after them, which he wrote in Books, even of all Herbs, Plants and Trees; some say those Writings were carried to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar; being kept in the Temple at Jerusalem for the publick view of the People, but being transported to Babylon in the Captivity, Alexander the GREAT TY∣RANT at the taking of Babylon gave them to his Master Aristotle, who committed them to the mercy of the fire. But since the daies of Solomon, many have those famous men been that have written of this Subject, and great Encouragements have
been given them by Princes, of which I shall quote an example or two, Mathiolus his greediness was such to finish his Comment upon Di∣oscorides, which Book is yet in use in the famous Universities in Leyden in Holland, & Mountpilier in France, that he forgot to count what the char∣ges of it might amount to, although I rather cōmend him for his dilli∣gence in Studie and Care of the Worlds good, than harbor the leastill thought of him for not counting the middle and both ends before he began the Work, I say when he came to count the charges of Printing and cutting the Cuts, it far surmounted his Estate; in this he was a∣bundantly furnished by Ferdinand the Emperor, and diverse other Princes of Germany, as himself confessed furnished him with great sums of money, for perfecting that so great, so good a Work; the Prince Elector of Saxonysent him much money towards his charge, as also Joachim, Marquess of Brandenburg, who as he was neighbor to Saxony in Place, so was he in Affection to so good a Work; Frederick, Count Pa∣latine of the Rhine, the Cardinal Prince of Trent, the Arch Bishop of Saltz∣berg, the Dukes of Bavaria and Cleveland, and the Free State of Norimberg, together with many others, so that he had the help of the Emperor, of Arch Dukes, Dukes, Electors, Cardinals, Princes. Happie is that Nation whose Magistrates countenance such as mind and study their Good: I might instance in many more, and thereby give you a glimps how Magistrates formerly favored this Art, and which is more, how studious they were in it. Bellonius a man that soared high in the Na∣ture of Herbs, also professed he had the helping hand of Kings and Cardinals to maintain him in his Studies, and more than this, Kings themselves were Studious in it; amongst which (Solomon excepted) Mithridates that renowned King of Pontus seems to bear away the Bell, his Writings after his death were found in his Country Mannor by Pompey the great, but never a Roman of them all had the honesty to print them with his name in the Frontispiece, so that we have nothing of them but what is quoted by some honest Authors, especially by Plutarch. Ad nos vix tenuis fame dilabitur aura. Men mind our good, but such cross times do fall, We only hear they did, and that is all. Mesue King of Damascus, Avicenna, and Evax King of Arabia, labored much in this Study, and I could well have afforded  have mentio∣ned Dioclesian the Roman Emperor had he not washed out his Vertues, and defiled them with a Purple stain, in a most bloody persecution of Christians. It is quoted in Virgil, that when a famous Prince was proffe∣red by Apollo to be taught his Arts, viz. Physick, Musick, Augury, and the Art of shooting in the Bow, he made choice of Physick and to know the Nature of Herbs.
Ipse suas artes, sua munera, laetus Appollo Augurium, Citheram{que} dedit, celeres{que} sagittas, Ille, ut depositi preferret fata Parentis Scire potestates Herbarum, usum{que} Medendi Maluit: & mutas agitare (inglorias) Artes. His Arts to him, when great Appollo gave, He did nor Augury, nor Arrows crave, Nor the Melodious Lute, but to prevent His Fathers death, who now with age was spent, To be an Herbarist, and Medicine To learn, he rather did his thoughts incline. So precious hath the knowledg of the Vertues of Herbs been in former times to men of quality, and indeed happy is that Nation, whose Rulers mind Knowledg, as Solomon saith on the contrary, Wo to that Nation whose King is a Child, and indeed in Ancient times people need little other Physick than such Herbs as grew neer them, some Footsteps of which and but a few only, are now in use with us to this day, as people usually boyl Fennel with Fish, and know not why they do it but only for custom, when indeed the Original of it was foun∣ded upon Reason, because Fennel consumes that Flegmatick quality of Fish, which is obnoxious to the Body of man, Fennel being an Herb of Mercury, and he so great an Enemie to the Sign Pisces. In this Art the Worthies of our own Nation, Gerard, Johnson, and Parkinson are not to be forgotten, who did much good in the Studie of this Art, yet they and all others that wrote of the Nature of Herbs, gave not a bit of a reason why such an Herb was apropriated to such a part of the Body, nor why it cured such a Disease; truly my own body being sickly brought me easily into a capacitie to know that Health was the greatest of all Earthly Blessings, and truly he was ne∣ver sick that doth not beleeve it; then I considered that all Medicines were compounded of Herbs, Roots, Flowers, Seeds &c. and this first set me a work in studying the Nature of Simples, most of which I knew by sight before, and indeed all the Authors I could reade gave me but little satisfaction in this particular, or none at all; I cannot build my faith upon Authors words, nor beleeve a thing because they say it, and could wish ever bodie were of my mind in this, to labor to be able to give a reason for every thing they say or do; they say reason makes a man differ from a Beast, if that be true, pray what are they that in∣stead of Reason for their judgment, quote old Authors, perhaps their Authors knew a reason for what they Wrote, perhaps they did not, what is that to us, do we know it? Truly in writing this Work first, to satisfie my self I drew out all the Vertues of vulgar Herbs, Plants, and Trees &c. out of the best and most approved Authors I had or could get, and having done so, I set my self to studie the Reason of
them; I knew well enough the whol world and every thing in it was formed of a Composition of contrary Elements, and in such a harmo∣ny as must needs shew the wisdom and Power of a great God. I knew as well this Creation though thus composed of contraries was one u∣nited Body, and man an Epitome of it, I knew those various affections in man in respect of Sickness and Health were caused Naturally (though God may have other ends best known to himself) by the va∣rious operations of the Macrocosm; and I could not be ignorant, that as the Cause is, so must the Cure be, and therefore he that would know the Reason of the operation of Herbs must look up as high as the Stars; I alwaies found the Disease vary according to the various motion of the Stars, and this is enough one would think to teach a man by the Effect where the Cause lay; Then to find out the Reason of the Operation of Herbs, Plants, &c. by the Stars went I, and here∣in I could find but few Authors, but those as full of nonsense and con∣tradictions as an Egg is full of meat, this being little pleasing, and less profitable to me, I consulted with my two Brothers, Dr REASON, and Dr EXPERIENCE, and took a Voyage to visit my Mother NATURE, by whose advice together with the help of Dr DILLI∣GENCE, I at last obtained my desires, and being warned by Mr Hone∣sty, a stranger in our daies to publish it to the World, I have done it. But you will say, What need I have written of this Subject, seing so many famous and learned men have written so much of it in the English Tongue, nay much more than I have done? To this I Answer, 1. All that have written of Herbs either in the English or not in the English Tongue, have no waies answered my intents in this Book, for they have intermixed many, nay very many outlandish Herbs, and ve∣ry many which are hard, nay not at all to be gotten, and what harm this may do I am very sensible of. Once a Student in Physick in Sus∣sex sent up to London to me, to buy for him such and such Medicines, and send them down, which when I viewed, they were Medicines quoted by Authors living in another Nation, and not to be had in Lon∣don for Love nor Money, so the poor man had spent much pains and Brains in studying Medicines for a Disease that were not to be had; so a man reading Gerards or Parkinsons Herbal for the Cure of a Diseas, he may as like as not, light on an Herb that is not here to be had, or not without great difficulty, if possible; but in mine, all grow neer him. 2. My last, though not the least of my Reasons is, Neither Gerard nor Parkinson nor any that ever wrote in the like Nature, ever gave one wise Reason for what they wrote, and so did nothing els but train up yong Novices in Physick in the School of Tradition, and teach them just as a Parrot is taught to speak, an Author saith so, therefore 'tis true, and if all that Authors say be true, why do they contradict one another? But in mine, if you view it with the Eye of Reason, you shall see a Reason for every thing that is written, whereby you may find the very Ground and Foundation of Physick, you may know
what you do, and wherefore you do it, and this shall call me Father, it being (that I know of) never done in the world before. I have now but two things more to write and then I have done. 1 What the profit and benefit of this Work is. 2 Instructions in the Vse of it. 1. The Profit and Benefits arising from it, or that may acrue to a wise man, from it are many, so many that should I sum up all the par∣ticulars, the Epistle would be as big as the Book; I shall only quote some few general Heads. First, The admirable Harmony of the Creation is herein seen, in the Influence of Stars upon Herbs and the Body of man, how one part of the Creation is subservient to another, and all for the use of man whereby the Infinite Power and Wisdom of God in the Creation ap∣pears; and if I do not admire at the simplicity of the Ranters, never trust me, who but viewing the Creation can hold such a sottish Opi∣nion, as that it was from eternity, when the Mysteries of it are so cleer to everie eye; but that Scripture shall be verified to them, Rom. I. 20. The invisible things of Him from the Creation of the world are cleerly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and God∣head, so that they are without excuse. And a Poet could teach them a better Lesson. Excideret ne tibi divini muner is author Presentem monstrat, quaelibet Herba Deum. Because out of thy thoughts God should not pass, His Image stamped is on every Grass. This indeed is true, God hath stamped his Image upon every Crea∣ture, and therefore the abuse of the Creature is a great sin; but how much more doth the Wisdom and Excellencie of God appear if we consider the Harmony of the Creation in the Vertue and Operation of every Herb; this is the first. Secondly, Hereby thou maist know what infinite Knowledg Adam had in his Innocencie, that by looking upon a Creature, he was able to give it a name according to his Nature, and by knowing that, thou maist know how great thy fall was, and be humbled for it eve in this respect, because hereby thou art so ignorant. Thirdly, Here is the right way for thee to begin the study of Phy∣sick if thou art minded to begin at the right end, for here thou hast the Reason of the whol Art. I wrote before in certain Astrological Le∣ctures which I read, and printed, intituled Semeiotica Vranica what Planet caused (as a second Cause) every Disease, and how it might be found out what Planet caused it; here thou hast what Planet cures it by Sympathy and Antipathy; and this brings me to my last promise, Viz. Instructions for the right use of the Book. And herein let me premise a word or two, Many Herbs, Plants, &c
are not in the Pook apropriated to their propper Planets, the Reason was, want of time, or some other thing else, which many that know me will easily guess at; at last the Book hanging longer in the Press than I imagined it would, I took the time and pains (though I could ill have spared either) to apropriate them all, and have for thy bene∣fit (Courteous Reader) inserted them in order after the Epistle, now then for thy Instruction, First, Consider what Planet causeth the Disease; that thou maist find in my Semeiotica. Secondly, Consider what part of the Body is afflicted by the Diseas, and whether it lie in the Flesh, or Blood, or Bones, or Ventricles. Thirdly, Consider by what Planet the afflicted part of the Bodie is governed; that my Semeiotica will inform you in also. Fourthly, You have in this Book the Herbs for Cure a propriated to the several Diseases, and the Diseases for your ease set down in the Margin, whereby you may strengthen the part of the Bodie by its like, as the rain by Herbs of Mercury, the Breast and Liver by Herbs of Ju∣piter, the Heart and Vitals by Herbs of the Sun, &c. Fifthly, You may oppose Diseases by Herbs of the Planet opposite to the Planet that causeth them, as Diseases of Jupiter by Herbs of Mercury, and the contrary; Diseases of the Lumnaries by Herbs of Sa∣turn, and the contrary; Diseases of Mars by Herbs of Venus, and the contrary. Sixthly, There is a way to cure Diseases somtimes by Sympathy, and so every Planet cures his own Diseases,, as the Sun and Moon by their Herbs cure the Eyes, Saturn the Spleen, Jupiter the Liver, Mars the Gall and Diseases of Choller, and Venus Diseases in the Instruments of Generation. Seventhly, There was smal Treatise of mine of Humane Vertues, printed at the latter end of my Ephemeris for the yeer 1651. I suppose it would do much good to yong Students to peruse that with this Book. Eighthly Yong Students would do themselves much good, and be∣nefit themseles exceedingly in the Study of Physick if they would tak the pains to view the Vertues of the Herbs &c. in the Book, and compare them to these Rules, they shall to their exceeding great con∣tent find them all agreeable to them, and shall thereby see the reason why such an Herb conduceth to the Cure of such a Disease. Ninthly, I gave you the Key of al in the Herb Wormwood, which if be∣cause of the volubility of the Language, any think it will not fit the Lock, I will here give it you again in another Herb of the same Pla∣net which in the Book either through my own forgetfulness, or my Amanuensis was omitted, and here I shal give it you plainly without any circumstances. The Herb is Carduus Benedictus. It is called Carduus Benedictus, or blessed Thistle or holy Thistle, I suppose the name was put uppon it by some that had little Holinessin
themselves: It is an Herb of Mars, and under the Sign Aries; now in handling this Herb, I shall give you a rational Pattern of all the rest, and if you please to view them throughout the Book, you shall to your content find it true. It helps Swimmings and giiddiness of the Head, or the Disease called Verti∣go, because Ariesis the House ofMars. It is an excellent Remedy against the yellow Jaundice, and other Infirmities of the Gall, because Marsgoverns Choller. It strengthens the attractive faculty in man, and clarifies the Blood, because the one is ruled by Mars. The continual drinking the Decoction of it helps red Faces, Tetters, and Ring∣worms because Marscauseth them. It helps Plague-sores, Boils, and Itch, the Bitings of mad Dogs and venemous Beasts, all which infirmities are under Mars. Thus you see what it doth by Sympathy. By Antypathy to other Planets. It cures the French Pox by Antypathy to Venuswho governs it. It strengthens the Memory and cures Deafness by Antipathy to Saturnwho hath his Fall in Aries which Rules the Head. It cures Quartan Agues, and other Diseases of Melancholly and adust Choller by sympathy to Saturn, Marsbeing exalted in Capricorn. Also it provokes Vrine, the stopping of which is usually caused by Marsor the Moon. If you please to make use of these Rules, you shall find them true throughout the Book, and by heeding them, you may be able to give a Reason of your Judgment to him that asketh you: I assure you it gave much content to me, and for your goods did I pen it; but I must conclude, my Epistle having exceeded its Bounds alreadie; hereby you see what Reason may be given for Medicines, and what necessity there is for every Physitian to be an Astrologer, you have heard it before I suppose, but now you know it; what remains, but that you labor to glorifie God in your several places, and do good to your selves first by encreasing your Knowledg, and to your Neighbors afterwards by helping their Infirmities; some such I hope this Nation is worthy of, and to such shall I remain a Friend, during life, readie to my poor power to help. Nich. Culpeper. Spittle-fields next door to the red Lyon. Novemb. 6. 1652.
Authors made use of in this TREATISE. A AEgineta. AEtius. Aristotle. Avicenna. Averrois. Avenaris. Andreas Caesalpinus. Antonius Musa. B Bauhine. Bellus. Bartholomeus Anglus. Butler, a Manuscript. C Clusius. Cameravius. D Dodoneus. Dioscorides. E Dr. Experience. F Fabius Columna. Fuchsius. G Gesner. Galen. Gerrhard. I Isidore. Johnson. L Leonicerus. Lobel. Lug dunensis. M Mathiolus. Mesue. Mizaldus. O Otho Brunfelfius. P Parkinson. Pliny. Pena. Platearius. Pona. R Dr. Reason. Rhazis. S Serapio. T Taberna Montanus. Theophrastus. Turner. Tragus.
A Catalogue of the Herbs and Plants &c. in this Treatise, apropriated to their several PLANETS. Vnder Saturn are, Barley Red Beets Beech-tree Bifoyl, or Twayblade Birdsfoot Bistort, or Snakeweed Blewbottles Buckshorn-Plantane Wild Campions Pilewort Cleavers, or Goosgrass Clowns Woundwort Comfry Cudweed, or Cottonweed Sciatica Cresses Crosswort Darnel Doddar Epithimum Elm-tree Osmond Royal Fleawort Flixweed Fumitory Stinking Gladwin Goutwort Wintergreen Haukweed Hemlock Hemp Henbane Horstail Knapweed Knotgrass Medlar-tree Moss Mullein Nightshade Polypodium Poplar-tree Quince-tree Rupture-wort Rushes Solomons-Seal Sarazens Consound Service-tree Spleenwort, or Cetrach Tamaris Melancholly-Thistle Blackthorn Throughwax Tutsan, or Parkleaves Woad. Vnder Jupiter are, Agrimony Alexanders Asparagus Avens Bay-tree White Beets Water-Bettony Wood-Bettony Bilberries Borrage Bugloss Chervil Sweet Cicely Cinkfoyl Costmary, or Alecost Dandelyon Docks Bloodwort Dog, or Quich-grass Endive Hartstongue Hysop Housleek, or Sengreen Liverwort Lungwort Sweet Maudlin Oak-tree Red Roses Sage Sauce alone, or Jack by the Hedg Scurvy-grass Succory Our Ladies Thistles. Vnder Mars are, Arsesmart Asarabacca Barberry-bush Sweet Bazil Bramble-bush Briony Brooklime Butchers-broom Broom Broomrape Crowfoot Cuckoopint, or Wake-Robin Cranebil Cotton-Thistle Flax-weed, or Toad-flax. Fursebush Garlick Hawthorn Hops Naddir Masterwort Mustard Hedg-Mustard Mettles Onions Pepperwort, or Dittander Carduus Benedictus in the Epistle Rhadish Horse Rhadish Rhubarb Rapontick
Bastard Rhubarb Thistles Star-thistle Tobacco Wolly Thistle Treacle Mustard Mithridate Mustard Wold, Weld, or Dyers Weed, Wormwood. Vnder the Sun are, Angelica Ash-tree Bawm One-blade Burnet Butter-bur Chamomel Chelondine Centaury Eyebright St. Johns wort Lovage Marigolds Misleto Peony St. Peters wort Pimpernel Rosa Solis Rosemary Rhue Saffron Tormentil Turnsole, or Heliotropium Vipers Bugloss Walnut-tree Vnder Venus are, Alehoof, or Ground-Ivy Black Alder-tree Alder-Tree Apple-tree Stinking Arrach Arch-Angel, or Dead Nettles Beans Ladies Bedstraw Birch-tree Bishops Weed Blites Bugle Burdock Cherry-tree Winter Cherries Chickweed Cichpease Clary Cocks-head Coltsfoot Cowslips Daisies Devils-bit Elder Dwarf Elder Eringo Featherfew Figwort Filipendula Foxgloves Golden-rod Gromwel Groundsel Herb Robert Herb Truelove Kidneywort. peniwovt: pa: yo: Ladies Mantle Mallows Marsh-Mallows Mercury Mints Motherwort Mugwort Nep, or Catmint Parsnip Peach-tree Pear-tree Penyroyal Perewinkle Plantane Plum-tree Primroses Ragwort Rocket Winter-Rocket Damask Roses Wood Sage Sanicle Selfheal Sopewort, or Bruisewort Sorrel Wood Sorrel Sowthistles Spignel Strawberries Garden Tansy Wild Tansy, or Silver-weed Teazles Vervain Vine-tree Violets Wheat Yarrow. Vnder Mercury are, Calaminth, or Mounta Mint Carrots Carraway Dill Elicampane Fern Fennel Hogs Fennel Germander Hazel Nut-tree Horchound Houndstongue Lavender Liquoris Wall-Rhue Maidenhair Golden Maidenhair Sweet Marjoram Melilot Moneywort Mulberry-tree Oats Parsley Cow Parsnep Pellitory of the Wall Groundpine, or Chamepitys Rest-Harrow, or Chamock Sampire Summer and winter Savory Scabious Smallage Southernwood Meadow Trefoyl Garden Valerian Woodbind, or Honey-Suc∣kles. Vnder the Moon are, Adders Tongue Cabbages Coleworts
Sea Coleworts Columbines Watercresses Duckmeat Yellow Waterflag Flower-de-luce Fluellin Ivy Lettice Water-Lillies Loosestrife, with, and with∣out spiked Heads Moonwort Mousear Orpine Poppies Purslain Privet Rattle-grass White Roses White Saxifrage Burnet Saxifrage Wall-flowers, or Winter-gil∣liflowers Willow-tree
The Names of several Books printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Prin∣ting Press in Cornhill, by the Exchange, London. Four several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physick and Astrology. 1 A PHYSICAL DIRECTORY: Or a Translation of the Dispensatory, made by the Colledg of Physitians of London. Whereunto is ad∣ded, The Key to Galen's Method of Physick. 2 A DIRECTORY for Midwives; or a Guide for Women. 3 An EPHEMERIS for the year 1651. Amplified with Rational Predictions from the Book of the Crea∣tures. 1 Of the State of the Year. 2 What may pro∣bably by the effects of the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, July 9. 1650. in Scotland, Holland, Zealand, York, Amsterdam, &c. and about what time they may probably happen. To which is joyned, An Astrologo∣physical Discours of the Humane Vertues in the Body of Man. 4 GALENS ART OF PHYSICK; wherein is laid down, 1. A Description of Bodies, Healthful, Unhealthful, and Neutral. 2. Signs of good and bad Constitutions. 3. Signs of the Brain, Heart, Liver, Testicles, Temperature, Lungues, Stomach, &c. being too Hot, Cold, Dry, Moist, Hot and dry, Hot and moist, Cold and dry, Cold and moist. 4. Signs and Causes of Sickness. Translated into English, and largely Commented on; Together with convenient Medicines for all particu∣lar Distempers of the Parts, a Description of the Complexion, their Conditions, and what Diet and Exercise is fittest for them. A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at Dedbam in Essex. The Wonders of the Load-stone, by Mr. Samuel Ward of Ipswich. An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Mat∣thew. By Mr. Ward. Clows Chirurgery. Marks of Salvation. Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Good∣win. Great Church Ordinance of Baptism. Mr. Love's Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech. Vox Pacifica, or a Perswasive to Peace. Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and Satans Overthrow. Pious mans practice in Parliament Time. A Treatise of the Rickets, being a Disease common to Children; Wherein is shewed, 1. The Essence, 2. The Causes, 3. The Signs, 4. The Remedies of the Disease. Published in Latin by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bate, and Dr. Regemorter. Mr. Symsons Sermon at Westminster. Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major. Mr. Phillips Treatise of Hell. —of Christs Geneology. Seven Books of Mr. Jeremiah Burroughs lately publi∣shed; As also the Texts of Scripture upon which they are grounded. 1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4. II. Wherin is shewed, 1. What Contentment is, 2. It is an holy Art and Mystery, 3. The Excellen∣cies of it, 4. The Evil of the contrary sin of Mur∣muring, and the Aggravations of it. 2 Gospel-Worship, on Levit. 10. 3. Wherin is shewed, 1. The right manner of the Worship of God in ge∣neral; and particularly, In Hearing the Word, Re∣ceiving the Lords Supper, and Prayer. 3 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1. 17. Wherin is shewed, 1. That the Conversations of Beleevers must be above what could be by the Light of Nature, 2 Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3. And sutable to what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those Men that have their Portion in this Life only, on Psal. 17. 14. 4 A Treatise of Earthly-mindedness. Wherin is she∣wed, 1 What Earthly-mindedness is, 2 The great Evil therof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. Vers. Also to the same Book is joyned, A Treatise of Heavenly∣mindedness, and walking with God, on Gen. 5. 24. and on Phil. 3. 20. 5 An Exposition, on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the Prophesie of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chap∣ters of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of Hosea. The Compassionate Samaritan. Twelve several Books of Mr. William Bridg, Collected into one Volumn. Viz. 1 The great Gospel-Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from Christs Priestly Office. 2 Satans Power to Tempt; and Christs Love to, and Care of His People under Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every Condition. 4 Grace for Grace or, the Overflowings of Christs Fulness received by all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith, through Natural Impossibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual-Life, and In-Being of Christ in all Beleevers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 The Saints Hiding-Place in time of Gods Anger. 10 Christs Coming is at our Midnight. 11 A Vindication of Ordinances. 12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts. Cum multis aliis—
THE English Physitian. Adders Tongue. ☽ Description. THis small Herb hath but one Leaf; which grows with the Stalk a fingers length above the ground, being fat, and of a fresh green colour, broad like the Water Plantane (but less) without any middle Rib in it: from the bottom of which Leaf on the inside, riseth up (ordinarily) one, somtimes two, or three small slender: stalks, the upper half wherof is somwhat bigger, and dented with smal round dents of a yellowish green, colour, like the Tongue of an Adder or Serpent (only this is as useful as they are formidable) The Root continues all the year. Place. It groweth in moist Meadows, and such like places. Time. And is to be found in April and May, for it quickly perisheth with a little heat. Vertues and use. It is temperate, in respect of heat, but dry in the Second Degree. The Juyce of the Leaves drunk with the distilled Water of Horstail is a singular Remedy for all manner of wounds in the Breast, Bowels,Wounds in the Breast, Bowels, Vomiting, Bleeding, Terms stops, Whites, Wounds, Ulcers, In∣flamati∣ons in Wounds. or other parts of the Body, and is given with good success un∣to those who are troubled with Casting, Vo∣miting, or bleeding at the Mouth or Nose, or otherwise downwards. The said Juyce given in the distilled Water of Oaken Buds is very good for Women who have their usual Courses, or the Whites flowing down too abundantly. It helps sore Eyes. The Leaves infused or boy∣led in Oyl Omphacine, or unripe Olives set in the Sun for certain daies, or the green Leaves Sufficiently boyled in the said Oyl, is made an excellent green Balsom, not only for green and fresh Wounds, but also for old and invererate Ulcers, especially if a little fine clear Turpentine be dissolved therin: It also stayeth and represseth all inflamations that a∣rise upon pains, by Hurts, or Wounds. It is an Herb under the Dominion of the Moon in Cancer, and therfore if the weakness of the Rententive Faculty be caused by an evil influence of Saturn, in any part of the Body governed by the Moon, or under the Domini∣on of Cancer, this Herb cures it by Sympathy: It cures those Diseases before specified in any part of the Body under the influence of Sa∣turn, by Antypathy. What parts of the Body are under each Pla∣net and Sign, and also what Diseases may be found in my Astrological Judgment of Dis∣eases, and for the internal Work of Nature in the Body of Man, as Vital, Animal, Natural, and Procreative Spirit of Man, The Appre∣ Judgment Memory. the external Sences, viz. Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Ta∣sting, and Feeling; the Vertues, Attractive, Retentive, Digestive, Expulsive &c. under the Dominion of what Planets they are, may be found in my Ephemers for the yeer 1651. in both which you shall find the Chaff of Au∣thors blown away by the Fame of Dr. Reason, and nothing but Rational Truths left for the Judgment of the Ingenious to feed upon. Lastly, To avoid blotting Paper with one thing many times, and also to ease your Purses in the price of the Book, and withal to make you Studious in Physick, you have at the latter end of the Book, the way of preserving all Herbs either in Juyce, Conserve Oyl, Oyn∣ment, or Plaister, Electuary Pill or Troches. Agrimony. ♃ Description. THis hath divers long leaves (some greates, some smaller) set upon a Stalk, all of them dented about the edges, green above, and
grayish underneath, and a little hairy withal: Among which ariseth up usually, but one strong, round, hairy, brown Stalk, two or three Foot high, with smaller Leaves set here and there upon it, at the top wherof grow ma∣ny smal yellow Flowers one above another in long Spikes: after which come rough heads of Seeds hanging downwards which wil cleave to and stick upon Garments or any thing that shal rub against them. The Root is black, long, and somwhat woody, abiding many yeers and shooting afresh every Spring which Root, though smal hath a reasonable good scent. Place. It 'groweth upon Banks near the sides of Hedges, or Pales. Time. And it Flowreth in July and August, the Seed being ripe shortly after. Vertues and uses. It is of a clensingClensing, Drying, Binding, Liver, Jaundice, Inward Wounds, Inward Bruises, Bloody and trou∣bled urin, Chollick, Breast, Cough, Tertain and Quar∣tan Agues, Bloody Flux, ul∣cers, Can∣cers, Thorns, Splinters and Nails in the flesh Members out of joynt, A∣posthumes. and cutting faculty with∣out any manifest heat, moderately drying and binding; It openeth and clenseth the Liver, helpeth the Jaundice, and is very beneficial to the Bowels, healing all inward Wounds, Brui∣ses, Hurts, and other distempers. The Deco∣ction of the Herb made with Wine and drunk is good against the stinging and biting of Ser∣pents, and helps them that have foul, trou∣bled, or bloody waters, and makes them piss cleer spedily; It also helpeth the Chollick, clenseth the Breast, and rids away the Cough. A draught of the Decoction taken warm before the Fit, first removes, and in time rids away the Tertian or Quartan Agues: The Leaves and Seed taken in Wine, Stayeth the Bloody Flu.  app, being stamped with old Swines grease, it helpeth old sores, Can∣cers, and inveterate Ulcers; and draweth forth Thorns, Splinters of Wood, Nails, or any other such thing gotten into the Flesh; it hel∣peth to strengthen the Members that be out of joynt; and being bruised and applied, or the Juyce dropped in, it helpeth foul and impost∣huned Ears. The distilled Water of the Herb is good to all the said purposes, either inward or out∣ward, but a great deal weaker. It is an Herb under Jupiter, and the Sign cancer, and therfore strengthens those parts under that Planet and Sign, and removes Dis∣eases in them by Sympathy, and those under Saturn, Mars, and Mercury, by Antipthy. If they happen in any part of the Body gover∣ned by Jupiter, or under the Signs, Cancer, Sagitary, or Pisces, and therfore must needs be good for the Gout, either used outwardly in an Oyl or Oyntment, or inwardly in an Electuary or Syrup, or concreated Juyce, for which see the latter end of the Book. It is a most admirable remedy for such whole Livers are annoyed either by heat or cold. The Liver is the former of Blood, and Blood the Nourisher of the Body, and Agri∣mony and Strengthner of the Liver. I cannot stand to give you a Reason in eve∣ry Herb why it cureth such Diseaess, but if you please to peruse my Judgment in the Herb Wormwood you shall find them there, and it will be well worth your while to consider it in every Herb, you shall find them true through∣out the Book. Alehoof, or Ground-Ivy. ♀ Description. THis well known Herb, lieth, spreadeth, and crcepeth upon the ground, shooting forth Roots, at the corners of the tender joyn∣ted Stalks, set all along with two round Leavs at every Joynt, somwhat hairy, crumpled, and unevenly dented about the edges with round dents: at the Joynts likewise with the Leaves towards the end of the Branches come forth hollow long Flowers of a blewish Purple co∣lour with small white spots upon the lips that hang down: The Root is smal with strings. Place. It is commonly found under Hedges, and on the sides of Ditches, under Houses, or in shadowed Lanes, and other wast grounds in almost every part of the Land. Time. They Flower somwhat early, and abide so a great while; the Leaves continue green un∣till Winter, and somtimes abide, except, the Winter be very sharp and cold. Vertues and use. It is quick, sharp, and bitter in tast, and is therby found to be hot and dry, a singular. Herb for all inward Wounds,Inward Wounds, Pains Gri∣ping, Wind Choller, Stomach, Spleen, Belly, stop∣ping in the Liver, Gal Plague, Poyson, Gout, Sci∣ati, sore Mouth & Throat, Ulcers in the Privi∣ties, Itch, Scabs, Web in the Ej Redness & watring of them, ul∣cers, noise in the Ears Deafness. exulcerated Lungs, or other parts, either by it self or boy∣led with other the like Herbs: And being drunk, it in short time easeth all griping Pains, Windy and Chollerick Humors in the Stomach, Spleen, or Belly: helps the yel∣low Jaundice by opening the stoppings of the Gaul and Liver, and Melancholly by opening the stoppings of the Spleen, expelleth Venom or Poyson, and also the Plague, it provoketh Urin, and Womens Courses. The Decocti∣on of it in Wine drunk for some time toge∣ther procureth case unto them that are trou∣bled with the Sciatica or Hip Gout, as also the Gout in the Hands, Knees, or Feet: and if you put to the Decoction, some Honey, and a little Burnt Allum, it is excellent good to gargle any sore mouth or Throat, and to wash the Sores and Ulcers in the privy parts of man or woman: It speedily healeth green Wounds being bruised and bound therunto: The Juyce of it boyled with a little Hony & Vardigrees, doth wonderfully clens Fistula's, Ulcers, and
stayeth the spreading or eating of Cancers and Ulcers, It helpeth the Itch, Scabs, Wheals, and other breakings out in any part of the Body. The Juyce of Celondine, Field Day∣sies, and Ground-Ivy clarified, and a little fine Sugar dissolved therin and dropped into the Eyes is Sovereign Remedy for all the Pains, Redness, and Watering of them; as also for the Pin and Web, Skins, and Films growing over the Sight; It helpeth Beasts as well as Men; The Juyce dropped into the Ears doth wonderfully help the noise and singing of them, and helpeth the Hearing which is de∣cayed. It is good to Tun up with new Drink, for it will so clarifie it in a night, that it will be the fitter to be drunk the next morning; or if any Drink be thick with removing or a∣ny other accident, it will do the like in a few hours. It is an Herb of Venus, and therfore cures her Diseases by Sympathy, and those of Mars by Antipathy; how to preserve it all the yeer you shall find at the latter end of the Book. Alexander. ♃ Description. IT is usually sown in all the Gardens in Eu∣rope, and so well known, that it needs no further Description. Time. They Flower in June and July, and the Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and use. It warmeth a cold Stomach, and openeth stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, it is good to move Womens Courses, to expel the Af∣ter-birth, to break Wind, to provoke Urine, and help the Strangury; and these things the Seeds wil do likewise, if either of them be boyled in Wine, or being bruised and taken in Wine, it is also effectual against the biting of Serpents.Obstructi∣ons of the Liver and Spleen, provokes the Terms Afterbirth Wind, pro∣vokes u∣rin, biting of Ser∣pents. And now you know what Alexan∣der Porredg which is so familiar in this City is good for, that you may no longer cat it out of ignorance but out of knowledg. The Black Alder-Tree. ♀ Description. THis Tree seldom groweth to any great bigness, but for the most part abideth like a Hedg, Bush, or Tree spreading into Branches, the Wood of the Body being white, and of a dark, red Core or Heart; the out∣ward Bark is of a blackish colour, with many white spots theron: but the inner Bark next unto the Wood is yellow, which being chew∣ed will turn the Spittle neer unto a Saffron colour. The Leaves are somwhat like those of the ordiuary Alder-Tree, or the Foemale Cornel, or Dogberry-Tree, called in Sussex Dog-wood, but blacker, and not so long. The Flowers are white, coming forth with the Leaves at the Joynts, which turn into smal round Berries, first green, afterwards red, but blackish when they are through ripe divided as it were into two parts, wherin is contained two smal round and flat Seeds: The Root runneth not deep into the Ground, but sprea∣deth rather under the upper crust of the Earth. Place. This Tree or Shrub may be found plenti∣fully in St. Johns Wood by Hornsey,, and in the Woods upon Hamsted Heath; as also at a Wood called the old Park in Barcomb in Sus∣sex, neer the Brooks side. Time. It Flowreth in May, and the Berries are ripe in September. Vertues and use. The inner yellow Bark herof purgeth down∣wards both Choller & Flegm,Choller, Flrgm. & the watry hu∣mors of such as have the Dropsie, and streng∣theneth the inward parts again by binding. If the Bark hereof be boyled with Agrimony, Wormwood, Dodder, Hops, and some F with Smalledg, Endive, and Succory, Roots, and a reasonable draught taken every morning for some time together, it is very effectual a∣gainst the Jaundice, Dropsie,Jaundice Dropsy, Cach, Liver, Spleen. and the evil di∣sposition of the Body, especially if some sui∣table purging medicine have been when be∣fore to avoid the grosser excrements; It purgeth and strengtheneth the Liver and Spleen, clensing them from such evilhumors and hardness as they are afflicted with, It is to be understood that these things are perfor∣med by the dryed Bark, for the fresh green Bark taken inwardly provoketh strong Vomi∣tings, pains in the Stomach, and gripings in the Belly: Yet if the Decoction may stand and settle two or three daies until the yellow colour be changed black, it will not work so strongly as before, but will strengthen the Sto∣mach,Stomach weak, A∣petite lost, Flux, Li Itch, Scab tooth-ach, Teeth loos. and procure an Appetite to Meat. The outer Bark contrarywise, doth bind the Body, and is helpful for all Lasks and Pluxes therof, but this must also be dried first, wherby it wil work the better. The inner Bark herof boyled in Vineger, is an approved remedy to kill Lice, to cure the Itch, and take away  by drying them up in a short time: It is singu∣lar good to wash the Teeth, to take away the Pains, to fasten those that are loos, to clens them, and keep them sound. The Leaves are good Fodder for Kine to make them give more Milk. If in the Spring time you use the Herbs be∣fore
mentioned and will but take a handful of each of them, and to them ad a handful of El∣der Buds, and having bruised them all, boyl them in a Gallon of ordinary Beer when 'tis new, and having boyled them half an hour, ad this to three Gallons more, and let them work together, and drink a draught of it every morning, half a pint or there aocuts: It is an excellent Purge for the Spring, to consume that Flegmatick quality the Winter, hath left behind it, and withal keep your Body in health, and consume those evil humors which the heat of Summer will readily stir up, esteem it as a Jewel. ♀ The Common Alder-Tree. Description. GRoweth to a reasonable heighth, and spreads much if it like the place; It is so generally wel known unto Country People that I conceive it needless to tel them that which is no news. Place and Time. It delighteth to grow in moist Woods and watry places, Flowring in April or May, and yeilding ripe Seed in September. Vertues and Use. The Leaves and Bark of the Alder-Tree, are cooling, drying, and binding,Cooling, Drying, Binding, Swellings, Fleas. The fresh Leaves laid upon swellings, dissolveth them, and staieth the Inflamations; The Leaves put under the bare Feet gauled with travelling are a great refreshing to them: The said Leaves gathered while the morning dew is on them, and brought into a Chamber troubled with Fleas, wil gather them therinto, which being suddenly cast out wil rid the Chamber of those troublesom Bed-fellows. It is a Tree under the Dominion of Venus, and of some warry Sign or other, I suppose Pisces, and therfore the Decoction, or distil∣led Water of the Leaves is excellent against Burnings, and Inflamation,Burnings, inflama∣tions. either with Wounds or without, to bath the place grieved with, and especially for that inflamation in the Breast which the vulgar call an Ague. If you cannot get the Leaves, as in Winter tis impossible, make use of the Bark in the same manner. ☉ ♌ Angelica. TO write a Description of that which is so well known to be growing in almost every Garden, I suppose is altogether need∣less: yet for its Vertues it is of admiaable use. In times of Heathenism when men had found out any excellent Herb &c. they dedi∣cated it to their gods, As the Bay-trce to A∣pello, the Oak to Jupiter, the vine to Bac∣chus, the Poplar to Hercules: These the Pa∣pists following as their Patriarchs, they dedi∣cate them to their Saints, as our Ladies Thi∣stle to the Blessed Virgin, St. Johns Wort to St. John, and another Wort to St. Peter, &c. Our Physitians must imitate like Apes, (though they cannot come off half so cleverly) for they Blasphemously call Pansies, or Harts∣eas, an Herb of the Trinity, becaus it is of three colours: and a certain Oyntment, an Oyntment of the Apostles, becaus it consisteth of twelve Ingredients; Alas poor Fools, I am sorry for their folly, and grieved at their Blasphemy; God send them the rest of their Age, for they have their share of Ignorance already; O! why must ours be Blasphemous becaus the Heathens and Papists were Idola∣trous? certainly they have read so much in old rustie Authors, that they have lost all their Deomity, for unless it were amongst the Ranters, I never read or heard of such Blasphemy: The Heathens and Papists were bad, and ours wors, the Papists giving Idola∣trous Names to Herbs for their Vertues sake, not for their fair looks; and therfore some called this an Herb of the Holy Ghost, others more moderate called it Angelica, becaus of its Angelical Vertues, and that name it retains still, and all Nations follow it so near as their Dialect will permit. Vertues and use. It resists Poyson,Poyson, Pestilence, Epidemi∣cal Disea∣ses. by defending and comfor∣ting the Heart, Blood, and Spirits, it doth the like against the Plague, and all Epidemical Diseases if the Root be taken in pouder to the waight of half a dram at a time, with some good Triacle in Cards Water, and the par∣ty therupon laid to sweat in his Bed. If Treacle be not at hand, take it alone in Car∣dus, or Angelica Water. The Stalks or Roots candied and eaten fasting, are good Preserva∣tives in time of Infection; and at other times to warm and comfort a cold Stomach. The Root also steeped in Vineger, and a little of that Vineger taken somtimes fasting, and the Root smelled unto is good for the same pur∣pose. A water distilled from the Root sim∣ply, or steeped in Wine and distilled in Glass, is much more effectual than the Water of the Leaves; and this Water drunk two or three spoonfuls at a time, easeth all Pains and Tor∣ments coming of Cold and Wind,Cold  Pleuresy, Cough, Lungues, Breast, Strang, Shortness of Breath Chollick, provokes the Terms, afterbirth, stoppings of the Li∣ver and Spleen, In∣digestion, Sur∣fets, Tooth∣ach, biting of Mad∣dogs. so as the Body be not bound: and taken with some of the Root in Pouder at the beginning helpeth the Pluresy, as also all other Diseases of the Lungues and Breast, as Coughs, Phthisick, and shortnefs of Breath; and a Syrup of the
Stalks doth the like: It helps pains of the Col∣lick, the Strangury, and stopping of the Urin, procureth Womens Courses, and expelleth the After-birth, openeth the stoppings of the Li∣ver and Spleen, and briefly easeth and discus∣seth al windiness and inward swellings. The Decoction drunk before the fit of an Ague, that they may sweat (if possible) before the fit come, wil in two or three times taking rid it quite away: It helps digestion, and is a reme∣dy for a Surfet. The Juyce or the Water be∣ing dropped into the Eyes or Ears, helps dim∣ness of sight and deafness: The Juyce put in∣to the hollow Teeth, easeth their pains. The Roots in Pouder made up into a Plaister with a little Pitch; and laid on the biting of a mad∣Dog, or any other venemous creature, doth wonderfully help: The Juyce or the Water dropped, or tents wet therin, and put into old filthy deep Ulcers,Ulcers, Gout, Sci∣atica. Or the Pouder of the Root (in want of either) doth clens and caus them to heal quickly, by covering the naked Bones with Flesh. The distilled Water applied to places pained with the Gout or Sciatica, doth give a great deal of ease. The wild Angelica is not so effectual as the Garden, although it may be safly used to al the purposes aforesaid. It is an Herb of the Sun in Leo; let it be gathered when he is there, the Moon applying to his good Aspect; let it be gathered either in his hour, or in the hour of Jupiter, let Sol be angular. Oserve the like in gathering the Herbs of other Plants, and you may happen do wonders. In al Epidemical Diseases caused by Saturn this is as good a Preservative as grows. ♀ Apples. A Word or two of the most usual kinds of Apples, though the colledg of Physitians make use of none but such as Vulgò vulgati, Pearmains, vel Pippins. Apples in general are cold and windy, and being of sundry tasts, Galen sheweth thereby how to distinguish them: Som have a sharp tast, and are good for fainting Stomachs and loos Bellies;Fainting Stomach, Loos Bel∣lies, Thirst, Flegm. others sowr, good to cool and quench thirst; som sharp, fit to cut gross flegm; som sweet, soon destributed in the Body, and as soon passed away, yet sooner corrupted is the Stomach if they be staid: The best sorts before they be throughly ripe are to be avoi∣ded: then to be roasted or scalded is the best way to take them, and a little Spice or Seeds cast upon them and taken after meat, do stren∣then both Stomach and Bowels,Stomach, Bowels, Vomiting, Flux, losen, Worms Melan∣cholly, A∣gues, Heats of the Li∣ver and Stomach. especially in those that loath, or hardly digest their meat, or are given to casting, or have a Flux or Lask: Those that are a little sowr and harsh used in that manner are fittest: Sweet Apples loosen the Belly and drive forth Worms; Sowr Ap∣ples stop the Belly, and provoke Urin 3 and Crabs for this purpose are fittest: The sweet Apples as the Pippin and Pearmain, help to dissolve Melancholly humors, and to procure Mirth, and therfore are fittest for Confectio Alkerimes, and Syrupus de Pomis. The Leavs boyled and given to drink in hot Agues, where the heat of the Liver and Stomach causeth the Lips to break out, and the Throat to grow dry, harsh and furred, is very good to wash and gargle it withal, and to drink down som. This may to good purpose be used when better things are not at hand, or cannot be had. The Juyce of Crabs either Verjuyce or Cider, is of singular good use in the Heat and faintings of the Stomach, and against Casting to make a Posset with, or taken som of it alone by it self. The Juyce of Crabs, or Cider applied with wet cloaths therein to scaldedScalding, Burning, Eyes, In∣flamation ulcers, Spots, Freckles. or burnt places, cooleth, healeth, and draweth sorih the Fire. A rotten Apple applied to Eyes blood∣shotten, or enflamed with heat, or that are black and blue about them by any stroke or fall, and bound too all day or night, helpeth them quickly. The distilled Water of rotten Apples doth cool the heat and inflamations of Sores, and is good to bath foul creeping Ul∣cers, and to wash the Face to take away Spots, Freckles or other discolorings. The distilled Water of good and sound Apples is of special good use to procure Mirth, and expel Melan∣cholly. The Ointment called Pomatum, if sweet and well made, helpeth the Chops in the Lips or Hands,Chaps in the Lips & Hands and maketh smooth and sup∣ple the rough Skin of the Hands or Face par∣ched with wind or other accidents. Thus my Authors. All that I can say of Apples is this: 1 That they are extream windy. 2 That they provoke Urin, being roasted (especially Pomwaters) and mixed with fair Water, and drunk up at night going to bed; half a dozen great ones mixed with a quart of Water, excellently provokes Urin, if there be no material stone in the Body: This I had of Gerhard, and have often known it proved, and alwaies with good success. All Apples loosen the Belly and pleasure the Stomach by their coolness. Arrach wild & stinking. ♀ Description. THis hath small and almost round Leaves, yet a little pointed and without dent or cut, of a dusky mealy colour, growing on the slender Stalks and Branches that spread on the
the Leaves, and smal Seeds succeding like the rest, perishing yearly, and rising again with its own sowing. It smels like old rotten Fish, or somthing worse. Place. It grows usually upon Dunghils. Time. They flower in June and July, and their Seed is ripe quickly after. Vertues and use. Stinking Arrach is used as a remedy to help Women painèd, and almost strangled with the Mother,Mother, by smelling to it: But inwardly ta∣ken, there is not a better Remedy under the Moon for that Disease. I would be large in commendation of this Herb, were I but Elo∣quent. It is an Herb under the dominion of Venus, and under the sign Scorpio: It is com∣mon almost upon every Dunghil. The Works of God are given freely to Man, his Medicins are common and cheap, and easie to be found: tis the Medicines of the Colledg of Physitians that are so dear and scarce to find) I com¦mend it for an Universal Medicine for the Womb,Womb. and such a Medicine as will easily, saf∣ly, and speedily cure any Diseas therof, as the fits of the Mother, Dislocation or falling our therof; it cools the Womb being over-hea∣red (And let me tel you this, and I wil tel you but the truth, Heat of the womb is one of the greatest causes of hard labor in Childbirth) It makes barren women fruitful, it clenseth the Womb if it be foul and strengthens it excee∣dingly; it provokes the Terms if they be stop∣ped, and stops them if they flow immoderatly: You can desire no good to your Womb, but this Herb will effect it; therfore if you love Children, if you love Health, if you love Ease, keep a Syrup alwaies by you made of the Juyce of this Herb and Sugar (or Honey if it be to clens the Womb) and let such as be rich keep it for their poor neighbors, and bestow it as freely as I bestow my studies upon them, or els let them look to answer it another day when the Lord shall come to make inquisition for Bloud. ♀ Archangel. To put a gloss upon their practice; the Physitians call an Herb (which Country people ulgarly know by the name of Dead∣Nettles) Archangèl, wherein whether they savor of more Superstition or Folly I leave to the judicious Reader. There is more curiosi∣ty than courtesie to my Countrymen used by others in the explaination, aswel of the Names as Description of this so wel-known an Herb; which that I may not: also be guilty of, Take this short Description first of the Red-Arch∣angel. Descriptions. This hath divers square stalks somwhat hai∣ry, at the joynts whereof grow two sad green Leaves dented about the edges, opposit to one another, the lowermost upon long footstalks, but without any toward the tops which are somwhat round, yet pointed, and a little crum∣pled and hairy: Round about the upper Joynts where the Leaves grow thick, are sundry ga∣ping Flowers of a pale reddish colour, after which com the Seeds three or four in a Husk. The Root is smal and thriddy, perishing every year: the whol Plant hath a strong scent, but not stinking. White-Archangel hath diverse square stalks not standing streight upright but bending downward, wheron stand two Leavs at a Joynt, larger and more pointed than the other, dented about the edges and greener also more like un∣to Nettle-Leavs, but not stinking, yet hairy: At the Joynts with the Leavs stand larger and more open gaping white Flowers, in Husks round about the Stalks (but not with such a bush of Leavs, as Flowers set in the top, as is on the other) wherin stand smal roundish black Seeds: The Root is white, with many strings at it, not growing downward but lying under the upper crust of the Earth, and abideth many years encreasing: This hath not so strong a scent as the former. Tellow-Archangel is like the White in the Stalks and Leavs, but that the Stalks are more streight and upright, and the Joynts with Leaves are further asunder, having longer Leavs than the former; and the Flowers a little larger and more gaping, of a fair yellow colour in most, in som paler. The Roots are like the White, only they creep not so much under the ground. Place. They grow almost every where, (unless it be in the middle of the street) the Yellow most usually in the wet grounds of Woods, and som∣times in the dryer, in divers Countries of this Nation. Time. They flower from the begining of the spring all the summer long. Vertues and use. The Archangels are somwhat hot and dryer than the stinking Nettles, and used with better success for the stopping and hardness of the Spleen than they by using the Decoction of the Herb in Wine, and afterwards applying the Herb hot unto the Region of the SpleenSpleen. as a Plaister, or the Decoction with Spunges. The Flowers of the WhiteWhite, Red and yellow Flux. Archangel are presered, or conserved to be used to stay the Whits, and the Flowers of the Red to stay th Reds in Women. It makes the Heart merry, drives a∣way Melancholly,Melancho∣ly, Quar∣tan Agues, Bleeding at Nose, Swelling, Kings-E∣vil, Gout, Sciatica, Joynts, ulcers, old sores, Bruises, Burnings. quickens the Spirits, is good against Quartan Agues, stancheth bleedings at Mouth or Nose, if it be samped and applied
to the nape of the Neck: The Herb also bru∣sed and with some Salt and Vinegar, and Hogs Greas laid upon any hard tumor or swelling; or that which is vulgarly called the Kings E∣vil, doth help to dissolve or discuss them, and being in like manner applied doth much allay the pains and give eas to the Gout, Sciatica, and other aches of the Joynts and Sinews: It is also very effectual to heal all green Wounds, and old Ulcers, also to stay their fretting, gna∣wing, and spreading; It draweth forth Splin∣ters and such like things gotten into the flesh, and is very good against bruises and burnings. But the yellow Archangel, is most commended for old filthy corrupt Sores and Ulcers, yea, although they grow to be hollow; and to dissolve tumors. The chief use of them is for Women it being an Herb of Venus, and may be found in my Guide for Women. ♂ Arsmart. Description of the Mild. THis hath broad Leaves set at the great red Joynts of the Stalks, with semicir∣cular blackish marks on them usually, yet somtimes without: The Flowers grow in long Spikes usually either blush or whitish with such like Seed following. The Root is long with many strings thereat perishing yeer∣ly; this hath no sharp tast (as another sort hath, which is quick and biting) but rather sowr like Sorrel, or els a little drying or with∣out tast. Place. It grows in watery Plashes, Ditches, and the like, which for the most part are dry in Sum∣mer. Time. It Flowreth in June, and the Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and use. It is of a cooling and drying quality, and very effectual for purrified Ulcersulcers, Cold swel∣lings, brui∣ses, conge∣led Blood, Toothach, Felons, or Andicoms, worms in the Ears. Fleas, Ti∣red Horses, in Man or Beast, to kill the Worms and clens the putri∣fied Places: The Juyce therof dropped in, or otherwise applied, consumeth all cold Swel∣lings, and dissolveth the congealed Blood of bruises by strokes, falls, &c. A piece of the Root, or some of the Seed bruised and held to an aching Tooth, taketh away the pain. The Leaves bruised and laid to the Joynt that hath a Fellon theron, taketh it away: The Juyce deroyeth Worms in the Ears being dropped into them: if the hot Arsmart be strewed in a Chamber it will soon kill all the Fleas; and the Herb or Juyce of the cold Arsmart put to Horses or other Cattels sores will drive away the Flie in the ottest time of Summer; A good handful of the hot biting Arsmart put under a Horses Saddle will make him travel the better although he were half tired before: The mild Arsmart is good against hót Impo∣sthumes and InflamationsImpostums Inflama∣tions, Wounds. at the beginning, and to heal green Wounds. All Authors chop the Vertues of both sorts of Arsmart together, as men chop Herbs for the Pot, when both of them are of clean con∣trary qualities, The hot Arsmart groweth not so high or tall as the mild doth, but hath ma∣ny leaves of the colour of Beach leaves, very seldom or never spotted, in other particulars it is like the former, but may easily be known from it, if you will be but pleased to break a Leaf of it cross your Tongue, for the hot will make your Tongue, to smart, so will not the cold; if you see them both together, you may easily distinguish them, becaus the mild hath far broader Leaves: And out Colledg of Phy∣sitians out of their learned care for the pub∣lick good, Anglice their own gain, mistake the one for the other in their New-Master-Piece, wherby they discover, 1. Their Ignorance, 2. Their Carelesness, and he that hath but half an eye may see their pride without a pair of Spectacles. I have done what I could to di∣stinguish them in their Vertues, and when you find not the contrary named, use the cold. The truth is, I have not yet spoken with Dr. Reason, nor his Brother Dr.Experience, con∣cerning either of them both. ♂ Asarabacca. Description. A Sarabacca hath many Heads rising from the Roots, from whence come many smooth Leaves, every one upon his own Footstalk, which are rounder and bigger than Violet Leaves, thicker also, and of a darker green shining colour on the upper side, and of a paler yellow green underneath, little or no∣thing dented about the edges; from among which rise smal round hollow, brown green husks, upon short stalks about an inch long, divided at the brims into five divisions, very like the Cups or Heads of the Henbane Seed, but that they are smaller; and these be all the Flowers it carrieth, which are somwhat sweer, being smelled unto, and wherein when they are ripe is contained smal cornered, rough Seeds, very like the Kernels or Stones of Grapes or Raisons. The Roots are small and whitish spreading divers waies in the ground, and encreasing into divers Heads; but not running or creeping under ground as some o∣ther creeping Herbs do; They are somwhat sweet in smell, resembling. Nardus, but more when they are dry, than green; and of a sharp but not unpleasant tast.
Place. It groweth frequently in Gardens. Time. They keep their Leaves green all Winter, but shoot forth new in the Spring, and with them come forth those Heads or Flowers which give ripe Seed about Midsummer, or somwhat after. Vertues and use. This Herb being drunk, not only provoketh vomiting, but purgeth downward, and by U∣rin also, purging both Choller and Flegm: if you ad to it some Spicknard, with the Whey of Goats Milk or Honeyed Water, it is made more strong, but it purgeth Flegm more ma∣nifestly than Choller, and therfore doth much help pains in the Hips and other parts, it be∣ing boyled in Whey, it wonderfully helpeth the Obstruction of the Liver and Spleen, and therfore profitable for the Dropsie and Jaun∣dice being steeped in Wine and drunk.Causeth Vomiting, Choller, Flegm, urin, Obstructi∣ons of the Liver and Spleen, Dropsy, Jaundice, Agues. It helps those continual Agues that come by the plenty of stubborn humors: An Oyl made therof by setting it in the Sun, with some Lau∣danum added to it, provoketh sweating (the rige of the Back being anointed therwith) and therby driveth away the shaking Fits of A∣gues. It will not abide any long boyling, for it loseth its chiefest strength therby; nor much beating; for the finer Pouder doth provoke Vomits and Urin, and the courser purgeth downwards. The common Use herof is to take the Juyce of five or seven Leavs in a little Drink to caus Vomitings: The Roots have also the same Vertue, though they do not operate so forci∣bly, yet they are very effectual against the bi∣ting of Serpents,Serpents. and therfore is put as an in∣gredient both into Metbridate and Venice Treacle. The Leaves and Roots being boy∣led in Ly, and the HeadHead. often washed ther∣with, while it is warm, comforteth the Head and Brain that is ill affected by taking cold, and helpeth the Memory.Memory. I shall desire Ignorant people to forbear the use of the Leavs, the Roots purge more gent∣ly, and may prove beneficial in such as have Cancers, or old putrified Ulcers, or Fistulaes upon their Bodies, to take a dram of them in Pouder in a quarter of a pint of white Wine in the morning. The truth is, I fancy Pur∣ging and Vomiting Medicines as little as any Man breathing doth, for they weaken Na∣ture, nor shall never advise them to be used unless upon urgent necessity. If a Physitian be Natures servant, it is his duty to strengthen his Mistris as much as he can, and weaken her as little as may be. ♃ Asparagus, Sparagus, or Sperage. Description. IT riseth up at first with divers whitish green scaly Heads, very brittle or easie to break while they are yong, which afterwards rise up into very long and slender green stalks, of the bigness of an ordinary riding wand at the bot∣tom of most, or bigger or lesser, as the Roots are of growth; on which are set divers bran∣ches of green Leavs, shorter and smaller than Fennel to the top, at the joynts wherof come forth small mossie yellowish Flowers, which turn into round Berries, green at the first, and of an excellent red colour when they are ripe, shewing like Beads of Corral, wherin are contained exceeding hard, black Seeds. The Roots are dispersed from a spongeous Head into many long, thick, and round strings, wherby it sucketh much Nourishment out of the ground, and encreaseth plentifully there∣by. & Jupit; Prickly Asparagus, Spara∣gus, or Sperage. Description. IT groweth usually in Gardens; and some of it grows wild, in Appleton Meadow in Glouce stershire, where the poor people do ga∣ther the Buds, or yong Shoots, and sell them cheaper than our Garden Asparagus is sold at London. Time. They do for the most part Flower, and bear their Berries late in the yeer, or not at all, al∣though they are housed in Winter. Vertues and use. The yong Buds or branches boyled in ones ordinary broth, maketh the BellyBelly, Strangury, Disury, Gout, Sci∣atica, Eyes Tooth-ach. soluble and open, and boyled in white Wine, provoketh Urin being stopped, and is good against the Strangury, or difficulty of making water; it expelleth the gravel and stone out of the Kid∣neys, and helpeth pains in the Reins: And boyled in white Wine or Vineger it is preva∣lent for them that have their Arteries loosned, or are troubled with the Hip-Gout, or Sciati∣ca. The Decoction of the Roots boyied in Wine and taken is good to cleer the sight, and being held in the Mouth easeth the Toothach: And being taken fasting several mornings to∣gether stirreth up bodily lust in Man or Wo∣man
(whatsoever some have written to the contrary.) The Garden Asparagus nouri∣sheth more than the wild; yet hath it the same effects in al the asorementioned Diseases. The Decoction of the Roots in white Wine, and the Back and Belly bathed therwith, or kneeling or lying down in the same, or sit∣ting therin as a Bath, hath been found effectu∣al against pains of the Reins and Bladder, pains of the Mother and Chollick,Reins, Bladder, Mother, Cramp, Chollick, Convulsion and generally a∣gainst all pains that happen to the lower parts of the Body; and no less effectual against stiff and benummed Sinews, or those that are shrunk by Cramps, and Convulsions, and hel∣peth the Sciatica. ☉ Ash-Tree. THis is so wel known that time wil be mis∣pent and Paper wasted in writing a De∣scription of it; and therfore I shall only insist upon the Vertues of it. Vertues and use. The yong tender Tops with the Leaves ta∣ken inwardly, and some of them outwardly applied are singular good against the biting of the Viper, Adder,Adders & Vipers bi∣ting, Drop∣sy, Stone, Jaundice, Leprosie, Scabs, Scald Heads, Stitches, Stone, Di∣sury, Ric∣kets. or any other Venemous Beast: And the Water distilled therfrom, be∣ing taken a smal quantity every morning fa∣sting, is a singular Medicine for those that are subject to a Dropsie, or to abate the greatness of those who are too gross or fat. The Deco∣ction of the Leaves in white Wine, helpeth to break the Stone and expel it, and cureth the Jaundice. The Ashes of the Bark of the Ash made into Ly, and those Heads bathed ther∣with which are Leprous, Scabby, or Scal'd, they are therby cured. The Kernels within the Husks commonly called Ashen Keys, pre∣vaileth against Stitches and pains in the sides proceeding of Wind, and avoideth away the stone by provoking Urin. I can justly except against none of all this save only the first, viz. That Ash-tree Tops and Leaves are good against the biting of Ser∣pents and Vipers, and I suppose this had its rise from Gerard, or Pliny, both which hold that there is such an Antipathy between an Adder and an Ash-tree, that if an Adder be compassed round with Ash-tree Leaves, she wil sooner run through the fire than through the Leaves, the contrary to which is the truth, as both my eyes are witnesses: the rest are Vertues somthing likely; only if it be in Win∣ter when you cannot get the Leaves, you may safely use the Bank instead of them, the Keys you may easily keep all the year, gathering them when they are ripe. ♃ Avens. Description. THe ordinary Avens hath many long, rough, dark green, winged Leavs rising from the Root; every one made of many Leavs set on each side of the middle Rib, the largest three wherof grow at the ends and are snip'd or dented round about the edges: the other being smal pieces, somtimes two and somtimes four standing on each side of the middle rib underneath them; among which do rise up divers rough or hairy Stalks about two foot high branching forth with Leavs at every Joynt, not so long as those below, but almost as much cut in on the edges, some into three parts, some into more: On the Tops of the Branches stand smal pale yellow Flowers consi∣sting of five Leavs, like the Flowers of Cynkfoyl, but larger in the middle, wherof standeth a smal green Head, which when the Flower is fallen groweth to be rough and round, being made of many long greenish purple Seeds (like grains) which wil stick upon your Cloathes. The Root consists of many brow∣nish strings or fibres, smelling somwhat like unto Cloves, especially those which grow in the higher, hotter, and drier grounds, and in the freer and clear Air. Place. They grow wild in many places under Hedg sides, and by the Pathwaies in Fields, yet they rather delight to grow in shadowy than in Sunny places. Time. They Flower in May and June for the inost part, and their seed is ripe in July at the fur∣thest. Vertues and use. It is good for the Diseases of the Chest or Breast,Breast, Stitches, Wind, Bel∣ly, Stomach Inward Wounds, Heart, cold Brain, Ob∣structions, Chollick, Fluxes, Ruptures, Spots and Marks in the Face, Plague, Poyson, Indigesti∣on. for pains and Stitches in the Sides, and to expel crude and raw humors from the Belly and Stomach by the sweet savor and war∣ming quality; it dissolveth the inward con∣gealed Blood hapning by falls or bruises, and the spitting of Blood, if the Roots either green or dryed be boyled in Wine and drunk, as also al manner of inward Wounds or out∣ward if they be washed or bathed therwith. The Decoction also being drunk comforteth the Heart, and strengtheneth: the Stomach, and a cold Brain, and therfore is good in the Spring time to open Obstructions of the Li∣ver, and helpeth the wind Chollick; it also helpeth those that have Fluxes, or are bursten, or have a Rupture; It taketh away spots or marks in the Face, being washed therwith: The Juyce of the fresh Root or Pouder of the dried Root hath the same effect with the De∣coction.
The Root in the Spring time stee∣ped in Wine doth give it a delicat savor and tast, and being drunk fasting every morning comforteth the Heart, and is a good Preserva∣tive against the Plague, or any other Poyson; it helpeth Digestion, and warmeth a cold Sto∣mach, and openeth the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. It is very safe, you need have no Dose pre∣scribed and is very fit to be kept in every good bodies house. ♃ ♋ Balm. THis Herb is so wel known to be an Inha∣bitant almost in every Garden, that I shal not need to write any Description thereof, al∣though the Vertues thereof which are many may not be omitted. Vertues and use. The Arabian Physitians have extolled the Vertues hereof to the Skyes, although the Greeks thought it not worth mentioning. Se∣apio saith, It causeth the Mind and HeartMind, Heart, Faintings Swonings, Melancho∣ly, Indige∣stion, Ob∣struction of the Brain, Heart, Ar∣teries, Ve∣nemous-Beasts, Mad Dogs Terms provokes, Toothach, Bloody Flux. to becom merry, and reviveth the Heart fainting into soundings, especially of such who are over taken in their sleep, and driveth away al trou∣blesom cares and thoughts out of the Mind a∣rising from Melancholly, or black Choller; which Avicen also confirmeth. It is very good to help Digestion, and open Obstructions of the Brain; and hath so much purging quality in it (saith Avicen) as to expel those Melan∣cholly vapors from the Spirits & Blood which are in the Heart and Arteries, although it can∣not do so in other parts of the Body. Diasco∣rides saith, That the Leaves steeped in Wine, and the Wine drunk, and the Leavs externally applied is a remedy against the sting of Scor∣pions, and the bitings of mad Dogs, and com∣mendeth the Decoction therof for Women to bath or sit in to procure their Courses; it is good to wasaching Teeth therwith, and pro∣fitable for those that have the bloudy-Flux. The Leaves also with a little Nitre taken in Drink, are good against a Surfet of Mush∣romes,Mushroms dificulty of breathing, Gout, Liver, Spleen, women in Child bed, Fainting in travel, Boyls, helps the griping pains of the Belly, and being made into an Electuary is good for them that cannot fetch their breath: Used with Salt it takes away Wens, Kernels, or hard Swellings in the Flesh or Throat; it clenseth foul Sores, and caseth pains of the Gout: It is good for the Liver and Spleen. A Tansie or Cawdle made with Egs and the Juyce therof while it is yong, putting to it some Sugar and Rosewater is good for Women in Childbed when the Af∣ter-birth is not thronghly avoided, and for their faintings upon, or after their sore travel. The Herb bruised and boyled in a little Wine and Oyl and laid warm on a Boil, will ripen and break it. It is an Herb of Jupiter and under Cancer, and strengthens Nature much in al its actions; let a Syrup made with the Juyce of it and Su∣gar, (as you shall be taught at the latter end of the Book) be kept in every Gentlewomans house, to releeve the weak stomachs and sick Bodies of their poor sickly Neighbors; as also the Herb kept dry in the Hous that so with o∣ther convenient Simples you may make it into an Electuary with Hony according as the Dis∣eas is, and as you shall be taught at the latter end of the Book. ♂ Barberry. THe Shrub is so wel known to every Boy and Girl that hath but attained to the age of seven years, that it needs no Description. Vertues and use. Mars owns the Shrub, and presents it to the use of my Country-men to purge their Bodies of Choller.Choller, Scabs, Itch Teters, Ringworm Yellow-Jaundice, Boyls, Agues, Burning, Scaldings, Apetit lo Hair. The inner Rind of the Barberry Tree boyled in White-Wine and a quarter of a pint drunk each morning, is an excellent reme∣dy to clense the Body of Chollerick Humors, and free it from such Diseases as Choller can∣seth, such be Scabs, Itch, Tetters, Ringworms, yellow Jaundice, Boils, &c. It is excellent for hot Agues, Burnings, Scaldings, heat of Bloud, heat of the Liver, Bloudy-flux, for the Berries are as good as the Bark, and more pleasing; they get a man a good stomach to his victuals, by strengthning the attractive faculty, which is under Mars, as you see more at large in the latter end of my Ephemeris for the year 1651. The Hair washed with the Ly made of the A∣shes of the Tree and Water, 'twil make it turn yellow, viz. of Mars his own colour. The Fruit and Rind of the Shrub, the Flowers of Broom and of Hath, or Furz, clens the Body of Chol∣ler by Sympathy, as the Flowers, Leaves and Bark of the Peach-Tree do by Antipathy; be∣cause these are under Mars, that under Ve∣nus. ♄ Barly. THe continual usefulness hereof hath made al in general so aquainted herewith, that it is altogether needless to describe its several kinds hereof plentifully growing, being year∣ly sown in this Land. The Vertues whereof take as followeth. Vertues and use. Barly in al the parts and compositions ther∣of (except Malt) is more cooling than Wheat, and a little clensing: and al the Preparations
therof, as Barly-water and other things made therof, do give great nourishment to persons troubled with Feavers, Agues,Feavers, Agues, Stomach, Apostums, Inflamati∣ons, Spleen Ears, Throat, Neck, Kings-E∣vil, Lepro∣sie, Flux, Gout, Irsh Eyes. and heats in the Stomach. A Pultis made of Barly Meal or Flower boyled with Vinegar and Honey, and a few dry Figs put into them, dissolveth all hard Imposthums, and aswageth Inflamations being therto applied: And being boyled with Melilot and Chamomel Flowers, and som Lin∣seed, Fenngreek and Rue in Pouder, and ap∣plied warm, it easeth the pains in the Sides and Stomach, and windiness of the Spleen. The Meal of Barly and Fleawort boyled in Water, and made into a Pultis with Honey and Oyl of Lillies, applied warm, cureth swellings un∣der the Ears, Throat, Neck and such like: and a Plaister made therof with Tar, Wax & Oyl, helpeth the Kings-Evil in the Throat: Boy∣led with sharp Vinegar into a Pultis and laid on hot helpeth the Leprosie: Being boyled in red-Wine with Pomgranat Rinds and Mirtles, stayeth the Lask or other Flux of the Belly: Boyled with Vinegar and a Quince, it easeth the hot pains of the Gout. Barly flower, white Salt, Honey and Vinegar mingled together, taketh away the Itch speedily and certainly: The Water distilled from the green Barly in the end of May is very good for thos that have Defluxions of humors fallen into their Eyes, and easeth the pains being dropped into them: or White-Bread steeped therein and bound on to the Eyes, doth the same. Garden Bazil, OR ♀ Sweet Bazil. Description. THe greater ordinary Bazil riseth up usu∣ally with one upright Stalk diversly bran∣ching forth on all sides, with two Leaves at e∣very Joynt, which are somewhat broad and round, yet pointed, of a pale green colour, but fresh, a little snipt about the edges, and of a strong heady scent: the Flowers are smal and white standing at the rops of the Branches, with two smal Leavs at the Joynt, in som pla∣ces green, in others brown, after which come black Seed. The Root perisheth at the ap∣proach of Winter, and therfore must be new sowen every year. Place. I only groweth in Gardens. Time. It must be sowed late, and flowers in the heat of Summer, being a very tender Plant. Vertues and use. This is the Herb which all Authors are to∣gether by the Ears about, and rail at one ano∣ther like Lawyers: Galen and Diascoride hold it not fitting to be taken inwardly: and Chrysippus rails at it with downright Billings∣gate-Rhetorick. Fliny, and the Arabian Phy∣sitians defend it. For mine own part I presently found that Speech true; Non nostrum inter nos tantas-componre lites. And away to Dr Reason went I, who told me it was an Herb of Mars, and under the Scorpion, and perhaps therfore called Basili∣con, and then no mervail if it carry a kind of virulent quality with it: Being applied to the place bitten by a venemous Beast, or stung by a Wasp or Horner,Venemous Beasts, Bees, Wasps, Hornets. it speedily draws the Poyson to it; Every like draws his like. Myzalus affirms, That it being laid to rot in Horsdung it wil breed Venemous Beasts. And Hollerius a French Physitian affirms upon his own know∣ledg, That an acquaintance of his by common smelling to it, had a Scorpion bred in his Brain. Somthing is the matter this Herb and Rue wil not grow together, no, nor near one another: And we know Rue is as great an enemy to Poy∣son as any grows. To conclude: It expelleth both Birth, and After-birth; and as it helps the deficiency of Venus in one kind, so it spoils al her actions in another. I date write no more of it. ♃ The Bay-Tree. THis is so wel known that it needs no De∣scription; I shal therfore only write the Vertues therof, which are many. Vertues and use. Galen saith, That the Leaves or Bark do dry and heal very much, and the Berries more than the Leaves: The Bark of the Root is less sharp and hot, but more bitter, and hath some astriction withal, whereby it is effectual to break the Stone,Stone, Ob∣structions of the Li∣ver and Spleen, Dropsie, Poyson, Jaundice, Bees, Wasps, Hornees Terms provokes, Cause De∣livery, After birth Eyes, Lungs, and good to open obstructi∣ons of the Liver, Spleen, and other inward parts, which bring the Dropsie, Jaundice, &c. The Berries are very effectual againft al Poy∣son of venemous Creatures, and the Stings of Wasps and Bees, as also against the Pestilence or other infectious Diseases, and therfore is put into sundry Triacles for that purpose: They likewise procure Womens Courses; and seven of them given to a Woman in sore travel of Child-birth, do cause a speedy delivery, and expel the After-birth; and therfore not to be taken by, such as have not gon but theit time lest they procure Abortment, or cause Labor too soon: They wonderfully help al: cold and rhumatick Distillations from the Brain to the Eyes, Lungs or other parts: And being made into an Electuary with Honey, do help the
Consumption, old Coughs, shortness of Breath,Coughs, Shortness of Breath, Megrim, wind, Ver∣tigo, Disu∣ry, Mother, worms, Joynts, Nerves, Arteries, Stomach, Belly, womb, Ears, Marks in the Skin, Itch, Scabs. and thin Rhewms: as also the Mea∣grim, they mightily expel wind and provoke Urin; help the Mother, and kil the Worms: The Leaves also work the like effects. A Bath of the Deccction of the Leavs and Ber∣ries, is singular good for Women to sit in that are troubled with the Mother, or the Diseases therof, or the stoppings of their Courses, or for the Diseases of the Bladder, pains in the Bowels by wind, and stoppnig of Urin: A Decoction likewise of equal parts of Bay-ber∣ries, Cummin-Seed, Hysop, Origanum, and Euphorbium, with some Honey, and the Head bathed therwith doth wonderfully help Distil∣lations and Rhewms, and setleth the Pallat of the Mouth into its place. The Oyl made of the Berries is very comfortable in all cold Griefs of the Joynts, Nervs, Arteries, Stomach, Belly, or Womb, and helpeth Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, Aches, trembling and numness in a∣ny part, weariness also, and pains that come, by sore travelling: Al griefs and pains like∣wise proceeding from Wind, either in the Head, Stomach, Back, Belly, or Womb, by nointing the parts affected therwith: And pains in the Ears are also cured by dropping in some of the Oyl, or by receiving into the Ears the warm fume of the Decoction of the Berries through a Funnel. The Oyl takes a∣way marks of the Skin and Flesh by bruises, fats, &c. and dissolveth the congealed Blood in them: It helpeth also the Itch, Scabs, and Wheals in the Skin. I shal but only ad a word or two to what my Friend hath written, viz. That it is a Tree of the sun, and under the Colostial sign Leo, and resisteth WitchcraftWitchcraft very potently, as also al the evil old Saturn can do to the Body of Man, and they are not a few, for it is the Speech of one, and I am mistaken if it were not Myzal∣dus, That neither Witch nor Devil, Thun∣der nor Lightning wil hurt a Man in the place where a Bay-Tree is. ♀ Beans. BOth the Garden and Field Beans are so wel known that it saveth me labor of wri∣ring any 'Description of them: Their Ver∣tues briefly are as followeth. The distilled wather of the Flowers of Gar∣den Beans is good to clens the Face and Skin from SpotsSpots, Stone, Disury, Inflama∣tion, Womens Breasts, and Wrinckles, and the Meal or Flower of them, or the smal, doth the same. The Water distilled from the green Husks is held to be very effectual against the Stone, and to provoke Urine. Bean Flower is used in Pultisses to asswage Inflamations rising upon Wounds, and the swelling of Womens Breasts caused by the curding of their Milk, and re∣presseth their Milk: The Flower of Beans and Fenugreek mixed with Honey, and applied to Fellons, Boyls, Bruises,Felons, or Andicoms, Boils, Bru∣ses, Ears. or blue Marks by blows, or the Imposthumes in the Kernels of the Ears, helpeth them all: And with Rose Leavs, Frankinsens and the white of an Egg being applied to the Eyes,Eyes, Lee∣ches. helpeth them that are swoln, or do water, or have received any blow upon them is used with Wine. If a Bean be parted in two, the skin being taken away, and laid on the place where a Leech hath been set that bleedeth too much, it staieth the blee∣ding. Bean Flower boyled to a Pultis with Wine and Vinegar and some Oyl put therto, ceaseth both pain and swelling of the Cods:Cods swel∣led, Flux, Pain, Sinews,  Sciatica, Gout. The Husks boyled in Water to a consumption of a third part therof staieth a Lask: and the Ashes of the Husks made up with old Hogs Greas, helpeth the old pains; contusions and Wounds of the Sinews, the Sciatica, and Gout. The Field Beans have all the afore∣mentioned Vertues as the Garden Beans. Beans eaten are extream windy meat, but if after the Dutch fashion when they are half boyled you husk them, and then stew them (I cannot tell you how, for I never was Cook in al my life) they are wholsomer Food. ♃ French-Beans. Description. THe French or Kidney Bean ariseth up at first but with one ftalk which afterwards divideth its self into many Arms or Branches, but also weak that if they be not sustained with sticks or poles, they wil lie fruitless upon the ground: at several places of these Branches grow forth long footstalks, with every one of them three broad round and pointed green Leavs at the end of them, towards the tops wherof come forth divers Flowers made like unto Pease Blossoms, of the same colour for the most part that the fruit wil be of, that is to say, white, yellow, red, blackish, or of a deep purple; but white is most usual; after which come long and slender flat Pods, some crooked, some straight, with a string as it were running down the Back therof, wherein are contained flattish round fruit made to the fashion of a Kidney; the Root is long and spreadeth with many strings annexed to it, and perisheth every year, There is also another sort of French Beans commonly growing with us in this Land, which is called the Scarlet flowred Bean. This ariseth up with sundry Branches as the other, but runs up higher to the length of Hop-poles, about which they grow twining, but turning contrary to the Sun, having Foot∣stalks
with three Leaves on each as on the o∣ther: The Flowers also are in fashion like the other, but many more set together, and of a most Orient Scalet Colour. The Beans are lar∣ger than the ordinary kind, of a deep Purple colour, turning black when it is ripe and dry: The Root perisheth also in Winter. Vertues. The ordinary French Beans are of an casie digestion, they move the Belly, provoke Urin, enlarge the Breast that is straitned with short∣ness of Breath, engender Sperme, and incite Venery.Disury, Shortness of breath, Incite to Venery. And the Scarlet-coloured Beans in regard of the glorious beauty of their colour, being set near a Quickset Hedg, wil bravely adorn the same, by climing up theron; so that they may be discerned a great way, not without admira∣tion of the beholder at a distance. But they wil go near to kil the Quicksets by cloathing them in Scarlet.A gallant shew. ♀ Ladies-Bedstraw. Description. THis ariseth up with divers smal brown and square upright Stalks a yard high or more, somtimes branched forth into divers parts, ful of Joynts, and with diverse very fine small Leaves at ever one of them little or nothing rough at al: At the tops of the Branches grow many long tufts or branches of yellow Flowers very thick set together, from the several Joynts which consist of four smal Leavs apiece, which smel somwhat strong, but not unpleasant: The Seed is smal and black like Poppy seed, two for the most part joyned together: The Root is reddish with many smal thrids fastned unto it, which take strong hold of the ground and cree∣peth a little: And the Branches leaning a little down to the ground take Root at the Joynts therof, wherby it is easily encreased. Ther is also another sort of Ladies-Bedstraw growing frequently in England, which beareth white Flowers as the other doth yellow; but the Branches of this are so weak that unless it be sustained by the Hedges, or other things near which it groweth it wil lie down on the ground; the Leaves a little bigger than the former, and the Flowers not so plentiful as those; and the Root here of is also thridy, and abiding. Place. They grow in Meadows and Pastures both wet and dry, and by the Hedges. Time. They flower in May for the most part, and the Seed is ripe in July and August. Vertues and use. The Decoction of the former of these being drunk is good to fret and break the Stone, and provokes urin, stayeth inward bleedings, and healeth inward Wounds:Stone, Dysurey, Bleeding, Wounds, The Herb or Flo∣wer bruised and put up into the Nostrils, stay∣eth their bleeding likewise: The Flowers and the Herb made into an Oyl by being set in the Sn, and changed after it hath stood ten or twelve daies; or into an Ointment being boyled in Axungia or Sallet-Oyl with some Wax melted therein after it is strained; either the Oyl made therof or the Ointment do help BurningsBurnings, Gauled∣Feet, Weariness, Stifness of Joynts, Scabs, Itch with Fire, or Scalding with Water: the same also, or the Decoction of the Herb and Flower is good to bath the Feet of Tra∣vellers and Lacquies whose long running cau∣seth weariness and stifness in their Sinews and Joynts; If the Decoction be used warm, and the Joynts afterwards anointed with the Oint∣ment. It helpeth the dry Scab, and the Itch in Children: And the Herb with the white Flo∣wer is also very good for the Sinews, Arteries, and Joynts to comfort and strengthen them af∣ter travel, cold and pains. They are both Herbs of Venus, and therfore strengthen the patrs both internal and exter∣nal which she rules. Beets. Description. THere are two sorts of Beets which are best known generally, and wherof I shal princi∣pally intreat at this time. Viz. The White and the Red Beets, and their Vertues. The Common White Beet hath many great Leaves next the ground somwhat large, and of a whitish green colour: The Stalk is great, strong and ribbed, bearing great store of leaves upon it almost to the very top of it: The flo∣wers grow in very long tufts; smal at the ends, and turning down their Heads, which are smal, pale, greenish, vellow Burrs, giving cornered prickled Seed. The Root is great, long and hard, and when it hath given Seed of no use at all. The Common Red Beet differeth not from the White, but only it is lesser and the Leaves and the Roots are somwhat red: The Leaves are differently red, in som only with red strakes or veins, som of a fresh red, and others of a dark red. The Rot here of is red, spungy and not used to be eaten. The White Beet doth much loosen the Belly, and is of a clensing and digestingClens, Di∣gest, Disury obstructi∣ons of the Liver and Spleen, Vertigo, Venemous Beasts. quality, and provoketh Urin: The Juyce of it openeth ob∣structions both of the Liver and Spleen, and is good for the Headaches and swimmings therein, and turnings of the Brain; and is ef∣fectual also against al venemous creatures and applied upon the Temples, stayeth Inflamati∣ons
in the Eyes; it helpeth BurningsBrning, St. Antho∣nies Fire, Wheals, Blisters, Chilblains, Kibes, Itch Dandriff, Scurff, Scabs, ul∣cers, Cankers, Bold∣ness. being used without Oyl, and with a little Allum put to it, is good for St. Anthonies fire. It is al∣so good for al Wheals, Pushes, Blisters and Blains in the Skin: The Herb boyled and laid upon Chilblains or Kibes, helpeth them: The Decoction therof in Water and some Vi∣negar healeth the Itch, if bathed therwith, and clenseth the Head of Dandraf, Scurff, and dry Scabs, and doth much good for fretting and running Sores, Ulcers, & Cankers in the Head, Legs, or other parts, and is much commended against Baldness and shedding of Hair. The red Beet is good to stay the Bloody Flux,Flux Terms stops, whites, Stinking Breath, Noise in the Ears, Toothach, Smell lost. Womens, Courses, and the Whites, and to help the yellow Jaundice. The Juyce or the Root put into the Nostrils purgeth the Head, helpeth the nois in the Ears, and the Tooth-ach; the Juyce snuffed up the Nose helps a stinking Breath if the caus lies in the Nose as many times it doth, if any bruis have been there, as also want of smel coming that way. Water-Betony. ♃ ♋ Description. FIrst of the Water-Betony, which riseth up with square hard greenish Stalks, and som∣times brown, set with broad dark green Leavs dented about the edges with notches, somwhat resembling the Leavs of the Wood-Betony, but much larger, two for the most part set at a Joynt. The Flowers are many, set at the tops of the Stalks and Branches, being round bel∣lied, and open at the Brims and divided into two parts, the uppermost being like a Hood, and the lowest like a Lip hanging down, of a dark red colour, which passing away, there comes in their places smal round Heads with smal points in the ends, wherin lie smal and brownish Seeds: The Root is a thick Bush of strings and threds growing from an Head. Place. It groweth by Ditchsides, Brooks, and o∣ther Water-courses generally through this Land, and is seldom found far from the Wa∣ters sides. Time. It Flowreth about July, and the Seed is ripe in August, Vertues and Use. It is of a clensing quality; the Leavs brui∣sed and applied are effectual for all old and fil∣thy Ulcers;Ulcers, Bruises, Sunbur∣ning. and especially if the Juyce of the Leavs be boyled with a little Honey, and tents dipped therin, and the Sores dressed therwith: as also for Bruises or Hurts whether inward or outward. The distilled water of the Leaves is used for the same purposes; as also to bath the Face or Hands spotted or blemished, or discolored by Sunburning. I confess I do not much fancy distilled Wa∣ters, I mean such Waters as are distilled cold, some vertue of the Herb they may happliy have (it were a strange thing else) but this I am confident of, that being distilled in a Pew∣ter Stil, as the vulgar and apish fashion is, both Chymical Oyl and Salt is left behind, unless you burn them, and then all is spoiled, Water and al, which was good for as little as can be by such a Distillation. You have the best way of Distillation in my Translation of the Lon∣don Dispensatory. The Colledg of Physitians having as much skil in Distillations as an Ass hath reading Hebrew. Water-Betony is an Herb of Jupiter in can∣cer and is apropriated more to Wounds and Hurts in the Breast than Wood-Betony which follows. ♃ ♈ Wood-Betony. Description. THe Common or Wood-Betony hath many Leavs rising from the Root which are somwhat broad and round at the ends, roundly dented about the edges, standing upon long Footstalks, from among which rise up smal, square, slender, but yet upright hairy Stalks, with some Leaves thereon, two apiece at the Joynts, smaller than the lower, whereon are set several spiked Heads of Flowers like Lavender, but thicker and shorter for the most part, and of a reddish or purple colour, spotted with white spots both in the upper and lower part: The Seeds being contained within the Husks that hold the Flowers, are blackish, somwhat long and uneven. The Roots are many white threddy strings; the Stalk peri∣sheth, but the Root with some Leavs theron, abides al the Winter. The whol Plant is somwhat smal. Place. It groweth frequently in Woods, and de∣lighteth in Shady-places. Time. And it flowreth in July, after which, the Seed is quickly ripe, yet in its prime in May. Vertues and Vse. Antonius Musa physitian to the Emperor Augustus caesar, wrote a peculiar Book of the Vertues of this Herb, and amongst other Vertues, saith of it, That it preserveth the Lives and Bodies of Men free from the danger of Epidemical Diseases,Epidemi∣cal Disea∣ses, Witch∣craft, Ape∣tite, indi∣gestion, Stomach, Belching, Jaundice, Falling∣sickness, Palsey, Convulsion shrinking of the Si∣news, Gout, Dropsie, Frensie, Cough, Cold, shortness of Breath, Agues of all sorts, Sore Eyes, Worms, Obstructi∣ons of the Liver and Spleen, Stitches, Pains in the Back and Belly, Terms provokes, Mother, Childbirth Stone, Toothach, Venemous Beasts, Mad-dogs Weariness, Bleeding at Mouth and Nose, Pissing & spitting of Blood, Ruptures, Bruises, Wounds, Veins and Sinews cut, ulcers, Fistulaes, Boyls, Ears. and from Wicchcrafts also: It is found by daily experience to be good for many Diseases; It helpeth those that loath, or cannot digest their Meat, those that
have weak Stomachs, or sower belchings, or continual rising in their Stomach, using it fa∣miliarly either green or dry; either the Herb, the Root, or the Flowers in Broth drunk, or Meat, or made into Conserve, Syrup, Water Electuary, or Pouder as every one may best frame themselvs unto, or as the time or season requireth, taken any of the aforesaid waies. It helpeth the Jaundice, Falling-sickness, the Palsie, Convulsions or shrinking of the Si∣news, the Gout, and those that are inclined to Dropsies, those that have continual Pains in their Head, although it turn to Phrensie. The Pouder mixed with pure Honey is no less a∣vailable for al sorts of Coughs or Colds, Wheesing or shortness of Breath, Distillati∣ons of thin Rhewm upon the Lungues, which causeth Consumptions. The Decoction made with Mead and a little Penyroyal, is good for those that are troubled with putrid Agues, whe∣ther Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan, and to draw down and evacuate the Blood and humors that by falling into the Eyes do hinder the Sight: The Decoction therof made in Wine and taken, killeth the Worms in the Belly, o∣peneth Obstructions both of the Spleen and Liver, careth Stitches and Pains in the Back, or Sides the Torments and griping pains of the Bowels, and the wind Chollick: and mixed with Honey purgeth the Belly, helpeth to bring down Womens Courses, and is of especial use for those that are troubled with the falling down of the Mother, and pains therof and causeth an easie and speedy delivery of Women in Childbirth: it helpeth also to break and expel the Stone either in the Blad∣der or Kidneys. The Decoction with Wine gargled in the Mouth, easeth the Toothach. It is commended against the sting or biting or Venemous Serpents or Mad Dogs. Being used inwardly and applied outwardly to the place. A dram of the Pouder in Betony taken with a little Honey in some Vinegar, doth wonderfully refresh those that are overwearied by travail; it staieth bleedings at the Mouth or Nose, and helpeth those that pise or spit Blood, and those that are Bursten or have a Rupture, and is good for such as are bruised by any fall or otherwise. The green Herb bruised, or the Juyce applied to any inward hurt or outward green Wound in the Head or Body wil quickly heal and close it up; as also any Veins or Sinews that are cut; and will draw forth any broken Bone, or Splinter, Thorn or other thing gotten into the Flesh: It is no less profitable for old Sores, or filthy Ulcers, yea, though they be Fistulaus and hollow, but some do advise to put in a little Salt to this purpose: Being applied with a little Hogs Lard, it helpeth a Plague-Sore, and other Boyls and Pushes: The fumes of the Decoction while it is warm received by a Funnel into the Bars, caseth the pains of them, destroyeth the Worms, and cureth the running Sores in them. The Juyce dropped into them doth the same. The Root of Betony is dis∣pleasing both to the tast and Stomach, whereas the Leavs and Flowers by their sweet and spicy tast, are comfortable both in Meat and Med∣icine. There are some of the many Vertues Anto∣ny Musa an expert Physitian (for it was not the practice of Octavius Caesar to keep Fools about him) apropriates to Betony; It is a very precious Herb that's certain, and most fitting to be kept in a mans hous both in Sy∣rup, Conserve, Oyl, Oyntment, and Plaister. The Flowers are usually Conserved. The Herb is apropriated to the Planet Ju∣piter, and the Sign Aries. ♄ The Beech-Tree. IN treating of this Tree, you must understand that I mean the great Mast Beech; which is by way of distinction from that other smal rough sort, called in Sussex, the smal Beech; but in Essex, Hornbeam. I suppose it needless to describe it, being already so wel known to my Countrymen. Place. It groweth in Woods amongst Oaks, and o∣ther Trees, and in Parks, Forrests, and Cha∣ses, to feed Deer; and in other places to fat∣ten Swine. Time. It bloometh in the end of April, or begining of May for the most part, and the Fruit is ripe in September Vertues and use. The Leavs of the Beech-Tree are cooling and binding,Cools, Binds, Hot swel∣lings, Scurff, Scabs, Tetters. and therefore good to be applied to hot Swelling to discuss them: The Nuts do much nourish such Beasts as feed thereon: The Water that is found in the hollow places of decaying Beeches, will cure both Man and Beast of any Scurf, Scab, or running Tetters, if they be washed therwith. You may boyl the Leavs into a Pultis, or make an Ointment of them when time of year serves. ♄ BILBERRIES: called also (by som) Whorts, and Whortleberries. Descriptions. OF these I shal only speak of two sorts, which are commonly known in England, Viz The Black, and the Red Bilberries. And first of the Black.
This smal Bush creepeth along upon the ground, scarce rising half a yard high, with di∣vers smal dark green Leaves set on the green Branches, not alwaies one against another, and a little dented about the edges: At the foot of the Leaves com forth smal, hollow, pale, blush coloured Flowers, the brims ending in five points, with a reddish threed in the middle, which pass into smal round Berries of the big∣ness and colour of Juniper Berries, but of a Purple sweetish sharp tast; the Juyce of them giveth a Purplish colour to their Hands and Lips that eat and handle them, especially if they break them. The Root groweth asloop under ground, shooting forth in sundry places as it creepeth: This loseth its Leaves in Win∣ter. The Red Bilberry, or whortle-bush, riseth up like the former, having sundry harder Leaves, like the Box-Tree Leaves, green and round pointed standing on the several Branches, at the tops whereof only, and not from the sides as in the former, com forth divers round flowers of a pale red color, after which succeed, round, reddish sappy Berries when they are ripe, of a sharp tast: The Root runneth in the ground, as the former; but the Leaves of this abide al Winter. Place. The first groweth in Forrests, on the Heaths and such like barren plaaces: The Red grows in the North parts of this Land, as Lanca∣shire, Yorkshire, &c. Time. They slower in March and April; and the Fruit of the Black is ripe in June and July. Vertue and use. The Black Bilberries are good in hot AguesAgues, Stomach, Liver, Vomiting, Apetit lost, Cough, Phtisick, Fluxes. and to cool the heat of the Liver and stomach; they do somwhat bind the Belly, and stay Vo∣mitings and Loathings: The Juyce of the Berries made into a Syrup, or the Pulp made into a Conserve with Sugar, is good for the purposes aforesaid, as also for an old Cough or an Ulcer in the Lungs, or other diseases there∣in. The Red Whorts are more binding, and stop Womens Courses, spitting of Blood, or any other Flux of Blood or Humors, being used aswel outwardly as inwardly. Bifoyl, or Twayblade. Description. THis smal Herb from a Root somewhat sweet, shooting downwards many long strings, riseth up a round green Stalk bare or naked next the ground for an inch, two or three to the middle therof, as it is in age or growth, as also from the middle upward to the Flowers, having only two broad Plantan-like Leaves (but whiter) set at the middle of the Stalk one against another, and compasseth it round at the bottom of them. Place. It is a usual Inhabitant in Woods, Copses, and in many other places in this Land. There is another sort growes in wet grounds and Marshes, which is somwhat differing from the former: It is a smaler Plant, and greener, having somtimes three Leaves; the Spike of Flowers is less than the former, and the Roots of this do run or creep in the ground. They are much and often used by many to good purpose for Wounds both green and old, and to consolidate or knit Ruptures. The Birch-Tree. ♀ Description. THis groweth a goodly tall straight Tree, fraught with many Boughes and slender Branches bending downward; the old ones being covered with a discoloured chapped Bark, and the yonger being browner by much: The Leaves at their first breaking out are crumpled, and afterward like the Beech Leaves, but smaler and greener, and dented about the edges: It beareth smal short Catkins, somwhat like those of the Hazel-Nut-tree, which abide on the Branches a long time, until growing ripe they fall on the ground, and their Seed with them. Place. It usually groweth in Woods. Vertues. The Juyce of the Leaves while they are yong, or the distilled Water of them, or the Water that coms out of the Tree, being bored with an Augur and distilled afterwards; any of these being drunk for som time together, is available to break the StoneStone, sore Mouths. in the Kidnies or Bladder; and is good also to wash sore Mouths. ♄ Birds-Foot. THis smal Herb groweth not above a span high, with many Branches spread on the ground, set with many wings of small Leaves; The Flowers grow upon the Bran∣ches, many smal ones of a pale yellow colour, being set at a head together, which afterwards turn into so many smal joynted Cods with Seeds in them; the Cods well resembling the Claws of smal Birds, whence it took its name. There is another sort of Birds-Foot in all
things like the former, but a little larger; the Flowers of a pale whitish red colour, and the Cods distinct by Joynts like the other, but a little more crooked, and the Roots do carry many smal white Knots or Kernels amongst the Strings. Place. These grow on Heaths, and many open un∣tilled places of this Land. Time. They flower and seed in the end of Sum∣mer. Vertues and use. They are of a drying, bindingDry, Bind, Wounds, Stone, Ruptures. quality, and therby very good to be used in Wound-drinks, as also to apply outwardly for the same pur∣pose. But the latter Birds-foot is found by ex∣perience to break the Stones in the Back or Kidnies, and drive them forth, if the Decocti∣on therof be taken; and it wonderfully hel∣peth the Rupture, being taken inwardly, and outwardly applied to the place. All Salts have best operation upon the Ston, as Ointments & Plaisters have upon Wounds; and therfore if you may make a Salt of this for the Stone, the way how to do so may be found in my Translation of the London Dispensatory, and it may be I may give you again in plainer terms at the latter end of this Book. ♀ Bishops-weed. Description. COmmon Bishops-weed riseth up with a round straight Stalk, somtimes as high as a Man, but usually three or four foot high, be∣set with divers smal, long, and somwhat broad Leavs, cut in som places and dented about the edges, growing one against another, of a dark green colour; having sundry Branches on them, and at the top smal umbels of white flo∣wers, which turn into smal round brown Seed, little bigger than Parsly-seed, of a quick hot scent and tast: The Root is white and strin∣gie, perishing yearly after it hath seeded, and usually riseth again of its own sowing. Place. It groweth wild in many places in England and Wales, as between Greenheath and Gravs∣end. Vertues. It digesteth Humors, provoketh Urin and Womens Courses, dissolveth Wind; and be∣ing taken in Wine, easeth pains and griping in the Bowels, and is good against the biting of Serpents: It is used to good effect in those Medicins which are given to hinder the poy∣sonful operation of Cantharides upon the pas∣sages of the Urin: Being mixed with Honey, and applied to black and blue marks, coming of blows or bruises, it takes them away: and be∣ing drunk or outwardly applied, it abateth an high colour, and makes it pale; and the Fumes therof taken with Rozin, or Raisons, clenseth the Mother.Disury, Terms pro∣vokes, Wind, Chollick, Venemous Beasts, Canthari∣rides, black and blew spots, High co∣lour; Mo∣ther. It is hot and dry in the third degree, of a bitter tast and somthing sharp withal; it pro∣vokes Lust to purpose; I suppose Venus owns it. Bistort, or Snakeweed. ♄ Description. THis hath a thick; short, knobbed Root, blackish without, and somwhat reddish within, a little crooked or turned together, of an harsh astringent tast, with divers black threds hanging there, from whence spring up every year divers Leaves standing upon long Footstalks, being somwhat broad and long like a Dock-leaf, and a little pointed at the ends, but that it is of a blewish green colour on the upper side, and of an Ash colour gray, and a little purplish underneath, with divers Veins therin; from among which rise up di∣vers smal and slender Stalks, two foot high, and almost naked, and without Leavs, or with very few, and narrow, bearing a spiky Bush of pale Flesh colour'd Flowers, which being past there abideth smal Seed, somwhat like unto Sorrel Seed, but greater. There are other sorts of Bistort, growing in this Land, but smaller, both in height, Root, and Stalks, and especially in the Leavs, The Root blackish without, and somwhat whitish within, of an austere binding tast as the for∣mer. Place. They grow in shadowy moist Woods, and at the foot of Hils, but are chiefly nourished up in Gardens. The narrow leaved Bistort groweth in the North, in Lancashire, york∣shire, and Cumberland. Time. They Flower about the end of May, and the Seed is ripe about the beginning of Ju∣ly. Vertues and use. Both the Leavs and Roots have have a po∣werful faculty to resist al Poyson.Poyson, Plague, Smal pocks Meazles, Purples, Epidemi∣cal Dise∣ses. The Root in Pouder taken in drink expelleth the Venem of the Plague, the smal Pox, Meazles, Purples, or any other infectious Diseas, driving it out by sweating: The Root in Pouder or the Decoction therof in Wine being drunk, stayeth al manner of inward bleedingsInward bleeding, Flux, Vo∣miting, Ruptures, Jaundice, or spittings of Blood, and any Fluxes in the Body of either Man or Woman, or Vomitings; it is also ve∣ry available against Ruptures or Burstings, or all bruises or fals, dissolving the congealed Blood, and easeth the pains that happen there∣upon it also helpeth the Jaundice. The Wa∣ter
distilled from both Leavs and Roots, is a singular remedy to wash any place bitten or stung by any venemousVenemous Beasts. creature; as also for any of the purposes before spoken of. And is very good to wash any running Sores or Ulcers.Ulcers, The Decoction of the Root in Wine being drunk, hindreth AbortionAbortion, Worms, Diabites, or Mis∣carriage in Child-bearing. The Leavs also kil the Worms in Children, and is a great help for them that cannot keep their Water, if the Jayce of Plantane be added therto. And out∣wardly applied, much, helpeth the Gonorrhea, or running of the Reins.Running of the Reins. A dram of the Pou∣der of the Root taken in the Water thereof, wherein som red hot Iron or Steel hath been quenched is also an admirable help thereto, so as the Body be first prepared and purged from the offensive humors. The Leaves, Seed, or Roots are al very good in Decoctions, Drinks or Lotians, for inward or outward WoundsWounds, or other fores: and the Pouder strewed upon any cut or wound in a Vein, stayeth the im∣moderat bleedingBleeding, thereof. The Decoction of the Roots in Water whereunto som Pomgra∣nate Pils and Flowers are added, injected into the Matrix,Matrix, stayeth the access of humors to the Ulcers therof, and bringeth it to its right place, being fallen down, and stayeth the im∣moderat flux of the Courses.Terms stops, The Root here∣of with Pellitory of Spain and burnt Allum of each a like quantity, beaten smal and made in∣to Past, with some Honey, and a little Picce thereof put into an hollow-Tooth,Tooth-ach, or held be∣tween the Teeth if there be no hollowness in them, stayeth the defluxion of Rhewm upon them, which causeth pains, and helps to clense the Head,Head. and avoid much offensive Water. The Distilled Water is very effectual to wash Sores or CankersCankers, in the Nose or any other part, if the Pouder of the Root be aplied ther∣unto afterwards. It is good also to fasten the Gums,Gums, In∣flamations Almonds of the Ears. and to take away the heat and inflama∣tions that happen in the Jaws, Almonds of the Throat or Mouth, if the Decoction of the Leavs, Roots, or Seeds be used, or the Juyce of them; but the Roots are most effectual to all the purposes aforesaid. ☉ One-Blade. Description. THis smal Plant never beareth more than one Leaf, but only when it rises up with its Stalk which thereon beareth another, and seldom more, which are of a bluish green co∣lour, broad at the bottom and pointed with many Ribs or Veins like Plantane: At the top of the Stalk grow many smal white Flo∣wers Star-fashion smelling somthing sweet; after which come smal reddish Berries when they are ripe. The Root is smal, of the bigness of a Rush, lying and creeping under the upper crust of the Earth, shooting forth in diverse places. Place. It groweth in moist shadowy, grassie places of Woods in many places of this Realm. Time. It flowreth about May, and the Berries be ripe in June, and then quickly perisheth until the next year it springth from the same again. The Vertues. Half a dram, or a dram at most of the Roots hereof in Pouder, taken in Wine and Vineger of each a like quantity, and the party presently laid to swear, is held to be a sovereign remedy for those that are infected with the Plague, and have a sore upon them, by expelling the Poy∣son and defending the Heart and Spirits from danger: it is also accounted a singular good Wound-Herb, and therfore used with other Herbs in making such Balms as are necessary for the curing of Wounds, either green or old, and especially if the Nervs of Sinews be hurt.Peslilence, Wounds, Nervs. hurt. ♀ ♈ The Bramble; OR Black-Berry-Bush. THis is so wel known that it needeth no Descrption. The Vertues therof are as followeth. Vertues and use. The Buds, Leavs and Branches while they are green are of a good use in the UlcersUlcers, Sores, Quinsie, Wounds, Flux, Bloodyflux Spitting Bloud, Gravel, Stone, Secrets. and putrid sores of the Mouth and Throat, and for the Quinsie; and likewise to heal other fresh Wounds and Sores; but the Flowers & Fruit unripe are very binding, and so profitable for the Bloudy-flux, Lasks, and are a fit remedy for spitting of Bloud. Either the Decoction or Pouder of the Root being taken is good to break or drive forth Gravel, and the Stone in the Reins and Kidnies. The Leavs and Bram∣bles aswel green as dry, are excellent good Lo∣tions for sores in the Mouth or secret parts: The Decoction of them & of the dried Bran∣ches, do much bind the Belly, and are good for the too much flowing of Womens Courses: The Berries or the Flowers are a powerful re∣mady against the PoysonPoyson, Venemous Beasts. fundament Piles, of the most vene∣mous Serpents; as wel drunk as outwardly ap∣plied, helpeth the sores of the Fundament, and the Piles.Terms stops, The Juyce of the Berries mixed with Juyce of Mulberries, do bind more effe∣ctually, and help fretting and eating sores and Ulcers whersoever. The Distilled Water of the Branches, Leaves and Flowers; or of the Fruit, is very pleasant in tast, and very effe∣ctual
in Feavers and hot distempers of the Bo∣dy, Head,Feavers, Head, Eyes, Itch, Scab∣by Heads. Eyes and other parts, and for al the purposes aforesaid. The Leaves boyled in Ly and the Head washed therewith, healeth the Itch and the running sores therof, and maketh the Hair black. The Pouder of the Leaves strewed on cankrous and running Ulcers, doth wonderfully help to heal them. Some use to condensate the Juyce of the Leaves, and some the Juyce of the Berries to keep for their use all the year, for the purposes aforesaid. It is a Plant of Venus in Aries: You shall have som Directions at the latter end of the Book for, the gathering of al Herbs and Plants &c. If any ask the Reason why Venus is so prickly? Tel them 'tis because she is in the house of Mars. ♀ Blites. Description. OF these there are two sorts commonly known, Viz. White and Red. The White hath Leavs somwhat like unto Beets, but smaller, rounder and of a whitish green co∣lour, every one standing upon a smal long Footstalk: The Stalk riseth up two or three foot high with such like Leavs theron: The Flowers grow at the top in long round tufts or clusters, wherein are contained smal and round Seed. The Root is very full of threeds or strings. The red Blites is in all things like the white, but that his Leavs and tufted heads, are excee∣ding red at first, and after turn more Purplish. There are other kinds of Blites which grow wild, differing from the two former sorts but little, only the wild are smaler in every part. Place. They grow in Gardens, and wild in many places of this Land. Time. They seed in August and September. Vertues and use. They are all of them cooling, drying and binding, serving to restrain the Fluxes of Bloud in either man or woman, especially the Red; which also stayeth the overflowing of women's Reds, as the white Blite stayeth the Whites in Women.Reds and Whites in Women. It is an excellent secret, you cannot wel fail in the use; they are al un∣der the Dominion of Venus. There is one other sort of wild Blites, like the other wild kinds, but having long and spike heads of greenish Seed, seeming by the thick setting together to be al Seed. This sort the Fishes are delighted with, and it is a good and usual Bait; for Fishes will bite fast enough at them, if you have but wit enough to catch them when they bite. ♃ ♌ Borrage & Bugloss. THese are so wel known to be Inhabitants in every Garden, that I old it needless to describe them. Time. They flower in June and July, and the Seed is ripe shortly after. Vertues and use. They are very Cordial. The Leaves or Roots are to very good purpose used in putrid and Pestilential Feavers,Feavers, Pestilence, Poyson, Venemous Beasts. Milk in Nurses. Melancholy, Ill Bloud, to defend the Heart, and hlp to resist and expel the Poyson, or the Venom of other Creatures; the Seed is of the like effect; and the Seed and Leavs are good to encrease Milk in Womens Breasts: The Leavs, Flowers and Seed, all, or any of them are good to expel Pensiveness and Melanchol∣ly: it helpeth to clarifie the Bloud, and miti∣gate heat in Feavers. The Juyce made into a Syrup prevaileth much to all the purposes a∣foresaid, and is put with other cooling, open∣ing, clensing. Herbs, to open obstructions, and help the yellow-Jaundice,Yellow Jandice, Itch, Ring∣worms, Tetters, and mixed with Fu∣mitory, to cool, clens, and temper the Blood, therby it helpeth the Itch, Ringworms; and Tetters, or other spreading ScabsScabs, Weakness by long sickness, Consum∣ption, Swooning, Inflama∣tions. Ulcers, sore Mouths & Throat, Cough, Flegm. or Sores. The Flowers candied or made; into a Con∣serve are helping in the former causes, but are chiefly used as a Cordial, and is good for those that are weak with long sickness, and to com∣fort the Heart and Spirts of those that are in a consumption, or troubled wth often swoonings or passions of the Heart: The Distilled Wa∣ter is no less effectual to all the purposes afore∣said, and helpeth the redness and inflamati∣on of the Eyes being washed therewith The dried Herb is never used, but the green; yet the Ashes therof boyled in Mead, or Honyed Water is available against Inflamations and Ulcers in the Mouth or Throat, to wash and gargle it therewith. The Roots of Bugloss are effectual being made into a licking Electuarie for the Cough, and to condensate thin flegm, and Rhewmatick Distillations upon the Lungs. They are both Herbs of Jupiter; and under Leo, both great Cordials, great strengthners of Nature. ♄ Bluebottles. THese are so wel known generally unto my Country men to grow among their Corn, that I suppose it needless to write any Description therof: There are other kinds
which I purposely omit both in this and o∣thers, my intent being only to insist most principally upon the vulgarly known, and commonly growing Flowers and Herbs. Time. They Flower and Seed in the Summer Months. Vertues and use. The Pouder or dried Leavs of the Bluel ot∣tle, or Cornflower is given with good success to those that are bruised by a sal, or have bro∣ken a Vein inwardly, and void much Blood at the Mouth, being taken in the Water of Plan∣tane, Horstail, or the greater Comfry.Bruises, Broken Veins, Poyson, Plague, Epidemi∣cal Diseases, Wounds, ulcers, Inflama∣tions in the Eyes. It is a Remedy, against the Poyson of the Scorpion, and resisteth al other Venoms and Poysons; The Seed or Leavs taken in Wine is very good against the Plague, and al infectious Diseases, and is very good in Pestilential Feavers. The Juyce put into fresh or green Wounds doth quickly soder up the Lips of them together, and is very effectual to heal al Ulcers and Sores in the Mouth: The Juyce dropped into the Eyes, taketh away the heat and inflamation in them. The distilled Water of the Herb hath the same properties; and may be used for all the Effects aforesaid. Briony, or VVild Vine. ♂ Description. THe Common white Briony groweth ram∣ping upon the Hedges, sending forth many long rough very tender branches at the begin∣ning, with many very rough broad Leavs ther∣on, cut (for the most part) into five partitions, in form very like a Vine Leaf, but smaller, rougher, aud of a whitish or hoary green co∣lour, spreading very far, spreading and twi∣ning with his smal Claspers (that come forth at the Joynts with he Leavs) very far on whatsoever standeth next it: At the several Joynts also (especially towards the top of the Branches) cometh forth a long Stalk bearing many whitish Flowers, together in a long tuft, consisting of five smal Leaves apiece, laid open like a Star: after which come the Berries, separated one from another more than a Cluster of Grapes, green at the first, and ve∣ry red when they are through ripe, of no good sent, but of a most loathsom tast provoking Vomit: The Root groweth to be exceeding great with many long Twines or Branches growing from it of a pale whitish colour on the outside, and more white within, and of a sharp, bitter loathsom tast. Place. It groweth on Banks, or under Hedges, through this Land the Roots lie very deep. Time. It Flowreth in July and August, som earlier and some later than others. Vertues and Vse. The Roots of the Briony purge the Bell, with great Violence, troubling the Stomach, and hurting the Liver, and therfore not rash∣ly to be taken, but being corrected is very pro∣fitable for the Diseases of the Head, as Fal∣ling-sickness,Falling∣sickness, Vertigo, Flegm, Palsies, Convulsion Cramp, Stitches, Dropsies, Gravel, Stone, Obstructi∣ons, Womb, Mo∣ther, Dead Child, Af∣ter-birth. Giddiness, and Swimmings, by drawing away much Flegm and Rhewmatick humors that oppress the Head, as also the Joynts and Sinews, and is therfore good for Palseys, Convulsions, Cramps, and Stitches in the Sides, and the Dropsie; and in pro∣voking Urin it clenseth the Reins and Kidnies from Gravel and the Stone, by opening the Obstructions of the Spleen, and consumeth the hardness and swellings therof. The De∣cction of the Root in Wine drunk once a week at going to bed, clenseth the Mother, and helpeth the rising therof, expelleth the dead Child, and Afterbirth, but is not to be used by Women with Child, for fear of abortion; a dram of the Root in Pouder taken in white Wine bringeth down their Courses. An E∣lectuary made of the Roots and Honey, doth mightily clens the Chest of Rotten Flegm, and wonderfully help an old strong Cough,Cough, Shortness of Breath, Sores, Can∣kers, Gan∣grenes, Tetters, Ring∣worms, Black Spots, Freckles, Morphew, Leprosie. those that are troubled with shortness of Breath, and is very good for them that are bru∣sed inwardly, to help to expel the clotted or congealed Blood. The Leavs, Fruit, and Root, do clens old and filthy Sores, are good against al fretting and running Cankers, Gan∣grenes, and Tetters, and therfore the Berries are by some Country People called Tetter∣Berries. The Root clenseth the Skin wonder∣fully from al black and blow Spots, Freckles, Morphew, Leprosie, soul Scars, or other de∣formity whatsoever: as also al running Scabs, and Manginess are healed by the Pouder of the dried Root, or the Juyce therof, but especially by the fine white hardned Juyce: The distil∣led water of the Roots worketh the same effects but more weakly. The Root bruised and ap∣plied of it self to any place where the Bones are broken,Broken Bones, Splinters Thorns, Whitlows, or Nail∣wheals, or Andicoms. helpeth to draw them forth, as also Splinters and Thorns in the Flesh; and be∣ing applied with a little Wine mixed therwith it breaketh Boyls, and helpeth Whitlows on the Joynts. For al these latter beginning at Sores, Can∣kers &c. apply it outwardly and take my ad∣vice along with you, you shal find in my Tran∣slation of the London Dispensatory, among the Preparations at latter end, a Medicin cal∣led Foeculae Brioniae, take that and use it, you have the way there how to make it, and mix that with a little Hogs Greas or other conve∣nient Oyntment, and use it at your need. As for the former Diseases where it must be taken inwardly, it purgeth very Violently, and
needs an abler hand to correct it than most Country people have, therfore it is a better way for them (in my opinion) to let the Sim∣ple alone, and take the Compound Water of it, mentioned in my Dispensatory, and that is far more safe, being wisely corrected. ♂ Brooklime. Description. THis sendeth forth from a creeping Root, that shooteth forth strings at every Joynt as it runneth, divers and sundry green Stalks, round and sappy with some branches on them, somwhat broad, round, deep green, and thick Leavs set by couples theron: from the Bosom wherof shoot forth long Footstalks, with sun∣dry smal blue Flowers on them, that consist of five smal round pointed Leavs apiece. There is another sort nothing differing from the former, but that it is greater, and the Flo∣wers of a paler blue Colour. Place. They grow in mal standing Waters, and u∣sually neer Watercresses. Time. And Flower in June and July, giving Seed the next Month after. Vertues and use. Brooklime and Watercresses are generally u∣sed together in Diet Drinks with other things, serving to purge the BloodBlood pur∣geth, Ill Humors, Scurvy, Disury, Stone, Terms provokes, Dead child Swellings, Inflama∣tions. and Body from ill Humors that would destroy health, and are helpful for the Scurvy: They do also provoke Urin, and help to break the Stone and pass it away; they procure Womens Courses, and ex∣pel the dead Child. Being fried with Butter and Vinegar and applied warm, it helpeth all manner of Tumors or Swellings, and Infla∣mations. Such drinks ought to be made of Sundry Herbs according to the Malady offending, I shal give a plain and easie Rule at the latter end of the Book. ♂ Butchers-Broom. Description. THe first shoots that sprout from the Root of Butchers-Broom are thick, whitish, and short, somwhat like those of Asparagus, but greater: these rising up to be a foot and an half high are spread into divers Branches, green & somwhat crested with the roundness, tough and flexible, wheron are set somwhat broad and almost round hard Leavs, sharp and prickly pointed at the ends, of a dark green co∣lour, two for the most part set at a place, very close or neer together; about the middle of the Leaf, on the back or lower side from the middle Rib, breaketh forth a smal whitish green Flower consisting of four smal round pointed Leavs standing upon little or no Foot∣stalk, and in the place wherof cometh a smal round Berry, green at the first, and red when it is ripe, wherin are two or three white, hard, round Seeds contained: The Root is thick, white, and great at the Head, and from thence sendeth forth divers thick, white, long, tough strings. Place. It groweth in Copses, and upon Heaths and wast grounds, and oftentimes under or neer the Holly-Bushes. Time. It shooteth forth his yong buds in the Spring and the Berries are ripe in or about September, The Branches and Leavs abiding green al the Winter. Vertues and use. The Decoction of the Roots made with Wine, openeth Obstructions,Obstructi∣ons, Disury, Gravel, Stone, Strangury, Terms provokes, Yellow-Jaundice, Headach, Flegm. Broken Bones, Dislocati∣ons. provoketh U∣rin, helpeth to expel Gravel and the Stone, the Strangury, and Womens Courses, as also the yellow Jaundice and the Head-ach; and with some Honey or Sugar put therunto, clen∣seth the Breast of Flegm, and the Chest of much clammy Humors gathered therin. The Decoction of the Roots drunk, and a Pultis made of the Berries and Leavs being applied, are effectual in knitting and consolidating broken Bones and Parts out of Joynt. It is called Bruscus in some places, and in Sussex Kneeholly, and Knecholm. The com∣mon way of using it is to boyl the Roots of it and Parsly, and Fennel, and Smallage in white Wine, and drink the Decoction, adding the like quantity of Grass Roots to them; the more of the Roots you boyl the stronger will the Decoction be, it works no ill effects, yet I hope you have wit enough to give the stron∣gest Decoction to the strongest Bodies. Broom, & Broomrape. ♂ TO spend time in writing a Description herof is altogether needless, it being so generally used by all the good Huswifes al∣most through this Land to sweep their Houses with, and therfore very wel known to all sorts of people. The Broomrape springeth up in many pla∣ces from the Roots of the Broom (but more often in fields, by Hedg sides, and on Heaths) The Stalk wherof is of the bignels of a Fin∣ger or Thumb, above two Foot high having a show of Leavs on them and many Flowers at
the top, of a deadish, yellow colour, as also the Stalks and Leavs are. Place. They grow in many places of this Land commonly, and as commonly spoyl all the Land they grow in. Time. And Flower in the Summer Months, and give their Seed before Winter. Vertues and Use. The Juyce, or Decoction of the yong Bran∣ches, or Seed, or the Pouder of the Seed taken in Drink, purgeth downwards, and draweth FlegmatickFlegm, Joynts, Dropsie, Sides, Spleen, Bladder, Kidneys, Stone, Di∣sury, black Jaundice, Agues. and watery humors from the Joynts, wherby it helpeth the Dropsie, Gout, Sciatica, and the pains in the Hips and Joynts: It also provoketh strong Vomits, and helpeth the pains of the Sides, and swellings of the Spleen, clenfeth also the Reins, or Kidnies and Bladder of the Stone, provoketh Urin a∣bundantly, and hindreth the growing again of the Stone in the Body. The continual use of the Pouder of the Leaves and Seed, doth cure the Black Jaundice: The distilled Wa∣ter of the Flowers is profitable for al the same purposes; it also helpeth Sursets, and altereth the Fits of Agues, if three or four ounces therof, with as much of the Water of the les∣ser Centaury and a little Sugar put therin, be taken a little before the fit cometh, and the party be laid down to sweat in their Bed. The Oyl or Water that is drawn from the ends of the green sticks heated in the fire, helpeth the Toothach.Toothach. The Juyce of the yong Branches made into an Oyment of old Hogs Greas and anointed, Or the yong Branches bruised and heated in Oyl or Hogs Greas, and laid to the Sides pained by wind, as in Stitches,Wind, Stitches, Lice. or the Spleen, easeth them in once or twice using it: The same boyled in Oyl is the safest and su∣rest Medicine to kil Lice in the Head or Bo∣dy of any; and is an especial Remedy for Joynt aches, and swoln Knees that come by the falling down of Humors. The Broomrape also is not without his Ver∣tues. The Decoction therof in Wine is thought to be as effectual to avoid the StoneStone, Disury, Green Wounds, in the Kidnies and Bladder, and to provoke Urin, as the Broom it self: The Juyce therof is a sin∣gular good help to cure as wel green Wounds, as old and filthy Sores, and malignant Ulcers. The insolate Oyl wherin there hath been three or four Repetitions of Insusion of the top stalks with Flowers strained and cleered, clenseth the Skin of al manner of Spots, Marks and Freckles that arise either by the heat of the Sun, or the Malignity of humors. As for the Broom (for as yet I know not what to say to Broomrape in the business) but as for Broom, Mars owns it, and it is excee∣ding prejudicial to the Liver, I suppose by Rsn of the Antipathy between Jupiter and Mars, therfore if the Liver be disaffected, ad∣minister none of it. Bucks-horn Plantane. ♄ Description. THis being sown of Seed, riseth up at the first with smal, long, narrow hairy dark green Leavs like grass, without any division or gash in them; but those that follow are ga∣shed in on both sides the Leavs into three or four gashes, and pointed at the ends, resem∣bling the Knags of a Bucks Horn (wherof it took the name) and being well grown round about the Root upon the ground, in order one by another therby resembling the form of a Star: from among which rise up divers hairy Stalks, about a hand breadth high, bearing e∣very one a smal long spiky Head like to those of the common Plantane, having such like Bloomings and Seed after them. The Root is single, long, and smal, with divers strings at it. Place. They grow in dry Sandy grounds, as in Tuttle-Fields by Westminster, and divers other places of this Land. Time. They Flower and Seed in May, June, and July, end their green Leavs do in a manner abide fresh al the Winter. Vertues and Use. This boyled in Wine and drunk, and some of the Leavs applied to the hurt place, is an ex∣cellent remedy for the biting of the Viper or Adder which I take to be one and the same: The same being also drunk helpeth those that are troubled with the Stone in the Veins or Kidnies by cooling the heat of the parts affli∣cted strengthning them: as also weak Sto∣machs that cannot retain but cast up their Meat.Venemous Beasts, Stone, Stomach, Vomiting, Bleeding, Pissing blood, Flux Bloody Flux, Agues, Eyes. It stayeth al bleedings at Mouth and Nose, bloody Urin, or the Bloody Flux, and stoppeth the Lask of the Belly and Bowels. The Leavs herof bruised and laid to their sides that have an Ague, suddenly easeth the Fit: and the Leavs and Roots beaten with some Bay Salt and applied to the Wrists, worketh the same effects. The Herb boyled in Ale or Wine and given for some mornings and eve∣nings together, staieth the distillations of hot and sharp Rhowms falling into the Eyes from the Head, and helpeth al sorts of sore Eyes. Venus challengeth the Dominion of this Herb.
♀ ♎ Description. THis hath larger Leavs than those of the selfheal, but els of the same fashion, or rather a little longer, in some green on the upper side, and in others more brownish, dented about the edges, somwhat hairy, as the square Stalk is also, which riseth up to be half a yard high somtimes, with the Leavs set by couples; from the middle almost whereof up∣wards stand the Flowers together, with many smaler and browner Leaves than the rest on this stalk below, set at distances, and the stalk bare between them, among which Flowers are also smal ones of a bluish, and somtimes of an Ash colour, fashioned like the Flowers of the Ground-Ivy, after which come small, round, blackish Seed. The Root is composed of ma∣ny strings, and spreadeth upon the ground in divers parts round about. The White-flowered Bugle differeth not in form or greatness from the former, saving that the Leavs and Stalks are alwaies green and ne∣ver brown like the other, and that the Flowers therof are very white. Place. They grow in Woods, wet Copses, and Fields generally throughout England; but the White flowered Bugle is not so plentiful as the other. Time. They flower from May until July, and in the mean time perfect their Seed. The Roots and Leavs next therunto upon the ground abi∣ding all Winter. Vertues and Use. The Decoction of the Leavs and Flowers made in Wine and taken dissolveth the conge∣led Blood in those that are bruised inwardly by a fall or otherwise, and is very effectual for any inward Wounds, Thrusts or Stabs into the Body or Bowels, and is an especial help in all Wound-drinks, and for those that are Liver∣grown (as they cal it.)Bruises, Falls, Wounds, Scabs, Ulcers, Liver∣grown, Gangreans Fistulaes, Sore Mouths, Gums. Sores in the Secrets, broken bones. It is wonderful in cu∣ring all manner of Ulcers and Sores whether new and fresh, or old and inveterate, yea Gan∣grenes and Fistulaes also, if the Leavs bruised be aplied, or their Juyce used to wash and bath the places. And the same made into a Lotion with some Honey and Allum, cureth all sores of the Mouth or Gums be they never so foul, or of long continuance; and worketh no less powerfully and effectually for such Ulcers and Sores as happen in the secret parts of Men or Women: Being also taken inwardly, and out∣wardly applied, it helpeth those that have bro∣ken any Bone, or have any Member out of Joynt. An Ointment made with the Leaves of Bugle, Scabious and Sanicle bruised and boyled in Hogs-Greas, until the Herbs be dry, and then strained forth into a Pot, for such oc∣casions as shal require it, is so singular good for al sorts of hurts in the Body, that non that know its usefulness will be without it. This Herb is belonging to Dame Venus, and if the Vertues of it make you in love with it, (as they wil if you be wise) keep a Syrup of it to take inwardly, and an Ointment and Plai∣ster of it to use outwardly alwaies by you. The truth is, I have known this Herb cure some Diseases of Saturn, of which I thought good to quote one. Many times such as give themselvs much to drinking are troubled with strange Fancies, strange sights in the night∣time, and some with Voices, as also with the Diseas Ephialtes or the Mare.Mares, Strange Sights in the night. I take the reason of this to be (according to Fernelius) a Melan∣cholly vapor made thin by excessive drinking strong Liquor, and so flyes up and disturbs the Fancy, and breeds imaginations like it self, viz. fearful and troublesom: These I have known cured by taking only two spoonfuls of the Syrup of this Herb, after Supper two hours when you go to bed. But whether this do it by Sympathy or Antipathy is som question; all that know any thing in Astrologie, know that there is a great Antipathy between Saturn and Venus in matter of Procreation, yea such an one, that the barreness of Saturn can be remo∣ved by none but Venus, nor the lust of Venus be repelled by none but Saturn: but I am not yet of opinion this is done this way; and my reason is, because these vapprs though in qua∣lity Melancholly; yet by their flying upward seem to be somthing Aërial, therefore I rather think it is done by Sympathy, Saturn being ex∣alted in Libra the house of Venus. Selfheal, which follows, is of the same nature, and I am of opinion the same Herb, only dif∣fers a little in form according to the difference of place they grow in; this I am sure they work the same effect. ☉ Burnet. THe common Garden Burnet is so well known that it needeth no Description. There is another sort which is wild, the Description wherof take as followeth. Description. The great wild Burnet, hath winged Leavs rising from the Roots like the Garden Burnet, but not so many, yet each of these Leavs are at the least twice as large as the other, ad nic∣ked in the same manner about the edges, of a grayish colour on the underside: The Stalks are greater and rise higher, with many such like Leavs set theron, and greater heads at the tops of a brownish green colour, and out of them
come smal dark purple Flowers, like the for∣mer, but greater. The Root is black and long like the other, but greater also: It hath al∣most neither scent nor tast therin like the Gar∣den kind. Place. The first grows frequently in Gardens. The Wild kind groweth in divers Countries of this Land, especially in Huntington & Northamp∣ton shires in the Meadows there; as also near London by Pancras-Church, and by a Causey side in the middle of a Field by paddington. Time. They flower about the end of June and be∣ginning of July, and their Seed is ripe in Au∣gust. Vertues. They are accounted to be both of one pro∣perty, but the lesser is more effectual, because quicker and more Aromatical: It is a friend to the Heart, Liver,Heart, Liver, Melancho∣ly, Pestilence, epidemical Diseases, Bleeding, Stoppeth Terms and Whites, Belching, Vomiting, Wounds, Ulcers, Cankers, Sores, Fluxes. and other the principal parts of a mans Body. Two or three of the Stalks with Leavs put into a Cup of Wine, e∣specially Clarret, are known to quicken the Spirits, refresh and cheer the Heart and drive away Melancholly. It is a special help to de∣fend the Heart from noisom vapors, and from Infection of the Pestilence, the Juyce therof being taken in som Drink, and the party laid to sweat thereupon. They have also a drying and an astringent quality, whereby they are a∣vailable in all manner of Fluxes of Bloud or Humors, to stanch bleedings inward or out∣ward, Lasks, Scourings, the Bloudy-flux, Wo∣mens too abundant Courses, the Whites, and the Chollerick belchings and castings of the Stomach; and is a singular good Wound-herb for all sorts of Wounds both of the Head and Body, either inward or outward; for all old Ulcers, or running Cankers and moist sores to be used either by the Juyce or Decoction of the Herb, or by the Pouder of the Herb or Root, or the Water of the Distilled Herb, or Ointment by it self, or with other things to be kept. The Seed is also no less effectual both to stop Fluxes and dry up moist Sores, being taken in Pouder inwardly, in Wine or steeled Water, that is, wherin hot Gads of Steel have been quenched. Or the Pouder of the Seed mixed with the Ointments. This is an Herb the Sun challengeth domi∣nion over, and is a most precious Herb, little inferior to Betony: The continual use of it preservs the Body in health, and the Spirits in vigor; for if the Sun be the preserver of life under God, his Herbs are the best in the World to do it by. ☉ The Butter-Bur. Description. THis riseth up in February, with a thick Stalk about a foot high, whereon are set a few. smal Leavs, or rather pieces, and at the tops a long spiked head of Flowers, of a blush or deep red colour, according to the soil wherin it groweth; and before the Stalk with the Flo∣wers have abidden a month above ground, wil be withered and gone, blown away with the wind; and the Leaves will begin to spring, which being ful grown are very large & broad, being somwhat thin and almost round, whose thick red foot stalks, about a foot long stand to∣wards the middle of the Leavs: The lower parts being divided into two round parts, close almost one to another, and of a pale green co∣lour, and hoary underneath. The Root is long and spreading under ground, being in some places no bigger than ones Finger, in others much bigger, blackish on the outside & white within, of a bitter and unpleasant tast. Place and Time. They grow in low and wet grounds by Ri∣vers and Waters side: their Flower (as is said) rising and decaying in February and March, before the Leavs which appear in April. Vertues and use. The Roots hereof are by long experience found to be very available against the PlaguePlague, epidemical Diseases. Poyson, Mother, : wheezing, Difficulty of brea∣thing, Disury, Terms provokes, Flat and broad worms, Blmishes of the skin and Pestilential Feavers, by provoking Sweat, if the Pouder therof be taken in Wine, it also resisteth the force of any other Poyson. The Root hereof taken with Zedoàry and Ange∣lica, or without them, helps the rising of the Mother: The Decoction of the Root in Wine is singular good for those that wheeze much, or are short-winded. It provoketh Urin also and Womens courses, and killeth the flat and broad Worms in the Belly. The Pouder of the Root doth wonderfully help to dry up the moisture of sores that are hard to be cured, and taketh away all spots and blemishes of the skin. It were wel if Gentlewomen would keep this Root preserved, to help their poor Neighbors: It is fit the Rich should help the Poor, for the Poor cannot help themselvs.
♀ The Bur-Dock. IT is so well known even to the little Boys who pul off the Burs to throw and stick up∣on one another, that I shal spare to write any Description of it. Place. They grow plentifully by Ditches and Wa∣ter-sides, and by the High-waies almost every where through this Land. Vertues and use. The Bur Leavs are cooling,Cools, Dryes, Ulcers, Sores, Flegm, Sinews, Arteries, moderatly dry∣ing, and discussing withal, whereby it is good for old Ulcers and Sores: A dram of the Roots taken with Pine Kernels, helpeth them that spit foul, tery, and bloudy Flegm: The Leavs applied on the places troubled with the shrinking of the Sinews or Arteries, give much case: The Juyce of the Leavs, or rather the Roots themselvs given to drink with old Wine doth wonderfully help the bitings of any Ser∣pents: And the Root beaten with a little Salt and laid on the place, suddenly easeth the pain thereof, and helpeth those that are bit with a mad-Dog.Venemous Beasts,Mad dogs, Disury, Bladder, The Juyce of the Leavs taken with Honey provoketh Urin, and remedieth the pain of the Bladder. The Seed being drunk in Wine forty daies together, doth wonderfully help the Sciatica.Sciatica, Burning, The Leavs bruised with the White of an Egg and applied to any place burnt with Fire, taketh out the Fire, gives sud∣den ease, and heal;s it up afterwards. The De∣coction of them fomented on any fretting sore or CankerSores, Cankers, stayeth the corroding quality, which must be afterwards anointed with an Oint∣ment made of the same Liquor, Hogs-Greas, Nitre and Vinegar, boyled together. The Roots may be preserved with Sugar, and taken fasting, or at other times for the said purposes, and for Consumptions, the Ston,Consnmp∣tion, Stone, Flux. and the Lask. The Seed is much commended to break the Stone and cause it to be expelled by Urin; and is often used with other Seeds and things to that purpose. Venus challengeth this Herb for her own, and by its Leaf or Seed you may draw the Womb whith way you pleas, either upward by applying it to the Crown of the Heed, if in case it fal out; or downward in fits of the Mo∣ther, by applying it to the Soals of the Feet; Or if you would stay it in its place, apply it to the Navel, and that is one good way to stay the Child in it. See more of it in my Guide for Women. Cabbages and Coleworts. ☽ IShal spare a labor in writing a Descrip∣tion of these, sith almost every one that can but write at all may describe them from his own knowledg, they being ge∣nerally so well known that Descriptions are altogether needless. Place. These are generally planted in Gardens. Time. Their flowering time is towards the middle or end of July, and the Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and use. The Cabbages or Colewors boyled gently in Broth and eaten, do open the Body, but the second Decoction doth bind the Body.Venemous Beasts. Terms provokes, Hoarsness, Consump∣tion, The Juyce therof drunk in Wine helpeth those that are bitten by an Adder, and the Decoction of the Flowers bringeth down Womens Courses. Being taken with Honey, it recovereth hoars∣ness or loss of the voice. The often eating of them wel boyled, helpeth those that are ing into a Consumption. The Pulp of the middle Ribs of Coleworts boyled in Almond Milk, and made up into an Electuary with Honey, being taken often, is very profitable for those that are pursie and short-winded. Being boy∣led twice, and an old Cock boyled in the Broth and drunk, it helpeth the pains and obstructi∣onsObstructi∣ons, Stone, Sight, Canker Surfets, of the Liver and Spleen, and the Stone in the Kidnies. The Juyce boyled with Honey and dropped into the corner of the Eye, clea∣reth the sight, by consuming any Fn or cloud begining to dim it; it also consumeth the Can∣ker growing therin. They are much commen∣ded being eaten before meat, to keep one from surfetting, as also from being drunk with too much Wine, or quickly make a man sober a∣gain that is drunk before. For (as they say) there is such an Antipathy or enmity between the Vine and the Colewort, that the one will die where the other groweth. The Decoction of Coleworts taketh away the pain and ach, and allayeth the swellingsSwellings, Gout, Sores, Scabs, Wheals, of swoln and gouty Legs and Knees, wherein many gross and wa∣try humors are fallen, the place being bathed therwith warm: It helpeth also old and fithy sores being washed therewith, and healeth all smal Scabs, Pushes and Wheals that break out in the Skin. The Ashes of Colewort Stalks mixed with old Hogs-Grease are very effectual to anoint the Sides of those that have had long
pains therin, or any other place pained with MelanchollyMelan∣cholly, Wind. and windy humors. This was surely Chrysiptus his god, and ther∣fore he wrote a whol Volumn of them and their Vertues; and that none of the least nei∣ther, for he would be no smal Fool, he apro∣priates them to every part of the Body, and to every Diseas in every part, and honest old Ca∣to they say used no other Physick, I know not what Mettals their Bodies were made of, this I am sure, cabbages are extream windy whe∣ther you take them as Meat, or as Medicine, yea as windy Meat as can be eaten, unless you eat Bagpipes or Bellows, and they are but sel∣dom eaten in our daies, and Colwort Flowers are somthing more tollerable, and the whol∣somer Food of the two. The Moon challengeth the Dominion of the Herb. The Sea Colewort. ☽ Description. THis hath divers somwhat long and broad, large thick wrinkled Leavs, somwhat crum∣pled upon the edges, growing each upon a se∣veral thick Footstalk very brittle, of a grayish green colour. From among which riseth up a strong thick stalk two Foot high and better, with some Leavs theron to the top, where it brancheth forth much; and on every Branch, standeth a large Bush of pale whitish Flowers, consisting of four Leavs apiece: The Root is somwhat great and shooteth forth many Branches under ground, keeping the green Leavs al the Winter. Place. They grow in many places upon the Sea Coasts, as wel on the Kentish, as Essex Shores, as at Lidd in Kent, Colechester in Essex, and divers other places, and in other Countries of this Land. Time. They Flower and Seed about the time that other kinds do. Vertues. The Broth or first Decoction of the Sea Colewort doth by the sharp nitrous and bitter qualities therin, open the Belly and purge the Body, it clenseth and digesteth more power∣fully than the other kind: The Seed herof bruised and drunk, killeth Worms. The Leavs or the Juyce of them applied to Sores or Ulcers clenseth and healeth them, and dissol∣veth Swellings, and taketh away Inflamati∣ons.Sores, Wounds, Ulcers, Swellings, Inflama∣tions. Calamint, or Mountain ☿ ☽ Mint. Description. THis is a smal Herb seldom rising above a a Foot high, with square hoary and woo∣dy Stalks, and two smal hoary Leavs set at a Joynt, about the bigness of Marjoram, or not much cigger, a little dented about the edges, and of a very fierce or quick scent, as the whol Herb is: The Flowers stand at several spaces of the Stalks from the middle almost upwards, which are smal and gaping like to those Mints, and of a pale Blush colour: after which fol∣low smal, reund, blackish Seeds: The Root is smal and Woody, with divers smal sptigs spreading within the ground, and dieth not, but abideth many yeers. Place. It groweth on Heaths, and Upland dry grounds, in many places of this Land. Time. They Flower in July, and their Seed is ripe quickly after. Vertues and vse. The Decoction of the Herb being drunk, bringeth down Womens Courses and provo∣keth Urin: It is profitable for those that are Bursten, or troubled with Convulsions or Cramps, with shortness of Breath, or Cholle∣rick torments and pains in their Bellies or Sto∣machs, it also helpeth the yellow Jaundice, and staieth Vomiting, being taken in Wine; taken with Salt and Honey, it killeth al man∣ner of Worms in the Body: It helpeth such as have the Leprosie, either taken inwardly, drinking Whey after it, or the green Herb outwardly applied: It hindreth Conception in Women: being either burned, or strewed in the Chamber, it driveth away Venemous Serpents. It takes away black and blue marks in the Face, and maketh black Scars become wel colored, if the green Herb (not the dry) be boyled in Wine and laid to the place, or the place washed therwith. Being applied to the Hucklebone, by continuance of time it spen∣deth the humors which caused the pain of the Sciatica. The Juyce dropped into the Ears killeth the Worms in them: The Leavs boy∣led in Wine and drunk provoketh sweat, and openeth Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen;Terms provokes, Disury, Ruptures, Convul∣sions. Cramps, Shortness of Breath, Jaundice, Vomiting, Worms, Leprosie, Serpents, Black and blue Marks, Scars, Sciatica, Obstructi∣on of the Liver and Splein. it helpeth them that have a Tertian AgueTertion Agues (the Body being first purged) by taking away the cold Fits. The Decoction herof with some
Sugar put therto afterwards, is very profitable for those that be troubled with the overflow∣ing of the Gal,Gall, Cough, Bowels, Spleen. and that have an old Cough, and that are scarce able to breath by the short∣ness of their wind: That have any cold di∣stemper in their Bowels, and are troubled with the hardness of the Spleen, for al which pur∣poses, both the Pouder called Diacalaminthes and the Compound Syrup of Calamint (which are to be had at the Apothecaries) are most effectual. Let not Women be too busy with it, for it works very violently upon the Foeminin parts. ☉ Chamomel. THis is so wel known every where that it is but lost time and labor to describe it. The Vertues wherof are as followeth. A Decoction made of Chamomel and drunk, taketh away al pains and Stitches in the Sides.Stitches in the Side. The Flowers of Chamomel beaten and made up into Bals with Oyl driveth away al sorts of Agues;Agues. if the party grieved be anointed with that Oyl taken from the Flowers, from the Crown of the Head to the Soal of the Foot, and afterwards laid to sweat in his Bed, and that he sweat wel: This is Niches∣sor an Egyptian's Medicine. It is profitable for all sorts of Agues that come either from Flegm or Melancholly, or from an Inflamati∣on of the Bowels being applied when the Hu∣mors causing them shal be concocted; and there is nothing more profitable to the sides and Region of the Liver and SpleenLiver, Spleen, Weariness, than it. The bathing with a Deeoction of Chamomel taketh away weariness, easeth pains to what part of the Body soever they be applied: it comforteth the SinewsSinews, Swellings, that are overstrained, mollifieth al Swellings: It moderately com∣forteth al parts that have need of warmth, di∣gesteth and dissolveth whatsoever hath need therof by a wonderful speedy property. It easeth al the pains of the Chollick and Stone,Chollick, Stone, Belly-ach, and al pains and torments of the Belly, and gently provoketh Urin. The Flowers boyled in Poster Drink provoketh Sweat, and helpeth to expel Colds, Aches,Cold, Ach, and Pains, whersoever and is an excellent help to bring down Wo∣mens Courses. A Syrup made of the Juyce of Chamomel with the Flowers and white Wine, is a Remedy against the Jaundice and Drop∣sie.Jaundice, Dropsie, The Flowers boyled in a Ly, are good to wash the Head, and comfort both it and the Brain.Brain, The Oyl made of the Flowers of Chamomel is much used against al hard swel∣lings, pains or aches, shrinking of the Sinews or Cramps,Cramp, or pains in the Joynts, or any o∣ther part of the Body; being used in Clisters, it helpeth to dissolve wind and pains in the Belly; anointed also it helpeth Stitches and pains in the Sides.Stitch in the Side. Nichessor saith the Egyptians dedicated it to the Sun becaus it cured Agues; and they were like enough to do it, for they were the arrantest Apes in their Religion that ever I red of. Bacchinus, Pena, and Lobel commend the Syrup made of the Juyce of it and Sugar, taken inwardly, to be excellent for the Spleen. Also this is certain, that it most wonderfully breaks the Stone, some take it in Syrup or Decoction, others inject the Juyce of it into the Bladder with a Syring; my Opinion is. That the Salt of it taken half a dram in a morning, in a little White or Rhehish Wine is better than either, that it is excel∣lent for the Stone appears by this, which I have seen tried, viz. That a Stone that hath been taken out of the Body of a man being wrapped in Chamomel will in time dissolve, and in a little time too. ♄ Campions wild. Descriptions. THe white wild Campion hath many long and somwhat broad dark green Leavs, lying upon the ground with divers Ribs ther∣in somwhat like Plantane, but somwhat hairy, broader, and not so long: The hairy Stalks rise up in the middle of them three or four foot high, and somtimes more, with divers great white Joynts at several places theron, and two such like Leavs therat up to the top, sen∣ding forth Branches at the several Joynts also; al which bear on several Footstalks white Flo∣wers at the tops of them, consisting of five broad pointed Leavs, every one cut in on the end unto the middle, making them seem to be two apiece, smelling somwhat sweet, and each of them standing in large green striped hairy Husks, large and round below next to the Stalk: The Seed is smal and grayish in the hard Heads that come up afterwards: The Root is white and long, spreading divers fangs in the ground. The Red Wild Campion groweth in the same manner as the White, but his Leavs are not so plainly ribbed, somwhat shorter, roun∣der and more woolly in handling: The Flo∣wers are of the same form and bigness, but in som of a pale, in others of a bright red colour, cut in at ends more finely, which maketh the Leavs seem more in number than the other. The Seed and the Roots are alike: The Roots of both sorts abiding many years. Ther are forty five kinds of Campions more, those of them which are of Physical uses ha∣ving the like Vertues with these above descri∣bed, which I take to be the two chiefest kinds.
Place. They grow commonly through this Land by Fields, Hedg-fides, and Ditches. Time. They flower in Summer som earlier than o∣thers, and some abiding longer than others. Vertues and use. It is sound by experience that the Decoction of the Herb either the White or Red being drunk, doth stay inward bleedings;Bleeding inward & outward, Disury, Gravel, Choller, Venemous Beasts. Plagues, Sores, ulcers, Cankers, Fistulaes. and ap∣plied outwardly it doth the like: And being drunk helpeth to expel the Urin being stop'd, and Gravel. or the Stone in the Reins or Kid∣nies. Two drams of the Seed drunk in Wine, purgeth the Body of Chollerick humors, and helpeth those that are ftung by Scorpions, or other venemous Beasts; and may be as effe∣ctual for the Plague: It is of very good use in old Sores, Ulcers Cankers, Fistulaes and the like, to clens and heal them, by consuming the moist humors falling into them, and correct∣ing the putrifaction of Humors offending them. ☿ Carrots. THe Garden kind are so wel known that they need no Description; but because they are of les Physical use than the Wild kind (as indeed almost in all Herbs the Wild are most effectual in Physick, as being more pow∣erful in operation then the Garden kinds) I shal therfore briefly describe the wild Carrot. Description. It groweth in a manner altogether like the Tame, but that the Leavs and Stalks are som∣what whiter and rougher: The Stalks bear large tufts of white Flowers, with a deep Pur∣ple spot in the middle, which are contracted together when the Seed begins to ripen, that the middle part being hollow and low, and the outer Stalks rising high, maketh the whol Um∣bel to shew like a Birds-Nest. The Root is small, long, and hard, unfit for meat, being somwhat sharp and strong. Place. The Wild kind groweth in divers parts of this Land plentifully by the Fields sides, and in untilled places. Time. They flower and seed in the end of Sum∣mer. The Vertues. The Wild kind, breaketh Wind,Wind, Stitches, provokes Urin and the Terms, Stone, and remo∣veth Stitches in the Sides, provoketh Urin and Womens Courses, and helpeth to break and expel the Stone: The Seed also of the same worketh the like effect, and is good for the Dropsie,Dropsie, Chollick, Barrenness, Ulcers. and those whose Bellies are swollen with Wind; helpeth the Chollick, the Stone in the Kidnies, and the rising of the Mother, being taken in Wine, or boyled in Wine and taken; and helpeth Conception. The Leavs being applied with Honey to running Sores or Ulcers, doth clense them. I suppose the Seeds of them perform this better than the Roots; And though Galen commend Garden Carrots highly, to break Wind; yet experience teacheth, that they breed it first; and we may thank Nature for expel∣ling it, not they: The Seeds of them expel Wind indeed, and so mend what the Root marreth. ☿ Caraway. Description. IT beareth divers Stalks of fine cut Leavs ly∣ing upon the ground somwhat like to the Leavs of Carrots, but not bushing so thick, of a little quick tast in them, from among which riseth up a square Stalk not so high as the Car∣rot, at whose Joynts are set the like Leavs but smaler and finer, and at the top smal open tufts or Umbels of white Flowers, which turn into smal blackish Seed smaler than the Anniseed, and of a quicker and hotter tast. The Root is whitish, smal and long, somwhat like unto a Parsnep, but with more wrinckled Bark, and much less, of a little hot and quick tast, and stronger than the Parsnep, and abideth after Seed-time. Place. It is usually sown with us in Gardens. Time. They flower in June or July, and seed quick∣ly after. Vertues and use. Caraway Seed hath a moderat sharp quality wherby it breaketh Wind and provoketh Urin, which also the Herb doth.Wind, Disury, Indigestiō, Head, Stomach, Bowels, Mother, Black and blue spots, Bruises, Chollick. The Root is better food than the Parsnep, and is pleasant & com∣fortable to the Stomach, helping digestion. The Seed is conducing to all the cold griefs of Head and Stomach, the Bowels or Mother, as also the wind in them, and helpeth to sharpen the Eye-sight. The Pouder of the Seed put into a Pultis, taketh away black and blue spots of Blows or Bruises. The Herb it self, or with some of the Seed bruised and fryed, laid hot in a bag or double cloth to the lower part of the Belly, easeth the pains of the wind Chollick. The Roots of Caraways eaten as men eat Parsnips, strengthen the Stomacks of ancient people exceedingly, and they need not make a whol meal of them neither, and are fit to be planted in every ones Garden. Caraway Comfects, once only dipped in Sugar, and half a spoonful of them eaten in the morning fasting, and as many after each
meal is a most admirable Remedy for such as are troubled with Wind. ☉ Celandine. Description. THis hath divers tender, round, whitish, green Stalks, with greater Joynts than or∣dinary in other Herbs, as it were Knees, very brittle and easie to break, from whence grow Branches with large tender long Leavs, much divided into many parts, each of them cut in on the edges, set at the Joynts on both sides of the Branches, of a dark bluish green colour on the upper side like Columbines, and of a more pale bluish green underneath, ful of a yellow sap, when any part is broken; of a bit∣ter tast and strong scent. At the tops of the Branches which are much divided, grow gold yellow Flowers of four Leaves apiece, after which come smal long pods, with blackish seed therin. The Root is somwhat great at the head, shooting forth divers other long Roots and smal Strings, reddish on the outside and yellow within, ful of a yellow sap therein. Place. It groweth in many places by old Walls, by the Hedges, and way sides in untilled places; and being once planted in a Garden, especially in some shady place, it wil remain there. Time. They flower all the Summer long, and the Seed ripeneth in the mean time. Vertues and use. The herb or Roots boyled in white-Wine and drunk, a few Aniseeds being boyled ther∣with, openeth Obstructions of the Liver and Gall,Obstructi∣ons of the Liver and Gall, yel∣low jaun∣dice, Drop∣sie, Pesti∣lence. helpeth the yellow Jaundice: and the often using it, helps the Dropsie, and the Itch, and those that have old Sores in their Legs, or other parts of the Body. The Juyce thereof taken fasting, is held to be of singular good use against the Pestilence: The distilled Water, with a little Sugar, and a little good Triacle mixed therwith (the party upon the taking be∣ing laid down to sweat a little) hath the same effect. The Juyce dropped into the EyesEyes. clen∣seth them from Films and cloudiness which darken the sight, but it is best to allay the sharpnes of the Juyce with a little Breast-milk: It is good in old filthy corroding creeping Ul∣cersUlcers, whersoever, to stay their malignity of fret∣ting and running, and to cause them to heal the more speedily: The Juyce often applied to Tetters, Ring worms,Tetters, Ring∣worms, Cancers, Warts, Belly, Bu∣wels, Mo∣ther Worms Terms stops, Tophach, Itch, Beau∣ty lost. or other such like sprea∣ding Cancers, will quickly heal them, and rubbed often upon Warts will take them away. The Herb with the Roots bruised and heated with Oyl of Camomel, and applied to the Na∣vel, taketh away the griping pain in the Belly and Bowels, and all the pains of the Mother: and applied to Womens Breasts stayeth the o∣vermuch flowing of their Courses. The Juyce Decoction of the Herb gargled between the Teeth that ake, easeth the pain; and the Pouder of the dryed Root, laid upon an aching hollow, or loos Tooth, wil caus it to fal out. The Juyce mixed with som Pouder of Brim∣stone, is not only good against the Itch, but taketh away al discolourings of the Skin what∣soever: And if it chance that in a tender Bo∣dy it causeth any Itching or Inflamation, by bathing the place with a little Vinegar it is helped. This is an Herb of the Sum, & under the Coe∣lestial Lyon, and is one of the best cures for the Eyes that is. Al that know any thing in A∣strologie, know as wel as I can tel them, That the Eyes are subject to the Luminaries; let it then be gathered when the Sun is in Leo, and the Moon in Aries applying to his Trine; let Leo arise, then may you make it into an Oyl or Oyntment which you please to anoint your sore Eyes withal: I can prove it both by my own experience, and the experience of those to whom I have taught it, That most desperat sore Eyes have been cured by this only Medi∣cine Andthen I pray, is not this farbetter than endangering the Eyes by the art of the Needle? for if this do not absolutly take away the Film, it will so facilitate the work that it may be don without danger. Another il-favored trick have Physitians got to use to the Eye, and that is worse than the Needle; which is, To eat away the Film by corroding or gnawing Medicines. This I ab∣solutly protest against. 1 Because the Tunicles of the Eye are very thin, and therfore soon eaten asunder. 2 The Callus or Film that they would eat away is seldom of an equal thickness in every place, and then the Tunicle may be eaten a∣sunder in one place, before the Film be consu∣med in another, and so be a readier way to ex∣tinguish the sight than to restore it. It is called Chelidonium from the Greek word , which signifies a Swallow, be∣cause they say, That if you prick out the Eyes of yong Swallows when they are in the Nest, the old ones will recover their Eyes again with this Herb. This I am confident, for I have tried it, That if you mar the very Apple of their Eyes with a Needle, she wil recover them again, but whether with this Herb or no I know not. Also I have read (and it seems to me som∣what probable) That the Herb being gathered as I shewed before, and the Elements drawn apart from it by the art of the Alchyraist; and after they are drawn apart, rectified, the earthy quality still in rectifying them, added to the Terra damnata (as Alchymists call it) or Ter∣ra sacratissima (as som Phylosophers call it)
the Elements so rectified are sufficient for the Cure of al Diseases, the humor offending be∣ing known and the contrary Element given, It is an Experience wurth the trying, and can do no harm. The Iesser Celondine, usually known by the Name of ♄ Pilewort. I Wonder what ailed the Antients to give this the name of Celandine which resembles it neither in Nature nor form: It acquired the Name of Pilewort from its Vertues, and it being no great matter where I set it down, so I do set it down at al, I humor'd Dr. Tradi∣tion so much as to set it down here. Description. This Celandine then or Pilewort (which you please) doth spread many round, pale, green Leavs set on weak and trailing Branches, which lie upon the ground, and are fat, smooth, and somwhat shining, and in some places (though seldom) marked with black spots, each stan∣ding on a long Footstalk among which rise smal yellow Flowers, consisting of nine or ten smal narrow Leavs, upon slender Footstalks very like unto a Crowfoot, wherunto the Seed also is not unlike, being many smal ones set together upon a Head. The Root is made of many smal Kernels like grain of Corn, some twice as long as others, of a whitish colour with some Fibres at the end of them. Place. It groweth for the most part in the moist corners of Fields, and places that are neer wa∣ter Sides, yet wil abide in dryer grounds, if they be but a little shadowed. Time. It Flowreth betimes about March or April, is quite gone in May, so as it cannot be found until it spring again. Vertues and use. It is certain by good experience that the Decoction of the Leavs and Roots, doth won∣derfully help the Piles and Hemorrhoids,Hemor∣rhoids, Kings E∣vil. as also Kernels by the Ears and Throat called the Kings evil; or any other hard Wens or Tumors. Here's another Secrot for my Country Men and Women, a couple of them together, Pile∣wort being made into an Oyl Oyntment or Plaister, readily cures both the Piles or He∣morrhoids, and the Kings Evil, If I may Lawfully cal it the Kings Evil now there is no King, the very Herb born about ones Bo∣dy ne the Skin, helps in such Diseases, though it never touch the place grieved, let good people make much of it for these uses, with this I cured my own Daughter of the Kings Evil, broke the Sore, drew out a quar∣ter of a pint of Corruption, and cured it without any Scar at all, and in one Weeks time. The Ordinary small ☉ Centaury. Description. THis groweth up most usually but with one round and somwhat crested stalk, about a foot high, or better, branching forth at the top into many sprigs, and some also from the Joynts of the Stalks below; The Flowers that stand at the tops as it were in an umbel or tuft, are of a pale red, tending to a Carnation colour, consisting of five, somtimes six small Leavs, very like those of St. Johns Wort, o∣pening themselvs in the day time, and closing at night; after which come Seed in little short Husks in form like unto Wheat Corns: The Leavs are smal and somwhat round. The Root smal and hard, perishing every year: The whol Plant is of an exceeding bitter tast. There is another sort in al things like the former, save only it beareth white Flowers. Place. They grow ordinarily in Fields, Pastures, and Woods, but that with the white Flowers, not so frequent as the other. Time. They Flower in July, or there abouts, and Seed within a Month after. Vertues and use. This Herb boyled and drunk, purgeth Chollerick and gross humors, and helpeth the Sciatica: It openeth Obstructions of the Liver, Gall, and Spleen, helping the Jaun∣dice, and easing pains in the Sides, and hard∣ness of the Spleen, used outwardly, and is gi∣ven with very good effect in Agues: It hel∣peth those that have the Dropsie or the green Sickness, being much used by the Italians in pouder for that purpose. It killeth the Worms in the Belly as is found by experience. The Decoction therof (viz.) the tops of the Stalks with the Leavs and Flowers, is good against the Chollick, and to bring down Womens Courses, helpeth to avoid the dead birth, and easeth pains of the Mother, and is very effe∣ctual in al old pains of the Joynts, as the Gout,Choller, Sciatica, Obstructi∣ons, Lver, Gall, Spleen, Agues, Dropsie, green sick∣ness, Chol∣lick, Terms provokes, Joynts, Gout, Sci∣atica, Cramps, or Convulsions.Cramp, Convulsi∣on, Vene∣mous Beasts, A dram of the Pouder therof taken in Wine, is a wonderful good help against the biting and poyson of the Adder. The Juyce of the Herb with a little Honey put to it, is good to cleer the Eyes from dimness, mists, and clouds that of∣fend
or hinder the Sight: It is singular good both for green and fresh Wounds, as also for old UlcersEyes, Wounds, ulcers. and Sores, to close up the one and clens the other, and perfectly to cure them both, although they be hollow or Fistulous; the green Herb especially being bruised and laid therto. The Decoction therof dropped into the Ears, clenseth them from Worms, clen∣seth the foul Ulcers and spreading Scabs of the Head, and taketh away al Freckles, Spots,Ears, Scabby Heads, Freckles, Spots, and Marks in the Skin being washed therwith. The Herb is so safe you cannot fail in the using of it, only give inwardly for inward Diseases, use it outwardly for outward Diseases, 'Tis very wholsom but not very toothsom. Dr. Reason and Dr. Experience could not a∣gree (the last time I spake with them) whe∣ther the Herb were under the Dominion of the Sun or Mars. ♀ The Cherry-Tree. I Suppose there are sew but know this Tree, for his Fruits sake, and therfore shal spare the writing a Description therof. Place. For the place of its growth, it is afforded room in every Orchard. Vertues and Vse. Cherries, as they are of different tasts, so they are of divers qualities: The sweet pass through the Stomach and Belly more speedily, but are of little Nourishment. The tart or sowr, are more pleasing to an hot Stomach, procuring appetite to meat, and help to cut tough Flegm and gross humors; but when these are dryed they are more binding the bel∣ly than when they are fresh, being cooling in hot Diseases, and welcom to the Stomach, and provoke Urin. The Gum of the Cherry-Tree dissolved in Wine, is good for a cold Cough, and boarsness of the Throat, mendeth the co∣lour in the Face, sharpneth the Eye-sight, pro∣voketh appetite, and helpeth to break and expel the Stone. The Black Cherries bruised with the Stones and distilled, the Water therof is much used, to break the Stone, expel gravel, and break the Wind.Appetite lost, Flegm Gross Hu∣mors, Cool, provoke urine, Cough, Hoarsness, Sight, Gravel, Wind. ♀ Winter Cherries. Description. THe Winter Cherry hath a running or cree∣ping Root in the ground of the bigness many times of ones little Finger, shooting forth at several Joynts in several places, wher∣by it quickly spreadeth a great compass of gronnd: The Stalk riseth not above a yard high, wheron are set many broad; and long green Leavs; somwhat like Night shade but larger, at the Joynts wherof come forth whi∣tish Flowers made of five Leavs apiece, which after turn into green Berries, inclosed with thin Skins, which change to be reddish, when they grow ripe, the Berry likewise being red∣dish, and as large as a Cherry, wherin are con∣tained many flat and yellowish Seeds lying within the pulp; which being gathered and strung up are kept all the yeer to be used upon occasion. Place. They grow not naturally in this Land, but are cherished in Gardens for their Vertues. Time. They Flower not until the middle or latter end of July, and the Fruit is ripe about the end of August, or beginning of September. Vertues and use. They are of great use in Physick: The Leavs being cooling may be used in Inflama∣tions, but not opening, as the Berries and Fruit are, which by drawing down the Urine provoke it to be avoided plentifully when it is stopped or grown hot, sharp, and painful in the passage; it is good also to expel the Stone and Gravel out of the Reins, Kidnies, and Bladder, helping to dissolve the Stone, and a∣voiding it by greet or gravel sent forth in the Urin; It also helpeth much to clens inward Im∣postumes or Ulcers in the Reins or Bladder, or in those that avoid a Bloody or foul Urin. The distilled Water of the Fruit, or the Leavs to∣gether with them, or the Berries green or dry, distilled with a little Milk, and drunk morning and evening with a little Sugar, is effectual to al the purposes afore specified, and especially against the heat and sharpness of the Urin.Inslamati∣ons, Disu∣ry, Stone, Gravel, ulcers in the Reins and Blad∣der, pissing Blood, sharpness of urins. I shal only mention one way amongst many others which might be used for ordering the Berries to be helpful for the Urin and the Stone, which is thus.A precious Receipt. Take three or four good handfuls of the Berries either green and fresh, or dried and having bruised them, put them into so many Gallons of Beer or Ale when it is new tunned up: This Drink taken daily hath been found to do much good to many, both to eas the pains and expel Urin, and the Stone; and to caus the Stone not to ingender. The Decoction of the Berries in Wine or Wa∣ter is the most usual way; but the Pouder of them taken in drink is more effectual. ♃ Chervil. Description. THe Garden Chervil doth at first somwhat resemble Parsly, but after it is better grown the Leavs are much cur in and jagged
resembling Hemlocks, being a little hairy and of a whitish green colour, somtimes turning reddish in the Summer with the Stalks also; It riseth little above half a Foot high, bearing white Flowers in spoked tufts, which turn in∣to long and round Seed pointed at the ends, and blackish when they are ripe; of a sweet tast, but no smel, though the Herb it self smel∣leth reasonable wel: The Root is smal and long and perisheth every yeer, and must be so∣wen anew in the Spring for Seed, and after July for Autumn Sallet. The wild Chervil groweth two or three foot high, with yellow Stalks and Joynts, set with broader and more hairy Leavs, divided into sundry parts nicked about the edges, and of a darker green colour, which likewise grow red∣dish with the Stalks; at the tops wherof stand smal white tufts of Flowers & afterwards sma∣ler and longer seed: The Root is white, hard, and enduring long. This hath little or no scent. Place. The first is sown in Gardens, for a Sallet∣Herb. The second groweth wild in many of the Meadows of this Land, and by the Hedg∣sides, and on Heaths. Time. They flower and seed early, and thereupon are sown again in the end of Summer. Vertues and use. The Garden Chervil being eaten, doth mo∣derately warm the Stomach,Stomach Clotted Blood, Bruises, Falls, Disury, Stone, Pleuresie, Sides, Swellings, black and blue Spots. and is a certain remedy (saith Tragus) to dissolve congealed or clotted Bloud in the Body, or that which is clotted by bruises, fals, &c. The Juyce or di∣stilled Water therof being drunk, and the brui∣sed Leavs laid to the place, being taken either in meat or drink, it is held good to provoke Urin, to expel the Stone in the Kidnies, to send down Womens Courses, and to help the Plurisie and prickings of the Sides. The wild Chervil bruised and applied, dis∣solveth Swellings in any part of the Body, and taketh away the Spots and Marks of congealed Blood by Bruises or Blows, in a little space. Sweet Chervil; OR ♃ Sweet Cicely. Description. THis groweth very like the greater Hemlock having large spread Leavs, cut into diverse parts, but of a fresher green colour than the Hemlock, tasting as sweet as the Anniseed. The Stalk riseth up a yard high or better being cre∣sted or hollow, having the like Leavs at the Joynts, but lesser; and at the tops of the bran∣ched Stalks, Umbels or Tufts of white Flowers; after which com large and long crested, black shining Seed, pointed at both ends, tasting quick, yet sweet and pleasant. The Root is great and white, growing deep in the ground, and spreading sundry long Branches therein, in tast and smel stronger than the Leavs or Seed, and continuing many years. Place. This groweth in Gardens. Vertues. This whol Plant besides its pleasantness in Sallets, hath also his Physical Vertues. The Root boyled and eaten with Oyl and Vinegar, (or without Oyl) doth much pleas and warm an old and cold Stomach,Cold Sto∣mach, Wind, Flegm, Lungues, Phtisick, Pestilence, Termspro∣vokes, Af∣terbirth, Appetite lost, ulcers Epidemi∣cal Disea∣ses. oppressed with wind or flegm, or those that have the Phtisick or Consumption of the Lungs. The same drunk with Wine, is a preservative from the Plague; it provoketh Womens Courses, and expelleth the After-birth, procureth and appetit to meat, and expelleth Wind. The Juyce is good to heal the Ulcers of the Head and Face. The candied Roots hereof are held as effectual as Angelica to preserv from Infection in the time of a Plague, and to warm and comfort a cold weak Stomach. It is so harmless you cannot use it amss. ♀ Chickweed. Description. THis is generally known to most People, I shal therfore not trouble you with the Description therof; nor my self with setting fourth the several kinds; sith but only two or three are considerable for their usefulness. Place. These are usually found in moist and watry places, by Wood sides, and els-where. Time. They flower about June, and their Seed is ripe in July. Vertues and use. It is found to be as effectual as Purslane to al the purposes whereunto it serveth, except for meat only. The Herb bruised or the Juyce ap∣plied (with cloaths or spunges dipped therein) to the Region of the Liver,Hot Liver, Apostums Swellings, Red Face, Wheals, Pushes, Itch, Scabs Cramp, Convulsi∣on, Palsey, Red Eyes, Hemor∣rhoids, ulcers, and as they dry to have fresh applied, doth wonderfully temper the heat of the Liver; and is effectual for all Imposthums and Swellings wheresoever; for all redness in the Face, Wheals, Pushes, Itch, Scabs, the Juyce either simply used, or boyled with Hogs-Greas and applied; the same hel∣peth Cramps, Convulsions and Palsies: The Juyce or distilled Water is of much good use for al heat and redness in the Eyes to drop som therof into them; as also into the Ears to ease pains in them, and is of good effect to ease
the pains, the heat, and sharpness of Blood in the Piles and generally al pains in the Body that arise of heat; it is used also in hot and vi∣rulent Ulcers and sores in the privy parts of Man or Woman, or on the Legs or els-where. The Leavs boyled with Marsh-Mallows and made into a Pultis with Fenugreek, and Lin∣seed, applied to Swellings or Imposthumes ri∣peneth and breaketh them, or swageth the swellings and easeth the pains: It helpeth the SinewsSinews, when they are shrunk by Cramps or o∣therwise, and to extend and make them pliable again, by this Medicine. Boyl an handful of Chickweed and a handful of Red-Rose Leavs dryed, but not distilled in a Quart of Musca∣dine until a fourth part be consumed; then put to them a pint of the Oyl of Trotters, or Sheeps-feet; let them boyl a good while still stirring them wel; which being strained, a∣noint the grieved place herewith, warm against a fire, rubbing it wel in with ones hand, and bind also some of the Herb (if you wil) to the place, and with Gods blessing it will help in three times dressing. Cich-Peas, or Cicers. ♀ Description. THe Garden sorts, whether Red, Black, or White, brings forth Stalks a yard long, wheron do grow many smal and almost round Leavs, dented about the edges, set on both sides of a middle Rib: at the Joynts come forth one or two Flowers upon short Footstalks, Peas fashion, either white or whi∣tish, or purplish red, lighter or deeper accor∣ding as the Peas that follow will be, that are contained in smal, thick, and short Pods, wherin lie one or two Peas more usually, a lit∣tle pointed at the lower end, and almost round at the Head, yet a little corner'd or sharp. The Root is smal, and perisheth yeerly. Place and Time. They are sown in Gardens, or the Fields, as Peas, being sown later than Peas, and ga∣thered at the same time with them, or present∣ly after. Vertues and use. They are no less windy than Beans, but nou∣rish more, they provoke Urine, and are thought to encreas Sperm, they have a clensing faculty, wherby they break the Stones in the Kidneys.Disury, Seed en∣creas, Stone, Costivness, Terms provokes. To drink the cream of them being boyled in Water is the best way; it moveth the Belly downwards, provoketh Womens Courses, and Urin, and encreaseth both Milk and Seed. One ounce of Cicers, two ounces of French Barley, and a smal handful of Marsh-Mallow Roots, clean washed and cut, being boyled in the broth of a Chicken, and four ounces taken in the morning and fasting two hours after is a good Medicine for a pain in the Sides.Pain in the sides, The white Cicers are used more for Meat than Me∣dicine, yet have they the same effects, and are thought more powerful to encreas Milk and Seed. The wild Cicers are so much more powerful than the Garden kinds, by how much they ex∣ceed them in heat and driness; whereby they do more open Obstructions, break the Stone, and have al the properties of cutting, opening, digesting, and dissolving,Obstructi∣on, Stone, Open, Di∣gest, Dis∣solve. and this more spee∣dily, and certainly than the former. Cinkfoyl, or Five Leaved ♃. Grass; Called in some Countries, Five finger'd Grass. Description. THis spreadeth and creepeth far upon the ground, with long slender strings like Strawberries, which take Root again and shooteth forth many Leavs made of five parts, and somtimes of seven, dented about the edges and somwhat hard; The Stalks are slender leaning downwards, and bear many smal yellow Flowers theron, with some yellow threds in the middle, standing about a smooth green head; which when it is ripe is a little rough, and containeth smal brownish Seeds. The Root is of a blackish brown colour, sel∣dom so big, as ones little finger, but growing long with some threds therat; and by the smal strings it quickly spreadeth over the ground. Place. It groweth by Wood sides, Hedg sides, the Pathwaies in Fields, and in the Borders and Corners of them almost through all this Land. Time. It Flowreth in Summer, some sooner, some later. Vertues and use. It is an especial Herb used in all Inflamati∣ons and FeaversInslamati∣on, Fea∣vers, Pe∣stilence, Sore Mouths, ulcers, Cankers, Fistulaes, Quincy, Yellow Jaundice, Falling sickness, Flux, Terms stops Whites, Bloody Flux, Tooth-ach, Hoarsness, Cough, Palsey of the Hands, Knots in the Flesh, St. Antho∣nies Fire, Shingles, Scabs, Itch, Joynts pained, Sciatica, Ruptures, Gouts, Bruises, Falls, Bleeding. whether Infectious or Pesti∣lential; or among other Herbs to cool, and temper the Blood and humors in the Body; As also for all Lotions, Gargles, Injections, and the like for sore Mouths, Ulcers, Cankers, Fistulaes, and other corrupt, Foul, or running Sores. The Juyce herof drunk about four ounces at a time for certain daies together, cureth the Quinsie, and the yellow Jaundice, and taken for thirty daies together cureth the Falling-sickness. The Roots boyled in Milk and drunk is a most effectual remedy, for all Fluxes in Man or Woman, whether the
Whites, or Reds, as also the Bloody Flux. The Roots boyled in Vinegar, and the Deco∣ction therof held in the Mouth, easeth the pains of the Toothach. The Juyce or Deco∣ction taken with a little Honey, helpeth the hoarsness of the Throat, and is good for the Cough of the Lungs. The distilled Water of both Roots and Leavs is also effectual to all the purposes aforesaid: and if the Hands be often washed therin, and suffered at every time to dry in of it self without wiping, it wil in short time help the Palsy or shaking in them. The Root boyled in Vinegar, helpeth all Knots, Kernels, hard swellings, and lumps growing in any part of the Flesh, being ther∣to applied; as also al Inflamations, and St. Anthonies Fire, all Imposthumes, and pain∣ful Sores, with heat and putrefaction; the shingles also, and all other sorts of running, and soul Scabs, Sores, and Itch. The same also boyled in Wine, and applied to any Joynts full of pain and achor the Gout in the Hands or Feet, or the Hip-gout, called the Sciatica, and the Decoction therof drunk the while, doth cure them; and easeth much pains in the Bowels. The Roots are likewise effectual to help Ruptures or Burstings, being used with other things available to that purpose, taken either inwardly or outwadly, or both; as al∣so for Bruises, or Hurts by Blows, Falls, or the like, and to stay the bleeding of Wounds in any part inward or outward. This is an Herb of Jupiter, and therfore strengthens the parts of the Body that he rules, let Jupiter be angular and strong when it is gathered, and if you give but a scruple (which is but twenty grains of it) at a time, either in white Wine, or white Wine Vinegar, you shal very seldom miss the cure of an Ague be it what AgueAgues. soever in three Fits, as I have often proved to the admiration both of my self and others, let no Man despise it becaus it is plain and easie, the waies of God are all such, 'tis the ungodliness and impudency of Man that made things hard, and hath (by so doing) made sport for al the Devils in Hell, and grieved the good Angels, and when you reade this, your own Genius, if you be any thing at al acquainted with it, may dictate to you many as good Conculsions both of this and other Herbs. Some hold that one Leaf cures a Quotidian, three a Tertian, and four a Quartan Ague; and a hundred to one if it be not Dioscorides, for he is ful of such Whimseys. The truth is, I never stood so much upon the number of the Leavs, nor whether I gave it in Pouder or Decoction: If Jupiter were strong and the Moon applying to him or his good aspect at the gathering of it, I never knew it miss the desired effects. ♀ Clary. Description. OUr ordinary Garden Clary hath four square Stalks, with broad, ough, wrink∣led, whitish, or hairy green Leavs, somwhat evenly cut in on the edges, and of a strong, sweet, sent, growing some neer the ground, and some by couples upon the Stalks: The Flo∣wers grow at certain distances with two smal Leavs at the Joynts under them, somwhat like unto the Flowers of Sage, but smaller, and of a whitish blue colour: The Seed is brownish, and somwhat Flat, or not so ound as the wild, the Roots are blackish and spread not far, and perish after the Seed time: It is usu∣ally sown, for it seldom riseth of its own sow∣ing. Place. This groweth in Gardens. Time. It Flowreth in June and July, some a little later than others, and their Seed is ripe in August, or therabouts. Vertues and use. The Seed is used to be put into the EyesEyes to cleer them from Moats, or other such like things gotten within the Lids to offend them, as also to clear them from white or red spots in them. The Muccilage of the Seed made with Water, and applied to Tumors and swellings,Swellings, disperseth and taketh them away, as also dra∣weth forth Splinters, Thorns,Splinters, Thorns, or other things gotten into the Flesh. The Leavs used with Vi∣negar either by it self or with a little Honey, doth help hot Inflamations, as also Boyls, Fe∣lons,Inflamati∣ons, Boyls, Felons, and the hot Inflamations that are gathe∣red by their pains, if it be applied before they be grown too great. The Pouder of the dri∣ed Leavs put into the Nose provoketh neesing, and therby purgeth the Head and BrainHead, Brain, Lust pro∣vokes, Back, Terms provokes, of much Rhewm and Corruption. The Seed or Leavs taken in Wine provoketh to Venery. It is of much use both for Men and Women that have weak Backs, to help to strengthen the Reins, used either by it self or with other Herbs conducing to the same effect, and in Tansies often: The fresh Leavs dipped in a Batter of Flower, Egs, and a little Milk, and fried in Butter, and served to the Table, is not unpleasant to any, but exceeding profitable for those that are troubled with weak Backs, and the effects therof. The Juyce of the Herb put into Ale or Beer, and drunk, brin∣geth down Womens Courses, and expelleth the After-birth.Afterbirth
It is an usual cours with Men when they have gotten the running of the Reins, or Wo∣men the Whites, then run to the bush of Clary; Maid bring hither the Frying Pan, fetch me some Butter quickly, then to eating fryed Cla∣ry just as Hogs eat Acorns, and this they think wil cure their Diseas (forsooth) wheras when they have devoured as much Clary as wil grow upon an Acre of ground, their Backs are as much the better as though they had pissed in their shoos, nay perhaps much wors. As for that trick of curing the Eyes by it, I can as yet say nothing to it, for the rest it may be effectual. We will grant that Clary strengthens the Back, but this we deny, That the cans of the running of the Reins in Men, or the Whites in Women lies in the Back (though the Back may somtimes be weakned by them) and ther∣fore the Medicine is as proper, as for me when my Toe is sore, to lay a Plaister to my Nose. Cleavers, or Goosgrass. ♄ Description. THe common Cleavers hath divers very rough square Stalks, not so big as the Tag of a Point, but rising up to be two or three yards high somtimes, if it meet with any tall Bushes or Trees wheron it may climb (yet without any Claspers) or els much lower lying upon the Ground full of Joynts, and at every of them shooteth forth a Branch, besides the Leavs therat, which are usually six, set in a round compass like a Star, or the Rowel of a Spur: from between the Leavs at the Joynts towards the tops of the Branches, come forth very smal white Flowers; every one upon a smal threddy Footstalk, which after they are fallen, there do shew two smal, round, rough Seeds, joyned together like two Testicles, which when they are ripe grow hard and whi∣tish, having a little hole on the side somwhat like unro a Navil. Both Stalks, Leavs, and Seeds are so rough that they wil cleav to any thing shal touch them. The Root is small and very threddy, spreading much in the Ground, but dieth every yeer. Place. It groweth by the Hedg, and Ditch Sides in many places of this Land, and is so trou∣blesom an Inhabitant in Gardens, that it rampeth upon and is ready to choak what ever grows next it. Time. It. Flowreth in June and July, and the Seed is tripe and falleth again in the end of July or August, from whence it pringeth up again, and not from the old Roots. Vertues and use. The Juyce of the Herb, and Seed together taken in Wine, helpeth those that are bitten with an Adder, by preserving the Heart from the Venom;Venemous Beasts, Heart, Fainess, Yellow Jaundice, Flux, Bloo∣dy Flux, Wounds, Ulcers, Swellings, Kings E∣vil, Pain in the Ears. It is familiarly taken in Broth to keep them lean; and lank that are apt to grow fat. The distilled Water drunk twice a day helpeth the yellow Jaundice, and the De∣coction of the Herb in experience found to do the same, and stayeth Lasks and Bloody Flux∣es. The Juyce of the Leavs, or they a little bruisep and applied to any bleeding wound, stayeth the Bleeding. The Juyce is also very good to close up the Lips of green Wounds; and the Pouder of the dried Herb strewed therupon doth the same, and likewise helpeth old Ulcers: Being boyled with Hogs Greas, it healeth al sorts of hard Swellings or Kernels in the Throat, being anointed therwith. The Juyce dropped into the Ears taketh away the pains of them. It is a good remedy in the Spring, eaten (being first chopped smal and boyled well) in Water-gruel, to clens the Blood, and streng∣then the Liver, thereby keeping the Body in health, and fitting it for that change of Season that is coming. Clowns Woundwort. ♄ Description. IT groweth up somtimes to three or four Foot high, but usually about two Foot, with square, green, rough Stalks, but slender, joyn∣ted somwhat far asunder, and two very long, and somwhat narrow, dark green Leavs, bluntly dented about the edges thereat ending in a long point, The Flowers stand toward the tops compassing the Stalks at the Joynts with the Leavs and end likewise in a spiked op, having long and much open gaping hoods of a Purplish red colour, with whitish spots in them, standing in somwhat rough Husks, wherin afterwards stand blackish round Seeds. The Root is composed of many long strings, with some tuberous long Knobs gro∣wing among them, of a pale yellowish or whi∣tish colour, yet at some times of the year these knobby Roots in many places are not seen in the Plant: The whol Plant smelleth somwhat strongly. Place. It groweth in sundry Counties of this Land both North and West, and frequently by Path sides in the Fields neer about London, and within three or four miles distance about it, yet it usually grows in or neer Ditches. Time. It Flowreth in June and July, and the Seed is ripe soon after.
Vertues and use. I is singularly effectual in all fresh and green Wounds,Wounds, ulcers, Blood, Cancers, Bloody Flux, Ves∣sels broken Ruptures, Spitting, pissing, and Vomiting Blood, Veins swelled, Muscles cut. and therfore beareth not this name for nought. And is very available in stan∣ching of Blood, and to dry up the Fluxes of Humors in old fretting Ulcers, Cancers, &c. that hinder the healing of them. A Syrup made of the Juyce of it is inferior to none for inward Wounds, Ruptures of Veins, Bloody Flux, Vessels broken, spitting, pissing or vomiting Blood, Ruptures are ex∣cellently and speedily, even to admiration cu∣red by taking now and then a little of the Sy∣rup, and applying an Oyntment or Plaister of the Herb to the place. Also if any Vein be swelled, or Muscle cut, apply a Plaister of this Herb to it, and if you ad a little Comfry to it 'twil not do amiss, I assure the Herb de∣servs Commendations though it have gotten but a Clownish name, and whoever reades this (if he try it as I have done) will commend it as well as I. I have done, only take notice, that it is of a dry Earthy quality, and under the Domini∣on of the Planet Saturn. Cocks-Head. ♀ Description. THis hath divers weak, but rough Stalks, half a yard long, leaning downwards, beset with winged Leavs, longer and more pointed than those of Lentils, and whi∣tish underneath; from the tops of these Stalks arise up other slender Stalks, naked without Leavs unto the tops, where there grow many smal Flowers in manner of a Spike, of a pale reddish olr, with some blueness among them after which rise up in their places, round, rough, and somwhat flat Heads. The Root is tough and somwhat woody, yet liveth and shooteth anew every yeer. Place. It groweth under Hedges, and somtimes in the open Fields, in divers places of this Land. Time. They Flower all the Months of July and August, and the Seed ripeneth in the mean while. Vertues and use. It hath a power to rarifie and digest, and therfore the green Leavs bruised and laid as a Plaister disperseth Knots, Nodes, or Kernels in the Flesh,Knots and Kernels in the Flesh, Strangury, Milk in Cattel. and if when it is dry it be taken in Wine, it elpeth the Strangury: and be∣ing anointed with Oyl, it provoketh Sweat. It is a singular Food for Cattel, to caus them to give store of Milk, and why then may it not do the like being boyled in the ordinary drink of Nurses. ☽ Columbines. THese are so wel known, growing in al∣most every Garden, that I think I may save the expence of time in writing a Descrip∣tion of them. Time. They Flower in May, and abide not for the most part when June is past, perfecting their Seed in the mean time. Vertues and use. The Leavs of Columbines are commonly u∣sed in Lotions with good success for sore Mouths and Throats:Sore Mouths & Throats, Obstructi∣ons, yellow Jaundice, Womens Travail, Tragus saith, That a dram of the Seed taken in Wine with a little Saffron, openeth Obstructions of the Liver, and is good for the yellow Jaundice, if the party after the taking therof be laid to sweat wel in his Bed: The Seed also taken in Wine causeth a speedy Delivery of Women in Childbirth; if one draught suffice not, let her drink a second, and it is effectual: The Spaniards use to eat a piece of the Root hereof in a morning fasting, many daies together, to help them being troubled with the StoneStone. in the Reins or Kidneys. Coltsfoot, or Foalsfoot. ♀ Description. THis shooteth up a fiender Stalk with small yellowish Flowers somwhat early, which fall away quickly, and after they are past, come up somwhat round Leavs, somtimes dented a little about the edges, much lesser, thicker and greener than those of Butterbur, with a little down or Freez over the green Leaf on the upper side, which may be rubbed away, and whitish or mealy underneath. The Root is smal and white spreading much under ground, so that where it taketh, it whil hardly be dri∣ven away again, if any little piece be abiding therin; and from thence springeth fresh Leavs. Place. It groweth as well in wet grounds, as in drier places. Time. And Flowreth in the end of February, the Leavs beginning to appear in March. Vertues and use. The fresh Leavs or Juyce, or a Syrup made therof is good for a hot dry Cough, for whee∣sings and shortness of breath.Cough, Wheesing, shortness of breath. The dry Leavs are best for those that have thin Rhewms, and Distillations upon the Lungs, causing a
Cough, for which also the dried Leavs taken as Tobacco, or the Root, is very good. The distilled water herof simply, or with Elder Flo∣wers and Nightshade, is a singular remedy a∣gainst al hot Agues,Agues, Inflama∣tions, Swelling, St. Antho∣nies fire, Burnings, Chollerich Pushes, Piles, In∣flamations in the Pri∣vities. to drink two ounces at a time, and apply Cloathes wet therein to the Head and Stomach; which also doth much good being applied to any hot Swellings or Inflamations, it helpeth St. Anthonies Fire, and Burnings, and is singular good to take a∣way Wheals, and smal Pushes that arise through heat; As also the burning heat of the Piles, or privy parts, cloathes wet therin be∣ing therunto applied. ♄ Comfry. ♑ Description. THe common great Comfry hath divers very large and hairy green Leavs lying on the ground, so hairy or prickly that if they touch any tender part of the Hands, Face, or Body, it will caus it to itch: The Stalk that riseth up from among them being two or three Foot high, hollow and cornered, is very hairy also, having many such like Leavs as grow below, but lesser and lesser up to the top. At the Joynts of the Stalks, it is divided into many branches with some Leavs theron, and at the ends stand many Flowers in order one above another, which are somwhat long and hollow like the finger of a Glove, of a pale whitish colour, after which come smal black Seed. The Roots are great and long, spreading great thick Branches under ground, black on the outside and whitish within, short or easie to break, and ful of a glutinous or clammy Juyce of little or no tast at al. There is another sort in al things like this, save only it is somwhat less, and beareth Flo∣wers of a pale purple colour. Place. They grow by Ditches and Water Sides, and in divers Fields that are moist, for therin they chiefly delight to grow: The first gene∣rally through al the Land, and the other but in some several places. By the leave of my Author, the first grow often in dry places. Time. They Flower in June and July, and give their Seed in August. Vertues and use. The great Comfry helpeth those that spit blood, or make a Bloody Urin; The Root boyled in Water or Wine and the Decoction drunk, helpeth al inward Hurts, Bruises and Wounds, and the Ulcers of the Lungs, cau∣sing the Flegm that oppresseth them to be ea∣sily spit forth; It staieth the defluxions of Rhewm from the Head upon the Lungs, the Fluxes of Blood or humors by the Belly, Wo∣mens immoderate Courses, as well the Reds; as the Whites; and the running of the Reins hapning by what caus soever. A Syrup made therof is very effectual for all those inward Griefs and Hurts; and the distilled Water for the same purpose also, and for outward Wounds and Sores in the Fleshy, or Sinewy part of the Body whersoever; as also to take away the fits of Agues, and to allay the sharpness of Hu∣mors. A Decoction of the Leavs herof is a∣vailable to all the purposes, though not so effe∣ctual as of the Roots. The Roots being out∣wardly applied, helpeth fresh Wounds or Cuts immediatly, being bruised and laid therunto; and is especial good for Ruptures and broken Bones: yea it is said to be so powerful to con∣solidate and Knit together; that if they be boyled with dissevered pieces of Flesh in a pot it will joyn them together again. It is good to be applied to Womens Breasts that grow sore by the abundance of Milk coming into them: as also to repress the overmuch blee∣ding of the Hemorrhoids to cool the Inflama∣tion of the parts therabouts, and to give eas of pains. The Roots of Comfry taken fresh, beaten smal, and spread upon Leather, and laid upon any place troubled with the Gout, do presently give eas of the pains; and applied in the same manner giveth eas to pained Joynts and profiteth very much for running and moist Ulcers; Gangrenes,Spitting, pissing Blood, In∣ward Wounds & Bruises, Phtisick, Bloody Flux, Terms stops, Whites, Nervs cut, Muscles cut, sharp Humors, Wounds, Ruptures, broken Bones, Knotted Breasts, Hemor∣rhoids, Inflama∣tion, Gout, Pained Joynts, Gan∣greans. Mortifications, and the like, for which it hath by often experience been found helpful. This is also an Herb of Saturn, and I sup∣pose under the Sign Capricorn, cold, dry, and earthy in quality, what was spoken of Clowns Woundwort may be said of this. ♃ Costmary, or Alecost. THis is so frequently known to be an In∣habitant in almost every Garden, that I suppose it needless to write a Descripti∣tion therof. Time. It Flowreth in June and July. Vertues and use. The ordinary Costmary as well as Maudlin, provoketh Urin abundantly, and moistneth the hardness of the Mother; It gently purgeth Choller and Flegm, extenuating that which is gross, and cutting that which is tough and gluttenous, clenseth that which is foul, and hindreth putrefaction and corruption, it dis∣solveth without Attraction, openeth Obstru∣ctions, and healeth their evil effects, and is a wonderful help to al sorts of day Agues. It is astringent to the Stomach,Disury, Womb, Choller, Flegm, pu∣trefaction, Corrupti∣on, Obstru∣ctions Quotidion Agues, Stomach, and strengtheneth
the LiverLiver, and al the other inward parts, and taken in Whey, worketh the more effectually. Taken fasting in the morning, it is very pro∣fitable for the pains in the HeadHead-ach, that are con∣tinual, and to stay, dry up, and consume all thin Rhewms,Rhewm, or distillations from the Head into the Stomach, and helpeth much to digest raw humorsRaw Hu∣mors. that are gathered therein. It is very profitable for those that are fallen into a continual evil disposition of the whol Body called Cachexia,Cachexia, being taken especially in the beginning of the Diseas: It is an especial friend and help to evil, weak, and cold Livers. The Seed is familiarly given to Children for the Worms,Worms, and so is the infusion of the Flowers in white Wine, given them to the Quantity of two ounces at a time: It maketh an excellent Salve to clens and heal old Ulcers,ulcers. being boyled with Oyl Olive, and Adders Tongue with it: and after it is strained, to put a little Wax, Rozin, and Turpentine to bring it into a convenient Body. Cudweed, or Cottonweed. ♄ Description. THe common Cudweed riseth up but with one Stalk somtime, and somtimes, with two or three, thick set on all sides with small long, and narrow whitish or wooly Leavs from the middle of the Stalk almost up to the top; with every Leaf standeth a smal Flower, of a dun or brownish yellow colour, or not so yellow as others; in which Heads after the Flowers are fallen come smal Seed wrapped up with the down therin and is crried away with the Wind. The Root is small and thred∣dy. There are other sorts hereof, which are somwhat lesser than the former, not much dif∣ferent, save only that as the Stalk and Leavs are shorter, so the Flowers are paler, and more open. Place. They grow in dry, barren, sandy, and gra∣velly Grounds, in most places of this Land. Time. They Flower about July, some earlier, some later, and their Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and use. The Plants are all astringent, or binding and drying,Bind, Dry, and therfore profitable for De∣flnxions of Rhewm from the Head, and to stay Fluxes,Fluxes, of Blood whersoever. The De∣coction being made into red Wine and drunk, or the Pouder taken therin; it also helpeth the Bloody Flux, and easeth the torments that come therby,Terms ill stopped, stayeth the immoderate Courses of Women, and is also good for in∣ward or outward Wounds, Hurts, and Bruises, and helpeth Children both of Burstings and the Worms; and the Diseas called Tenasmus,Ruptures, Worms, Tenasmus, which is an often provocation to the Stool, and doing nothing, being either drunk or in∣jected: The green Leavs bruised and laid to any green WoundWounds, Bleeding, staieth the bleeding, and healeth it up quickly: The Decoction or Juyce therof doth the same, and helpeth all old and filthy UlcersUlcers, quickly: The juyce of the Herb taken in Wine and Milk is (as Pli∣ny saith) a Sovereign remedy against the Mumps and Quinsie;Quinsy. and further saith, That whosoever shal so take it, shal never be trou∣bled with that Diseas again. Venus is Lady of it. ♀ ♈. Cowslips. BOth the Wild and Garden Cowslips are so wel known that I wil neither trouble my self nor the Reader with any description of them. Time. They Flower in April and May. Vertues and Vse. The Flowers are held to be more effectual than the Leavs, and the Roots of little use. An Oyntment being made with them taketh away Spots, and Wrinkles of the Skin, Sun∣burningSpots, Wrinkles, Sunbur∣ning, Head Heat, Wind Beauty ads, Verti∣go, Ephial∣tes, Con∣vulsion, Cramp, Back Blad∣der, Wounds, Trembling, Frenzy, Falling∣sicknest, Palsey. and Freckles, and ads Beauty excee∣dingly: They remedy all infirmities of the Head coming of Heat and Wind, as Vertigo, Ephialtes, fals apparitions, Phrensies, Falling∣sickness, Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, Pains in the Nerves: The Roots eas pains in the Back and Bladder, and open the passages of Urine: The Leavs are good in Wounds, and the Flowers take away trembling: If the Flo∣wers be not well dried and kept in a warm place, they wil soon putrifie and look green, have a special eye over them: if you let them see the Sun once a Month, it wil do neither the Sun nor them harm. Becaus they strengthen the Brain and Nerves, and remedy Palsies the Greeks gave them the name Prralisis; The Flowers pre∣served or conserved, and the quantity of a Nutmeg eaten every morning, is a sufficient Dose, for inward Diseases, but for Wounds Spots, Wrinkles, and Sunburning, an Oynt∣ment is made of the Leavs and Hogs greas. Venus laies claim to the Herb as her own, and it is under the Sign Aries, and our City Dames know wel enough the Oyntment or Distilled Water of it, adds Beauty, or at least restores it when it is lost.
♄ Sciatica-Cresses. Description. THese are of two kinds; The first riseth up with a round Stalk about two foot high spread into divers Branches, whose lower Leavs are somwhat larger than the upper, yet all of them cut, or torn on the edges, somwhat like unto Garden-Cresses, but smaller: The Flowers are smal and white, growing at the tops of the Branches, where afterwards grow Husks with smal brownish Seed therin, very strong and sharp in tast, more than the Cres∣ses of the Garden: The Root is long, white and woody. The other hath the lower leavs whol, som∣what long and bread not torn at al, but only somwhat deeply dented about the edges to∣wards the ends, but those that grow up higher are lesser. The Flowers and Seed are like the former, and so is the Root likewise: and both Root and Seed as sharp as it. Place. These grow by the way sides in untilled pla∣ces, and by the sides of old Walls. Time. They Flower in the end of June, and their Seed is ripe in July. Vertues and use. The Leavs, but especially the Roots taken fresh in the Sūmer time, beaten & made into a Pultis or Salve, with old Hogs Greas, and applied to the place pained with the Sciatica,Sciatica, to continue theron four hours if it be on a Man, and two hours on a Woman; the place afterwards bathed with Wine and Oyl mixed together, and then wrapped with Wool or Skins after they have swet a little, wil assuredly cure not only the same Diseas in the Hips, Huc∣klebone, or other of the Joynts, as the Gout in the Hands or Feet, but all other old Griefs of the Head (as invererate Rhewms) and other part of the Body that is hard to be cured: And if of the former GriefsGout, Head-ach, Rhewms, any part remain; the same Medicine after twenty daies is to be ap∣plied again. The same is also effectual in the Diseases of the Spleen and applied to the Skin it taketh away the blemishes therof, whe∣ther they be Scars, Leprosie, ScabsSpleen, Scars, Le∣prosie, Scurf, Scabs. or Scurf: which although it exulcerate the part, yet that is to be helped afterwards with a Salve made of Oyl and Wax. Esteem of this as another Secret. ☽ ♎ Water-Cresses. ♄ Description. OUr ordinary Water-Cresses spreadeth forth with many weak hollow sappy Stalks, shooting out fibres at the Joynts, and upward, long winged Leavs, made of sundry broad, sappy and almost round Leavs of a brownish green colour. The Flowers are ma∣ny and white, standing on long Footstalks, af∣ter which come small yellow Seed, contained in smal long pods like Horns: The whol Plant abideth green in the Winter, and tasteth somwhat hot and sharp. Place. They grow (for the most part) in the smal standing Waters, yet somtimes in smal Rivu∣lets of running Water. Time. They Flower and Seed in the beginning of Summer. Vertues and use. They are more powerful against the Scurvy,Scurvy, Blood, Hu∣mors, Ston Disury, Terms pro∣vokes, Ul∣cers, Frec∣kles, Pim∣ples, Spots, Dulness, Lethargy. and to clens the Blood and Humors than Brooklime is, and serve in al the other uses in which Brooklime is available, as to break the Stone, and provoke Urin, and Womens Cour∣ses. The Decoction, therof clenseth Ulcers by washing them therwith. The Leavs brused, or the Juyce, is good to be applied to the Face, or other parts troubled with Freckles, Pimples, Spots, or the like, at night, and washed away in the morning,. The Juyce mixed with Vi∣neger, and the forepart of the Head bathed therwith, is very good for those that are dull and drowsie, or have the Lethargy. Water-cress Pottage is a good Remedy to clens the Blood in the Spring, and help Head∣aches, and consume the gross Humors Winter hath left behind, those that would live in health may use it if they pleas, if they will not I cannot help it: If any fancy not Pottage they may eat the Herb as a Sallet. ♄ Crosswort. Description. THe Common Crosswort groweth up with square hairy brown Stalks, little above a Foot High, having four smal broad and poin∣ted hairy, yet smooth green Leavs, growing at every Joynt, each against other Cross waies, which hath caused the name: Toward the tops of the Stalks  the Joynts with the Leavs in three or four rows upwards, stand smal pale, yellow Flowers, after which come smal blac∣kish,
round Seed, four for the most part set in every Husk. The Root is very smal and full of Fibres, or Threads, taking good hold of the ground, and spreading with the Branches a great deal of ground, which perisheth not in Winter, although the Leavs die every year, and spring again anew. Place. It groweth in many moist grounds as well Meadows, as untilled places about London. In Hamsted Church-yard, at ye in Kent, and sundry other places. Time. It Flowreth from May al the Summer long in one place or other, as they are more open to the Sun; and the Seed ripeneth soon af∣ter. Vertues and use. This is a singular good WoundWounds inward & outwand, Flegm, Ob∣structions, Stomach, Bowels, Ruptures. Herb, and is used inwardly, not only to stay bleeding of Wounds, but to consolidate them, as it doth outwardly any green Wounds, which it quick∣ly sodereth up and healeth. The Decoction of the Herb in Wine, helpeth to expectorate Flegmout of the Chest, and is good for Ob∣structions in the Breast, Stomach, or Bowels, and helpeth a decayed Appetite; It is also good to wash any Wound or Sore with, to clens and heal it: The Herb bruised and then boyled and applied outwardly for certain daies together, renewing it often, and in the mean time, the Decoction of the Herb in Wine ta∣ken inwardly every day, doth certainly cure the Rupture in any, so as it be not too invete∣rate; but very speedily if it be fresh and late∣ly taken. ♂ Crowfoot. ABundance are the sorts of this Herb, that to describe them all would the the Pa∣tience even of Socrates himself, but becaus I have not yet attained to the Spirit of Socrates, I shall but describe the most usual. Description. The most common Crowfoot hath many dark green Leavs cut into divers parts, in tast biting & sharp, biting & blistering the Tongue, it bears many Flowers and those of a bright resplendent yellow colour, I do not remem∣ber that ever I saw any thing yellower, Vir∣gins in Ancient time used to make Pouder of them to strew Bride Beds, after which Flowers come smal heads, of Seeds, round, but tugged like a Pine Apple. Place. They grow very common every where, un∣less you run your Head into a Hedg you cannot chuse but see some of them wherever you walk. Time. They Flower in May and June, even till September. Names. Many are the Names this furious biting Herb hath obtained, almost enough to make up a Welch-mans Pedegree, if he fetch it no further than John of Gaunt of William the Conqueror, for it is called Frogs-foot from the Greek name  Crowfoot, Gold Knobs, Gold Cups, King Kob, Bassinets, Troll Flower, Polts, Locker Goulons, and Buttier∣Flowers. Vertues and use. This fiery and hot spirited Herb of Mars is no way fit to bagiven inwardly, but an Oynt∣ment of the Leavs or Flowers wil draw a Bli∣ster, and may so be fitting applied to the nape of the Neck to draw back Rhewm from the Eyes, the Herb being bruised and mixed with a little Mustard, draws a Blister as well and as perfectly as Cantharides, and with far less danger to the Vessels of Urin, which Can∣tharides Naturally delight to wrong, I knew the Herb once applied to a Pestilential rising that was falling down, and it saved life even beyond hope, it were good keeping an Oynt∣ment and Plaister of it if it were but for that. Cuckowpint, or VVake∣Robin. ♂ Description. THis shooteth forth three, four, or five Leavs at the most from one Root, every one wherof is somwhat large and long, broad at the bottom next the Stalk, and forked, but ending in a point, without cut on the edges, of a ful green colour, each standing upon a thick round Stalk, of a hands breadth long or more: among which after two or three Months that they begin to wither, riseth up a bare round whitish green Stalk, spotted and straked with purple, somwhat higher than the Leavs: at the top wherof standeth a long hollow Hose or Husk, close at the bottom, but open from the middle upwards ending in a point; in the middle wherof standeth a smal long Pestle or Clapper, smaller at the bottom than at the top, of a dark purple colour as the Husk is on the inside, though green without; which after it hath so abidden for some time, the Husk with the Clapper decayeth, and the foot or bottom therof groweth to be a smal long Bunch of Berries, green at the first, and of a yellowish red colour when they are ripe, of the bigness of an Hazel Nut Kernel; which abide ther∣on almost until Winter; The Root is round
and somwhat long, for the most part lying a∣long, the Leavs shooting forth at the bigger end, which when it beareth his Berries, is somwhat wrinkled and loos, another being growing under it, which is solid and firm with many smal threads hanging therat: The whol Plant is of a very sharp biting tast, pricking the Tongue as Nettles do the Hands, and so abideth for a great while without alteration: The Root hereof was anciently used instead of Starch to starch Linnen withal. There is another sort of Cuckowpint, with lesser Leavs than the former, and somwhat; harder, having blackish spots upon them which for the most part abide longer green in Summer than the former; and both Leavs and Roots are more sharp and fierce than it: In al things els it is like the former. Place. These two sorts grow frequently almost un∣der every Hedg side in many places of this Land. Time. They shoot forth Leavs in the Spring, and continue but until the middle of Summer, or somwhat later, their Husks appearing before they fall away; and their Fruit shewing in August. Vertues and Vse. Tragus reporteth that a dram weight, or more if need be, of the spotted Wake-Robin, either fresh and green, or dried, being beaten and taken is a most present and sure Remedy for Poyson and the Plague.Poyson, Plague, The Juyce of the Herb taken to the quantity of a spoonful hath the same effect. But if there be a little Vine∣gar added therunto as well as unto the Root a∣foresaid, it somwhat all ayeth the sharp biting tast therof upon the Tongue. The green Leavs bruised and laid upon any BoylBoyl, or Plague Sore, doth wonderfully help to draw forth the Poyson. A dram of the Pouder of the dried Root taken with twice so much Su∣gar in the form of a licking Electuary, or the green Root doth wonderfully help those that are pursie and short winded, as also those that have a Cough; it breaketh, digesteth, and riddeth away FlegmDifficulty of breath, Cough, Flegm, from the Stomach, Chest, and Lungs. The Milk wherin the Root hath been boyled is effectual also for the same pur∣pose. The said Pouder taken in Wine or o∣ther Drink; or the Juyce of the Berries, or the Pouder of them; or the Wine wherein they have been boyled, provoketh Urine, and bringeth down Womens Courses, and purgeth them effectually after Child-bearing to bring away the After-birth. Taken with Sheeps Milk it healeth the inward UlcersDisury, Terms provokes, Afterbirth Ulcers, of the Bo∣wels. The distilled Water herof is effectual to all the purposes aforesaid; A spoonful ta∣ken at a time healeth the Itch; And an ounce or more taken at a time for some daies toge∣ther doth help the Rupture;Itch, Rup∣tures. The Leavs ei∣ther green or dry, or the Juyce of them, doth clens all manner of rotten and filthy Ulcers in what part of the Body soever, and healeth the stinking Sores in the Nose called Polipus.Polipus, The Water wherin the Root hath been boyled dropped into the Eyes,Eyes clenseth them from a∣ny Film or Skin, Clouds or Mists which begin to hinder the Sight, and helpeth the watering or redness of them; or when by some chance they become black and blue. The Root mix∣ed with Bean Flower and applied to the Throat or JawsThroat, Jaws, that are inflamed helpeth them. The Juyce of the Berries boyled in Oyl of Roses, or beaten into Pouder and mixed with the Oyl, and dropped into the Ears and easeth pains in them. The Berries or the Roots beaten with hot Ox Dung, and applied, easeth the pains of the Gout. The Leavs and Roots boyled in Wine with a little Oyl, and applied to the Piles, or the falling down of the Funda∣ment easeth them; and so doth sitting over the hot fumes therof. The fresh Roots brui∣sed, and distilled with a little Milk, yieldeth a most Sovereign Water to clens the Skin from Scurff, Freckles, Spots, or BlemishesGout, Piles, or Hemor∣rhoids, Funda∣ment fal∣ling down, Scurf, Freckles, Spots, Blemishes. whatso∣ever therin. Authors have left large Commendation of this Herb you see, but for my part I have nei∣ther spoken with Dr. Reason, nor Dr. Expe∣rience about it. ♀ ♋ Daisies. THese are so well known to almost e∣very Child, that I suppose it is al∣together needless to write any De∣scription of them. Take therfore the Vertues of them as followeth. Vertues and Vse. The greater wild Daisie is a Wound Herb of good respect, often used in those Drink or Salvs that are for Wounds,Wounds, inward & outward, Choller, Liver, either inward or outwards. The Juyce or distilled Water of these, or the smal Daisies, doth much temper the heat of Choller, and refresheth the Liver and other inward parts. A Decoction made of them and drunk, helpeth to cure the Wounds made in the hollowness of the Breast: The same also cureth al UlcersBreast, ulcers, and Pustles in the Mouth or Tongue, or in the secret parts. The Leavs bruised and applied to the Cods, or to any other parts that are swollenSwellings, and hot, doth resolve it and temper the Heat: A Deco∣ction made hereof with Walwort and Agrimo∣ny, and the places fomented or bathed there∣with warm, giveth great eas to them that are troubled with the Palsy, Stiatica, or the Gout. The lame also disperseth and dissolveth the Knots or KernelsKernels. that grow in the Flesh or a∣ny
part of the Body, and the BruisesBruises, Falls, Ruptures, Burnings, Inflama∣tions. and Hurts that come of Fals and Blows: They are also used for Ruptures, and other inward Burnings with very good success. An Oyntment made hereof doth wonderfully help al Wounds that have Inflamations about them, or by reason of moist humors having access unto them, are kept long from healing, and such are those for the most part that happen in the Joynts of the Arms or Legs. The Juyce of them dropped into the running Eyes of any doth much help them. The Herb is under the Sign Cancer, and un∣der the Dominion of Venus, and therfore ex∣cellent good for Wounds in the Breast, and ve∣ry fitting to be kept both in Oyls, Oyntments, and Plaisters, as also in Syrup. DANDELYON, ♂ Vulgarly called, Piss-a-beds. Description. THis is wel known to have many long and deeply gashed Leavs lying on the ground, round about the Head of the Root; the ends of each Gash or Jag on both sides looking downwards towards the Root, the middle rib being white which broken yieldeth abundance of bitter Milk, but the Root much more: from among the Leavs which alwaies abide green, arise many slender, weak, naked Footstalks, every one of them bearing at the top one large yellow Flower, consisting of many rows of yellow Leavs, broad at the points and nicked in, with a deep spot of yellow in the middle, which growing ripe, the green Husk wherin the Flower stood, turneth it self down to the Stalk, and the Head of down becometh as round as a Ball, with long reddish Seed under∣neath, bearing a part of the Down on the Head of every one, which together is blown away with the Wind, or may be at once blown a∣way with ones Mouth. The Root growth downwards exceeding deep, which being bro∣ken off within the ground, wil notwithstan∣ding shoot forth again; and wil hardly be de∣stroyed where it hath once taken deep Root in the ground. Place. It groweth frequent in al Meadows and Pa∣sture Grounds. Time. It Flowreth in one place or other almost all the yeer long. Vertues and use. It is of an opening and clensing quality, and thefore very effectual for the Obstructions of the Liver, Gall, and Spleen, and the Diseases that arise from them, as the Jaundice, & Hypo∣condriacal Passion: It wonderfully openethOpeneth, Clenseth, Obstructi∣ons, Liver, Gall, Spleen, Jaundice, Hypochon∣driacal Melan∣cholly, Disury, Consup∣tion, Cachexia, Watching, Heat, Agu, Pestilence. the Passages of the Urin both in yong and old. It powerfully clenseth Aposthumes, and in∣ward in the Uritory passages, and by the dry∣ing and temperate quality doth afterwards heal them; for which purpose the Decoction of the Roots or Leavs in white Wine, or the Leavs chopped as Potherbs with a few Alli∣sanders and boyled in their Broth, is very effe∣ctual. And whoso is drawing towards a Con∣sumption, or an il Disposition of the whol Bo∣dy called Cachexia, by the use herof for some¦time together shal find a wonderful help: It helpeth also to procure rest and sleep to Bodies distempered by the Heat of Ague Fits, or o∣therwise. The distilled Water is effectual to drink in Pestilential Feavers, and to wash the Sores. You see here what Vertues this common Herb hath, and that's the reason you French and Dutch so often eat them in the Spring; and now if you look a little further you may see plainly without a pair of Spectakles, that Forraign Physitians are not so selfish as ours are, but more communicative of the Vertues of Plants to People. ♄ Darnel. Description. THis hath all the Winter long, sundry long, fat, and rough Leavs, which when the Stalk riseth, which is slender and joynted, are narrower, but rough stil; on the top groweth a long spike composed of many Heads, set one above another, containing two or three Husks with sharp, but short Beards or awns at the ends; the Seed is easily shaked out of the Ear, the Husk it self being somwhat tough. Place. The Country Husbandmen do know this too well to grow among their Corn or in the Borders and Pathwaies of other Fields that are fallow. Vertues and use. As this is not without some Vices, so hath it also many Vertues. The Meal of Darnel is very good to stay Gangreans,Gangreans Cankers, Leprosie, Morphew, Ring∣worms, and other such like fretting and eating Cankers, and putrid Sores: It also clenseth the Skin of al Lepries, Morphews, Ringworms, and the like, if it be used with Salt and Rhadish Roots. And being used with quick Brimstone and Vinegar, it dissolveth Knots and Kernels, and breaketh those that are hard to be dissolved, being boy∣led in Wine with Pidgeons Dung and Lin∣seed: A Decoction therof made with Water and Honey, and the place bathed therwith, is profitable for the Sciatica.Sciatica, Thorns, Splinters, broken Bones, Diabets. Darnel Meal ap∣plied
in a Pultis, draweth forth Splinters and broken Bones in the Flesh: The red Darnel boyled in red Wine and taken, stayeth the ask and all other Fluxes, and Womens bloody Is∣sues; and restraineth Urin that passeth away too snddenly. ☿ Dill. Description. THe common Dill groweth up with sel∣dom more than one Stalk, neither so high, nor so great usually as Fennel, being round, and with fewer Joynts theron, whose Leavs are sadder, and somwhat long, and so like Fennel that it deceiveth many; but har∣der in handling and somwhat thicker, and of a stronger unpleasanter set: The tops of the Stalks have four Branches and smaller Umbels of yellow Flowers, which turn into smal Seed somwhat flatter and thinner than Fennel Seed. The Root is small and woody, perishing eve∣ry year after it hath born Seed; and is also unprofitable, being never put to any use. Place. It is most usually sown in Gardens, and Grounds for the purpose, & is also found wild with us in some places. Vertues and use. The Dill being boyled and drunk is good to eas Swellings & pains,Swellings, Pains, Loosness, Vomiting, Mother, Hiccough, Raw and tough Hu∣mors. Wind, Apostums, ulcers. it also stayeth the Belly, and Stomach from casting: The Decoction there of helpeth Women that are troubled with the Pains and Windiness of the Mother, if they sit therin. It stayeth the Hiccough, being boyled in Wine and but smelled unto, being tied in a Cloth. The Seed is of more use than the Leavs, and more effectual to digest raw and viscuous humors, and is used in Medicines that serve to expel Wind and the pains procee∣ding therfrom. The Seed being toasted or fried, and used in Oyls or Plaisters, dissol∣veth the Imposthumes in the Fundament, and drieth up all moist Ulcers (especially in the secret parts.) The Oyl made of Dill is effe∣ctual to warm, to resolve Humors and Impost∣humes, to eas pains and to procure rest. The Decoction of Dill be it Herb or Seed (only if you boyl the Seed you must bruis it) in white Wine, being drunk is a gallant ex∣peller of Wind and provoker of the Terms.Terms provokes. ♀ Devils-bit. Description. THis riseth up with a round, green, smooth Stalk about two soot high, set with divers long and somwhat narrow, smooth, dark, green Leavs, somwhat snip'd about the edges for the most part, being els al whol and not divided at al or but very seldom, even to the tops of the Branches which yet are smaller than chose be∣low, with one Rib only in the middle: At the end of each Branch standeth a round Head of many Flowers set together in the same man∣ner or more nearly than the Scabious, and of a more blewish purple colour; which being past there followeth Seed that falleth away. The Root is somwhat thick, but short and blackish with may Strings, abiding after Seed time many yeers.A Learned Tale that cost a dull Fryar, se∣ yeers study. This Root was longer un∣tillthe Devil (as the Fryars say) hit away the rest of it for spight, envying its usefulness un∣to Man-kind. Foe sure he was not troubled with any Diseas for which it is proper. There are two other sorts hereof in nothing unlike the former, save that the one beareth White, and the other Blush colour'd Flo∣wers. Place. The first groweth as well in dry Meadows and Fields, as moist, in many places of this Land: But the other two are more rare, and hard to meet with, yet they are both found growing wild about Appledore, neer Rye in Kent. Time. They Flower not usually untill August. Vertues and use. The Herb or Root (all that the Devil hath left of it) being boyled in Wine and drunk is very powerful against the Plague, and all Pe∣stilentialPestilence, Feavers, Poyson, Venemous Beasts, Bruises, Falls, Clotted Blood, Diseases or Feavers, Poysons also, and the bitings of Venemous Beasts; It also helpeth those that are inwardly bruised by any casualty, ar outwardly by Falls or Blows, dis∣solving the clotted Blood: and the Herb or Root beaten and outwardly applied, taketh a∣way the black and blue Marks that remain in the Skin. The Decoction of the Herb, with Honey of Roses put therin is very effectual to help the inveterate tumors and Swellings of the Almonds and Throat,Swellings of the Throat, Mother, Wind, Worms, Wounds, Scurff, Itch, Dan∣driff, Pim∣ples, Frec∣kles, Mor∣phew. by often gargling the Mouth therwith. It helpeth also to pro∣cure Womens Courses, and easeth all pains of the Mother, and to break and discuss Winds therein and in the Bowels. The Pouder of the Root taken in Drink, driveth forth the Worms in the Body: The Juyce, or distilled Water of the Herb is effectual for green Wounds, or old Sores, and clenseth the Body inwardly, and the Seed outwardly, from Sores, Scurff, Itches, Pimples, Freekles, Morphew, or o∣ther deformities therof, but especially if a little Vitriol be dissolved therin.
♃ Dock. THese are so wel known many kinds of them, that I shall not trouble you with a Description of them; my Book grows big too fast. Vertues and use. All of them have a kind of cooling (but not all alike) drying quality the Sorrels being most cold, and the Bloodworts most drying: Of the Bur-Dock I have spoken already by himself. The Seed of most of the other kinds whether of the Garden or Field, do stay Lasks or FluxesFlux; Loathing of Meat, Spitting Blood, Scabs, Itch, Freckles, Morphew. of all sorts, the loathings of the Stomach through Choller, and is helpful to those that spit Blood. The Roots boyled in Vinegar helpeth the Itch, Scabs, and breakings out of the Skin, if it be bathed therwith. The Distilled Water of the Herb and Roots hath the same Vertue, and clenseth the Skin of Freckles, Morphews, and all other Spots and Discolourings therin. All Docks being boyled with Meat, make it boyled the sooner: Beside Bloodwort is excee∣ding strengthning to the Liver, and procures good Blood, being as wholsom a Pot Herb as any grows in a Garden, yet such is the nicity of our times forsooth, that Women will not put it in the Pot becaus it makes the Pottage black, Pride and Ignorance (a couple of Mon∣sters in the Creation) preferring Nicity be∣fore Health. Dodder of Time, or Epi∣thimum, and other Dodders. ♄ Description. THis first from Seeds giveth Roots in the Ground, which shooteth forth threads or Strings, grosser, or finer, as the pro∣perty of the Plant wherein it groweth, and the Climate doth suffer, creeping and spreading on that Plant wheron it fastneth, be it high or low. These Strings have no Leavs at all upon them, but wind and interlace themselves so thick upon a smal Plant that it taketh away all comfort of the Sun from it, and is ready to choke or strangle it: After these Strings are risen up to that Height that they may draw Nourishment from the Plant, they seem to be broken off from the ground, either by the strength of ther rising, or withered by the heat of the Sun. Upon these Strings are found clu∣sters of small Heads or Husks, out of which star forth whitish Flowers, which afterwads give smal pale colour'd Seed somwhat flat, and twice as big as Poppy Seed. It generally par∣ticipates of the Nature of that Plant which it climbeth upon, but the Dodder of Time is ac∣counted the best, and is the only true Epithi∣mum. Vertues and use. This is accounted the most effectnal for Me∣lanchollick Diseases, and to purge black or burnt Choller,Melan∣cholly, Ad∣dust Chol∣ler, Trem∣bling, fain∣ting, swooning, Spleen, Hypochon∣dria, Obstructi∣ons, Gall, Jaundice, Liver, which is the caus of many Dis∣eases of the Head and Brains, as also for the trembling of the Heart, faintings, and Swou∣nings. It is helpful in all Diseases and Griefs of the Spleen, and of that Melancholly that ariseth from the windiness of the Hypochon∣dria. It purgeth also the Reins or Kidneys by Urin. It openeth Obstructions of the Gall, wherby it profiteth them that have the Jaun∣dice; as also of the Liver, and Spleen; pur∣ging the Veins of Chollerick and Flegmatick Humors, and helpeth Childrens Agues, a little Wormseed being put therto. The other Dodders do (as I said before) participate of the Nature of those Plants whereon they grow: As that which hath been found growing upon Nettles in the West Country, hath by experience been found very effectual to procure plenty of Urin, where it hath been stopped or hindred.Disury, And so of the rest. All Dodders are under Saturn, Tell not me of Physitians crying up Epithimum, or that Dodder which grows upon Time (most of which comes from Hymettus in Greece, or Hy∣bla in Sicilia, becaus those Mountains abound with Time) he is a Physitian indeed that hath wit enough to chuse his Dodder according to Nature of the Diseas and Humor peccant, we confess, Time is the hottest Herb, it usually grows upon, and therfore that which grows upon Time is hotter than that which grows up∣on colder Herbs, for it draws Nourishment from what it grows upon as well as from the Earth where its Root is, and thus you see old Saturn is wise enough to have two Strings to his Bow. Sympathy and Antipathy, are the two Hin∣ges upon which the whol Moddel of Physick turns, and that Physitian which minds them not is like a Door off from the Hooks, more likely to do a man a mischief than to secure him: then all the Diseases Saturn causeth, this helps by Sympathy, & strengthens al the parts of the Body he rules, such as caused by Sol it helps by Antipathy, what those Diseases are see my Judgment of Diseases by Astrology, and you be pleased to look the Herb Wormwood, you shal find a Rational way for it.
♃ Dogs-Grass; OR Quich-Grass. Description. IT is well known that this Grass creepeth far about under ground with long white joynted Roots; and smal fibres almost at every Joynt very sweet in tast, as the rest of the Herb is, and interlacing one another, from whence shoot forth many fair long grassy Leavs, small at the ends and cutting or sharp on the edges. The Stalks are joynted like Corn, with the like Leavs on them, and a long spiked Head with long Husks on them and hard rough Seed in them. Place. It groweth commonly through this Land in divers plowed grounds, to the no smal trouble of the Husbandman, as also of the Gardiners in Gardens to weed it out if they can, for it is a constant Customer to the place it gets foo∣ting in. Vertues and use. This is the most Medicinable of all the Quith-grasses: Being boyled and drunk it o∣peneth Obstructions of the Liver and Gall,Liver, Gall, Disury, Griping, Inflamati∣on, ulcers, in the Blad¦der, Wounds, Vomiting, Worms, and the Stoppings of the Urin, and easeth the griping pains of the Belly, and Inflamations; wasteth the matter of the Stone in the Bladder, and the Ulcers thereof also: The Roots bru∣sed and applied doth consolidate Wounds: The Seed doth more powerfully expel Urin, and stayeth the Lask, and Vomitings; The distilled Water alone, or with a little Worm∣seed killeth the Worms in Children. The way of use is to bruis the Roots, and having well boyled them in white Wine, drink the Decoction; 'tis opening, but not pur∣ging very safe; 'tis a Remedy against all Dis∣eases coming of StoppingStopping. and such are half those which are incident to the Body of man; and although a Gardiner be of another opini∣on, yet a Physitian holds half an Acre of them to be worth five Acres of Carrots twice told over. Dovesfoot, or Cranes∣bill. ♂ Description. THis hath divers small, round, pale, green Leavs, out in about the edges, much like Mallows, standing upon long reddish hairy Stalks lying in a round compass upon the ground; among which rise up two or three, or more reddish Joynted, slender, weak, and hairy Stalks, with some such like Leavs there∣on, but smaller, and more cut in up to the tops, where grow many very smal, bright, red Flo∣wers of five Leavs apiece, after which follow smal Heads, with smal short bea pointing forth, as all other sorts of these Herbs do. Place. It groweth in Pasture Grounds, and by the Path sides in many places, and wil also be in Gardens. Time. It Flowreth in June, July, and August, some earlier, and some later, and the Seed is ripe quickly after. Vertues and use. It is found by experience to be singular good for the Wind Chollick,Chollick, Stone, Gra∣vel, Wounds, Congealed Blood, Sores, ul∣cers, Fistulaes, Gout, Si∣news, Ruptures. and pains there∣of, as also to expel the Stone and Gravel in the Kidnies. The Decoction there of in Wine is an exceeding good Wound Drink for those that have inward Wounds, Hurts, or Bruises, both to stay the bleeding, to dissolve and expel the congealed Blood, and to heal the parts, as also to clens, and heal outward Sores, Ulcers, and Fistulaes; and for green Wounds many do but bruise the Herb, and apply it to the place, and it healeth them quickly. The same Decoction in Wine fomented to any place pained with the Gout, or to Joynt-aches, or pain, of the Sinews giveth much eas. The Pouder, or Decoction of the Herb taken for some time together is found by experience to be singular good for Ruptures, and Burstings in People, either yong or old. ☽ Ducksmeat. THis is so well known to swim on the top of standing Waters, as Ponds, Pools, and Ditches, that it is needless further to de∣scribe it. Vertues and use. It is effectual to help Inflamations,, and St. Anthonies fire,Inflamati∣ons, St. Anthonies Fire, Pesti∣lenee, Eyes Swillings of the Cods, Headach. as also the Gout, either appli∣ed by it self, or in a Pultis with Barley Meal. The distilled Water herof is by some highly e∣steemed, against all inward Inflamations, and Pestilent Feavers; as also to help the redness of the Eyes, the Swellings of the Cods, and of the Breasts before they be grown too much. The fresh Herb applied to the Forehead, ea∣seth the Pains of the Head-ach coming of heat. Cancer claims the Herb, and the Moon wil be Lady of it, a word is enough to a Wise man.
Down, or Cotton∣Thistle. ♂ Description. THis hath many large Leavs lying on the ground, somwhat cut in, and as it were crumpled on the edges, of a green colour on the upper side, but covered over with a long hairy Wool, or Cottony Down, set with most sharp, and cruel pricks; from the middle of whose Heads of Flowers, thrust forth many Purplish, Crimson Treds, and sometimes (al∣though more seldom) white ones. The Seed that followeth in these Heads, lying in a great deal of fine white Down is somwhat large, long, and round, like the Seed of Ladies Thi∣stle, but somwhat paler. The Root is great and thick spreading much, yet it usually dieth after Seed time. Place. It groweth on divers Ditches Banks, and in the Corn-fields, and High-waies generally e∣very where throughout the Land. Time. It Flowreth and beareth Seed about the end of Summer, when other Thistles do Flower and Seed. Vertues and use. Pliny and Dioscorides write, That the Leavs & Roots hereof taken in Drink, helpeth those that have a Crick in their Neck,Wry Neck, wher∣by they cannot turn their Neck but their whol Body must turn also (Sure they do not mean those that have got a Crick in their Neck by being under the Hangmans Hands.) Galen saith that the Root and Leavs hereof are of an heating quality, and good for such Persons as have their Bodies drawn together by some Spasme,Spasmus, Convulsion Rickets, or Convulsion; as it is with Children that have the Rickets, or rather (as the Col∣ledg of Physitians will have it) the Rachites, for which name for the Diseas, they have (in a particular Treatise lately set forth by them) Learnedly Disputed, and put forth to the pub∣lick view, that the World may see, they took much pains to little purpose. Mars owns the Plant, and manifests to the World, that though it may hurt your Fingers it will help your Body, for I fancy it much for the Premises. ♀ The Elder-Tree. I Hold it needless to write any Descripti∣on of this, sith every Boy that plaies with a Potgun, will not mistake another Tree instead of Elder. I shall therfore in this place only describe the Dwarf Elder, called also Danewort, and Walewort. ♀ The Dwarf Elder. Description. THis is but an Herb every yeer dying with his Stalks to the ground, and rising again afresh every Spring; and is like unto the El∣ders both in form and quality, rising up with a four square rough hairy Stalk four foot high or more somtimes. The winged Leavs are somwhat narrower than the Elder, but els very like them. The Flowers are white with a dash of Purple standing in Umbels, very like the Elder also, but more sweet in scent, after which come smal blackish Berries, full of Juyce while they are fresh, wherein there lie smal hard Kernels or Seed. The Root doth creep under the upper crust of the ground, springing a∣fresh in divers places being of the bigness of ones finger or Thumb somtimes. Places. The Elder-Tree groweth in Hedges, being planted there to strengthen the Fences, and Partitions of Grounds, and to hold up the Banks by Ditches, and Water-courses. The Dwarf Elder groweth Wild in many places of England, where being once gotten into a Ground it is not easily gotten forth a∣gain. Times. Most of the Elder-Trees Flower in June, and their Fruit is ripe for the most part in Au∣gust. But the Dwarf Elder, or Wallwort Flowreth somwhat later, and his fruit is not ripe until September. Vertues and Vse. The first Shoots of the common Elder boy∣led like Asparagus, & the yong Leavs & Stalks boyled in Fat Broth, doth mightily carry forth Flegm and Choller.Flegm, Choller, The middle, or inner Bark boyled in Water, and given to drink worketh much more violently; and the Ber∣ries either green or dry, expel the same hu∣mors, and is often given with good success to help the Dropsie.Dropsie, The Bark of the Root
boyled in Wine, or the Juyce therof drunk, worketh the same effects, but more powerful∣ly than either the Leavs or Fruit. The Juyce of the Root taken doth mightily provoke Vo∣mit, and purgeth the watery Humors of the Dropsie. The Decoction of the Root taken cureth the biting of the Adder, and biting of Mad Dogs;Venemous Beasts, Mad Dogs, Terms provokes. It mollifieth the hardness of the Mother, if Women sit therin, nd openeth the Veins, and bringeth down their Courses: The Berries boyled in Wine performeth the same effect; and the hair of the Head washed therwith is made black. The Juyce of the green Leavs applied to the hot InflamationsInflamati∣on, of the Eyes, asswageth them. The Juyce of the Leavs snuffed up into the Nostrils purgeth the Tunicles of the Brain.Brain, The Juyce of the Berries boyled with a little Honey and drop∣ped into the Ears,Ears, helpeth the pains of them. The Decoction of the Berries in Wine being drunk provoketh Urine.Urine pro∣vokes, Sunbur∣ning, Frec∣kles, Mor∣phew. Headach, ulcers. The distilled Water of the Flowers is of much use to clear the Skin from Sunburning, Freckles, Morphew, or the like; and taketh away Headaches coming of a cold caus, the Head being bathed therwith. The Leavs or Flowers distilled in the Month of May, and the Legs often washed with the said distilled Water, it taketh away the Ulcers and Sores of them: The Eyes washed there∣with, it taketh away the redness and Blood∣shot: And the Hands washed morning and evening therwith helpeth the Palsey,Palsey. and sha∣king of them. The Dwarf Elder is more powerful than the Common Elder, in opening and purging Choller, Flegm, and Water, in helping the Gout,Gout In∣flamation, Burning, Scalding, Chollick, Stone, Disury. the Piles, and Womens Diseases, colo∣reth the Hair black, helpeth Inflamation in the Eyes, and pains in the Ears; the biting of Serpents or a Mad Dog, Burnings and Scal∣dings, the wind Chollick, Chollick and Stone, the difficulty of Urine, the cure of old Sores, and Fistulous Ulcers. Either Leavs or Bark of Elder stripped up∣ward as you gather it causeth Vomiting, but stripped downward it purgeth downwards. Also Dr. Butler in a Manuscript of his com∣mends Dwarf Elder to the Sky for Dropsies, viz. to drink it being boyled in white Wine, to drink the Decoction I mean, not the El∣der. ♄ The Elm-Tree. THis Tree is so well known, growing ge∣nerally in all Countries of this Land; that it is needless to describe it. Vertues and Vse. The Leavs herof bruised, and applied hea∣leth green WoundsWounds, Scurff, Leprosie, being bound thereon with its own Bark: The Leavs or the Bark used with Vinegar, cureth Scurf, and Lepry very effectually: The Decoction of the Leavs, Bark, or Root, being bathed, healeth broken Bones.Beauty, The Water that is found in the Blad∣ders on the Leavs, while it is fresh, is very ef∣fectual to clens the Skin and make it fair: if clothes be often wet therin and applied to the RupturesRuptures, of Children it helpeth them; if they be after wel bound up with a Truss, The said Water put into a Glass, and set in the Ground, or els in Dung for twenty five daies, the Mouth therof being close stopped; and the bottom set upon a lay of ordinary Salt, that the Feces may settle and the Water become very clear, is a singular and Soveraign Balm for green Wounds, being used with soft tents: The Decoction of the Bark of the Root so∣mented mollifieth hard tumors, and the shrin∣king of the Sinews.Swellings, The Roots of the Elm boyled for a long time in Water, and the fat rising on the top therof being clean scummed off, and the place anointed therwith that is grown Bald,Baldness, and the Hair fallen away, will quickly restore them again. The said Bark, ground with Brine and Pickle until it come to the form of a Pultis, and laid on the place, pained with the Gout,Gout, giveth great eas. The Decoction of the Bark in Water is excellent to bath such places as have burnedBurning. with fire. ♃ Endive. Description. THe common Garden Endive beareth a longer and a larger Leaf than Succory, and abideth but one yeer, quickly running up to Stalk and Seed, and then perisheth: It hath blue Flowers, and the Seed of the ordi∣nary Endive is so like Succory Seed, that it is hard to distinguish them. Vertues and Vse. The Decoction of the Leavs, or the Juyce, or the distilled Water of Endive serveth well to cool the excessive Hear in the Liver and Stomach,Liver, Stomach, Agues, Sharpness of urine, and Exca∣riations thereby, Passion of the Heart, ulcers, Swellings, Eyes, Gout. and in the hot Fits of Agues, and all other Inflamations in any part of the Bo∣dy; it cooleth the heat and sharpness of the Urine, and the Excoriations in the Uritory parts; The Seed is of the same property or rather more powerful, and besides is available for the faintings, swounings, and passions of the Heart. Outwardly applied they serve to temper the sharp Humors of fretting Ulcers, hot Tumors and Swellings, and Pestilential Sores; and wonderfully helpeth not only the redness and Inflamation in the Eyes, but the dimness of the Sight also: They are also used to allay the pains of the Gout.
You cannot use it amiss, a Syrup of it is a fine cooling Medicine for Feavers. ☿ Elecampane. Description. THis shooteth forth many large Leavs, long, and broad, lying neer the ground, smal at both ends, somwhat soft in handling, of a whitish green on the upper side, and gray underneath, each set upon a short Footstalk; from among which rise up divers great, and strong hairy Stalks, three or four foot high with some Leavs thereon compassing them a∣bout at the lower ends, and are branched to∣ward the tops, bearing divers great and large Flowers like those of the Corn Marigold, both the Borden of Leavs and the middle thrum being yellow, which turn into Down; with long small brownish Seed among it, and is carried away with the wind. The Root is great and thick, branched forth divers waies, blackish on the outside, and white within, of a very bitter tast, and strong, but good sent, especially when they are dryed, no part els of the Plant having any smel. Place. It groweth in the moist Grounds, and shado∣wy places oftner than in the dry and open Bor∣ders of Fields and Lanes, and in other wast places almost in every County of this Land. Time. It Flowreth in the end of June and July, and the Seed is ripe in August, The Roots are gathered for use, as well in the Spring be∣fore the Leaves come forth, as in Autumn or Winter. Vertues and use. The fresh Roots of Elecampane preserved with Sugar, or made into a Syrup or Conserve, are very effectual to warm a coldCold Sto∣mach, Wind, Stitch, Spleen, Cough, Shortness of Breath, Wheesing, Terms provokes, Mother, Stone, Poyson, Venemous Beasts, Pestilence, Eyes, Worms. and windy Stomach; or the pricking therin, and Stitches in the Sides caused by the Spleen; and to help the Cough, shortness of Breath, and whee∣sing in the Lungs. The dried Root made in∣to Pouder, and mixed with Sugar and taken, serveth to the same purposes, and is also pro∣fitable for those that have their Urine stopped; or the stopping of Womens Courses, the pains of the Mother, and of the Stone in the Reins, Kidneys, or Bladder: It resisteth Poy∣son, and stayeth the spreading of the Venom of Serpents, as also of putrid and pestilential Feavers, and the Plague it self. The Roots and Herb beaten and put into new Ale or Beer, and dayly drunk, cleareth, strengthneth, and quickneth the Sight of the Eyes wonder∣fully. The Decoction of the Roots in Wine or the Juyce taken therin, killeth and driveth forth all manner of Worms in the Belly, Sto∣mach, and Maw; and gargled in the mouth; or the Root chewed fastneth loos Teeth,Loos Teeth, and helpeth to keep them from Putrefaction: And being drunk is good for those that spit Blood,Spitting Blood, Cramps, Convulsi∣ons, Gout, Joynts, Itch, helpeth to remove Cramps or Con∣vulsions, and the pains of the Gout, the Scia∣tica, the loosness and pains in the Joynts, or those Members that are out of Joynt, by cold or moisture hapning to them, applied out∣wardly as well as inwardly, and is good for those that are bursten, or have any inward, bruis. The Roots boyled well in Vinegar, beaten afterwards and made into an Oynt∣ment, with Hogs Suet or Oyl of Trotters is an excellent remedy for Scabs or Itch in yong or old: The places also bathed or washed with the Decoction doth the same; it also helpeth all sorts of filthy, old, putrid Sores or CankersCankers, wheresoever. In the Roots of this Herb lieth the chief effect for all the Remedies aforesaid: The distilled Water of the Leavs and Roots together is very profitable to clens the Skin of the Face or other parts, from any Morphew, Spots,Freckles, Morphew, Spots. or Blemishes therein, and maketh it cleer. Eringo, or Sea-Holly. ♀ ♎ Description. THe first Leavs of our ordinary. Sea-Holly, are nothing so hard and prickly as when they grow old, being almost round and deep∣ly dented about the edges; hard, and sharp pointed, and a little crumpled, of a bluish green colour, every one upon a long Footstalk: but those that grow up higher with the Stalk, do as it were compass it about. The stalk it self is round and strong, yet somwhat crested with Joynts and Leavs set therat, but more divided, sharp, and prickle; and branches ri∣sing from thence, which have likewise other smaller Branches, each of them bearing several bluish round prickly Heads, with many smal jagged prickly Leavs under them standing like a Star, and are somtimes found greenish or whitish: The Root groweth wonderful long, even to eight or ten Foot in length, set with Rings or Circles, toward the upper part, but smooth and without Joynts down lower, brow∣nish on the outside, and very white within, with a pith in the middle, of a pleasant tast, but much more being artificially preserved and candy'd with Sugar. Place. It is found about the Sea Coasts, in almost every Country of this Land which bordereth upon the Sea. Time. It Flowreth in the end of Summer, and gi∣veth ripe Seed within a Month after.
Vertues and use. The Decoction of the Root herof in Wine is very effectual to open the Obstructions of the Spleen and Liver,Obstructi∣ons, Spleen, Liver, yellow Jaundice, Dropsie, Chollick, Disury, Strangury, Reins, and helpeth the yellow Jaundice, the Dropsie, the pains in the Loins, and wind Chollick, provoketh Urine, and ex∣pelleth the Stone, and procureth Womens Courses, The continued use of the Decocti∣on for 15. daies taken fasting and next to Bed∣ward, doth help the strangury, the pissing by drops, the stopping of Urine and Stone, and all defects of the Reins or Kidneys; and if the said drink be continued longer, it is said that it perfectly cureth the Stone, and that experi∣ence hath found it so: It is found good a∣gainst the French Pox.French Pox, Kings Evil, Venemous Beasts, The Roots bruised and applied outwardly, helpeth the Kernels of the Throat, commonly called the Kings evil; or taken inwardly and applied to the place stung or bitten by any Serpent, healeth it speedily. If the Roots be bruised and boyled in old Hogs greas, or salted Lard and applied to broken Bones, ThornsThorns, broken Bones, Splinters, Thorns, Apostums, Melan∣cholly, Quartan, & Quoti∣dian A∣gues, Wry Necks, &c. remaining in the Flesh doth not only draw them forth, but healeth up the place again, gathering new Flesh where it was consumed: The Juyce of the Leavs dropped into the Ears, helpeth Im∣posthumes therin: The Distilled Water of the whol Herb when the Leavs and Stalks are yong, is profitably drunk for all the purposes aforesaid; and helpeth the Melancholly of the Heart, and is available in Quartane and Quotidian Agues, as also for them that have their Necks drawn awry, and cannot turn them, without turning their whol Body. The Plant is Venerial, and breedeth SeedSeed bree∣deth. exceedingly and strengthens the Spirit procre∣ative, it is hot and moist, and under the Coe∣lestial Ballance. ☉ ♌ Eyebright. Description. THe common Eyebright is a small low Herb, rising up usually but with one blackish, green Stalk, a span high, or not much more, spread from the bottom in∣to sundry Branches, wheron are set smal and and almost round, yet pointed dark, green, Leavs finely snipped about the edges, two al∣waies set together, and very thick: At the Joynts with the Leavs from the middle up∣ward, come forth small white Flowers stryped with purple and yellow Spots or stripes; af∣ter which follow small round Heads with ve∣ry small Seed therin: The Root is long, small, and threddy at the end. Place. It groweth in many Meadows, and grassy places, in this Land. Vertues and Vse. If this Herb were but as much used as it is neglected, it would half spoil the Spectacle∣makers Trade; and a man would think that reason should teach people to prefer the prefer∣vation of their Natural before Artificial Spe∣ctacles: which that they may be instructed how to do, take the Vertues of Eyebright as followeth. The Juyce or distilled Water of Eyebright taken inwardly in white Wine or Broth, or dropped into the Eyes for divers daies toge∣ther, helpeth all infirmities of the Eyes that caus dimness of Sight: Some make a Conserv of the Flowers to the same effect: Being used any of these waies it also helpeth a weak Brain or Memory.Eyes, Dimness, Brain, Memory. This tunned up with strong Beer that it may work together, and drunk; Or the Pouder of the dried Herb mixed with Sugar, a little Mace, and Fennel Seeds, and drunk or eaten in Broth: Or the said Pouder made into an Electuary with Sugar and taken, hath the same powerful effect to help and re∣store the Sight decaied through age. And Ar∣noldus de villa nova, saith, It hath restored Sight to them that have been blind a long time before. It is under the Sign of the Lyon, and Sol claims Dominion over it. ☿ Fern. Description. OF this there are two kinds principally to be noted; viz. The Male and Female: The Female groweth higher than the Male, but the Leavs therof are lesser, & more divided or dented; & of as strong a smel as the Male: The Vertues of them are both alike; and therfore I shall not trouble you with any fur∣ther Description or distinction of them. Place. They both grow on Heaths, and in shady places neer the Hedg sides in all Countries of this Land. Time. They flourish and give their Seed at Mid∣summer. The Femal Fern is that plant which is In Sussex called Brakes, the Seed of which some Authors hold to be so rare, such a thing there is I know,, and may easily Be had upon Mid∣summer Eve, and for ought yet I know two or three daies before or after, if not more. Vertues and Vse. The Roots of both these sorts of Ferns, be∣ing bruised and boyled in Mead or Honyed Water, and drunk, killeth both the broad and long WormsWorms in the Body; and abateth the
Swelling and hardness of the Spleen.Spleen, The green Leavs eaten, purgeth the Belly and Chollerick and waterish humors, but it trou∣bles the Stomach.Choller, Flegm, Stomach, They are dangerous for Women with Child to meddle with, by rea∣son they caus abortment. The Roots bruised and boyled in Oyl or Hogs greas, maketh a very profitable Oyntment to heal Wounds,Wounds, or pricks gotten into the Flesh. The Pouder of them used in foul Ulcers,Ulcers, drieth up their Ma∣lignant moisture, and causeth their speedier healing: Fern being burned, the smoke ther∣of driveth away. Serpents, Gnats,Serpents, Gnats, Venemous Beasts. and other noisom Creatures, which in the Fenny Coun∣tries do in the night time trouble and molest people lying in their Beds with their Faces un∣covered it causeth Barrenness. Osmond Royal, or Wa∣ter Fern. ♄ Description. THis shooteth forth in the Spring time (for in the Winter the Leavs perish) di∣vers rough hard Stalks, half round and hollo∣wish, or flat on the other side, two Foot high, having divers Branches of winged yellowish green Leavs on all sides, set one against ano∣ther, longer, narrower, and not nicked on the edges as the former: From the top of some of these Stalks grow forth a long Bush of smal, and more yellowish green scaly aglets as it were set in the same manner on the Stalks as the Leavs are; which are accounted the Flower and Seeds; The Root is rough, thick, and Scaly, with a white pith in the middle which is called the Heart therof. Place. It groweth on Moors, Bogs, and Watery places in many parts of this Land. Time. It is green all the Summer; and the Root only abideth in Winter. Vertues and Use. This hath all the Vertues mentioned in the former Ferns, and is much more effectual than they both for inward and outward Griefs; and is accounted singular good in Wounds, BruisesWounds, Bruises, or the like, the Decoction to be drunk, or boyled into an Oyntment or Oyl, as a Balsom of Balm, and so it is singular good against Bruises, and Bones brokenBroken Bones, Chollick, Spleen, Ruptures, Disury. or out of joynt, and giveth much eas to the Chollick, and Splene∣tick Diseases; as also for Ruptures, or bur∣stings. The Decoction of the Root in white Wine provokes Urine exceedingly and clen∣seth the Bladder and passages of Urine. ♀ Featherfew. Description. COmmon Featherfew hath many large fresh green Leavs very much torn or cut on the edges: The Stalks are hard and round set with many such like Leavs, but somwhat smaller, and at the tops stand many single Flowers upon several smal Footstalks, consi∣sting of many smal white Leavs, standing round about a yellow thrum in the middle. The Root is somwhat hard and short, with many strong Fibres at it: The scent of the whol Plant is very strong, and stuffing, and the tast very bitter. Place. This groweth wild in some places of this Land; but it is for the most part nourished in Gardens. Time. It Flowreth in the Months of June and Ju∣ly. Vertues and Vse. It is chiefly used for the Diseases of the Mo∣ther, whether it be the strangling or rising of the Mother,Mother, Womb, Terms, provokes, or Hardness or Inflamations of the same, applied outwardly thereunto: or a Decoction of the Flowers in Wine with a lit∣tle Nutmeg or Mace put therin, and drunk of∣ten in a day, & is an approved Remedy to bring down Womens Courses speedily, and helpeth to expel the dead Birth and Afterbirth.Dead Birth, After∣birth, For a Woman to sit over the hot fumes of the De∣coction of the Herb made in Water or Wine is effectual also for the same; and in some cases to apply the boyled Herb warm to the privy parts. The Decoction therof made, with some Sugar or Honey put therto, is used by many with good success, to help the Cough,Cough, Reins, Bladder, Choller, Flegm, Melan∣cholly, Sadness. and stuffing of the Chest by cold, as also to clens the Reins and Bladder, and help to ex∣pel the stone in them. The Pouder of the Herb taken in Wine, with some Oximel pur∣geth both Choller and Flegm, and is available for those that are short winded; and are trou∣bled with Melancholly and Heaviness or sad∣ness of the Spirits. It is very effectual for all pains in the Head coming of a cold caus, the Herb being bruised, and applied to the crown of the Head; as also for a Vertigo,Headach, Vertigo, that is a turning or swimming in the Head. The Decoction therof drunk warm, and the Herb bruised with a few Corns of Bay Salt and ap∣plied to the Wrists before the coming of the AgueAgue, Deformety of the skin Fits, doth take them away. The distilled Water taketh away Freckles, & other Spots and Deformities in the Face. The Herb bruised and heated on a Tyle, with some Wine to moisten it, or fried with a little WineWind, and Oyl in a frying Pan, and applied warm out∣wardly
to the places, helpeth the wind and ChollickChollick, Opium. in the lower part of the Belly: It is an especial Remedy against Opium taken too liberally. Venus commands the Herb and hath com∣manded it to succour her Sisters [Women] and to be a general strengthner of their Wombs and remedy such infirmities, as a careless Mid∣wife hath there caused, if they will be but plea∣sed to make use of her Herb boyled in white Wine, and drink the Decoction, it clenseth the Womb, expelleth the Afterbirth, doth the Woman all the good she can desire of an Herb. And if any grumble becaus they cannot get the Herb in Winter, tell them if they pleas they may make a Syrup of it in Summer. ☿ Fennel. EVery Garden affordeth this so plentifully, that it needeth no Description. Vertues and Vse. Fennel is good to break wind,Wind, Disury, Stone, Encrea∣seth Milk, Amends Milk, Hiccough, Loathing of meat, Venemous Beasts, Poyson, Mushroms Obstructi∣ons in the Liver, Spleen, and Call, Yellow Jaundice, Gout, Cramp, Wheesing, Terms provokes, After De∣livery, Clens, open, Fatness, Eyes. to provoke Urine, and eas the pains of the Stone, and help to break it. The Leavs or Seed boiled in Barley Water and drunk is good for Nurses to encreas their Milk and make it more wholsom for the Child: The Leavs, or rather the Seed boyled in Water staieth the Hiccough, and taketh away that loathing which often∣times hapneth to the Stomachs of Sick, and Feaverish Persons, and allayeth the heat ther∣of. The Seed boyled in Wine and drunk, is good for those that are bitten by Serpents, or have eaten Poyson full Herbs or Mushroms: The Seed and the Root much more helpeth to open Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Gall, and thereby helpeth the painful and windy swellings of the Spleen, and the yel∣low Jaundice, as also the Gout and Cramps. The Seed is of good use in Medicines to help shortness of breath, and Wheesing by stopping of the Lungs. It helpeth also to bring down the Courses and to clens the parts after delivery. The Roots are of most use in Physick Drinks and Broths that are ta∣ken to clens the Blood, to open Obstructions of the Liver to provoke Urine, and amend the ill colour in the Face after Sickness, and to caus a good habit through the Body: Both Leavs, Seeds, and Roots hereof are much used in Drinks, or Broths, to make people more spare and lean that are too fat: The distilled Water of the whol Herb or the condensate Juyce dissolved, but especially the Natural Juyce that in hot Countries issueth out there∣of of its own accord, dropped into the Eyes, clenseth them from mists and films that hin∣der the fight. The sweet Fennel is much wea∣ker in Physical uses, than the common Fennel. The wild Fennel is stronger and hotter than the tame; and therfore most powerful against the Stone, but not so effectual to encreas Milk, becaus of its driness. One good old fashion is not yet quite left off, viz. To boil Fennel with Fish, for it consumes that Flegmatick homot which Fish. most plentifully afford and annoy the body by, therfore it is a most fit. Herb for that pur∣pose though few that use it know why or wher∣fore they do it, I supoose the Reason of its be∣nefit this way is becaus it is an Herb of Mer∣cury ad under Virgo, and therfore bears An∣tipathy to Pisces. Dill is also an Herb of Mercury, which I forgot to certifie you of be∣fore. Sow-Fennel, or Hogs∣Fennel. ☿ Description. THe common Sow-Fennel hath divers branched Stalks of thick and somwhat long Leavs, three for the most part joyned together at, a place, among which riseth re∣sted strait Stalk, less than Fennel with some Joynts theron, and Leavs growing there, and toward the top some Branches issuing from thence, likewise on the tops of the Stk and Branches stand divers tufts of yellow Flo∣wers, where after grow somwhat flat, thin, and yellowish Seed bigger than Fennel Seed: The Root groweth great and deep with many other parts and Fibres about them, of a strong scent like hot Brimstone and yielding orth a yellowish Milk, or clammy Juyce almost like a Gum. Place. It groweth plentifully in the Salt low Mar∣shes neer by Feaversham in Kent. Time. It Flowreth and seedeth in July and Au∣gust. Vertues and Vse. The Juyce of Sow-Fennel (saith Dioscori∣des and Galen) used with Vinegar and Rose∣water, or the Juyce with alittle Euphorbium put to the Nose, helpeth those that are trou∣bled with the Lethargy, the Frensie,Lethargy, Frenzie, Vertigo, Falling∣Sicknoss, Headach, Palsey, Sciatica, Cramp, Sinews, Cramp, shortness of breath, Winds Spleen, the tur∣ning or Giddiness of the Head the Falling∣Sickness, long and inveterate Headach, the Palsie, Sciatica, and the Cramp, and general∣ly all the Diseases of the Sinews, used with Oyl and vinegar. The Juyce dissolved in Wine, or put into an Eg, is good for the Cough, or shortness of Breath and for those that are troubled with the Wind in the Body It purgeth the Belly gently, helpeth the hard∣ness of the Spleen, giveth eas to Women that
have sore travall in Childbirth,Childbirth Reins, Bladder, Womb, Ears, Hollow Teeth, Ulcers, broken Bones, Thorns, Wounds. and easeth the pains of the Reins and Bladder, and also of the Womb. A little of the Juyce dissolved in Wine and dropped into the Ears, easeth much of the pains in them; and put into an hollow Tooth, easeth the pain therof. The Root is less effectual in all the aforesaid Diseases: yet the Pouder of the Root clenseth foul Ulcers being put into them; and taketh out Splin∣ters of broken Bones or other things in the Flesh and healeth them up perfectly, as also it dryeth up old and inveterate running Sores, and is of admirable Vertue in all green Wounds. Figwort, or Throat∣wort. ♀ Description. THe common great Figwort sendeth forth divers great, strong, hard, square, brown Stalks three or four Foot high, wherin grow large, hard, and dark green Leavs, two at a Joynt, which are larger and harder than Net∣tle Leavs, but not stinging: At the tops of the Stalks stand many purple Elowers set in Husks, which are somwhat gaping and open, somwhat like those of Water-Betony; after which come hard round Heads, with a small point in the middle, wherin lie small brow∣nish Seed. The Root is great, white, and thick, with many branches at it growing a∣slope under the upper crust of the Ground, which abideth many yeers but keepeth not his green Leavs in Winter. Place. It groweth frequently in moist and shadowy Woods, and in the lower parts of Fields and Meadows. Time. It Flowreth about July, and the Seed will be ripe about a Month after the Flowers are fallen. Vertues and use. The Decoction us the Herb taken inward∣ly, and the bruised Herb applied outwardly, dissolveth clotted or congealed Blood,Congealed Blood by Wound, Bruise, or Fall, Kings E∣vil, Wens, Hemor∣rhoids, Funda∣ment, Ulcers, Scurff, Spots, Freckles, Deformity, Leprosie. within the Body, coming by any Wound, Bruis, or Fall; and is no less effectual for the Kings E∣vil, or any other Knots, Kernels, Bunches or Wens growing in the Flesh whersoever, and for the Hemorrhoids or Piles, or other Knobs or Kernels which somtimes grow a∣bout the Fundament: An Oyntment made hereof, may be used at all times when the fresh Herb is not to be had. The distilled Water of the whol Plant, Roots and all is used for the same purposes, and drieth up the su∣perfluous virulent moisture of hollow and cor∣roding Ulcers; It taketh away all redness, Spots and Freckles in the Face, as also the Scurff or any foul Deformity therin, and the Leprosie likewise. Some Latin Authors call it Cervicria be, caus 'tis apropriated to the Neck, and we Throatwort becaus 'tis apropriated to the Throat: Venus owns the Herb, and the Coelestial Bull will not deny it, therefore a better Remedy cannot be for the Kings Evil, becaus the Moon that rules the Diseas is exal∣ted there, nor for any Diseas in the Neck, the rest of the Diseases specified, you may if you look see a very good reason for their cure by this Herb. Filipendula, or Drop∣wort. ♀ Description THis sendeth forth many Leavs some big∣ger, some lesser, set on each side of a mid∣dle Rib, and each of them dented about the edges, somwhat resembling wild Tansie, or rather Agrimony, but harder in handling, a∣mong which riseth up one or more Stalks two or three Foot high, with like Leavs growing theron, and somtimes also divided into other Branches spreading at the top into many white sweet smelling Flowers, consisting of five Leavs apiece with some threds in the middle of them standing together in a tuft or Umbel each upon a smal Footstalk, which after they have been open and blown a good while do fall away, and in their places appear final, round chaffy heads like Buttons wherein are the chaffy Seed set and placed. The Root con∣sists of many smal black tuberous pieces, fast∣ned together by many smal long blackish Strings which run from one to another. Place. It groweth in many places of this Land, in the Corners of dry Fields and Meadows, and their Hedg Sides. Time. They Flower in June and July, and their Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and Vse. It is very effectual to open the passages of the Urine, and help the Strangury,Disury, Strangury, Reins, Bladder, Stone, Gravel, and all o∣ther pains of the Bladder and Reins, helping mightily to expel the Stone in the Kidnies or Bladder, and the Gravel also, and these are done by taking the Roots in Pouder, or a Decoction of them in white Wine, whereun∣to a little Honey is added: The same also helpeth to expel the Afterbirth. The Roots made into Pouder and mixed with Honey in∣to the form of an Electuary doth much help
them whose Stomachs are swollen, dissolving and breaking the WindWind, Lungs, Wheersing, Hoarceness Cough, Flegm. which was the cause therof, and is also very effectual for all disea∣ses of the Lungs, as shortness of breath, wheesings, hoarsness of the Throat, and the Cough, and to expectorate cold Flegm, or a∣ny other parts thereabouts. It is called Droport becaus it helps such as piss by drops. The Yellow VVater-Flag, OR, Flower-de-luce. Description. THis groweth like the Flower-de-luces, but it hath much longer, and narrower sad green Leavs joyned together in that fashi∣on; the Stalk also groweth oftentimes as high, bearing smal yellow Flowers, shaped like the Flower-de-luce with three falling Leavs, and other three arched that cover their Bottoms; but instead of the three upright Leavs as the Flower-de-luce hath, this hath only three short pieces standing in their places, after which succeed thick and long three square Heads containing in each part somwhat big and Flat Seed like to those of the Flower-de-luces: The Root is long and slender, of a pale brownish colour on the outside, and of a Hore flesh colour on the inner side, with many hard fibres thereat, and very harsh in tast. Place. It usually groweth in watery Ditches, Ponds, Lakes, and More sides which are al∣waies overflown with water. Time. It flowreth in July, and the Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and use. The Root of this Water-Flag is very astrin∣gent, cooling, and drying, and therby helpeth all Lasks and Fluxes, whether of Blood or Humors, as bleeding at Mouth, Nose, or o∣ther parts, bloody Fluxes, and the immode∣rate Flux of Womens Courses. The distilled water of the whol Herb, Flowers, and Roots is a Soveraign good Remedy for watering Eyes, both to be dropped into them, and to have Cloathes or Spunges werted therin and applied to the Forehead; It also helpeth the Spots or Blemishes that happen in or about the Eyes, or in any other parts: The said wa∣ter fomented on Swellings and hot Inflamati∣ons of Womens sore Breasts, upon Cankers also, and those spreading Ulcers called Noli me Tangere,Binds, Cools, Dries, Flux, Bloodyflux Bleeding, Terms stops, Eyes, Spots, Blemishes, Inflamati∣ons, Sore Breasts, Cankers, Ulcers, Noli me tangere. doth much good; It helpeth al∣so soul Ulcers in the privy parts of man or woman, or elswhere. An Oyntment made of the Flowers is better for these external appli∣cations. Take notice that the Moon rules the Plant and then I have done. Flaxweed, or Toadflax. Description. OUr common Flaxweed. hath divers Stalks full fraught with long and nar∣row blue or Ash-colour'd Leavs, and from the middle of them almost upward stored with a number of pale yellow Flowers, of a strong unpleasant scent, with deeper yellow mouths, and blackish flat Seeds in round Heads. The Root is somwhat woody and white, especially the main downright one, with many fibres, a∣biding many yeers, shooting forth Roots e∣very way round about, and new Branches e∣very yeer. Place. This groweth throughout this Land, both by the way sides in Meadows, as also by Hedg sides, and upon the sides of Banks and Bor∣ders of Fields. Time. It Flowreth in Summer, and the Seed is ripe usually before the end of August. Vertues and use. This is frequently used to provoke Urine being stopped, and to spend the abundance of those watery Humors by Urine which caus the Dropsie.Disury, Dropsie, Obstructi∣on of the Liver, yellow Jaundice, Dead Child and Afterbirth Inflamati∣ones, Eyes, Ulcers, Cancers, Fistulaes, Leprosie, Scabs, Pimples, Freckles. The Decoction of the Herb both Leavs and Flowers in Wine, taken and drunk doth somwhat move the Belly downwards, o∣peneth Obstructions of the Liver, and helpeth the yellow Jaundice, expelleth Poyson, pro∣voketh Womens Courses,, driveth forth the dead Child, and Afterbirth. The Distilled water of the Herb and Flowers is effectual for all the same purposes, especially being drunk with a dram of the Pouder of the Seeds, or Bark of the Root of Walwort and a little Cinnamon for certain daies together, is held a singular Remedy for the Dropsie: The Juyce of the Herb or the distilled Water drop∣ped into the Eyes is a certain Remedy for all heat, Inflamations and redness in them. The Juyce or water put into foul Ulcers whi∣ther they be Cancrous or Fistulous, with tents rouled therin, or the parts washed or in∣jected therwith clenseth them throughly from the bottom, and healeth them up safely. The same Juyce or Water also clenseth the Skin wonderfully of all sorts of deformity thereof, as Lepry, Morphew, Scurff, Wheals, Pim∣ples, or any other Spots or Marks in the Skin, applied of it self, or used with some Pouder of Lupines. Mars owns the Herb, in Sussex we call it
Gall-wort, and lay it in our Chickens wa∣ter, to cure them of the Gall I think, I am sure it releevs them when they are drooping. Fleawort. Description. THe ordinary Fleawort riseth up with a Stalk two Foot high, or more, full of Joynts and Branches on every side up to the top, and at every Joynt two small long and narrow whitish green Leavs somwhat hairy: At the tops of every Branch stand divers small short scaly or chaffy Heads, out of which come forth small whitish yellow threds, like to those of the Plantane Herbs, which are the Bloomings or Flowers. The Seed inclosed in those Heads is smal and shining while it is Fresh very like unto Fleas, both for colour and bigness, but turning black when it grow∣eth old. The Root is not long but white, hard, and woody, perishing every yeer and rising again of its own Seed for divers yeers if it be suffred to shed: The whol Plant is som∣what whitish and hairy, smelling somwhat like Rozin. There is another sort hereof differing not from the former in the manner of growing, but only that his Stalk and Branches being somwhat greater do a little more bow down to the ground: The Leavs are somwhat larger; the Heads somwhat lesser, the Seed alike; and the Root and Leavs abide all the Winter, and perish not as the former. Place. The first groweth only in Gardens, the se∣cond plentifully in Fields that are neer the Sea. Time. They Flower in July, or thereabouts. Vertues and use. The Seed fried and so taken staieth the FluxFlux, Cor∣rosion, Chollerick Humors, or Lask of the Belly, and the corrosions that come by reason of hot, Chollerick, Sharp, and malignant Humors or by the too much pur∣ging of any violent Medicine, as Scammony or the like. The Muccilage of the Seed made with Rose Water, and a little Sugar Candy put therto is very good in all hot Agues and burning Feavers,Agues, Feavers, Inflamati∣on, Thirst, Hoarceness Salt Hu∣mors, Pleuresie, and other Inflamations to cool the thirst, and lenify the dryness and roughness of the Tongue and Throat. It hel∣peth also hoarsness of the voice, and Diseases of the Breast and Lungs caused by heat, or sharp salt humors, and the Pluresie also. The Muccilage of the Seed made in Plantane Wa∣ter whereunto the Yolk of an Egg or two, and a little Populeon is put, is a most safe and sure Remedy to eas the sharpness, prickings, and pains of the HemorrhoidsHemor∣rhoids, Headach, Megrim, Apostums, Blains, Wheals, Pushes, Purples, Gout, Joynts, Sciatica, Nipples, Sore Breasts, Ears, Worms, or Piles, if it be laid on a cloath and bound therto. It helpeth also all Inflamations in any parts of the Body and the pains that come thereby, as the Head∣ach and Megrim, and all hot Imposthumes or Swellings, or breakings out of the Skin, as Blains, Wheals, Pushes, Purples, and the likes as also the pains of the Joynts, and of those that are out of joynt; the pains of the Gout and Sciatica, the Bursting of yong Children, and the swelling of the Navel, applied with Oyl of Roses and Vinegar. It is also very good to heal the Nipples and Sore Breasts of Women being often applied thereunto. The Juyce of the Herb with a little Honey put in∣to the Ears helpeth the running of them, and the Worms breeding in them: The same al∣so mixed with Hogs Greas, and applied to corrupt and filthy UlcersUlcers. and Sores, clenseth and healeth them. The Herb is cold and dry, Saturnine, I suppose it obtained the name Fleawort becaus the Seeds are so like Fleas. Flixweed. Description. THis riseth up with a round upright hard Stalk four or five Foot high, spread into sundry Branches, wheron grow many grayish green Leavs very finely cut and severed into a number of short and almost round parts. The Flowers are very smal and yellow growing Spike fashion, after which come very smal, long Pods, with very smal yellowish Seed in them. The Root is long and woody perishing every yeer. There is another sort differing in nothing save only it hath somwhat broader Leaves: They have a strong evil savor being smelt un∣to, and are of a drying tast. Place. They grow wild in the Fields by Hedg∣sides, and High-waies, and among rubbish, and in many other place. Time. They Flower and Seed quickly after, name∣ly in June and July. Vertues and use. Both the Herb and Seed of Flixweed is of excellent use to stay the FluxFlux, Bleeding, Bloody Flux, Terms stops, broken Bones, Members disioynted. or Lask of the Besly being drunk in Water wherein gads of Steel heated have been often quenched; and is no less effectual for the said purpose than Plantane or Comfry, and to restrain any o∣ther Flux of Blood in man or Woman, as al∣so to consolidate Bones broken or out of Joynt. The Juyce therof drunk in Wine, or the Decoction of the Herb drunk, doth kill the Worms in the Stomach or Belly, or the
Wormswarms, Sores, Ulcers. that grow in putrid and filthy Ulcers; And made into a Salve doth quickly heal all old sores, how foul or Malignant soever they be. The distilled water of the Herb worketh the same effects although somwhat weaker, yet is a fair Medicine, and more acceptable to be taken. It is called Flixweed becaus it cures the Flux, and for its uniting broken Bones, &c. Paracelsus extols it to the Skies. It is fitting Syrups, Oyntments, and Plaisters of it were kept in your Houses. Flower-de-luce. Description. THis is so well known, being nursed up in most Gardens, that I shall not need to spend time in writing a Description thereof. Time. The Flaggy kinds thereof have the most Physical uses; the Dwarf kinds thereof flo∣wer in April, the greater sorts in May. Vertues and Vse. The Juyce or Decoction of the green Roots of the Flaggy kind of Flower-de-luce, with a little Honey drunk, doth purge and clens the Stomach of gross and tough Flegm and Choller therin; It helpeth the Jaundice and the DropsieStomach, Flegm, Choller, Jaundice, Dropsie, by evacuating those humors both upwards and downwards, and becaus it somwhat hurteth the Stomach, is not to be ta∣ken but with Honey and Spicknard. The same being drunk doth eas the pains and tor∣ments of the Belly and Sides,Belly, Sides, Agues, Liver, Spleen, Stones, Convulsi∣on, Cramp, Venemous Beasts, Disury, Chollick, Termspro∣vokes, Cough, the shaking of Agues, the Diseases of the Liver and Spleen, the Worms in the Belly, the Stone in the Reins, Convulsions or Cramps that come of cold Humors, it also helpeth those whose Seed passeth from them unawars; It is a Re∣medy against the bitings and stingings of Ve∣nemous Creatures being boyled in Water and Vineger and drunk: Being boyled in Wine and drunk it provoketh Urine, helpeth the Chollick, bringeth down Womens Courses; and made up into a Pessary with Honey, and put up into the Body, draweth forth the dead Child. It is much commended against the Cough to expectorate tough Flengm; It much easeth pains in the Head, and procureth sleep: Being put into the Nostrils it procureth Neesing,Sneesing, and therby purgeth the Head of Flegm: The Juyce of the Root applied to the Piles or HemorrhoidsHemor∣rhoids, Toothach, giveth much eas. The Decoction of the Roots gargled in the Mouth easeth the Toothach, and helpeth a Stinking breath. The Oyl called Oleum Iri∣num if it be rightly made of the great broad Flag Flower-de-luce (and not of the great Bulbous blue Flower-de-luce as is used by some Apothecaries) and Roots of the same of the Flaggy kinds is very effectual to warm and comfort all cold Joynts and Sinews, as also the Gout and Sciatica,Joynts, Sinews, Gout, Sciatica, womb, Rhewm, Breast, Wounds Ulcers, Fistulaes, Cankers. and mollisieth, dissol∣veth, and consumeth Tumors or Swellings in any part of the Body, as also of the Matrix: It helpeth the Cramp and Convulsion of the Sinews: The Head and Temples anointed therwith helpeth the Catark or thin Rhewm distilling from thence; and used upon the Breast or Stomach, helpeth to extenuate the cold tough Flegm. It helpeth also the pains and noise in the Ears, and the stench of the Nostrils. The Root it self either green or in Pouder helpeth to clens, heal, and incarnate Wounds, and to cover the naked Bones with Flesh again that Ulcers have made bare; and is also very good to clens and heal up Fistulaes and Cankers that are hard to be cured. Fluellin. Description. THis shooteth forth many long Branches partly lying upon the Ground, and part standing upright, set with almost round Leavs, yet a little pointed, and somtimes more long than round, without order theron, somwhat hoary, and of an evil greenish white colour; at the Joynts all along the Stalks, and with the Leavs come forth smal Flowers one at a place, upon a very small short Footstalk, gaping somwhat like Snapdragons, or rather like Toadflax, with the upper Jaw of a yellow co∣lour, and the lower of a Purplish, with a smal heel or Spur behind, after which come small round Heads, containing smal black Seed. The Root is smal and threddy, dying every yeer, and raiseth it self again of its own sow∣ing. There is another sort of Lluellin which hath longer Branches wholly trailing upon the ground two or three foot long, and somtimes more, thinner set with Leavs theron, upon smal Footstalks: The Leaves are a little lar∣ger and somwhat round, and cornered som∣times in some places on the edges; but the lo∣wer part of them being the broadest, hath on each side a smal point, making it seem as if they were Ears, somwhat hairy but not hoary, and of a better green colour than the former; The Flowers come forth like the former, but the colours therein are more white than yellow, and the Purple not so fair: It is a larger Flo∣wer, and so are the Seed, and Seed Vessels: The Root is like the other, and perisheth eve∣ry yeer. Place. They grow in divers Corn Fields, and in borders about them, and in other fertile
Grounds, about Southfleet in Kent abun∣dantly, at Buckworth, Hamerton, and Rich∣wersworth in Huntingtonshire; and in divers other places. Time. They are in Flower about June and July, and the whol Plant is dry and withered before August be done. Vertues and Vse. The Leavs bruised and applied with Barley Meal to watering EyesEyes, Flux, that are hot and infla∣med by defluxions from the Head, doth very much help them, as also the Fluxes of Blood or Humors, as the Lask, Bloody Flux,Bloody Flux, Terms stops, Wo∣mens Courses, and staieth all manner of blee∣ding at Nose, Mouth, or any other place, or that cometh by any Bruis, or Hurt, or bur∣sting a Vein; and wonderfully it helpeth all those inward parts that need consolidating or strengthening: and is no less effectual both to heal and close green Wounds,Wounds, Ulcers, Cankers, as to clens or heal all foul or old Ulcers, fretting or spreading Cankers or the like. Bees are industrious and go abroad to ga∣ther Honey from each Plant and Flower, but Drones lie at home, and eat up what the Bees have taken pains for; Just so do our Colledg of Physitians, lie at home and domineer, and suck out the Sweetness of other Mens Labors and Studies, themselvs being as ignorant in the Knowledg of Herbs as a Child of four yeers old, as I can make appear to any Ratio∣nal man by their last Dispensatory, now then to hide their Ignorance, there is not a readier way in the World, than to hide Knowledg from their Country men, that so no Body might be able so much as to smel out their Ignorance, when Simples were more in use mens Bodies were in better health by far than now they are, or shall be if the Colledg can help it. The truth is, this Herb is of a fine cooling, drying quality, and an Oyntment or Plaister of it, might do a Man a courtesie that hath any hot virulent Sores, 'tis admirable for the Ulcers of the French Pox, and being a gallant An∣tivenerian Medicine, under the Dominion of Saturn, if taken inwardly may cure the Dis∣eas. It was at first called Foemale Speedwel, but a Shentle man of wales whose Nose was almost eaten off with the Pox, and so neer the matter, that the Docters commanded it to be cut off, being cured by only the Use of this Herb, to honor the Herb for saving his Nose whol, gave it one of her own Country names, LLUELLIN. Foxglove. Description. THis hath many long and broad Leavs ly∣ing upon the Ground dented about the edges, a little soft or woolly, and of a hoary green colour among which rile up somtimes sundry Stalks, but one very often bearing such Leavs thereon from the bottom to the middle, from whence to the top it is stored with large and long hollow reddish Purple Flowers, a little more long and eminent at the lower edg, with some white Spots within them, one above another, with smal green Leavs at every one, but all of them turning their. Heads one way and hanging downwards, having some threds also in the middle, from whence rise round Heads pointed sharp at the ends, wherein smal brown Seed lieth. The Roots are many smal Huskie Fibres, and some greater strings among them; The Flower hath no scent; but the Leavs have a bitter hot tast. Place. It groweth on the dry sandy Grounds for the most part, and as well on the higher as lower places under Hedg-sides in almost every County of this Land. Time. It seldom Flowreth before July, and the Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and use. This Herb is familiarly and frequently used by the Italians to heal any fresh or green Wound,Wounds, the Leavs being but bruised and bound thereon; and the Juyce therof is also u∣sed in old Sores, to clens, dry, and healClens, dry Heal, them. The Decoction hereof made up with some Su∣gar or Honey is available to clens and purge the Body, both upwards and downwards som∣times of tough Flegm and clammy Humors and to open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen;Obstructi∣on of the Liver and Spleen, Kings E∣vil, Falling∣sickness, Scabby, Heads. It hath been found by experience to be available for the Kings Evil, the Herb bruised and applied; or an Oyntment made with the Juyce thereof and so used: And a Decoction of two handfuls therof with four Ounces of Polipody in Ale, hath been found by late experience to cure divers of the Falling∣sickness, that have been troubled with it above twenty yeers. My self am confident that an Oyntment of it is one of the best Remedies for a Scabby Head that is.
Fumitory. Description. OUr common Fumitory is a tender sappy Herb, sending forth from one square slender weak Stalk and leaning downwards on all sides many Branches two or three foot long, with finely cut and jagged Leavs of a whitish or rather Blewish, Seagreen colour: At the tops of the Branches stand many small Flowers, as it were in a long spike one above another, made like little Birds of a reddish Purple colour with whitish Bellies: After which come small round Husks containing smal black Seed. The Root is yellow, smal, and not very long, ful of Juyce while it is green But quickly perishing with the ripe Seed: In the Corn Fields in Cornwal this beareth white Flowers. Place. It groweth in the Corn Fields almost every where as well as in Gardens. Time. It Flowreth in May for the most part, and the Seed ripeneth shortly after. Vertues and Vse. The Juyce or Syrup made thereof, or the Decoction made in Whey by it self, with some other purging or opening Herbs and Roots to caus it to work the better, (it self being but weak) is very effectual for the Liver and Spleen,Liver, Spleen, Choller, Ádust Melan∣cholly, Madness, Forgetful∣ness, Jaundice, yellow & black, opening the Obstructions thereof and clarifying the Blood from Saltish, Chollerick, and Adust Humors, which caus Lepry, Scabs, Tetters, and Itches, and such like breakings out of the Skin, and after the Purging doth strengthen all the inward parts; it is good al∣so against the yellow Jaundice, and spendeth it by Urin, which it procureth in abundance. The Pouder of the dried Herb given for some time together cureth Melancholly, but the Seed is strongest in operation for all the for∣mer Diseases. The dististilled Water of the Herb is also of good effect in the former Dis∣eases, and conduceth much against the Plague and Pestilence,Pestilence, being taken with good Trea∣cle. The Distilled Water also, with a little Water and Honey of Roses helpeth all the Sores of the Mouth or Throat,Sore Mouth & Throat, Eyes, being gargled often therwith. The Juyce dropped into the Eyes cleareth the Sight, and taketh away red∣ness and other defects in them, although it procure some pain for the present and cause Tears. Dioscorides saith it hindreth any fresh springing of hairsHairs, on the Eyelids (also they be pulled away) if the Eyelids be anointed with the Juyce hereof with Gum Arabick dis∣solved therin. The Juyce of Fumitory aud Docks mingled with Vinegar, and the places gently washed or wet therwith, cureth all sorts of Scabs, Pimples, Itches, Wheals,Scabs, Itch, Pimples, Wheals, or Pushes which arise on the Face or Hands, or any o∣ther part of the Body. Saturn owns the Herb and presents it to the World as a Cure for his own Diseases, and a strengthner of the parts of the Body he rules: If by my Astrological Judgment of Diseases, from the Decombiture, you find Saturn Au∣thor of the Diseas, or if by Direction from a Nativity you fear a Saturnine Diseas approa∣ching, you may by this Herb prevent it in the one, and cure it in the other; and therfore 'tis fit you keep a Syrup of it alwaies by you. The Furs-Bush. THis is so well known, as well by this name, as in some Countries by the name Gors, that I shal not need to write any Description therof, my intent being to teach my Country men what they know not, rather than to tell them again of that which is gene∣rally known before. Place. They are known to grow on dry barren Heaths, and other wast gravelly or sandy grounds in all Countries of this Land. Time. They also Flower in the Summer Months. Vertues and use. They are hot and dry good to open Obstru∣ctions of the Liver and Spleen.Obstructi∣ons, Liver, Spleen, Yellow Jaundice, Disury, Gravel, Stone. A Decocti∣on made with the Flowers therof hath been found effectual against the Jaundice, as also to provoke Urine, and clens the Kidneys from Gravel or Stones ingender'd in them. It is a Plant of Mars, and doth all this by Sympathy. Garlick. THe offensivenes of the breath of him that hath eaten Garlick will leade you by the Nose to the knowledg hereof, and (in stead of a description (direct you to the place wher it groweth in Gardens, which kinds are the best and most Phisical. Vertues and use. This was antiently accounted the Poormans, Treacle, it beeing a remedy for all diseases or hurts (except those which it self breeds) It provoketh UrineUrine, Terms prouokes, Mad Dogs Venemount Beasts, Worms, and womens Courses, hel∣peth the biting of a Mad Dog and of other Venemous Creatures killeth Wormes in
Childern, cutteth and avoydeth tough flegm purgeth the head, helpeth the Lethargie,Lethargy, Flegm, Pestilence, Aposlums, Mineral Vapors, Stinking Vapors, Henbane, Hemlock,wolfbane, Dropsie, Cramps, Convulsions, Fal∣ing-sick∣ness. is a good preservative against, a remedy for any Plague sore, or soul Ulcer: taketh away spots and blemishes in the Skin, easeth pains of the eares ripeneth and breaketh Impestumes or other swelling: And for all these diseases the Onyons are also effectual; But the Garlick hath some more peculiar vertues besides the former: Vi It hath a speciall quality to discuss the inconveniences coming by corn pt Agues or Mineral Vapours or by drinking corrupt and stinking waters; As elso by taking of Wolf∣bane, Henbane, Hemlock, or other poysonfull and dangerous herbs. It is also held good in Hydropick diseases, the Jaundice, falling∣sickness, Cramps, Convulsiers, the piles or Hemorrhoids or other cold diseases. My Author quotes here many ases this is good for, but conceals it services: its heat is very vehement, and al vehement hot things send up but ill favor'd vapors to the brain; in chol∣lerick men 'twil ad fuel to the fire, in men op∣pressed by melancholly t'wll attenuate the humor and send up strange sancies and as strange visions to the head, therfore let it be ta∣ken in wardly with great moderation, outward∣ly you may maken  bold with it. Mars owns the herb. Germander. Discription. COmmon Germander shooteth forth sun∣dry stalks with small and somwhat round leavs, dented about the edges: The Flowers stand at the tops, of a deep purple colour: The Root is composed of divers sprigs, which shoot forth a great way round about, quickly over∣spreading a ground. Place. It groweth usually with us in Gardens Time. And flowreth in June or July. Vertues and use. This taken with Honey (saith Dioscorides) is a remedy for Coughs for hardnes of the Spleen,Cough, Spleen, Disury, Dropsie, Terms pro∣vokes, Dead child, Poyson, ulcers, and difficulty of Urine,& helpeth those that are fallen into a Dropsie, especially at the beginning of the diseas, a Decction being made therof when it is green & drunk: It also brin∣geth down Womens Courses and expelleth the dead child: It is most effectual against the poy∣son of al Serpents, being drunk in Wine and the bruised herb outwardly applyed used with Honey,it denseth old and soul Ulcers, and made into an Oyl and the Eyes anoynted ther∣with, taketh away their dimness and moystness: It is like wise good for the paines in the sides: and Cramps.Cramps. The Decetion thereof taken for some daies together, driveth away and cu∣reth both Tertian and Quartan Agues.Agues, Falling sickness, Headach, Melan∣cholly, dulness of Spirit, Convulsion Palsey, Yellow, Jaundice, Worms. It is also good against all diseases of the brain as con∣tinual Headach Falling Sicknes, Melanchol∣ly Drowsines and Dulnes of spirit, Convulsions and Palseys. A dm of the seed taken in Pou∣der purgeth by Urine and is good against the yellow Jaundice. The Juyce of the leaves drop∣ped into the eares killeth the worms in them: The tops therof when they are in flower stee∣ped twenty four hours in a draught of white Wine and drunk, killeth wormes in the belly. It is a most prevalent Herb of Mercury, and strengthens the brain and apprehention ex∣ceedingly; you may see what humane vertues are under Mercury in the latter end of my Ephemeris for 1651. strengthen them when weak, relieve them, when drooping, by this Herb. Stinking Gladwin. Description. THis is one of the kinds of Flower-de∣luces, having divers Leavs rising from the Roots very like a Flower-de-luce, but that they are sharp edged on both sides, and thicker in the middle, of a deeper green colour, narrower and sharper pointed and of a strong ill scent if they be bruised between the fingers: In the midle riseth up a reasonable strong Stalk a yard high at least, beareth 3.or 4 Flowers at the top made somwhat like the Flowers of the Flower-de-luce with three up∣right Leaves of a dead Purplish Ash-colour with some Veins discoloured in them, the o∣ther three do not fall down, nor the three o∣ther smal ones are so arched nor cover the low∣er leaves as the Flower-de-luce doth, but stand loose, or asunder from them: After they are past, there come up three square hard Husks opening wide into three parts when they are ripe, wherin lie reddish seed, trning black when it hath abidden long: The Root is like that of the Flower-de-luce but reddish on the outside, and whitish within, very sharp and hot in tast, of as evil a scent as the leavs. Place. This groweth as well on the upland grounds as also in moist places, in woods and shadowy places by the Sea side in many places of this Land, and is usually nursed up in Gardens. Time. It flowreth not until July, and the seed is ripe in August or September, yet the Huskes after they are ripe opening themselves, will hold their seeds within them for 2.or 3. Months, and not shedd them. Vertues and Vse. It is used by many countrey people to purge corrupt tough Flegm and ChollerFlegm, Choller, which they
do by drinking the decoction of the Roots, and some to make it work more gently do but infuse the sliced roots in Ale, and some take the leavs Wch seryeth wel for the weaker stomachs. The Juyce herof put up, or snuffed up the nose causeth neezing, & draweth from the headHead, much corruption; & the pouder therof doth the same: The Pouder therof drunke in wine, helpeth those that are troubled with Cramps, and Con∣vulsionCramp, Convulsion Gout, Sciatica, Belly ach, Strangury, Fluxes, or Wth the Gout or Sciatica and giveth eas to those that have any griping pains in their body or belly, and helpeth those that have the Strangury: It is given Wth much profit to those that have had long Fluxes by the sharp & evil quality of humors, which it stayeth having first clensed & purged them by the drying and bin∣ding property therin. The Root boyled in wine and drunk doth effectually procure womens courses, and used as a Pessary worketh the same effects, but causeth Abortion in women with child.Terms provokes,Disury, Half a dram of the seed beaten to pouder and taken in wine doth speedily caus one to pis which otherwis cannot: The same taken with vinegar, dessolveth the hardnes & swellings of the spleen.Spleen, wounds, Splinters, Thorns, broken Bones, The Root is very effectual in all Wounds, and specially of the head, as also to draw forth any splinters, Thornes, Broken bones, or any other thing sticking in the flesh without causing pain, being used with a little Verdigreese and Honey, and the great Cen∣taury Root: The same boyled in Vinegar and laid upon any Tumor or Swelling, doth very effectually dissolve and consume them, yea even the swellings of the Throat called the Kings evil.Kings E∣vil, Itch, Scabs, Blemishes in the Skin. The Juyce of the Leavs and Roots healeth the Itch and all running or spreading Scabs or Sores, and Blemishes or Scars in the Skin wheresoever they be. Golden Rod. Description. THis riseth up with brownish smal round Stalks two foot high and somtimes more, having thereon many narrow and long dark greene leaves very seldom with any dents a∣bout the edges, or any strakes or white spots therin, yet they are somtimes so found; divided at the tops into many small branches, with divers small yellow flowers on every one of them, all which are turned one way, and being ripe do turn into down & are caried away with the wind. The Root consisteth of many small fibres which grow not deep in the ground, but abideth all the winter therin, shooting forth new branches every yeer, the old ones dying downe to the ground. Place. It groweth in the open places of woods and Copses both moyst and dry grounds in many places of this Land. Time. It Flowreth about the Month of July. Vertues and use. Arnoldus de villa nova, commendeth it much against the StoneStone, Gravel, Disury, Wounds, Flux, Bloody Flux, Terms stops, Ruptures, in the Reins and Kidneys, and to provoke Urine in abundance, whereby also the Gravel or Stone may be a∣voided. The Decoction of the Herb green or dry, or the distilled Water therof is very effe∣ctual for inward Bruises,as also to be outward∣ly applied, it stayeth bleedings in any part of the Body, and of Wounds also, the Fluxes of Humors, the Bloody Flux, and Womens Courses; and is no ess prevalent in all Rup∣tures or Burstings, being drunk inwardly and outwardly applied. It is a Severaign Wound Herb, inferior to none, both for inward and outward Hurts, green Wounds and old Sores and Ulcersulcers, Sore Mouth & Throat, Teeth loos. are quickly cured therewith. It is also of especial use in all Lotions for Sores or Ulcers in the Mouth, Throat, or privy parts of Man or Woman: The Decoction also helpeth to fasten the Teeth that are loos in the Gums. Venus claims the Herb, and therefore to be sure, it restores Beauty lost.Beauty lost. Goutwort, or Herb∣Gerrard. Description. THis is a low Herb seldom rising half a yard high, having sundry Leavs stan∣ding on brownish green Stalks by threes, snipped about, and of a strong unplea∣sant savour. The Umbels of Flowers are white, and the Seed blackish, the Root run∣neth in the Ground, quickly taking up a great deal of room. Place. It groweth by Hedg and Wall sides, and of∣ten in the borders or Corners of Fields, and in Gardens also. Time. It Flowreth, and Seedeth about the end of July. Vertues and use. Goutwort had not his name for nothing, but upon good experience to help the cold Gout, and Sciatica, as also JoyntGout, Sciatica, Joynts, aches, and other cold Griefs. The very bearing of it about one, easeth the pains of the Gout, and defends him that bears it from the Diseas.
Gromel. OF this I shall briefly describe three kinds which are principally used in Physick, the Vertues whereof are alike, though som∣what different in their manner and form of growing. Description. The greater Gromel groweth up with slen∣der hard and hairy Stalks trailing and taking Root in the ground as it lieth thereon, and parted into many other smaller Branches with hairy dark green Leavs thereon. At the Joynts with the Leavs come forth very smal blew Flowers, and after them hard stony roundish Seed. The Root is long and woody abiding the Winter and shooting forth fresh Stalks in the Spring. The smal wild Gromel sendeth forth divers upright hard branched Stalks two or three foot high, full of Joynts, at eve∣ry of which groweth smal, long, hard, and rough Leavs, like the former but lesser, among which Leavs come forth small white Flowers, and after them grayish round Seed like the former. The Root is not very long, but with many Strings thereat. The Garden Gromel hath divers upright slender woody hairy Stalks brown and crested, very little branched, with Leavs like the for∣mer, and white Flowers, after which in rough brown Husks is contained a white hard round Seed shining like Pearls, & greater than either of the former: The Root is like the first descri∣bed, with divers Branches and Strings thereat, which continueth (as the first doth) all Win∣ter. Place. The two first grow wild in barren or untilled places, and by the way sides in many places of this Land. The last is a Nursling in the Gar∣dens of the curious. Time. They all Flower from Midsummer unto September somtimes, and in the mean time the Seed ripeneth. Vertues and use. These are accounted to be of as singular force as any other Herb or Seed whatsoever, to break the Stone, and to avoid it and the GravelStone, Gravel, ei∣ther in the Reins or Bladder; as also to pro∣voke Urine being stopped, and to help the Strangury.Strangury, The Seed is of greatest use, being bruised and boiled in white Wine, or in Broth, or the like, or the Pouder of the Seed taken therin: Two drams of the Seed in Pouder ta∣ken with Womens Breast-Milk, is very effe∣ctual to procure a speedy Delivery to such Wo∣men as have sore pains in their TravailTravail in Women. and cannot be delivered. The Herb it self (when the Seed is not to be had) either boyled or the Juyce therof drunk, is effectual to all the pur∣poses aforelaid but not so powerful or speedy in operation. The Herbe belongs to Dame Venus, and therfore if Mars caus the Chollick or Stone, as usually he doth if in Virgo. this is your cure. Winter Green. Description. THis sendeth forth 7. 8. or 9. Leaves from a smal brownish creeping Root, e∣very one standing upon a long Footstalk, which are almost as broad as long, round pointed, of a sad green colour and hard in handling, and like the Leaf of a Pear-tree, from whence ariseth a slender weak Stalk, yet standing upright, bearing at the top many smal, white and sweet smelling Flowers, laid open like a Star, consisting of five round poin∣ted Leavs, with many yellowish threds stan∣ding in the middle, about a green Head, and a long stile with them, which in time groweth to be the Seed Vessel, which being ripe is found five square with a smal point at it, weer∣in is contained Seed as small as dust. Place. It groweth seldom in the Fields, but fre∣quently in the Woods Northwards, viz. In Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Scotland. Time. It Flowreth about June or July. Vertues and Vse. Winter-Green is a singular good Wound Herb and an especial Remedy for to heal green WoundsWounds, speedily, the green Leavs being bru∣sed and applied, or the Juyce of them: A Salve made of the green Herbs stamped or the Juyce boyled with Hogs Lard, or with Sllet Oyl and Wax, and some Turpentine added unto it, is a Soveragn Salve, and highly extol∣led by the Germans who much use it to heal all manner of Wounds and Sores. The Herb boyled in Wine and Water and given to drink to them that have any inward Ulcers in their Kidneys or Neck of the Bladder,Ulcers, Kidneys, Bladder, Flux, Bloodyflux Terms stops, Inflamati∣ons, Cankers, Fistulaes. doth won∣derfully help them: It staieth also all Fluxes whether of Blood or Humors, as the Lask, Bloody Flux, Womens Courses, and bleeding of Wounds, and taketh away any Inflamati∣on rising upon pains of the Heart. It is no less helpful for foul Ulcers hard to be cured, as also for Cankers or Fistulaes. The distil∣led Water of the Herb doth effectually per∣from the same things.
Groundsel. Description. OUr common Groundsel hath a round green, and somwhat brownish Stalk, spread toward the top into Branches, set with long and somwhat narrow green Leavs cut in on the edges, somwhat like the Oak Leavs, but lesser and round at the ends; at the tops of the Branches stand many smal green Heads, out of which grow small yellow threds or thrums, which are the Flowers, and continue many daies blown in that manner before it pass away into Down, and with the Seed is carried away in the wind, The Root is smal and threddy, and soon perisheth and as soon riseth again of its own sowing, so that it may be seen many Months in the Yeer, both green, and in Flower and Seed, for it will Spring and Seed twice in a yeer at least if it be suffe∣red in a Garden. Place. This groweth almost every where, as wel on the tops of Walls as at the foot among Rub∣bish, and untilled grounds, but especially in Gardens. Time. It Flowreth as is said before, almost in eve∣ry Month through the yeer. Vertues and use. The Decoction of the Herb (saith Dioscori∣des) made with Wine and Drunk `helpeth the pains in the Stomach proceeding of Chollerholler in the Stomach, Yellow Jaundice, Falling∣sickness, Disury, Gravel, Sciatica, Chollick, Liver, Terms provokes, womens Breasts, Privy parts, Arteries Joynts & Sinews over heated, Kernels, Wounds in the Sinews, Inflamati∣ons in the Eyes; (which it may well do by a Vomit, as daily experience sheweth) the Juyce hereof taken in Drink, or the Decoction of it in Ale, gently performeth the same: It is good against the Jaundice and Falling-sickness being taken in Wine, as also against difficulty of making Water, it provoketh Urin, expelleth Gravel in the Reins or Kidneys; a dram thereof gi∣ven in Oximel, after some walking or stir∣ring the Body; It helpeth also the Sciatica, griping of the Belly and the Chollick, helpeth the defects of the Liver, and provoketh Wo∣mens Courses. The fresh Herb boyled and made into a Pultis and appled to the Breasts of Women that are swollen with pain and heat, as also to the privy parts of Man or Wo∣man, the Seat, or Fundament, or the Arte∣ries, Joynts, and Sinews when they are infla∣med and swoln, doth much eas them: and used with some Salt helpeth to dissolve Knots or Kernels in any part of the Body. The Juyce of the Herb, or (as Dioscorides saith) the Leavs and Flowers with some fine Frankin∣cense in Pouder, used in Wounds of the Body, Nervs, or Sinews, doth singularly help to heal them: The Distilled Water of the Herb per∣formeth well all the aforesaid Cures, but e∣specially for Inflamations or watering of the Eyes by reason of the Defluxion of Rhewm into them. This Herb is Venus her Mrs. piece, and is as gallant an Universal Medicine for all Dis∣eases coming of heat whatsoever they be, or in what part of the Body soever they lie, as the Sun shines upon; 'tis very safe and friendly to the Body of Man, yet causeth Vomiting if the Stomach be afflicted, if not, it purging, and it doth it with more gentleness than can be expected. 'Tis moist and somwhat cold withal, thereby causing expulsion, and re∣pressing the Heat caused by the motion of the internal parts in Purges and Vomits, Lay by your Learned Receipts, Take so much Sen∣na, so much Scammony, so much Colocynthis, so much Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, &c. This Herb alone preserved in a Syrup, in a distilled Water, in an Oyntment shal do the deed for you in all hot Diseases, and it shall do it, 1. Safely, 2. Speedily. Harts-Tongue. Description. THis hath divers Leavs ing from the Root every one severally which fold themselvs in their first sprin∣ging and spreading; when they are full grown are about a foot long, smooth and green above, but hard and with little Sap in them, and straked on the back athwart on both sides of the middle Rib, with smal and somwhat long brownish marks; the bottoms of the Leavs are a little bowed on each side of the middle Rib somwhat narrow with the length, and somwhat smal at the end. The Root is of many black threds, folded or interlaced together. Time. It is green all the Winter, but new Leavs spring every yeer. Vertues and Vse. Harts-Tongue is much commended against the hardness and stoppings of the Spleen and Liver,Spleen, Liver, Flux, Bloodyflux Hiccough, Guths, Venemous Beasts. and against the heat of the Liver and Stomach, and against Lasks and the Bloody Flux: The Distilled Water therof is also ve∣ry good against the Passions of the Heart, and to stay the Hiccough, to help the falling of the Pallat, and stay the bleeding of the Gums be∣ing gagled in the mouth. Dioscorides faith it is good against the stinging or biting of Serpents. Jupiter claims Dominion over this Herb, therfore is a singular Remedy for the Liver, both to strengthen it when weak, and eas it
when afflicted. 'tis no matter by what you should do well to keep it in a Syrup all the yeer, for though my Author say 'tis green all the yeer, I scarce beleev it. As for the use of it, my Directions at latter end will be sufficient, and enough for those that are studious in Physick to whet their Brains upon for one year or two. The Hazel Nut. THese are so well known to every Boy, that they need no Description. Vertues and Vse. The parched Kernels made into an Electu∣ary, or the Milk drawn from the Kernels with Mead or Honeyed Water, is very good to help an old Cough;Cough, Phtisick, Flux, Terms stops, and being parched and a lit∣tle Pepper put to them and drunk, digesteth the Distillations of Rhewm from the Head: The dried Husks and Shels to the weight of two drams taken in red Wine, staieth Lasks, and Womens Courses, and so doth the red Skin that covers the Kernels which is more effe∣ctual to stay Womens Courses. And if this be true as it is, then why should the Vulgar so familiarly affirm, that eating Nuts causeth shortness of Breath than which nothing is falser, for how can that which strengthens the Lungues cause shortness of breath? I confess the Opinion is far older than I am, I knew Tradition was a Friend to Ertors before, but never that he was the Fa∣ther of Slanders, or are mens tongues so gi∣ven to slandering one another that they must slander Nuts too, to keep their tongues in re? If any thing of the Hazel Nut be stop∣ping' tis the Husks and Shels, and no body is so mad to eat them unless Physically, and the red Skin which covers the Kernel which you may easily pull off. And thus have I made an Apology for Nuts which cannot speak for themselves. Hawkweed Description This hath many large hairy leaves lying on the ground, much rent or torn on the sides into many gashes like Dandelion but with greater parts more like the smooth sow Thistle from among wth ariseth a hollow rough stalk two or three foot high branched from the middle upward, wherin are set at every Joynt longer leaves, little or nothing rent or cut in, bearing at their top sundrypale, yellow Flowers consisting of many small narrow leavs, broad pointed and nicked in at the ends, set in a dou∣ble row or more, the outermost beeing larger than the inner, which form most of the Hawkweeds (for there are many kinds of them) do hold, which turne into down, and with the small brownish seeds, is blown away with the wind: The Roote is long and som∣what greater with many small fibres thereat. The whole is full of bitter milke. Place. It groweth in divers places about Field sides, and the path waies in dry grounds. Time. It flowreth & flies away in the SūmerMonths. Vertues and use. Howkweed (saith Dioscorides) is coolingCools, Dries, Binds, Gnawing in the Stomach, Inflama∣tion, Agues, Crudity, Disury, Venemous Beasts, Poyson, Dropsie, Flegm, Chollick, Spleen, Watching, Lust stops, Venerious Dreams, Reins, Bladder, Eyes, Ulcers, Burnings, Inflama∣tions, St. Anthonies Fire, Heat, salt Flegm, Convulsion Cramp, Freckles, Spots, Morphew Wrinkles. somwhat drying and binding, and therfore good for the heat of the stomach, and gna∣wings therein, for Inflamations and the hot fits of Agues. The Juice therof in wine helpeth digestion, discusseth wind, hindreth crudities abiding in the stomack, and helpeth the difficulty of making Water, the biting of Venemous Serpents, and sting of the Scorpion, if the herb be also outwardly apply∣ed to the place, and is very good against all other Poysons. A scruple of the dryed Juyce given in wine and vinegar is profitable for those that have the Dropsie. The decoction of the Herb taken with Honey, digeisteth thin flegm in the chest or lungs, and with Hysop helpeth the cough. The Decoction therof and of wild Succory made with wine and taken helpeth the wind chollick and hard∣ness of the spleen, it procureth rest and sleep, hindereth venery and venercous dreams, coo∣leth, heats, purgeth the stomach, encreaseth blood, & helpeth the diseases of the Reins and Bladder. Outwardly applied it is singular good for all the defects and diseases of the eyes, used with some womens Milke, and is used wth good success in fretting or creeping ulcers, elpecially in the beginning. The green Herb bruised and with a little Salt applyed to any place burnt with fire before blisters do arise, helpeth them, as also inflamations St Antho∣nies fire and al Pushes, and eruptions, heat, and salt Flegm. The same applyed with Meal and fair water in manner of a Poultis to any place affected with convulsions and the Cramp or such as are out of Joynt doth give help and ease. The distilled water clenseth the skin and taketh away freckles, Spots, the Morphew or Wrinkles in the face. The Hawthorn. It is not my intent to trouble you with a Description of this Tree which is so well known that it needeth none.
It is ordinarily but a Hedg Bush, although being pruned and dressed it groweth to be a Tree of a reasonable height. As for the Hawthorn tree at Glastenbury, which is said to flower yearly on Christ∣mas Dry, it rather shews the superstition of those who observe it for the time of its Flow∣ring, than any great wonder, sith the like may be found in diverse other places of this land, as in Whey-street in Rumney Marsh, and neer unto Nantwiche in Cheshire by a place called White-Green, where if the Winter be milde they will be white blossomes all over before and about Christmas, as in May, if the weather be frosty, it Flowreth not until January, or that the hard weather be over. Vertues and use. The Berries or the seeds in the Berries beaten to pouder and drunk in wine, are held singular good against the stoneStone, Dropsie, Flux, Inward pains, Splinters, Thorns. and are good for the dropsy. The distilled water of the Flowers stayeth the lask. The seeds cleared from the Down, bruised and boy∣led in wine & drunk is good for inward tor∣menting pains: If cloathes and spunges be wet in the said distilled water and applyed to any place wherin thornes, splinters or the like do abide in the Flesh, it will notably draw them forth. And thus you see the thorn gives a medicine for his own pricking, and so doth almost every thing else. Hemlock Description. The Common great Hemlock groweth up with a green stalk four or five foot high or more, ful of red spots somtimes, and at the Joynts very large winged leavs set at them which are divided into many other winged leaves, one set against another dented about the edges, of a sad green colour branched towards the top where it is full of Umbles of white Flowers, and afterwards with whitish flat Seed: The Root is long, white, and somtimes crooked and hollow within, the whol Plant and every part hath a strong, hea∣dy, and ill favor'd scent, much offending the Senses. Place. It groweth in all Countries of this Land by Wals and Hedges sides, in wast Grounds and untilled places. Time. It Flowreth and Seedeth in July, or there∣abouts. Vertues and Vse. Hemlock is exceeding cold and very dange∣rous, especially to be taken unwardly: It may safely be applied to Inflamations,Inflamati∣ons, St. Anthonies Fire, Tetters, Ring∣worms, Eyes, Pin and Web, Tumors, and Swelling in any part of the Body (save the Privy parts) as also to St. Anthonies fire, Wheals, Pushes, and creeping Ulcers that rise of hot sharp Humors, by cooling and repel∣ling the heat. The Leavs bruised and laid to the Brow or Forehead, is good for their Eyes that are red and swollen, as also to take away a Pin and Web growing in the Eye, this is a tried Medicine,; Take a smal Handful of the Herb and half so much Bay Salt beaten toge∣ther, and applied to the contrary Wrest of the Hand for twenty four Hours, doth remove it in thrice dressing. If the Root hereof be roasted under the Embers, wrapped in double wet Papers, until it be soft and tender, and then applied to the GoutGout, in the Hands or Fin∣gers it will quickly help this evil. If any shall through mistake eat the Herb Hemlock instead of Parsly, or the Root instead of a Parsnip (both which it is very like) whereby hapneth a kind of Phrensie, or Perturbation of the sen∣ses, as if they were stupified or drunk, The Remedy is as Pliny saith, to drink of the best and strongest pure Wine, before it strike to the Heart, or Gentian put into Wine, or a draught of good Vinegar, wherewith Tragus doth af∣firm that he cured a Woman that had eaten the Root. Saturn claims Dominion over the Herb, yet Iwonder why it may not be applied to the pri∣vities in a Priapismus, or continual standing of the Yard, it being very beneficial for that Dis∣eas; I suppose my Authors Judgment was first upon the opposit Disposition of Saturn to Ve∣nus in those Faculties, and therfore he forbid the applying of it to those parts that it might not caus Barrenness, or spoil the Spirit Procre∣ative, which if it do, yet applied to the Pri∣vities it stops lustful thoughts.Lechery. Hemp. THis is so well known to every good Hus∣wife in the Country, that I shal not need to write any Description of it. Time. It is sown in the end of March, or begin∣ning of April, and is ripe in August or Sep∣tember. Vertues and use. The Seed of Hemp consumeth Wind,Wind, and by the much use there of disperseth it so much that it drieth up the natural Seed, for Procrea∣tion; yet being boyled in Milk and taken, helpeth such as have a hot dry Cough.Cough, The Dutch make an Emulsion out of the Seed, and give it with good success to those that have the Jaundice,Jaundice, especially in the beginning of the Diseas if there be no Ague accompanying it, for
openeth Obstructions of the Gall,Gall., Choller, and causeth digestion of Choller. The Emulsion or De∣coction of the Seed staieth Lasks and continu∣al Fluxes, easeth the Chollick,Flux, Chollick, Bleeding, and allayeth the troublesom Humors in the Bowels, and staieth bleeding at the Mouth, Nose, or other place, some of the Leavs being fried with the Blood of that bleed, and so given them to eat. It is held very good to kill the WormsWorms, in man or Beast, and the Juyce dropped into the Ears killeth Worms in them, and draweth forth Earwigs,Earwigs, or other living Creatures gotten into them. The Decoction of the Root allayeth InflamationsInflama∣tion, in the Head or any other parts; the Herb it self, or the Distilled Water there∣of doth the like. The Decoction of the Roots easeth the pains of the Gout,Gout, the hard Tumors, or Knots in the Joynts, the pains and shrinking of the Sinews,Sinews shrunk. and the pains of the Hips: The fresh Juyce mixed with a lit∣tle Oyl and Butter, is good for any place that hath been burnt with fire being thereto appli∣ed. It is a Plant of Saturn, and good for some∣thing els you see than to make Halters only. Henbane. Description. OUr common Henbane hath very large, thick, soft, woolly Leavs lying upon the ground, much cut in or torn on the edges of a dark ill grayish green colour, among which rise up divers thick & short Stalks two or three foot high, spread into divers smaller Branches with lesser Leavs on them, and many hollow Flowers scarce appearing above the Husks, and usually torn on the one side, ending in five round points growing one above another, of a deadish yellow colour, somwhat paler to∣ward the edges, with many purplish Veins therein, and of a dark yellowish purple in the bottom of the Flower, with a smal pointel of the same colour in the middle, each of them standing in hard close Husk, which after the Flower is past, groweth very like the Husk of Asarabacca, and somwhat sharp at he top Points, wherein is contained much smal Seed very like Poppy Seed, but of a dusky grayish colour. The Root is great, white and thick, branching forth divers waies under ground, so like a Parsnip Root (but that it is not so white) that it hath deceived divers. The whol Plant more than the Root hath a heavy ill soporiferous smell somwhat offensive. Place. It commonly groweth by the way sides, and under Hedg sides and Wals. Time. It Flowreth in July, and springeth again yeerly of its own Seed. I doubt my Author mistook July for June, if not for May. Vertues and Vse. The Leavs of Henbane do cool all hot In∣flamationsInflama∣tion, Cods, Womens Breasts, in the Eyes or any other part of the Body; and are good to asswage all manner of Swellings of the Cods or Womens Breasts, or els where, if they be boyled in Wine, and either applied themselves or the Fomentation warm; it also asswageth the pain of the Gout, the Sciatica and all other pains in the JoyntsGout, Sciatica, Joynts, which arise from an hot caus. And applied with Vinegar to the Forehead and Temples, helpeth the Headach and want of sleep in hot Feavers.Watching, The Juyce of the Herb or Seed, or the Oyl drawn from the Seed doth the like. The Oyl of the Seed is helpful for the Deaf∣ness, Nois, and Worms in the Ears,Deafness, Noise in the Ears, being dropped therein; the Juyce of the Herb, or Root doth also the same. The Decoction of the Herb, or Seed, or both, killeth Lice in Man and Beast. The fume of the dried Herb Stalks and Seed burned, quickly healeth Swel∣lings, Chilblains,, or KibesChilblains Kibes, in the Hands or Feet, by holding them in the fume thereof. The Remedy to help those that have taken Henbane is to drink Goats Milk, Honyed Wa∣ter or Pine Kernels, with Sweet Wine: or in the absence of these, Fennel Seed, Nettle Seed, the Seed of Cresses, Mustard, or Radish, as also Onions, or Garlick taken in wine, do all help to free them from danger, and restore them to their due temper again. Take notice that this Herb must never be taken inwardly, outwardly, an Oyl, Oynt∣ment, or Plaister of it, is most admirable for the Gout, to cool the Venerial heat of the Reins in the French Pox,French∣Pox. to stop the Tooth∣ach being applied to the aching side, to allay all Inflamations, and to help the Diseases be∣fore premised. I wonder in my Heart how Astrologers could take on them to make this an Herb of Jupiter, and yet Mizaldus, a man of a pene∣trating Brain, was also of this Opinion as wel as the rest, the Herb is indeed under the Do∣minion of Saturn, and I prove it by this Ar∣gument. All the Herbs which delight most to grow in Saturnine places, are Saturnine Herbs. But Henbanc delights most to grow in Satur∣nine places, and whol Cart loads of it may be found neer the places where they empty the common Jakes, and scarce a stinking Ditch to be found without, it growing by it. Ergo 'tis an Herb of Saturn.
Herb Robert. Description. THis riseth up with a reddish stalk two foot high, having divers leaves there∣on upon very long and reddish footstalkes, divided at the ends into three or five divisions, each of them cut in on the edges some deeper then others, and all dented likewise about the edges, which often tims turn reddish: At the tops of the stalk come forth divers flo∣wers made of five leavs, much larger then the Doves foot, and of a more reddeish colour after which come beak heads as in others: The Roote is small and threddy, and smelleth as the whole plant very strong, almost stinking. Place. This groweth frequently every where by way sides, upon ditch banks, and wast grounds whersoever one goeth. Time. It flowreth in June and July chiefly, and the seed is ripe shortly after. Vertues and use. Herb Robert is commended not only a∣gainst the stone,Stone, Bleeding, Terms stops, wounds, Vlcers in the Privities. but to stay bloud, where or howsoever flowing; it speedily healeth all green wounds, and is effectual in old ulcers in the peivy parts or else where. You may perswade your self this is true and also conceive a good reason for it, if you you doe but consider 'tis an herb of Venus for al it hath gotten a mans name. Herb True-love, OR One-berry. Description. THe ordinary Herb True-love, hath a small creeping Root running under the upper crust of the ground, somwhat like a Coutchgrass Root but not so white, shooting forth stalks with leavs, some wherof carry no berries, though others do; every stalk smooth without Joynts and blackith green, ri∣sing about half a foot high if it bear berries otherwise seldom so high, bearing at the top four leaves set directly one against a∣nother in maner of a Cross or a Riband tied (as it is called) on a True-loues Knot: which are each of them a part: somwhat like unto a Nightshade Leaf, but somwhat broader, having somtimes but three Leavs, somtimes five, somtimes six, and these som∣times greater than in others. In the middle of the four Leavs fiseth up one smal slender Stalk about an inch high, bearing at the top thereof one Flower spread open like a Star consisting of four small and narrow long pointed Leavs of a yellowish green colour, and four other lying between them lesser than they; in the middle wherof standeth a round dark purplish Btton or Head, compassed a∣bout with eight smal yellow Mealy th eds, with three colours make it the more conspicu∣ous and lovely to behold: This Button or Head in the middle, when the other Leavs are withered, becometh a blackish Purple Berry full of Juyce of the bigness of a reasonable Grape, having within it many white Seeds: The whol Plant is without any manifest tast. Place. It groweth in Woods and Copse, and somtimes in the corners or borders of Fields and wast Grounds in very many places of this Land; and abundantly in the Woods, Gop∣ses, and other places about Chisselhurst and Maidstone in Kent. Time. They spring up in the middle of April or May, and are in Flower soon after; The Barries are ripe in the end of May, and in some places in June. Vertues and Vse. The Leavs or Berries hereof are effectual to expel poysonPoyson, Pestilences, of all sorts, especially that of the Aconites, as also the Plague, and other Pesti∣lential Diseases. Some have been holpen therby saith Mathiolus, that have lien long in a lingring sickness, and others that by Witch∣craftFeavers, Witchcraft (as it was thought) were become half foolish, by taking a dram of the Seed or Ber∣ries hereof in Pouder every day for twenty daies together, they were restored to their for∣mer health. The Roots in Pouder taken in Wine easeth the pains of the ChollickChollick, speedi∣ly: The Leavs are very effectual as well for green Wounds,Wounds, Ulcers, Swellings in the Groyn, Cods, and Privities, Inflama∣tions, A∣posthumes. as to clens and heal up old fil∣thy Sores and Ulcers; and is very powerful to discuss all Tumors, and Swellings in the Cods, privy Parts, or Groyn, or in any part of the Body, and speedily to ally all Inflamations. The Leavs or their Juyce applied to Felons, or those Nails of the Hands or Toes that have Imposthumes or Sotes gathered together at the Roots of them, healeth them in short space. The Herb is not to be described for the premises, but is fit to be noutished in every good Womans Garden. Venus owns it.
Hysop. THis is so well known to be an Inhabitant in every Garden, that it wil save me La∣bor in writing a Description thereof. The Vertues are as followeth. Vertues and use. Dioscorides saith that Hysop boyled with Rue and Honey, and drunk, helpeth those that are troubled with Coughs, shortness of breath, wheesing,Cough, shortuess of breath, Wheesing, Gross Hu∣mors, Worms, yellow Jaundice, Dropsie, Spleen, Inflama∣tions, black and blue spots, Quinsie, Toothach, Noise in the Ears, Venemous Beasts, Lice, It∣ching of the Head Falling∣sickness, Wounds. and Rhewmatick Distilla∣tions upon the Lungs: Taken also with Oxi∣mel, it purgeth gross Humors by the Stool; and with Honey killeth Worms in the Belly; and with fresh or new Figs bruised, helpeth to loosen the Belly, and more forcibly if the Root of Flower-de-luce and Cresses be added therto. It amendeth and cherisheth the Na∣tive colour of the Body spoiled by the yellow Jaundice, and being taken with Figs and Ni∣tre helpeth the Dropsie and the Spleen. Being boyled with Wine, it is good to wash Inflama∣tions: and taketh away black and blew Spots and Marks that come by Strokes, Bruises, or Fals, being applied with warm Water. It is an excellent Medicine for the Quinsie, or Swel∣ling in the Throat, to wash and gargle it, be∣ing boyled with Figs. It helpeth the Tooth∣ach, being boyled in Vinegar, and gargled therwith. The hot Vapors of the Decoction taken by a Funnel in at the Ears, easeth the Inflamations and singing nois of them: Be∣ing bruised and Salt, Honey, and Cummin Seed put to it, it helpeth those that are stung by Serpents. The Oyl thereof being anoyn∣ted killeth Lie, and taketh away Itching of the Head: It helpeth those that have the Falling-sickness which way soever it be ap∣plied: It helpeth to expectorate tough Flegm, and is effectual in al cold Griefs, or Diseases of the Chest and Lungs, being taken either in a Syrup or licking Medicine. The green Herb bruised and a little Sugar put thereto, doth quickly heal any cut, or green Wound, being thereunto applied. The Herb is Jupiters, and the Sign Cancer; It strengthens all the parts of the Body under cancer and Jupiter, which what they be may be found amply discoursed of in my Astrolo∣gical Judgment of Diseases. Hops. THese are so well known that they need no Description, I mean the manured kind which every good Husband or Huswife is ac∣quainted with. The wild Hop groweth up as the other doth, ramping upon Trees or Hedges that stand next unto them, with rough branches, and Leavs like the former; but it giveth smaller Heads & in far less plenty than it, so that there is scarce a Head or two seen in a year on di∣vers of this wild kind; wherein consisteth the chief difference. Place. They delight to grow on low moist grounds, and are found in all parts of this Land. Time. They spring not up until April, and Flo∣wer not until the latter end of June, the heads are not gathered until the middle or latter end of September, Vertues and use. This Physical operation is to open Obstru∣ctions of the Liver and Spleen to clens the Blood,Obstructi∣ons, Liver Spleen, Blood, Reins clenseth, French Pox, Scabs, Itch, Tetters, Ring∣worms, Morphen Poyson, Worms, Terms provokes Disury, yellow Jaundice Liver, Stomach, Agues. to loosen the Belly, to clens the Reins from Gravel, and provoke Urine. The De∣coction of the tops of Hops, as well of the tame as the wild, worketh the same effects. In cleansing the Blood they help to cure the French Diseas, and al manner of Scabs, Itch, and other breakings out in the Body, as also al Tetters, Ringworms, and spreading Sores, the Morphew, and all discolourings of the Skin. The Decoction of the Flowers and tops, do help to expel poyson that any one hath drunk: Half a dram of the Seed in Pouder taken in drink, killeth Worms in the Body, bringeth down Womens Courses, and expel∣leth Urin: A Syrup made of the Juyce and Sugar, cureth the yellow Jaundice, easeth the Headach that comes of Heat, and tempereth the heat of the Liver and Stomach, and is profitably given in long and hot Agues that rise of Choller and Blood. Both the wild and the manured are of one property, and alike ef∣fectual in al the aforesaid Diseases. By all these Testimonies, Beer appears to be better than Ale. Mars owns the Plant, and then Dr. Reason will tell you how it performs these actions. Horehound Description COmmon Horehound groweth up with square hoary Stalks, half a yard or two foot high, set at the Joynts with two round crumpled rough Leavs, of a sullen hoary green colour, of a reasonable good scent, but a very bitter tast: The Flowers are smal, white and gaping, set in rough, hard, prick∣ly Husks, round about the Joynts with the Leaves from the middle of the Stalk upwards, wherein afterwards is found smal round blackish Seed. The Root is blackish, hard, and
woody, with many strings ther eat, and abideth many years. Place. It is found in many parts of this Land, in dry grounds and wast green places. Time. It Flowreth in or about July, and the Seed is ripe in Augst. Vertues and Vse. A Decoction of the dried Herb with the Seed, or the Juyce of the green Herb taken with Honey, is a Remedy for those that are pursie or short winded, or have a Cough or are fallen into a Consumption either through long sickness, or thin Distillations of Rhewm upon the Lungs.Difficulty of breath, Cough, Consump∣tion, Flegm, Terms provokes, Afterbirth, Weariness, Poyson, Venemous Beasts, Ulcers, Sides, Eyes, Yellow Jaundice, Ears, Obstructi∣ons of the Liver and Spleen. Liver, Itch, Tetters, Worms, Dogs bi∣tings, Womens Breasts, Thorns, Asthmaes. It helpeth to expectorate tough Flegm from the Chest, being taken with the Roots of Iris or Orris. It is given to Women to bring down their Courses, to ex∣pel the Afterbirth, and to them that have sore and long Travails, as also to those that have taken Poyson, or are stung or bitten by Ve∣nemous Serpents: The Leavs used with Ho∣ney purge foul Ulcers stay running or cree∣ping sores, and the growing of the Flesh over the Nails. It also helpeth pains of the sides. The Juyce thereof with Wine and Honey hel∣peth to cleer the Eyesight, and snuffed up in∣to the Nostrils, purgeth away the yellow Jaun∣dice, and with a little Oyl of Roses dropped into the Ears easeth the pains of them. Ga∣len saith it openeth Obstructions both of the Liver and Spleen, purgeth the Breast and Lungues of Flegm; and used outwardly, it both clenseth and digesteth. A Decoction of Horchound (saith Mathiolus) is availa∣ble for those that have bad Livers, and for such as have Itches and running Tet∣ters; The Pouder hereof taken, or the Decoction, killeth Worms. The green Leavs bruised and boyled in old Hogs Greas unto an Oyntment, healeth the biting of Dogs abateth the Swellings of Womens Breasts, and taketh away the Swelling and Pains that come by any pricking of Thorns, or such like means, and used with Vinegar it clenseth and healeth Tetters. There is a Syrup made of Horehonnd to be had at the Apothecaries, very good for old Coughs, to rid the tough Flegm, as also to avoid cold Rhewm from the Lungs of old Folks, and for those that are Astmatick or short winded. Horstail. Description. OF this there are many kinds, but I shall not trouble you nor my self with any large Description of them, which to do, were but as the Proverb is, to find a knot in a Rush; All the kinds hereof being nothing else but knotted Rushes, some with Leavs and some without: Take the Description of the most eminent sort as followeth. The greater Horstail at the first springing hath Heads somwhat like those of Asparagus, and after grow to be hard, rough, hollow Stalks, joynted at sundry places up to the top, a foot high, so made as if the lower part were put into the upper, whereat grow on each side a Bush of smal, long, Rush-like hard Leavs, each part resembling a Hors Tail (from whence it was so called) At the tops of the Stalks come forth smal Catkins like to those of Trees. The Root creepeth under ground having Joynts at sundry places. Place. This (as most of the other sorts hereof) groweth in wet grounds. Time. They spring up in April, and their bloo∣ming Catkins in July, seeding for the most part in August, and then perish down to the ground, rising afresh in the Spring. Vertues and use. Horstail, the smoother rather than the rough, and the Leaved rather than the Bare, are most Physical: It is very powerful to stanch bleedingsBleeding, Flux, Terms stops, Pissing Blood, Inward ulcers, Excoriati∣ons of the Bladder, Ulcers, Wounds, Ruptures, Disry, Stone, Sangury, Cough, Inflamati∣ons, Pim∣ples, Red Faces whersoever, either inward or outward, the Juyce or Decoction thereof be∣ing drunk, or the Juyce, Decoction, or distil∣led Water applied outwardly: It staieth also al sorts of Lasks and Fluxes in Man or Wo∣man, and the pissing of Blood, and healeth al∣so not only the inward Ulcers, and excoriati∣ons of the Entrails, Bladder, &c. but al b∣ther sorts of foul, moist, and running Ulcers, and soon sodereth together the tops of green Wounds; It cureth also Ruptures in Chil∣dren. The Decoction hereof in Wine being drunk, provoketh Urin, and helpeth the Stone and the Strangury; and the distilled Water thereof drunk two or three times in a day, a smal quantity at a time; as also easeth the Intrails or Guts, and is effectual against a Cough that cometh by distillation from the Head. The Juyce or distilled Water being warmed, and hot Inflamations, Pustules, or red Wheals, and other breakings out in the Skin, being bathed therewith doth help them, and doth no less eas the Swellings, heat, and Inflamations of the Fundament or Privy parts in Man or Woman. The Herb is belonging to Saturn yet is ve∣ry harmless, and excellent good for the Pre∣mises.
Houfleeks, or Sen∣green. ♃ THese are so wel known unto my Coun∣try Men that I shal not need to write a∣ny Description of them. Place. It groweth commonly on Walls and Hous¦sides, and flowreth in July. Vertues and use. Our ordinary Housleek is good for all in∣ward heats,Heat, Eyes,, as wel as outward, and in the Eyes or other parts of the Body: A Posset made with the Juyce of Housleek is singular good in al hot Agues,Agues, Thirst, Salt Rhewms, Ears, Terms, stops, Fluxes, Inflama∣tions, St.Antho∣nies Fire, Burnings, Scaldings, Tetters, Ring∣worms, Corns on the Hands and Feet, Headach, Frenzy, Watching, Bleeding, for it cooleth and tempereth the Blood and Spirits, and quench the thirst; and is also good to stay al hot Defluxions of sharp and salt Rhewms in the Eyes, the Juyce be∣ing dropped into them, or into the Ears hel∣peth them; It helpeth also other Fluxes of Humors into the Bowels, and the immode∣rate Courses of Women. It cooleth and re∣straineth also all other hot Inflamations. St. Anthonies Fire, Scaldings and Burnings, the Shingles, fretting Ulcers, Cankers, Tetters, Ringworms and the like, and much easeth the pain of the Gout proceeding from an hot caus. The Juyce also taketh away Warts and Corns in the Hands or Feet, being often bathed therwith, and the Skin of the Leavs being laid on them afterwards. It easeth also the Head∣ach, and distempered heat of the Brain in Phrensies, or through want of sleep, being applied to the Temples and Forehead. The Leavs bruised and laid upon the Crown or Seam of the Head staieth bleeding at the Nose very quickly. The distilled Water of the Herb is profitable for all the purposes afore∣said: The Leavs being gently rubbed on any place stung with Nettles or Bees,Nettles, Bees, &c. doth quick∣ly take away the Pain. It is an Herb of Jupiter, and it is reported by Myzaldus to preserve, it grows upon from Fire and Lightning. ☿ Houndstongue. Description. THe great ordinary Houndstongue hath many long and somwhat narrow, soft, hairy darkish green Leavs, lying on the ground somwhat like unto Bugloss Leavs, from among which riseth up a rough hairy Stalk a∣bout two foot high, with some smaller Leavs thereon, and branched at the top into divers parts, with a smal Leaf at the Foot of every Branch, which is somwhat long, with many Flowers set along the same, which Branch is crooked or turned inwards before it Flowreth and openeth by degrees as the Flowers do blow, which consist of four smal purplish red Leavs of a dead colour, scarce rising out of the Husk wherein they stand, with some threds in the middle: It hath somtimes a white Flower. After the Flowers are past there cometh rough flat Seed, with a smal pointel in the middle, easily cleaving to any Garment that it toucheth, and not so easily pulled off again: The root is black, thick, and long, hard to break, and ful of a clammy Juyce, smelling somwhat strong, of an evil scent as the Leavs also do. Place. It groweth in most places of this Land, in wast grounds, and untilled places by high way sides, Lanes, and Hedg sides. Time. It Flowreth about May and June, and the Seed is ripe shortly after. Vertues and Use. The Root is very effectually used in Pills, as wel as in Decoctions, or otherwise, to stay al sharp and thin Defluxions of Rhewm from the Head into the Eyes or Nose, or upon the Stomach or Lungs, as also for Coughs or shortness of breath.Eyes, Nose, Stomach, Lungs, shortness of breath, The Leaves boyled in Wine (saith Dioscorides) but others do ra∣ther appoint it to be made with Water, and to ad thereto Oyl and Salt, mollifieth or ope∣neth the Belly downwards; it also helpeth to cure the biting of a mad Dog,Mad dogs some of the Leavs being also applied to the Wound: The Leavs bruised, or the Juyce of them boyled in Hogs Lard, and applied, helpeth the falling away of the Hair which cometh of hot and sharp humors; as also for any place that is scalded or burnt:Scaldings, Burnings, The Leavs bruised and laid to any green Wound doth heal it up quickly. The Root baked under the Embers wrapped in Past, or wet Papers, or in a wet double Cloth, and thereof a Suppository made and put up into, or applied to the Fundament, doth very effectually help the painful Piles or He∣morrhoids.Hemor∣rhoids, Wounds, Ulcers, French Pox. The distilled Water of the Herb and Roots, is very good to al the purposes a∣foresaid, to be used as wel inwardly to drink, as outwardly to wash any sore places, for it healeth al manner of Wounds and Punctures and those foul Ulcers that arise by the French Pox. Mizaldus ads to this, that the Leavs laid un∣der the Feet wil keep the Dogs from barking at you, Houdstongue becaus it ties the Tongue of Hounds, whether it be true or not I never tried yet I have cured the biting of a mad Dog with this only Medicine.
St. Johns-wort Description THe common St. Johns-wort shoo∣teth forth brownish, upright, hard, round Stalks, two foot high, sprea∣ding many Branches from the sides up to the tops of them with two smal Leavs set one against another at every place, which are of a deep green colour, som∣what like the Leavs of the lesser Centaury, but narrower, and ful of smal holes in every Leaf, which cannot be so wel perceived as when they are held up to the light: At the tops of the Stalks and Branches stand yellow Flowers made of five Leavs apiece, with many yellow threds in the middle, which being bruised do yeild a reddish Juyce like blood, after which come smal round Heads, wherein is contained smal blackish Seed smelling like Rozin: The Root is hard and woody with divers strings and fibres at it, and of a brownish colour which abideth in the ground many yeers, shoo∣ting anew every Spring. Place. This groweth in Woods and Copses, as wel those that are shady, as open to the Sun. Time. They Flower about Midsummer, and in July, and their Seed is ripe in the latter end of July or in August. Vertues and use. St. Johns-wort, is as singular a Wound Herb as any other whatsoever, either for in∣ward Wounds, Hurts,Wounds, Bruises, or Bruises, to be boyled in Wine and drunk, or prepared into Oyl or Oyntment, Bath or Lotion outwardly: It hath power to open Obstructions,Obstructi∣ons, Swellings, to dissolve Swellings to close up the Lips of Wounds, and to strengthen the parts that are weak & feeble. The Decoction of the Herb and Flowers, but of the Seed especially in Wine being drunk; or the Seed made into Pouder and drunk with the Juyce of Knotgrass, helpeth al manner of spitting and Vomiting of Blood,Spitting and Vomi∣ting blood, Venemous Beasts, Disury, be it by any Vein broken inwardly, by Bruises, Falls, or howsoever: The same helpeth those that are bitten or stung by any Venemous Creature: And is good for those that are troubled with the Stone in their Kidneys, or that cannot make water; and being applied provoketh Womens Courses. Two drams of the Seed of St. Johns-wort made into Pouder and drunk in a little Broth, doth gently expel Choller,Choller, or congealed Blood in the Stomach; The Decoction of the Leavs and Seeds being drunk somwhat warm before the Fits of A∣gues,Agues, whether they be Tertians, or Quar∣tanes, doth alter the fits, and by often using doth take them quite away: The Seed is much commended being drunk for forty daies toge∣ther, to help the Sciatica:Sciatica, Falling∣sickness, Palsey. the Falling sickness, and the Palsey. It is under the Coelestial Sign Leo, and un∣der the Dominion of the Sun, it may be if you meet with a Papist that is an Astrologer, he will tel you St. John made it over to him by a Letter of Attourney, especially if withal he be a Lawyer also. Ivy. Description. THis is so well known to every Child al∣so to grow in Woods upon the Trees, and upon the stone Walls of Churches, Houses, &c. and somtimes to grow alone of it self, though but seldom. Time. It Flowreth not until July, and the Berries are not ripe til Christide that they have felt the Winter Frosts. Vertues and use. A pugil of the Flowers, which may be about a dram (saith Dioscorides) drunk twice a day in red Wine, helpeth the Lask and Bloody Flux.Flux, Bloody Flux, It is an enemy to the Nerves and Si∣news being much taken inwardly, but very helpful unto them being outwardly applied. Ply saith that the yellow Berries are good a∣gainst the Jaundice,Jaundice, and taken before one be set to drink hard, preserveth from drunken∣ness, and helpeth those that spit Blood: and that the white Berries being taken inwardly, or applied outwardly killeth the Worms in the Belly.Spitting Blood, Worms, Drunken∣ness, Pestilence, The Berries are a singular Remedy to prevent the Plague, as also to free them from it that have got it, by drinking the Berries ther∣of made in Pouder, for two or three daies to∣gether: They being taken in Wine do cer∣tainly help to break the Stone,Stone, Disury, Terms provokes, Spleen, Stitch, provoke Urine and Womens Courses. The fresh Leavs of I∣vy boyled in Vinegar, and applied warm to the sides of those that are troubled with the Spleen, Ach, or Stitch in the sides, doth give them much eas: The same applied with some Rosewater and Oyl of Roses to the Temples and Forehead, easeth the HeadachHeadach, though it be of long continuace. The fresh Leavs boyled in Wine, and old filthy UlcersUlcers, that are hard to be cured washed therewith, doth wonderfully help to clens and heal them, it also quickly healeth green WoundsWounds, Burnings, Scaldings, salt Flegm,, as also it is effectual to heal al Burnings and Scaldings, and all kind of ezuicerations coming thereby. or by Salt Flegm or hot Humors in other parts of the Body. The Juyce of the Berries or Leavs snuffed up into the Nose, purgeth the Head
and Brain of thin Rhewm that maketh De∣fluxions into the Eyes and Nose, and cureth the Ulcers and Stench therin: The same drop∣ped into the Ears helpeth the old and running Sores of them. Those that are troubled with the Spleen shal find much eas by continual drinking out of a Cup made of Ivy, so as the drink may stand some smal time therin before it be drunk. Cato saith, that Wine put into such a Cup wil soak through it, by reason of the Antipathy that is between them.Rhewm, Sore Ears. There seems to be a very Antipathy between Wine and Ivy, for if any have got a surfet by drinking Wine, his speediest cure is to drink a draught of the same Wine wherein a hand∣ful of Ivy Leavs being first bruised have been boyled. Kidneywort, or Wall∣Penyroyal. ♀ ♎ Description. THis hath many thick, flat, and round Leavs growing from the Root, every one having a long Footstalk fastned underneth about the middle of it and a little uneven∣ly waved somtimes about the edges, of a pale green colour, and somwhat hollow on the up∣per side like a Sawcer; from among which rise one or more tender smooth hollow Stalks half a foot high with two or three smal Leavs thereon, usually not round as those below, but somwhat long and devided at the edges: The tops are somtimes devided into long Branches, bearing a number of Flowers, set round about a long spike one above another, which are hollow and like a little Bell, of a whitish green colour, after which come smal Heads contai∣ning very smal brownish Seed,, which falling on the ground, wil plentifully spring up before Winter, if it have moisture. The Root is round and most usually smooth, grayish with∣out and white within, having smal fibres at the head of the Root, and bottom of the Stalk. Place. It groweth very plentifully in many places of this Land, but especially in all the West parts thereof, upon stone and mud Wals, upon Rocks also, and in stony places upon the ground, at the Bottom of old Trees, and somtimes on the Bodies of them that are de∣cayed and rotten. Time. It usually Flowreth in the begining of May and the Seed is ripening quickly after, shed∣deth it self: so that about the end of May usu∣ally, the Leavs and Stalks, are withered, dry, and gone until September, that the Leavs spring up again, and so abide all Winter. Vertues and Use. The Juyce or the distilled water being drunk is very effectual for al InflamationsInflama∣tions Pimples, Redness, St. Antho∣nies fire, Kidneys urt by the Stone, Disury, Dropsie, Stone, Bloodyflux, Piles, Hemor∣rhoids, Gout, Sciatica, Cods, Kings Evil, Kibes, Chilblains. and unna∣tural heats, to cool a fainting hot Stomach, or a hot Liver or the Bowels: The bruised Herb or the place bathed with the Juyce or distilled Water thereof and outwardly applied healeth Pimples, Redness, St. Anthonies Fire, and o∣ther outward heats and Inflamations. The said Juyce or Water helpeth much also to heal sore Kidneys, torn or fretted by the Stone, or exulcerated within, and easeth the pns; It also provoketh Urine, and is available for the Dropsie, and helpeth to break the Stone, coo∣ling the Inflamed parts and other pains of the Bowels, and the bloody Flux; It is singular good to cool the painful Piles, or Hemorrhoi∣dal Veins, the Juyce being used as a Bath un∣to them, or made into an Oyntment: It is no less effectual to give eas of pains to the hot Gout,, the Sciatica, and the Inflamations and Swellings in the Cods; It helpeth the Ker∣nels or Knots in the Neck or Throat, called the Kings Evil; healeth Kibes and Chilblains if they be bathed with the Juyce, or anointed with an Oyntment made thereof, and some of the skin of the Leaf laid upon them; It is al∣so used in green Wounds to stay the Blood, and to heal them quickly. Venus challengeth the Herb, under Libra. ♄ Knapweed. Description. The common sort herof hath many long and somwhat broad darke green leaves, rising from the Root deeply dented about the edges, and somtimes a little rent or torne on both sides in two or three places, and som∣what hairy withal among which riseth up a strong round stalk four or five foot high, devi∣ded into many branches: at the tops wherof stand great scalygreen heads, & from the middle of them thrust forth a number of dark purplish red thrumms or threds, which after they are withered and past, ther is found divers black Seeds: lying in a great deal of down, somwhat like unto a Thistle Seed, but smaller: The Root is white, hard and woody, with divers fibres annexed therunto, which perisheth not but abideth with leavs theron all the win∣ter, shooting out fresh every Spring. Place. It groweth in most Feilds and Meadows, and about their borders and Hedges and in many wast grounds also, almost every where.
Time. It usually flowreth in June and July, and the seed is ripe shortly after. Vertues and Use. This Knaproeed helpeth to stay Fluxes, both of blood at the mouth or nose, or other outward parts, and those veins that are inwardly broken, or inward wounds, as also the Fluxes of the belly; It stayeth the distillations of thin and sharp humors from the head upon the stomach and Lungs: it is good for those that are bruised by any fall, blowes, or other∣wise.Fluxes, Bleeding, Veins broken, Phtisick, Falls, Blows, Ruptures, Sores, Cankers, Fistulaes. Scabby head, Sore throat Voula, Jaws. It is very profitable for those that are bursten and have a Rupture, by drinking the decoction of the Hearbe and roots in wine. and applying the same outwardly to the place. It is singular good in al running sores, cankrous and fistulous drying up the moysture and healing them up gently, without sharpness; it doth the like to running sores or scabs of the head or other parts. It is of special use for the soreness of the Throat, swelling of the Vvula and Jawa; and excellent good to stay the bleeding and heale up all green wounds. Saturn challengeth the herb for his own. ♄ Knot-grass. Description. THis is generally so wel known that it nee∣deth no Description. Place. It groweth in every County of this Land, by the High-way sides and by foot paths in Fields, as also by the sides of old Walls. Time. It springeth up late in the Spring, and abideth until Winter, when all the branches perish. Vertues and Use. The Juyce of the common kind of Knot-grass, is most effectuall to stay bleedingBleeding, Heat, Flux, Bloody Flux, Courses stops, Disury, Gravel, Venemous Beasts, Rhewm, Worms, Heat, at the mouth, being drunke in steeled or red Wine: and the bleeding at the Nose, to be applyed to the Forehead and Temples or to be squirted up into the Nostrils. And no less effectuall to coole and temper that heat of the blood, & stomach and to stay any Flux of the blood or humers, as Lask, Bloodyflux, Womens courses, and Running of the Reins. It is singular good to provoke Urine, helpe the strangurie, and allay the heate that cometh therby; and it is powerful by Urin to expel the Gravell, or stone in the kidneys or Bladder, a dram of the pouder of the Herb being taken in wine for many dayes together: Being boyled in wine and drunke, it is profitable to those that are stung or bitten by venemous creatures, and very effectual to stay al defluxi∣ons of rhewmatick humors upon the stomach, & killeth Worms in the belly or stomack, quie∣teth inward paines that arise from the heat, sharpness & corruption of blood and Choller:Choller, Inflama∣tions; Apostums, Gangrenes Fistulaes, Cankers, Ulcers, Wounds Ears. The distilled water herof taken by it self, or wth the pouder of the Herb or seed, is very effectual to al the purposes aforesaid, and is accounted as one of the most Soveraign remedies to cool all manner of inflamations, breakings out through heate, hot Swellings, and Impostumations Gangrenes, and Fistulous Cankers, or foule filthy Ulcers, being applyed or put into them; but especially for all sorts of Ulcers and sores happening in the privie parts of men or women. It helpeth all fresh and green Wounds, and speedily helpeth them: The Juyce dropped into the Ears. cleanseth them being soule and having running matter in them. Saturn seems to me to own the Hearb, and yet some hold the sun, out of doubt 'tis Saturn, it is very prevalent for the premises: as also for btoken Joynts, and Ruptures. ♀ Ladies-Mantle. Description. THis hath many leavs rising from the Root, standing upon long hairy footstalkes, being almost round, but a little cut in on the edges, into eight or ten parts more or less, making it seem like a Star, with so many corners and points, and dented round a∣bout, of a light green colour somwhat hard in handling, and as if it were folded, or plaited at first, and then crumpled in divers places, and a little hairy as the Stalk is also, which ri∣seth up among them to the height of two or three foot, with such like Leavs thereon but smaller, and being weak is not able to stand upright, but bendeth down to the Ground, de∣vided at the top into two or three smal Bran∣ches, with smal yellowish green Heads, and Flowers of a whitish colour, breaking out of them; which being past, there cometh smal yellow Seed like Poppy Seed: The Root is somwhat long and black with many strings or fibres thereat. Place. It groweth naturally in many Pastures, and Wood sides, in Harfordshire, wiltshire, and Kent, and other places of this Land. Time. It Flowreth in May and June, and abideth after Seed time green al the Winter. Vertues and Use. Ladies-Mantle is very proper for those Wounds that have Inflamations,Inflamati∣ons, and is very
effectual to stay Bleedings, Vomitings, Flu∣xesBleeding, Vomiting, Fluxes, Bruises, Ruptures, Flagging Breasts, Barrenness women with child. of al sorts in man or woman, and Bruises by Fals or otherwise, and helpeth Ruptures, and such Women or Maids as have over great Flagging Breasts, causing them to grow less and hard, being both drunk, and outwardly ap∣plied: The distilled water drunk for twenty daies together helpeth Conception, and to re∣tain the Birth, if the Woman do somtimes al∣so sit in a Bath made of the Decoction of the Herb. It is one of the most singular Wound Herbs that is, and therfore highly prized and praised by the Germans, who use in al Wounds inward and outward, to drink the Decoction thereof and wash the Wounds therewith, or dip Tents therein and put them into the Wounds, which wonderfully drieth up al hu∣midity of the Sores, and abateth Inflamations therein. It quickly healeth al green Wounds, not suffering any corruption to remain behind, and cureth old Sores though Fistulous and hollow. Venus claims the Herb as her own. ☿ Lavender. THis is so wel known, being an Inhabitant in almost every Garden, that it needeth no Description. Time. It flowreth about the end of June and be∣ginning of July. Vertues and Use. Lavender is of special good use, for all the Griefs and pains of the Head and Brains,Head, Brains, Apoplexie, Falling-sickness, Lethargy, Cramps, Convulsi∣ons, Palsey both dead and sha∣king, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Terms provokes, Chollick, Vertigo, loss of voyce, Trembling, Fainting. that proceed of a cold caus, as the Apoplexy, Fal∣ling-sickness, the drowsie or sluggish Malady, Cramps, Convulsions, Palseys, and often Faintings. It strengtheneth the Stomach, and freeth the Liver and Spleen from Obstru∣ctions, provoketh Womens Courses, and ex∣pelleth the dead Child and Afterbirth. The Flowers of Lavender steeped in Wine helpeth them to make water that are stopped, or are troubled with the Wind or Chollick, if the places be bathed therewith. A Decoction made with the Flowers of Lavender, Hore∣hound, Fennel, and Asparagus Roots, and a little Cinnamon is very profitably used to help the Falling-sickness, and the giddiness or tur∣ning of the Brain. To gargle the Mouth with the Decoction thereof is good against the Toothach. Two spoonfuls of the distilled Water of the Flowers taken, helpeth them that have lost their voice; as also the tremblings and passions of the Heart, and faintings and swounings, not only being drunk, but applied to the Temples, or Nostrils to be smelt unto but it is not safe to use it where the Body repleat with Blood and Humors, becaus of the hot and subtil spirits wherewith it is possessed. The Chimical Oyl drawn from Lavender, u∣sually called Oyl of Spike, is of so fierce and piercing Spirits that it is cautiously to be used: some few drops being sufficient to be given with other things, either for inward or out∣ward Griefs. Mercury owns the Herb, and it carries his effects very potently. Lavender Cotten hath the same Vertues with Southernwood, which shal be shewed you when I come to speak of it. ☽ ♋ Lettice. THis is so wel known being generally used as a Sallet Herb, that it is altogether needless to write any Description thereof. Vertues and Use. The Juyce of Lettice mixed or boyled with Oyl of Roses, and applied to the Forehead and Temples procureth Sleep, and easeth the Headach proceeding of an hot caus; being eaten boyled, it helpeth to loosen the Belly.Watching, Head-ach, Indige∣stion, Thirst, Milk en∣creaseth, choller, Bowels, Lust, Venerious Dreams, It helpeth digestion, quencheth thirst, encrea∣seth Milk in Nurses, easeth griping pains of the Stomach or Bowels, that come of Chol∣ler. It abateth Bodily lust, represseth Venere∣ous Dreams, being outwardly applied to the Cods with a little Camphire: Applied in the same manner to the Region of the Heart, Li∣ver or Reins, or by bathing the said place with the Juyce or distilled Water, wherein some white Sanders and red Roses are put also, it not only represseth the heat and InflamationInflama∣tion, Heat of Urire. therein, but comforts and strengthens those parts, and also tempereth the heat of Urine. Galen adviseth old men to use it with Spices, and where Spices are wanting to ad Mints, Rocket and such like hot Herbs, or els Citron, Lemmon, or Orange Seeds, to abate the cold of one, and heat of the other. The Seed and distilled Water of the Lettice work the like ef∣fects in al things: but the use of Lettice is chiefly forbidden to those that are short win∣ded, or have any imperfection in their Lungs; or spit Blood. The Moon owns them, and that's the reason they cool and moisten what heat and driness Mars causeth, because Mars hath his fall in Cancer, and they cool the Heart, becaus the Sun rules it, between whom and the Moon is a Reccption in the Generation of Man, as you may soe in my Guide for women.
The VVater-Lilly. ☽ Description. OF these there are two principally noted kinds, Viz. Thewhite, and the Yel∣low. The white Lilly hath very large, round and thick dark green Leavs lying on the Water, sustained by long and thick Footstalks, that rise from a great thick, round and long tube∣rous black Root, spungy or loos with many Knobs thereon like Eyes, and whitish within, from amidst the which rise other the like thick and great Stalks, sustaining one large white Flower thereon, green on the outside, but as white as Snow within, consisting of di∣vers rows of long, and somwhat thick and nar∣row Leavs, smaller and thinner the more in∣ward they be, encompassing a head within wth many yellow threds, or thrums in the middle, where after they are past, stand round Poppy∣like Heads ful of broad, Oyly, and bitter Seed. The yellow kind is little different from the former save only it hath fewer Leavs on the Flowers, greater and more shining Seed, and a whitish Root, both within and without: The Roots of both being somwhat sweet in tast. Place. They are sound growing in great Pools and standing Waters, and somtimes in slow running Rivers and lesser Ditches of Water, in sundry places of this Land. Time. They Flower most commonly about the end of May, and their Seed is ripe in Au∣gust. Vertues and use. The Leavs and Flowers of the Water-Lillies are cold and moist, but the Root and Seed is cold and dry: The Leavs do cool al Inflama∣tions,Inflamati∣ons, Agues, and both outward and inward heats of Agues, and so doth the Flowers also, either, by the Syrup or Conserve; The Syrup hel∣peth much to procure rest, and to settle the Brains of Frantick persons, by cooling the hot distemperature of the Head.Watching, Frenzy, The Seed as wel as the Root is effectual to stay FluxesFlux, of Blood or Humors, either of Wounds, or of the Belley;Belly, but the Roots are most used, some chusing the one, and some the other to be more effectual to cool, bind and restrain all Fluxes in Man or Woman, as also the run∣ning of the Reins,Running of the Reins, Venery, and the passage away of the Seed when one is asleep: but the frequent use hereof extinguisheth Venereous actions: The Root is likewise very good for those whose U∣rine is hot and sharp to be boyled in Wine or Water, and the Decoction drunk. The Di∣stilled water of the Flowers is very effectual for al the Diseases aforesaid, both inwardly ta∣ken and outwardly applied, and is much com∣mended to take away Freckles, Spots, Sun∣burn, and Morphew from the Face, or other parts of the Body. The Oyl made of the Flo∣wers as Oyl of Roses is made, is profitably u∣sed to cool hot Tumors, and the Inflamati∣ons of Ulcers and Wounds and to ea the pains, and help the Sores. The Herb is under the Dominion of the Moon, and therefore cools and moistens like the former. Liquoris. Description. OUr English Liquoris riseth up with di∣vers woody Stalks, whereon are set at several distances, many narrow long green Leavs, set together on both sides of the Stalk, and an od one at the end, very wel resembling a yong Ash-tree sprung up from the Seed: This by many yeers continuance in a place without removing, and not else, will bring forth Flowers, many standing together Spike fashion one above another upon the Stalks, of the form of Pease Blossoms, but of a very pale blue colour, which turn into long somwhat flat and smooth Rods, wherein is contained smal, round hard Seed: The Root runneth down exceeding deep into the ground, with divers other smaller Roots and Fibres gro∣wing with them, and shoot out Suckers from the main Roots al about, wherby it is much en∣creased, of a brownish colour on the outside, and yellow within: Place. It is planted in Fields and Gardens in divers places of this Land, and thereof good profit is made. Vertues and use. Liquoris boyled in fair Water with some Maidenhair and Figs, maketh a good Drink for those that have a dry Cough, or Hoarce∣ness,Cough, Hoarsness, Phtisick, Consump∣tion, Reins, Strangury, Heat of Urine, Eyes, Bladder. Wheesing, shortness of breath; and for al the Griefs of the Breast and Lungs, Phtisick or Consumptions caused by the Distillation of Salt humors on them. It is also good in all pains of the Reins, the Strangury, and heat of Urine: The fine Pouder of Liquoris blown through a Quil into the Eyes that have a Pin and Web (as they cal it) or Rhewmatick Di∣stillations into them, doth clens and help them: The Juyce of Liquoris is as effectual in al the Diseases of the Breast & Lungs, the Reins and Bladder, as the Decoction. The Juyce dis∣solved in Rose Water with some Gu-Traga∣canth, is a fine licking Medicine for Hoarce∣ness, Wheesings, &c.
♃ ♋ Liverwort. Description. THe Common Liverwort, groweth close and spreadeth much upon the ground in moyst and shadowy places, with many sad green leaves, or rather (as it were) sticking flat one to another, very unevenly cut in on the edges, and crumpled, from among which arise smal slender stalks an Inch or two high at most, bearing smal Starlike Flowers at the tops: The Roots are very fine and smal. Vertues and use. It is a singular good Herb for all the disea∣ses of the Liver,Liver, Inflamati∣on, yellow Jaundice, Spleen, Running of the Reins, whites, Tetters, Ring∣worms, Surfets. both to cool and clense it, and helpeth the Inflamations in any part, and the yellow Jaundice likewise: Being brui∣sed and boyled in small Beer and drunke, it cooleth the heat of the Liver and Kidneys, and helpeth the runing of the Reins in men, & the Whites in Women: It is a singular remedy to stay the spreading of Tetters, Ringworms, and other fretting and running Sores & Scabs, and is an excellent remedy for such whose Livers are corrupted by sursets wch causeth their bo∣dies to break out, for it fortifies the Liver ex∣ceedingly and make it impregnable. It being under the command of Jupiter, and under the sign Cancer. Loos-strife or Willow∣Hearb. Discription. THe Common yellow Loos-strife groweth to be four or five foot high or more, with great round stalks a little crested, diversly bran∣ched from the middle of them to the tops, into great & long Branches, on al wch at the Joynts ther grow long and narrow Leavs, but broader below, and usually two at a Joynt, yet som∣times three or four somwhat like Willow Leaves, smooth on the edges, and of a faint green colour from the upper Joynts of the branches, and at the tops of them also stand many yellow Flowers of five Leaves a piece, with diverse yellow threeds in the middle, which turn into small round heads, containing small cornered Seeds: The Roote creepeth under ground, almost like Couchgrass, but greater, and shooteth up every Spring, brownish heads, which afterwards grow up in∣to stalks: It hath no scent nor tast but only astringent. Place. It groweth in many places of this Land in moyst Meadowes and by water sides. Time. It Flowreth from June to August. Vertues and use. This Hearb is good to stay all manner of Bleeding at Mouth or Nose or Wounds, and all Fluxes of the Belly, and the bloody Flux, given either to drinke, or taken by Clyster; it stayeth also the abundance of Womens Courses: It is a singular good wound Hearb for green wounds, to stay the bleeding,Bleeding, Flux, Bloody Flux, Terms stops, Wounds, Sore, Mouth, Privities, Gnats. and quickly to close together the lips of the Wound, if the herb be bruised and the Juyce only applyed: It is often used in Gargles for sore mouthes, as also for the secret parts: the smoke herof being burned driveth away Flyes and Gnats which use in the night-time to molest people inhabiting neere Marshes and in the Fenney Countryes. Loos-Strife, with Spiked Heads of Flowers. ☽ ♋ Description. THis groweth with many woody square stalkes, full of Joynts about three foot high at least, at everyone wherof stand two long Leaves, shorter, narrower, and of a deeper green colour than the former; and some brownish. The stalkes are branched into many long stemmes of spiked Flowers, half a foot long, growing in Rundles one above another, out of smal husks very like the Spiked heads of Laven∣der, each of which Flowers have five round pointed Leaves of a Purple Violet Colour, or somwhat inclining to redness, in wch husks stand small round heads, after the Flowers are fallen, wherein is contained small seed: The Root creepeth under ground like unto the yellow, but is greater than it; and so is the heads of the Leaves when they first appear out of the ground and more brown than the other. Place. It groweth usually by Rivers, and Ditches sides in wet grounds, as about the Ditches at and neer Lambeth: and in many other places of this Land. Time. It Flowreth in the months of June and July. Vertues and Use. This Herb is no whit inferior unto the former; it having not only all the vertues which the former hath, but some particular vertues of its own found out by experience, as namely.
The distilled water is a present remedy for hurts and blows on the eyes and for blindness,Eyes, Blindness, so as the Christaline humor be not perished or hurt; and this hath been sufficiently proved true by the experience of a man of judgment, who kept it long to himself as a great sccret. It also cleareth the Eyes of dust or any other thing gotten into them, and preserveth the Sight: It is also very much available against WoundsWounds, and Thrusts, being made into an Oyntment on this manner; To every ounce of the Water, ad two drams of May Butter without Salt, and of Sugar and Wax of each as much also, let them boyl gently all toge∣ther: Let Tents be dipped in the Liquor that remaineth after it is cold, and put into the Wounds, and the place covered with a Lin∣nen cloth doubled and anointed with the Oyntment, and this is also an approved Me∣dicine. It likewise clenseth and healeth all foul Ulcers and Sores wheresoever, and stai∣eth their InflamationsUlcers, Inflama∣tions, by washing them with the Water, and laying on them a green Leaf or two in the Summer, or dry Leaves in the Winter. This Water gargled warm in the Mouth, and somtimes drunk also doth cure the Quinsie,Quinsie, Kings E∣vil, Spots, Marks, Scars. or Kings Evil in the Throat. The said Water applied warm taketh away all Spots, Marks, and Scars in the Skin: And a little of it drunk quencheth thirst when it is extraordinary. The Herb is an Herb of the Moon, and under the Sign. Cancer, neither do I know a better Preserver of the Sight when 'tis well, nor a better Curer of sore Eyes than Eye∣bright taken inwardly, and this used outward∣ly, 'tis cold in quality. ☉ ☿ Lovage. Description. THis hath many long and great Stalks, of large winged Leavs devided into many parts like Smallage, but much larger and greater, every Leaf being cut about the edges broadest forwards, and smallest at the Stalk, of a sad green colour, smooth and shi∣ning, from among which rise up sundry strong hollow green Stalks, five or six foot, yea som∣times seven or eight foot high, full of Joynts, but lesser Leavs set at them than grow below, and with them toward the tops come forth long Branches, hearing at their tops large Um∣bels, of yellow Flowers, and after them flat brownish Seed: The Root groweth thick, great and deep, spreading much and enduring long, of a brownish colour on the outside, and whitish within: The whol Plant, and every part of it smelleth strong, and Aromatically, and is of an hot sharp biting tast. Place. It is usually planted in Gardens, where if it be suffered it groweth huge and great. Time. It Flowreth in the end of July, and seedeth in August. Vertues and Use. It openeth, cutteth and digesteth Humors,Humors, Terms provokes, Disury, Cold Sto∣mach, In∣digestion, Wind, Poyson, Epidemi∣cal Disea∣ses. and mightily provoketh Womens Courses and Urine. Half a dram at a time of the dried Root in Pouder taken in Wine, doth wonder∣fully warm a cold Stomach, helping digestion, and consuming all raw & superfluous moisture therein; easeth al inward gripings and pains dissolveth wind, and resisteth Poyson and in∣fection: It is a known and much practised Remedy to drink the Decoction of the Herb for any sort of Ague,Agues, Belly-ach, Quinsie, Pleuresie, Spots, Freckles, Boyls. and to help the pains and Torments of the Body and Bowels coming of cold. The Seed is effectual to al the pur∣poses aforesaid (except the last) and worketh more powerfully, The distilled water of the Herb helpeth the Quinsie in the Throat, if the Mouth and Throat be gargled and washed therewith, and helpeth the Pluresie, being drunk three or four times. Being dropped in∣to the Eyes it taketh away the redness or dim∣ness of them, it likewise taketh away Spots or Freckles in the Face. The Leavs bruised and fried with a little Hogs Lard & laid hot to any Botch or Boyl, wil quickly break it. It is an Herb of the Sun under the Sign Taurus, if Saturn offend the Throat (as he alwaies doth if he be occasioner of the Malady and in Taurus in the Genesis) this is your cure. Lungwort. Description. THis is a kind of Moss, that groweth on sundry sorts of Trees, especially Oaks, and Beeches, with broad grayish tough Leavs, diversly folded, crumpled, and gashed in on the edges, and somtimes spotted also, with many smal spots on the upper side: It was ne∣ver seen to bear any Stalk or Flower at any time. Vertues and Use. This is of great use with many Phystians to help the Diseases of the Lungs, and for Coughs, Wheesings, and shortness of breath,Lungues, Coughs, Wheesings, shortness of breath, Ulcers in the Privi∣ties and elswhere. which it cureth both in Man and Beast: It is very profitably put into Lotions that are ta∣ken to stay the moist Humors that flow to Ul∣cers, and hinder their healing, as also to wash all other Ulcers in the privy parts of Man or Woman. It is an excellent Remedy boyled in Beer for broken-winded Horses. Iu seems to own the Herb.
Madder. Description. THe Garden Madder shooteth forth many very long, weak four square reddish Stalks trailing on the Ground a great way, ve∣ry rough or hairy and full of Joynts; At e∣very of those Joynts come forth divers long, and somwhat narrow Leavs, standing like a Star about the Stalks, rough also and hairy, toward the tops whereof come forth many smal pale yellow Flowers: after which come smal round Heads, green at first, and reddish afterwards, but black when they are ripe, wher∣in is contained the Seed. The Root is not very great, but exceeding long, running down half a mans length into the grouund, red and very clear while it is fresh, spreading divers waies. Place. It is only manured in Gardens or larger Fields for the profit that is made thereof. Time. It Flowreth towards the end of Summer, and the Seed is ripe quickly after. Vertues and Use. It hath an opening quality, and afterwards to bind and strengthen. It is an assured Re∣medy for the yellow Jaundice by opening the Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, and clen∣sing those parts: It openeth also the Obstru∣ctions of the Spleen, and diminisheth the Me∣lanchollick humor. It is available for the Palsey and Sciatica, and effectual for Bruises inward or outward, and is therfore much u∣sed in Vulnerary Drinks.Yellow Jaundice, Obstructi∣ons of the Liver and Gall, Spleen, Melan∣cholly, Palsey, Sciatica, Bruises inward and out∣ward, Terms provokes, Freckles, Morphew, Scurf. The Root for all those aforesaid purposes, is to be boyled in Wine or Water, as the caus requireth, and some Honey or Sugar put therunto afterwards. The Seed herof taken with Vinegar and Ho∣ney, helpeth the Swellings and Hardness of the Spleen. The Decoction of the Leaves and Branches is a good Fomentation for Wo∣men to sit over thar have not their Courses. The Leavs and Roots beaten and applied to any part that is discoloured with Freckles, Morphew, the white Scurf, or any such defor∣mity of the Skin, clenseth them throughly, and taketh them away. Maidenhair. Description. OUr common Maidenhair doth from a number of hard black Fibres send forth a great many blackish shining brittle Stalks, hardly a span long; in many not half so long, on each side set very thick with smal round dark green Leavs, and spotted on the back of them like other Ferns. Place. It groweth much upon old Stone Wals in in the West parts, and Wales, in Kent and di∣vers other places of this Land; It joyeth like∣wise to grow by Springs, Wels, and rockie moist and shadowy places; and is alwaies green. Wall-Rue; Or ordinary White Maidenhair. Description. THis hath very fine pale green Stalks, al∣most as fine as hairs, set confusedly with divers pale green Leavs on very short Foot∣stalks, somwhat neer unto the colour of Gar∣den Rue, and not much differing in form, but more diversly cut in on the edges, and thicker, smooth on the upper part and spotted finely underneath. Place. It groweth in many places of this Land, as at Dartford, and the Bridg at Ashford in Kent, at Beconsfield in Buckinghamshire, at Wolley in Huntingtonshire, on Frammingham Castle in Suffolk, on the Church wals at Mayfield in Sussex, in Summerset Shire and divers other places of this Land, and is green in Winter as well as in Summer. Vertues and use. The Vertues of both these are so neer alike; that although I have described them, and their places of growing, severally; yet I shall in writing the Vertues of them joyn them both together: as followeth. The Decoction of the Herb Maidenhair being drunk, helpeth those that are troubled with the Cough, shortness of breath, the yel∣low Jaundice,Cough, shortness of breath, the yellow Jaundice, Spleen, Disury, Stone, Terms provokes, Bleeding, Fluxes, Lungs, Swellings, Vlcers, Scursf Sores, Ballness. diseases of the Spleen, stopping of Urin, and helpeth exceedingly to break the Stone in the Kidneys: (in all which Diseases the Wall Rue is also very effectual) It provo∣keth Womens Courses, and staieth both Blee∣dings and Fluxes of the Stomach and Belly, e∣specially when the Herb is dry, for being green, it loosneth the Belly, and avoideth Choller and Flegm from the Stomach and Li∣ver it clenseth the Lungs, and by rectifying the Blood causeth a good colour to the whol Body: The Herb boyled in Oyl of Chamo∣mel, dissolveth Knots, allayeth Swellings, and drieth up moist Ulcers. The Ly made there of is singular good to clens the head from Scurf, and from dry and running Sores; stayeth the falling or shedding of the Hair, and causeth it to grow thick, fair, and wel co∣loured; for which purpose some boyl it in
Wine putting some Smallage Seed thereto, and afterwards some Oyl. The Wall Rue is as effectual as Maidenhair in all Diseases of the Head, and falling or the recovering of Hair again; and generally for all the aforementi∣oned Diseases: and besides, The Pouder of it taken in drink for fourty daies together, hel∣pteh the burstings in Children. Golden Maidenhair Description. TO the two former give me leave to ad this, and I shall do no more but only describe it unto you, and for the Vertues re∣fer you unto the former, sith whatsoever is said of them, may be also said of this: It hath many small brownish red hayres to make up the form of Leavs growing about the ground from the Root, and in the middle of them in Summer, rise smal Stalks. of the same colour, set with very fine yellowish green hairs on them, and bearing a smal gold yellow head, lesser than a Wheat Corn standing in a great Husk. The Root is very smal and threddy. Place. It groweth on Bogs and Moorish places, and also on dry shadow places at Hampstead Heath and elswhere. Mallows, and Marsh∣Mallows. THe Common Mallowes are generally so well known that they need no Description. Our common Marsh-mallows have diver soft hoary white stalkes rising to be three or four foot high, spreading forth many Branches the Leavs wherof are soft and hairy, somwhat lesser then the other Mallow Leaves but longer pointed, cut (for the most part) into some few deivisions, but deep: The Flowers are many but smaller also then the other Mal∣lows & white, or tending to a blush colour. After which come such like round cases and Seed as in the other Mallows. The Roots are many and long, shooting from one Head, of the bigness of a Thumb or Finger, very pliant, tough and bending like Liquoris, of a whitish yellow colour on the outside, and more white within, full of a slimy juyce which being, layd in water will thicken it as if it were gelly. Place. The Common Mallows grow in every coun∣trey of this Land. The Common Marsh Mallowes in most of the Salt Mashes from Woolwich, downe to the Sea, both on the Kentish and Essex Shoares and in diverse other places of this Land. Time. They Flower all the Summer Months, even until the Winter do pull them down. Vertues and Use. The Leavs of either of the sorts above na∣med, and the Roots also boyled in Wine or Water, or in Broth, with Parsley or ennel Roots, doth help to open the Body, and is very convenient in hot AguesAgues, or other di∣stempers of the Body to apply the Leavs so boyled warm to the Belly; It not only voi∣deth hot ChollerickCholler, Gripings in the Belly, Milk, and other offensive Hu∣mors but easeth the pains and torments of the Belly coming thereby; and are therefore used in all Clysters conducing to those purpo∣ses: The same used by Nurses, procureth them store of Milk. The Decoction of the Seed of any of the common Mallows, made in Milk or Wine doth Merveilously help excoriations,Excoria∣tion, Phtisick, Pleuresie, the Phtisick, Plurisie, and other Diseases of the Chest and Lungues that proceed of hot causes, if it be continued taking for some time together: The Leavs and Roots work the same effects: They help much also in the excoriations of the Guts and Bowels and hardness of the Mother, and in all hot and sharp diseases thereof. The Juyce drunk in Wine, or the Decoction of them therein doth help Women to a speedy and easie Deli∣very.Travail in Women, Pliny saith, That whosoever shal that take a spoonful of any of the Mallows, shal that day be free from all Diseases that may come unto him; and that it is special good for the Fal∣ling-sickness.Falling sickness, The Syrup also and Conserve made of the Flowers are very effectual for the the same Diseases, and to open the Body being costive: The Leavs bruised and laid to the EyesEyes, with a little Honey, taketh away the Im∣postumations of them. The Leavs bruised or rubbed upon any place stung with Bees, WaspsBees, Wasps &c. or the like, presently taketh away the pains, redness, and Swellings that rise thereupon : and Dioscorides saith, The Decoction of the Leavs and Roots helpeth all sorts of Poyson,Poyson, so as the Poyson be presently voided by Vo∣mit. A Pultis made of the Leavs boyled and bruised, whereunto some Bean or Batley Flo∣wer and Oyl of Roses is an especial Remedy a∣gainst all hard Tumors and Inflamations of Impostums and Swellings of the Cods and other parts, and easeth the pains of them; as also against the hardness of the Liver or Spleen, being applied to the places.Hardswel∣ling inflamation, Cods Liver, Spleen, Roughness of the skin The Juyce of the Mallows boyled in old Oyl and applied, taketh away al roughness of the Skin,
as also the Scurf, Dandrif,Scurff, Dandrif, Scabby Heads, Scalding, Burning, St. Antho∣nies Fire, or dry Scabs in the Head or other parts if they be anointed there∣with or washed with the Decoction, and preserveth the Hair from falling off. It is al∣so effectual against Scaldings and Burnings, St. Anthonies fire, and all other hot, red, and painful Swellings in any part of the Body.sore Mouth & Throat, The Flowers boyled in Oyl or Water (as eve∣ry one is disposed) wherunto a little Honey and Allum is put, is an excellent Gargle to wash, clens, and heal any sore Mouth or Throat in a short space. If the Feet be ba∣thed or washed with the Decoction of the Leavs, Roots, and Flowers, it helpeth much the Defluxions of Rhewm from the Head. If the Head be washed therewith, it staieth the falling and shedding of the Hair.Baldness, The green Leavs (saith Pliny) beaten with Nitre and applied draweth out Thorns,Thorns, or Pricks in the Flesh. The Marsh Mallows are more effectual in al the Diseases before mentioned: The Leavs are likewise used to loosen the BellyBelly, gently, and in Decections for Clysters, to eas al pains of the Body, opening the strait Passages, and making them slippery, whereby the StoneStone, may descend the more easily and without pain, out of the Reins, Kidneys, and Bladder,Reins, Kidneys, Bladder, Coughs, Hoarsness, shortness of Breath, Wheesing, Excrriati∣on of the Guts, and to eas the torturing pains thereof: But the Roots are of more especial use for those pur∣poses, as well as for Coughs, Hoarsness, shortness of Breath, and Wheesings, being boyled in Wine or Honeyed Water and drunk. The Roots and Seeds hereof boyled in Wine or Water, is with good success used by them that have Excoriations in the Guts, or the bloody Flux, by qualifying the violence of the sharp fretting Humors, easing the pains, and healing the Soreness: It is profitably ta∣ken of them that are troubled with Ruptures, Cramps, or Convulsions of the Sinews;Ruptures, Cramps, Convulsi∣ons, The Kings Evil, Kernels, Chincough and boyled in white Wine for the Impostumes of the Throat, commonly called the Kings Evil, and of those Kernels that rise behind the Ears, and inflamations or Swellings in Womens Breasts. The dried Roots boyled in Milk and drunk is special good for the Chin∣Cough. Hippocrates used to give the Deco∣ction of the Roots, or the Juyce therof to drink to those that were wounded, and ready to faint through loss of Blood, and applied the same, mixed with Honey and Rozin to the Wounds:Wounds, As also the Roots boyled in Wine to those that had received any Hurt by Bruises, Falls, or Blows,Bruises, Falls, Blows, Muscles, or had any Bone or Member out of Joynt, or any Swelling pain, or ach in the Muscles, Sinews, or Arteries. The Muccilage of the Roots, and of Linseed, and of Fennugreek put together, is much used in Pultises, Oyntments, and Plaisters, to mol∣lifie and digest all hard. Swellings, and the In∣flamation of them and to eas pains in any part of the Body. The Seed either green or dry mixed with Vinegar clenseth the Skin of the Morphew,Morphew, sunbur∣ning. and al other discolourings, being bathed therewith in the Sun. You may remember that not long since there was a raging Diseas called the Bloody Flux, the Colledg of Physitians not knowing what to make of it, called it the Plague in the Guts, for their wits were at ne plus ultra about it. My son was taken with the same Diseas, and the excoriation of his Bowels was exceeding great; my self being in the Country was sent for up, the only thing I gave him was Mal∣lows bruised and boyled both in his Milk and Drink, in two daies (the blessing of God be∣ing upon it) it cured him, and I here to shew my thankfulness to God in communicating it to his Creatures, leav it to posterity. ☿ ♈ Sweet Marjerom. THis is so wel known being an Inhabitant in every Garden, that it is needless to write any Description thereof, neither of the Win∣ter Sweet Marjerom, nor Pot Marjerom. Place. They grow commonly in Gardens; some sorts there are that grow wild in the Borders of Corn Fields, and Pastures in sundry places of this Land, but it is not my purpose to insist upon them: The Garden kinds being most u∣sed and useful. Time. They Flower in the end of Summer. Vertues and use. Our common Sweet Marjerom is warming and comfertable in cold Diseases of the Head, Stomach,Head, Stomach, Sinews, and other parts, taken in∣wardly, or outwardly applied: The Decocti∣on thereof being drunk helpeth al the Diseases of the Chest which hinder the freeness of breathing; and is also profitable for the Ob∣structions of the Liver and Spleen:Breast, Obstru∣ctions, Liver, Spleen, Womb, Wind, It helpeth the cold Griefs of the Womb, and the windi∣ness thereof, and the loss of Speech, by resolu∣tion of the Tongue. The Decoction thereof made with som Pellitory of Spain, and long Pepper, or with a little Acorus or Origanum, being drunk, is good for those that are begin∣ning to fall into a Dropsie,Dropsie, Bellyach, Terms provokes, for those that can∣not make Water, and against pains and tor∣ments in the Belly; it provoketh Womens Courses if it be put up as a Pessary. Being made into Pouder and mixed with Honey, it taketh away the black marks of BlowsMarks of Blows, and Bruises, being therto applied. It is good for the Inflamations and watering of the Eyes, be∣ing mixed with fine Flower and laid unto them. The Juyce dropped into the EarsNoise in the Ears, easeth the Pains and singing nois in them. It is pro∣fitably put into those Oyntments and Salves
that are made to warm and comfort the out∣ward parts, as the Joynts and Sinews, for Swellings also and places out of Joynt.Joynts, Sinews, Swellings, Nesing, The Pouder thereof snuffed up into the Nose, pro∣voketh neezing, and thereby purgeth the Brain; and chewed in the Mouth draweth forth much Flegm.Flegm. The Oyl made thereof is very warming and comfortable to the Joynts that are stiff, and the Sinews that are hard to mollifie and supple them. Marjerom is much used in all odoriferous Waters, Pouders, &c. that are for Ornament or delight. It is an Herb of Mercury and under Aries, and is therfore an excellent Remedy for the Brain and other parts of the Body and Mind, under the Dominion of the same Planet. ☉ ♌ Marigolds. THese being so pelentifull in every Garden are so well known that they need no Description Time. They Flower al the Summer long, and som∣times in the Winter if it be mild. Vertues and Use The Flowers either green or dryed are used much in Possets, broths, and drinkes, as a comforter of the Heart and spirits,Heart, Vital Spirits, Pestilence, smal Pox, Meazles, Hot swel∣lings, and to expell any malignant or pestilential quality which might annoy them. It is an Herb of the Sun and under Leo they strengthen the heart exceedingly, and are very expulsive, and little less Effectual in the smal pox and measles than Saffron: The Juyce of Marigold Leaves mixed with Vinegar, and any hot swelling bathed with it, instantly giveth ease and asswageth it. A plaister made with the dry Flowers in pou∣der, hogs greas, Turpentine and Rozin, and applyed to the breast, strengthens and succours the heart infinitly in feavers whether pestilen∣tial or not pestileutiall.Feavers, Pestilence. ♂ Masterwort. Description. Common Masterwort hath divers stalks of winged Leaves devided into sun∣dry parts, three for the most part standing together at a small footstalk on both sides of the greater, and three likewise at the end of the stalk, somwhat broad and cut in on the edges, into three or more devisions all of them dented about the brims, of a dark green colour, somwhat resembling the Leaves of Angelica, but that these grow lower to the ground, & on lesser stalks: among which rise up 2. or 3. short stalks about 2. foot high, and slender, with such like Leavs at the Joynts as grow below, but with lesser & fewer devisions, bearing Umbels of white Flowers, and after them small, thinne, flat, blackish seed bigger than Dil seeds: The Root is somwhat greater and groweth rather sideways than down deep into the ground, shooting forth sundry heads, which tast sharp, biting on the Tongue, and is the hottest and sharpest part of the Plant, and the seed next unto it, beiug somewhat blackish on the outside, and smelling well. Place. It is usually kept in Gardens with us in England. Time. It Flowreth and seedeth about the end of August. Vertues and Use. The Root of Masterwort is hotter than Pep∣per and very available in all cold Grelfes and Diseases both of Stomach and body, dissol∣ving very powerfully upward and downward: It is also used in a decoction with wind a∣gainst all cold rhewms,Cold Griefs, Stomach, Wind, Cold Rhewms, Urine, Stone, Gravel, Womens Comses, Dead Child, Mother, Dropsie, Cramps, & Falling∣sickness, Cold Poysons, Sweat, or distillations upon the Lungs, and shortnes of breath, to be taken morning and evening; it also provokerh Urin and helpeth to break the Stone, and expel the Greavell from the Kidneys, procuereth wo∣mens Courses, and expelleth the dead birth; is singular good for the strangling of the Mother, and other such like Feminine Dis∣eases. It is effectuall also aganist the Dropsie, Cramps, and the Falling sicknes, for the de∣cection in wine being gargled in the Mouth draweth down much water and flegm from the brain, purging & easing it of what oppres∣seth it. It is of a rare quality against al sorts of cold poyson, to be taken as there is cause, It provoketh sweat. But left the tast herof, or of the seed (which worketh to the like effect though not so powerfully) should be too of∣fensive; the best way is to take the water distilled both from the Herb and Root. The Juyce herof dropped or Tents dipped therin, and applyed either to green wounds, or filthy rotten UlcersGreen Wounds, Rotten ulcers, Gout. and those that come by inveno∣med Weapons, doth soon clens and heal them, or isthey be bathed with the distilled water. The same is also very good to help the Gout coming of a cold cause. It is an Herb of Mars. Sweet Maudlin. Description. COmmon Maudlin have somwhat long and narrow Leaves, snip'd about the edges the stalks are two foot high, bearing at
the topps many yellow flowers Set round to∣gether and all of an equal height in umbles tufts like unto Tansy after which flowereth small whitish Seed almost as big as Wormseed The whol Herb is sweet and bitter. Place and Time. It groweth in Gardens, and Flowreth in June and July. Vertues and use. The Vertues hereof being the same with Costmary, or Alecost, I shal not trouble you to make any repetition thereof, left my Book grow too big: but rather refer you unto Cost∣mary for satisfaction. The Medlar. Description. THis Tree groweth neer the bigness of the Quince Tree, spreading Branches reasonable large, with longer and narrower Leaves than either the Apple or Quince, and not dented about the edges: At the end of the Sprigs stand the Flowers made of Five white, great broad pointed Leavs, nicked in the mid∣dle, with some white threds also: after which cometh the Fruit, of a brownish green colour, being ripe, bearing a Crown as it were on the top, which were the five green Leaves; and being rubbed off or fallen away, the head of the Fruit is seen to be somwhat hollow. The Fruit is very harsh before it be mellowed, and hath usually five hard Kernels within it. There is another kind hereof differing nothing from the former, but that it hath some Thorns on it in several places, which the other hath not, and the Fruit is smal and not so pleasant. Time. They grow in this Land; and Flower in May for the most part, and bear ripe Fruit in September, and October. Vertues and use. They are very powerful to stay and FluxesFluxes. of Blood or Humors in Man or Woman: the Leavs have also the like quality. The Fruit eaten by Women with Child, stayethStayeth Womens Longings Hinders Miscar∣riage, Gargle, their longings after unusual meats, and is very ef∣fectual for them that are apt to miscarry, and be delivered before their time, to help that ma∣lady, and make them joyful Mothers. The Decoction of them is good to gargle and wash the Mouth, Throat and Teeth, when there is any defluxion of Blood to stay it, or of Hu∣mors, which causeth Pains and Swellings: It is a good bath for Women to sit over that have their CoursesWomens Courses, Piles, flow too abundantly; or for the Piles when they bleed too much. If a Pultis or Plaister be made with dried Medlars beaten and mixed with the Juyce of red Roses, whereunto a few Cloves and Nutmeg may be added, and a little red Correl also, and appli∣ed to the Stomach that is given to casting, or loathing of meat,Loathing of Meat, or Casting, Bleeding, Fresh wounds, Sone in the Kidneys, it effectually helpeth. The dried Leavs in Pouder, strewed on fresh, blee∣ding Wounds, restraineth the Blood, and healeth up the Wound quickly  The Medlar stones made into Pouder and drunk in Wine, wherein some Parsley Roots have lien infused all night, or a little boyled, do break the Stone in the Kidneys, helping to expel it. The Fruit is old Saturns, and sure a better Medicine he hardly hath to strengthen the re∣tentive faculty; therfore it staies Womens Longings, the good old Man cannot endure Womens minds should run a gadding: Also a Plaister made of the Fruit dried before they be rotten, and other convenient things, and applied to the Reins of the Back, stops Mis∣carriageMiscar∣riage. in Women with Child. Melilot, or Kings Claver. Description. THis hath many green Stalks two or three foot high, rising from a tough long white Root, which dieth not every yeer; set round about at the Joynts with smal and som∣what long wel smelling Leavs set three toge∣ther, unevenly dented about the edges: The Flowers are yellow, and well smelling also, made like other Trefoyls, but smal, standing in long Spikes, one above another, for an hand breath long, or better, which afterwards turn into long crooked Cods, wherein is con∣tained flat Seed, somwhat Brown. Place. It groweth plentifully in many places of this Land, as in the edg of Susfolk and in Essex, as also in Huntingtoushire, and in o∣ther places, but most usually in Corn Fields, in corners of Meadows. Time. It Flowreth in June and July and is ripe quickly after. Vertues and Use. Melilot boyled in Wine and applied mollifi∣eth all hard Tumors and Inflamations that happen in the Eyes or other parts of the Body,Hard Tumors & Inflama∣tions in the Eyes, or elswhere. Ulcers in the Head, Stomach pained, as the Fundament: or privy parts of Man or Woman; and somtimes the Yolk of a roasted Egg, or fine Flower or Poppy Seed, or En∣dive is added unto it: It helpeth the sprea∣ding Ulcers in the Head, it being washed with a Ly made thereof; It helpeth the pains of the Stomach being applied fresh, or boyled with any of the aforenamed things. It helpeth also the pains of the Ears being dropped into
them; and steeped in Vinegar and Rose-Wa∣ter it mitigateth the Headach.Hiadach, wind, Spleen, Dimness of sight, stupidity of senses, strengthen Memory, Apoplexy. The Flowers of Melilot and Chamomel are much used to be put together in Clisters to expel Wind, & to eas pains; also into Pultices for the same purpose, and to asswage Swellings or Tumors in the Spleen or other parts; & helpeth Inflamations in any part of the Body. The Juyce dropped into the Eyes is a singular good Medicine to take away any Film or Skin that cloudeth or dimmeth the Eyesight. The Head often wa∣shed with the distilled Water of the Herb and Flowers, or a Ly made therwith, is effectual for those that have suddenly lost their senses; as also to strengthen the Memory, to comfort the Head and Brains, and to preserve them from pains and the Apoplexie. French, and Dogs Mercury. Description. THis riseth up with a square green stalk full of Joynts two foot high or ther abouts, with two Leaves at every Joynt and branches likewise from oth sides of the stalk, set with fresh green Leaves somwhat broad and long, a∣bout the bigness of the Leaves of Bassell finely dented about the edges: towards the topps of the stalks and branches come forth at every Joynt in the Male Mercury two small round green heads, standing together upon a short footstalk which growing ripe are the seeds; not having any Flower: In the female; The stalk is longer, spike fashion, set round about with smal green husks, which are the Flowers made like smal branches of Grapes which give no seed, but abide long upon the stalks without shedding: The Root is com∣posed of many smal Fibres, which perisheth eve∣ry year at the first approach of winter, and ri∣seth again of its own sowing, and where it once is suffered to sow it self, the ground will never want it afterwards even both sorts of it. Dogs Mercury. Discription. HAving described unto you that which is called French Mercury, I come now to shew you in a Description this kind also. This is likewise of two kinds, Male and Fe∣male, having many stalks slenderer & lower than Mercury and without any branches at all upon them: The Male is set with two Leavs at e∣very Joynt somwhat greater than the Female, but more pointed and full of Veins, and som∣what harder in handling, of a darker green co∣lour, and less dented or snip'd about the edges: At the Joynts with the Leavs come forth lon∣ger Stalks than the former, with two hairy round Seeds upon them twice as big as those of the former Mercury: The tast hereof is Herby, and the smel somwhat strong and Virulent: The Female hath much harder Leavs standing upon longer Foot∣stalks, and the stalks are also longer: From the Joynts come forth Spikes of Flowers, like the French Female Mercury, The Roots of them both are many, and full of smal Fibres, which run under ground, and mat themselves very much, not perishing as the former Mer∣curies do, but abiding the Winter, and shoot forth new Branches every yeer (for the old die down to the ground. Place. The Male and Female French Mercury are found wild in divers places of this Land; as by a Village called Brookland in Rumney Marsh in Kent. The Dogs Mercury in sundry places of Kent also, and elswhere; but the Female more sel∣dom than the Male. Time. They flourish in the Summer months, and therein give their Seed. Vertues and Use. The Decoction of the Leavs of Mercury, or the Juyce thereof in Broth, or Drunk with a little Sugar put to it, purgeth Chollerick and waterish Humors.Purgeth Chollerick Humors, Womens sickness, Mother, Womens Courses, strangury, sore Eyes, Agues, Flegm, Rhewms and Catarrhes, Melan∣colly Humors, Hippocrates commendeth it wonderfully for Womens Diseases; and ap∣plied it to the secret parts to eas the pains of the Mother; and used the Decoction of it both to procure Womens Courses, and to ex∣pel the Afterbirth: And gave the Decoction thereof with Mirrh or Pepper, or used to ap∣ply the Leavs outwardly against the Strangu∣ry, and Diseases of the Reins and Bladder. He used it also for sore and watering Eyes, and for the Deafness and pain in the Ears, by drop∣ping the Juyce therof into them, and bathing them afterwards in white Wine. The Decoction thereof made with Water and a Cock Chicken, is a most safe Medicine against the hot fits of Agues: It also clenseth the Breast and Lungs of Flegm, but a little offendeth the Stomach: The Juyce or distil∣led Water snuffed up into the Nostrils purgeth the Head and Eyes of Catarrhes and Rhewms. Some use to drink two or three ounces of the distilled water with a little Sugar put to it, in the morning fasting, to open and purge the Body of gross viscuous and Melancholly Hu∣mors. It is wonderful (if it be not Fabu∣lous) that Dioscorides and Theophrastus do relate of it: Viz. That if Women use these herbs either inwardly or outwardly for three daies together after Conception, and their Courses be past, they shal bring forth Male or Female Children, according to that kind of
Herb they use. Mathiolus saith, That the Seed of both the Male and Female Mercury boyled with Wormwood and drunk, cureth the yellow JaundiceYellow Jaundice, Warts, Scabs, Tetters, & Ring∣worms, Swellings, Inflamati∣ons, Waterish & Melan∣cholly Humors. in a speedy manner: The Leavs or the Juyce rubbed upon Warts, taketh them away: The Juyce mingled with some Vinegar, helpeth all running Scabs, Tet∣ters, Ringworms and the Itch. Galen saith that being applied in manner of a Pultis, to a∣ny Swelling or Inflamation, it digesteth the Swelling and allayeth the Inflamation; and is therfore given in Clysters to evacuate the Belly from offensive Humors. The Dogs Mercury, although it be less used yet may serve in the same manner to the same purpose to purge waterish and Melanchollick Humors. Mercury they say owns this Herb, but I ra∣ther think' tis Venus, and am partly confident of it too, for I never read that Mercury ever minded Womens businesses so much, I beleev he minds his study more. Mint. Description. OF all the kinds of Mints, the Spear∣Mint or Heart-Mint, being most use∣ful; I shal only describe it: as followeth. Spear-Mint, hath divers round Stalks, and long, but narrowish Leavs set thereon; of a a dark green colour. The Flowers stand in Spiked Heads at the tops of the Branches, be∣ing of a pale blush colour. The smel or scent hereof is somwhat neer unto Bassil It en∣creaseth by the Root under ground, as all the others do. Place. It is an usual Inhabitant in Gardens; And becaus it seldom giveth any good Seed, the defect is recompensed by the plentiful encreas of the Root, which being once planted in a Garden will hardly berid out again. Time. It Flowreth not until the beginning of Au∣gust, for the most part. Vertues and Use. Dioscorides saith, It hath an heating, bin∣ding and drying quality, and therefore the Juyce taken with Vinegar staieth Bleeding: It stirreth up Venery or Bodily lust: Two or three Branches thereof taken with the Juyce of sowr Pomegranates stayeth the Hiccough, Vo∣miting, and allayeth Choller: It dissolveth Impostumes being laid too with Barley Meal.Provokes Venery, stayeth Vomiting, Allayeth Choller, Impostums great Breasts, Mad Dogs biting, Pains of the Ears, It is good to repress the Milk in Womens Breasts, and for such as have swollen, flagging, or great Breasts: applied with Salt, it helpeth the biting of a Mad Dog; with Mead or Ho∣neyed Water, it easeth the pains of the Ears. and taketh away the roughness of the Tongue, being rubbed thereupon. It suffereth not Milk to curdle in the Stomach if the Leavs hereof be steeped or boyled in it before you drink it. Briefly it is very profitable to the Stomach: The often use hereof is a very po∣werful Medicine to stay Womens Courses, and the Whites.Good for the Sto∣mach, Pains of the Head, Sores & Scabs, Chops of the Fun∣dament, Poyson, Applyed to the Forehead or Temples, it easeth pains of the Head. And is good to wash the Heads of yong Children therewith, against all manner of breakings out, Sores, or Scabs therein; and healeth the chops of the Fundament. It is also profitable against the Poyson of Venemous Creatures. The distilled Water of Mints is available to all the purposes aforesaid, yet more weakly. But if a Spirit thereof be rightly and Chimi∣cally drawn, it is much more powerful than the Herb it self. Simeon Sethi saith, It helpeth a cold Liver, strengthneth the Belly and Sto∣mach, causeth digestion,Helpeth Liver and Stomach, stayeth Vomiting and Hic∣cough, provoketh Lust, Spleen, Gravel, Stone, and Strangury, comforts the Head, sore Mouth, ill Breath, Pallet down, staieth Vomit and the Hiccough, is good against the Gnawings of the Heart, provoketh Appetite, taketh away Obstructions of the Liver, and stirreth up Bo∣dily Lust: But thereof too much must not be taken, becaus it maketh the Blood thin and wheyish, and turneth it into Choller, and ther∣fore Chollerick persons must obstain from it. It is is a safe Medicine for the biting of a Mad Dog, being bruised with Salt and laid thereon. The Pouder of it being dried and taken after Meat helpeth digestion, and those that are Splenetick: taken with Wine it hel∣peth Women in their Sore Travail in Child∣hearing; It is good against the Gravel and and Stone in the Kidneys, and the Strangury. Being smelled unto, it is comfortable for the Head and Memory. The Decoction thereof gargled in the Mouth cureth the Gums and Mouth that is sore, and mendeth an ill savou∣red Breath: as also with Rue and Coriander, causeth the Pallat of the Mouth that is down to return to his place, the Decoction being gargled and held in the Mouth. The Vertues of the wild or Hors Mints, such as grow in Ditches (whose Description I purposely omitted in regard they are well e∣nough known) are especially to dissolve windWind, Venereal Dreams, & Nightly pollutions, Ears pained, biting of Serpents, Kings E∣vil, stinking Breath, in the Stomach, to help the Chollick, and those that are short winded, and are an especial Remedy for those that have Venerious Dreams and pollutions in the Night being outwardly applied to the Testicles or Cods. The Juyce dropped into the Ears easeth the pains of them, and destroyeth the Worms that breed therein. They are good against the Venemous biting of Serpents. The Juyce laid on warm helpeth the Kings Evil, or Kernels in the Throat: The Decoction or distilled Water helpeth a stinking Breath proceeding from the corrupti∣on of the Teeth; and snuffed up into the Nose purgeth the Head. Pliny saith, That eating of the Leavs hath been found by expe∣rience
to cure the Lepry,Lepry, and applying some of them to the Face: and to help the Scurf or DandrifDandrif. of the Head used with Vinegar. They are extream bad for wounded people, and they say a wounded man that eats Mints his Wound will never be cured, and that's a long day. Misselto. Description. THis riseth up from the Branch or Arm of the Tree whereon it groweth, with a woody Stem, parting it self into sundry Bran∣ches, and they again devided into many other smaller Twigs, interlacing themselves one within another, very much covered with a grayish green Bark, having two Leaves set at every Joynt, and at the end likewise, which are somwhat long and narrow, smal at the bot∣tom but broader toward the end: At the Knots or Joynts of the Boughs and Branches, grow smal yellowish Flowers, which turn into smal round white transparant Berries three or four together, full of glutinous moisture, with a blackish Seed in every of them, which was never yet known to spring being put into the ground or any where els to grow. Place. It groweth very rarely on Oaks with us, but upon sundry other, as well Timber as Fruit∣Trees, plentifully in Woods, Groves, and the like through all this Land. Time. It Flowreth in the Spring time, but the Ber∣ries be not ripe until October, and abide on the Branches all the Winter, unless the Black∣Birds, and other Birds do devour them. Vertues and Use. Both the Leavs and Berries of Misleto do heat and dry, and are of subtil parts: The Birdlime doth mollifie hard Knots, Tumors, and Impostumes,Impostums ripeneth and discusseth them; and draweth forth thick as well as thin Hu∣mors from the remote places of the Body, di∣gesting and separating them: And being mix∣ed with equal parts of Rozin and Wax, doth mollifie the hardness of the Spleen,Spleen, Vlcers, and hea∣leth old Ulcers and Sores: Being mixed with Sandarack, and Oment, it helpeth to draw off-foul Nails: and if quicklime and Wine Lees be added thereunto it worketh the stron∣ger. The Milleto it self of the Oak (as the best) made into Pouder and given in drink to those that have the Falling-sickness;Falling∣sickness, doth assu∣redly heal them as Mathiolus saith, but it is fit to use it for forty daies together. Some have so highly esteemed of the Vertues hereof that they have called it Lignam Sanctae Crucis, Wood of the holy Cross, beleeving it to help the Falling-sickness, Apoplexie, and Palsie,Apoplexy, Palsey, very speedily, not only to be inwardly taken, but to be hung at their Necks. Tragus saith, That the fresh Wood of any Misleto bruised, and the Juyce drawn forth and dropped into the Ears that have Impostumes Impostums in them, doth help and eas them within a few daies. That it is under the Dominion of the Sun, I do not question, and can also take for gran∣ted that that which grows upon Oaks partici∣pates somthing of the Nature of Jupiter, be∣caus an Oak is one of his Trees; as also that which grows upon Pear-trees and Apple-trees, participates somthing of the Nature, becaus he rules the Trees, and it draws sap from the Trees, it grows upon having no Root of its own, but why that should have most vertues that grows upon Oaks I know not, unless be∣caus 'tis rarest, and hardest to come by, and our Colledges Opinion is in this contrary to the Scripture which saith, Gods tender Mer∣cies are over all his Works, and so 'tis, Let the Colledg of Physitians walk as contrary to him as they pleas, and that's as contrary as the East is to the West. Clusius affirms that which grows upon Pear-trees to be as preva∣lent, and give order that it should not touch the ground after it is gathered, and also saith, That being hung about the Neck, it remedies Witchcraft. Money-wort, or Herb Two-pence. Description. THe common Money-wort, sendeth forth from a smal threddy Root, divers long, weak, and slender Branches lying and running upon the ground two or three Foot long or more, set with Leavs two at a Joynt one a∣gainst another at equal distances, which are almost round, but pointed at the ends, smooth and of a good green colour: At the Joynts with the Leavs from the middle forward come forth at every Joynt somtimes one yellow Flower, and somtimes two, standing each on a smal Footstalk, and made of five Leavs, nar∣row, and pointed at the ends, with some yel∣low thredssn the middle: which being past, there stand in their places smal round Heads of Seed. Place. It groweth plentifully in almost all places of this Land; commonly in moist grounds by Hedg sides, and in the middle of grassy Fields. Time. They Flower in June; and July, and their Seed is ripe quickly after.
Vertues and use. Moneywort is singular good to stay all Flu∣xes in Men or Woman, whether they be Lasks, Bloody Fluxes,Fluxes, Vlcers, Green Wounds Oldulcers. the Flowing of Womens Courses, Bleedings inwardly or outwardly, and the weakness of the Stomach that is given to casting. It is very good also for all Ulcers, or Excoriations of the Lungs or other in∣ward parts. It is exceeding good for all Wounds, either fresh or green to heal them speedily; and for old Ulcers that are of a spreading nature: For all which purposes, The Juyce of the Herb, or the Pouder drunk in Water, wherein hot Steel hath been often quenched: Or the Decoction of the green Herb in Wine or Water drunk; Or the Seed, Juyce or Decoction used to the outward places to wash or bath them, or to have Tents dipped therein and put into them, are effectual. Moonwort. Description. This riseth up usually but with one dark green thick and fat Leaf standing upon a short footstalk, not a bove two fingers breadth; but when it will flower it may be said to beare a small slender stalk about four or five Inches high, having but one leaf set in the middle therof, wch is much devided on both sides into somtimes five or seven parts on a sid, somtimes more, each of which parts is small next the middle rib, but broad forwards and round pointed, resembling therein an half Moon from whence it took the name, the uppermost parts or divisions being less than the lowest: The Stalk riseth above this Leaf two or three inches, bearing many Branches of small long Tongues, every one like the spiky Head of Adders-Tongue, of a brownish colour, which whether I shall call them Flowers or the Seed, I well know not which after they have continued a while resolve into a Mealy dust: The Root is smal and Fibrous. This hath somtimes divers such like Leavs as are be∣fore Described, with so many branches or tops arising from one Stalk each devided from the other. Place. It groweth on Hills, and Heaths, yet where there is much Grass, for therein it delighteth to grow. Time. It is to be found only in April and May, for in June when any hot weather cometh for the most part it is withered and gone. Vertues and use. Moonwort is cold and drying more than Adders-tongue, and is therefore held to be more available for all Wounds both inward and outward: The Leavs boyled in red Wine and drunk stayeth the immoderate Flux of Womens CoursesWomens Courses, Bleedings, Vomiting, Fluxes, Broken & disioynted Bones, Green Wounds. and the Whites: It also staieth Bleeding, Vomitings, and other Flu∣xes; It helpeth all Blows and Bruises, and to consolidate all Fractures and Dislocations. It is good for Ruptures: But it is chiefly used by most, with other Herbs to make Oyls or Balsoms to heal fresh or green Wounds (as I said before) either inward or outward, for which it is excellent good. Moonwort is an Herb which they say will o∣pen Locks, and unshoo such Horses as tread upon it, this some laugh to scorn, and those no smal Fools neither, but Country people that I know, call it [Unshoo the Horse] be∣sides I have heard Commanders say, That on White Down in Devon. neer Tiverton, there was found thirty Hors shoos, pulled off from the feet of the Earl of Essex his Horses being there drawn up in a Body, many of them be∣ing but newly shod, and no reason known, which caused much admiration; and the Herb described usually grows upon Heaths. The Moon owns the Herb. Mosses. I Shal not trouble the Reader with any De∣scription of these, sith my intent is to speak only of two kinds as the most principal, Viz. Ground-Moss, and Tree-Moss, both which are very well know. Place. The Ground-Moss, growing in our moist Woods, and the bottoms of Hills, in boggy grounds, and in shadowy Ditches, and many other such like places. The Tree-Moss groweth only on Trees. Vertues and use. The Ground-Moss, is held to be singular good to break the Stone,Stone, Inflama∣tions; Fluxes, Vomiting, Bleeding, Womens Courses, and to expel and drive it forth by Urin, being boyled in Wine and drunk: The Herb bruised and boyled in Water and applied easeth all Inflamations and pains coming of an hot caus  and is therfore used to eas the pains of the hot Gout. The Tree-Mosses are cooling and binding, and partake of a digesting and mollifying qua∣lity withal, as Galon saith. But each Moss doth partake of the Nature of the Tree from whence it is taken; therefore that of the Oak is more Binding: and is of good effect to stay Fluxes in man or Woman, as also Vomitings or Bleedings, the Pouder thereof being taken in Wine: The Decoction thereof in Wine is very good for Women to be hathed with, or to sit in that are troubled with the overflowing of their Courses: The same being drunk stay∣eth the Stomach that is troubled with casting,
or the Hiccough; and as Ainna saith, it comforteth the Heart: The Pouder thereof taken in Drink for some time together, is thought available for the Dropsie.Dropsie, The Oyl of Roses that hath had fresh Moss steeped ther∣in for a time, and after boyled and applied to the Temples and Forehead, doth Merveilous∣ly eas the HeadachHeadach, coming of a hot caus, as also the Distillations of hot Rhewm or Hu∣mors to the Eyes or other parts: The Anti∣ents much used it in their Oyntments and o∣ther Medicines against Lassitude, and to strengthen and comfort the Sinews.Sinews. For which, if it was good then, I know no reason but it may be fonnd so still. Motherwort. Discription. THis hath a hard, square, brownish, rough, strong Stalk, rising three or four foot high at the least, spreading into many Bran∣ches, whereon grow Leavs ou each side with long Footstalks, two at every Joynt, which are somwhat broad and long as it were, rough, or crumpled, with many great Veins therein; of a sad green colour, and deeply dented about the edges, and almost devided: From the middle of the Branches up to the tops of them (which are very long and smal) grow the Flowers round about them at distances in sharp pointed rough hard Husks, of a more red or purple-colour than Balm or Horehound, but in the same manner and form as the Hore∣hounds: after which come smal round blackish Seed in great plenty: The Root sendeth forth a number of long Strings and smal Fibres, ta∣king strong hold in the Ground; of a dark yellowish or brownish colour, and abideth as the Horehound doth; the smell of this being not much different from it. Place. It groweth only in Gardens with us in Eng∣land. Vertues and use. Motherwort, is held to be of much use for the trembling of the Heart, and in faintings and swouningsSwon∣nings, Sore Tra∣vail, Mother, Urine, Womens Courses, Flegm, Cold Flegm, Cramps, Convul∣sions, Melan∣cholly. Vapors. from whence it took the name Cardiaca. The Pouder thereof to the quanti∣ty of a spoonful drunk in Wine is a wonderful help to Women in their Sore Travails, as al∣so for the suffocations or risings of the Mo∣ther; and from these effects it is likely it took the name of Motherwort with us. It also pro∣voketh Urine and Womens Courses, clenseth the Chest of cold Flegm oppressing it, and killeth the Worms in the Belly: It is of good use to warm and dry up the cold Humors, to digest and dispers them that are setled in the Veins Joynts, and Sinews of the Body, and to help Cramps, and Convulsions. Venus owns the Herb, and it is under Leo, there is no better Herb to drive Melancholly Vapors from the Heart, to strengthen it, and make a merry cheerful blith soul, than this Herb, it may be kept in a Syrup or Conserve, therfore the Latins called it Cardiaca: Besides, it makes Women joyful Mothers of Children, and settles their Wombs as they should be, therfore we call it Motherwort. Mousear. Description. THis is a low Herb creeping upon the ground by small strings like the Straw∣berry Plant, whereby it shooteth forth smal Roots, whereat grow upon the Ground many small and somwhat short Leavs set in a round form together, hollowish in the middle where they are broadest, of an hoary colour all over, and very hairy, which being broken do give a white Milk: From among these Leavs spring up two or three smal hoary Stalks about a span high, with a few smaller Leavs thereon; At the tops whereof standeth usual∣ly but one Flower, consisting of many paler yellow Leavs broad at the points, and a little dented in, set in three or four rows, the grea∣ter outermost, very like a Dandelyon Flower, and a little reddish underneath about the ed∣ges, especially if it grow in a dry ground: which after they have stood long in Flower, do turn into Down, which with the Seed is carryed away with the Wind. Place. It groweth on Ditch Banks, and somtimes in Ditches if they be dry and in sandy Grounds. Time. It Flowreth about June and July, and a∣bideth green all the Winter. Vertues and Use. The Juyce hereof taken in Wine or the De∣coction thereof drunk doth help the JaundiceJaundice, Stone, Bellyach, Dropsie, Flux, Wounds, Bloody Flux, Terms stops, although of long continuance, to drink there∣of morning and evening, and abstain from o∣ther drink two or three hours after: It is a special Remedy against the Stone, and the tormenting pains thereof; as also other Tor∣tures and griping pains of the Bowels; The Decoction thereof with Succory and Centaury, is held very eflectual to help the Dropsie, and them that are inclining thereunto, and the Dis∣eases of the Spleen. It stayeth the Fluxes of Blood either at the Mouth or Nose, and in∣ward Bleedings also, for it is a singular Wound Herb for Wounds both inward and outward; It helpeth the Bloody Flux and stayeth the abundance of Womens Courses:
There is a Syrup made of the Juyce hereof and Sugar by the Apothecaries of Italy, and other places, which is of much account with them, to be given to those that are troubled with the Cough or Phtisick:Cough, Phtisick, Ruptures, Canker, ulcers, spreading sores. The same also is singu∣lar good for Ruptures or Burstings. The green Herb bruised and presently bound to any fresh cut or Wound, doth quickly soder the lips thereof. And the Juyce, Decoction, or Pouder of the dried Herb, is most singular to stay the Malignity of spreading and fretting Cankers and Ulcers wheresoever, yea in the Mouth, or secret parts: The distilled Water of the Plant is available in all the Diseases a∣foresaid, and to wash outward Wounds and Sores, and to apply Tents, or Cloaths wet therein. The Moon owns the Herb also, and though Authors cry out upon Alchymists for attemp∣ting to fix Quick Silver by this Herb and Moonwort: A Roman would not have jud∣ged a thing by the success, if it be to be fixed at all, 'tis by Lunar Influence. Mugwort Description. THe common Mugwort have divers Leavs lying upon the ground, very much devided, or cut deeply in about the Brims somwhat like Wormwood but much larger, of a dark green colour on the upper side and very hoary white underneath. The stalks rise to be four or five foot high, having on it such like Leavs as those below, but somwhat smaller, branching forth very much toward the top, whereon are set very smal pale yellowish Flo∣wers like Buttons, which fall away, and after them come small Seed inclosed in round Heads: The Root is long and hard with ma∣ny smal Fibres growing from it, whereby it taketh strong hold in the ground, but both Stalk and Leaf do die down every yeer, and the Root shooteth anew in the Spring. The whol Plant is of a reasonable good scent, and is more easily propogated by the Slips, than by the Seed. Place. It groweth plentifully in many places of this Land, by the way sides, as also by smal Water∣Courses, and in divers other places. Time. It Flowreth and Seedeth in the end of Sum∣mer. Vertues and Use. Mugwort is with good success put among other Herbs that are boyled for Women to fit over the hot Decoction, to draw down their Courses, to help the Delivery of the Birth, and expel the Afterbirth, as also for the Ob∣structions and Inflamations of the Mother.Terms provokes, Birth, Afterbirth Womb In∣flamed, wens, Kings Evil, pains in the Neck, Opium, Sciatica, Sinews pained, Cramp, It breaketh the Stone, and causeth one to make water where it is stopped: The Juyce thereof made up with Mirrh, and put under as a Pessary, worketh the same effect, and so doth the Root also, being made up with Hogs Greas into an Oyntment, it taketh away Wens and hard Knots and Kernels that grow about the Neck and Throat, and easeth the pains about the Neck and more effectually, if some Field Daisies be put with it. The Herb it self being fresh or the Juyce thereof taken, is a spe∣cial Remedy upon the overmuch taking of O∣pium. Three drams of the Pouder of the dri∣ed Leavs taken in Wine, is a speedy and the best certain help for the Sciatica. A Decocti∣on thereof made with Chamomel and Agri∣mony, and the place bathed therewith while it is warm, taketh away the pains of the Si∣news and the Cramp. This is an Herb of Venus, therefore main∣taineth the parts of the Body she rules, and Remedies the Diseases of the parts that are un∣der her Signs, Taurus and Libra. The Mulberry-Tree. THis is so well known in the places where it groweth, that it needeth no Descripti∣on. Time. It beareth Fruit in the Months of July and August. Vertues and Use. The Mulberry is of different parts; the ripe Berries by reason of their Sweetness and slip∣pery moisture, opening the Belly, and the unripe binding it, especially when they are dried, and then they are good to stay Fluxes, Lasks,Binding, Fluxes, Lasks, Terms stops, Inflamati∣on Vvula, sore Mouth & Throat, Toothach, Bleeding, Hemor∣rhoids, and the abundance of Womens Cour∣ses. The Bark of the Root killeth the broad Worms in the Body. The Juyce, or the Sy∣rup made of the Juyce of the Berries, helpeth all Inflamations and Sores in the Mouth or Throat, and the Pallet of the Mouth when it is fallen down. The Juyce of the Leavs is a Remedy against the biting of Serpents, and for those that have taken Aconite: The Leavs beaten with Vinegar is good to lay on any place that is burnt with fire. A Decoction made of the Bark and Leavs, is good to wash the Mouth and Teeth when they ach. If the Root be a little slit or cut, and a smal hole made in the ground next thereunto, in the Harvest time, it will give out a certain Juyce, which being hardned, the next day is of good use to help the Toothach, to dissolve Knots, and purge the Belly: The Leavs of Mulber∣ries are said to stay bleeding at Mouth or Nose, or the Bleeding of the Piles, or of a
Wound being bound unto the places.Acurious secret. A Branch of the Tree taken when the Moon is at the full and bound to the Wrist of a Womans Arm whose Courses come down too much doth stay them in a short space. Mercury rules the Tree, therefore are its ef∣fects variable as his are. Mullein. Description. THe common white Mullein hath many fair large woolly white Leavs lying next the ground, somwhat longer than broad, poin∣ted at the ends, and as it were dented about the edges: The Stalk riseth up to be four or five Foot high, covered over with such like Leavs, but lesser, so that no Stalk can be seen for the multitude of Leavs thereon up to the Flowers, which come forth on all sides of the Stalk, without any Branches for the most part, and are many set together in a long spike, in some of a gold yellow colour, in others more pale, consisting of five round pointed Leavs, which afterwards give smal round Heads, wherein is smal brownish Seed contai∣ned: The Root is long, white, and Woody, perishing after it hath born Seed. Place. It groweth by the way sides, and in Lanes in many places of this Land. Time. It Flowreth in July, or thereabouts. Vertues and use. A smal quantity of the Root given in Wine, is commended by Dioscorides against Lasks and FluxesFlux, Ruptures, Cramp, Convul∣sion, Cough, Toothach, Hemor∣rhoids, Bloody Flux, Obstrncti∣ons, Reins, Bladder, Sinews, of the Belly: The Decoction thereof drunk is profitable for those that are Bursten, and for Cramps and Convulsions, and for those that are troubled with an old Cough. The Decoction thereof gargled ca∣seth the pains of the Toothach: An Oyl made by the often Infusion of the Flowers, is of very good effect for the Piles. The Deco∣ction of the Root in Red Wine, or in Water (if there be an Ague) wherein red hot Steel hath been often quenched, doth stay the Bloo∣dy Flux. The same also openeth Obstructi∣ons of the Bladder and Reins when one can∣not make water. A Decoction of the Leavs hereof, and of Sage, Marjetom and Camomil Flowers and the places bathed therewith that have Sinews stark with cold, or Cramps, doth bring them much eas, and comfort. Three ounces of the distilled water of the Flowers drunk morning and evening for some daies to∣gether is said to be the most excellent Reme∣dy for the hot Gout,Gout, Warts, The Juyce of the Leavs and Flowers being laid upon rough Warts, as also the Pouder of the dried Roots rubbed on doth easily take them away; but doth no good to smooth Warts. The Pouder of the dried Flowers is an especial Remedy for those that are troubled with belly-aches or the pains of the Chollick.Bellyach, Chollick, Inflama∣tion, Thorns, Splinters, Boyls, Groyn, Disjun∣ctures. The Decoction of the Root, and so likewise of the Leavs is of great effect to dissolve the Tumors, Swellings, or Infla∣mation of the Throat. The Seed and Leavs boyled in Wine, and applied, draweth forth speedily Thorns, or Splinters gotten into the Flesh, easeth the pains, and healeth them also. The Leavs bruised and wrapped in double pa∣pers, and covered with hot Ashes and Em∣bers to bake a while and then taken forth and laid warm on any Botch or Boyl hapning in the Groyn or share, doth dissolve and heal them. The Seed bruised, and boyled in Wine and laid on any Member that hath been out of Joynt and is newly set again, taketh away all Swellings and pains thereof. Mustard. Description. THe common Mustard hath large and broad rough Leavs, very much jagged with uneven, and unorderly gashes, somwhat like Turnip Leavs, but lesser and rougher: The Stalk riseth to be more than a foot high, and somtimes two foot high, being round, rough, and branched at the top, bea∣ring such like Leavs thereon as grow below, but lesser, and less devided; and divers yel∣low Flowers one above another at the tops; after which come smal rough pods, with smal lank flat ends, wherein is contained round yellowish Seed, sharp, hot, and biting upon the Tongue: The Root is smal, long, and woody, when it beareth Stalks and perisheth every yeer. Place. This groweth with us in Gardens only, and other manured places. Time. It is an annual Plant, Flowring in July, and their Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and use. Mustard Seed hath the Vertue of Heating,Heats, Dries, Splinters, Thorns, Terms provokes, Falling∣sickness, Lethargy, Sneezing, discussing, rarefying and drawing out Splin∣ters of Bones, and other things out of the Flesh. It is of good effect to bring down Wo∣mens Courses, for the Falling sickness or Le∣thargy, drousie forgetful evil, to use it both in∣wardly and outwardly to rub the Nostrils, Forehead, and Temples, to warm and quic∣ken the Spirits, for by the fierce sharpness it purgeth the Brain by sneezing, and drawing down Rhewm and other Viscuous Humors, which by their Distillations upon the Lungs and Chest procure coughing, and therefore
with some Honey added thereto doth much good therein. The Decoction of the Seed made in Wine and drunk, provoketh Urine, resisteth the force of Poyson, the Malignity of Mushroms,Disury, Poyson, Mushroms Venemous Beasts, Agues, Lu, pro∣vokes, Spleen, Vvula, Sciatica, Toothach, Pains, Hair, Bruises, Black and blue spots, roughness, Leprosie, Low (e E∣vil Mor∣Freckles, WryNecks. and the Venom of Scorpions, or other Venemous Creatures, if it be taken in time: and taketh before the cold fits of Agues, altereth, lesseneth, and cureth them. The Seed taken either by it self or with other things either in an Electuary or Drink, doth mightily stir up Bodily lust, and helpeth the Spleen and pains in the sides, and gnawing in the Bowels. And used as a Gargle, draweth up the Pallat of the Mouth being fallen down, and also it dissolveth the Swellings abou the Throat, if it be outwardly applied. Being chewed in the Mouth, it oftentimes helpeth the Toothach: The outward application hereof upon the pained place of the Sciatica, discusseth the Humors, and easeth the pains, as also of the Gout, and other Joynt aches. And is much and often used to eas pains in the sides or loyns, the shoulders or other parts of the Body, upon the applying thereof to rais Bli∣sters, and cureth the Diseas by drawing it to the outward part of the Body: It is also u∣sed to help the falling of the Hair: The Seed bruised, mixed with Honey and applied, or made up with Wax, taketh away the Marks, and black and blue spots of Bruises or the like, the roughness or Scabbedness of the Skin, as also the Leprosie and lowsie evil: it helpeth also the crick in the Neck. The distilled Wa∣ter of the Herb when it is in Flower is much used to drink inwardly to help in any the Dis∣eases aforesaid, or to wash the Mouth when the Pallat is down, and for the Diseases of the Throat to gargle, but outwardly also for Scabs, Itch, or other like Infirmities, and clenseth the Face from Morphew, Spots, Frec∣kles, and other Deformities. It is an excellent Sawce for such whose Blood wants clarifying and for weak Stomachs being an Herb of Mars, but naught for Chol∣lerick people, though as good for such as are aged or troubled with cold Diseases, Aries claims somthing to do with it, therfore it strengthens the heart and resisteth poyson, let such whose Stomachs are so weak, they can∣not digest their meat or appetite it, take of Mustard Seed a dram, Cinnamon as much, and having beaten them to Pouder ad half as much Mastich in Pouder, and with Gum A∣rabick dissolved in Rose Water, make it up into Troches, of which they may take one of about half a dram weight an hour or two be∣fore meals, let old men and women make much of this medicine, and they will either give me thanks, or manifest ingratitude. Hedg-Mustard. Description. THis groweth up usually but with one blackish green Stalk, tongh, easie to bend but not break, branched into diverse parts, and somtimes with divers Stalks set full of Branches, whereon grow long, rough, or hard rugged Leavs, very much torn and cut on the edges into many parts, some bigger, and some lesser, of a dirty green colour: The Flo∣wers are smal and yellow, that grow at the tops of the Branches, in long Spikes, flowring by degrees, so that continuing long in Flower the stalks will have smal round Cods at the bottom, growing upright and close to the Stalk, while the top Flowers yet shew them∣selvs; in which are contained smal yellow Seed, sharp and strong, as the Herb is also: The Root groweth down slender and woody, yet abiding, and springing again every yeer. Place. This groweth frequently in this Land by the Waies and Hedg sides, and somtimes in the o∣pen Fields. Time. It flowreth most usually about July. Vertues and Use. It is singular good in all the Diseases of the Chest and Lungs, hoarceness ef voice, and by the use of the Decoction therof for a little space, those have been recovered who had ut∣terly lost their voice, and almost their Spirits also. The Juyce threof made into a Syrup, or licking Medicine with Honey or Sugar is no less effectual for the same purpose, and for all other Coughs, Weesings, and shortness of Breath. The same is also profitable for those that have the Jaundice, the Pluresie, pains in the Back and Loyns, and for torments in the Belly or the Chollick, being also used in Cly∣sters. The Seed is held to be a special Reme∣dy against Poyson and Venom: It is singular good for the Sciatica, the Gout, and all Joynt∣aches, Sores and Cankers in the Mouth, Throat, or behind the Ears; and no less for the hardness and Swelling of the Testicles, or of Womens Breasts.Breast, Lungs, Hoarceness Cough, shortness of breath, Jaundice, Pleuresie, Back, Loyns, Belly, Chollick, Poyson, Sciatica, Gout, Joynts, Fistulaes, ulcers, Cankers, Testicles, Womens Breasts. Mars owns this Herb also.
Nep, or Catmint. Description. THe common garden Nep shooteth forth hard four square Stalks with a hoariness on them, a yard high or more, full of Branches, bearing at every Joynt two broad Leavs, somwhat like Balm but longer pointed, softer, whiter, and more hoary, nicked about the edges, and of a strong sweet scent. The Flowers grow in large tusts at the tops of the Branches, and un∣derneath them likewise on the Stalks many to∣gether, of a whitish Purple colour. The Roots are composed of many long strings or Fibres, fastning themselves strongly in the ground, and abide with green Leavs thereon all the Winter. Place. It is only nursed up in our Gardens. Time. And it flowreth in July or thereabouts. Vertues and Use Nep is generally used for Women to procure their Courses, being taken inwardly or out∣wardly, either alone or with other convenient Herbs in a decoction to bath them, or sit over the hot fumes therof, and by the frequent use thereof it taketh away barrenness, and the wind and pains of the Mother.Terms provokes, Barrenness Womb, Wind, Mother, Cough, Rhewms, Vertigo, Cramp, Cold ach, Difficulty of breath, Bruises, Hemor∣rhoids, Scabby Heads. It is also used in pains of the Head coming of any cold caus, as Catarrh's, Rhewms, and for swimming and giddiness thereof, and is of especial use for the windiness of the Stomach and Belly. It is effectual for any Cramps or cold aches to dissolve the cold and wind that afflicteth the place, and is used for Colds, Coughs, and shortness of breath. The Juyce thereof drunk in Wine is profitable for those that are bruised by any accident. The green Herb bruised and applied to the Fundament, and lying there two or three hours, easeth the pains of the Piles. The Juyce also being made up into an Oyntment, is effectual for the same purpose: The head washed with a Decoction thereof, it taketh away Scabs; and may be effectual for other parts of the Body also. It is an Herb of Venus. Nettles. THese are so well known that they need no Description at all, they may be found by the feeling in the darkest night. Vertues and Use. The Roots or Leavs boyled or the Juyce of either of them, or both, made into an Electu∣ary with Honey or Sugar, is a safe and sure Medicine to open the Pipes and passages of the Lungs,Lungs, Wheezing, shortness of breath, Pleuresie, Almonds of the Ears Ears, Throat, Mouth, Vvula, Terms provokes, Mother, Disury, Gravel, Worms, Spleen, Bleeding, Venemous Beasts, MadDogs, Hemlock, Henbane, Night∣shade, Man∣drakes, Lethargy, Morphew, Leprosie, Bleeeing, Polipus, ulcers, Fistulaes, Gangrenes Scabs, Itch, Wounds, Weariness, Disjun∣ctures, Gout, Sciatica, Joynts. which is the caus of wheesing and shortness of breath, and helpeth to expecto∣rate tough Flegm, as also to raise the impostu∣mated Pleurefie, and spend it by spitting; The same helpeth the swelling of the Almonds of the Throat, the Mouth and Throat being gargled therewith: The Juyce is also effectual to settle the Pallate of the Mouth in its place, and to heal and temper the Inflamations and soreness of the Mouth and Throat. The De∣coction of the Leavs in Wine being drunk is singular good to provoke Womens Courses, and settle the suffocation or strangling of the Mother, and all other Diseases thereof, as al∣so applied outwardly with a little Mirrh. The same also, or the Seed provoketh Urine, and expelleth the Gravel and Stone in the Reins or Bladder often proved to be effectual in ma∣ny that have taken it. The same killeth the Worms in Children easeth pains in the sides, and dissolveth the windiness in the Spleen, as also in the Body, although others think it only powerful to provoke Venery. The Juyce of the Leavs taken two or three daies together, staieth bleeding at the Mouth: The Seed be∣ing drunk is a Remedy against the stinging of Venemous Creatures, the biting of Mad Dogs The poysonful qualities of Hemlock, Hen∣bane, Nightshade, Mandrake, or other such like Herbs that stupifie or dull the senses, as also the Lethargy, especially to use it outward∣ly to rub the Forehead and Temples in the Lethargy, and the places bitten or stung with Beasts, with a little Salt. The distilled water of the Herb is also effectual (although not so powerful) for the Diseases aforesaid, as for outward Wounds and Sores to wash them, and to clens the Skin from Morphew, Lepry, and other discolourings thereof: The Seed or Leaves bruised and put into the Nostrils, stai∣eth the bleeding of them, and taketh away the Flesh growing in them called Polipus. The Juyce of the Leavs, or the Decoction of them, or of the Roots, is singular good to wash ei∣ther old rotten and stinking sores, or Fistulaes and Gangrenes, and such as are fretting, ea∣ting, or corroding Scabs, Mainginess and Itch in any part of the Body, as also green Wounds by washing them therwith, or applying the green Herb bruised thereunto, yea although the Flesh were seperated from the Bones: The same applied to our wearied Members refre∣sheth them, or to places that have been out of Joynt being first set again, strengthneth, drieth and comforteth them, as also those places trou∣bled with Aches and Gouts, and the Defluxi∣on of Humors upon the Joynts or Sinews, it easeth the pains, and drieth or dissolveth the
Defluxions. An Oyntment made of the Juyce, Oyl, and a little Wax, is singular good to rub cold and benummed Members. An handful of the Leavs of green Nettles, and another of Wallwort, or Danewort; bruised and applied simply of themselves to the Gout, Sciatica, or Joyntaches in any part hath been found to be an admirable help thereunto. This also is an Herb Mars claims Domini∣on over, you know Mars is hot and dry, and you know as well that Winter is cold and moist; then you may know as well the reason why Nettle tops eaten in Spring consume the Flegmatick superfluities in the Body of man, that the coldness and moisture of Winter, hath left behind. Nightshade. Description. COmmon Nightshade hath an upright, round, green, hollow stalk, about a Foot or half a yard high, bushing forth into many Branches, whereon grow many green Leavs, somwhat broad and pointed at the ends, soft and full of Juyce, somwhat like unto Bazil, but larger, and a little unevenly dented about the edges at the tops of the Stalks and Bran∣ches, come forth three or four or more white Flowers made of five smal pointed Leavs a∣piece, standing on a Stalk together, one above another with yellow pointels in the middle, composed of four of five yellow threds set toge∣ther which afterwards turn into so many pen∣dulous green Berries of the bigness of smal Pease, full of green Juyce, and smal whitish round flat Seed lying within it. The Root is white and a little woody when it hath given Flower and Fruit with many smal Fibres at it; The whol Plant is of a waterish insipide tast, but the Juyce within the Berries is som∣what viscuous, and of a cooling and binding quality. Place. It groweth wild with us, under old Walls, and in Rubbish, the common paths, and sides of Hedges and Fields, as also in our Gardens here in England without any planting. Time. It dieth down every yeer, and ariseth again of its own sowing, but springeth not until the latter end of April at the soonest. Vertues and Use. This Common Nightshade is wholly used to cool all hot InflamationsInflamati∣ons, either inwardly or outwardly, being no way dangerous to any that shall use it, as most of the rest of the Nightshades are; yet it must be used mode∣ly: The distilled water only of the whol Herb is fittest and safest to be taken inwardly. The Juyce also clarified and taken being mingled with a little Vinegar, is good to wash the Mouth and Throat that is inflamed:Inflama∣tions, Eyes, Shingles, Ring∣worms, Terms stops, Testicles, Gouts, Ears. But outwardly the Juyce of the Herb or Ber∣ries with Oyl of Roses, and a little Vinegar and Ceruss labored together in a leaden Mor∣ter, is very good to anoint all hot Inflamati∣ons in the Eyes; It doth also much good for the Shingles, Ringworms, and in all running fretting, and corroding Ulcers, and in moist Fistulaes, if the Juyce be made up with some Hens dung and applied thereto: A Pessary dipp'd in the Juyce, and put up into the Ma∣trix stayeth the immoderate Flux of Womens Courses: A Cloth wet therein and applied to the Testicles or Cods, upon any Swelling therein giveth much eas, as also to the Gout that cometh of hot and sharp Humors. The Juyce dropped into the Ears, easeth pains ther∣in that arise of heat or Inflamation. And Pli∣ny saith, it is good for hot Swellings under the Throat. Have a care you mistake not the deadly Nightshade for this; if you know it not, you may let them both alone and take no harm, having other Medicines sufficient in the Book. The Oak. THis is so well known (the Timber thereof being the Glory and Safe∣ty of this Nation by sea) that it needeth no Description. Vertues and use. The Leavs and Bark of the Oak, and the Acorn Cups, do bind and dry very much: The inner Bark of the Tree, and the thin Skin that covereth the Acorn, are most used to stay the spitting of Blood,Dry, Bind, Spitting Blood, Bloody Flux, Vomiting, Venerious Acts, Disury, Poyson, Venemous Beasts, Cantha∣rides, Ulcers of the Blad∣der, Mother, Wounds, and the Bloody Flux: The Decoction of that Bark and the Pouder of the Cups, to stay Vomitings, spitting of blood, bleeding at Mouth, or other Flux of Blood in man or woman, Lasks also, and the involuntary Flux of Natural Seed. The A∣corns in Pouder taken in Wine, pravoketh U∣rine, and resisteth the Poyson of Venemous Creatures. The Decoction of Acorns and the Bark made in Milk and taken resisteth the force of Poysonous Herbs and Medicines, as also the Virulency of Cantharides, when one by eating them, hath his Bladder exulcerated, and pisseth Blood. Hippocrates saith, he used the fumes of Oak Leavs to Woman that were troubled with the strangling of the Mother; and Oalen applied them being bruised to cure green Wounds. The Distilled water of the Oaken Buds before they break out into Leavs, is good to be used
either inward, or outwardly, to asswage Infla∣mationsInflama∣tion, Flux, Pestilen∣ces, Epidemi∣cal Disea∣ses, Liver, Stone, Terms stops, Scabs. and stop all manner of Fluxes in man or woman: The same is singular good in Pe∣stilential and hot burning Feavers, for it re∣sisteth the force of the infection, and allayeth the heat; it cooleth the heat of the Liver, breaketh the Stone in the Kidneys, and staieth womens Courses: The Decoction of the Leavs worketh the same effects. The water that is found in the hollow places of old Oaks, is very effectual against any foul or spreading Scab. The Distilled Water (or Decoction which is better) of the Leavs is one of the best Re∣medies that I know for the WhitesWhites in Wo∣men. Jupiter owns the Treo. Oats. THese are also so well known that they need no Description. Vertues and Use. Oats fryed with Bay-Salt, and applied to the sides, takes away the pains of Stitches and WindStitch, wind, Itch, Leprosie, Fistulaes, Apostums, Freckles. in the sides or Belly: A Pultis made of the Meal of Oats, and some Oyl of Bays put thereto, helpeth the Itch, and the Leprosie, as also the Fistulaes of the Fundament, and dis∣solveth hard Imposthumes The Meal of Oats boyled with Vinegar and applied, taketh away Freckles and Spots in the Face, or other parts of the Body. One-blade. Description. THis smal Plant never beareth more than one Leaf, but only when it riseth up with his Stalk, which thereon beareth another, and seldom more, which are of a blewish green colour, pointed, with many Ribs or Veins therein, like Plantane: At the top of the Stalk, grow many smal white Flowers, Star-fashion, smelling somwhat sweet; after which come smal reddish Berries when they are ripe. The Root is small of the bigness of a Rush, lying and creeping under the upper crust of the Earth, shooting forth in diverse pla∣ces. Place. It groweth in moist, shadowy, and grassy places of Woods, in many places of this Land. Time. It wreth about May, and the Berries be ipe in June, and then quickly perisheth un∣til the next yeer, it springeth from the same Root again. Vertues and use. Half a Dram, or a Dram at most in Pouder of the Roots hereof taken in Wine and Vine∣gar, of each equal parts, and the party laid presently to sweat thereupon, is held to be a Soveraign Remedy for those that are infected with the Plague, and have a Sore upon them, by expelling the poyson and infection, and de∣fending the Heart and Spirits from danger.Pestilence, Poyson, Epidemi∣cal Disea∣ses, Wounds, Sinews cut. It is a singular good Wound Herb; and is therupon used wth other the like effects in ma∣king Compound Balms for the curing of Wounds, be they fresh and green, or old and Malignant, and especially if the Sinews be hurt. Onions. THese are so well known that I need not spend time about writing a Description of them. Vertues and Vices. Onions are Flatulent or Windy, yet they do somwhat provoke appetite, encreas thirst, eas the Belly and Bowels; provoke Womens Courses, help the biting of a mad Dog,Mad Dogs, Worms, Cough, Lethargy, Epidemi∣cal Disea∣ses. and of other Venemous Creatures to be used with Honey and Rue, and encreaseth Sperm, espe∣cially the Seed of them: They also kill the Worms in Children if they drink the Water fasting wherein they have been steeped all night. Being roasted under the Embers and eaten with Honey, or Sugar and Oyl they much conduce to help an inveterate Cough, and expectorate the tough Flegm. The Juyce being snuffed up into the Nostrils, purgeth the Head and helpeth the Lethargy (yet the often eating of them is said to procure pains in the Head) It hath been held with divers Country people a good preservative against Infection to eat Onions fasting with Bread and Salt: as also to make a great Onion hollow, filling the place with good Triacle, and after to roast it well under the Embers, which after taking a∣way of the outermost skin thereof, being bea∣ten together, is a Soveraign Salve for either Plague-Sore, or any other putrid Ulcer. The Juyce of Onions is good for either scalding, or burning by fire, water, or Gunpouder, and used with Vinegar, taketh away all Blemishes, Spots, and Marks in the Skin, and dropped in∣to the Ears, easeth the pains and nois of them. Applied also with Figs beaten together, he∣peth to ripen and break Impostumes and other Sores. Leeks are as like them in quality as a Pome∣water is like an Apple: They are a Remedy against a Surfeit of Mushroms, being baked
under the Embers and taken; and being boy∣led and applied warm helpeth the Piles; In other things they have the same property as the Onions, although not so effectual. Mars owns them, and they have gotten this quality, to draw any corruption to them, for if you pill one and lay him upon a Dunghil, you shall find him rotten in half a day, by drawing putrifaction to it, then being bruised and applied to a Plague-Sore 'tis very proba∣ble 'twill do the like. Orpine. Description. COmmon Orpine riseth up with diverse round brittle Stalks, thick set with fat and fleshy Leavs without any order, and little or nothing dented about the edges, of a pale green colour; The Flowers are white or whitish growing in tufts, after which come small chaffy Husks, with Seed like dust in them. The Roots are diverse thick, round white tuberous clogs; and the Plant groweth not so big in some places as in others where it is found. Place. It is frequent almost in every Country of this Land, and is cherished in Gardens with us, where it groweth greater than that which is wild, and groweth in the shadowy sides of Fields and Woods. Time. It Flowreth about July and the Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and Use. Orpine is seldom used in inward Medicines with us, although Tragus saith from experi∣ence in Germany that the distilled water there∣of is profitable for gnawings, or excoriationsExcoria∣tion of Bowels, Phtisick, Womb, Bloody Flux, Wounds, Instama∣tion, Scalding, Burnings, Quinsie, Ruptures. in the Stomach or Bowels, and for Ulcers in the Lungs, Liver, or other inward parts, as al∣so in the Matrix, and helpeth all those Disea∣ses, being drunk for certain daies together: And that it stayeth the sharpness of Humors in the Bloody Flux, and other Fluxes in the Body, or in Wounds: The Root, thereof also performeth the same effect. It is used out∣wardly to cool any heat or Inflamation upon any Hurt or Wound, and easeth the pains of them: as also to heal Scaldings or Burnings: The Juyce thereof beaten with some green Sallet Oyl, and anointed: The Leaf also brui∣sed and laid to any green Wound in the Hands or Legs, doth heal them quickly; and being bound to the Throat, much helpeth the Quin∣sie, It helpeth also Ruptures and Burstiness. If you pleas to make the Juyce into a Syrup with Honey or Sugar, you may safely take a spoonful or two at a time (let my Author say what he will) for a Quinsie, and you shall find the Medicine more pleasant, and the Cure more speedy, than if you took a Dogs-turd which is the Learned Colledges vulgar Cure. The Moon owns the Herb, and he that knows but her Exaltation, knows what I say is true. Parsley. THis is so well known to be an In∣habitant in every Garden, that it is needless to write any Description of it. The vertues of it being ma∣ny are as followeth. Vertues and use. It is very comfortable to the Stomach,Stomach, Disury, Terms provokes, Liver, Spleen, Falling∣sickness, Stone, Wind, Venemous Beasts, Cough, Sucking Children, Eyes, Womens Breasts, Curdled Milk, Black and blue marks Jaundice, Falling∣sickness, Dropsie, and helpeth to provoke Urine and Womens Cour∣ses, and to break wind both in the Stomach and Bowels, and doth a little open the Body, but the Root much more, and openeth Ob∣structions both of the Liver and Spleen, and is therfore accounted one of the five opening Roots; Galen commendeth it against the Falling-sickness, and to provoke Urine migh∣tily, especially if the Roots be boyled and ea∣ten like Parsnips. The Seed is effectual to provoke Urine and Womens Courses, to ex∣pel wind, to break the Stone, and eas the pains and torments thereof, or of any other part in the Body occasioned by Wind. It is also effe∣ctual against the Venom of any poysonfull Creature, and the danger that cometh to them that have taken Litharge, and is good against the Cough. The distilled water of Parsley is a familiar Medicine with Nurses to give their Children when they are troubled with wind in the Stomach or Belly, which they call the frets, and is also much available to them that are of greater yeers. The Leavs of Parsley laid to the Eyes that are inflamed with heat or swoln, doth much help them, if it be used with Bread or Meal; and being fryed with Butter and ap∣plied to Womens Breasts that are hard through the curdling of their Milk, it abateth the hardness quickly, and also it taketh away black and blue marks coming of Bruises or Falls. The Juyce thereof dropped into the Ears with a little Wine easeth the pains. Tragus setteth down an excellent Medicine to help the Jaun∣dice and Falling-sickness, the Dropsie, and Stone in the Kidneys, in this manner: Take of the Seeds of Parsley, Fennel, Annis, and Ca∣raways of each an ounce; of the Roots of Parsley, Burnet, Saxifrage, and Carawaies, of each one ounce and an half, let the Seeds be bruised, and the Roots washed and cut smal: Let them lie all night in sleep in a pottle of
white Wine, and in the morning be boyled in a close earthen Vessel until a third part or more be wasted, which being strained and clea∣red: take four ounces thereof morning and e∣vening first and last, abstaining from drink after it for three hours: This openeth Ob∣structionsObstructi∣ons of the Liver & Spleen. of the Liver and Spleen, and expel∣leth the Dropsie and Jaundice by Urine. Parsnip. THe Garden kind hereof is so well known (the Root being commonly eaten) that I shal not trouble you wth any Description of it. But the wild kind being of more Physical use, I shall in this place describe unto you. Discription. The wild Parsnip differeth little from the Garden kind, but groweth not so fair and large, nor hath so many Leavs; and the Root is shorter, more woody and not so fit to be ea∣ten, and therefore the more Medicinable. Place. The name of the first sheweth the place of its growth, Viz. In Gardens. The other groweth wild in divers places, as in the Marshes by Rochester and elswhere, and flowreth in July; the Seed being ripe about the beginning of August, the second yeer after the sowing: for if they do flower the first yeer the Country people call them Madneps. Vertues and use. The Garden Parsnep nourisheth much, and is good and wholsom Nourishment, but a little windy, whereby it is thought to procure bodily lust but it fatneth the Body much if much used.ust rovokes, sisury, ense, pen, enemous easts, bollick, isury. It is conducible to the Stomach and Reins, and provoketh Urine. But the wild Parsnep hath a cutting, attenuating, clensing and opening quality therein: It resisteth and helpeth the bitings of Serpents, easeth pains and Stitches in the sides, and dissolveth wind both in the Stomach and Bowels, which is the Chollick, and provoketh Urine. The Root is often used, but the Seed much more. The wild being better than the tame shews Dame Nature is the best Physitian. Cow-Parsnep. Description. THis groweth with three or four large spread, winged, rough, Leavs, lying of∣ten on the Ground, or else raised a little from it, with long, round, hairy footstalks un∣der them, parted usually into five devisions, the two couples standing each against other, and one at the end, and each Leaf being almost round, yet somwhat deeply cut in on the edges in some Leavs, and not so deep in others, of a whitish green colour, smelling somwhat strongly: among which ariseth up a round crested hairy Stalk two or three foot high with a few Joynts and Leavs thereon, and branched at the top, where stand large Umbels of white, and somtimes reddish Flowers, and after them, flat, whitish, thin winged Seed, two alwaies joyned together. The Root is long and white with two or three long strings growing down into the ground, smelling likewise strongly, and unpleasant. Place. It groweth in moist Meadows, and the bor∣ders and corners of Fields, and neet Ditches, generally through this Land. Time. It Flowreth in July, and Seedeth in Au∣gust. Vertues and Use. The Seed hereof as Galen saith is of a sharp and cutting quality, and is therefore a fit Me∣dicine for the Cough and shortness of Breath, the Falling-sickness and the Jaundice.Cough, Difficulty of breath, Falling∣sickness, Jaundice, Fistula, Flegm, Liver, Mother, Lethargy, Frenzy, Headach, Scabs, Shingles. The Root is available to all the purposes aforesaid, and is also of great use to take away the hard skin that groweth on a Fistula, if it be but scra∣ped upon it. The Seed hereof being drunk clenseth the belly from tough Flegmatick mat∣ter therein: easeth them that are Liver-grown, and Womens passions of the Mother, as well being drunk as the smoke thereof received un∣derneath, and likewise raiseth such as are fallen into a deep sleep, or have the Lethargy, by burning it under their Nose: The Seed and Root boyled in Oyl, and the Head rubbed therewith, helpeth not only those that are fal∣len into a Frenzy, but also the Lethargy or Drowsie evil; and those that have been long troubled with the Headach, if it be likewise u∣sed with Rue: It helpeth also the running Scab and the Shingles: The Juyce of the Flowers dropped into the Ears that run and are ful of matter, it clenseth and healeth them. The Peach-tree. Description. THe Peach-tree groweth not so great as the Apricock-tree, yet spreadeth Branches reasonable well, from whence spring smaller reddish twigs, whereon are set long and nar∣row green Leavs dented about the edges. The Blosloms are greater than the Plum, and of a light Purple colour. The Fruit round, and somtimes as big as a reasonable Pippin, others are smaller, as also differing in colours and
tasts, as russer, red, or yellow, waterish or firm, with a frieze or Cotton all over, with a cleft therein like an Apricock, and a rugged surrowed great Stone within it, and a bitter Kernel within the Stone: It sooner waxeth old, and decayeth, than the Apricock, by much. Place. They are nursed up in Gardens and Or∣chards through this Land. Time. They Flower in the Spring, and Fructifie in Autumn. Vertues and use. The Leavs of Peaches bruised and laid on the Belly killeth Worms; and so they do also being boyled in Ale and drunk, and open the Belly likewise; and being dried is a safe Me∣dicine to discuss Humors.Worms, Open, Humors, Wounds, The Pouder of them strewed upon fresh bleeding Wounds, stayeth their bleeding and closeth them up. The Flowers steeped all night in a little Wine standing warm, strained forth in the morning and drunk fasting, doth gently open the Belly and move it downwards: A Syrup made of them as the Syrup of Roses is made, worketh more forcibly than that of Roses, for it pro∣voketh Vomiting, and spendeth waterish and Hydropick Humors by the continuance there∣of. The Flowers made into a Conserve wor∣keth the same effect. The Liquor that drop∣peth from the Tree being wounded, is given in the Decoction of Coltsfoot, to those that are troubled with the Cough or shortness of breath, Dropsie, Cough, shortness of Breath, Vomiting, & spitting of Blood, Stone, mind, Chollic by adding thereto some sweet Wine; and putting some Saffron also therein, it is good for those that are hoarce or have lost their voice, helpeth all defects of the Lungs, and those that vomit or spit blood. Two drams thereof given in the Juyce of Lemmons or of Radish, is good for those that are trou∣bled with the Stone. The Kernels of the Stones do wonderfully eas the pains and wrin∣gings of the Belly through wind or sharp Hu∣mors, and help to make an excellent Medicine for the Stone upon all occasions, on this man∣ner! Take fifty Kernels of Peach Stones, and one hundred of the Kernels of Cherry Stones, a handful of Eldor Flowers, fresh or dried, and three pints of Muscadine, set them in a closed pot into a bed of Horse dung for ten daies, which after distill in Glass with a gentle fire, and keep it for your use; you may drink upon occasion three or four ounces at a time. The Milk or Cream of these Kernels being drawn forth with some Vervain Water, and applied to the Forehead and Temples, doth much help to procure rest and sleep to sick persons wan∣ting it.Watching, The Oyl drawn from the Kernels, the Temples being therewith anointed doth the like: The said Oyl put into Clysters ea∣seth the pains of the wind Chollick, and a∣nointed on the lower part of the Belly doth the like, and dropped into the EarsEars, caseth the pains of them: The Juyce of the Leavs doth the like: being also anointed on the Forhead and Temples, it helpeth the Megrim and all other pains in the Head. If the Kernels be bruised and boyled in Vinegar until they be∣come thick, and applied to the Head, it mer∣veilously procure the Hair to grow again up∣on bald places or where it is too thin.Baldness. Lady Venus owns this Tree, and by it op∣poseth the ill effects of Mars, and indeed for Children and yong people, nothing is better to purge Choller, and the Jaundice, than the Leavs and Flowers of this Tree, being made into a Syrup or Conserve, let such as delight to please their lust regard the Fruit, but such as love their health and their Childrens, let them regard what I say, they may safely give two spoonfuls of the Syrup at a time, 'tis as gentle as Venus her self. The Pear-tree. THese are so well known that they need no Description. Vertues and Use. For their Physical use they are best discer∣ned by their tasts: All the sweet or lushious sorts whether manured or wild, do help to move the Belly downward more or less: Those that are harsh and sowr do on the contrary bind the Belly as much; and the Leavs do so also. Those that are moist do in some sort cool, but harsh or wild sorts much more, and are very good in repelling Medicines: as if the wild sorts be boyled with Mushroms,Mushroms it maketh them the less dangerous. The said Pears boyled with a little Honey, helpeth much the oppressed Stomach,Stomach, as al sorts of them do, some more, some less; but the harsher sorts do most cool and bind, serving well to be bound to green wounds to cool and stay the Blood, and heal up the wound without fur∣ther trouble or Inflamation;Inflama∣tions, Cool, Bind, Wounds. as Galen saith he hath found by experience. And wild Pears do sooner close up the Lips of green Wounds than the others. Schola Salerni adviseth to drink much Wine after Pears, or els (they say) they are as bad as poyson, nay and they curs the Tree for it too, but if a poor man find his Stomach oppressed by eating Pears 'tis but working hard and it will do as wel as drinking Wine. The Trce be∣longs to Venus, and so doth the Apple-tree.
Pellitory of the Wall. Description. THis riseth up with many brownish, red, tender and weak, clear, and almost tran∣sparent stalks about two foot high, upon which grow at the several Joynts, two Leavs somwhat broad and long, of a dark green co∣lour, which afterwards turn brownish, smooth on the edges, but rough and hairy as the Stalks are also At the Joynts with the Leavs from the middle of the stalks upwards, wher it spreadeth into some branches, stand many smal pale, pur∣plish Flowers, in hairy rough Heads or Husks; after which come smal black and rough Seed, which will stick to any cloth or Garment that shall touch it. The Root is somwhat long with many smal Fibres thereat, of a dark red∣dish colour, which abideth the Winter, al∣though the Stalks and Leavs perish and spring afresh every yeer. Place. It groweth wild generally through this Land, about the borders of Fields, and by the sides of Walls, and among Rubbish; It will endure well being brought into Gardens, and planted on the shady side, where it will spring of its own sowing. Time. It flowreth in June and July, and the Seed is ripe soon after. Vertues and Use. The dried Herb Pellitory made up into an Electuary with Honey, or the Juyce of the Herb, or the Decoction thereof made up with Sagar or Honey, is a singular Remedy for any old or dry Cough,Old or dry Cough, shortness of Breath, Stone and Gravel, the shortness of breath, and Wheesing in the Throat. Three ounces of the Juyce thereof taken at a time, doth won∣derfully help stopping of the Urine, and to ex∣pel the Stone or Gravel in the Kidneys or Bladder and is therfore usually put among o∣ther Herbs, used in Clisters to mitigate pains in the Back, Sides, or Bowels proceeding of wind, stopping of Urine, the Gravel or Stone as aforesaid: If the bruised Herb sprinkled with some Muskadine be warmed upon a Tile; or in a Dish upon a few quick coals in a Cha∣sing-dish, and applied to the Belly, it wor∣keth the same effect. The Decoction of the Herb being drunk, easeth pains of the Mo∣ther,Mother, Womens Courses, Obstructi∣ons, Sore Throat, Teeth, and bringeth down Womens Courses; it also easeth those griefs that arise from Ob∣structions of the Liver, Spleen, and Reins: The same Decoction with a little Honey ad∣ded thereto is good to gargle a sore Throat. The Juyce held a while in the Mouth, easeth pains in the Teeth. The distilled water of the Herb drunk with some Sugar worketh the same effects; and clenseth the Skin from Spots, Freckles,Freckles, Hbeals, Sunbnrn, Morphew, pain in the Ears, Impostums Burnings & Scal∣dings, inflama∣tions Ulcers, Scabs, Falling of the Hair, Piles, Gout, Fistulaes, Green Wounds, Bruised, Tendon or Muscle. Purples, Wheals, Sunburn, Morphew, &c. The Juyce dropped into the Ears easeth the noise in them, and taketh away the pricking and shooting pains therein: The same or the distilled Water, asswageth hot and swelling Impostumes, Burnings and Scaldings by fire or Water, as also all other hot Tumors and Inflamations, or breakings out of Heat, be∣ing bathed often with wet Cloathes dipped therein. The said Juyce made into a Liniment with Ceruss and Oyl of Roses and anointed therewith, clenseth foul rotten Ulcers, and stayeth spreading or creeping Ulcers, and the running Scabs or Sores in Childrens Heads: and helpeth to stay falling of the Hair from off the Head. The said Oyntment, or the Herb applied to the Fundament openeth the Piles and easeth their pains; and being mixed with Goats Tallow, helpeth the Gout. The Juyce is very effectual to clens Fistulaes, and to heal them up safely; or the Herb it self bruised, and applied with a little Salt. It is likewise so effectual to heal any green Wound, that if it be bruised and bound thereto for three daies, you shall need no other Medicine to heal it further. A Pultis made hereof with Mallows, and boyled in Wine, with Wheat Bran, and Bean Flower; and some Oyl put thereto, and applied warm to any bruised Sinew, Tendon, or Muscle, doth in a very short time restore them to their strength, taking away the pains of the Bruises; and dissolveth the congealed Blood coming of Blows or Falls from high places. The Juyce of Pellitory of Wall clarified and boyled into a Syrup with Honey, and a spoon∣ful of it drunk every morning, by such as are subject to the Dropsie, if continuing that cours though but once a week, if ever they have the Dropsie, let them come but to me, and I will cure them gratis. Peny-royal. Description. THis is so well known unto all (I mean the common kind) that it needeth no De∣scription. There is a greater kind than the ordinary sort found wild with us, which so abideth be∣ing brought into Gardens, and differeth not from it but only in the largeness of the Leavs and Stalks, in rising higher, and not creeping upon the ground so much. The Flowers whereof are Purple, growing in Rundles about the Stalk like the other. Place. The first which is common in Gardens,
groweth also in many moist and watery places of this Land. The second is sound wild in Essex in divers places by the High-way from London to Cole∣chester, and thereabouts more abundantly than in other Countries, and is also planted in their Gardens in Essex. Time. They Flower in the latter end of Summer, about August. Vertues and Use. Dioscorides saith, That Peny-royal maketh thin, tough Flegm,Tough Flegm, Terms provokes, Dead Child, & Afterbirth Vomiting, Melan∣cholly, Venemous Beasts, Fainting and Swouning, Gums, out, Marks in the Face, Toothach, Pains in the Joynts, Headach, pains of the Belly & Breast, Falling∣sickness, Stinking Water, Cramps & Convulsi∣ons, warmeth the coldness of any part whereto it is apylied, and digesteth raw or corrupt matter: Being boyled & drunk, it provoketh Womens Courses and expelleth the dead Child and afterbirth, and staieth the disposition to Vomit, being taken in Water and Vinegar mingled together. And being mingled with Honey and Salt it avoideth Flegm out of the Lungs, and purgeth Melan∣cholly by the Stool. Drunk with Wine it hel∣peth such as are bitten or stung with Vene∣mous Beasts: and applied to the Nostrils with Vinegar, reviveth those that are fainting and swouning. Being dried and burnt it strengthe∣neth the Gums; It is helpful to those that are troubled with the Gout being applied of it self to the place until it wax red: and applied in a Plaister, it taketh away spots or marks in the Face: Applied with Salt, it profiteth those that are Splenetick or Liver-grown. The De∣coction doth help the Itch, if washed therwith: Being put into Baths for Women to sit there∣in, it helpeth the Swelling and hardness of the Mother. The green Herb bruised and put in∣to Vinegar clenseth foul Ulcers, and taketh a∣way the marks and bruises of blows about the Eyes, and all discolourings of the Face by fire, yea and the Leprosie, being drunk and outwardly applied: Boyled in Wine with Honey and Salt, it helpeth the Toothach. It helpeth the cold Griefs of the Joynts, taking away the pains, and warming the cold parts, being fast bound to the place after a bathing, or sweating in an hot hous. Pliny addeth that Penny-royal and Mints together help fain∣tings or swounings, being put into Vinegar, and put to the Nostrils to be smelled unto, or a little thereof put into the Mouth. It easeth the Headach, and the pains of the Breast and Belly, stayeth the gnawing of the Stomach, and inward pains of the Bowels; being drunk in Wine it provoketh Womens Courfes, and ex∣pelleth the dead child and afterbirth: Being given in Wine it helpeth the Falling-sickness: Put into unwholsom or stinking Water that men must drink (as at Sea, and where other cannot be had) it maketh them the less hurt∣ful: It helpeth Cramps or Convulsions of the Sinews being applied with Honey, Salt, and Vinegar. It is very effectual for the Cough, being boyled in Milk and drunk, and for Ul∣cers or Sores in the Mouth.Sore Mouth, Jaundice, Dropsie, pains of the Head & Sinews, Eyesight, Lethargy, Burnings. Mathiolus saith, The Decoction thereof being drunk, helpeth heJaundice and Dropsie, and all pains of the Head and Sinews that come of a cold caus, and that it helpeth to clear and quicken the Eye∣sight. Applied to the Nostrils of those that have the Falling-sickness or the Lethargy, or put into the Mouth, it helpeth them much, being bruised and with Vinegar applied. And applied with Barley Meal, it helpeth Burnings by fire, and put into the Ears, easeth the pains of them. The Herb is under Venus. Peony, Mas. & Femina. Description. THe Male Peony riseth up with many brownish Stalks, whereon grow many fair green and somtimes reddish Leavs, one set a∣gainst another upon a Stalk without any parti∣cular devision in the Leaf at all. The Flo∣wers stand at the tops of the Stalks, consisting of five or six broad Leavs, of a fair purplish red colour, with many yellow threds in the middle standing about the Head, which after riseth to be the Seed Vessels, devided into two, three, or four rough crooked Pods like Horns, which being ful ripe, open, and turn them∣selves down one edge to another backward, shewing within them divers round, black shi∣ning Seed, having also many red or Crimson grains, intermixed with the black, whereby it maketh a very pretty shew. The Roots are great, thick, and long, spreading and running down reasonable deep in the Ground. The ordinary Female Peony hath many Stalks and more Leavs on them than the Male: the Leavs not so large but nicked diversly on the edges, some with great and deep, others with smaller cuts and devisions, of a dark or dead green colour. The Flowers are of a strong heady scent, most usually smaller and of a more purple colour than the Male, with yel∣low thrums about the Head as the Male hath. The Seed Vessels are like Horns as in the Male, but smaller, the Seed also is black but less shining. The Roots consist of many thick and short tuberous clogs, fastned at the ends of long strings and all from the Head of the Root which is thick and short, and of the like scent with the Male. Place and Time. They grow in Gardens; and Flower usually about May. Vertues and Use. The Root of the Male Peony fresh gathered, hath been found by experience to cure the
Falling-sickness;Falling sicknsess, but the surest way is (be∣sides hanging it about the Neck, by which Children have been cured) to take the Root of the Male Peony washed clean and stamped somwhat smal, and lay it to infuse in Sack for twenty four Hours, at the least, after strain it, and take first and last, morning and eve∣ning a good draught for sundry daies together before and after a full Moon, and this will al∣so cure older persons, if the Disease be not grown too old and past cure, especially if there be a due and orderly preparation of the Body, with Posset drink made of Betony &c. The Root is also effectual for Women that are not sufficiently clensed after Childbirth, and such as are troubled with the Mother; for which likewise the black Seed beaten to Pouder and given in Wine, is also available.Women not clensed in Cild∣birth, Mother, Ephialtes, or, the Night∣Mare, Melan∣chollick Dreams. The black Seed also taken before bed time, and in the morning, is very effectual for such as in their sleep are troubled with the Diseas called Ephi∣altes or Incubus, but we do commonly cal it the Night-Mare; a diseas which Melancholly persons are subject unto; It is also good a∣gainst Melanchollick Dreams. The Distil∣led water, or Syrup made of the Flowers, wor∣keth the same effects that the Root and the Seed do, although more weakly. The Female is often used for the purposes aforesaid, by reason the Male is so scarce a Plant that it is possessed by few, and those great Lovers of Rarities in this kind. It is an Herb of the Sun, and under the Lyon, Physitians say Male Peony Roots are best, but Dr. Reason told me, male Peony was best for men, and female Peony for wo∣men, and he desires to be judged by his bro∣ther Dr. Experience. The Roots are held to be of most Vertue, then the Seeds next the Flowers, and last of all the Leavs. Pepperwort, or Dit∣tander. Description. OUr common Pepper-wort sendeth forth somwhat long and broad Leavs, of a light blewish green colour, finely dented about the edges, and pointed at the ends, standing upon round hard Stalks three or four foot high, spreading many Branches on all sides, and having many smal white Flowers at the tops of them, after which follow small Seed in small Heads: The Root is slender running much under ground, and shooting up again in many place; and both Leavs and Root, are very hot and sharp of tast like Pepper, for which caus it took the name. Place. It groweth Naturally in many places of this Land, as at Clare in Essex, neer also unto Ex∣ceter in Devonshire, upon Rochester com∣mon in Kent; in Lancashire and divers other places; but is usually kept in Gardens. Time. It Flowreth in the end of June, and in July. Vertues and Use Pliny and Paulus AEgineta say that Pepper∣wort is very effectual for the Sciatica,Sciatica, Gout, pains in the Joynts, Discolou∣rings of the Skin, Marks & Scars by Burning, Speedy Delivery. or any other Gout or pain in the Joynts, or any o∣ther inveterate grief; the Leavs hereof to be bruised and mixed with old Hogs grease and applied to the place; and to continue thereon four hours in Men, and two hours in women, the place being afterwards bathed with Wine and Oyl mixed together, and then wrapped with Wool or Skins after they have sweat a lit∣tle. It also amendeth the Deformities or dis∣colourings of the Skin, and helpeth to take a∣way Marks, Scars, and Scabs, or the foul marks of burning with fire or iron. The Juyce hereof is in some places used to be given in Ale to drink to women with child, to procure them a speedy delivery in Travail. Here's another Martial Herb for you, make much of it. Perwinkle. Description. THe common sort hereof hath many Bran∣ches trayling, or running upon the ground shooting out smal Fibres at the Joynts as it runneth, taking thereby hold in the ground and Rooteth in divers places, At the Joynts of these Branches stand two small dark green shining Leavs, somwhat like Bay Leavs, but smaller, and with them come forth also the Flowers (one at a Joynt standing upon a tender Footstalk) being somwhat long and hollow, parted at the brims, somtimes into four somtimes five Leavs, the most ordinary sort are of a pale blue colour, some are pure white, and some of a dark reddish Purple colour. The Root is little bigger than a Rush, bushing in the ground, and creeping with his Branches far about, whereby it quickly possesseth a great compass, and is therfore most usually planted under Hedges, where it may have room to run. Place. Those with the pale blue, and those with the white Flowers grow in Woods and Or∣chards by the Hedg sides in diverse places of this Land. But those with the Purple Flowers in Gardens only.
Time. They Flower in March and April. Vertues and Use. The Perwincle is a great binder, staying bleeding both at Mouth and Nose, if some of the Leavs be chewed: The French use it to stay Womens Courses. Dioscorides, Galen, and AEgineta commend it against the Lask, and Fluxes of the Belly to be drunk in Wine.Stanch bleeding, Womens Courses, Flux of the Belly. Venus owns this Herb, and saith that the Leavs eaten by man and wife together, cau∣seth love between them. St. Peters-wort. Name. IF Superstition had not been the Father of Tradition, as well as Ignorance the Mo∣ther of Devotion, this Herb as well as St. Johns wort had found some other name to be known by; but we may say of our Fore-fa∣thers as St. Paul of the Athenians, I perceive that in many things you are too Superstitious: Yet seing it is come to that pass, that Custom having gotten possession pleads Prescription for the name, I shall let it pass, and come to the Description of the Herb, which take as followeth. Description. It riseth up with square upright Stalks for the most part, somwhat greater and higher than St. Johns wort (and good reason too, St. Peter being the greater Apostle (ask the Pope else) for though God would have the Saints equal, the Pope is of another Opinion) but brown in the same mannor, having two Leavs at every Joynt, somwhat like, but larger than St. Johns wort, and a little rounder pointed with few or no Holes to be seen therein, and having somtimes some smaller Leavs rising from the Bosom of the greater, and somtimes a little hairy also: At the tops of the Stalks stand many Starlike Flowers, with yellow threds in the middle very like those of St. Johns wort, insomuch that this is hardly dis∣cerned from it but only by the largeness of height, the Seed being also alike in both. The Root abideth long sending forth new shoots e∣very yeer. Place. It groweth in many Groves and small low Woods, in divers places of this Land, as in Kent, Huntington, Cambridg, and Nothamp∣ton shires, as also neer water Courses in other places. Time. It Flowreth in June and July, and the Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and Use. It is of the same property with St. Johns wort, but somwhat weak, and therefore more seldom used. Two drams of the Seed taken at a time in Honeyed water, purgeth Chollerick HumorsChollerick Humors, Sciatica, Burnings. (as saith Dioscorides, Pliny, and Ga∣len) and thereby helpeth those that are trou∣bled with the Sciatica: The Leavs are used as St. Johns wort, to help those places of the Body that have been burnt with Fire. There is not a straw to chuse between this and St. Johns wort, only St. Peter must have it, lest he should lack Pot-herbs. Pimpernel. Discription. COmmon Pimpernel hath diverse weak square Stalks lying on the ground beset all along with two smal and almost round Leavs at every Joynt one against another, very like Chickweed, but hath no Footstalks, for the Leavs do as it were compass the Stalk: The Flowers stand singly each by themselvs at them and the Stalks, consisting of five round small pointed Leavs of a fine pale red colour, tending to an Orange, with so many threds in the middle, in whose places succeed, smooth round Heads, wherein is contained smal Seed. The Root is smal and fibrous perishing every yeer. Place. It groweth every where almost, as well in the Meadows and Cornfields, as by the Way∣sides, and in Gardens arising of it self. Time. It Flowreth from May unto August, and the Seed ripeneth in the mean time and falleth. Vertues and Use. This is of a clensing and attractive qua∣lity, whereby it draweth forth Thorns or Splinters,Thorns or Splinters, purgeth the Head, Wounds & Ulcers, Clenseth Face, Plague & Pestilenti∣al Feavers Venemous Beasts, Mad Dogs biting, Obstru∣ctions, Urine, Stone & Gravel, or other such like things gotten in∣to the Flesh, and put up into the Nostrils purgeth the Head; and Galen saith also they have a drying faculty, whereby they are good to soder the lips of Wounds, and to clens foul Ulcers. The distilled Water or Juyce is much esteemed by French Dames to clense the Skin from any roughness, deformity, or discolou∣ring thereof: Being boyled in Wine, and given to drink, it is a good Remedy a∣gainst the Plague, and other Pestilential Fea∣vers, if the Party after taking it warm lie in his bed and sweat for two hours after, and use the same twice at least. It helpeth also all stin∣gings and bitings of Venemous Beasts or mad Dogs, being used inwardly and applied out∣wardly: The same also openeth the Obstru∣ctions of the Liver, and is very available a∣gainst the Infirmities of the Reins, it provo∣keth Urine, and helpeth to expel the Stone and Gravel out of the Kidneys and Bladder, and
helpeth much in all inward Wounds and Ul∣cers.Wounds & Ulcers, Clouds or Mists in the Eyes, Toothach, Hemor∣rboids. The Decoction or distilled Water is no less effectual to be applied to all Wounds that are fresh and green, or old filthy fretting and running Ulcers, which it very effectually cu∣reth in short spaces. A little Honey mixed with the Juyce and dropped into the Eyes clen∣seth them from cloudy mists, or thick Films which grow over them and hinder the sight: It helpeth the Toothach being dropped into the Ear on the contrary side of the pain. It is also effectual to eas the pains of the Hemor∣rhoids or Piles. Ground Pine, or Cha∣mepitys. Description. OUr common Ground Pine groweth low, seldom rising above an handbreadth high, shooting, forth divers smal Branches, set with slender smal long narrow grayish or whi∣tish Leavs somwhat hairy; and devided into three parts many times many bushing together at a Joynt, and somtimes some growing scat∣teredly upon the Stalks, smelling somwhat strong like unto Rozin; the Flowers are somwhat smal and of a pale yellow colour gro∣wing from the Joynts of the Stalks all along among the Leavs, after which come small, long, and round Husks: The Root is smal woody perishing every yeer. Place. It groweth more plentifully in Kent than in any other Country of this Land; as namely, in many places from on this side Dartford, a∣long to Southfleet, Cotham, and Rochester, and upon Chattam down hard by the Beacon, and half a mile from Rochester in a Field nigh a Hous called Salsey. Time. It Flowreth and giveth Seed in the Summer Months. Vertues and Use. The Decoction of Ground Pine drunk, doth wonderfully prevail against the StranguryStrangury, Obstructi∣ons, Mother, Womens, Courses, Dead Child and Afterbirth or any inward pains arising from the Diseases of the Reins and Urine, and is especial good for all Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen and gently openeth the Body, for which purpose they were wont in former times to make Pills with the Pouder thereof, and the Purple Figs. It marveilously helpeth all the Diseases of the Mother used inwardly, or applied outwardly, procuring Womens Courses, and expelling the dead Child and af∣terbirth, yea it is so powerful upon those Fe∣minine parts that it is utterly forbidden to Women with Child, in that it will caus abort∣ment or delivery before the time: It is as effe∣ctual also in all pains and Diseases of the Joynts, as Gouts, Cramps, Palseys, Sciatica, and Aches;Gouts, Cramps, Palseys, Sciatica, Aches &c. Dropsie, poyson of the Aco∣nites, Venemous, Creatures, Cold Cough Palsie, Hard Breasts, & hard Swellings, Ulcers, & old Sores, Green Wounds. either the Decoction of the Herb in 'Wine taken inwardly, or applied outward∣ly, or both for some time together, for which purpose the Pills made with the Pouder of Ground Pine, and of Hermodactils with Ve∣nice Turpentine are very effectual. These Pills also are special good for those that have the Dropsie, to be continued for some time. The same is a special good help for the Jaun∣dice, and for griping pains in the Joynts, Bel∣ly, or inward parts; It helpeth also all Disea∣ses of the Brain proceeding of cold and Fleg∣matick Humors and Distillations, as also for the Falling-sickness. It is an espcial Remedy for the Poyson of the Aconites of all sorts, and other poisonful Herbs, as also against the stinking of any Venemous Creature. It is a good Remedy for a cold Cough, especially in the beginning. For all this purposes afore∣said, the Herb being tunned up in new Drink and drunk is almost as effectual, but far more acceptable to weak and dainty Stomachs. The Distilled Water of the Herb hath the same ef∣fects, but more weakly. The Conserve of the Flowers doth the like, which Mathiolus much commendeth against the Palsey. The green Herb or the Decoction thereof being applied, dissolveth the hardness of Womens Breasts, and all other hard Swellings in any other part of the Body. The green Herb also applied, or the Juyce thereof with some Honey, not only clenseth putrid, stinking foul and Malignant Ulcers and Sores of all sorts, but healeth and sodereth up the lips of green Wounds in any part also. Let Women forbear it if they be with Child, for it works violently upon the Foe∣minine part; and Mars owns it, I tell them but so. Plantane. THis groweth so familiarly in Meadows and Fields, and by Pathways, and is so well known that it needeth no Description. Time. It is in its beauty about June, and the Seed ripeneth shortly after. Vertues and Use. The Juyce of Plantane clarified and drunk for divers daies together, either of it self or in other drink prevaileth wonderfully against all torments or Excoriations in the GutsPains in the Guts, Distiilat∣ion of Rhewm, Fluxes, & Women, Courses, or Bo∣wels, helpeth the distillations of Rhewm from the Head, ond staieth all manner of Fluxes even Womens Courses when they flow too abundantly; It is good to stay spitting of
Blood, and all other Bleedings at the Mouth, or the making of foul or bloody water by rea∣son of any Ulcer in the Reins or Bladder, and also staveth the too free bleeding of Wounds.spitting Blood or Bleeding at Mouth, or Nose or of Wounds, phtisick, Consumption or Ul∣cers in the Lungs, Tertian Ague, Dropsie, & Falling∣sickness, Toothach, pin and web in the yes, pains in the Ears, Instamati∣ons, Burning or Scalding, Hollow Ulcers, Cankers, and sore Mouth, or privy parts, Piles, pains of the Head, Lunacy & phrensie, Biting of Serpents, or Mad Dogs, HotGouts Bones out of Joynt, Worms in the Belly, or in Ul∣cers, Scabs and Itch, Tetters, Ring∣worms, shingles, & fretting sores, Wounds. It is held an especial Remedy for those that are troubled with the Phtisick, or Consumption of the Lungs, or Ulcers in the Lungs, or Coughs that come of heat. The Decoction or Pouder of the Roots or Seed, is much more binding for all the purposes aforesaid than the Leavs. Dioscorides saith, That three Roots boyled in Wine and taken helpeth the Tertian Ague, and four the Quartan Ague: But (let∣ting pass the number as Fabulous) I conceive the Decoction of divers Roots may be effectu∣al. The Herb (but especially the Seed) is held to be profitable: against the Dropsie, the Falling-sickness, the yellow Jaundice, and stop∣pings of the Liver and Reins. The Roots of Plantane and Pellitory of Spain beaten to Pouder and put into hollow Teeth, taketh a∣way the pains of them: The clarified Juyce or distilled Water dropped into the Eyes cooleth the Inflamations in them, and taketh away the Pin and Web; and dropped into the Ears easeth pains in them, and helpeth and resto∣reth the Hearing: The same also with Juyce of Housleek is profitable against all In∣flamations and breakings out in the skin, and against Burnings or Scaldings by fire or Wa∣ter. The Juyce or Decoction made either of it self or other things of like nature is of much use and good effect for old and hollow Ulcers that are hard to be cured, and for Cankers and Sores in the Mouth or privy parts of Man or Woman; and helpeth also the pains of the Piles in the Fundament. The Juyce mixed with Oyl of Roses, and the Temples and For∣head anointed therewith, easeth the pains of the Head proceeding from heat, and helpeth Lunatick, and Phrenetick persons very much; as also the bitings of Serpents or a Mad Dog: The same also is profitably applied to all hot Gouts in the Feet or Hands, especially in the beginning. It is also good to be applied where any Bone is out of Joynt to hinder Inflamati∣ons, Swellings and Pains that presently rise thereupon. The Pouder of the dried Leavs taken in drink, killeth Worms of the Belly, and boyled in Wine killeth Worms that breed in old and foul Ulcers. One part of Plantane Water, and two parts of the brine of pouder'd Beef boyled together and clarified, is a most sure Remedy to heal all spreading Scabs and Itch in the Head or Body, all manner of Tet∣ters, Ringworms, the Shingles, and all other running and fretting Sores. Briefly the Plan∣tanes are singular good Wound Herbs to heal fresh, or old Wounds and Sores either inward or outward. Its true Myzaldus and others yea almost all Astrologo-Physitians hold this to be an Herb of Mars, and they give a verisimile of a truth for it too, Viz. becaus it cures diseases of the Head and privities which are under the Houses of Mars, Aries, and Scorpio: All Diseases of the Head comming of heat are caused by Mars, for Venus is made of no such hot met∣tle, or at least deals in inferior parts. The truth is, it is under the command of Venus, and cures the Head by Antipathy to Mars, and the Privities by Sympathy to Venus, neither is there hardly a Martial Diseas but it cures, If I were to fortisie my Body against a Martial Diseas I would do it by this Herb as soon as by any,and may do it (it may be) when time shal serve. Plums. THese are so well known that they need no Description. Vertues and Use. As there is great diversity of the kinds, so is there in the operations of Plums, for some that are sweet, moisten the Stomach and make the Belly soluble; those that are sowr quench thirst more and bind the Belly ; the moist and wate∣rish do soonest corrupt in the Stomach, but the firm do nourish more and offend less: The dried Fruit sold by the Grocers under the name of Damask Prunes, do somwhat loosen, the Belly, and being stewed are often used both in health and sickness, to rellish the Mouth and Stomach to procure Appetite, and a little to open the Body, allay Choller, and cool the Stomach: Plum-tree Leavs boyled in Wine, is good to wash and gargle the Mouth and Throat to dry the Flux of Rhewm coming to the Pallat, Gums, or Almonds of the Ears.Open the Belly, Quench Thirst, & pind the Belly, Procure Appetite, Allay Choller, Cool the Stomach, Rhewin, Stone, Tetters, & Ring∣worms, Piles, Ulcers, Hoarsness, and pains in the Ears Stone and Chollick. The Gum of the Trees is good to break the Stone. The Gum or Leavs boyled in Vine∣gar and applied, killeth Tetters and Ring∣worms. Mathiolus saith, The Oyl pressed out of the Kernels of the Stones, as Oyl of Almonds is made, is good against the inflamed Piles, the Tumors or Swellings of Ulcers, Hoarsness of the voice, roughness of the Tongue and Throat, and likewise the pains in the Ears. And that five ounces of the said Oyl taken with one ounce of Muscadine, dri∣veth forth the Stone, and helpeth the Chol∣lick. All Plums are under Venus, and are like Women, some better, some worse.
Pollipody of the Oak. Description. THis is a smal Herb consisting of nothing but Roots and Leavs: bearing nei∣ther Stalk, Flower, nor Seed as it is thought. If hath three or four Leavs ri∣sing from the Root, every one singly by it self, of about a hand length, which are winged, con∣sisting of many smal narrow Leavs, cut into the middle rib standing on each side of the Stalk, large below, and smaller up to the top, not dented or notched on the edges at all, as the Male Fern hath; of a sad green colour and smooth on the upper side, but on the underside somwhat rough, by reason of cer∣tain yellowith spots set thereon: The Root is smaller than ones little finger lying aslope, or creeping along under the upper drust of the earth, brownish on the out∣side, and greenish within, of a sweetish harsh∣ness in tast, set with certain rough Knags on each side thereof, having also much Mossiness or yellow hairiness upon it, and some Fibres underneath it, whereby it is nourished. Place. It groweth as well upon old rotten stumps, or trunks of Trees, as Oak, Beech, Hazel; Willow, or any other, as in the Woods under them; and upon old Mud Wals, as also in Mossie, Stony, and gravelly places, neer unto Woods; That which groweth upon Oaks is accounted the best, but the quantity thereof is scarce sufficient for the common use. Time. It being alwaies green, may be gathered for use at any time. Vertues and Use. Mesues (who is called the Physitians Evan∣gelist, for the certainty of his Medicines, and the truth of his Opinions) saith, That it dri∣eth up thin Humors,Dryeth Humors, purgeth burnt Choller, Flegm, Melan∣cholly, Quartan Agues, Spleen, Chollick, digesteth thick and tough, and purgeth burnt Choller, and espe∣cially tough and thick Flegm, and thin Flegm also, even from the Joynts; and is therfore good for those that are troubled with Melan∣cholly, or Quartan Agues, especially if it be taken in Whey, or Honeyed Water, or in Barley water, or the Broth of a Chicken with Epithimum, or with Beets and Mallows. It is also good for the hardness of the Spleen and for prickings or Stitches in the sides, as also for the Chollick, some use to put to it some Fen∣nel Seeds, or Annis Seeds or Ginger to cor∣rect that loathing it bringeth to the Stomach, which is more than needeth, it being a safe and gentle Medicine fit for al persons at al sea∣sons, which daily experience confirmith; And an ounce of it may be given at a time in a De∣coction, if there be not Saena or some other strong purger put with it. Adram or two of the Pouder of the dried Roots, taken fasting in a cup of Honeyed water, worketh gently, and for the purposes aforesaid. The distilled water both of Roots and Leavs is much commended for the Quartan Ague, to be taken for many daies together, as also against Melancholly, or fearful or troublesom sleepsTrouble∣som sleeps, Cough, shortness of Breath, and Whee∣sings, Lun∣gs, phtisick, Member, out of Joynt, pollipus o Diseas in the Nose, Chops in the Fin∣gers or Toes. or Dreams, and with some Sugar Candy dissolved therein, is good against the Cough, shortness of breath and Wheesings, and those distillations of thin Rhewin upon the Lungs, which caus Phtisicks, and oftentimes Consumptions. The fresh Roots beaten smal: or the Pouder of the dried Roots mixed with Honey and applied to any Member that is out of Joynt, doth much help it: Applied also to the Nose cureth the Dis∣eas called Polipus, which is a piece of Flesh growing therein which in time stoppeth the passage of breath through that Nostril; And it helpeth those clefts or Chops that come be∣tween the fingers or Toes. And why I pray must Pollipodium of the Oak only be used, Gentle Colledg of Physi∣tians, can you give me but a glimps of a rea∣son for it? is it only becaus it is dearest? will you never leave your coverousness till your lives leave you? The Truth is, that which grows upon the Earth is best ('tis an Herb of Saturn and he seldom climbs trees) to purge Melancholly, if the humor be otherwise, chuse your Pollipodium accordingly. The Poplar-Tree. Description. THere are two sorts of Poplars which are most familiar with us, Viz. The Black, and the White, both which I shall here describe unto you. The white Poplar groweth great and reaso∣nable high, covered with a thick smooth white Bark, especially the Branches, having large Leavs cut into several devisions almost  a Vine Leaf, but not of so deep a green on the upper side, and hoary white underneath, of a reasonable good scent, the whol form represen∣ting the Leaf of Coltsfoot. The Catkins which it bringeth forth before the Leavs, are long, and of a faint reddish colour, which fall away bearing seldom good Seed with them. The Wood hereof is smooth, soft, and white, very finely waved, whereby it is much estee∣med. The Black Poplar groweth high  strai∣ter than the White, with a grayish Bark bea∣ring broad and green Leaves somwhat like Ivy
Leavs not cut in on the edges like the White, but whol and dented, ending in a point, and not white underneath, hanging by slender long Footstalks, which with the Air are con∣tinually shaken like as the Aspin Leavs are: The Catkins hereof are greater than of the White, composed of many round green Berries as it were set together in a long Cluster, con∣taining much downice matter, which being ripe is blown away with the wind, The clam∣my Buds hereof before they spread into Leavs, are gathered to make the Unguentum Popu∣leon, and are of a yellowish green colour and smal, somwhat sweet, but strong. The Wood is smooth, tough, and white, and easie to be cloven: On both these Trees groweth a sweet kind of Musk, which in former times was used to be put into sweet Oyntments. Place. They grow in moist Woods and by water sides in sundry places of the Land, yet the white is not so frequent as the other. Time. Their time is likewise expressed before, The Catkins coming forth before the Leavs and ripen in the end of Summer. Vertues and Use. The White Poplar, saith Galen, is of a clen∣sing property: The weight of one ounce in Pouder of the Bark thereof being drunk saith Dioscorides is a Remedy for those that are troubled with the Sciatica, or the Strangury:Sciatica, Strangury, pain in the Ears, Dull sight, Gout, Falling∣sickness, Warts, Pushes, & Wheals, Heat, & Inflama∣tions, Dryeth Womens Milk. The Juyce of the Leavs dropped warm into the Ears easeth the pains in them: The yong clammy Buds or Eyes before they break out in∣to Leavs, bruised, and a little Honey put to them, is a good Medicine for a dull Sight. The Black Poplar is held to be more cooling than the White, and therefore the Leavs brui∣sed with Vinegar and applied, helpeth the Gout; The Seed drunk in Vinegar is held good against the Falling-sickness. The Wa∣ter that droppeth from the hollow places of this Tree, taketh away Warts, Pushes, Wheals, and other the like breakings out in the Body. The yong black Poplar Buds, saith Mathio∣lus, are much used by Women to beautifie their hair, bruising them with fresh Butter and strai∣ning them after they have been kept for some time in the Sun. The Oyntment called Popu∣leon, which is made of this Poplar, is singular good for all heat, or Inflamation in any part of the y, and tempereth the heat of Woun his much used to dry up the Milk in Womens Breasts, When they have weyned their Children. Poppy. OF this I shal describe three kinds,Viz. The Whites and Black, of the Garden, and the Erratick, wild Poppy, or Corn Rose. Discription. The white Poppy hasth at first four or five whitish green Leavs lying upon the ground, which rise with the Stalk, compassing it at the bottom of them, and are very large, much cut or torn in on the edges, and dented also be∣sides: The Stalk which is usually four or five foot high, hath somtimes no Branches at the top, & usually but two or three at most bearing every one but one Head, wrapped in a thin Skin, which boweth down before it be ready to blow, and then rising and being broken, the Flower within it spreadeth it self open, and consisteth of four very large White round Leavs, with many whitish round threds in the middle, set about a small round green Head, having a Crown, or Star-like cover at the Head thereof, which growing ripe becometh as large as a great Apple. wherein are contai∣ned a great number of smal round Seed, in se∣veral partitions or devisions next unto the shell, the middle thereof remaining hollow and empty. All the whol Plant, both Leavs, Stalks and Heads, while they are fresh, yong, and green, yield a Milk when they are broken, of an unpleasant bitter tast, almost ready to provoke casting, and of a strong, heady smel, which being condensate is called Opium. The Root is white, and woody, perishing as soon as it hath given ripe Seed. The Black Poppy little differeth from the former, until it beareth his Flower, which is somwhat less, and of a black Purplish colour, but without any purple spots in the bottom of the Leaf. The Head of Seed is much less than the former, and openeth it self a little round about the top under the Crown, so that the Seed which is very black will fall out if one turn the Head thereof downwards. The wild Poppy, or Corn Rose, hath long and narrow Leavs very much cut in on the ed∣ges into many devisions, of a light green co∣lour, and somtimes hairy withal; The Stalk is blackish and hairy also, but not so tall as the Garden kinds, having some such like Leavs thereon as grow below, parted into three or four Branches somtimes, whereon grow smal hairy Heads bowing down before the Skin break, wherein the Flower is inclosed, which when it is ful blown open, is of a fair yellowish red or crimson colour, and in some much paler, without any spot in the bottom of the Leavs, having many black soft threds in the middle compassing a smal green Head, which when it
is ripe, is not bigger than ones little finger end, wherin is contained much black Seed, smaller by half than that of the Garden.The Root pe∣risheth every yeer, and springeth again of its own sowing. Of this kind there is one lesser in all the parts thereof, and differeth in no∣thing els. Places. The Garden kinds do not naturally grow wild in any place, but are all sown in Gardens where they grow. The Wild Poppy, or Corn Rose is plentiful enough, and many times too much in the Corn Fields of all Countries through this Land, and also upon Ditch Banks, and by Hedg sides: The smaller wild kind is also found in Corn Fields, and also in some other place, but not so plentiful as the former. Time. The Garden kinds are usually sown in the Spring, which then Flower about the end of May, and somwhat earlier, if they spring of their own sowing. The Wild Kinds Flower usually from May until July, and the Seed of them is ripe soon after the Flowring. Vertues and use. The Garden Poppy Heads with Seeds made into a Syrup, is frequently and to good effect used to procure rest and sleep in the sick and weak, and to stay Catarrh's and Defluxions of hot thin Rhewms from the Head into the Stomach, and upon the Lungs, causing a con∣tinual Cough, the Fore-runner of a Consump∣tion. It helpeth also Hoarsness of the Throat, and when one hath lost their voice, which the Oyl of the Seed doth likewise. The black Seed boyled in Wine and drunk; is said also to stay the Flux of the Belly and Womens Courses. The empty thels of the Poppy Heads are usu∣ally boyled in water and given to procure rest and sleep; so do the Leavs in the same man∣ner; as also if the Head and Temples be ba∣thed with the Decoction warm, or with the Oyl of Poppies, the green Leaves or Heads bruised and applied with a little Vinegar, or made into a Pultis with Barley Meal, or Hogs Greas, it cooleth and tempereth al Inflamati∣ons, as also the Diseas called St. Anthonies Fire. It is generally used in Treacle and Me∣thridate, and in all other Medicines that are made to procure rest and sleep,Procure∣sleep, Catarrhs, and deflu∣xions of Rhewm¦stayeth, Hoarsness, Flux of the Belly and womens courses, Inflamati∣ons and St. Anthonies Fire, paints in the Head, Phrensies, Toothach, and to eas pains in the Head as well as in other parts; It is also used to cool Inflamations, Agues, or Phrensies, and to stay Defluxions which caus a Cough or Consumption: and also other Flu∣xes of the Belly, or Womens Courses; It is also put into hollow Teeth to eas the pain, and hath been found by experience to eas the pain of the Gout. The Wild Poppy, or Corn Rose (as Ma∣thiolus saith) is good to prevent the Falling∣sickness.Falling Sickness, Plurisie, Surfets Agues and Inflama∣tions. The Syrup made with the Flowers is with good effect given to those that have the Pluresie; and the dried Flowers also, ei∣ther boyled in water, or made into Pouder and drunk either in the Distilled Water of them, or in some other Drink worketh the like effect. The Distilled Water of the Flowers, is held to be of much good use against Surfets, being drunk evening and morning; It is also more cooling than any of the other Poppies, and therefore cannot but be as effectual in hot Agues, Phrensies, and other Inflamations ei∣ther inward or outward, the Syrup or Water to be used therein, or the green Leavs used out∣wardly, either in an Oyntment, as it is in Populeon, a cooling Oyntment, or any other wales applied. Galen saith the Seed is dange∣rous to be used inwardly. The Herb is Lunar, and of the Juyce of it is made Opium, only for lucre of Money they cheat you, and tell you 'tis a kind of Tear, or some such like thing that drops from Poppies when they weep, and that is some where be∣yond the Sea, I know not where, beyond the Moon. Purslane. THe Garden Purslane (being used as a Sal∣let Herb) is so well known that it needeth no Description; I shal therefore only speak of its Vertues, as followeth. Vertues and use. It is good to cool any heat in the Liver, Blood, Reins, and Stomach, and in hot A∣gues, nothing better; It stayeth hot and Chollerick Fluxes of the Belly, Womens Courses, the Whites, and Gonorrhea, or run∣ning of the Reins, the Distillations from the Head, and pains therein proceeding of heat, want of sleep, or the Phrensie.Cooleth heat of Blood in hot Agues, Chollerick Fluxes, womens Courses, the whites & Genor∣rhea, Distillati∣ons, Phrensie, Heat of Urine, Lust, and Venercoue Dreams worms, Vomiting, old, dry cough, Short Breath, & Phtisick Ulcers, in the se∣cret parts, The Seed is more effectual than the Herb, and is of singu∣lar good use to cool the heat and sharpness of Urine, and the outragious Lust of the Body, Venerious Dreams, and the like, insomuch that the overfrequent use hereof, exinguisheth the Heat and Vertue of Natural Procreation. The Seed bruised and boyled in Wine and gi∣ven to Children, expelleth the Worms. The Juyce of the Herb is held as effectual to all the purposes aforesaid, as also to stay Vomitings; and taken with some Sugar or Honey, helpeth an old and dry Cough, shortness of Breath, and the Phtisick, and stayeth immoderate Thirst. The Distilled water of the Herb is used by many (as the more pleasing) with a little Sugar, to work the same effects. The Juyce also is singular good in the Inflamati∣ons and Ulcers of the secret parts in man or woman, as  of the Bowels and Hemor∣rhoids, hen they are Ulcerous, or Excoria∣tions
in them. The Herb bruised and applied to the Forehead and Temples, allayeth exces∣sive heat therein, hindring rest and sleep; and applied to the Eyes taketh away the rednessRedness of the Eyes, and Inflama∣tions, Crick, or pain in the Neck, Blastings by Light∣ning Burning by Gun∣pouder, Sore Breasts, Childrens Navils, Sore Mouths, & swollen Gums, Fastneth Teeth, Toothach, Bloody Urine, Gout, cramp, & stifness of the Si∣news. and Inflamation in them, and those other parts, where Pushes, Wheals, Pimples, St. Antho∣nies Fire and the like break forth, especially if a little Vinegar be put to it: And being laid to the Neck with as much of Galls and Linseed together, taketh away the pains there∣in, and the Crick in the Neck. The Juyce is used with Oyl of Roses for the said causes, or for Blastings by Lightning, and Burnings by Gun-Pouder, or for Womens sore Breastss, and to allay the heat in all other Sores or Hurts: applied also to the Navels of Children that stick forth, it helpeth them: It is also good for sore Mouths, and Gums that are swollen to fasten loos Teeth. Camerarius saith, That the distilled water used by some, took away the pain of their Teeth when all other Reme∣dies failed, and that the thickned Juyce made in Pills with the Pouder of Gum Tragacanth, and Arabick, being taken prevaileth much to help those that make a bloody water. Applied to the Gout, it easeth pains thereof, and hel∣peth the hardness of Sinews if it come not of the Cramp, or a cold caus. 'Tis an Herb of the Moon. See Lettice. Primroses. THese are so well known that they need no Description. Of the Leavs of Primroses is made as fine a Salve to heal green Wounds as any is that I know: you shall be taught to make Salves of any Herb at the latter end of the Book, make this as you are taught there, and do not (you that have any Ingenuity in you) see your poor Neighbors go with wounded Limbs when a Halfpenny cost will heal them. Privet. Description. OUr common Privet is carried up with many slender Branches, to a reasonable height and breadth, to cover Arbours, Bowrs, and Banquetting Houses, and brought, wrought, and cut into many forms, of Men, Horses; Birds, &c. which though at first sup∣ported, groweth afterwards strong of it self: It beareth long and narrow green Leavs by couples, and sweet smelling white Flowers in tufts at the ends of the Branches, which turn into smal black Berries that have a Purplish Juyce within them, and some Seeds that are flat on the one side, with a hole or dent there∣in. Place. It groweth in this Land in divers Woods. Time. Our Privet Flowreth in June and July; The Berries are ripe in August and Septem∣ber. Vertues and Use. It is little used in Physick with us in these times, more than in Lotions to wash Sores, and Sore Mouths, and to cool Inflamations and dry up Fluxes.Lotions to wash sore Mouths & Throats, Cool Inflama∣tions, Dry Flu∣xes, Inflamati∣on in wounds Headach, Fluxes, & womens courses, Voiding Blood, Rhewm in the Eyes Yet Mathiolus saith it serveth to all the uses for which Ciprus or the East Privet is appointed by Dioscorides and Galen. He further saith, That the Oyl that is made of the Flowers of Privet infused ther∣in, and set in the Sun, is singular good for the Inflamations of Wounds, and for the Headach coming of an hot caus. There is a sweet wa∣ter also distilled from the Flowers that is good for all those Diseases that need cooling and drying, and therefore helpeth all Fluxes, of the Belly or Stomach. Bloody Fluxes, and Wo∣mens Courses, being either drunk or applied, as also for those that void Blood at their Mouth or at any other place, and for Distil∣lations of Rhewms into the Eyes especially if it be used with Tutiae. Queen of the Meadows, Meadow-sweet, or Mead-sweet. Description. THe Stalks of this are reddish, rising to be three foot high, somtimes four or five foot, having at the Joynts there of large winged Leavs, standing one above another at distances, con∣sisting of many and somwhat broad Leavs, set on each side of a middle rib, being hard, rough, or rugged, crumpled much like to Elm Leavs, having also some smaller Leavs with them (as Agrimony hath) somewhat deepiy dented a∣bout the edges, of a sad green colour on the up∣per side, and graish underneath, of a pretty sharp scent and tast, somwhat like unto Bur∣net, and a Leaf hereof put into a Cup of Cla∣ret Wine giveth also a fine rellish to it: At the tops of the Stalks and Branches stand ma∣ny tusts of small white Flowers, thrust thick together. which smel much sweeter than the Leavs: and in their places, being fallen, come crooked and cornered Seed; The Root is somwhat woody, and blackish on the outside
and brownish within, with diverse greater strings, and lesser Fibres set thercat, of a strong scent, but nothing so pleasant as the Flowers and Leavs and perisheth not, but abideth ma∣ny yeers, shooting forth anew every Spring. Place. It groweth in moist Meadows, that lie much wet, or neer the Courses of Water. Time. It Flowreth in some place or other all the three Summer Months, that is, June, July, and August, and their Seed is ripe quickly af∣ter. Vertues and Use. It is used to stay all manner of Bleedings, Fluxes, Vomitings, and Womens Courses,Bleedings, Fluxes, Vemitings Womens Courses, and the u bites, Quartan Ague, Chollick, Opens the Belly, Old ulcers healeth, Sore Mouths, or Secrets, Raise Bli∣sters, Inflamati∣on in the Eyes. and also their Whites, It is said to alter and take away the fits of Quartan Agues, and to make a merry heart, for which purpose some use the Flowers, and some the Leavs. It hel∣peth speedily those that are troubled with the Chollick, being boyled in Wine; and with a little Honey taken warm, it openeth the Bel∣ly: but boyled in red Wine and drunk it stay∣eth the Flux of the Belly. Being outwardly applied, it healeth old Ulcers that are Can∣krous or eaten, or hollow and Fistulous, for which it is by many much commended, as al∣so for the Sores in the Mouth or secret parts. The Leavs when they are full grown being laid upon the Skin, will in a short time raise Blisters thereon, as Tragus saith. The wa∣ter thereof helpeth the heat and Inflamation in the Eyes. Venus claims dominion over the Herb. The Quince-Tree. Description. THe Ordinary Quince-tree groweth often to the height and bigness of a reasonable Apple-tree, but more usually lower and croo∣ked with a rough Bark, spreading Arms and Branches far abroad. The Leavs are somwhat like those of the Apple-tree, but thicker, har∣der, and fuller of Veins, and white on the under side, not dented at all about the edges, The Flowers are large and white, somtimes dash'd over with a Blush: The Fruit that fol∣loweth is yellow, being neer ripe, and cove∣red with a white Freez or Cotton, thick set on the yonger, and growing less as they grow to be through ripe; bunched out often times in some places, some being liker an Apple and some a Pear, of a strong heady scent, and not durable to keep, and is sowr, harsh, and of an unpleasant tast to eat fresh, but being scal∣ded, roasted, baked, or preserved, becometh more pleasant. Place and Time. It best likes to grow neer Ponds and Water∣sides, and is frequent through this Land; and Flowreth not until the Leavs be come forth. The Fruit is ripe in September or October. Vertues and Use. Quinces when they are green, helps all sorts of FluxesFluxes, Lasks, &c. Provoketh Appetite, stayeth Vomiting, Fainting Spirits, choller, Flegm, Poyson, womens Breasts, Plague Sores, Preserveth Hair. in man or Woman, and Chollerick Lasks, Castings, and whatsoever needeth A∣striction more than any way prepared by fire: Yet the Syrup of the Juyce, or the Conserve, are much conducible, much of the binding quality being consumed by the fire: If a little Vinegar be added, it stirreth up the langui∣shing Appetite, and the Stomach given to ca∣sting; Some Spices being added, it comfor∣teth and strengthneth the decayed and fainting Spirits, and helpeth the Liver oppressed; that it cannot perfect the digestion, and correcteth Choller and Flegm: If you would have them Purging, put Honey to them instead of Sugar; and if more Laxative, for Choller, Rubarb; for Flegm, Turbith; for warery Humors, Scammony, but if more forcibly to bind, use the unripe Quinces with Roses, and Acacia, or Hypocistis, and some torrefied Rubarb. To take of the crude Juyce of Quinces, is held a Preservative against the force of deadly poy∣son; for it hath been found most certain true, that the very smel of a Quince hath taken a∣way all the strength of the Poyson of White Hellebore. If there be need of any outward binding and cooling of any hot Fluxes; The Oyl of Quinces, or other Medicines that may be made thereof are very available to anoint the Belly, or other parts therewith: It likewise strengtheneth the Stomach and Belly, and the Sinews that are loosned by sharp Humors fal∣ling on them, and restraineth immoderate sweatings. The Muccilage taken from the Seeds of Quinces boyled a little in Water, is very good to cool the Heat and heal the Sore Breasts of Women. The same with a little Sugar is good to lenefie the harshness and hoarsness of the Throat, and roughness of the Tongue. The Cotton or Down of Quinces boyled and applied to Plague Sores, healeth them up; and said as a Playster made up with Wax, it bringeth hair to them that are bald, and keepeth it from falling if it be ready to shed.
Radish and Horse∣Radish. THe Garden Radish is so wel known that it needeth no Description. Description. The Hors-Radish hath his first Leavs that rise before Winter, about a foot and a holf long, very much cut in or torn on the edges into many parts of a dark green co∣lour, with a great Rib in the middle: After these have been up a while, others follow, which are greater, rougher, broader, and lon∣ger whol, and not devided as the first, but on∣ly somwhat roundly dented about the edges: The Stalk when it beareth Flowers (which is but seldom) is great rising up with some few lesser Leavs thereon to three or four foot high, spreading at the top many smal Bran∣ches of whitish Flowers, made of four Leavs apiece after which come smal Pods like those of Shepheards-Purs, but seldom with any Seed in them. The Root is great, long, white, and rugged shooting up divers Heads of Leavs, which may be parted for encreas, but it doth not creep within ground nor run above ground, and is of a strong sharp and bitter tast, almost like Mustard. Place. It is found wild in some places of this Land, but is chiefly planted in Gardens where it joy∣eth in a moist and shadowy place. Time. It Flowreth but seldom, but when it doth, it is in July. Vertues and Use. The Juyce of Hors-Radish given in drink is held to be very effectual for the Scurvy.Scurvy, Worms, Sciatica, Liver, & Spleen, It killeth the Worms in Children being drunk, and also laid upon the Belly. The Root brui∣sed and laid to the place grieved with the Scia∣tica, Joynt-ach, or the hard Swellings of the Liver and Spleen. doth wonderfully help them all. The Distilled water of the Herb and Roots is more familiar to be taken with a lit∣tle Sugar for all the purposes aforesaid. Garden Radishes are in wantonness by the Gentry eaten as Sallet, but they breed but scurvy Humors in the Stomach, and corrupt the Blood, and then send for a Physitian as fast as you can, this is one caus, makes the owners of such nice Pallars so unhealthful, yet for such as are troubled with the Gravel, Stone,Stone, Disury. or stoppage of Urine, they are good Physick if the Body be strong that takes them, you may make the Juyce of the Roots into a Syrup if you pleas for that use, they purge by Urine ex∣ceedingly. I Know not what Planet they are under, I think none of all the Seven will own them. Ragwort. Description. THe greater common Ragwort hath many large and long dark green Leavs lying on the ground, very much rent and torn on the sides into many pieces, from among which rise up somtimes but one, and somtimes two or three square or crested blackish or brownish Stalks three or four foot high, somtimes bran∣ched bearing diverse such like Leavs upon them at several distances unto the tops, where it brancheth forth into many Stalks bearing yellow Flowers, consisting of diverse Leaves set as a Pale or Border, with a dark yellow thrum in the middle, which do abide a great while, but at last are turned into Down, and with the smal blackish gray Seed are carried away with the wind. The Root is made of many Fibres, whereby it is firmly fastned into to the ground, and abideth many yeers. There is another sort hereof different from the former only in this, That it riseth not so igh; the Leavs are not so finely jagged, nor of so dark a green colour, but rather somwhat whitish, soft and woolly, and the Flowers u∣sually paler. Place. They grow both of them wild in Pastures, and untilled grounds in many places, and of∣tentimes both of them in one Field. Time. They Flower in June,and July, and the Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and Use. Ragwort, Clenseth, Digesteth, and Discus∣seth. The Decoction of the Herb to wash the Mouth or Throat that have Ulcers or SoresSore Mouth or Throat Swellings and Impo∣stumes, Quinsie & Kings Evil, Catarrbs & Deflu∣xions, Green Wounds & ulcers in the privy Parts, Running Cankers, & hollow Fistulaes, Aches & pains, Sciatica. therein; and for Swellings, hardness, or Im∣postumations, for it throughly clenseth and healeth them; as also the Quinsie and the Kings Evil: It helpeth to stay Catarrrhes, thin Rhewms & Defluxions from the Head in∣to the Eyes, Nose, or Lungs. The Juyce is found by experience to be singular good to heal green Wounds, and to clense and heal all old and filthy Ulcers in the Privities and in other parts of the Body; as also inward Wounds and Ulcers, and stayeth the Malig∣nity of fretting or running Cankers and hol∣low Fistulaes, not suffering them to spread fur∣ther. It is also much commended to help A∣ches and pains either in the Fleshy parts or in the Nervs and Sinews; as also the Sciatica, or pain of the Hips or Huckle-Bone, to bath the
places with the Decoction of the Herb, or to anoint them with an Oyntment made of the Herb bruised and boyled in old Hogs Suet, with some Mastich and Olibanum in Pouder, added unto it after it is strained forth. In Sussex we call it Ragweed. Rattle-grass. OF this there are two kinds, which I shall speak of, Viz. The Red and yellow. Description. The common red Rattle, hath sundry reddish hollow Stalks, and somtimes green risng from the Root, lying for the most part on the ground, yet some growing more upright, with many smal reddish or greenish Leavs set on both sides of a middle Rib finely dented about the edges: The Flowers stand at the tops of the Stalks and Branches, of a fine purplish red co∣lour, like smal gaping hoods, after which come flat blackish Seed in small Husks, which lying loos therein, will Rattle with shaking. The Root consists of two or three small whi∣tish strings, with some fibres thereat. The common Yellow Rattle hath seldom a∣bove one round green Stalk rising from the Root, about half a yard or two foot high, and but few Branches theron having two long and somwhat broad Leavs set at a Joynt, deeply cut in on the edges, resembling the Comb of e Cock, broadest next to the Stalk and smaller to the end: The Flowers grow at the tops of the Stalks with some shorter Leavs with them, hooded after the same manner that the others are, but of a fair yellow colour in most, or in some paler, and in some more white. The Seed is contained in large Husks, and being ripe will rattle or make a nois with lying loose in them. The Root is small and slender pe∣rishing every yeer. Place. They grow in our Meadows and Woods, ge∣nerally through this Land. Time. They are in Flower from Midsummer until August be past somtimes. Vertues and use. The Red Rattle is accounted profitable to heal up Fistulaes,Fistulaes, & hollow Ulcers, womens Courses, Fluxes, and hollow Ulcers and to stay the Flux of Humors to them, as also the abundance of Womens Courses, or any other Flux of Blood, being boyled in red Wine and drunk. The Yellow Rattle or Cocks Comb is held to Be good for those that are troubled with a Cough, or with Dimness of Sight,Cough, Dim sight. if the Herb being boyled with Beans, and some Ho∣ney put thereto, be drunk, or dropped into the Eyes. The whol Seed being put into the Eyes draweth forth any skin, Dimness, or Film from the sight without trouble or pain. Rest-Harrow, or Cam∣moak. Description. THe common Rest-Harrow riseth up with divers rough woody twigs, half a yard, or a yard high, set at the Joynes with∣out order, with little roundish Leavs somtimes more than two or three at a place, of a dark green colour, without thorns while they are yong, but afterwards armed in sundry places with short and sharp Thorns. The Flowers come forth at the tops of the twigs and Bran∣ches whereof it is ful, fashioned like Peas, or Broom Blossoms, but lesser, flatter, and som∣what closer, of a faint purplish colour; after which come smal Pods, containing smal, flat, and round Seed: The Root is blackish on the outside and whitish within, very tough and hard to break when it is fresh and green, and as hard as an Horn when it is dried, thrusting down deep into the ground, and spreading like∣wise, every piece being apt to grow again if it be left in the ground. Place. It groweth in many places of this Land, as well in the Arable as wast ground. Time. It Flowreth about the beginning or middle of July, and the Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and use. It is singular good to provoke Urine when it is stopped,Urine stopped, Stone, and to break and drive forth the Stone, which the Pouder of the Bark of the Root taken in Wine performeth effectually. Mathiolus saith, the same helpeth the Diseas called Hiernia Carnosa, the Fleshy RuptureFleshy Rupture, by taking the said Pouder for some Months toge∣ther constantly, and that it hath cuted some which seemed incurable by any other means than by cutting or burning. The Decoction thereof made with some Vinegar and gargled in the Mouth, easeth the Toothach,Toothach, especially when it comes of Rhewm; and the said De∣coction is very powerful to open Obstructi∣ons of the Liver and Spleen,Liver & Spleen Obstructed and other parts. A Distilled Water made in Balneo Mariae with four pound of the Roots hereof first sliced smal, and afterwards steeped in a Gallon of Canary Wine, is singular good for all the pur∣poses aforesaid and to clens the passages of the Urine. The Pouder of the said Root made in∣to an Electuary or Lozenges with Sugar: as also the Bark of the fresh Roots boyled tender and afterwards beaten Into a Consetve with Sugar, worketh the like effect. The Pouder of
the Roots strewed upon the Brims of Ulcers,Ulcers. or mixed with any other convenient thing and applied consumeth the hardness and can∣seth them to heal the better. Rocket. IN regard the garden Rocket is rather used as a Sallet Herb than to any Physical pur∣poses, I shall omit it, and only speak of the common wild Rocket: The Description whereof take as followeth. Description. The common wild Rocket, hath longer and narrower Leavs much more devided into slen∣der cuts and jags on both sides of the middle Rib, than the Garden kinds have, of a sad o∣verworn green colour, from among which ri∣seth up divers stiff Stalks two or three foot high, somtimes set with the like Leavs but smaller, and smaller upwards, branched from the middle into divers stiff Stalks, bearing sundry yeilow Flowers on them made of four Leavs apiece, as the others are, which af∣terwards yield smal reddish Seed, in smal long Pods, of a more bitter and hot biting tast than the Garden kinds, as the Leavs are al∣so. Place. It is found wild in divers places of this Land. Time. It Flowreth about June and July, and the Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and Use. The Wild Rocket is more strong and effe∣ctual to encreas Sperm and Venereous quali∣ties, whereunto also the Seed is more effectu∣al than the Garden kinds: It serveth also to help Digestion and provoketh Urine excee∣dingly. The Seed is used to cure the bitings of Serpents, the Scorpion, and the Shrew∣Mouse, and other Poysons, and expelleth Worms and other noisom Creatures that breed in the Body. The Herb boyled or stewed, and some Sugar put thereto, helpeth the Cough in Children being taken often.Increaseth Sperm & Venery, Helps Di∣gestion, Provokes Urine, Biting of Serpents &c. Cough in Children, Increaseth Milk, Clenseth the Face, Scars, Blue spots, Marks of smal Pox. The Seed also taken in drink taketh away the ill scent of the Armpits, encreaseth Milk in Nurses, and wa∣steth the Spleen. The Seed mixed with Ho∣ney, and used on the face, clenseth the Skin from Spots, Morphew and other discolourings therein: and used with Vinegar taketh away Freckles and redness in the Face or other parts, and with the Gall of an Ox, it amendeth foul Scars, black and blew Spots, and the marks of the smal Pox. The Wild Rockets are forbidden to be used alone in regard their sharpness fumeth into the Head, causing ach and pain therein: and are no less hurtful to hot and Chollerick per∣sons, for fear of inflaming their Blood, and therefore for such we may say, a little doth but a little harm. For angry Mars rules them, and he somtimes will be testy when he meets with Focls. Winter Rocket, or Cresses. Description. VVInter Rocket, or winter Cresses, hath diverse somwhat large sad green Leavs lying upon the ground, torn or cut into divers parts, somwhat like unto Roc∣ket, or Turnep Leavs with smaller pieces next the bottom, and broad at the ends which so a∣bide all Winter (if it spring up in Autumn, when it is used to be eaten) from among which riseth up divers smal round Stalks full of bran∣ches, bearing many smal yellow Flowers of four Leavs apiece, after which come smal long Pods with reddish Seed in them: The Root is somwhat stringy, and perisheth every yeer after the Seed is ripe. Place. It groweth of its own accord in Gardens and Fields by the way sides in diverse places, and particularly in the next Pasture to the Conduit-Head behind Grayes-Inne that brings Water to Mr. Lamb's Conduit in Hol∣bourn. Time. It Flowreth in May, and Seedeth in June, and then perisheth. Vertues and Use. This is profitable to provoke Urine, and helpeth the Strangury.Strangury, Gravel & Stone, Scurvy, Wounds, Ulcers, & Sores. and to expel Gravel and the Stone; It is also of good effect in the Scurvey: It is found by experience to be a sin∣gular good Wound Herb, to clense inward Wounds, the Juyce or Decoction being drunk, or outwardly applied to wash foul Ulcers and Sores, clensing them by sharpness, and hin∣dring or abating the dead Flesh from growing therein, and healing them by the drying quali∣ty. Roses. I Hold it altogether needless to trouble the Reader with a Description of any of these, sith both the Garden Roses, and the Wild Ro∣ses of the Bryars are well enough known; Take therefore the Vertues of them as follo∣weth:
And first I shal begin with the Garden kinds. Vertues and Use. The White and the Red Roses are cooling and drying, yet the White is taken to exceed the Red in both those properties, but is seldom used inwardly in any Medicine. The bitter∣ness in the Roses when they are fresh, especial∣ly the Juyce purgeth Choller, and watery Hu∣mors,Choller, & Waterish Humors, Headach, Pains in the Ears, Eyes, Throat & Gums, Funda∣ment, Bo∣wels, & Matrix. St Antho∣nies fire, stomach, Womens Courses, Defluxi∣ons, fastneth Teeth, Lask & spitting of Blood, Heat & Inflamati∣ons, Rest & sleep, whites & Reds in Women, Choller & Flegm, Redness & watering of the Eyes, but being dried and that heat which caused the bitterness being consumed, they have then a binding and astringent quality; Those also that are not ful blown do both cool and bind more than those that are full blown, and the White Roses more than the Red. The Decoction of Red Roses made with Wine and used, is very good for the Headach, and pains in the Eyes, Ears, Throat, and Gums, as also for the Fundament, the lower Bowels, and the Matrix, being bathed, or put into them. The same Decoction with the Roses remai∣ning in it is profitably applyed to the Regi∣on of the Heart to eas the Inflamation therin; as also St. Anthonies fire, and other Diseases of the Stomach. Being dried and beaten to Pouder, and taken in steeled Wine or Water, it helpeth to stay Womens Courses. The yel∣low threds in the middle of the red Roses (Wch are erroniously called the Rose Seeds) being poudered and drunk in the distilled water of Quinces, stayeth the overflowing of Womens Courses, and doth wonderfully stay the Deflu∣xions of Rhewm upon the Gums and Teeth, preserving them from corruption, and fast∣ning them if they be loose, being washed and gargled therewith, and some Vinegar of Squils added thereto. The Heads with Seed being u∣sed in Pouder or in a decoction, stayeth the Lask, and spitting of Blood. Red Roses do strengthen the Heart, the Stomack, and the Li∣ver, and the retentive Faculties, they mitigate the pains that arise from Heat, asswage Infla∣mations, procure rest and sleep, stay both Whites and Reds in Women, the Gonorrhea, running of the Reins, and the Fluxes of the Belly; The Juyce of them doth purge and clens the Body from Choller and Flegm: The Husks of the Roses with the Beards and Nails of the Roses are binding and cooling, and the Distilled Water of either of them is good for the Heat and redness in the Eyes, and to stay and dry up the Rhewms and watering of them. Of the Red Roses are usually made many Compositions all serving to sundry good uses; Viz. Electuary of Roses; Conserve both moist and dry, which is more usually called Su∣gar of Roses; Syrup of dryed Roses, and Ho∣ney of Roses; The Cordial Pouder called Diarhodon Abhatis', and Aromatica Rosa∣rum; The Distilled Water of Roses, Vine∣gar of Roses, Oyntment and Oyl of Roses, and the Rose Leavs dried, which although no Composition, yet of very great use and effect. To write at large of every one of these would make my Book swel too big, it being suffici∣ent for a Volum by it self to speak fully of them: But briefly; The Electuary is pur∣ging, whereof two or three Drams taken by it self in some convenient Liquor is a Purge sufficient for a weak Constitution; but may be encreased to six drams according to the strength of the Patient. It purgeth ChollerA Purge for Chol∣ler, Hot Fea∣vers, Pains of the Head, Heat of the Eyes, Jaundice, & Joynt Aches, Distillati∣ons, & Defluxi∣ons of Rhewm, Fluxes, & Lasks, running of the Reins, Faintings, swounings & trem∣bling of the Heart, Helpeth Digestion, Stayeth casting, Infection, Cooleth the Liver & Blood, resisteth Putrefa∣ction, & Infection, sore Mouths, Throats, &c. Comfort the Heart & stomach, stay Vomi∣ting, Faint spirits, Redness of Eyes, without trouble, and is good in hot Feavers, and pains of the Head arising from hot Chol∣lerick Humors, and heat in the Eyes, the Jaundice also, and Joynt Aches proceeding of hot Humors. The moist Conserve is of much use, both binding and Cordial, for until it be about two years old it is more binding than Cordial, and after that, more Cordial than Binding: Some of the yonger Conserve taken with Methridatum mixed together, is good for those that are troubled with Distillations of Rhewm from the Brain to the Nose, and Defluxions of Rhewm into the Eyes, as also for Fluxes, end Lasks of the Belly; and being mixed with the Pouder of Mastick is very good for the Running of the Reins, and for o∣ther loosness of Humors in the Body. The old Conserve mixed with Aromaticum Rosarum is a very good Cordial against Faintings, Swounings, Weakness, and Tremblings of the Heart, strengthning both it, and a weak Sto∣mach, helpeth digestion, stayeth casting, and is a very good Preservative in the time of In∣fection. The dry Conserve which is called Sugar of Roses, is a very good Cordial to strenthen the Heart and Spirits; as also to stay Defluxions. The Syrup of dried Red Roses strengthneth a Stomack given to casting, coo∣leth an overheated Liver and the Blood in Agues, comforreth the Heart and resisteth pu∣tresaction and infection, and helpeth to stay Lasks and Fluxes. Honey of Roses is much used in Gargles and Lotions to wash Sores ei∣ther in the Mouth, Throat, or other parts, both to clens and heal them, and to stay the Fluxes of Humors falling upon them; it is also used in Clisters both to cool and clens. The Cordial Pouders called Diarhodon Abba∣tis and Aromaticum Rosarum do comfort and strengthen the Heart and Stomach, procure an Appetite, help Digestion, stayeth Vomi∣ting; and is very good for those that have slip∣pery Bowels to strengthen them, and to dry up their moisture. Red Rose Water is of well known and familiar use in all occasions (and better than Damask Rose Water) being coo∣ling and Cordial, refreshing and quickning the weak and faint Spirits, used either in meats or broths, to wash the Temples, or to smel to at the Nose, or to smel the sweet vapors ther∣of out of a perfuming Pot or cast on a hot Fire-shovel: It is also of much good use a∣gainst the redness and Inflamations in the eyes to bath them therwith, and the Temples of
the Head also against pain and ach. for which purpose also Vinegar of Roses is of much good use, and to procure rest and sleep,Procure Sleep, if some thereof and Rosewater together be used to smel unto, or the Nose and Temples moi∣stned therewith, but more usually to moisten a piece of Red Rose Cake cut fit for the pur∣pose, and heated between a double folded Cloth, with a little beaten Nutmeg and Pop∣py Seed strewed on the side that must lie next to the Forehead & Temples, & so bound therto for al night. The Oyntment of Roses is much used against heat & Inflamations in the Head, to anoint the forhead & temples, & being mix∣ed with Vnguenium Populeon, to procure rest; as also it is used for the heat of the Liver, of the Back and Reins,Heat of the Liver, Back & Reir Pushes, Whels & Pimples, Fluxes of Humors, and to cool and heal Pu∣shes, Wheals and other red Pimples rising in the Face or other parts. Oyl of Roses is not only used by it self to coole any hot Swellings or Inflamations, and to bind and stay Fluxes of Humors unto Sores, but is also put into Oyntments and Plaisters that are cooling and binding, and restraining the Flux of Humors. The dried Leavs of the Red. Roses are used both inward and outwardly, both cooling, binding, and Cordial, for with them are made both Aromaticum Rosarum, Diarhodon Ab∣batis, and Saccharum Rosarum, each of whose Properties are before declared. Rose Leavs and Mints heated and applied outwardly to the Stomach, stayeth castings, and very much strengthneth a weak Stomach;Weak sto∣mach, and applyed as a Fomentation to the Region of the Liver and Heart, doth much cool and temper them, and also serveth instead of a Rose Cake (as is said before) to quiet the over hot spirits and cause rest and sleep. The Syrup of Damask Roses is both Simple and Compound, and made with Agrick. The Simple Solutive Syrup, is a familiar, safe, gentle, and easie Medicine, purging Choller,Purge Choller, taken from one ounce to three or four; yet this is remarkable herein, That the distilled Water of this Syrup should notably bind the Belly;Bind the Belly, The Syrup with A∣grick is more strong and effectual, for one ounce thereof by it self will open the Body more than the other, and worketh as much on Flegm as Choller. The Compound Syrup is more forcible in working on Melanchollick Humors, and available against the Lepry, Itch, Tetters,Melan∣chollick, Humors, Lepry, Itch Tetters, French Pox, &c. and the French Diseas: Also Honey of Roses Solutive is made of the same infusion that the Syrup is made of, and there∣fore worketh the same effect both in opening and purging, but is ostener given to Flegma∣tick than Chollerick persons, and is more used in Clysters than in Potions, as the Syrup made with Sugar is.Opens the Belly, The Conserve and Preserved Leavs of these Roses are also operative, in gently opening the Belly. The Simple Water of the Damask Roses is chiefly used for fumes to sweeten things, as the dried Leavs thereof to make sweet Pouders, and fill sweet Bags, and little use they are put to in Physick, al∣though they have some purging quality; The wild Roses also are few or none of them used in Physick, but yet are generally held to come neer the Nature of the Manured Roses. The Fruit of the wild Bryar which are called Heps being throughly ripe and made into a Con∣serve with Sugar besides the pleasantness of the tast doth gently bind the Belly,Bind the Belly, & stay Deflu∣xions, and stay Defluxions from the Head upon the Stomach, drying up the moisture thereof, and helpeth digestion. The Pulp of the Heps dried unto a hard consistence, like to the Juyce of Liquo∣ris, or so dried that it may be made into Pou∣der and taken in drink stayeth speedily the Whites in Women.Whites in Women, Stone, provoke urine, Chollick, The Bryar Ball is often used being made into Pouder and drunk to break the Stone, to provoke Urine when it is stopped, and to eas and help the Chollick; some appoint it to be burnt, and then taken for the same purpose. In the middle of these Balls are often found certain white Worms,Worms. which being dried and made into Pouder, and some of it drunk, is found by experience of many to kill and drie forth the Worms of the Belly. What a quarter have Authors made with Roses, what a racket have they kept? I shall ad, Red Roses are under Jupiter, Damask under Venus, and White under the Moon, and Province under the King of France. RosaSolis, or Sun-dew. Description. THis hath diverse sinal round hollow Leavs, somwhat greenish, but full of certain red hairs, which makes them seem red, every one standing upon its own Fooststalk, reddish hairy likewise. The Leavs are continualty moist in the hottest day, yea the hotter the Sun shines on them the moister they are, with a certain sliminess that will rope (as we say) the smal hairs alwaies holding this moisture: among these Leavs rise up small slender stalks, reddesh also, three or four fin∣gers high, bearing diverse smal white Knobs one above another which are the flowers, af∣ter which in the Heads are certain smal Seeds. the Root is a few small hairs. Place. It groweth usually on Bogs, and in wet pla∣ces, and somtimes in moist Woods. Time. It Flowreth in June, and then Leavs are fittest to be gatrhered. Vertues and Use. Rosa Solis is accounted good to help those Distillati∣that have salt Rhewm distilling on their Lungs ons o which breedeth a Consumption, and therefore Rhewm,
the Distilled water thereof in Wine is held fit and profitable for such to drink, which Water will be of a gold yellow colour: The same Water is held to be good for all other Diseases of the Lungs, as Phtisicks, Wheesing, short∣ness of Breath, or the Cough; as also to heal the Ulcers that happen in the Lungs,Phtisick,  beesings: Shortness of breath, Cough, Ulcers in he Lungs, comfort the Heart, Raise Blisters. Passions of the Heart. and it comforteth the Heart and fainting Spirits; The Leavs outwardly applied to the Skin will raise Blisters, which hath caused some to think it, dangerous to be taken inward; but there are other things which will also draw Blisters, yet nothing dangerous to be taken inwardly. There is an usual Drink made hereof with A∣qua vitae and Spices freuently, and without any offence or danger, but to good purpose u∣sed in qualms and passions of the Heart. The Sun rules it, and 'tis under the Sign Cancer. Rosemary. OUr Garden Rosemary is so well own, that I need not here describe it. Time. It Flowreth in April and May with us, and somtimes again in August. Vertues and Use. It is an Herb if as great use with us in these daies, as any whatsoever, not only for Phy∣sical but Civil purposes. The Physical use of it (being my present Task) is very much, both for inward and outward Diseases; For by the warming and comforting heat thereof it hel∣peth all cold Diseases,Cold Diseases, Rhewm, Swimming of the Head, Drowsiness Stupidity, DumbPal∣sey, Lethargy & Falling∣sickness Toothach, stinking breath, Weak Memory. stomach, Retention of Meat, Wind, Liver∣grown, Dim sight, both of the Head, Sto∣mach Liver and Belly. The Decoction thereof in Wine helpeth the cold Distillations of Rhewm into the Eyes, and all other cold Diseases of the Head and Brain, as the Gid∣diness or swimming therein Drowsiness, or Dulness of the mind and senses, like a stupid∣ness, the dumb Palsey, or loss of speech, the Lethargy, and Falling-sickness, to be both drunk and the Temples bathed therewith. It helpeth the pains in Gums and Teeth, by Rhewm falling into them, or by putrefaction causing an evil smel from them, or a stinking Breath. It helpeth a weak Memory, and quickneth the Senses. It is very comfortable to the Stomach in all the cold Griefs thereof, helping both retention of meat, and digestion, the Decoction or Pouder being taken in Wine: it is a Remedy for the windiness in the Stomach or Bowels, and expellerh it po∣werfully, as also Wind in Spleen. It hel∣peth those that are Livergrown, by opening the Obstructions thereof. It helpeth dim Eyes, and procureth cleer sight, the Flowers thereof being taken all the while it is Flow∣ring, every morning fasting with bread and Salt. Both Doscorides and Galen say. That if a Decoction be made thereof with Water and they that have the yellow JaundiceYellow Jaundice, do ex∣ercise their Bodies presenty after the taking thereof, it will certainly cure it: The Flowers and the Conserve made of them, is singular good to comfort the Heart, and to expel the contagion of the Pestilence;Pestilence, to burn the Herb in Houses and Chambers correcteth the Air in them: Both the Flowers and the Leavs are very profitable for Women that are troubled with the Whites, if they be daily taken.Whites in Women, Cough, Phtisick, or Consump∣tion, The dried Leavs shred smal and taken in a Pipe like as Tobacco is taken, helpeth those that have any Cough or Phtisick, or Consumption, by warming and drying the thin Distillations which caus those Diseases. The Leavs are much used in Bathing, and made into Oynt∣ments or Oyls, is singular good to help cold benummed Joynts,benummed Joynts, Sinews, or Members. The Chimical Oyl drawn from the Leavs and Flo∣wers, is a Soveraign help for all the Diseases aforesaid; to touch the Temples and Nostrils with two or three drops, for all the Diseases of the Head and Brains spoken of before; as al∣so to take a drop two or three as the caus requi∣reth for the inward griefs, yet must it be done with Descretion, for it is very quick and pier∣cing, and therefore but a very little must be ta∣ken at a time. There is also another Oyl made by insolation in this manner: Take what qunatity you will of the Flowers, and put them into a strong Glass close stopped, tie a fine linnen cloth over the Mouth, and turn the Mouth down into another Strong Glass, which being set in Sun, an Oyl will distil down into he lower Glass,to be preserved as precious for divers uses, both inward and out∣ward as a Sovereign Balm to heal the disea∣ses before mentioned, to clcer a dim sight, and to take away spots, marks and scars in the skin.spots and scars in the Skin. The Sun claims Priviledg in it and 'tis un∣der the Coelestial Ram. Rubarb, or Rhapon∣tick. DO not start, and say this grows you know not how far off; and then ask me, How it comes to pass that I bring it among our English Simples: for though name may speak it Forreign yet it grows with us in Eng∣land, and that frequent enough in our Gar∣dens, and when you have throughly perused its Vertues, you will conclude it nothing inferi∣or to that which is brought us out of China, & by that time this hath been as much used as that hath been, the name which the other
hath gotten wil be eclipsed by the same of this: Take therfore a Description at large of it, as followeth. Description. At the first appearing out of the ground when the Winter is past, is hath a great round brownish head rising from the middle or sides of the Root, which openeth it self into sundry Leavs one after another, very much crumpled or folded together at the first, and brownish, but afterward it spreadeth it self and becometh smooth very large and almost round, every one standing on a brownish Stalk of the thickness of a mans Thumb, when they are grown to their fulness, and most of them two foot and more in length, especially when they grow in any moist or good Ground; and the Stalk of the Leaf also from the bottom thereof to the Leaf it self, being also two Foot, The breadth thereof from edg to edg in the broadest place, being also two foot, of a sad or dark green colour, of a fine tart, or sowrish tast, much more pleasant: than the Garden or Wood sorrel. From among these riseth up some but not every yeer, a strong thick Stalk, not growing so high as the Patience or Garden Dock, with such round Leavs as grow below, but smaller, at every Joynt up to the top, and among the Flowers which are white spreading forth into many Branches, and consisting of five or six small white Leavs apiece, hardly to be discerned from the white threds in the mid∣dle, and seeming to be all threds after which come brownish three square Seed like unto o∣ther Docks, but larger whereby it may be plainly known to be a Dock. The Root gro∣weth in time to be very great, with divers and sundry great spreading Branches from it, of a dark, brownish, or reddish colour on the out∣side, with a pale yellow skin under it which covereth the inner substance or Root, which ind and Skin being pared away, the Root ap∣peareth of so fresh and lively a colour, with flesh∣colour'd Veins running through it, that the choicest of that Rubarb that is brought us from beyond the Seas cannot excel it: Which Root if it be dried carefully and as it ought (which must be in our Countrey by the gentle heat of a fire in regard the Sun is not hot e∣nough here to do it, and every piece kept from touching one another) will hold his colour almost as well as when it is fresh; and hath been approved of and commended by those who have oftentimes used them. Place. It groweth in Gardens, and Flowreth a∣bout the beginning or middle of June, and the Seed is ripe in July. Time. The Roots that are to be dried and kept all the yeer following, are not to be taken up be∣fore the Stalk and Leavs be quite withered and gone, and that is not until the middle or end of October; and if they be taken a little be∣fore the Leavs do spring, or when they are sprung up, the Roots will not have half so good a colour in them. I have given the precedence unto this, be∣caus in vertues also it hath the preheminence; I come now to describe unto you that which is called Patience, or Monks Rubarb; and next unto at, the great round Leav'd Dock, or Bastard Rubarb; for the one of these may happily supply in the absence of the other; be∣ing not much unlike in their Vertues, only one more powerful and efficacious than the other; And lastly; shall shw you the Ver∣tues of all the three Sorts. Garden Patience, or Monks Rubard. Description. THis is a Dock, bearing the name of Ru∣barb, for some purging quality therein, and groweth up with large tall Stalks, set with somwhat broad and long fair green Leavs, not dented at all; The tops of the Stalks being devided into many smal Branches, bear reddish or purplish Flowers, and three square Seed like unto other Docks. The Root is long, great and yellow like unto the wild Docks but a little redder, and if it be a little dried sheweth less store of discoloured veins, than the next doth when it is dry. Great round leav'd Dock, OR, Bastard Rubarb. Description. THis hath divers large, round, thin, yello∣wish with green Leavs, rising from the Root, a little waved about the edges, every one standing on a reasonable thick, and long brownish Footstalk; from among which riseth up a pretty big Stalk about two foot high, with some such like Leavs growing thereon, but smaller. At top whereof stand. In a long spike many smal brownish Flowers, which turn into hard three square shining brown Seed, like the Garden Patience before descri∣bed. This Root groweth greater than that, with many Branches or great Fibres thereat, yellow on the outside, and somwhat pale yellow within, with some discoloured veins like to the Rubarb which is first described, but much less than it, especially when it is dry. Place and Time. These also grow in Gardens, and Flower and Seed at or neer the same time that our true Rubarb doth, Viz. they Flower in June, and the Seed is ripe in July.
Vertues and use A dram of the dried Root of Monks Rubarb, with a seruple of Ginger made into Pouder and taken fasting in a draught or mess of warm Broth, purge Choller and FlegmPurge Choller & Flegm, stay Las ks and bloody Flux, Scabs & ulcerous Sores, Running Sores, Pains of the Ears, Toothach, Jaundice, pains of the Sto∣mach & loathing of Meat, Kings E∣vil, Stone, Urine, Dim sight, Liver & Blood, Choller & Flegm, Obstructi∣ons Jaundice, Dropsie, Spleen, Agues, pains of the sides, & spitting of Blood, Running of the Reins, Swelling in the Head, Sciatica, Gout, downward very gently, and safely without danger: The Seed thereof contrarily doth bind the Belly, and helpeth to stay any sort of Lask or Bloody Flux. The distilled water thereof is very pro∣fitably used to heal Scabs, as also foul Ulcerous Sores, and to allay the Inflamations of them. The Juyce of the Leavs or Roots, or the De∣coction of them in Vinegar is used as a most effectual Remedy to heal Scabs and running Sores. The Bastard Rubarb hath all the properties of the Monks Rubarb, but more effectual for both inward and outward Diseases. The De∣coction thereof with Vinegar dropped into the Ears, taketh away the pains gargled in the Mouth, taketh away Toothach, and be∣ing drunk healeth the Jaundice. The Seed thereof taken easeth the gnawing and griping pains of the Stomach, and taketh away the loa∣thing thereof unto Meat: The Root thereof helpeth the ruggedness of the Nails, and being boyled in Wine helpeth the Swellings of the Throat, commonly called the Kings evil, as also the Swellings of the Kernels of the Ears: It helpeth them that are troubled with the Stone; provoketh Urine, and helpeth the dimness of the Sight. The Roots of this Ba∣stard Rubarb are used in opening and purging Diet Drinks with other things, to open the Liver, and to clens and cool the Blood. The poperties of that which is called the English Rubarb, are the same with the former, but much more effectual, and hath all the properties of the true Indian Rubarb, except the force in purging, wherein it is but of half the strength thereof, and therfore a double quan∣tity must be used: it likewise hath not that bit∣terness and astriction; in other things it wor∣keth almost n an equal quality, which are these: It purgeth the Body of Choller and Flegm, being either taken of it self, made in∣to Pouder and drunk in a draught of white Wine, or steped therein all night and taken fasting, or put among other Purgers, as shall be thought convenient, clensing the Stomach, Liver, and Blood, opening Obstructions, and helping those griefs that come thereof; as the Jaundice, Dropsie, swelling of the Spleen, Tertian and day Agues, and the pricking pain of the sides, and also it stayerh spitting of Blood. The Pouder taken with Cassia dissol∣ved, and a little wash'd Venice Turpentine, clenseth the Reins and strengthneth them af∣terwards, and is very effectual to stay the run∣ning of the Reins or Gonorrea. It is also gi∣ven for the pains and swellings in the Head, for those that are troubled with Melancholly, and helpeth the Sciatica, the Gout, and the Cramp.Cramp, Clotted Blood, Ulcers in the Eyes, or Eye∣lids, swellings & Inflamati∣ons, Black & blue spots, Purge the Liver & Stomach. The Pouder of Rubarb taken with a little Mummia and Madder Roots in some red Wine, dissolveth clotted Blood in the Bo∣dy, hapning by any fall or bruise, and healeth burstings and broken parts as well inward as outward: The Oyl likewise wherein it hath been boyled, worketh the like effects, being anointed. It is used to heal those Ulcers that happen in the Eyes and Eyelids, being steeped and strained; as also to asswage the Swellings and Inflamations; and applied with Honey, or boyled Wine, it taketh away all black and blue Spots or Marks that happen therein. Whey, or white Wine are the best Liquors to steep it in, and thereby it worketh more effe∣ctually in opening Obstructions, and purging the Stomach and Liver. Many do use a little Indian Spicknard as the best Correcter there∣of. Mars claims Predominancy over all these wholsom Herbs, you cry out upon him for an infortune, when God created him for your good (only he is angry with Fools) what dis∣honor is this, not to Mars, but to God Him∣self. Meadow Rue. Description. THis riseth up with a yellow stringy Root, much spreading in the ground, and shoo∣ting forth new sprouts round about, with ma∣ny Herby green Stalks two foot high, crested all the length of them, set with Joynts here and there, and many large Leavs on them as well as below, being devided into smaller Leavs, nicked or dented in the forepart of them, of a sad green colour on the upperside, and pale green underneath: Toward the top of the Stalk there shooteth forth divers short Bran∣ches, on every one thereof there stand two, three, or four smal round Heads or Buttons, which breaking the skin that incloseth them shew forth a tuft of pale greenish yellow threds, which falling away there comes in their places small three cornre'd Cods, wherein is con∣tained smal; long, and round Seed. The whol Plant hath a strong unpleasant scent. Place. It groweth in many places of this Land; in the Borders of moist Meadows, and by Ditch sides. Time. It Flowreth about July or the beginning of August. Vertues and Use. Dioscorides saith that this Herb bruised and applied perfectly healeth old Sores:Old sores and the distilled water of the Herb and Flowers doth the like. It is used by some among other Pot∣herbs
to open the BodyOpen the Body, Lice & Vermine, Plague, Jaundice. and make it soluble; but the Roots washed clean, and boyled in Ale and drunk provoketh to the Stool more than the Leavs; but yet very gently. The Root boyled in Water, and the places of the Body most troubled with Vermine or Lice, washed therewith while it is warm, destroyeth them utterly. In Italy it is used against the Plague, and in Saxony against the Jaundice, as Came∣rarious saith. Garden Rue. THis is so well known, both by this name, and the Name Herb of Grace, that I shal not need to write you any further Description of it; But shall only shew you the Vertues of it as followeth. Vertues and Use. It provoketh Urine and Womens Courses,Urine, Womens Courses, Poysons, Plague, Abate Venery, pains of the chest & Sides, Cough, Hard breathitg, Sciatica, & Joynt aches, Agues, Wind Chollick, Mother, Worms, Gout, Dropsie, Bleeding, Swelling of the Cods Wheals & Pimples, being taken either in Meat or Drink. The Seed thereof taken in Wine, is an Antidote a∣gainst all dangerous Medicines or deadly Poy∣sons. The Leavs taken either by themselves, or with Figs and Walnuts is called Metbri∣dates his Counter poyson, against the Plague and causeth all Venemous things to become harmless: Being often taken in Meat or Drink it abateth Venery, and destroyeth the ability to beger Children. A Decoction made there∣of with some dried Dill Leavs and Flowers, easeth all pains and torments inwardly to be drunk, and outwardly to be applied warm to the place grieved. The same being drunk helpeth the pains both of the Chest and Sides, as also Coughs, hardness of breathing, the Inflmations of the Lungs, and the tor∣menting pains of the Sciatica, and the Joynts, being anointed or laid to the places, as also the shaking Fits of Agues, to take a draught before the Fit come: Being boyled or infused in Oyl it is good to help the wind Chollick, the hardness or windiness of the Mother, and fre∣eth women from the strangling or suffocation thereof, if the Share and the Parts thereabouts be anointed therewith: It killeth and driveth forth the Worms of the Belly, if it be drunk after it is boyled in Wine to the half with a little Honey: It helpeth the Gout or pains in the Joynts of Hands, Feet, or Knees applied thereunto: and with Figs it helpeth the Dropsie being bathed therewith: being brui∣sed and put into the Nostrils it staieth the Bleeding thereof. It helpeth the swelling of the Cods it they be bathed with a Decoction of Rue and Bay Leaves. It taketh away Wheals and Pimples if being bruised with a few Mirtle Leavs, if it be made up with Wax, and applied: It cureth the MorphewMorphew & Warts, Scab, Tet∣ter & Ring∣worm, Pains of the Ears, Dimsight, St. Antho∣nies sire, Running sores of the Head, Vlces of the Nose, Antidote, pains of the Chest, Stomach, Spleen, Belly Obstructi∣ons, and ta∣keth away all sorts of Warts, if boyled in Wine with some Pepper and Nitre and the places rubbed therewith: and with Allum and Honey, helpeth the dry Scab or any Tetter or Ringworm: The Juyce thereof warmed in a Pemegranate Shel or Rind, and dropped into the Ears helpeth the pains of them. The Juyce of it and Fennel with a little Honey, and the Gall of a Cock put thereto, helpeth the dim∣ness of the Eyelight. An Oyntment made of the Juyce therof with Oyl of Roses, Ceruss, and a little Vinegar, and anointed cureth St. Anthonies Fire, and all foul running Sores in the Head; and the stinking Ulcers of the Nose, or other parts. The Antidote used by Methridate every morning fasting to secure himself from any Poyson or Infection, was this. Take twenty Leavs of Rue, a little Salt, a couple of Walnuts, and a couple of Figs bea∣ten together into a Mass with twenty Juniper Berries, which is the quantity appointed for every day. Another Electuary is made thus; Take of Nitre, Pepper, and Cummin Seed, of each equal Parts, of the Leaves of Rue clean picked, as much in weight as all the other three weighed, beat them well together, and put to as much Honey as will make it up into an Electuary; (but you must first steep your Cummin seed in Vinegar twenty four hours, and then dry it, or rather toast it in a hot Fire∣shovel, or in an Oven) and it is a Remedy for the pains or griefs of the Chest or Stomach, of the Spleen, Belly or Sides, by Wind or Stit∣ches; of the Liver by Obstructions, of the Reins and Bladder by the stopping of Urine, and helpeth also to extenuate fat corpulent Bo∣dies. What an Infamy is cast upon the Ashes of Methridates (or Methradates, as the Augu∣stanes read his name) by unworthy people; they that deserve no good report themselves, love to give non to others, Viz. That that renowned King of Pontus fortified his Body by Poyson against Poyson (He cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils) what a sot is he that knows not if he had accustomed his Body to cold Poysons hot Poysons would have dispatch'd him, or the contrary if not, corro∣sions would have done it, the whol world is at this very time beholding to him for his Stu∣dies in Physick, and he that useth the quan∣tity of but a Hazel Nut of that Recept every morning, to which his name is adjoyned shall to admiration preserve his Body in health, if he do but consider that Rue is an Herb of the Sun and under Leo, and gather it and the rest accordingly.
Rupture wort. Description. THis spreadeth very many threddy Bran∣ches round about upon the ground, about a span long, devided into many other smaller parts, full of small Joynts set very thick toge∣ther, whereat come forth two very small Leavs of a fresh yellowish green colour branches and all, where groweth forth also a number of ex∣ceeding smal yellowish Flowers, scarce to be discerned from the Stalks and Leavs, which turn into Seed as smal as the very dust: The Root is very long and smal, thrusting down deep into the ground: This hath neither smel nor tast at first, but afterward hath a little a∣stringent tast, without any manifest heat, yet a little bitter and sharp withal. Place. It groweth in dry, sandy, and Rockie pla∣ces. Time. It is fresh and green all the Summer. Vertues and use. Rupture wort hath not his name in vain, for it is found by experience to cure the Rup∣ture,Ruptures, Fluxes, Running of the Reins, Strangury, Stone or Gravel, Stitches, Yellow Jaundice, Worms, Wounds, Defluxi∣ons, Foul Ul∣sers. not only in Children but also in Elder Persons, if the Diseas be not too inveterate, by taking a dram of the Pouder of the dried Herb every day in Wine for certain daies to∣gether; Or the Decoction made in Wine and drunk: Or the Juyce or distilled water of the green Herb taken in the same manner; and helpeth all other Fluxes either in men or Wo∣men; Vomitings also, and the Gonorrhea or running of the Reins, being taken any of the waies aforesaid. It doth also most assuredly help those that have the Strangury, or have their Urine stopped, or are troubled with the Stone or Gravel in their Reins or Bladder. The same also helpeth much all Stitches in the Side, all griping pains in the Stomach or Bel∣ly, the Obstructions of the Liver, and cureth the yellow Jaundice likewise: It killeth also the Worms in Children: Being outwardly applied it conglutineth Wounds notably, and helpeth much to stay Defluxions of Rhewm from the Head to the Eyes, Nose, and Teeth, being bruised green and bound thereto; Or the Decoction of the dried Herb, to bath the Forehead and Temples, or the Nape of Neck behind: It also drieth up the moisture of Fi∣stulous Ulcers, or any others that are foul and spreading. They say Saturn causeth Ruptures, if he do, he doth no more than he can cure, if you want wit he will teach you though to your cost, this Herb is Saturns own, and is a notable Anti∣venerian. Rushes. ALthough there are many kinds of Rushes, yet I shall only here insist upon those which are best known, and most Medicinal, as the Bulrushes, and other of the sot and smooth kinds; which grow so commonly in almost every place of this Land, and are so ge∣nerally noted, that I suppose it needless to trouble you with any Description of them: Briefly then take the Vertues of them as fol∣loweth. Vertues and Uices. The Seeds of these soft Rushes, saith Diosco∣rides and Galen, toasted (saith Pliny) being drunk in Wine and Water, stayeth the Lask and Womens Courses, when they come down too abundantly: but it causeth Headach: It provoketh sleep likewife but must be given with caution, lest the party that takes it wake not until the Resurrection: Pliny saith, The Root boyled in water to the consumption of one third, helpeth the Cough. Thus you see that Conveniences have their Inconveniences, and Vertue is seldom unac∣companied with some Vices. What I have written concerning Rushes is to satisfie my Country-mens Question, Are our Rushes good for nothing? Yes, and as good let alone as ta∣ken; There are Remedies enough without them for every Diseas, and therforo as the Proverb is, I care not a Rush for them, or ra∣ther they will do you as much good as if one had given you a Rush. Rye. THis is so well known in all the Countries of this Land, and especially to the Coun∣try people who feed much thereon, that if I should describe it, they would presently say, I might well have spared that Labor: Its Ver∣tues follow. Vertues and use. Rye is more digesting than Wheat; The Bread and the Leaven thereof ripeneth and breaketh Impostumes, Boyls, and other Swel∣lings:Impostums Boyls & Swellings, Pains of the Head, Chops of the Hands or Feet. The Meal of Rye put between a double cloth, and moistned with a little Vinegar, and heated in a Pewter dish, set over a Chafing∣dish of coals, and bound fast to the Head while it is hot, both much eas the continual pains of the Head: Mathiolus saith, That the ashes of Rye straw put into Water and suffered therein a day and a night, and the Chops of the Hands or Feet washed therewith, doth heal them.
Saffron. THe Herb needs no Description it being known generally where it grows. Place. It grows frequently at Walden in Essex, and in Cambridg-sbire Vertues and use. It is an Herb of the Sun, and under the Li∣on, and therfore you need not demand a reason why it strengthens the heart so exceedingly: Let not abov ten grains be given at one time, for if the Sun which is the Fountain of Life, may dazle the Eyes and make them blind, a Cordi∣al being taken in an immoderate quantity may hurt the Heart instead of helping it. It quic∣ken the Brain, for the Sun is exalted in V as well as he hath his House in SL it help Consumption of the Lungs, help difficulty of breathing: it is an excellent thing in Epide∣mical Diseases, as Pestilences, smal Pox, and Measles: It is a notable expulsive Medicine, and a notable Remedy for the yellow Jaundice. My own Opinion is (but I have no Author for it) that Hermodactils is nothing else but the Roots of Saffron dried, and my reason is, that the Roots of all Crocus both white and yellow purge Flegm as Hermodactils do, and if you please to dry the Roots of any Crocus, neither your eye nor your tast shal distinguish it from Hermodactils. Sage. OUr ordinary Garden Sage needeth no Description. Time. It Flowreth in or about July. Vertues and use. A Decoction of the Leavs and Branches of Sage made and drunk, saith Dioscorides pro∣voketh Urine,Provoke Urine, wo∣mens Courses, Expel the Dead Child & After birth, stanch Bleeding, Clense Ul∣cers & sores, Itching of the Cods, bringeth down Womens Cour∣ses, helpeth to expel the dead Child, and cau∣seth the hairs to become black; It staieth the bleeding of Wounds, and clenseth foul Ulcers or Sores; The seid Decoction made in Wine taketh away the itching of the Cods if they be bathed therwith. Agrippa saith, That: if Women that cannot conceive by reason of the moist slipperiness of their Wombs shall take a quantity of the Juyce of Sage with a little Salt for four daies before they company with their Husbands, it will help them not only to Conceive, but also to retain the Birth with∣out miscarrying. Orpheus saith, Three spoonfuls of the Juyce of Sage taken fasting with a little Honey, doth presently stay the spitting or casting up of Blood. For them that are in a Consumption, these Pills are much commended. Take of Spicknard and Ginger of each two drams; of the Seed of Sage toasted at the fire, eight drams, of long Pepper twelve drams, all these being brought into fine Pouder, put thereto so much Juyce of Sage as may make them into a Mass for Pills, taking a dram of them every morning fasting, and so likewise at night, drinking a little pure Water after them.Help Con∣ception & hinder Miscarri∣age, spitting Blood, consump∣tion, Pains of the Head & Joynts, Fallg∣sickness, Lethargy, Dulness of spirit, Palsey, Defluxi∣ons of Rhewm, Impostume behind the Ears. Hoarsness & cough, Bloody Flux, Ricing of Serpents, Worms in the Ears, or Sores, Quincken the senses, & help Memory, Sore Mouths & Throats, Cankers, Palsey or cramp, Stitch in the side. Mathiolus saith, it is very profitable for all manner of pains of the Head coming of cold and Rhewmatick Humors, as also for all pains of the Joynts, whether used inwardly or outwardly, and therfore helpeth the Falling-sickness, the Lethargy, such as are dull and heavy of spirit, the Palsey, and is of much use in an Defluxions of Rhewm from the Head, and for the Diseases of the Chest or Preast. The Leavs of Sage and Nettles brui∣sed together, and laid upon the Impostume that riseth behind the Ears, doth aslwage it much: The juyce of Sage taken in warm wa∣ter, helpeth a Hoarsness and the Cough. The Leavs sodden in Wine and laid upon the place affected with the Palsey helpeth much, if the Decoction be drunk also. Sage taken with Wormwood is used for the bloody Flux. Pliny saith, it procureth Womens Courses, and stay∣eth them coming down too fast, helpeth the stinging and biting of Serpents, and killeth the Worms that breed in the Ears and in Sores. Sage is of excellent use to help the Memory, warming and quickning the senses; and the Conserve made of the Flowers is used to the same purpose, and also for all the former recited Diseases. The Juyce of Sage drunk with Vi∣negar hath been of good use in the time of Plague at all times. Gargles likewise are made with Sage, Rosemary, Honeysuckles, and Plantane boyled in Wine or Water, with some Honey and Allum put thereto, to wash sore Mouthes and Throats, Cankers, or the secret parts of man or woman as need requi∣reth. And with other hot and comfortable Herbs. Sage is boyled to bath the Body or Legs in the Summer time, especially to warm cold Joynts or Sinews troubled with the Palsey or Cramp, and to comfort and strengthen the parts. It is much commended against the Stitch or pains in the side coming of Wind, if the place be fomented warm with the Decocti∣on thereof in Wine, and the Herb after the boyling be laid warm also thereunto. Jupiter claims this, and bid me tell you it is good for the Liver, and to breed good Blood.
VVood-Sage. Description. VVood-Sage riseth up with square hoary Stalks two foot high at the least, with two Leavs set at every Joynt, som∣what like other Sage Leavs, but smaller, sof∣ter, whiter, and rounder, and a little dented a∣bout the edges and smelling somwhat strongly: At the tops of the Stalks and Branches stand the Flowers on a slender long Spike turning themselves all one way when they blow, and are of a pale and whitish colour, smaller than Sage, but hooded and gaping like unto them: The Seed is blackish and round, four usually set in a husk together: The Root is long and stringy, with diverse Fibres thereat, and abi∣deth many yeers. Place. It groweth in Woods, and by Wood-sides, as also in diverse Fields and by-Lanes in this Land. Time. It Flowreth in June, July, and August. Vertues and Use. The Decoction of Wood-Sage provoketh U∣rine and Womens Courses:Provokes Urine, & Womens courses, & sweat, Swellings in the flesh, French Pox, Vein broken, Bursteness, Palsey, Ulcers & Sores, Green Wounds. it also provoketh Sweat, digesteth Humors, and discusseth Swel∣lings, and Nodes in the Flesh, and is there∣fore thought to be good against the French Pox. The Decoction of the green Herb made with Wine is a safe and sure Remedy for those who by falls, bruises, or Blows, doubt some Vein to be inwardly broken, to disperse and avoid the congealed blood, and to conso∣lidate the Vein; It is also good for such as are inwardly or outwardly bursten, the drink used inwardly, and the Herb applied outwardly: The same used in the same manner is found to be a sure Remedy for the Palsey: The Juyce of the Herb or the Pouder thereof dried, is good for moist Ulcers and sores in the Legs or other parts, to dry them, and caus them to heal the more speedily: It is no less effectual also in green Wounds to be used upon any occasi∣on. Solomons Seal. Description. THe common Solomons Seal riseth up with a round Stalk about half a yard high, bowing or bending down to the top, set with single Leavs one above another, somwhat large and like the Leavs of the Lilly∣Convalley, or May Lilly, with an eye of blew∣ish upon the green, with some ribs therein, and more yellowish underneath: At the foot of every Leaf almost from the bottom up to the top of the Stalk come forth small long white and hollow pendulous Flowers, som∣what like the Flowers of May-Lilly, but en∣ding in five long points, for the most part two together, at the end of a long Footstalk, and somtimes but one, and sometimes also two Stalks with Flowers at the Foot of a Leaf, which are without any scent at all, and stand all on one side of the Stalk: After they are past, come in their places, smal round Berries, green at the first, and blackish green, tending to blewness when they are ripe, wherein lie smal white hard and stony Seed: The Root is of the thickness of ones finger or Thumb, white and knobbed in some places, with a flat round circle representing a Seal, whereof it took the name, lying along under the upper crust of the Earth, and not growing downward but with many fibres underneath. Place. It is frequent in diverse places of this Land, as namely in a Wood two miles from Canter∣bury, by Fishpool-Hill: as also in a bushy Close belonging to the Parsonage of Alderbury neer Clarindon, two miles from Salisbury; in Chesson Wood, on Chesson Hill, between Newington and Sittingborn in Kent, and in diverse other places, in Essex and other Counties. Time. It Flowreth about May, The Root abideth, and shooteth anew every yeer. Vertues and Use. The Root of Solomons Seal is found by ex∣perience to be available in Wounds,Wounds & Sores, Vomiting & Blee∣ding, Fluxes, Running of the Reins, Knit Joynts; & broken Bones in man & beast, Ruptures, Hurts, and outward Sores, to heal and close up the lips of those that are green, and to dry up and restrain the Flux of Humors to those that are old: It is singular good to stay Vomitings, and Bleedings wheresoever, as also al Fluxes in man or woman, whether the Whites or Reds in Women, or the running of the Reins in men; also to knit any Joynt which by weakness u∣seth to be often out of place, or will not stay in long, when it is set: also to knit and joyn broken Bones in any part of the Body, the Roots being bruised and applied to the place: Yea it hath been found by late experience that the Decoction of the Root in Wine, or the bruised Root put in Wine or other drink, and after a nights infusion strained forth hard and drunk, hath holpen both man and Beast whose Bones have been broken by any occasion, which is the most assured refuge of help to people of diverse Countries of this Land, that they can have: It is no less effectual to help Rupture and Burstings, the Decoction in Wine, or the Pouder in Broth or Drink being inwardly taken and outwardly applyed to the place: The same is also available for inward
or outward Bruises, Falls or Blows,Bruises & Falls, black & blew Marks, Beautifie the Face. both to dispel the congealed blood, and to take away both the pains and the black and blew Marks that abide after the hurt. The same also or the distilled water of the whol Plant used to the Face or other part of the Skin, clenseth it from Morphew, Freckles, Spots; or Marks whatsoever, leaving the place, fresh, fair, and Lovely, for which purpose it is much used by the Italian Dames. Saturn owns this Plant for he loves his Bones well. Sampire. Description. THe Rock Sampire groweth up with a ten∣der green Stalk, about half a yard or two foot high at the most, branching forth almost from the very bottom, and stored with sundry thick, and almost round somwhat long Leavs, of a deep green colour, somtimes three toge∣ther, and somtimes more on a Stalk, and are sappy, and of a pleasant; hot, or spicy tast: At the tops of the Stalk and Branches, stand Um∣bels of white Flowers, and after them come large Seed bigger than Fennel Seed, yet som∣what alike. The Root is great, white, and long, continuing many yeers, and is of a hot spicy tast likewise. Place. It groweth on the Rocks that are often moi∣stened at the least, if not overflown with the Sea water. Time. And it Flowreth and Seedeth in the end of July and August. Vertues and Use. It is a safe Herb, very pleasant both to the tast and Stomach, helping digestion,Helps di∣gestion, Opens Obstructi∣ons, pro∣vokes Urin Expel Gra∣vel and the Stone. and in some sort opening the Obstructions of the Li∣ver and Spleen, provoking Urine, and hel∣ping thereby to wash away the Gravel and Stone ingendred in the Kidneys or Bladder. Sanicle. Description. THe ordinary Sanicle sendeth forth many great round Leavs standing upon long brownish stalkes, every one somewhat deep∣ly cut or divided into five or six parts, and some of those also cut in, somwhat like the Leaf of a Crowfoot, or Doves-foot, and fine∣ly dented about the edges, smooth, and of a dark green shining colour, and somtimes red∣dish about the Brims, from among which ri∣seth up smal round green Stalks without any Joynt or Leaf thereon, saving at the top, where it brancheth forth into Flowers, having a Leaf devided into three or four parts at that Joynt with the Flowers, which are smal and whit, starting out of smal round greenish yel∣low heads, many standing together in a tuft; in which afterward are the Seeds contained, which are smal round rough Burs, somwhat like the Seeds of Cleavers, and stick in the same manner upon any thing that they touch: The Root is composed of many black strings or fibres set together, at a little long head, which abideth with the green Leavs all the Winter and perish not. Place. It is found in many shadowy Woods, and other places of this Land. Time. It Flowreth in June, and the Seed is ripe shortly after. Vertues and Use. It is exceeding good to heal all green Wounds speedily, or any Ulcers, Impostumes, or bleedings inwardly:Green Wounds, Vlcers, Impostums Inward Bleedings, Swellings, ulcers in the Mouth Throat, & Privities, Womens Courses, Fluxes of Blood, Lasks, Vlcers in the Kid∣neys, Run∣ning or the Reins, Rupture. It doth wonderfully help those that have any Tumors in any part of their Bodies, for it represseth and dissipa∣teth the Humors, if the Decoction or Juyce thereof be taken, or the Pouder in drink, and the Juyce used outwardly; For there is not found any Herb that can give such present help either to Man or Beast when the Disease falleth upon the Lungs or Throat, and to heal up all the putrid Malignant Ulcers in the Mouth, Throat, and Privities, by gargling or washing with the Decoction of the Leavs and Root, made in Water, and a little Honey put thereto. It helpeth to stay Womens Cour∣ses, and all other Fluxes of Blood either by the Mouth, Urine or Stool, and Lasks of the Bel∣ly, the Ulceration of the Kidneys also, and the pains in the Bowels, and the Gonorrhea or running of the Reins, being boyled in Wine or Water, and drunk: The same also is no less powerful to help any Ruptures or Burstings, used both inwardly and outwardly, and briefly it is effectual in binding; restraining, consoli∣dating, heating, drying, and healing; as Com∣fry, Bugle, Self-heal, or any other of the Con∣sounds, or Vulnerary Herbs whatsoever. This is one of Venus her Herbs to cure ei∣ther Wounds, or what other mischiefs Mars inflicteth upon the Body of Man. Sarasens Consound. Description. THis groweth very high somtimes with brownish Stalks, and other whiles with green and hollow to a mans height, having ma∣ny long and narrow green Leavs snip'd about the edges, somwhat like those of the Peach∣Tree,
Tree, or Willow Leavs, but not of such a white green colour: The tops of the Stalks are furnished with many pale yellow Starlike Flowers standing in green heads, which when they are fallen, and the Seed ripe, which is somwhat long, smal, and of a yellowish brown colour wrapped in down, is therewith carried away with the wind: The Root is composed of many strings or fibres, set together at a head, which perish not in Winter, but abide, although the Stalks dry away, and no Leaf ap∣peareth in Winter. The tast hereof is strong and unpleasant, and so is the smel also. Place. It groweth in moist and wet grounds by Wood sides, and somtimes in the moist places of shady Groves, as also by the water side. Time. It Flowreth in July, and the Seed is soon ripe, and carryed away with the wind. Vertues and Use. Among the Germans, this Wound Herb is preferred before all others of the same quality. Being boiled in Wine and drunk, it helpeth the indisposion of the Liver, and freeth the Gall from Obstructions, whereby it is good for the yellow Jaundice,Obstructi∣ons yellow Jaundice, Dropsie, Vlcers of the Reins, Inward Wounds & Bruises, Pains in the Body, Mother, Agues, Green Wounds, Old Sores or Vlcers, Vlcers in the Mouth or Throat, Sores in the Privy Parts. and for the Dropsie in the beginning of it; for all inward Ulcers of the Reins; or elswhere, and inward Wounds and Bruises: And being steeped in Wine and then distilled, the Water thereof drunk is sin∣gular good to ease all gnawings in the Sto∣mach, or other pains of the Body, as also the pains of the Mother: And being boyled in Water it helpeth continual Agues; And this said Water, or the simple Water of the Herb di∣stilled, or the Juyce or Decoction, are very effectual to heal any green Wound or old sore or Ulcer whatsoever, clensing them from cor∣ruption and quickly healing them up: It is no less effectual for the Ulcers in the mouth or Throat, be they never so foul or stinking, by washing and gargling them therewith; and likewise for such Sores as happen in the privy parts of man or Woman: Briefly whatsoever hath been said of Bugle or Sanicle, may be found herein. Saturn owns this Herb, and 'tis of sober condition like him. Sawce alone, or Jack by the Hedg. Description. THe lower Leavs of this are rounder than those that grow towards the tops of the Stalks, and are set singly one at a Joynt, being somwhat round and broad, and pointed at the ends, dented also about the edges, somwhat re∣sembling Nettle Leavs for the form but of a fresher green colour, and not rough or pric∣king: The Flowers are very smal and white, growing at the tops of the Stalks one above a∣nother, which being past, there follow smal and long round pods, wherein are cantained, smal round Seed somwhat blackish: The Root is stringy and threddy, perishing every yeer af∣ter it hath given Seed, and raiseth it self again of its own sowing: The Plant or any part thereof being bruised, smelleth of Garlick, but more pleasantly, and tasteth somwhat hot and sharp, almost like unto Rocket. Place. It groweth under Walls, and by Hedg sides, and Pathwaies in Fields, in many places. Time. It Flowreth in June, July, and August. Vertues and Use. This is eaten by many Country people as Sawce to their Salt-fish, and helpeth well to digest the crudities and other corrupt Humors ingendred thereby, it warmeth also the Sto∣mach, and causeth digestion: The Juyce thereof boyled with Honey, is accounted to be as good as Hedg-Muster for the Cough, to cut and expectorate the tough Flegm.Helps di∣gestion, Cough, Tough Flegm, Wind∣Chollick, Stone, Vlcers in the Legs. The Seed bruised and boyled in Wine is a singular good Remedy for the Wind Chollick, or the the Stone, being drunk warm; It is also gi∣ven to Women troubled with the Mother, both to drink, and the Seed put into a Cloth and applied while it is warm is of singular good use. The Leavs also or Seed boyled is good to be used in Clysters to ease the pains of the Stone: The green Leavs are held to be good to heal the Ulcers in the Legs. VVinter and Summer Savory. BOth these are so well known (being en∣tertained as constant Inhabitants in our Gardens) that they need no Description. Vertues and Use. They are both of them hot and dry, especi∣ally the Summer kind, which is both sharp and quick in tast; expelling WindExpelleth Wind, Mother, provokes Vrine & Womens Courses, Tough Flegm, Lethargy, Dull sights in the Sto∣mach and Bowels, and is a present help for the rising of the Mother procured by Wind, pro∣voketh Urine and Womens Courses, and is much commended for Women with Child to take inwardly, and to smell often unto. It cut∣teth tough Flegm in the Chest and Lungs, and helpeth to expectorate in the more easily; It quencheth the dull spirits in the Lethargy, the Juyce thereof being snuffed, or cast up in∣to the Nostrils: The Juyce dropped into the Eyes cleareth a dull sight, if it proceed of
cold humors distilling from the Brain: The Juyce heated with a little Oyl of Roses, and dropped into the Ears easeth them of the noise and singingSinging in the Ears & Deaf∣ness, Sciatica & Palsey, stinging of Bees &c. in them, and of deafness also: Outwardly applied wth white flower in man∣ner of a Pultis, it giveth ease to the Sciatica, and Palsey'd Members, heating and warming them, and taketh away their pains: It also ta∣keth away the pain that comes of stinging by Bees, Wasps, &c. Mercury claims the Dominion over this Herb, neither is there a better Remedy against the Chollick and Illiack passionsChollick, Illiack passion. than this Herb, keep it dry by you all the yeer if you love your selves, and your ease, as 'tis an hun∣dred pound to a penny if you do not: keep it dry, make Conserves and Syrups of it for your use; and withal, take notice that the Summer kind is the best. The common white Saxifrage. Description. THis hath a few smal reddish Kernels or Roots, covered with some Skins lying among diverse smal blackish Fibres, which send forth diverse round, faint, or yellowish green Leavs, and grayish underneath, lying above the ground unevenly dented about the edges, & somwhat hairy, every one upon a little footstalk from whence riseth up a round brow∣nish hairy green stalk, two or three foot high, with a few such like round Leaves as grow be∣low, but smaller, and somwhat branched at the top, whereon stand pretty large white Flowers of five Leaves apiece, with some yellow threds in the middle, standing in long crested brow∣nish green Husks: After the Flowers are past there ariseth somtimes a round hard head by, forked at the top, wherein is contained small blackish Seed, but usually they fall away with∣out any Seed; and it is the Kernels or grains of the Root which are usually called the white Saxifrage Seed, and so used. Place. It groweth in many places of our Land, as well in the lower moist, as in the upper dry corners of Meadows, and graffy sandy places; It used to grow neer Lambs Conduit, on the back side of Grayes-Inn. Time. It Flowreth in May, and is then gathered as well for that which is called the Seed, as to distil, for it quickly perisheth down to the ground when any hot weather comes. Vertues and use. It is very effectual to clense the ReinsClenseth the Reins, Stone, and Bdder, and to dissolve the Stone ingendred in them, and to expel it and the Gravel by U∣rine, to provoke UrineGravel, provoke Urine, also being stopped, and to help the Strangury: for which purpo∣ses the Decoction of the Herb or Roots in white Wine, or the Pouder of the smal Ker∣nelly Roots which is called the Seed taken in white Wine, or in the same Decoction made with white Wine is most usual. The Distilled water of the whol Herb, Roots, and Flowers, is most familiar to be taken: It provoketh al∣so Womens Courses,Womens Courses Tough Flegm. and freeth and clenseth the Stomach and Lungs from thick and tough Flegm that troubles them. There is not ma∣ny better Medicines to break the Stone than this. Burnet Saxifrage. Description. YHe greater sort of our English Burnet Saxifrage groweth up with diverse long Stalks of winged Leavs, set directly opposite one to another on both sides, each being som∣what broad, a little pointed and dented about the edges, of a sad green colour. At the tops of the Stalks stand Umbels of white Flowers, after which comes small and blackish Seed: The Root is long and whitish, abiding long. Our lesser Burnet Saxifrage, hath much finer Leaves than the former, and very smal, and set one against another, deeply jagged about the edges, and of the same colour as the for∣mer: The Umbels of Flowers are white, and the Seed very small, and so is the Root, being also somwhat hot and quick in tast. Place. These grow in most Meadows of this Land, and are easie to be found, being well sought for among the Grass, wherein many times they lie hid scarcely to be discern'd. Time. They Flower about July, and their Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and use. These Saxifrages are as hot as Pepper, and Tragus saith by his experience they are more wholsom: They have the same properties that the Parsleys have, but in provoking U∣rine,Provoke Vrine, Ease Wind & Collick, Mother, Womens Courses, Stone, Tough Flegm, Venom, and easing the pains thereof, or of the Wind and Chollick, are much more effectual; The Roots or Seed being used either in Pou∣der, or in Decoction, or any other way; and likewise helpeth the Windy pains of the Mo∣ther, and to procure their Courses, to break and avoid the Stone in the Kidneys, to digest cold, viscuous, and tough Flegm in the Sto∣mach, and is a most especial Remedy against all kind of Venom. Caftoreum being boy∣led in the distilled water hereof, is singular good to be given to those that are troubled
with Cramps and Convulsions:Cramps & Convusi∣ons; Wounds in the Head, Freckles & spots. some do use to make the Seed into Comfits (as they do Caraway Seed) which is effectual to all the purposes aforesaid. The Juyce of the Herb dropped into the most grievous Wounds of the Head, drieth up their moisture and hea∣leth them quickly. Some Women use the di∣stilled Water, to take away Freckles or Spots in the Skin or Face: and to drink the same sweetned with Sugar for all the purposes afore∣said. Scabious, three sorts. Description. THe common Field Scabious groweth up with many hairy soft, whitish green Leaves, some whereof are but very little, if at all jagged on the edges, others very much rent and torn on the sides, and have threds in them, which upon the breaking may be plainly seen: from among which rise up divérse hairy green Stalks three or four foot high, with such like hairy green Leavs on them, but more deeply and finely devided, branched forth a little: At the tops hereof which are naked and bare of Leaves for a good space, stand round Heads of Flowers, of a pale blewish colour set together in a head, the outermost wherof are larger than the inward, wth many threds also in the middle, somwhat flat at the top, as the Head with Seed is likewise: The Root is great, white, & thick growing down deep into the ground, and abi∣deth many yeers. There is another sort of Field Scabious, dif∣ferent in nothing from the former, but only it is smaller in all respects. The Corn Scabious, differeth little from the first, but that it is greater in all respects and the Flowers more declining to Purple: And the Root creepeth under the upper crust of the Earth, and runneth not deep in the ground as the first doth. Place. The first groweth most usually in Meadows, especially about London every where. The second in some of the dry Fields about this City, but not so plentiful as the former. The third, in the standing Corn, or Fallow Fields, and the borders of such like Fields. Time. They Flower in June and July, and some abide Flowring until it be late in August, and the Seed is ripe in the mean time. There are many other sorts of Scabious, but I take those which I have here described to be most familiar with us; The vertues both of these and the rest being much alike, take them as followeth. Vertues and Use. Scabious is very effectual for all sorts of Coughs, shortness of Breath, and all other Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, ripening and digesting cold Flegm,Coughs & shortness of Breath, Cold Flegm, Inward Vlcers & Impo∣stumes, Plurisie, Infection, Carbuncle or Plague sores; Pains or stitches in the side; Scabs, tet∣ters, Ring∣worms, Itch, in∣ward Wounds, Cold swel∣lings, shrunk Sinews; Freckles & Pimples Morphew & Lepry, Dandriff & Scurf, Green Wounds, Old sorcs & Vlcers, Splinters, Thorns, & broken Bones &c. and other tough humors, voiding them forth by Coughing and spitting: It ripeneth also all sorts of inward Ulcers and Impostimes, the Plurisie also, if the Decoction of the Herb dry or green, be made with Wine, and drunk for some time to∣gether; four ounces of the clarified Juyce of Scabious taken in the morning fasting; with a dram of Methridate, or Venice Treacle, freeth the heart from any infection of Pestilence if after the taking of it, the party sweat two hours in their Beds; and this Medicine be again and again repeated if need require: The green Herb bruised and applied to any Carbuncle or Plague sore, is found by certain experience to dissolve or break it in three hours space. The same Decoction also drunk, helpeth the pains and Stitches in the sides. The Decoction of the Roots taken for fourty daies together, or a dram of the Pouder of them taken at a time in Whey, doth (as Matholus saith) wonder∣fully help those that are troubled with running or spreading Scabs, Tetters, or Ringwornis; yea though they proceed of the French Pox, which he saith he hath tryed by experience: The Juyce or Decoction drunk, helpeth also Scabs and breakings out in Itch and the like: The Juyce also made up into an Oyntment and used, is effectual for the same purpose. The same also helpeth all inward Wounds by the drying, clensing, and healing quality ther∣in: A Syrup made of the Juyce and Sugar is very effectual to all the purposes aforesaid, and so is the distilled water of the Herb and Flo∣wers made in due season; especially to be used when the green Herb is not in force to be ta∣ken. The Decoction of the Herb and Roots outwardly applied, doth wonderfully help al sorts of hard or cold Swellings in any part of the Body; and is as effectual for any shrunk Sinew or Vein. The Juyce of Scabiaus made up with the Pouder of Borax and Camphle, clenseth the Skin of the Face or other part of the Body, not only from Freckles and Pim∣ples, but also from Morphew and Lepry. The Head washed with the same Decoction, clen∣seth it from Dandrif, Scurf, Sores Itches, and the like, being used warm. Tents also dipped in the Juyce or Water thereof not only hea∣leth all green Wounds, but old Sores and Ul∣cers also: The Herb also bruised and applied doth in short time loosen, and cause to be drawn forth any Splinter, broken bone, Arrow head, or other such like thing lying in the Flesh.
Scurvy-grass. Description. OUr ordinary English Scurvygrass hath any th fat Leavs, more long than broad, and somtimes longer and narrower, somtimes also smooth on the edges, and som∣times a little waved, sometimes plain, smooth, and pointed, somtimes a little hollow in the middle and round pointed, of a sad green, and somtimes brownish colour, every one standing by it self upon a long Footstalk, which is brownish or greenish also: from among which rise smal slender Stalks, bearing a few Leaves thereon like the other, but longer and lesser for the most part: At the tops whereof grow many whitish Flowers, with yellow threds in the middle, standing about a green head which becometh the Seed Vessel, which will be som∣what flat when it is ripe, wherein is contained reddish Seed tasting somwhat hot: The Root is made of many white strings, which stick deeply in the mud, wherein it chiefly deligh∣teth yet it will well abide in the more upland and dryer grounds, and tasteth a little brackish or Salt, even there, but not so much as where at hath the Salt water to feed upon. Place. It groweth all along the Thames side, both on the Esseae and Kentish Shoars, from ool∣wich round about the Sea Coasts to Dover, Portsmouth, and even to Bristol, where it is had in plenty: The other with round Leavs groweth in the Marshes in Holland in Lin∣colnshire, and other places of Lincolnshire by the Sea side. Description. There is also another sort called Dutch Scur∣vy-Grass, which is most known and frequent in Gardens, which hath diverse fresh green, and almost round Leaves rising from the Root, nothing so thick as the former, yet in some rich ground, very large, even twice so big as others, not dented about the edges, nor hollow in the middle, every one standing upon a long Footstalk: from among these rise up divers long slender weak Stalks higher than the former, and with more white Flowers at the tops of them, which turn into smaller pods, and smaller brownish Seed than the former: The Root is white, smal, and threddy: The tast of this is nothing Salt ar all, but hath an hot Aromatical spicy tast. Time. They Flower in April or May, and give their Seed ripe quickly after. Vertues and Use. The English Scurvey-grass is more used for the Salt tast it beareth, wth doth somwhat open and clense, but the Dutch Scurvey-grass is of better effect, and chiefly used (if it may be had) by those that have the Scurvey,Scurvy, Liver & Spleen, especially to purge and clense the Blood, the Liver, and the Spleen, for all which Diseases it is of singular good effect by taking the Juyce in the Spring every morning fasting in a cup of Drink: The Decoction is good for the same purpose, and the Herb tunned up in new Drink, either by it self or with other things, for it openeth Obstructions, evacuateth cold clammy and Flegmatick Humors both from the Liver and the Spleen, wasting and consuming both the swelling and hardness thereof, and thereby bringing to the Body a more lively colour. flegmatick Humors, Foul ul∣cers & sore Mouths, Spots & Scars in the Skin.The Juyce also helpeth all foul Ulcers and Sores in the Mouth, if it be often gargled therewith; and used outwardly, clenseth the Skin from spots, marks, or Scars, that happen therein. Self-heal. Description. THe common Self-heal is a small low creeping Herb, having many small roundish pointed Leavs somwhat like the Leaves of Wild Mints, of a dark green colour without any dents on the edges, from among which rise diverse square hairy Stalks scarce a foot high, which spread somtime into Bran∣ches with diverse such smal Leaves set thereon, up to the tops, where stand brown spiked Heads, of many smal brownish Leaves like scales and Flowers set together, almost like the Head of Cassidony, which Flowers are gaping, and of a blewish purple, or more pale blew, in some places sweet, but not so in o∣thers: The Root consists of many strings or fibres downward, and spreadeth strings also, whereby it encreaseth: The smal stalks with the Leaves creeping upon the ground, shoot forth sibres taking hold of the ground, wherby it is made a great ruft in short time. Place. It is found in Woods and Fields every where. Time. It Flowreth in May, and somtimes in A∣pril. Vertues and Use. As Self-heal is like Bugle in form, so also in the Qualities and Vertues serving for al the purposes whereto Bugle is applied with good success either inwardly or outwardly, for in∣ward Wounds or UlcersInward Wounds & Vlcers, Bruises, wheresoever within the Body, for Bruises and Falls and such like hurts: if it be accompanied with Bugle, Sani∣cle, and other the like Wound Herbs it will be the more effectual, and to wash or inject
into Ulcers in the parts outwardly where there is cause to repress the heat and sharpness of Humors flowing to any sore Ulcer, Inflamati∣on, Swelling or the like, or to stay the Flux of bloodFlux of Blood; Foul sores Green wounds; in any Wound or Part, this is used with good success, as also to clense the foul∣ness of Sores, and cause them more speedily to be healed. It is an especial Remedy for all green Wounds to soder the lips of them, and to keep the place from any further inconveni∣ences: The Juyce hereof used with Oyl of Roses to anoint the Temples and Forehead, is very effectual to remove the Headach:Headach; Sores in the Mouth or Throat & secret parts. and the same mixed with Honey of Roses, clenseth and healeth all Ulcers in the Mouth and Throat, and those also in the secret parts. And the Proverb of the Germans, French, and o∣thers is verified in this, That he needeth nei∣ther Physitian nor Chyrurgion, that hath Self∣heal and Sanicle to help himself. Here is another Herb of Venus, Self-heal whereby when you hurt, you may heal your self, 'tis indeed a special Herb for inward and outward Wounds, take it inwardly in Syrups for inward Wounds, outwardly in Unguents and Plaisters for outward. The Service-tree. THis is so well know in the places where it grows that it needeth no Description. Time. It Flowreth before the end of May, and the Fruit is ripe in October. Vertues and use. Services when they are mellow are fit to be taken to stay Fluxes, Scowring, and Castings,Fluxes, Scowrings & Casting; yet less than Medlars: if they be dried before they be mellow, and kept all the yeer, they may be used in Decoctions for the said purpose, either to drink, or to bath the parts requiring it: and is profitably used in that manner to stay the bleeding of Wounds,Bleeding of wounds or at Mouth & Nose. and at the Mouth or Nose, to be applied to the Fore∣head and Nape of the Neck. Smallage. THis also is very well known, and therefore I shall not trouble the Reader with any Description thereof. Place. It groweth naturally in wet and Marsh grounds, but if it be sown in Gardens it there prospereth very well. Time. It abideth green all the Winter, and Seedeth in August. Vertues and Use. Smallage is hotter, dryer, and much more Medicinable than Parsley, for it much more openeth Obstructions of the Liver and SpleenLiver & spleen; Vrine & womens Courses, Yellow Jaundice, Agues; rarifieth thick Flegm, and clenseth it and the Blood withal. It provoketh Urine and Wo∣mens Courses, and is singular good against the yellow Jaundice: It is very effectual a∣gainst Tertian and Quartan Agues, if the Juyce thereof be taken; but especially made into a Syrup. The Juyce also put to Honey of Res, and Barley Water, is very good to Gangle the Mouth and Throat of those that have Soressore Mouths & Throats Vlcers & Cankers wind worms stinking Breath. and Ulcers in them, and will quick∣ly heal them: The same Lotion also clenseth and healeth all other foul Ulcers and Cankers elswhere if they be washed therewith. The Seed is especially used to break and expel wind, to kill Worms and to help a stinking Breath: The Root is effectual to all the pur∣poses aforesaid, and is held to be stronger in operation than the Herb, but especially to o∣pen Obstructions, and to rid away an Ague, if the Juyce thereof be taken in Wine, or the Decoction thereof in Wine be used. Sopewort, or Bruise∣wort. Description. THe Root creepeth under ground far and neer, with many Joynts therein, of a brown colour on the outside and yellowish within, shooting forth in diverse places many weak round Stalks, full of Joynts, set with two Leaves apiece at every one of them on the contrary side, which are ribbed somwhat like unto Plantane, and fashioned like the com∣mon field white Campion Leaves, seldom having any Branches from the sides of the Stalks, but set with diverse Flowers at the top standing in long Husks like the wild Campi∣ons, made of five Leavs apiece, round at the ends, and a little dented in the middle, of a pale Rose colour, almost white, somtimes dee∣per, and somtimes paler, of a reasonable good scent. Place. It groweth wild in many low and wet grounds of this Land, by the Brooks, and sides of running Waters. Time. It Flowreth usually in July, and so conti∣nueth all August, and part of September be∣fore they be quite spent.
Vertues and use. The Country people in diverse places do use to bruise the Leaves of Sopewort, and lay it to their Fingers, Hands, or Legs when they are cut,Cut Fin∣gers, pro∣vokes Vrine, Expels Gravel & Stone, Dropsie, French Pox. to heal them up again. Some make great boast there of that it is Diuretical to pro∣voke Urine, and thereby to expel Gravel and the Stone in the Reins or Kidneys: and do also account it singular good to avoid Hydro∣pical waters thereby to cure the disease of the Dropsie: And they no less extol it to perform an absolute cure in the French Pox, more than either Sarsaparilla, Gujacum, or China can do, which how true it is, I leave to others to judg. Sorrel. OUr ordinary Sorrel, which groweth in Gardens, and also wild in the Fields, is so well known that it needeth no Descripti∣on. Vertues and Use. Sorrel is prevalent in all hot Diseases, to cool any Inflamation and heat of Blood in Agues Pestilential or Chollerick, or other sicknesses and sainting, rising from heat, and to refresh the overspent Spirits with the vio∣lence of furious or fiery fits of Agues, to quench Thirst, and procure an Appetite in fainting or decayd Stomachs: for it resisteth the putrefaction of the Blood, killeth Worms, and is as a Cordial to the heart which the Seed doth more effectually being more drying and binding, and thereby stayeth the hot Flu∣xes of Womens Courses, or of Humors in the Bloody Flux, or Flux of the Stomach.Cooleth Inflama∣tions, & heat of Blood; Agues, Quench thirst, Provoke Appetite, Killworms Womens Courses; Fluxes Poyson Jaundice, Gravel & stone Black Jaundice, Inward ulcers; Itch, Tet∣ters & Ring∣worms Kernels in the Throat sore Mouth Impostume Boyl or Plague sore. The Roots also in a Decoction, or in Pouder, is effectual for all the said purposes. Both Roots and Seed as well as the Herb is held powerful to resist the poyson of the Scorpion. The Decoction of the Roots is taken to help the Jaundice, and to expel Gravel and the Stone in the Reins or Kidneys. The Decoction of the Flowers made with Wine and drunk hel∣peth the black Jaundice, as also the inward Ulcers of the Body or Bowels. A Syrup made with the Juyce of Sorrel and Fumitary is a So∣veraign help to kill those sharp Humors that cause the Itch. The Juyce thereof with a lit∣tle Vinegar serveth well to be used outwardly for the same cause, and is also profitable for Tetters, Ringworms &c. It helpeth also to discuss the Kernels in the Throat, and the Juyce gargled in the Mouth helpeth the Sores therein. The Leaves wrapped up in a Cole∣woort Leaf, and roasted under the Embers, and applied to a hard Impostume, Botch, Boyl, or Plague Sore, both ripeneth and breaketh it. The Distilled water of the Herb is of much good use for all the purposes aforesaid. Venus owns it, and she will never deny the Herb that follows. Wood Sorrel. Description. THis groweth low upon the ground, ha∣ving a number of Leaves coming from the Root, made of three Leaves like a Trefoyl but broad at the ends and cut in the middle, of a faint yellowish green colour, every one stan∣ding on a long Footstalk, which at their first coming up are close folded together to the Stalk, but opening themselves afterwards, and are of a fine sowr rellish, and yeelding a Juyce which will turn red when it is clarified, and maketh a most dainty clear Syrup: Among these Leavs riseth up diverse slender weak Footstalks, with every one of them a Flower at the top, consisting of five small pointed Leaves Star fashion, of a white colour in most places, and in some dash'd over with a small shew of blush, on the back side only: After the Flowers are past follow smal round heads, with small yellowish Seed in them: The Roots are nothing but smal strings fastned to the end of a smal long piece, all of them be∣ing of a yellowish colour. Place. It groweth in many places of our Land, in Woods and Wood sides, where they be moist and shadowed, and in other places not too much open to the Sun. Time. It Flowreth in April and May. Vertues and Use. Wood Sorrel, serveth to all purposes that the other Sorrels do, and is more effectual in hin∣dring the putrefaction of Blood, and UlcersUlcers Inflama∣tions procure Appetite stay Vomi∣ting Pestilenti∣al Feavers Hot swellings Canker or Ulcer in the Mouth  ounds o seabs Destuxi∣ons. in the Mouth and Body, and in cooling and tem∣pering heats & Inflamations, to quench thirst, to strengthen a weak Stomach, to procure an appetite, to stay Vomiting, and very excellent in any contagious sickness, or Pestilential Feavers. The Syrup made of the Juyce is effe∣ctual in all the causes afore said, and so is the Distilled Water of the Herb also. Spunges or Linnen Cloathes wet in the Juyce and applied outwardly to any hot Swellings or Inflamati∣ons, doth much cool and help them: The same Juyce taken and gargled in the Mouth, and after it is spit forth, fresh taken, doth wonderfully help a foul stinking Canker, or Ulcer therein. It is singular good in Wounds, Thrusts, and Stabs in the Body, to stay bleeding, and to clense  and heal the Wounds speedily; and helpeth to stay any hot Defluxions into the Throat or Lungs.
Sow-Thistles. THese are generally so well known that they need no Description. Place. They grow in our Gardens and manured Grounds, and somtimes by old Walls, the path sides of Fields and High-waies. Vertues and use. Sow-thistles are cooling and somwhat bin∣ding, and are very fit to cool an hot Stomach, and to ease the gnawing painsPains & heat of the Stomach, short wind & Whee∣sing, Gravel & Stone, stinking Breath, speedy De∣livery, Strangury, Milk in∣creased, Deafness & singing in the Ears, Inflamed Eyes, Wheals, & Blisters Hemor∣rhoids, Cleer the Face. thereof; The Herb boyled in Wine is very helpful to stay the dissolutions of the Stomach: And the Milk that is taken from the Stalks when they are broken, given in drink, is beneficial to those that are short Winded and have a whee∣sing withal: Pliny saith that it hath caused the Gravel and Stone to be voided by Urine, and that the eating thereof helpeth a stinking breath: Three spoonfuls of the Juyce thereof taken in white Wine warmed, and some Oyl put thereto causeth Women in Travel to have so easie and speedy delivery, that they may be able to walk presently after: The said Juyce taken in warm drink, helpeth the Strangury and pains in making water. The Decoction of the Leaves and Stalks, cau∣seth abundance of Milk in Nurses, and their Children to be well coloured, and is good for those whose Milk doth curdle in their Breasts. The Juyce boiled or throughly heated with a little Oyl of Bitter Almonds in the Pill of a Pomegranate, and dropped into the Ears, is a sure Remedy for Deafness, singings, and all other Diseases in them. The Herb bruised or the Juyce is profitably applied to all hot Infla∣mations in the Eyes, or wheresoever else; and for Wheals, Blisters, or other the like erupti∣ons of heat in the Skin; as also for the heat and itching of the Hemorrhoids, and the heat and sharpness of Humors in the Secret parts of man or Woman: The distilled water of the Herb, is not only effectual for all the Dis∣eases aforesaid to be taken inwardly with a lit∣tle Sugar (which Medicine the daintiest Sto∣mach will not refuse) but outwardly, by apply∣ing Cloathes or Spunges wetted therein: It is wonderful good for Women to wash their Faces therewith, to cleer the Skin, and give a lustre thereto. Southernwood. THis is so well known to be an Ordinary Inhabitant in our Gardens, that I shall not need to trouble you with any Description thereof. The Vertues are as followeth. Time. It Flowreth for the most part in July and August. Vertues and use. Dioscorides saith, That the Seed bruised, heated in warm Water & drunk, helpeth those that are Bursten,Bursten, Cramps & Convul∣sions, Sciaticae, Strangury, Womens Courses, Toyson, Agues, Inflamed, Eyes, Pimples, Pushes & Wheals, Worms, Splinters & Thorns, Old Vlcers Sores in the Privi∣ties, Baldness, French pox, Stone, Spleen & Mother. or troubled with Cramps, or Convulsions of the Sinews, the Sciatica, or difficulty in making water, and bringeth down Womens Courses. The same taken in Wine is an Antidote or Counter poyson against all deadly Poyson, and driveth away Serpents, and other Venemous Creatures; as also the smel of the Herb being Burnt, doth the same. The Oyl thereof anointed on the Backbone before the Fits of Agues come taketh them a∣way: it taketh away Inflamations in the Eyes, if it be put with some part of a roasted Quince and boyled with a few crums of bread and ap∣plied. Boyled with Barely Meal it taketh a∣way Pimples, Pushes, or Wheals, that rise in the Face or other part of the Body. The Seed as well as the dried Herb is often given to kill the Worms in Children: The Herb bruised and laid to, helpeth to draw forth Splinters, and Thorns out of the Flesh. The Ashes thereof dryeth up and healeth old Ulcers that are without Inflamation, although by the sharpness thereof it biteth sore and putteth them to sore pains: as also the Sores in the privy Parts of man or woman. The Ashes mingled with old Sallet Oyl, helpeth those that have their hair fallen and are bald, causing the hair to grow again either on the Head or Beard. Dirantes saith, That the Oyl made of Southernwood and put among the Oynt∣ments that are used against the French Diseas, is very effectual, and likewise killeth Lice in the Head. The Distilled Water of the Herb is said to help them much that are troubled with the Stone, as also for the Diseases of the Spleen and Mother. The Germans commend it for a singular Wound Herb, and therefore call it Stabwort. It is held by all Writers, Antient and Modern to be more offensive to the stomach than Wormwood.
Spignel. Description. THe Roots of common Spignel do spread much and deep in the ground, many strings or branches growing from one Head which is hairy at the top, of a blackish brown colour on the outside and white within, smel∣ling well, and of an Aromatical tast, from whence rise sundry long stalks of most fine cut Leaves like hairs smaller than Dill, set thick on both sides of the Stalks, and of a good scent. Among these Leaves rise up round stif stalks, with few Joynts and Leaves at them, and at the tops an Umbel of fine pure white Flowers, at the edges whereof somtimes will be seen a shew of reddish blush colour, especi∣ally before they be full blown, and are succee∣ded by smal somwhat round Seed, bigger than the ordinary Fennel, and of a browner colour, devided into two parts, and crested on the back, as most of the Umbelliferous Seeds are. Place. It groweth wild in Lancashire, Yorkshire, and other Northern Countries, and is also planted in Gardens. Vertues and Use. Galen saith, The Roots of Spignel are a∣vailable to provoke Urine and Womans Cour∣sesProvokes Vrine & Womens Courses, Strangury, pain in the stomach, Mother, Joynt aches; Tough flegm, Venemous Creatures. but if too much thereof be taken it cau∣seth Headach: The Roots boyled in Wine or Water and drunk, helpeth the Strangury, and stoppings of the Urine, the Wind, swellings and pains in the Stomach, pains of the Mo∣ther, and all Joynt Aches. If the Pouder of the Roots be mixed with Honey, and the same taken as a licking Medicine, it breaketh tough Flegm, and drieth up the Rhewm that falleth on the Lungs. The Roots are accounted ve∣ry effectual against the stinging or biting of any Venemous Creature, and is one of the Ingredients in Methidate, and other Anti∣dotes for the same, Spleenwort, or Cete∣rach. Description. THe smooth Spleenwort from a black, threddy and bushy Root, sendeth forth many long single Leaves, cut in on both sides into round dents, almost to the middle, which is not so hard as that of Pollipodie, each devi∣sion being not alwaies set opposite unto the o∣ther, but between each, smooth, and of a light green on the upper side, and a dark yellowish roughness on the back, folding or rolling it self inward at the first springing up. Place. It groweth as well upon stone walls as moist and shadowy places about Bristol and other the West parts plentifully; as also on Fra∣mingham Castle, on Beckonsfield Church in Bakshire, at Strowde in Kent, and elswhere, and abideth green all the Winter. Vertues and Use. It is generally used against infirmities of the Spleen,Spleen, strangury stone, yellow, Jaundice; Running of the Reins, Melan∣cholly Diseases. it helpeth the strangury and wa∣steth the Stone in the Bladder, and is good a∣gainst the yellow Jaundice and the Hiccough; but the use of it in Women hindreth Concep∣tion. Mathiolus saith, That if a dram of the dust that is on the back side of the Leaves, be mixed with half a dram of Amber in Pouder, and taken with the Juyce of Purslane or Plan∣tane, it will help the running of the Reins Speedily, and that the Herb and Root being boyled and taken, helpeth all Melanchollick Diseases, and those especially that arise from the French Disease. Camerarius saith, That the Distilled water thereof being drunk is very effectual against the Stone in the Reins and Bladder: and that the Ly that is made of the Ashes thereof being drunk for some time to∣gether, helpeth Splenetick persons: It is used in outward Remedies for the same purpose. Star-thistle. Description. THe common Star-thistle hath diverse long and narrow Leaves lying next the ground, cut or torn on the edges, somwhat deeply, into many almost even parts, soft or a little woolley all over the green, among which rise up diverse weak stalks parted into many Branches all lying, or leaning down to the ground, that it seemeth a pretty Bush, set with diverse the like devided Leaves up to the tops, where severally do stand long and small whitish green heads, set with very sharp and long white pricks (no part of the Plant being else prickly) which are somwhat yellowish: out of the middle whereof riseth the Flower composed of many small reddish purple threds; and in the Heads after the Flowers are past, come small whitish round Seed lying in down, as others do. The Root is small, long, and woody, perishing every yeer, and rising again of its own sowing. Place. It groweth wild in the Fields about London in many places, as at Mile-end-Green, in Finsbury Fields beyond the Wind-mils, and many other places.
Time. It Flowreth early, and Seedeth in July, and somtimes in August. Vertues and use. The Seed of this Star-thistle made into Pouder and drunk in Wine, provoketh Urine,Provokes Vrine, stone, plague, fistula, french pox Obstru∣ctions, Agues. and helpeth to break the Stone, and drive it forth. The Root in Pouder and given in Wine and drunk, is good against the Plague or Pestilence, and drunk in the mornings fasting for some time together, is very profitable for a Fistula in any part of the Body. Baptista Sardus doth much commend the distilled Wa∣ter hereof being drunk, to help the French Disease, to open Obstructions of the Liver, and clense the Blood from corrupted Humors, and is profitably given against Quotidian or Tertian Agues. Strawberries. THese are so well known through this Land, that they need no Description. Time. They Flower in May ordinarily, and the Fruit is ripe shortly after. Vertues and use. Strawberries when they are green, are cold and dry, but when they are ripe they are cold and moist: The Berries are excellent good to cool the Liver,Cool the Liver, spleen, & stomach, Quench Thirst, Inflamati∣ons, Provoke Vrine, stay the Bloody flux & Womens Courses, panting of the heart Yellow Jaundice, Vlcers, sore Mouths or Vlcers in the privities Loos teeth, Catahs & Desflu∣xions, Inflamed Eyes pushes & Wheals Red face, Deformi∣ties in the skin, films over the Eyes. the Blood and the Spleen, or an hot Chollerick stomach, to refresh & comfort the fainting Spirits, & to quench Thirst: They are good also for other Inflamations, yet it is not arniss to refrain them in a Feaver, lest by their putrefying in the Stomach they encrease the Fits. The Leavs and Roots boyled in Wine and Water and drunk, do likewise cool the Liver and Blood, and asswage all Inflama∣tions in the Reins and bladder, provoketh U∣rine, and allayeth the heat and sharpness there∣of: The same also being drunk stayeth the Bloody Flux, and Womens Courses, and hel∣peth the Swellings of the Spleen. The Wa∣ter of the Berries carefully distilled is a Sove∣raign Remedy and Cordial in the panting and beating of the Heart, and is good for the yel∣low Jaundice. The Juyce dropped into foul Ulcers, or they washed therewith, or the De∣coction of the Herb and Root, doth wonder∣fully clense, and help to cure them Lotions and Gargles for sore Mouthes, or Ulcers ther∣in, or in the privy Parts, or elswhere, are made with the Leaves and Roots hereof; which is also good to fasten loose Teeth, and to heal spungy soul Gums: It helpeth also to stay Catarrhs or Desluxions of Rhewm into the Mouth, Throat, Teeth, or Eyes; The Juyce or Water is singular good for hot and red Inflamed Eyes, if dropped into them, or they bathed therewith; it is also of excel∣lent property for all Pushes, Wheals, and other breakings forth of hot & sharp Humors in the Face and Hands, or other parts of the Body, to bath them therewith; and to take away a∣ny redness in the Face, or Spots, or other De∣formities in the Skin, and to make it cleer and smooth. Some use this Medicine, Take so many Strawberries as you shall think fitting, and put them into a Distillatory or body of Glass fit for them, which being well closed, set it in a bed of Horsdung for twelve or fourteen daies, and afterwards distill it carefully and keep it for your use: It is an excellent water for hot inflamed Eyes, and to take away any film or Skin that beginneth to grow over them, and for such other defects in them as may be helped by any outward Medicine. Venus owns the Herb. Succory. Description. THe Garden Succory hath longer and nar∣rower Leaves than Endive, and more cut in or torn on the edges, and the Root abideth many yeers: It beareth also blew Flowers like Endive, and the Seed is hardly distingui∣shed from the Seed of the smooth or ordinary Endive. The wild Succory hath diverse long Leaves lying on the ground very much cut in or torn on the edges, on both sides even to the middle rib ending in point; somtimes it hath a red Rib down the middle of the Leaves, from a∣mong which riseth up a hard, round, woody stalk spreading into many Branches, set with smaller and lesser devided Leaves on them up to the tops where stand the Flowers, which are like the Garden kind as the Seed is also (only take notice that the Flowers of the Garden kind are gone in one Sunny day, they being so cold that they are not able to endure the Beams of the Sun; and therfore most delight in the shadow.) The Root is white, but more hard and woody than the Garden kind: The whol Plant is exceeding bitter. Place. This groweth in many places of our Land, in wast, untilled, and barren Fields. The o∣ther only in Gardens. Vertues and Use. Garden Succory as it is more dry, and less cold than Endive, so it openeth more: An handful of the Leavs or Roots boyled in Wine or Water, and a draught thereof drunk fa∣sting, driveth forth Chollerick and Flegmatick Humors; openeth Obstructions of the Liver Gall, and Spleen, helpeth the yellow Jaun∣dice, the Heat of the Reins and of the Urine,Chollerick & flegma∣tick Hu∣mors, Obstru∣ctions, Yellow Jaundice, Hot Reins & Urin,
the DropsieDropsie, also, and those that have an evil disposition in their Bodies by reason of long sickness, evil Diet &c. which the Greeks call , Cachexia. A Decoction thereof made with Wine and drunk, is very effectual against long lingring Agues:Agues, and a dram of the Seed in Pouder drunk in Wine before the Fit of an Ague, helpeth to drive it away: The Distilled Water of the Herb and Flowers (if you can take them in time) hath the proper∣ties, and is especial good for hot Stomachs, and in Agues, either Pestilential or of long con∣tinuance, for swounings and Passions of the Heart,passions of the Heart, Headach, Swellings & Infla∣mations, St. Antho∣nies fires, pushes, wheals & pimples, Inflamed Eyes, Too much Milk. for the heat and Headach in Children, and to the blood and Liver. The said water or the Juyce, or the bruised Leaves applied outwardly, allayeth Swellings, Inflamations, St. Anthonies Fire, Pushes, Wheals, and Pim∣ples, especially used with a little Vinegar, as also to wash pestiferous Sores. The said Wa∣ter is very effectual for sore Eyes that are in∣flamed with redness, and for Nurses Breasts that are pained by the abundance of Milk. The wild Succory as it is more bitter, so it is more strengthning to the Stomach and Liver. English Tobacco. Description. THis riseth up with a thick round Stalk about two foot high, where∣on do grow thick fat green Leaves, nothing so large as the other Indi∣an kinds, somwhat round pointed also, and nothing dented about the edges: The Stalk brancheth forth, and beareth at the tops divers Flowers set in green Husks, like the other but nothing so large, scarce standing above the Brims of the Husks, round pointed also, and of a greenish yellow colour. The Seed that followeth is not so bright, but larger, con∣tained in the like great Heads. The Roots are neither so great, nor woody, and perishing e∣very yeer with the hard Frosts in Winter, but riseth generally of its own sowing. Place. This came from some parts of Brassiile, as is thought, and is more familier to our Country, than any of the other sorts, early giving ripe Seed, which the others seldom do. Time. It Flowreth from June somtimes to the end of August, or later, and the Seed ripeneth in the mean time. Vertues and Use. It is found by good experience to be avai∣lable to expectorate tough FlegmTough Flegm, from the Stomach, Chest, and Lungs: The Juyce thereof made into a Syrup, or the distilled wa∣ter of the Herb drunk with some Sugar, or without if you will: Or the smoke taken by a Pipe as is usual, but fasting. The same hel∣peth to expel WormsWorms, Meagrim, pains in the Bo∣wels Gravel & Stone, wind, Mother, toothach, Kings E∣vil, Venemous Creature, Ague, Cramps & Aches, Sciatica, Itch, Scabs & Vlcers, Cankers & soul Sores, Lice, Fresh wound, Old sores, Impostums & hard Swellings. in the Stomach and Bel∣ly, and to case the pains in the Head or Mea∣grim, and the griping pains in the Bowels: It is profitable for those that are troubled with the Stone in the Kidneys, both to ease pains and by provoking Urine to expel Gravel and the Stone ingendred therein, and hath been found very effectual to expel windiness and o¦ther Humors which cause the strangling of the Mother: The Seed hereof is very effectual to help the Toothach, and the Ashes of the burnt Herb, to clense the Gums, and make the Teeth white. The Herb bruised and applied to the place grieved with the Kings Evil (as they call it) helpeth it in nine or ten daies effectually: Monardus saith it is a Counter-poyson for the biting of any Venemous Creature; the Herb also being outwardly applied to the hurt place: The distilled water is often given with some Sugar before the Fit of an Ague to lessen them, and take them away in three or four times using. If the Distilled fieces of the Herb having been bruised before the Distilla∣tion, and not distilled dry be set in warm dung for fourteen daies, and afterwards hung up in a Bag in a Wine Celler; that liquor that di∣stilleth therefrom is singular good to use for Cramps, Aches, the Gout, and Sciatica, and to heal Itches, Scabs, and running Ulcers, Cankers, and foul Sores whatsoever: The Juyce is also good for all the said griefs, and likewise to kill Lice in Childrens Heads. The green Herb bruised and applied to any green Wound, cureth any fresh Wound or cut whersoever: and the Juyce put into old Sores both clenseth and healeth them. There is also made hereof a singular good Salve to help Im∣postumes, hard Tumors, and other swellings by blows or falls. The Tamarisk-Tree. THis is so well known in the places where it grows that it needeth no Description. Time. It Flowreth about the end of May, or in June, and the Seed is ripe and blown away in the be∣ginning of September. Vertues and Use. If the Root, Leaves, or yong Branches be boyled in Wine or Vinegar and drunk, and applied outwardly, it is very powerful against the hardness of the spleen.Spleen, Hemor∣rhoids, spitting Blood, womens Courses, Jaundice, & Chollick The Leaves boyled in Wine and drunk is good to stay the bleeding of the Hemorrhoidal Veins, the spitting of Blood, and Womens too abounding Courses, and helpeth the Jaundice, the Chollick, and
the bitings of all Venemous Serpents,Venemous Serpents, except the p. The Bark is as effectual if not more to all the purposes aforesaid; and both it and the Leaves boyled in Wine, and the Mouth and Teeth washed therewith helpeth the Toothach;Toothach, Pain in the Ears, watering Eyes, Gangrenes & Vs, Nits & Lice, Spleen, Burning & Scal∣ding, French Pox, Lepry & Scabs, Dropsie, Melan∣cholly, Black Jaundice. being dropped into the Ears ea∣seth the pains, and is good for the redness and watering of the Eyes. The said Decoction with some Honey put thereto is good to stay Gangrenes and sretting Ulcers, and to wash those that are subject to Nits and Lice. The Wood is very effectual to consume the Spleen, and therefore to drink out of Cups and Cans made thereof is good for Splenetick persons. The Ashes of the Wood are used for all the purposes aforesaid, and besides doth quickly help the Blisters raised by Burnings or Scal∣dings, by fire or water. Alpinus and Veslin∣gius do affirm, That the AEgyptians do with as good success use the Wood hereof to cure the French Disease, as others do Lignum Vitae, or Gujacum; and give it also to such as are possessed with Lepry, Scabs, Pushes, Ulcers, or the like, and is available also to help the Dropsie, arising from the hardness and Ob∣struction of the Spleen, as also for Melanchol∣ly, and the black Jaundice that ariseth there∣of. Garden Tansie. THis also is so well known, that it nee∣deth no Description. Time. It Flowreth in June and July. Vertues and Use. Thee Decoction of the common Tansie, or the Juyce drunk in Wine is a singular Reme∣dy for all the griefs that come by stopping of the Urine, helpeth the Strangury and those that have weak Reins and Kidneys:Disury, Strangury, Reins, Kidneys, wind, womb, Miscar∣riage, It is also very profitable to dissolve and expel Wind in the Stomach, Belly, or Bowels, to procure Womens Courses, and expel windiness in the Matrix. If it be bruised and often smelled un∣to, as also applied to the lower part of the Belly, it is very profitable for such Women as are given to miscarry in Childbearing, to caus them to go out their full time: It is used also against the StoneStone, in the Reins, especially to men. The Herb fried with Eggs (as is accu∣stomed in the Spring time) which is called a Tansie, helpeth to digest, and carry downward those bad Humors that trouble the Stomach:Stomach, The Seed is very profitably given to Children for the Worms,Worms, and the Juyce in Drink is as effectual. Being boyled in Oyl it is good for the sinews shrunk by Cramps,Cramps. or pained with cold, if thereto applied. Dame Venus was minded to pleasure Wo∣men with Child by this Herb, for there grows not an Herb fitter for their uses than this is, it is just as though it were cut out for the pur∣pose, the Herb bruised and applied to the Navil staies miscarriage, I know no Herb like it for that use; boyled in ordinary Beer, and the Decoction drunk, doth the like, and if her Womb be not as she would have, this Deco∣ction will make it as she would have it, or at least as she should have it; let those Women that desire Children love this Herb, 'tis their best Companion, their Husband excepted. Also it consumes the Flegmatick Humors, the cold and moist coustitution of Winter most usually infects the Body of Man with, and that was the first reason of eating Tansies in the Spring, at last the world being over run with Popery, a Monster called Superstition perks up his head, and as a just Judgment of God obscures the bright beams of Knowledge by his dismal looks (Pysitians seeing the Pope and his Imps selfish they began to be so too) and now forsooth Tansies must be eaten only on Palm and Easter Sundaies, and their neighbor daies; as last Superstion being too hot to hold, and the selfishness of Physitians walking in the clouds, after the Fryars and Monks had made the people ignorant, the Superstion of the time was found out, but the Vertue of the Herb hidden, and now 'tis almost, if not altogether, left off: Surely our Physitians are beholding to none so much as they are to Monks and Fryars, for want of eating this Herb in Spring, make people sickly in Sum∣mer, and that makes work for the Physitian. If it be against any man or womans Consci∣ence to eat a Tansie in the Spring, I am as un∣willing to burden their consciences as I am that they should burden mine, they may boyl it in Wine and drink the Decoction, it will work the same effect. VVild Tansie, or Silver∣weed. THis also is so well known that it needeth no Description. Place. It groweth almost in every place. Time. It Flowreth in June and July. Vertues and Use. Wild Tansie stayeth the Lask, and all FluxesFlux, of Blood in men or women, which some say it will do if the green Herb be worn in the shoos, so it be next the Skin, and 'tis true e∣nough that 'twil stop the Terms if worn so, and the Whites too for ought I know. It stay∣eth also spitting or Vomiting of Blood.Terms, stops, Spitting Vomiting of Blood, The
Pouder of the dried Herb taken in some of the distilled Water helpeth the WhitesWhites, Ruptures, Belly-ach, Sciatica, Joynts, toothach, Loos teeth Gums, Ulcers in the Mouth wounds, Sore Legs, Pimples, Freckles, Sunbur∣sing. in women, but more especially if a little Coral and Ivory in Pouder be put to it: It is also much com∣mended to help Children that are bursten, and have a Rupture being boyled in Water and Salt. Being boyled in Wine and drunk, it easeth the griping pains of the Bowels, and is good for the Sciatica and Joynt Aches. The same boyled in Vinegar with Honey and Al∣lum, and gargled in the Mouth, easeth the pains of the Toothach, fastneth loose Teeth, helpeth the Gums that are sore, and setleth the pallat of the Mouth in its place when it is fal∣len down: It clenseth and healeth the Ulcers in the Mouth or secret parts, and is very good for Inward Wounds, and to close the lips of green Wounds; as also to heal old, moist, cor∣rupt running Sores in the Legs or elswhere: Being bruised and applied to the Soles of the Feet, and the Hand-wrests, it wonderfully cooleth the hot fits of Agues, be they never so violent. The distilled water clenseth the skin of all discolourings therein, as Morphew, Sun∣burning &c. as also Pimples, Freckles, and the like; and dropped into the Eyes or cloaths wet therein and applied, taketh away the heat, and Inflamations in them. Now Dame Venus hath fitted women with two Herbs of one name, one to help Concep∣tion, the other to maintain beauty, and what more can be expected of her? What now re∣mains for you but to love your Husbands, and not to be wanting to your poor Neighbors. Thistles. OF these there are many, kinds growing here in England, which are so well known that they need no Description: Their difference is easily known by the places where they grow:Vi. Place. Some grow in Fields, some in Meadows, and some among the Corn: others, on Heaths, Greens, and wast grounds in many places. Time. They all Flower in July and August, and their Seed is ripe quickly after. Vertues and Use. All these Thistles are good to provoke U∣rine, and to amend the stinking smell thereof; as also the rank smel of the Armpits, or of the whol Body, being boyled in Wine and drunk; and are said also to help a stinking breath and to strengthen the Stomach. Pliny saith that the Juyce bathed on the place that wanteth hair, it being fallen off, will cause it to grow again speedily.Disury, Ill smel, stinking Breath, Stomach. Sure Mars rules it, it is such a prickly busi∣ness. The Melancholly Thistle. Description. THis riseth up with a tender single hoary green Stalk, bearing thereon four or five long hoary green Leaves, dented about the edges, the points whereof are little or nothing prickly, and at the top usually but one Head, yet somtimes from the bosom of the upper∣most Leaf there shooteth forth another smal∣ler Head, scaly and somwhat prickly, with ma∣ny reddish Purple Thrums or Threds in the middle, which being gathered fresh will keep the colour a long time, and fadeth not from the Stalk in a long time, while it perfecteth the Seed, which is of a mean bigness lying in the Down: The Root hath many long Strings fastned to the Head, or upper part, which is blackish and perisheth not. There is another sort little differing from the former, but that the Leaves are more green above and more hoary underneath; and the Stalk being about two foot high beareth but one large scaly Head, with threds and Seeds as the former. Place. They grow in many moist Meadows of this Land, as well in these Southern, as in the Northern parts. Time. They Flower about July, or August, and their Seed ripeneth quickly after. Vertues and Use. Their Vertues are but a few, but those not to be despised, for the Decoction of the Thi∣stle in Wine being drunk, expels superfluous Melancholly out of the Body, and make a man as merry as a Cricket, superfluous Melan∣cholly causeth care, fear, sadness, despair, envy, and many evils more besides, but Religion, teacheth to wait upon Gods Providence, and cast our care upon Him, who careth for us; what a fine thing were it if men and women could live so? and yet seven yeers care and fear makes a man never the wiser, nor a farthing the richer. Dioscorides saith, the Root born about one doth the like, and removes all disea∣ses of Melancholly. Modern Writers laugh at him, let them laugh that wins, my Opinion is, that 'tis the best Remedy against all Me∣lancholly Diseases that grows, they that please may use it: 'tis under Capricorn, and therefore under both Saturn and Mars, one rids Me∣lanchollyMelan∣cholly. by Sympathy, the other by Antipa∣thy.
Our Ladies Thistle. Description. THis hath diverse very large and broad Leaves lying on the ground, cut in, and as it were crumpled, but somwhat hairy on the edges, of a white green shining colour, where∣in are many lines and strakes of a milky white colour, running all over, and set with many sharp and stift prickles all about; Among which riseth up one or more strong, round, and prickly stalks, set full of the like Leaves up to the top, where at the end of every Branch, cometh forth a great prickly Thistle like head, strongly armed with pricks, and with bright purple Thrums rising out of the middle of them; after they are past, the Seed groweth in the said heads, lying in a great deal of soft white Down, which is somwhat flattish and shining, large and brown. The Root is great, spreading in the ground, with many strings, and smal fibres fastned thereto. All the whol Plant is bitter in tast. Place. It is frequent on the Bank of almost every Ditch. Time. It Flowreth and Seedeth in June, July, and August. Vertues and Use. Our Ladies Thistle is thought to be as effe∣ctual as Carduus Benedictus for Agues,Agues, Plague, Obstructions, Liver Spleen, Stone, Dropsie, Stitches in the side, Liver, Blood. and to prevent and cure infection of the Plague, as also to open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and thereby is good against the Jaun∣dice; It provoketh Urine, breaketh and ex∣pelleth the Stone, and is good for the Dropsie: It is effectual also for the pains in the sides, and many other inward pains and gripings: The Seed and distilled water are held powerful to all the purposes aforesaid; and besides, it is often applied both inwardly to drink, and outwardly with Cloathes or Spunges to the Region of the Liver to cool the distempera∣ture thereof, and to the Region of the Heart, against swounings and passions of it. It clenseth the blood exccedingly, and in Spring if you please to boyl the tender Plant, (but cut off the Prickles, unless you have a mind to choak your self) it will change your blood as the season changes, and that's the way to be safe, as to change as the times change is the way to live secure, and that Flatterers and Weather-cocks know wel enough. The Woolley, or Cotton Thistle. Description. THis hath many large Leaves lying on the ground, somwhat cut in, and as it were crumpled on the edges, of a green colour on the upper side, but covered over with long hairy Wool or Cottony Down, set with most sharp and cruel pricks; from the middle of whose heads of Flowers come forth many pur∣plish crimson threds, and somtimes white, al∣though but seldom: The Seed that followeth in these white downy heads is somwhat large, long, and round, resembling the Seed of La∣dies Thistle, but paler: The Root is great, and thick, spreading much, yet usually dieth after Seed time. Place. It groweth on diverse Ditch Banks, and in the Cornfields and High-wayes, generally throughout the Land; and is often found growing in Gardens. Time. It Flowreth and beareth Seed about the end of Summer, when other Thistles do Flower and Seed. Vertues and Use. Dioscorides and Pliny write, That the Leavs and Roots hereof taken in drink, hel∣peth those that have a Crick in their Neck, that they cannot turn it unless they turn their whol Body. Galen saith, That the Root and Leaves hereof are good for such persons that have their Bodies drawn together by some Spasm or Convulsion, or other Infirmities, as the Rickets' (or as the Colledg of Physitians would have it, the Rachites, about which name they have quarrel'd sufficiently) in Children; being a Disease that hindereth their growth, by binding their Nerves, Liga∣ments, and whol structure of their Body. The Fullers Thistle, or Teasel. THis is so well known that it needeth no Description, being used by the Cloath∣workers. The wild Teasel is in all things like the for∣mer but that the prickles are smal, soft, and
upright, not hooked or stiff; and the Flowers of this are of fine blush or pale Carnation co∣lour, but of the Manured kind whitish. Place. The first groweth being sown in Gardens or Fields for the use of Cloathworkers: The o∣ther neer Ditches and Cills of water in many places of this Land. Time. They Flower in July, and are ripe in the end of August. Vertues and Use. Dioscorides saith, That the Root bruised and boyled in Wine until it be thick, and kept in a brazen Vessel or Pot, and after spread as a Salve and applied to the Fundament, doth heal the clefts thereof, as also Cankers and Fistulaes therein, as also taketh away Warts and Wers: The Juyce of the Leaves dropped into the Ears, killeth Worms in them. The distilled water of the Leaves dropped into the Eyes, taketh away redness and mists in them that hinder the sight; and is often used by women to preserve their beauty, and to take a∣way redness and Inflamations, and all other heat or discolourings. Treacle Mustard. Description. THis riseth up with a hard round stalke a∣bout a foot high, parted into some bran∣ches, having divers soft green leaves some∣what long and narrow set thereon, waved, but not cut in on the edges, broadest towards the ends, end somewhat round pointed: The flowers are white that grow at the tops of the branches, spike fashion one above another, after which come large round pouches, parted in the middle with a furrow, having one blac∣kish brown seed in either side, somewhat sharp in tast, and smelling of Garlick, espe∣cially in the fields where it is naturall, but not so much in gardens: The roots are small and threddy, perishing every yeare. And here give me leave to adde Methridate Mustard, al∣though it may seem more properly by the name  belong to the Alphabet M. Methridate Mustard. THis groweth higher then the former, spreading more and longer branches, whose leaves are smaller and narrower, some∣times unevenly dented about the edges; the Flowers are smal and white, growing on long branches, with much smaller and rounder seed vessels after them, and parted in the same manner, having smaller browne seeds then the former, and much sharper in taste: The root perisheth after seed time, but abideth the first winter after the springing. Place. They grow in sundry places of this Land, as halfe a mile from Hatfield by the river side under a hedge as you go to Hatfield, and in the street of Peckham on Surry side. Time. They flowre and seed from May to August. Vertues and Use. These Mustards are said to purge the bo∣dy both upwards and downwards, and procu∣reth Womens Courses so abundantly, that it suffocateth the birth: It breaketh inward Im∣posthumes being taken inwardly, and used in Glisters, helpeth the Sciatica, the seed applied outwardly doth the same. It is an especiall in∣gredient unto Methridate and Treacle, being of it selfe an Antidote resisting poyson, ve∣nome, and putrefaction: It is also availeable in many causes for which the common Mu∣stard is used, but somewhat weaker. The Black-Thorne, or, Sloe-Bush. THis is so well knowne, that it needeth no description. Place. It groweth in every place and Countrey, in the hedges and borders of fields. Time. It flowreth in Aprill, and sometimes in March, but ripeneth the fruit after all other plums whatsoever, and is not fit to be eaten until the Autumne frost have mellowed it. Vertues and Use. All the parts of the Sloe-Bush are binding, cooling,Binds, cools, dries Bleeding Flux, Bloody Flux, gnawings in bowels and stomach. and drying, and all effectuall to stay bleeding at the nose and mouth, or any o∣ther place; the Lask of the beily, or stomach, or the Bloody Flux, the two much abounding of womens Courses, and helpeth to ease the paines in the sides, bowels, and guts, that come by over-much scowring, to drink the de∣coction of the barke of the roots, or more usually the decoction of the Berries either fresh or dried. The Conserve is also of very much use, and most familiarly taken for the purposes aforesaid: But the distilled water of the Flowers first steeped in Sack for a night, and drawne there-from by the heat ofBalne∣um Angliceabaths, is a most certaineremedy tried and approved to ease all manner of gnawings in the stomach, the sides and bowels,
or any griping pains in any of them, to drink a smal quantity when the extremety of pain is upon them: The Leaves also are good to make Lotions, to gargle and wash the Mouth and Throat,Sore Mouth & Throat, Headach. wherein are Swellings, Sores, or Kernels, and to stay the Defluxions of Rhewm to the Eyes or other parts, as also to cool the heat and Inflamations in them, and to ease hot pains of the Head, to bath the Forehead and Temples therewith. The simple distilled water of the Flowers is very effectual for the said purposes, and is the condensate Juyce of the Sloes. The distilled water of the green Berries is used also for the said effects. Thoroughwax. Description. THe common Throughwax sendeth forth one straight round Stalk, and somtimes more, two foot high and better, whose lower Leaves being of a blewish green colour are smaller and narrower than those up higher, and stand close thereto, not compassing it, but as they grow higher, they do more and more en∣compass the Stalk, until it wholly (as it were) pass through them, branching toward the top into many parts, where the Leaves grow smal∣ler again, every one standing singly, and never two at any Joynt: The Flowers are very smal and yellow, standing in tufts at the heads of the Branches, where afterwards grow the Seed, smal and blackish, many thick thust to∣gether: The Root is smal, long, and woody, perishing every yeer after Seed time, and ri∣sing again plentifully of its own sowing, Place. It is found growing in many Corn Fields, and Pasture grounds in this Land. Time. It Flowreth in July, and the Seed is ripe in August. Vertues and Use. Thoroughwax is of a singular good use, for all sorts of Bruises and WoundsBruises, Wounds, Ulcers, either inward or outward, and old Ulcers and Sores like∣wise, if the Decoction of the Herb with water or Wine be drunk, and the places washed ther∣with, or the Juyce or green Herb bruised or boyled either by it self, or with other Herbs in Oyl or Hogs Grease, to be made into an Oyntment to serve all the yeer: The Deco∣ction of the Herb, or the Pouder of the dried Herb taken inwardly, and the same or the green Leaves bruised and applied outwardly, is singular good to cure RupturesRuptures, Navils sticking out. and Burstings, especially in Children, before it be two old. Being also applied with a little Flower and Wax to Childrens Navils that stick forth it helpeth them. Tormentil. Description. THis hath many reddish slender weak Branches rising from the Root, lying up∣on the ground, or rather leaning than standing upright, with many short Leaves that stand closer to the Stalks than Cinkfoyl doth (which this is very like) with the Footstalk encompas∣sing the Branches in several places, but those that grow next to the ground are set upon long Footstalks, each whereof are like the Leaves of Cinkfoyl, but somwhat longer and lesser, and dented about the edges, many of them devided but into five Leaves, but most of them into sevens whence it is also called Setfoyl; yet some may have six and some eight, according to the fertility of the Soyl: At the tops of the Branches stand diverse smal yellow Flowers consisting of five Leaves, like those of Cinkfoyl, but smaller. The Root is smaller than Bistort, somwhat thick, but blac∣ker without, and not so red within, yet som∣times a little crooked, having many blackish fibres thereat. Place. It groweth as well in Woods and shadowy places, as in the open Champion Country, a∣bout the borders of Fields in many places of this Land, and almost in every Broom Field in Essex. Time. It Flowreth all the Summer long. Vertues and Use. Tormentil is most excellent to stay all kind of Fluxes of BloodFlux, Bleeding, Veins cut, terms stops, Feavers, Pestilence, Smal pox Measels Purples, or Humors, in man or wo∣man, whether at Nose, Mouth, Belly, or any Wound in the Veins or elswhere: The Juyce of the Herb or Root taken in drink, not only resisteth all Poyson and Venom of any Crea∣ture, but of the Plague it self, and Pestilen∣tial Feavers, and contagious Diseases, as the Pox, Measels, Purples, &c. expelling the Ve∣nom and Infection from the Heart by swea∣ting, if the green Root be not at hand to be had, the Pouder of the dry Root is as effe∣ctual, a dram thereof being taken every mor∣ning: The Decoction likewise of the Herbs and Roots made in Wine and drunk worketh the same effect; and so doth the distilled wa∣ter of the Herb and Root being steeped in Wine for a night, and then distilled in Balneo Mariae. This Water thus distilled taken with some Venice Treacle, and the party presently laid to sweat will certainly (with Gods help) expel any Venom or poyson,Poyson or the Plague, Feaver, &c. for it is an ingredient of especial respect in all Antidotes or Counterpoysons. There is not found any Root more effectual to
help any Flux of the Belly, Stomach, Spleen,Speen, Blood Inflamed, Liver, Lungs, Yellow Jaundice, or Blood than this, to be taken inwardly, or applied outwardly. The Juyce taken doth wonderfully open Obstructions of the Liver and Lungs, and thereby in short space helpeth the yellow Jaundice. Some use to make Cakes hereof as well to stay all Fluxes, as to restrain all Chollerick Belchings, and much Vomi∣tings with Loathings in the Stomach: The Pouder of the ded Root made up with the white of an Egg and baked upon a hot Tile will do it. Andreus Valesius is of opinion, That the Decoction of this Root is no less effectual to cure the French Pox,French Pox than Guajacum, or China and 'tis not unlikely, because it so mightily resisteth putrefaction: Lobel saith, That Ron∣delitius used it as Hermodactils for Joynt-a∣ches: The Pouder also, or Decoction to be drunk, or to sit therein as a Bath is an assured Remedy against abortion in Women, if it proceed from the over Fluxibility or weakness of the inward retentive faculty: as also a Plaister made therewith and Vinegar applyed to the Roins of the Back, doth much help not only this but also those that cannot hold their Water, the Pouder being taken in the Juyce of Plantane; and it is also commended against the worms in Children.Miscar∣riage,Diabetes, Worms, Ruptures, It is very powerful in Ruptures and Burstings: as also for Brui∣ses and Falls, to be used as well outward as in∣wardly. The Root hereof made up with Pel∣litory of Spain and Allum, and put into an hollow Tooth,toothach, not only asswageth the pain, but staieth the Flux of Humors which caused it, Tormentil is no less effectual and power∣ful a Remedy for outward Wounds, Sores,Wounds, Sores, Hurts, and Hurts, than for inward, and is therefore a special Ingredient meet to be used in all Wound drinks, Lotions, and Injections for foul corrupt rotten Sores and Ulcers, of the Mouth, Secrets, or other parts of the Body. And to put either the Juyce or Pouder of the Root into such Oyntments, Plaisters, and such things that are to be applied to Wounds and So∣es: it also dissolveth all Knots, Ker∣nels, and hardness gathered about the Ears, the Throat, and Jaws and the Kings Evil if the Leaves and Roots be bruised and applied thereto: The same also easeth the pains of the Sciatica or Hip-goutGout, by restraining the sharp Humors that flow thereto. The Juyce of the Leaves and Roots used with a little Vinegar, is also a special Remedy against the running Sores of the Head or other parts, Scabs also and the Itch, or any such eruptions in the Skin proceeding of Salt and sharp Humors:Srabby Heads. The same also is effectual for the Piles or Hemor∣rhoids if they be washed and bathed therwith, or with the Distilled water of the Herb and Roots: It is found also helpful to dry up any sharp Rhewm that distilleth from the Head into the Eyes causing, redness, pain, waterings, Itchings, or the like, if a little pre∣pared Tutia, or white Amber be used with the Distilled water hereof: Many Women use this Water as a secret to help themselves and others when they are troubled with the too much flowing of the Whites or Reds, both to drink it, and inject it with a Syringe. And here's enough, only remember, the Sun chal∣lengeth the Herb. Turnsole, or Heliotro∣pium. Description. THe greater Turnsole riseth up with one upright Stalk about a foot high or more, deviding it self almost from the bottom into diverse smaller Branches of a hoary colour: at each Joynt of the Stalk and Branches grow two smal broad Leaves somwhat white or hoa∣ry also: At the tops of the Stalks and Bran∣ches stand many small white Flowers consi∣sting of four and somtimes five very small Leaves, set in order one above another, upon a smal cooked spike which turneth inwards like a bowed finger, opening by degrees as the Flowers blow open; after which in their pla∣ces come smal corner'd Seed, four for the most part standing together. The Root is smal and threddy perishing every yeer, and the Seed shedding every yeer, raiseth it again the next Spring. Place. It groweth in Gardens, and Flowreth and Seedeth with us inEngland, notwithstanding it is not natural to this Land, but to Italy, Spain, and France, where it groweth plenti∣fully. Vertues and Use. Dioseorides saith, That a good Handful of this, which is called the greater Turnsole, boy∣led in Water and drunk, pnrgeth both Chol∣ler and Flegm:Choller, Flegm, Stons, Disury, Terms provokes, Gout, Warts, Wens, Disjun∣ctures. And boyled with Cummin and drunk, helpeth the Stone in the Reins, Kidneys, or Bladder, provoketh Urine and Womens Courses, and causeth an easie and syeedy delivery in Childbirth. The Leaves bruised and applied to places pained with the Gout, or that have been out of joynt and new∣ly set are full of pain, do give much case. The Seed, and the Juyce of the Leaves also being rubbed with a little Salt upon Warts, Wens, and other hard Kernels in the Face, Eyelids, or any other part of the Body, will by often using take them away. 'Tis an Herb of the Sun, and a good one too.
Meadow Trefoyl, or Ho∣neysuckles. THese are so well known, especially by the name of Honeysuckles, White and Red, that I need not describe them. Place. They grow almost every where in this Land. Vertues and Use. Dodoneus saith, The Leaves and Flowers are good to ease the griping pains of the Guts, the Herb being boyled and used in a Clyster:Belly-ach, If the Herb be made into a Pultis and applied to Inflamations,Inflamati∣ons, Pin & Web, Eyes, it will ease them. The Juyce dropped into the Eyes is a familier Medicine with many Country people to take away the Pin and Web (as they call it) in the Eyes, it also allayeth the Heat and bloodshooting of them: Country people do also in many places drink the Juyce hereof against the biting of an Adder, and having boyled the Herb in water, they first wash the place with the Decoction, and then lay some of the Herb also to the hurt place. The Herb also boyled in Swines Grease and so made into an Oyntment, is good to apply to the biting of any Venemous Venemous Beast, Crea∣ture. The Herb also bruised and heated be∣tween two Tiles, and applied hot to the share, causeth them to make water who had it stop'd before:Disury, It is held likewise to be good for Wounds, and to take away Scars.Wounds, Scars, The De∣coction of the Herb and Flowers with the Seed and Root taken for some time, helpeth Women that are troubled with the Whites. Whites, The Seed and Flowers boyled in Water, and after made into a Pultis with some Oyl and applied, helpeth hard Swellings and Impo∣stumes. Swellings, Apostums. Of Tefoyl or three leaved Grass, there are very many sorts described by Authors, but one I have found out which I never red of, the Leaf is but small and it beareth a small yellow Flower, in the midst of each Leaf of the Herb, is a perfect picture of a Heart in red colour, it grows plentifully in a Field between Long∣ford and Bow; also I found one Root in the High-way between Chadwel and Rumford in Essex, as also another in the High-way be∣tween Horn-Church and Upminster in the same County, the tast is somthing more hot and spicy than the tast of the rest is. Tutsan, or Park Leaves. Description. THis hath many brownish shining round Stalks, crested all the length thereof, ri∣sing to be two and somtimes three foot high, branching forth even from the bottom, having diverse Joynts, and at each of them two fair large Leaves standing, of a dark blewish green colour on the upper side, and of a yellowish green underneath, turning red∣dish towards Autumn, but abiding on the Branches all the Winter: At the tops of the Stalks and Branches stand large yellow Flo∣wers, and Heads with Seed, which being gree∣nish at the first, and afterwards reddish, turn to be of a blackish purple colour when they are through ripe, with smal brownish Seed within them, and then yield a reddish Juyce or Li∣quor, of a reasonable good scent, somwhat re∣sinous, and of an harsh or stiptich tast, as the Leaves also and the Flowers be, although much less, but do not yield such a cleer Claret Wine Liquor as some say it doth: The Root is brownish, somwhat great, hard, and woody, spreading well in the ground. Place. It groweth in many Woods, Groves, and Wooddy Grounds, as Parks and Forrests, and by Hedg sides in many places of this Land, as in Hampsted Wood, by Railey in Essex, in the Wild of Kent, and in many other places need∣less to recite. Time. It Flowreth later than St. Johns, or St. Pe∣ters wort. Vertues and Use. Tutsan purgeth Chollerick Humors as St. Peters wort is said to do, for therein it wor∣keth the same effects, both to help the Sciatica and Gout, and to heal burnings by fire: It stayeth also the bleeding of Wounds, if either the green Herb be bruised, or the pouder of the dry be applied thereto.Choller, Sciatica, Gout, Burning, Bleeding, Wounds, Ulcers. It hath been ac∣counted and certainly is a soveraign Herb to heal any Wound or Sore either outwardly or inwardly, and therfore alwaies used in Drinks, Lotions, Balms, Oyls, Oyntments for any sort of green Wound, or old Ulcers and Sores, in all which the continual experience of for∣mer Ages hath confirmed the use thereof to be admirable good, though it be not so much in use now as when Physitians and Chirurgeons were so wise as to use Herbs more than now they do. It is an Herb of Saturn and a most noble Antivenerian.
Garden Valerian. Description. THis hath a thick short grayish Root lying for the most part above ground, shooting forth on all sides other such like small pieces or Roots, which have all of them many long and great strings or fibres under them, in the ground, whereby it draweth nourishment. From the Heads of these Roots spring up ma∣ny green Leaves, which at first are some∣what broad and long without any devision at all in them, or denting on the edges, but those that rise up after are more and more devided on each side, some to the middle Rib, being winged, as made of many Leaves together on a Stalk, & those upon the Stalk in like manner are more devided, but smaller towards the top than below: The Stalk riseth to be a yard high or more, somtimes branched at the top, wth ma∣ny smal whitish Flowers, somtimes dash'd over at the edges with a pale purplish colour, of a little scent: which paffing away there followeth small brownish white Seed that is easily carried away with the wind. The Root smalleth more strong than either Leaf or Flower, and is of more use in Medicine, Place. It is generally kept with us in our Gar∣dens. Time. It Flowreth in June and July, and continu∣eth Flowring until the Frosts pull it down. Vertues and Use. Dioscorides saith, That the Garden Valcrian hath a warming Faculty, and that being dry∣ed and given to drink, it provoketh Urine and helpeth the Strangury:Disury Strangury The Decoction ther∣of taken doth the like also, and taketh away pains of the sides, provoketh Womens Cour∣ses and is used in Antidotes.Stitch terms provokes Pliny saith, That the Pouder of the Root given in drink, or the Decoction thereof taken, helpeth all stoppings and stranglings in any part of the Body, whe∣ther they proceed of pains in the Chest or sides, and taketh them away.Brest The Root of Valerianboyled with Liquoris, Raisons, and Annis Seed, is singular good for those that are short winded, and for those that are troubled with the Cough, and helpeth to open the pas∣sages, and to expectorate Flegm easily.Short wind Cough Flegm It is given to those that are bitten or stung by any Venemous Creature, being boyled in Wine.Pestilence It is of especial Vertue against the Plague, the Decoction thereof being drunk, and the Root being used to smell unto; It helpeth also to expel the wind in the Belly.Wind The green Herb with the Root taken fresh, being bruised and applied to the Head taketh away the pains and prickings therein, staieth Rhewms and thin Distillations, and being boyled in white Wine, and the drop thereof put into the eye, taketh away the dimness of the sight, or any Pin or Web therein: It is of excellent pro∣perty to heal any inward Sores or Wounds, as also for outward Hurts or Wounds, and draw∣eth any Splinter or Thorn out of the Flesh.Headach Eyes Pin and Web Wounds Splinters thorn. Vervain. Description. THe common Vervain, hath somwhat long and broad Leaves next the ground deeply gash'd about the edges and some only deeply dented or cut all alike, of a blackish green co∣lour on the upper side, and somwhat gray un∣derneath: The Stalk is square branched into several parts, rising about two foot high, espe∣cially if you reckon the long spike of Flowers at the tops of them, which are set on all sides one above another, and somtimes two or three together, being small and gaping, of a Pur∣plish blew colour, and white intermixt; af∣ter which come small round Seed in small and somwhat long Heads: The Root is small and long, but of no use. Place. It groweth generally throughout this Land in diverse places by the Hedges and way sides, and other wast grounds. Time. It Flowreth about July, and the Seed is ripe soon after. Vertues and Use. Vervain is hot and dry, bitter, opening Ob∣structions, clensing, and healing,Obstructi∣ons Clensing Healing Yellow Jaundice, Venemous Beasts, Pestilence Agues Worms Cough shortness of Breath Wheesing Stone Gravel Reins Bladder It helpeth the yellow Jaundice, the Dropsie, and the Gout, the defects of the Reins and Lungs, and gene∣rally, all inward pains and torments of the Bo∣dy, the Leaves being boyled and drunk; The same is held to be good against the bitings of Serpents, and other Venemous Beasts; and against the Plague, and both Tertian and Quartane Agues, killeth and expelleth Worms in the Belly, and causeth a good colour in the Face and Body, strengthneth as well as corre∣cteth the Diseases of the Liver and Spleen, is very effectual in all Diseases of the Stomach and Lungs, as Coughs, shortness of Breath and Wheesings, and is singular good against the Dropsie, to be drunk with some Peony Seeds, bruised and put thereto; and is no less prevalent for the defects of the Reins and Bladder, to clense them of those Humors that ingender the Stone, and helpeth to break the Stone and to expel Gravel: It consolidateth and healeth also all Wounds both inward and
outward, and stayeth bleedings, and used with some Honey healeth all old Ulcers and Fistulaes in the Legs or other parts of the Bo∣dy, as also those Ulcers that happen in the Mouth,; or used with old Hogs grease it hel∣peth the Swellings and pains of the secret parts in man or Woman, as also for the Piles and Hemorrhoids: Applied with some Oyl of Roses and Vinegar unto the Forehead and Temples, it easeth the inveterate pains and ach of the Head, and is good for those that are Frenetick.Womb, Dropsie, Bleeding, Wounds, Ulcers, Fistulaes, Headach, Frenzie, Morphew, Freckles, Eyes. The Leaves bruised, or the Juyce of them mixed with some Vinegar doth wonderfully clense the Skin, and taketh away Morphew, Freckles, Pustulaes, and other such like Inflamations and deformities of the Skin in any part of the Body. The distilled water of the Herb when it is in his full strength, dropped into the Eyes, clenseth them from Films, Clouds, or mists that darken the sight, and wonderfully strengtheneth the Optick Nerves; The said Water is very powerful in all the Diseases aforesaid either inward or out∣ward, whether they be old corroding Sores, or green Wounds. This also is an Herb of Venus, and an ex∣cellent Herb for the Womb, to strengthen it and remedy all the cold griefs of it, as Plan∣tane doth the hot, the Herb bruised and hung about the Neck helps the Headach. The Vine. THe Leaves of the English Vine (I do not intend to send you to the Canaries for a Medicine) being boyled make a good Lotion for sore Mouths,Sore Mouth, Inflamati∣ons, being boyled with Barley Meal into a Pultis, it cools Inflamations of Wounds, the droppings of the Vine when 'tis cut in the Spring, which Country people call Tears, being boyled into a Syrup with Sugar and taken inwardly, is excellent to stay Wo∣mens longingsWomens Longing, after every thing they see, which is a Disease many Women with Child are sub∣ject too; the Decoction of Vine Leaves in white Wine doth the like: also the Tears of of the Vine drunk, two or three spoonfuls at a time, breaks the StoneStone, in the Bladder: This is a very good Remedy, and it is discreetly done to kill a Vine to cure a Man, but the Salt of the Leaves is held to be better. The Ashes of the burnt Branches will make TeethTeeth black. that are as black as a coal to be as white as snow if you do but every morning rub them with it. Violets. THese, both Tame and Wild, are so well known that they need no Description. Time. They Flower until the end of July, but are best in March and the beginning of April. Vertues and Use. All the Violets are cold and moist while they are fresh and green, and are used to cool any heat or distemperature of the Body, either in∣wardly or outwardly, as InflamationsInflamati∣on, Eyes, Womb, in the Eyes, in the Matrix or Fundament, in Impo∣stumes also and hot Swellings, to drink the Decoction of the Leaves or Flowers made with Water or Wine, or to apply them Pulti wise to the grieved place, it likewise easeth pains in the Head,Head-ach, Watching, caused through want of sleep; or in any other place arising of heat, being applied in the same manner, or with Oyl of Roses. A dram weight of the dried Leaves of the Flowers of Violets (but the Leaves more strongly) doth purge the Body of Chollerick Humors, and asswageth the heat being taken in a draught of Wine or any other Drink: The Pouder of the purple Leaves of the Flowers only pick'd and dried, and drunk in Water is said to help the Quinsie, and the Falling-sicknessQuinsie, Falling-sickness, Swellings, in Children, especially in the beginning of the Disease. The Flowers of the White Violets ripeneth and dissolveth. Swel∣lings. The Herb or Flowers while they are fresh, or the Flowers when they are dry, are effectual in the Plurisie,Pleuresie, Flegm, Hoarce∣ness, Throat, Back, Reins, Bladder, and all Diseases of Lungs, to lenesie the sharpness of hot Rhewms, and the Hoarsness of the Throat, the heat al∣so, and sharpness of Urine, and all pains of the Back, or Reins and the Bladder: It is good also for the Liver and the Jaundice, and in al hot Agues to cool the Heat and quench the Thirst: But the Syrup of Violets is of most use and of better effect, being taken in some convenient Liquor; and if a little of the Juyce or Syrup of Lemmons be put to it, or a few drops of the Oyl of Vitriol, it is made thereby the more powerful to cool the heat and to quench the Thirst,Thirst, Heart. and giveth to the drink a Clarret Wine colour, and a fine tart ellish, pleasing the tast. Violets taken, or made up with Honey doth more clense than cool, and with Sugar contrary-wise. The dryed Flowers of Violets are accounted among the Cordial Drinks, Pouders, and other Medicines espe∣cially where cooling Cordials are necessary:
The green Leaves are used with other Herbs, to make Plaisters and Pultisces for Inflamati∣ons and Swellings, and to ease pains whereso∣ever, arising of heat, and for the Piles also, being fried with Yolks of Eggs and applied thereto. Pansies or Heartsease are like unto Violets in all their operations but somwhat hotter and dryer, yet very temperate, and by viscuous Juyce therein doth somwhat mollifie, yet less than Mallows: It is conducing in like man∣ner as Violets to the hot Diseases of the Chest and Lungs: for Agues, Convulsions, and Fal∣ling-sickness in Children: The Decoction helpeth Itch and Scabs being bathed therwith: It is said also to soder green Wounds, and to help old Sores, the Juyce or distilled Water thereof being drunk. Vipers Buglofs. Description. THis hath many long rough Leaves lying on the ground, from among which rise up diverse hard round Stalks, very rough, as if they were thick set wth prickles or hairs, wher∣in are set such like long rough hairy or prickly sad green Leavs, somwhat narrow; the middle Rib for the most part being white. The Flo∣wers stand at the tops of the Stalks, branched forth into many long spiked Leaves of Flow∣ers, bowing or turning like the Turnsole, all of them opening for the most part on the one side, which are long and hollow, turning up the Brims a little, of a Purplish Violet colour in them that are fully blown, but more reddish while they are in the Bud, as also upon their decay and withering; but in some places of a paler purple colour,, with a long pointel in the middle, feathered or parted at the top: After the Flowers are fallen the Seeds grow∣ing to be ripe, are blackish, cornered and poin∣ted somwhat like unto the Head of a Viper. The Root is somwhat great and blackish, and woolly, when it groweth toward Seed time; and perisheth in the Winter. There is another sort little differing from the former, only in that it beareth white Flo∣wers. Place. The first groweth wild almost every where. That with white Flowers, about the Castle Walls of Lewes in Sussex. Time. They Flower in Summer, and their Seed is ripe quickly after. Vertues and Use. It is an especial Remedy against the biting of the Viper, and of all other Venemous BeastsVenemous Beasts, Poyson, or Serpents, as also against poyson and poysonful Hes. Dioscorides and others say, That whosoever shall take of the Herb or Root before they be bitten, shall not be hurt by the poyson of any Serpent. The Roots or Seeds are thought to be most effectual to com∣fort the Heart,Heart, Sadness, Melan∣cholly, Agues, Milk, Loyns, Back, Kidneys. and expel Sadness, or cause less Melancholly, it tempers the Blood, and allay∣eth the hot Fits of Agues: The Seed drunk in Wine procureth abundance of Milk in Wo∣mens Brests. The same also being taken ca∣seth the pains in the Loyns, Back, and Kid∣neys: The distilled Water of the Herb when it is in Flower, or his chiefest strength, is ex∣cellent to be applied either inwardly or out∣wardly for all the Griefs aforesaid. There is a Syrup made hereof very effectual for the comforting of the Heart, and expelling Sad∣ness and Melancholly. VVall-Flowers, or Winter Gilly-flowers. THe Garden kinds are so wel known that they need no Description. Description. The common single Wall-Flow∣ers which grow wild abroad, hath sundry smal long, narrow, and dark green Leaves, set without order upon smal round whitish wood∣dy Stalks which bear, at the tops diverse single yellow Flowers one above another, every one having four Leaves apiece, and of a very sweet scent: after which come long Pods con∣taining reddish Seed. The Root is white, hard and threddy. Place. It groweth upon old Church Walls, and old Walls of many Houses, and on the other stone Walls in diverse places. The other sorts in Gardens only. Time. All the single kinds do Flower many times in the end of Autumn, and if the Winter be mild, all the Winter long, but especially in the Months of February, March, and April, and until the heat of the Spring do spend them: But the double kinds continue not Flowring in that manner all the yeer along, although they Flower very early somtimes, and in some places very late. Vertues and Use. Galen in his seventh Book of Simple Me∣dicines saith, That the yellow Wall-flowers worketh more powerfully than any of the o∣ther kinds, and is therefore of more use in Physick; It clenseth the Blood and freeth the Liver and Reins from Obstructi∣ons,Obstructions, Liver, Terms provokes, Afterbirth Dead Child, Spleen, Weakness Disjun∣cture, Gout, Sinews, Apoplexy, Palsey. provo∣keth Womens Courses, expelleth the Secon∣dine
and dead Child, helpeth the hardness and pains of the Mother, and of the Spleen also, stayeth Inflamations and Swellings, comfor∣teth and strengthneth any weak part, or out of Joynt: helpeth to clense the Eyes from misti∣ness and Films on them, and to clense foul and filthy Ulcers in the Mouth or any other part, and is a singular Remedy for the Gout, and all Aches and Pains in the Joynts and Si∣news. A Conserve made of the Flowers is u∣sed for a Remedy both for the Apoplexie and Palsey. The VValnut-Tree. THis is so well known, that it needeth no Description. Time. It Blossometh early, before the Leaves come forth, and the Fruit is ripe in Septem∣ber. Vertues and Use. The Bark of the Tree, doth bind and dryBinds, Dries, very much, and the Leaves are much of the same temperature, but the Leaves when they are older, are heating and drying the Second Degree, and harder of digestion than when they are fresh, which by reason of their sweet∣ness are more pleasing and better digesting in the Stomach, and taken with sweet Wine they move the Belly downwards; but being old, they grieve the Stomach, and in hot Bodies cause Choller to abound, and the Headach, and are an enemy to those that have the Cough: But are less hurtful to those that have colder Stomachs, and are said to kill the broad WormsWorms, in the Belly or Stomach. If they be taken with Onions, Salt, and Honey, they help the biting of a Mad Dog, or the Venom or infectious poyson of any Beast &c. Oneus Pompeius found in the Treasury of Methridates King of Pontus, when he was overthrown, a Scrowl of his own Hand-wri∣ting, containing a Medicine against any Poyson and Infection, which is this: Take two dry Walnuts, and as many good Figgs, and twenty Leaves of Rue bruised and beaten together with two or three Corns of Salt, and twenty Juniper Berries, which taken every morning fasting, preserveth from danger of PoysonPoyson, Epidemi∣cal Disea∣ses, Inflamati∣on in the Throat, wounds of the Sinews Gangrenes Carbuncles Flux, Terms stops, Baldness, or Infection, that day it is taken. The Juyce of the outer green Husks, boyled up with Honey, is an excellent gargle for sore Mouths, the Heat and Inflamations in the Throat and Stomach: The Kernels when they grow old are more Oyly, and therfore not so fit to be eaten, but are then used to heal the Wounds of the Sinews, Gangrenes, and Carbuncles; The said Kernels being burned, are then very a∣stringent, and will then stay Lasks and Wo∣mens Courses, being taken in red Wine; and stay the falling of the Hair and make it fair, being anointed with Oyl and Wine; The green Husks will do the like being used in the same manner. The Kernels beaten with Rue and Wine, being applied, helpeth the Quinsie;Quinsie, and bruised with some Honey and applied to the Ears, easeth the pains and Inflamations of them: A piece of the green Husk put unto a hollow Tooth,Toothach, easeth the pains. The Catkins hereof taken before they fall off, dried and gi∣ven a dram thereof in Pouder with white Wine, wonderfully helpeth those that are troubled with the rising of the Mother.Mother, The Oyl that is pressed out of the Kernels, is very profitably taken inward like Oyl of Almonds, to help the Chollick,Chollick, Wind, and to expel wind very effectually, an ounce or two thereof may be taken at a time. The yong green Nuts taken before they be half ripe and preserved with Sugar, are of good use for those that have weak Stomachs, or Defluxions thereon. The di∣stilled water of the green Husk before they be half ripe, is of excellent use to cool the heat of AguesAgues, being drunk an ounce or two at a time, as also to resist the Infection of the Plague, if some thereof be also applied to the Sores thereof: The same also cooleth the heat of green Wounds and old Ulcers, and healeth them being bathed therewith: The distilled Water of the green Husks being ripe when they are shelled from the Nuts, being drunk with a little Vinegar, is also found by experi∣ence to be good for those that are infected with the Plague, so as before the taking ther∣of a Vein be opened. The said Water is very good against the Quinsin being gargled and bathed therewith, and wonderfully helpeth Deafness,Deafness, Ears. the Noise, and other pains in the Ears. The Distilled water of the yong green Leaves in the end of May performeth a singu∣lar cure on foul running Ulcers and Sores, to be bathed with wet Cloathes or Spunges ap∣plied to them evening and morning. VVold, VVeld, or Dyers VVeed. Description. THe common kind groweth bushing with many Leaves, long, narrow, and flat up∣on the ground, of a dark, blewish, green co∣lour, somwhat like unto Woad, but nothing so large, a little crumpled and as it were round pointed which do so abide the first yeer: And the next Spring from among them rise diverse round Stalks two or three foot high, beset with many such like Leaves thereon, but smal∣ler, and shooting forth some smal: Branches,
which with the Stalks carry many smal yellow Flowers in a long spiked Head at the tops of them where afterwards come the Seed, which is small and black inclosed in Heads that are devided at the tops into four parts. The Root is long, white, and thick, abiding the Winter: The whol Herb changeth to be yellow after it hath been in Flower a while. Place. It groweth every where by the way sides in moist grounds as well as dry, in Corners of Fields and by Lanes: and somtimes all over the Field; in Sussex and Kent they call it Greenweed. Time. It is in Flower about June. Vertues and Use. Mathilus saith, That the Root hereof cutteth tough Flegm, digesteth raw Flegm, thinneth gross Humors,Flegm, Humors, Tumors, Venemous Beasts, Pestilence, Worms. dissolveth hard Tu∣mors, and openeth Obstructions. Some do highly commend it against the bitings of Ve∣nemous Creatures, to be taken inwardly and applyed outwardly to the hurt place; as also for the Plague or Pestilence. The People in some Countries of this Land do use to bruise the Herb and lay it to Cuts or Wounds in the Hands or Legs to heal them. Wheat. THe several kinds hereof are so well known unto almost all people that it is altogether needless to write any Description thereof. Vertues and Use. Dioscorides saith, That to eat the Corns of green Wheat is hurtful to the Stomach, and breedeth Worms. Pliny saith, That the Corns of Wheat toasted upon an Iron Pan and eaten, is a pleasant Remedy for those that are chilled with cold.Cold, The Oyl pressed from Wheat between two thick Plates of Iron or Copper heated, healeth all Tetters and Ring∣wormsTetters, Ring∣worms, being used warm, and hereby Galen saith he hath known many to be cured. Ma∣thiolus commendeth the same Oyl to be put into hollow UlcersUlcers, Chops in the Hands & Feet, Mad Dogs to heal them up, and it is also good for Chops in the Hands or Feet, and to make a rugged Skin smooth. The green Corns of Wheat being chewed, and applied to the place bitten by a mad Dog, hea∣leth it: Slices of Wheat Bread soaked in Red Rose-water, and applied to the EyesEyes, that are hot, red, and inflamed, or blood-shotten, hel∣peth them. Hot Bread applyed for an hour at a time three daies together, perfectly hea∣leth the Kernels in the Throat commonly cal∣led the Kings Evil.Kings Evil, The Flower of Wheat mixed with the Juyce of Henbane, stayeth the Flux of Hurhors to the Joynts being laid ther∣on: The said Meal boyled in Vinegar hel∣peth the shrinking of the SinewsSinews, saith Pliny; and mixed with Vinegar and Honey boyled together, healeth all Freckles, Spots, and Pimples on the Face. Wheat Flower, mixed with the Yolk of an Eg, Honey, and Turpen∣tine, doth draw, clense, and heal, and Boyl, Plague Sore, or foul Ulcer. The Bran of Wheat Meal steeped in sharp Vinegar, and then bound in a Linnen Cloth, and rubbed on those places, that have the Scurf, Morphew, Scabs, or Leprosie,Scabs, Leprosie, wil take them away, the Bo∣dy being first well purged and prepared. The Decoction of the Bran of Wheat or Barley, is of good use to bath those places that are Bursten by a Rupture: and the said Bran boy∣led in good Vinegar, and appled to swollen Breasts, helpeth them, and stayeth all Infla∣mations; it helpeth also the bitings of Vi∣pers (which I take to be no other but our English Adder) and all other VenemousVenemous, Beasts, Creatures. The Leaves of Wheat Meal ap∣plied with some Salt, taketh away hardness of the Skin, Wharts, and hard Knots in the Flesh. Starch moistned with Rosewater and laid to the Cods taketh away their Itching.Cods, Wafers put in Water and drunk, stayeth the Lask and Bloody Flux, and is profitably used both inward and outwardly for the Ruptures in Children: Boyled in Water unto a thick Gelly and taken, it stayeth spitting of Blood: and boyled with Mints and Butter it helpeth the hoarsness of the Throat.Hoarce∣ness. The VVillow-tree. THese are so well known that they need no no Description: I shall therefore only shew you the Vertues thereof. Vertues and Use. Both the Leaves, Bark, and the Seed are used to stanch bleedingStanch Bleeding, Spitting of Blood, Fluxes of Blood, Vomiting, Distillati∣ons on the Lungs, Wind Chollick, Heat of Lust, Dimness of sight, & other Dis∣eases in the Eyes, Cleer the Face, Dry up Humors, of Wounds, and at Mouth and Nose, spitting of Blood, and all other Fluxes of Blood in man or woman, and to stay Vomiting, and provocation thereunto, if the Decoction of them in Wine be drunk. It hel∣peth also to stay thin, hot, sharp, salt Distilla∣tions from the Head upon the Lungs causing a Consumption: The Leaves bruised with some Peppr and drunk in Wine, much helpeth the wind Chollick. The Leaves bruised and boy∣led in Wine and drunk staieth the heat of Lust in man or woman, and quite extinguisheth it, if it be long used; The Seed is also of the same effect. The Water that is gathered from the Willow when it Flowreth, the Bark being slit, and a fitting Vessel set to receive it, is ve∣ry good for redness and dimness of Sight, for films that grow over the Eyes, and stay the Rhewms that fall into them, to provoke Urin
being stopped if it be drunk, and to cleer the Face and Skin from Spots and Discolourings. Galen aith, The Flowers have an admirable faculty in drying up Humors, beeing a Medi∣cine without any sharpness or corrosion: You may boyl them in white Wine, and drink as much as you will (so you drink not your self drunk.) The Bark work the same effects, if used in the same manner, and the Tree hath alwaies Bark upon it though not alwaies Flo∣wers: The Burnt ashes of the Bark, being mixed with Vinegar taketh away Warts,Warts, Corns & superflu∣ous flesh, Scurf or Dandriff Corns, and Superfluous Flesh being applied to the place. The Decoction of the Leaves or Bark in Wine, takes away Scurf or Dandrif by washing the place with it: 'Tis a fine cool Tree, The Boughs of which are very conve∣nient to be placed in the Chamber of one sick of a Feaver.Feaver. Woad. Description. IT hath diverse large Leaves, long, and som∣what broad withal, like to those of the greater Plantaue, but larger, thicker, of a gree∣nish colour and somwhat blew withal: From among which Leaves riseth up a lusty Stalk three or four foot high, with diverse Leaves set thereon; The higher the Stalk riseth, the smaller are the Leaves, at the top it spreadeth into diverse Branches, at the ends of which appear pretty little yellow Flowers, and after they pass away like other Flowers of the Field, come Husks, long, and somwhat flat withal, in form they resemble a Tongue, in colour they are black, and they hang bobbing downwards. The Seed contained within these Husks (if it be a little chewed) gives an Azure colour. The Root is white and long. Place. It is sowed in Fields for the benefit of it, where those that sow it cut it three 'times a yeer. Time. It Flowreth in June, but is long after before the Seed is ripe. Vertues and Use. Some People affirm the Plant to be destru∣ctive to Bees, which if it be I cannot help it: They say it possesseth Bees with a Flux, but that I can hardly beleeve, unless Bees be con∣trary to all other Creatures, I should rather think it possesseth them with the contrary Dis∣ease, the Herb being exceeding drying and binding. However, if any Bees be diseased thereby, the cure is to set Urine by them, but set it in such a Vessel that they cannot drown themselves, which may be remedied if you put pieces of Cork in it. I told you before the Herb was drying and binding, and so dry∣ing and binding that it is not fit to be given inwardly. An Oyntment made thereof stan∣cheth Bleeding:Bleeding Spleen Ulcers Inflamati∣ons, St. Antho∣nies fire defluxions of Blood. A Plaister made thereof and applied to the Region of the Spleen (and I pray you take notice, that the Spleen lies on the left side) takes away the hardness and pains thereof: The Oyntment is excellent good in such Ulcers as abound with moisture, and takes away the corroding and fretting Hu∣mors: It cools Inflamations, quencheth St. Anthonies fire, and stayeth Defluxions of Blood to any part of the Body. Woodbind, or Honey∣suckles. THe Plant is so common that every one that hath Eyes knows them, and he that hath none cannot reade a Description if I should write it. Time. They Flower in June, and the Fruit is ripe in August. Vertues and Use. Doctor Tradition, that grand Introducer of Errors, that Hater of Truth, that Lover of Folly, and that mortal Foe to Doctor Reason, hath taught the common People to use the Leaves and Flowers of this Plant in Mouth Waters, and by long continuance of time hath so grounded it in the Brains of the Vulgar that you cannot beat it out with a Beetle: All Mouth Waters ought to be cooling and dry∣ing, but Honeysuckles are clensing, consuming, and digesting, and therefore no waies fit for Inflamations, Thus Doctor Reason. Again, If you please we will leave Dr. Reason a while and come to Dr. Experience, a learned Gentle∣man, and his Brother; Take a Leaf and chew it in your Mouth, and you will quickly find it likelier to cause a sore Mouth or Throat than to cure it. Well then, if it be not good for this, What is it good for? 'Tis good for somthing: For God and Nature made no∣thing in vain: It is an Herb of Jupiter and apropriated to the Lungs,Lungs af∣flicted Asthma Spleen provokes Urine & speedy De∣livery in Childbirth Cramps Convulsi∣ons & Palseys the Coelestial Crab claims Dominion over it; neither is it a Foe to the Lyon: If the Lungs be afflicted by Mercury, this is your Cure: It is fitting a Conserve made of the Flowers of it were kept in every Gentlewomans House; I know no better cure for an Asthma than this; Besides, It takes away the evil of the Spleen, provokes Urine, procures speedy Delivery to Women in Travail, helps Cramps, Convulsions and Palseys, and whatsoever griefs comes of cold or stopping: If you please to make use of it in an Oyntment, it will cleer your Skin of Mor∣phew,
Freckles, and Sun∣burning,Freckles, and Sunburning, or whatsoever else discolours it, and then the Maids will love it. I have done, when I have told you what Authors say, and cavelled a little with them, They say the Flowers are of more effect than the Leaves, and that's true; but they say, The Seeds are of least effect of all: But Dr. Reason told me, That there was a Vital Spirit in every Seed to beget its like; and Dr. Ex∣periense told me, That there was a greater heat in a Seed than there was in any other part of a Plant, and withal, That Heat was the Mo∣ther of action, and then judg if old Dr. Tra∣dition (who may well be honor'd for his Age, but not for his Goodness) have not so poyso∣ned the World with his Errors before I was born, that it was never well in its wits since, and there is great fear it will die mad. Wormwood. Description. THree Wormwoods are familiar with us; One I shall not descsrabe, another I shall describe, and the Third be Critical at. And I care not greatly if I begin with the last first. Sea Wormwood hath gotten as many Names as Vertues (and perhaps one more) Scriphion, Santonicon, Belgicum, Narbonense, Xantomi∣cum, Misnense, and a matter of twenry more, which I will not blot Paper withal: A Papist got the Toy by the end, and he called it Holy Wormwood; and in truth I am of Opinion, Their giving so much holiness to Herbs is the Reason there remains so little in themselves. The Seed of this Wormwood is that which usually Women give their Children for the Worms: Of all Wormwoods that grow here, this is the weakest; I but Doctors commend it, and Apothecaries sell it, the one must keep his Credit, and the other get Money, and that's the key of the work. The Herb is good for somthing, because God made nothing in vain; Will you give me leave to weigh things in the Ballance of Reason; Then thus, The Seeds of the common Wormwood are far more prevalent than the Seed of this, to expell Worms in Children, or People of ripe age: Of both, some are weak, some are strong. The Seriphian Wormseed is the weakest, & hap∣pily may prove to be fittest for weakest Bodies (for it is weak enough in all conscience) Let such as are strong take the common Worm∣seed, for the other will do but little good. A∣gain, neer the Sea many people live, and Seriphium grows neer them, and therfore is more fitting for their Bodies because nouri∣shed by the same Air; and this I had from Dr. Reason. In whose Body Dr. Reason dwels not, dwels Dr.Madness, and he brings in his Brethren, Dr. Ignorance, Dr. Folly, and Dr. Sickness, and these together make way for Dr. Death, and the latter end of that man is worse than the beginning. Pride was the cause of Adam's Fall, Pride begate a Daughter, I do not know the Father of it unless the Divil, but she christned it, and call'd it Appetite, and sent her Daughter to tast these Wormwoods, who finding this the least bitter, made the sqeamish Wench extol it to the Skies, though the Vertues of it never reached to the middle Region of the Air. Its due praise is this; It is weakest, therefore fitter for weak Bodies, and fitter for those Bodies that dwell neer it than those that live far from it: my reason is, The Sea (as those that live far from it, know when they comt neer it) casteth not such a smel as the Land doth: The tender Mercies of God being over all his Works, hath by his eternal Providence planted Seriphium by the Sea side, as a fit Medicine for the Bodies of those that live neer it. Lastly, It is known to all that know any thing in the Course of Nature, That the Liver delights in sweet things; if so, it abhors bitter; then if your Liver be weak, it is none of the wisest courses to plague it with an Enemy: if the Liver be weak a Consumption follows; Would you know the Reason? 'tis this, A mans Flesh is repaired by Blood, by a third concoction which transmutes Blood into Flesh ('tis well I said [Conction] for if I had said [Boyling] every Cook would have understood me.) The Liver makes Blood, and if it be weakned that it makes not enough the Flesh wasteth, and why must Flesh alwaies be renewed? Because the eternal God when he made the Creation, made one part of it in continual dependency upon another: And why did he so? Because Him∣self is only Permanent, to teach us, That we should not fix our affections upon what is transitory, but upon what endures for ever. The result of all is this, If the Liver be weak and cannot make Blood enonough (I would have said [Sanguifie] if I had written only to Schollers) The Seriphian which is the weakest of Wormwoods is better than the best. I have been Critical enonough (if not too much. Place. It grows familiarly in England by the Sea side. Description. It starts up out of the earth with many round woody hoary Stalks from one Root, its height is four foot high, or three at the least. The Leaves in Longitude are long, in Latitude narrow, in Colour white, in Form hoary, in Similitude like Southernwood, only broader and longer, in Tast, rather salt than bitter, because it grows so neer the Salt Water: At the joynts with the Leaves toward the tops it
bear little yellow Flowers. The Root lies deep and is woody. Common Wormwood I shall not describe, for every Boy that can eat an Eg knows it. Romane Wormwood; And why Romane, see∣ing it grows familiarly in England? It may be it was so called because 'tis special good for a stinking Brcarh, which the Romans cannot be very free from maintaining so many Baudy Houses by Authority of his Holiness. Description. The Stalks are slenderer and shorter than the common Wormwood by one foot at least; the Leaves are more finely cut and devided than they are but somthing smaller; both Leaves and Stalks are hoary; the Flowers of a pale yellow colour, it is altogether like the common Wormwood, save only in bigness, or 'tis smaller; in tast, for 'tis not so bitter, in smell, for it is spicy. Place. It groweth upon the tops of the Mountains (it seems 'tis aspiring) there 'tis Natural; but usually nursed up in Gardens for the use of the Apothecaries in London. Time. All Wormwoods usually Flower in August, a little sooner or later. Vertues and Use. Will you give me leave to be Critical a lit∣tle? I must take leave; Wormnwood is an Herb of Mars, and if Pontanus say otherwise he is beside the Bridg. I prove it thus: What delights in Martial places is a Martial Herb, But Wormwood delights in Martial places, (for about Forges and Iron Works you may gather a Cart load of it) Ergo it is a Martial Herb. It is hot and dry in the first degree, Viz, Just as hot as your Blood and no hotter: It remedies the evils ChollerCholler, can inflict on the Body of man by Sympathy.Venery, It helps the evils Venus and her wanton Girls produce, by Antipathy; and it doth somthing else besides; It clenseth the Body of Choller (and who dares say Mars doth no good?) It provokes Urine, helps Surfets, SwellingsProvokes urine, Helps Surfets, Swellings, Appetite lost, Yelloow Jaundice, in the Belly; it causeth an Appetite to meat, because Mars rules the Attractive faculty in Man: The Sun never shone upon a better Herb for the yellow Jaundice than this is: Why should men cry out so much upon Mars for an Infor∣tue (or Saturn either?) Did God make Crea∣tures to do the Creation a mischief? This Herb testifies that Mars is willing to cure all the Diseases he causes; the truth is, Mars loves no Cowards, nor Saturn Fools, nor I, either. Take of the Flowers of Wormwood, Rosemary, and black Thorn, of each a like quantity, half that quantity of saffron, boyl this in Renish Wine, but put not in the Saf∣fron till it is almost boyled;Preserve Health, This is the way to keep a Mans Body in health, appointed by Camerarius in his Book intituled, Hortus, Me∣dicus, and 'tis a good one too. Besides all this, Wormwood provokes the Terms.Terms provokes I would willingly teach Astrologers, and make them Physitians (if I knew how) for they are most fitting for the Calling, if you will not beleeve me, ask Dr. Hippocrates, and Dr. Galen, a couple of Gentlemen that our Col∣ledg of Physitians keep to vapor with, not to follow. In this one Herb I shall give the Pat∣tern of a Rule to the Sons of Art, rough caft, yet as neer the Truth as the men of Benjamin could throw a stone; whereby my Brethren of the Society of Astrologers may know by a penny how a shilling is coyned: (as for the Colledg of Physitians they are too staely to learn, and too proud to continue, They say a Mouse is under the Dominion of the Moon, and that's the reason they feed in the night: The House of the Moon is Cancer: (Rats are of the same nature with Mice but that they are a little bigger.) Mars receives his fall in Can∣cer Erga Wormwood being an Herb of Mars is a present Remedy for the biting of Rats and Mice.Biting of Rats & Mice. Mushroms (I cannot give them the title of Herba, Frutex, or Arbor) are under the Dominion of Saturn (and take them one time with another they do as much harm as good:) if any have poyson'd himself by ea∣ting them, Wormwood an Herb of Mars cures him, because Mars is exalted in Capricorn the Hous of Saturn, & this it doth by Sympathy as it did the other by Antipathy.Mushroms Wheals, Pushes black & blew SpotsWheals, Pushes, Black & blew Spots, coming eitheir by bruises or beatings, Wormwood an Herb of Mars helps, becaus Mars (as bad as you love him, & as ill as you hate him) will not break your Head, but he'l give you a Plaister. If he do but teach you to know your selves, his Courtesie is greater than his Discourtesie: The greatest Antipathy between the Planets is between Mars and Venus, one is hot, the other cold, one Diurnal, the other Nocturnal; one dry, the other moist, their Houses are opposite, one Masculine the other Feminine, one pub∣lick the other private, one is valiant, the other effeminate, one loves the light, the other hates it, one loves the Field, the other the Sheets; then the Throat is under Venus, the QuinsieQuinsie, lies in the Throat and is an Inflama∣tion there: Venus rules the Throat (it being under Taurus her Sign) Mars eradicates all Diseases in the Throat by his Herbs (of which Wormwood is one) and send them to AEgypt on an errand never to return more; this by Antipathy. The Eyes are under the Lumina∣ries, the right Eye of a Man, and the left Eye of a Woman, the Sun claims Dominion over: The left Eye of a Man, and the right EyeEyes; of a Woman, are the priviledg of the Moon, Wormwood an Herb of Mars cures both: What belongs to the Sun by Sympathy becaus he is exalted in his House; but what belongs to the Moon by Antipathy, because he hath
his Fall in hers. Suppose a man be bitten or sungBiting or, stinging by Venemous Beasts. by a martial Creature, imagine a Wasp, a Hornet or Scorpion, Wormwood an Hb of Mars gives you a present cure: Then Mars as Chollerick as he is, hath learned that Pa∣tiences, to pass by yenr evil speeches of him, and tells you by my Pen, That he gives you no Affliction but he gives you a Cure; You need not run to Apollo nor AEsculapius; and if he were so Chollerick as you make him to be, he would have drawn his Sword for Anger o see the ill conditions of those people that can spy his Vices and not his Vertues. The eternal God when he made Mars, made him for a publick good, and the Sons of Men shall know it in the latter end of the world. Et caelum Mars solus habet. You say Mars is a Destroyer, mix a little Wormwood an Herb of Mars with your Ink, and neither Rats nor Mice will touch the Paper is written with it, and then Mars is a Preserver. A∣strologers say Mars causeth Scabs and Itch, and the Virgins are angry with him, because wanton Vnus told them he desorms their Skin: But quoth Mars, my only desire is they should know themselves; my Herb Wormwood will restore them to the beauty they formerly had, and in that I will not come an inch behind my opposite Venus; for which doth the greatest evil, he that takes away an innate beauty, and when he hath done knows how to restore it again; or she that teaches a company of wanton Lasses to paint their Fa∣ces? If Mars be in the Virgin in a Nativi∣ty, they say he usually causeth the Chollick ('tis well God hath set some body to pul down the pride of Man) He in the Virgin troubles none wth the Chollick but them that know not themselves (for who knows himself may easily know all the world:) Wormwood an Herb of Mars is a present cure for it: and whether it be most like a Christian to love him for his good, or hate him for his evil, judg ye. I had almost forgotten that Charity thinks no evil, I was once in the Tower and viewed the Wardrobe, and there was a great many fine Cloathes (I can give them no other title, for I was never neither Linnen or Woollen Dra∣per) yet as brave as they looked, my opinion was, the Moaths might consume them (yea Henry the eighth his Codpiece.) Moaths are under the Dominion of Mars, his Herb Wormwood being laid amongst Cloathes will make a Moath scorn to meddle with the Cloath, as much as a Lyon scorns to meddle with a Moule, or an Eagle a Fly. You say Mars is angry, and 'tis true enough, he is angry with my Country-men for being such Fools to be led by the Noses by a Colledg of Physitians, as they lead Bears to Paris-Gar∣den. Melancholly men cannot endure to be wrong'd in point of good name, and that hath orely troubled old Saturn, because they called him the greatest Infortune: In the Bo∣dy of Man he rules the SpleenSpleen (and that makes Covetous men so Splenetick.) The poor old man lies crying cut of his left side, Father Sarwn's angry, Mars comes to him, come Bicer, I confess thou an evil spoken of, and so am I th knowest I have my ex∣altation in thy House, I'le give him an Herb of mine, Wormwood, to cure t poor man; Saturn consented but spoke but little, and so Mars cured him by Sympathy. When Mars was free from War (for he loves to be figh∣ting, and is the best friend a Soldier hath) I say when Mars was free from War he cal∣led a Councel of War in his own Brain to know how he should do poor sinful man good, (desiring to forget his in being called an Infortune) He musters up his own Forces and places them in Bttalia, h, quoth he, why do I hurt a poor silly Man or Woman? His Angel Answers him, 'Tis because they have ofended their God [Look back to Adam] Well, saies Mars, though they speak evil of me, I'le do good to them; Death's cold, my Herbs shall heat them, They are full of ill Humors (else they would never have spoken ill of me) my Herb shall clense them and dry them: They are poor weak Creatures, my Herb shall threngthen them; they are dul witted, my Herb shall fortifie their Apprehen∣sions; and yet amongst Astrologers, all this doth not deserve a good word; h, the Pati∣ence of Mars. Faelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas Inque domus superum scandere cura fit. Oh happy he that can the Knowledg gain, To know th'eternal God made nought in vain. To this I add, I know the reason causeth such a Dearth Of Knowledg, 'tis, becaus men love the Earth. The other day Mars told me he met with Venus, and he asked her what the Reason was that she accused him for abusing Women, he never gave them the Pox, in the Dispute they fell out, and in anger parted, and Mars told me that his brother Saturn told him, that an Antivenerial Medicine was the best against the Pox.French Pox, Once a Month he meets with the Moon, Mars is quick enough of speech, and the Moon not much behind hand (neither are most Women) The Moon looks much after Children, and Children are much troubled with the Worms, she desued a Medicine of him, he bad her take his own Herb Worm∣wood: He had no sooner parted with the Moon but he met with Venus, and she was as drunk as a Bitch, Als poot Venus quoth he What, thou a Fortune and be drunk? I'le give thee an Antipathetical Cure, take my Herb Wormwood, thou shalt never get a
SurfetSurfet, by drinking. A poor silly Country∣man hath got an Ague and cannot go about his business, he wishes he had it not, and so do I, but I'le tell him a Remedy whereby he may prevent it. Take the Herb of Mars Wormwood, and if Infortunes will do good what will Fortunes do? Some say the Lungs are under Jupiter, and if the Lungs, then the breath, and yet a man somtimes gets a stin∣kingStinking Breath, breath, and yet Jupiter is a Fortune forsooth; up comes Mars to him, Come Brother Jupiter, thou knowest I sent thee a couple of Trines to thy Houses last night, the one from Aries, and the other from Scorpio, give me thy leave by Sympathy to cure the poor man by drinking a draught of Worm∣wood Beer every morning. The Moon was weak the other day, and she gave a man two terrible mischiefs, a dull Brain, and a weak sight,Dull Brain, weak Sight. Mars lies by his Sword and comes to her, Sister Moon saith he, This man hath anger'd thee, but I beseech thee take notice he is but a Fool, prithee be patient, I will with my Herb Wormwood cure him of both Infir∣mities by Antipathy, for thou knowst, thou and I cannot agree; with that the Moon began to quarrel; Mars (not delighting much in Womens Tongues) went away, and did it whether she would or no. He that reades this and understands what he reades, he hath a Jewel more worth then a Di∣amond: He that understands it not, is as lit∣tle fit to give Physick. There lies a Key in these words, which will unlock (if it be turned by a wise hand) the Cabbinet of Physick: I have delivered it so plainly as I durst; 'tis not upon Wormwood only that I wrote, but upon all Plants, Trees, and Herbs: He that under∣stands it not, is unfit (in my Opinion) to give Physick. This shall live when I am dead; and thus I leave it to the World, not caring Halfpenny whether they like or dislike it. The Grave equals all men, and therefore shall e∣qual me with the Princes, until which time the Eternal Providence is over me; then the ill tongue of a praling Priest, or of one who hath more Tongue than Wit, or more Pride than Honesty, shall never trouble me. Wis∣dom is justified of her Children; and so much for Wormwood. Yarrow. Description. IT hath many long Leaves spread upon the ground and fine cut, and devided into many smal parts, Its Flowers are white but not all of a whiteness, and staied in Knots, upon diverse green Stalks which rise from amongst the Leaves. Place. It is very frequent in all Pastures. Time. It Flowers late even in the latter end of Au∣gust. Vertues and Use. An Oyntment of them cures WoundsWounds, Inflama∣tions, Terms stops, Bloody Flux, Baldnss, Ulcers, Fistulaes, Retentive Faculty, Running of the Reins, Whites, Diabetes, Toothach. and is most fit for such as have Inflamations, it being an Herb of Dame Venus; It stops the Terms in Women being boyled in white Wine and the Decoction drunk, as also the Bloody Flux; the Oyntment of it is not on∣ly good for green Wounds, but also for Ulcers and Fistulaes, especially such as abound with moisture; It staies the shedding off of Hair, the Head being bathed with the Decoction of it; inwardly taken, it helps the retentive fa∣culty of the Stomach, it helps the running of the Reins in men, and the whites in women, and helps such as cannot hold their water; and the Leaves chewed in the Mouth ease the Toothach; and these Vertues being put to∣gether shew the Herb to be drying and bin∣ding. Achilles is supposed to be the first that let the Vertues of this Herb to posterity, ha∣ving learned them of his Master Chyron the Centaure, and certainly a very profitable Herb it is in the Camp, and perhaps therfore called Militaris.
DIRECTIONS. HAving in diverse places of this Treatise promised you the way of making Syrups, Conserves, Oyls, Oyntments, &c. of Herbs, Roots, Flowers &c. whereby you may have them ready for your use at such times when otherwise they cannot be had; I come now to perform what I promised, and you shall find me rather better than worse than my word. That this may be done Methodically, I shall devide my Di∣rections into two grand Sections, and each Sections into several Chapters, and then you shall see it look with such a Counte∣nance as this is. Sect. 1. Of gathering, drying, and keeping Simples and their Juyces. Chap. 1. Of Leaves of Herbs &c. Chap. 2. Of Flowers. Chap. 3. Of Seeds. Chap. 4. Of Roots. Chap. 5. Of Barks. Chap. 6. Of Juyces. Sect. 2. Of making and keeping Compounds. Chap. 1. Of Distilled Waters. Chap. 2. Of Syrups. Chap. 3. Of Juleps. Chap. 4. Of Decoctions. Chap. 5. Of Oyls. Chap. 6. Of Electuaries. Chap. 7. Of Conserves. Chap. 8. Of Preserves. Chap. 9. Of Lohochs. Chap. 10. Of Oyntments. Chap. 11. Of Plaisters. Chap. 12. Of Pultisses. Chap. 13. Of Troches. Chap. 14. Of Pills. Chap. 15. The way of fit∣ting Medicines to Com∣pound Diseases. Of all these in order.
SECT. 1. The way of gathering, drying, and preserving Simples and their Juyces. Chap. 1. Of Leaves of Herbs or Trees. 1. OF Leaves, chuse only such as are green and full of Juyce, pick hem carefully, and cast away such as are any way declining, for they will putrifie the rest, so shall one handful be worth ten of those you buy in Cheap side. 2. Note in what place they most delight to grow in, and gather them there, for Bettony that grows in the shadow is far better than that which grows in the Sun, because it de∣lights in the shadow; so also such Herbs as delight to grow neer the Water, let such be ga∣thered as grow neer the Water, though happi∣ly you may find some of them upon dry ground, the Treatise will inform you where every Herb delights to grow. 3. The Leaves of such Herbs as run up to Seed, are not so good when they are in flower as before (some few excepted, the Leaves of which are seldom or never used) in such cases, if through ignorance they were not known, or through negligence forgotten, you had better take the top and the Flower than the Leaf. 4. Dry them well in the Sun, and not in the shadow as the swinge of Physitians is, for if the Sun draw away the Vertues of Herbs, it must needs do the like by Hay by the same Rule, which the experience of every Country Farmer will explode for a notable piece of non-sense. 5. Such as are Artists in Astrology (and indeed none else are fit to make Physitians) such I advie, let the Planet that governs the Herb be Angular, and he stronger the better, if they can in Herbs of Saturn, let Saturn be in the Ascendent, in the Herbs of Mars, let Mars be in the Mid-heaven, for in those Hou∣ses they delight, let the Moon apply to them by good Apect and let her not be in the Houses of their Enemies: If you cannot well stay till she apply to them, let her apply to a Planet of the same Triplicity, if you cannot wait that time neither, let her be with a fixed Star of their Nature. 6. Having well dryed them put them up in brown Papers, sewing the Paper up like a Sack, and press them not too hard together, and keep them in a dry place neer the fire. 7. As for the duration of dryed Herbs, a just time cannot e given, let Authors pate their pleasures: For, First, Such as grow upon dry grounds will keep better than such as grow on moist. Secondly, Such Herbs as are full of Juyce will not keep so long as such as are dryer. Thirdly, Such Herbs as are well dryed will keep longer than such as are ill dried. Yet this I say, by this you may know when they are corrupted, viz. By their loss of co∣lour, or smell, or both, and it they be corrup∣ted, reason will tell you that they must needs corrupt the Bodies of those people that take them. 8. Gather all Leaves in the hour of that Planet that governs them. Chap. 2. Of Flowers. 1. THe Flower which is the beauty of the Plant, and of none of the least use in Physick, groweth yeerly, and is to be ga∣thered when it is in its prime. 2. As for the time of gathering them, let the Planetary hour, and the Planet that rules the Plant they come of, be observed, as we shewed you in the foregoing Chapter; as for the time of the day let it be when the Sun shines upon them that so they may be dry, for if you gather either Herbs or Flowers when they are wet or dewy, they will not keep, and this I forgot before. 3. Dry them well in the Sun, and keep them in Papers neer the fire, as I shewed you in the foregoing Chapter. 4. So long as they retain their colour and smel they are good, either of them being gone so is the Vertue also.
Chap. 3. Of Seeds. 1. THe Seed is that part of the Plant which is endewed with a vitall facul∣ty to bring forth its like, and it contains po∣tentially the whol Plant in it. 2. As for place let them be gathered from the plants where they delight to grow. 3. Let them be full ripe when they are ga∣thered, and forget not the Coelestial Harmo∣ny before mentioned, for I have found by ex∣perience that their Vertues are twice as great at such times than at others: There is an ap∣pointed time for every thing under the Sun. 4. When you have gathered them dry them a little, and but a little in the Sun before you lay them up. 5. You need not be so careful of keeping them so neer the fire as the other before men∣tioned, because they are fuller of Spirit, and therefore not so subject to corrupt. 6. As for the time of their duration 'tis pal∣pable they will keep good many yeers, yet this I say, they are best the first yeer, and this I make appear by a good argument, They will grow soonest the first yeer they be set, therefore then are they in their prime, and 'tis an easie matter to renew them yeerly. Chap. 4. Of Roots. 1. OF Roots chuse such as are neither rot∣ten nor wormeaten, but proper in their rast, colour, and smell, such as exceed neither in softness nor hardness. 2. Give me leave to be a little critical a∣gainst the Vulgar received Opinion, which is, That the Sap falls down into the Root in Autumn, and rises again in Spring, as men go to Bed at night and rise in the morning; and this idle tale of untruth is so grounded in the Heads not only of the Vulgar but also of the Learned, that a man cannot drive it out by Reason: I pray let such Sap-mongers answer me to this Argument, If the Sap fall into the Root in the fall of the Leaf, and lie there all the Winter, then must the Root grow only in the Winter, as experience witnesseth, but the Root grows not at all in the Winter, as the sac experience teacheth, but only in the Summer. Ergo, If you set an Apple Kernel in the Spring, you shall find the Root to grow to a pretty bigness in that Summer, and be not a whit bigger next Spring: What doth the Sap do in the Root all that while? pick straws? For God's sake build not your faith upon Traditi∣on, 'tis as rotten as a rotten Post. The truth is, when the Sun declines from the Tropick of Cancer, the Sap begins to congeal both in Root and Branch, when he toucheth the Tropick of Capricorn and ascends to us ward, it begins to wax thin again, and by de∣grees as it congealed: But to proceed: 3. The dryer time you gather your Roots in the better they are for they have the less ex∣crementitious moisture in then. 4. Such Roots as are soft, your best way is to dry in the Sun, or else hang them up in the Chimney corner upon a string; as for such as are hard you may dry them any where. 5. Such Roots as are great will keep longer than such as are small, yet most of them will keep a yeer. 6. Such Roots as are soft it is your best way to keep them alwaies neer the fire, and take this general Rule, If in Winter time you find any of your Roots, Herbs or Flowers begin to grow moist, as many times you shall, especial∣ly in the Winter time (for 'tis your best way to look to them once a month) dry them by a very gentle fire, or if you can with conveni∣ence keep them neer the fire, you may save your self the labor. 7. It is in vain to dry such Roots as may commonly be had, as Parsly, Fennel, Plan∣tane &c. but gather them only for present need. Chap. 5. Of Barks. 1. BArks which Physitians use in Medif cines are these sorts, of Fruits, o Roots, of Boughs. 2. The Barks of Fruits is to be taken when the Fruit is full ripe, as Orrenges, Lemmons. &c. but because I have nothing to do with Exoticks here, I shall pass them without any more words. 3. The Barks of Trees are best gathered in the Spring, if it be of great Trees, as Oaks or the like, because then they come easiest off, and so you may dry them if you please, but indeed your best way is to gather all Barks only for present use. 4. As for the Bark of Roots, 'tis this, and thus to be gotten, Take the Roots of such Herbs as have a pith in them, as Parsly, Fen∣nel, &c. slit them in the middle, and when you have taken out the pith (which you may easily and quickly do) that which remains is called (though somthing improperly) the Bark and indeed is only to be used.
Chap. 6. Of Juyces. 1. Juyces are to be pressed out of Herbs when they are yong and tender, and al∣so out of some Stalks, and tender tops of Herbs and Plants, and also out of some Flowers. 2. Having gathered your Herb you would preserve the Juyce of, when it is very dry (for otherwise your Juyce will not be worth a But∣ton) bruise it very well in a stone Mortar with a wooden Pestle, then having put it into a Canvas Bag (the Herb I mean, not the Mor∣tar for that will yield but little Juyce) press it hard in a press, then take the Juyce and clari∣fie it. 3. The manner of clarifying of it is this, put it into a Pipkin or Skillet, or some such thing and set it over the fire, and when the Scum riseth, take it off, let it stand over the fire till no more Scum rise, then have you your Juyce clarified, cast away the Scum as a thing of no use. 4. When you have thus clarified it, you have two waies to preserve it all the yeer. First, When it is cold put it into a Glass, and put so much Oyl on it as will cover it the thickness of two fingers, the Oyl will swim at top, and so keep the Air from coming to it to purrifie it; when you inend to use it, do no more but so, powr out into a Porrenger, a lit∣tle more than you intend to use, and if any Oyl come out with it (as if the Glass be not full 'tis a hundred to one it there do) you may easily scum it off with a Spoon, and put the Juyce you use not, into the Glass again it will quickly sink under the Oyl: This is the first way. Secondly, The second way is a little more difficult, and the Juyce of Fruits is usually preserved this way, when you have clarified the Juyce as before, boyl it over the fire, till (being cold) it be of the thickness of Honey, this is most commonly used for Diseases of the mouth, and is called Rb and Sapa. And thus much for the first Section, the Se∣cond follows. SECT. 2. The way of making and keeping all Ne∣cessary Compounds. Chap. 1. Of Distilled Waters. HItherto we have spoken of Medi∣cines which consist in their own Nature, which Authors vulgarly call Simples, though somthing im∣properly, for indeed and in truth, nothing is Simple but the pure Elements; all things else are compounded of them: We come now to treat of the Artificial Medicines, in the front of which (because we must begin somewhere) we place distilled Waters; In which consi∣der, 1. Waters are distilled out of Herbs, Flow∣ers, Fruits, and Roots. 2. We treat not here of strong Waters but of cold, as being to act Galen's Part and not Paracelsus. 3. The Herbs ought to be distilled when they are in their greatest vigor, and so ought the Flowers also. 4. The vulgar way of Distillation which people use, because they know no better, is in a Peuter Still, and although Distilled Waters are the weakest of all Artificial Medicines, and good for little unless for mixtures of other Medicines, yet this way distilled they are wea∣ker by many degrees than they would be, were they distilled in Sand: If I thought it not impossible to teach you the way of distilling in Sand by writing, I would attempt it. 5. When you have distilled your Water put it into a Glass, and having bound the top of it over with a Paper pricked full of holes, that so the excrementitious and fiery vapors may exhale (which indeed are they that cause that setling in distilled Waters called the Mother, which corrupts the Waters and might this way be prevented) cover it close and keep it for your use. 6. Stopping distilled Waters with a Cork makes them musty, and so will a Paper also if it do but touch the Water, your best way then
is to stop them with a Bladder, being first wet in Water, and bound over the top of the Glass. Such cold Waters as are distilled in a Peuter Still (if well kept) will endure a yeer, such as are distilled in Sand, as they are twice as strong, so will they endure twice as long. Chap. 2. Of Syrups. 1. A Syrup is a Medicine of a Liquid form, composed of Infusion, Deco∣ction and Juyce; and 1. for the more grateful tast, 2. for the better keeping of it, with a certain quantity of Honey or Sugar, hereafter mentioned boiled to the thickness of new Ho∣ney. 2. You see at the first view then that this Aphorism devides it self into three Branches, which deserve severally to be treated of, viz. 1. Syrups made by Infusion. 2. Syrups made by Decoction. 3. Syrups made by Juyce. Of each of these (for your Instruction sake kind Country men and women) I speak a word, or two or three apart. First, Syrups made by Infusion are usually made of Flowers, and of such Flowers, as soon lose both colour and strength by boyling, as Roses, Violets, Peach∣Flowers. &c. my Translation of the London Dispensatory will instruct you in the rest: They are thus made, having picked your Flowers clean, to every pound of them ad three pound (of three pints, which you will for it is all one) of Spring Water made boyling hot by the fire, first put your Flowers in a Peu∣ter Pot with a cover, then powr the Wa∣ter to them, then shutting the Pot, let it stand by the fire to keep hot twelve hours, then strain it out (in such Syrups as pge, as Daask Roses, Peach-Flo∣wers, &c. the usual and indeed the best way is to repeat this Infusion, adding fresh Flowers to the same Liquor diverse rimes that so it may be the stronger) ha∣ving strained it out, put the Infusion in∣to a Peuter Bason, or an Eartlien one well glassed, and to every pint of it, ad two pound of fine Sugar, which being only melted over the fire without boy∣ling, and scummed, will produce you the Syrup you desire. Secondly, Syrups made by Decoction are usually used of Compounds, yet may a∣ny Simple Herb be thus converted into Syrup; Take the Herb, Root, or Flow∣er you would make into Syrup and bruise it a little, then boyl it in a convenient quantity of Spring Water, the more wa∣ter you boyl it in the weaker will it be, a handful of the Herb, Root, &c. is a con∣venient quantity for a pint of Water; boyl it till half the water be consumed, then let it stand till it be almost cold, and strain it (being almost cold) through a woollen cloth, letting it run out at leisure without pressing, to every pint of this Decoction ad one pound of Sugar and boyl it over the fire till it come to a Sy∣rup, which you may know if you now and then cool a little of it in a spoon, scum it all the while it boyls, and when it is sufficiently boyled, whilst it is hot strain it again through a woollen cloth, but press it not; thus have you the Syrup perfected. Thirdly, Syrups made of Juyces are usually made of such Herbs as are full of Juyce, and indeed they are better made into a Syrup this way than any other; the O∣peration is thus, having beaten the Herb in a stone Mortar with a wooden Pestle, press out the Juyce and clarifie it as you were taught before in the Juyces, then let the Juyce boyl away till a quar∣ter of it (or neer upon) be consumed, to a pint of this ad a pound of Sugar, and boyl it to a Syrup, alwaies scumming it, and when it is boyled enough, strain it through & woollen cloth as we taught you before, and keep it for your use. 3. If you make Syrups of Roots that are a∣ny thing hard, as Parsley, Fennel, and grass Roots &c. when you have bruised them, lay them in steep some time in that Water which you intend to boyl them in, hot, so will the Vertue the better come out. 4. Keep your Syrups either in Glasses or stone Pots, and stop them not with Cork, nor Bladder, unless you would have the Glass break and the Syrup lost,  and as many Opi∣nions as there are in this Nation, I suppose there are but few or none of this, only bind a Paper about the Mouth. 5. All Syrups if well made will continue a yeer, with some advantage yet of all, such as are made by Infusion keep the least while. Chap. 3. Of Juleps. 1. Juleps were first invented as I suppose in Arabia, and my reason is because that word Juleb is an Arabick word. 2.It signifies only a pleasant Potion, and was vulgarly used (by such as were sick and wanted help, or such as were in health, and wanted no money) to quench thirst. 3. Now a daies 'tis commonly used,
1. To prepare the Body for Pigation. 2. To open Obstructions and the Pores. 3. To digest tough Humors. 4. To qualifie hot distempers &c. 4. It is thus made (I mean Simple Juleps for I have nothing to say to Compounds here; all Compounds have as many several Idea's as men have crotchets in their Brain) I say Simple Juleps are thus made: Take a pint of such distilled Water as conduceth to the cure of your distemper, which this Treatise will plentifully furnish you withal, to which add two ounces of Syrup conducing to the same ef∣fect (I shall give you Rules for it in the last Chapter) mix them together and drink a draught of it at your pleasure; If you love tart things ad ten drops of Oyl of Vitriol to your pint and shake it together, and it will have a fine grateful tast. 5. All Juleps are made for present use, and therefore it is in vain to speak of their durati∣on. Chap. 4. Of Decoctions. 1. ALL the difference between Decocti∣ons and Syrups made by Decoction is this, Syrups are made to keep, Decoctions only for present use, for you can hardly keep a Decoction a week at any time, if the wea∣ther be hot, not half so long. 2. Decoctions are made of Leaves, Roots, Flowers, Seeds, Fruits, or Barks, conducing to the cure of the Disease you make them for; in the same manner are they made as we shew∣ed you in Syrups. 3. Decoctions made with Wine last longer than such as are made with Water, and if you take your Decoction to clense the passages of Urine, or open Obstructions, your best way is to make it with white Wine instead of Wa∣ter, because that is most penetrating. 4. Decoctions are of most use in such Dis∣eases as lie in the Passages of the Body, as the Stomach, Bowels, Kidneys, Passages of Urine, and Bladder, because Decoctions pass quicker to those places than any other form of Medi∣cines. 5. If you will sweeten your Decoction with Sugar, or any Syrup fit for the occasion you take it for which is better, you may and no harm done. 6. If in a Decoction you boyl both Roots, Herbs, Flowers, and Seeds together, let the Roots boyl a good while first, because they re∣tain their Vertue longest, then the next in or∣der by the same Rule; viz. 1. The Barks, 2. the Herbs, 3. the Seeds, 4. the Flowers, 5. the Spices if you put any in, because their vertue comes soonest our. 7. Such things as by boyling cause sliminess to a Decoction, as Figs, Quince Seeds, Lin∣seed &c. your best way is, after you have brui∣sed them, to tie them up in a linnen rag, as you tie up a Calves Brains, and so boyl them. 8. Keep all Decoctions in a Glass close stopped, and in the cooler place you keep them, the longer will they last ere they be sowr. Lastly, The usual Dose to be given at one time, is usually two, three, four, or five oun∣ces, according to the age and strength of the Patient, the season of the yeer, the strength of the Medicine, and the quality of the Dis∣case. Chap. 5. Of Oyles. 1. OYL Olive, which is commonly known by the name of Sallet Oyl, I suppose because it is usually eaten with Sallets by them that love it; If it be pressed out of ripe Olives, according to Galen is temperate, and exceeds in no one quality. 2. Of Oyls, some are Simple, and some are Compound. 3. Simple Oyls are such as are made of Fruits or Seeds, by expression, as Oyl of sweet and bitter Almonds, Linseed, and Rapeseed Oyl &c. of which see my Dispensatory. 4. Compound Oyls are made of Oyl of Olives and other Simples, imagine Herbs, Flowers, Roots, &c. 5. The way of making them is this, Having bruised the Herbs or Flowers you would make your Oyl of, put them in an Earthen pot, and to two or three handfuls of them, powr a pint of Oyl, cover the pot with a paper, and set it in the Sun, about a Fortnight or less accor∣ding as the Sun is in hotness; then having warmed it very well by the fire, press out the Herbs &c. very hard in a press, and ad as ma∣ny more Herbs to the same Oyl, bruised (the Herbs I mean not the Oyl) in like manner, set them in the Sun as before, the ostner you re∣peat this the stronger will your Oyl be; at last when you conceive it strong enough, boyl both Herbs and Oyl together till the Juyce be consumed which you may know by its leaving its bubling, and the Herbs will be crisp, then strain it, whilst it is hot, and keep it in a stone or Glass Vessel for your use. 6. As for Chymical Oyls, I have nothing to say in this Treatise. 7. The General use of these Oyls is for pain in the Limbs, roughness of the Skin, the Itch &c. as also for Oyntments and Plaisters. 8. If you have occasion to use it for Wounds or Ulcers, in two ounces of Oyl, dissolve half an ounce of Turpentine, the heat of the fire will quickly do it, for Oyl it self is offensive to Wounds, and the Turpentine qualifies it.
Chap. 6. Of Electuaries. PHysitians make more a quoil than needs behalf about Electuaries: I shall pre∣scribe but one general way of making them up, as for the Ingredients you may vary them as you please, and according as you find occasi∣on by the last Chapter. 1. That you may make Electuaries when you need them, it is requisite that you keep alwaies Herbs, Roots, Seeds, Flowers &c. ready dried in your House, that so you may be in readiness to beat them into pouder when you need them. 2. Your better way is to keep them whol than beaten, for being beaten they are the more subject to lose their strength, because the Air soon penetrates them. 3. If they be not dry enough to beat into pouder when you need them, dry them by a gentle fire till they are so. 4. Having beaten them, sift them through a fine Tiffany Searce, that so there may be no great picces found in your Electuary. 5. To on ounce of your Pouder, ad three ounces of clarified Honey, this quantity I hold to be sufficient; I confess Authors dif∣fer about it: If you would make more or less Electuary, vary your proportions accordingly. 6. Mix them well together in a Mortar, and take this for a truth, you cannot mix them too much. 7. The way to clarifie Honey is to set it o∣ver the fire in a convenient vessel till the scum arise, and when the scum is taken off it is cla∣rified. 8. The usual Dose of Cordial Electuaries is from half a dram to two drams, of purging Electuaries from half an ounce to an ounce. 9. The manner of keeping them is in a pot. 10. The time of taking them, is either in the morning fasting, and fasting an hour after them, or at night going to bed three or four hours after supper. Chap. 7. Of Conserves. 1. THe way of making Conserves is two∣fold one of Herbs and Flowers, and the other of Fruits. 2. Conserves of Herbs and Flowers are thus made, If you make your Conserves of Herbs, as of Scurvy-grass, Wormwood, Rue, or the like, take only the Leaves and tender tops (for you may beat your heart out before you can beat the Stalks small) and having bea∣ten them, waigh them, and to  pound of them ad three pound of Sugar, beat them verie well together in a Mortar, you cannot beat them too much. 3. Conserves of Fruits, as of Barberries, Sloes, and the like is thus made; First scald the Fruit, then rub the pulp through a thick hair Sieve made for the purpose, called a pul∣ping Sieve, you may do it for a need with the back of a Spoon, then take this Pulp thus drawn, and ad to it its waight of Sugar and no more, put it in a Peuter Vessel, and over a Charcoal fire stir it up and down till the Sugar be melted, and your Conserve is made. 4. Thus have you the way of making Con∣serves, the way of keeping of them is in Ear∣then pots. 5. The Dose is usually the quantity of a Nutmeg at a time morning and evening, or (unless they be purging) when you please. 6. Of Conserves, some keep many yeers, as Conserves of Roses, others but a yeer, as Conserves of Borrage, Bugloss, Cowslips and the like. 7. Have a care of the working of some Conserves presently after they are made, look to them once a day and stir them about; Con∣serves of Borrage, Bugloss, and Wormwood have gotten an excellent faculty at that sport. 8. You may know when your Conserves are almost spoiled by this, you shall find a hard crust at top with little holes in it as though Worms had been eating there. Chap. 8. Of Preserves. OF Preserves are sundry sorts, and the Operations of all being somthing dif∣ferent we will handle them all apart. There are preserved with Sugar; 1. Flowers. 2. Fruits. 3. Roots 4. Barks. 1. Flowers are but very seldom preserved, I never saw any that I remember save only Cowslip Flowers, and that was a great fashi∣on in Sussex when I was a boy; It is thus done, first, take a flat Glass, we call them jarr Glasses, strew in a lain of fine Sugar, on that a lain of Flowers, on that another lain of Su∣gar, on that another lain of Flowers, do so til your Glass be full, then tie it over with a paper, and in a little time you shall have very excel∣lent and pleasant Preserves. There is another way of Preserving Flow∣ers, namely with Vinegar and Salt, as they pickle Capers and Broom Buds, but because I have little skill in it my self I cannot teach you.
2. Fruits, as Quinces and the like are pre∣served two waies, First, Boyl them well in Water, and then pulp them through a Sieve as we shewed you before, then with the like quantity of Sugar boyl the Water they were boyled in to a Sy∣rup, viz. a pound of Sugar to a pint of Li∣quor, to every pound of this Syrup ad four ounces of the Pulp, then boyl it with a very gentle fire to the right consilience, which you may easily know if you dip a drp of it upon a Trencher, if it be enough it will not stick to your fingers when it is cold. Secondly, Another way to preserve Fruits is this, First pare off the ind, then out them in halves and take cut the Core, then boyl them in Water till they are soft, It you know when Beef is boyled enough you may easily know when they are; the boyl the Water with its like waight of Sugar into a Syrup, put the Syrup into a Pot, and put the boyled Fruit as whol as you left it when you cut it into it, and let it so remain till you have occasion to use it. 3. Roots are thus preserved, First, scrape them very clean, and clense them from the Pith if they have any, for some Roots have not, as Eringo and the like, boyl them in Water till they be soft as we sew you before in the Fruits, then boyl the Water you boyled the Roots into a Syrup as we shewed you before, then keep the Roots whol in the Syrup till you use them. 4. As for Barks we have but few come to our hands to be done, and those of those few that I can remember, are Orrenges, Lem∣mons, Citrons, and the outer Bark of Walnuts which grows without the Shell, for the Shels themselves would make but scurvy Preserves, there be they I can remember, if there be any more put them into the number. Th of Preserving these is nor all one is Authors, for some are bitter, some are not, such as are bitter, say Authors, must be soaked in warm Water, often times changed till their bitter tast be fled, but I like not this way, and my reason is, because I doubt when their bit∣terness is gone, so is their Vertue also; I shall then prescribe one common way, namely the same with the former, viz. First boyl them whol till they be soft, then make a Syrup with Sugar and the Liquor you boyled them in, and keep the Barks in the Syrup. 5. They are kept in Glasses or glassed Pots. 6. The preserved Flowers will keep a yeer if you can forbear eating of them, the Roots and Barke much longer. 7. This Art was plainly and clerly as first invented for delicacy, yet came afterwards to be of excellent use in Physiak; For, 1. First, Hereby Medicines are made pleasant for sick and queazy Stomis, which else would  them. 2. Hereby they are preserved from dccaying a long time. Chap. 9. Of Lohochs. 1. THat which the Arabians call Lohoch, and the Greeks Eclegma, the Latins call Linctus, and in plain English, signifies nothing else but a thing to be licked up. 2. Their first invention was to prevent and remedy afflictions of the Breast and Lungs, to clense the Lungs of Flegm, and make it fit to be cast out. 3. They are in Body thicker than a Syrup, and not so thick as an Electuary. 4. The manner of taking them is often to take a little with a Liquoris stick, and let it go down at leisure. 5. They are easily thus made, make a De∣coction of any pectoral Herbs, the Treatise will furnish you with enough, and when you have strained it, with twise its waight of Ho∣ney or Sugar, boyl it to a Lohoch; If you are molested with tough Flegm, Honey is better than Sugar, and if you ad a little Vineger to it you will do well, if not, I hold Sugar to be better than Honey. 6. It is kept in Pots and will a yeer and lon∣ger. 7. Its use is excellent for roughness of the Windpipe, Inflamations of the Lungs, Ulcers in the Lungs, difficultie of Breath, Asthmaes, Coughs and distillation of Humors. Chap. 10. Of Oyntments. 1. VArious are the waies of making Oynt∣ments which Authors have left to po∣steritie, which I shall omit and quote one which is easiest to be made, and therefore most beneficial to people that are ignorant in Physick, for whose sakes I write this; It is thus done, Bruise those Herbs, Flowers, or Roots you would make an Oyntment of, and to two handfuls of your bruised Herbs ad a pound of Hogs Grease tryed, or clensed from the skins, beat them very well together in a stone Mor∣tar with a wooden Pestle, then put it in a stone Pot (the Herbs and Grease I mean, not the Mortar) cover it with a paper, and set it either in the Sun or some other warm place three, four, or fivs daies, that it may melt, then take it out and boyl it a little, then whilst it is hot, strain it out, pressing it out very hard in a Press, to this Grease ad as many more Herbs bruised as before, let them stand in like man∣ner
as long, then boyl them as you did the former, if you think your Oyntment be not strong enough you may do it the third and fourth time; yet this I tell you, the fuller of Juyce your Herbs are, the sooner will your Oyntment be strong, the last time you boyl it, boyl it so long till your Herbs be crisp and the Juyce consumed, then strain it, pressing it hard in a press, and to every pound of Oyntment, ad two ounces of Turpentine, and as much Wax, because Grease is offensive to Wounds as well as Oyl, 2. Oyntments are vulgarly known to be kept in Pots, and will last above a yeer, above two yeer. Chap. 11. Of Plaisters. 1. THe Greeks made their Plaisters of di∣verse Simples and put Mettals in most of them if not in all, for having reduced their Mettals into Pouder they mixed them with that fatty substance, whereof the rest of the Plaister consisted, whilst it was yet hot, con∣tinually stirring it up and down lest it should sink to the bottom, so they continually stirred it till it was stiff, then they made it up in rolls, which when they need for use they could melt by the fire again. 2. The Arabians made up theirs with Meals, Oyl, and Fat, which needed not so long boyling. 3. The Greeks Emplasters consisted of these Ingredients, Mettals, Stones, diverse sorts of Earths, Feces, Juyces, Liquoris, Seeds, Roots, Herbs, Excrements of Creatures, Wax, Rozin, Gums. Chap. 12. Of Pultisses. 1. PUltisses are those kind of things which the Latins call Cataplasmata, and our learned Fellows that if they can read English thats all, call them Cataplasms, because 'tis a rabbed word few understand; it is indeed a very fine kind of Medicine to ripen Sores, 2. They are made of Herbs and Roots fitted to the Disease and Member afflicted, being chopped smal and boyled in Water almost to a Jelly, then by adding a little Barley Meal or Meal of Lupines, and a little Oyl or rough Sheep Suer, which I hold to be better, spread upon a cloath and applied to the grieved place. 3. Their use is to case pains, to break Sores, to cool Inflamations, to dissolve hardness, to ease the Spleen, to concoct Humors, to dissi∣pate Swellings. 4. I beseech you take this Caution along with you, Use no Pultisses (if an help it) that are of a heating Nature re you have first clensed the Body, beey are subject to draw the Humors to them from eve∣ry part of the Body. Chap. 13. Of Troches. 1. THe Latins call them Placentulae, or little Cakes (and you might have seen what the Greeks call them too, had not the last Edition of my London Dispensatory been so hellishly printed, that's all the Com∣monwealth gets by one Stationer's printing a∣nothers Coppies, viz. To plague the Coun∣try with false Prints, and disgrace the Au∣thor) the Greeks , , and  they are usually little round flat Cakes, or you may make them square it you will. 2. Their first invention was, that Pouders being so kept might resist the intromission of Air and so endure pure the longer. 3. Besides, they are the easier carried in the Pockets of such as travel; many a man (for example) is forced to travel whose Stomach is too cold, or at least not so hot as it should be, which is most proper, for the Stomach is ne∣ver cold till a man be dead; in such a case 'tis better to carry Troches of Wormwood or of Galanga, in a Paper in his Pocker and more convenient behalf than to lug a Gally-pot a∣long with him. 4. They are thus made, At night when you go to bed, take two drams of fine Gum Tra∣gacanth, put it into a Gally-pot, and put half a quarter of a pint of any distilled Water fit∣ting the purpose you would make your Tro∣ches for, to it, cover it, and the next mor∣ning you shall find it in such a Jelly as Physi∣tians call Mussilage, with this you may (with a little pains taking) make any Pouder into Past, and that Past into little Cakes called Troches. 5. Having made them, dry them well in the shadow and keep them in a Pot for your use. Chap. 14. Of Pills. 1. THey are called Pilule because they re∣semble little Balls, the Greeks call them Catapotia. 2. It is the Opinion of Modern Physitians that this way of making up Medicines was in∣vented only to deceive the Pallat, that so by swallowing them down whol, the bitterness o the Medicine might not be perceived or a
least it might not be unsufferable, and indeed most of ills though not all are very bit∣ter. 3. I am of a clean contrary Opinion to this, I rather think they were done up in this hard form that so they might be the longer in dige∣sting, and my Opinion is grounded upon Reason too, not upon Fancy nor Hear-say; The first invention of Pills was to purge the Head, now as I told you before, such Infir∣mities as lay neer the passages, were best re∣moved by Decoctions, because they pass to the grieved part soonest, so here, if the insir∣mity lie in the Head or any other remote part, the best way is to use Pills, because they are longer in digestion, and therefore the better a∣ble to call the offending Humor to them. 4. If I should tell you here a long Tale of Medicines working by Sympathy and Anti∣pathy, you would not understand a word of it, they that are fit to make Physitians may find it in the Treatise: All Modern Physitians know not what belonged to a Sympatherical Cure, no more than a Cookoo knows what belongs to Flats and Sharps in Musick, but follow the vulgar road, and call it a hidden quality be∣cause 'tis hid from the Eyes of Dunces, and indeed none but Astrologers can give a reason of it, and Physick without Reason is like a Pudding without Fat. 5. The way to make Pills is very easie, for with the help of a Pestle and Mortar and a lit∣tle diligence, you may make any Pouder into Pills, either with Syrup or the Jelly I told you of before. Chap. ult. The way of mixing Medicines according to the Cause of the Disease and part of the Bo∣dy afflicted. THis being indeed the Key of the Work, I shall be somthing the more dilligent in it: I shall deliver my self thus; 1. To the Vulgar. 2. To Such as study Astrology, or such as study Physick Astrologically. First to the Vulgar: Kind souls I am sorry it hath been your hard mishap to have been so long trained in such Egyptian darkness, even darkness which to your sorrows may be felt; the vulgar road of Physick is not my practice, and I am therefore the more unfit to give you advice; and I have now published a little Book which will fully instruct you not only  the knowledg of your own Bodies but  fit Medicines to remedy each part of it when afflicted, mean season take these few Rules to stay your Stomachs.Galen's Art of Physick. 1. With the Disease regard the Cause and part of the Body afflicted, for example, sup∣pose a Woman be subject to miscarry through wind, thus do, 1. Look [Abortion] in the Table of Dis∣eases, and you shall be directed by that how many Herbs prevent miscarriage. 2. Look [Wind] in the same Table, and you shall see how many of those Herbs expell wind. These are the Herbs Medicinal for your Grief. 2. In all Diseases strengthen the part of the Body afflicted. 3. In mixed Diseases there lies some diffi∣culty, for somtimes two parts of the Body are afflicted with contrary Humors the one to the other, somtimes one part is afflicted with two contrary Humors, as somtimes the Liver is afflicted with Choller and Water, as when a man hath both a Dropsie and the yellow Jaun∣dice, and this is usually mortal. In the former, suppose the Brain be too cold and moist, and the Liver too hot and dry, thus do, 1. Keep your Head outwardly warm. 2. Accustom your self to smell of hot Herbs. 3. Take a Pill that beats the Head at night going to bed. 4. In the morning take a Decoction that cools the Liver, for that quickly passeth the Stomach, and is at the Liver imme∣diately. You must not think (Courteous People) that I can spend time to give you examples of all Diseases, these are enough to let you see so much light as you without Art are able to re∣ceive, If I should set you to look upon the Sun I should dazle your eyes and make you blind. Secondly, To such as study Astrology (who are the only men I know that are fit to study Physick, Physick without Astrology, being like a Lamp without Oyl) you are men I excee∣dingly respect, and such Documents as my Brain can give you at present (being absent from my study) I shall give you, and an exam∣ple to shew the proof of them. 1. Fortifie the Body with Herbs of the Na∣ture of the lord of the Ascendent, 'tis no mat∣ter whether he be a Fortune or an Infortune in this case. 2. Let your Medicine be somthing Antipa∣thetical to the lord of the sixth. 3. Let your Medicine be somthing of the Nature of the Sign ascending. 4. If the lord of the Tenth be strong, make use of his Medicines. 5. If this cannot well be, make use of the Medicines of the light of time. 6. Be sure alwaies fortifie the grieved part of the body by Sympathetical Remedies.
7. Regard the Heart, keep that upon the Wheels because the Sun is the Fountain of Life, and therefore those Universal Remedies Aurum potabile, and the Phylosophers Stone, cure all Diseases by only fortifying the Heart. But that this may appear unto you as cleer as the Sun when he is upon the Meridian, I here quote you an Example, which I perfor∣med when I was as far off from my study as I am now, yet am I not ashamed the world should see how much or little of my Lesson I have learned without Book. On July, 25. 1651. there came a Letter to me out of Bedfordshire, from a Gentleman (at that time) altogether to me unknown, though since well known, who was a Student both in Astrologie and Physick: The words which are these; Mr. Culpeper, My Love remembred unto you, although I know you not by face; yet because I do much respect that pretty little Lark, you so lately let fly into the world, which you call Semeiotica Uranica, which I have lately taken into my cage; I am therefore imboldned to write unto you in the behalf of a Neighbors wife, who is taken with a very violent Disease which began in the lowr parts of her Body, but is now as∣cended upwards, and tormenteth her in her Breast, Throat, Tongue, and Lips: This Dis∣ease took possession of her (as she relateth to me) about a fortnight before Michaelmas last, but the certain day and hour she is not able to no∣minate; she sent for me, and enquired whether she were not under an ill Tongue or not, or of what nature the Disease was: I have sent you the enclosed Scheam, I could find but one testi∣mony of Fascination or Witchcraft, which was one Sign possessing the Cusps of the Twelfth and First Houses, which to me holds forth no more than a strong suspition of it by the Que∣rent; However I am confident there is a Na∣tural Diseas which hurts much, because the Lord of the Sixt, which usually gives signifi∣cation of Natural Diseases, is now placed in the Ascendent; but at present I forbear to make any large discours of mine own Opinions, being desirous that you would endeavor your Skill in this Cure, for there is not a Doctor of them all far or near that have been so skilful to find out the Diseas, much less to effect the Cure. Sr. I expect your Answer; mean time bid you farewel, and remain yours in Affecti∣on, &c. The inclosed Scheam,
My Answer to the Letter, was to this effect. Sir, I received yours, July 25. wherein I find your enclosed Scheam, and (I suppose) the nature of the Disease, and have sent you such an Answer as I could, being far from my Study, which I entreat you to take in good part, being Festinaxi calamo Conscripta. As for the ig∣norance of your Country Doctors, they wan∣ting the true Judgment of Astrology, is to me no waies admirable; I perceive you to be a yong man by the time of your Genesis, which you also sent me, beware whom you trust with that, he that knows your Nativity knows when ill Directions operate, and if he be an Enemy, knows when to do you a mischief; If Cecil had not had Essex his Nativity, he had never gotten his Head off, but to instruct you being a yong Student, I shall give you my Judgment Methodically. Diacritica. You say you can find no Arguments of Witchcraft, but only one Sign possessing the Cusps of both Twelth and Ascendent, but if you had regarded the Propinquity of Venus to Saturn you would have made another of that, yet do not I think she is bewitched, because of other more prevalent restimonies; the Moon passing from the beams of Mars to the beams of Venus may seem to give some suspition of Honesty, and the Disease to come that way, which is encreased by Mars his being in the Ascendent in Scorpio, and the Dragons Tail upon the Cusp, yet I can hardly beleeve this, for Cauda in a humane Sign usually gives Slanders and not Tales of Truth, 'tis a hun∣dred to one if she suffer not in point of good name by the vulgar [this was too true] Be∣sides, the neerness of Venus to Saturn may well shew trouble of mind, and it being in the ninth House, pray enquire whether she have not been troubled about some tenents in Reli∣gion [the trouble of mind was true, but it was about a stranger, which the ninth House also signifies.] Diagnostica. Venus, Lady of the Twelfth, and Ascen∣dent, and Eigth, shews her alwaies to be her own foe in respect of Health; and truly I be∣leeve the original of the Disease was a Surfet either by eating moist Fruits, or else by cat∣ching wet in travelling; Venus with Saturn who is in square to the Ascendent troubles her Breast with tough Flegm and Melancholly: Besides, there being a most forcible reception between the Moon and Venus from fruitful Signs, I question whether she be not with Child or not, the Moon being in the fifth House, Mars is lord of the Disease, really in the Scorpion, and accidentally in the Ascen∣dent, together with Aries on the sixt, shew the Disease keep his Court in the Womb, and accidentally afflicts the Head from thence, so that heat of the Womb must needs be cause of the present distemper, and Mars in a moist Sign in the first neer the second may well de∣note heat, and breaking out about her Face and Throat. Prognostica. Whether she be curable or not, or how or when the Disease will end is our next Point; Truly I can see no danger of death the Moon being strong in her hain, and applying by Trine with a strong reception to the Lady of the Ascendent; yet this is certain, Mars strong in a fixed Sign will maintain the Dis∣ease stoutly, her hopes will be but smal when Venus comes to the Body of Saturn. viz. Au∣gust 2. for she will be overpressed with Me∣lancholly, the time I suppose of her Cure may be (if good courses be taken) when Mars leaves the Sign he is in, and comes to the place where the Body of Jupiter is, or at least then it may turn to another Disease more propiti∣ous; the Sun strong in the Tenth shews she may be cured by Medicine, and he being ex∣alted in the seventh, and caput there, I do not know but you are as likely a man to do it as any. Indicationes Curativae. It is confessed here that the Sun being ex∣ceeding strong in   House, should na∣turally signifie the curative Medicine, and as true that the evils of Mars, viz. heat in the Womb, and a salt humor in the blood ought to be removed before you meddle with the tough Flegm in the Breast, but yet seeing the Disease seems rather to participate of offen∣ding heat than any other Simple quality, you must have a care of hot Medicines left you go about ignem oleo extinguere, the Medicines must 1. be cool, 2. strengthning the Womb, 3. repressing the vapors, 4. of the nature of Sol and Venus. Therapeutice. To this intent I first commend unto you stinking Arrach, a pattern whereof I have sent you enclosed, you may find it upon Dunghils, especially such as are made of Horse-dung: It is cold and moist, an Herb of Venus in the Scorpion; Also Ros Solis an Herb of the Sun and under the Coelestial Crab, may do very well, and the better because Venus is in Can∣cer: It grows upon Bogs in untilled places, and is in flower about this time, it grows very low, with roundish green Leaves full of red hairs, and is fullest of dew when the Sun is hottest, whence it took its name; to these you may ad Tansie, which I take to be an Herb of Venus in Libra, and Let∣tice if you please which is an Herb of the Moon, Mars having his fall in Cancer they are all harmless, you may use them according to your own descretion: also Orpine, another Herb of the Moon is very good in this case.
Sir, I wish you well, and if you esteem of my Lark above his deserts, I pray trim his Feathers for him (correct the Errors by the Errata) else will he make but unpleasing Mu∣sick. Thus remain yonrs, &c. I the rather chose this Figure to judg of, because none should have just occasion to say of us Astrologers that we do as Physitians vul∣gar practice is, when they judg of Piss; first pump what they can out of the Querent, and then judg by his words; of which I will re∣hearse you one merry story, and so I will con∣clude the Book. A Woman whose Husband had bruised him∣self, took his Water, and away to the Doctor trots she; the Doctor takes the Piss and shakes it about, How long hath this party been ill (saith he) Sr. saith the Woman, He hath been ill these two daies, This is a mans water quoth the Doctor presently, this he learned by the word HE; then looking on the water he spied blood in it, the man hath had a bruise saith he, I indeed saith the woman, my Hus∣band fell down a pair of stairs backwards, then the Doctor knew well enough that what came first to danger must needs be his back and shoulders, said, the Bruise lay there; the wo∣man she admired at the Doctors skil, and told him, that if he could tell her one thing more she would account him the ablest Physitian in Europe; well, what was that? How many Stairs her Husband fell down, this was a hard Question indeed, able to puzle a stronger Brain than Mr. Doctor had, to pumping goes he, and having taken the Urinal and given it a shake or two, enquires whereabout she lived, and knowing well the place, and that the Hou∣ses thereabouts were but low built Houses, made answer) after another view of the Urine for fashion sake) that probably he might fall down some seven or eight stairs; ah, quoth the woman, now I see you know nothing, my Husband fell down thirty; thirty! quoth the Doctor, and snatching up the Urinal, is here all the water saith he? no saith the woman, I spilt some in putting of it in, look you there quoth Mr. Doctor, there were all the other stairs spilt. Yet mistake me not, I do not deny but such whose daily experience is to judg Waters, and usually judg a hundred in a day may know somthing by them: If any thing may be known by Urine, I am sure it may be Art, put them both together, vis unita fortior. Thus I take my leave of you; be diligent and I am yours.
AN ALPHABETICAL CATALOGUE OF THE DISEASES SPECIFIED IN THIS TREATISE: Together with the Page where to find the Cure. A ABortion, 17. Adders, 9. Afterbirth, 3 5 11 20 32 34 41 43 50 53 67 86 192 195 212 234. Aconitum, 195 Agues, 2 5 6 8 10 11 15 16 22 26 27 30 34 37 47 49 50 54 55 58 62 66 73 75 77 81 88 196 199 201 209 210 215 219 220 223 224 227 232 234 235. Andicomes,7 12 20. Aposthumes, 2 11 32 49 54 58 65 71 91 231. Appetite lost, 3 10 14 16 31 32 196 201 220 239. Arteries, 10 12 25 61. St. Anthonies fire, 14 3 4 37 45 62 63 70 78 199 205 210 224 237. Almonds of the Ears, 17 89 Ach, 27 195 202 205 210 222 224. Adust Choller, 44. Adust Melancholly, 57. Asthma, 67 237. Apoplexy, 72 81 83 235. B Baldness, 14 47 190. Barrenness, 28 72 89. Belly, 2 8 27 59 77 78 85 87 192 201 206 220 226 231. Belching, 14 24 Binding, 2 3 15 17 38 53 62 86 196 206 228. Beauty, 29 38 47 59. Breath, 12 13 14 24 26 36 48 51 66 67 76 89 189 190 199 217 221 226. Bleeding, 1 6 13 15 17 24 28 53 54 65 67 68 71 72 84 86 194 196 200 220 213 219 228 229 231. Blood, 18 21 36 39 44 45 69 205 209 212 230. Bloody Flux, 2 10 17 34 35 37 53 54 56 59 60 61 71 92 228. Black and blew Spots, 17 20 24 26 41 53 59 66 88 204 214 239. Bowels, 1 40 92. Bees, 216. Black Jaundice, 22. Bladder, 8 22 25 31 38 50 52 73. Blisters 14. Breast, 1 2 3 8 10 41 55 78 88 192. Back, 34 38. Brain, 8 10 27 49 72. Burning, 3 5 7 13 14 25 28 37 42 47 68 69 78 92 192 193 194 200 231. Birth, 50 86. Bruises, 7 12 14 15 22 32 34 37 42 43 50 52 76 78 88 89. Boyls, 10 12 41 220 221. Bees, 11. Breasts 8 12 53 61 82 89 194 200 201. Broken Bones 20 21 37 49 50 52 54 84 213. C Cachexia, 38 42. Cancers 2 29 36 53. Cantharides 17. Cankers 17 24 25 28 33 42 48 53 54 56 60 86 88 196 212 219 220. Childbirth 12 14 52 237. Chops 5 82 197 236. Clensing 2 13 51 56 189 194 214.
Chincough 78. Chollick 2 5 9 27 28 45 47 49 50 61 62 64 65 72 87 189 190 197 210 215 235 236. Cough 2 4 12 15 16 18 19 34 36 41 48 50 53 54 58 62 63 66 67 73 75 76 86 87 88 89 91 92 189 190 191 195 199 213 214 210 212 215 232. Choller 2 3 8 10 28 30 37 41 46 50 54 57 64 69 72 77 81 82 194 196 199 210 214 215 209 223 230 233 239. Cold 4 15 27 79 89 236. Chilblains 64. Cods 13 45 64 65 77 210 236. Congealed Blood 7. Cools 9 15 25 53 62 190 196 199 214 220 223 228. Convulsion 9 15 19 26 30 38 48 54 58 59 62 72 78 85 87 192 221. Cramp 9 19 26 27 30 38 48 54 58 59 62 72 78 85 86 87 89 192 195 209 212 221. Consumption 18 25 42 46 67. Corns 68 237. Clotted blood 33 43 209. Costiveness 33. Corrosion 53. Curdled Milk 92. D Dandriff 14 43 78. Dead child 21 53 79 192 195 212 235. Deformity 50 52 193. Deafness 2 64 216 217 221 235. Diabets 17 230. Digests 33. Dissolves 33. Disury 8 9 12 13 15 21 22 24 25 26 28 31 32 37 39 41 42 45 47 49 50 52 53 55 57 58 59 61 62 66 67 70 75 76 89 90 92 201 226 231. Dislocations 21. Dogs 66. Dropsie 3 8 9 11 20 22 27 28 30 46 49 53 55 58 62 63 66 70 78 79 85 92 190 192 195 196 209 210 215 225 227. Dimness of Sight, 49 81 197 202 207 209 215. Dulness, 39 213. Drying 2 4 15 62 90 197 198 235. Drunkenness 69. Dreams 72 82 199. Disjunctures 87 89 235. E Ears, 2 10 12 14 18 31 35 47 52 68 70 82 89 190 197 205 235. Errwigs 64. Epidemical Diseases, 4 14 20 24 32 75 91. Eyes 6 8 10 11 12 18 31 34 41 45 47 51 53 56 63 68 73 77 81 205 215 223 224 236 239. F Fainting 5 10 72 192. Falling-sickness, 18 20 33 38 56 58 61 66 72 77 79 83 92 192 195. Falls 21 32 34 52 78. Felones 7 12. Fatness, 51. Flegm, 3 5 8 19 21 22 25 31 32 40 50 58 67 69 79 81 85 189 192 197 209 215 217 224. Fleas 4 7. Feavers 10 54 65 79 229. Fistulaes 21 28 33 45 53 55 71 88 189 203. Flux, 2 3 5 9 10 12 14 21 25 33 37 8 44 53 54 56 60 67 69 71 72 75 84 85 194 199 201 209 213 225 328 229. Forgetfulness 57. Freckles, 5 20 31 39 41 44 53 75 76 88 191 226 238. Frenzy, 18 38 73 198. French Pox, 49 64 66 206 230. Fundament, 17 41 52. G Gall, 2 27 42 44 45 64. Gangrenes, 20 23 37 42 71 89. Gauls, 13. Gnats, 50. Gout, 2 5 7 8 10 11 12 15 25 34 37 39 41 48 54 55 59 63 64 79 89 90 191 192 193 196 198 200 209 230 231. Gums, 17 23 192 205 226. Guts, 195. Gravel, 17 20 21 28 31 52 57 59 79 82 89 191 194 204 211 214 216 220. Griping, 2. Groyn, 66 87. H Headach, 21 47 54 58 72 85 189 192 205 209 224 232. Head, 28 34 72. Heart, 9 10 47 205 233. Hemorrhoids, 30 33 52 54 55 86 89 195 224. Horses tired, 7. Hortnets, 11. Hoarceness, 25 31 34 73 233. Humors, 31 75 81 82 190 194 197 206 236. Hypochondria, 42 44. Hiccough, 43. I Jaundice, 2 3 8 9 10 11 15 26 27 44 55 57 63 85 88 189 220 223 230. Jaws, 41. Joynts, 7 12 13 22 37 59 88 207 220 222 226. Illiack Passion, 216. Inflamations, 1 4 5 7 12 17 20 21 26 31 34 37 45 47 53 54 62 63 64 67 68 71 72 73 74 77 89 82 90 91 92 190 191 199 220 223 233.
Imposthumes, 7 83 191 214 220. Itch, 2 3 11 12 29 32 41 44 57 59 66 196 206. Indigestion, 9 10 28 72 75. K Kings Evil, 7 11 30 35 52 56 59 70 75 78 86 202. Kidneys, 70 225. L Leprosie, 9 11 26 43 47 52 53 83 88 91. Lethergy, 39 51 72 87 91 192 207 212 215. Liver, 35 10 11 13 15 27 29 30 38 41 42 49 57 61 66 74 76 78 92 189 202 203 209 219 227 230. Lice, 3, 210. Lechery, 63. Loathing of meat, 44. Loosness, 5 43. Loose teeth, 48. Longings, 80. Lungs, 3 11 32 53 68 75 197 230 237. Lust provokes, 189. Lust stop, 199. M Mare, 23 193. Madness, 57 193. Mad-dogs, 5 10 15 25 47 57 82 89 91. Meazles, 17 229. Megrim, 12 224. Melancholly, 5 6 10 24 26 42 50 57 58 76 81 82 85 192 193 197 206 226 234. Memory, 8 49 57 212. Mother, 6 9 12 15 17 24 28 29 43 48 50 79 85 89 90 191 193 215 223 235. Mineral Vapors, 58. Mind, 10. Milk in Nurses, 18 50 72 77 234. Milk in Cattel, 36. Mouth, 16 18 23 33 59 78 192 196 200 205 215 219 220 229 233. Morphew, 20 42 43 44 47 48 62 66 73 88 191 210 233. Muscles cut, 37 78 191. Miscarriage, 80 212 225. Mushroms, 88 190 239. N Navil, 200. Nails in the Flesh, 2. Nepples, 54. Nerves, 12 17 37. Nightshade eaten, 89. Noise in the Ears, 2 14 64 66 78. Nits, 225. Nose, 6 15 68 196. —Nolime tangere, se Polipus. O Obstructions, 3 9 10 11 15 20 21 28 29 30 37 42 44 49 51 53 56 57 66 69 78 87 189 195 210 215 223 227. Opening, 33 42 51 189 190 201 214. Opium, 51 86. P Pain, 2 12 15 35 37 43 63 82 192 195 199 205 209 210 211 221. Palsey, 15 20 32 34 38 47 51 58 67 72 76 83 216 217. Piles, 17 37 41 70 80 191 196. Pissing Blood, 15 22 67. Pin and Web, 63 231 232. Plague, 2 4 9 17 18 19 20 24 32 33 41 42 43 48 57 58 65 69 79 91 194 201 210 217 220 223 232 236. Pleuresy, 4 32 33 54 75 77 88 89 197 217 233. Poyson, 2 4 9 11 17 18 19 20 41 43 48 58 65 67 77 79 88 90 91 194 201 210 220 221 229 234 235. Phthisick, 16 32 37 62 71 73 77 92 196 197 199 207. Purples, 17 54 229. Pushes, 37 206 221 223 239. Pimples, 39 43 53 57 67 206 210 217 224. Polipus, 41 53 89 197. Privities, 2 37 65. Q Quartan Agues, 2 49 197. Quotidian Agues, 49. Quinsie, 33 38 75 92 202 233 239. Quickens the Sences, 212. R Raw Humors, 43. Rhewm, 38 39 40 71 81 89 195 196 199 200 205 207 212. Reds, 19 205. Red Faces, 67 70. Reins, 9 49 50 52 66 86 216 223 225. Rickets, 9. Ringworms, 10 19 20 29 63 66 68 74 82 196 210 217 220 236. Roughness of the skin, 74. Running of the Reins, 18 74 209 211 213 214 222. Ruptures, 9 15 17 26 34 36 37 38 40 45 47 50 59 7 92 211 213 214 226 229. S Scaldheads, 9. Scaldings, 5 10 47 68 69 78 92 191. Scabs, 2 3 9 10 12 14 15 19 23 25 34 39 44 53 57 59 66 189 191. Scars, 39 218 231. Sciatica, 2 5 7 8 12 25 30 34 36 39 51 55 59 61 64 69 70 88 89 198 202 220 226. Scurff, 14 15 39 41 52 76 78 217. Serpents. 3 8 26 50 82. Seed encreaseth, 33 49. Scurvy, 20 39 202 226. Sides, 22 32 55 67. Stifness, 13. Shingles, 34 189 196. Smelling, 14. Smal pox, 17. Sneezing, 55. Sores, 20 23 24 25 26 28 55 71 76 82 215 220 230. Spitting blood, 18 36 37 44 48 69 90 196 212.
Splinters, 2 20 34 42 59 63 232. Spleen, 2 3 6 8 10 11 13 15 26 27 30 42 50 57 58 59 61 62 66 69 72 77 78 81 83 88 202 220 221 227 230 235 237. Spots, 5 9 12 20 38 39 41 48 52 62 73 75 218. Stitches, 9 15 20 22 27 28 91 212 227 232. Stomach, 2 3 5 11 12 15 16 22 32 37 40 48 50 55 62 66 68 72 78 80 190 209 220. Stoppings, 45. Surfets, 25 74 239. Swellings, 4 7 21 25 26 27 32 34 37 41 42 43 65 69 82 202 220 224 231 233 239. Strangury, 4 8 21 49 52 60 67 73 198 221 232. Stone, 9 11 12 13 15 16 17 20 21 22 25 27 28 31 36 39 45 47 48 49 60 63 65 67 70 78 80 84 85 91 190 191 202 203 221 214 215 216 221 227. Sunburning 14 38 47 73 191 226. Swoonings 10 44 89. Sinews 12 15 25 27 33 51 55 61 64 87 200. T Teeth loose 3 59. Teeth 52 191 200 233. Tertian Agnes, 2. Terms stops, 1 14 18 24 33 53 54 59 62 65 66 67 74 86 91 194 195 219 203 225 235. Terms provokes 11 15 21 24 25 28 33 34 41 43 48 50 55 57 58 59 66 76 81 85 86 87 89 92 192 210 213 215 221 230 232 239, Tetters, 15 29 66 67 74 196 290 220 236. Thorns 2 20 34 49 52 78 217 232, Thirst 196 22 233. Throat 2 41 43 191 205 213 219 220 221 229 233 235. Toothach 3 7 8 14 18 22 34 55 192 196 200 203 225. Travail in Women 36 77. Trembling 72. V Venemous Beasts 11 13 18 25 30 47 48 50 51 55 59 61 66 67 69 71 88 89 192 236 240. Vertigo 12 13 20 38 50 72. Vipers 9. Veins 36 71. Ulcers 5 7 15 18 19 20 25 26 28 31 33 38 39 41 43 45 47 52 53 55 60 65 75 76 79 80 86 89 90 194 196 201 203 210 211 214 215 217 220 221 226 229 236 Venery 973 82 90 189 219 204. Vomiting 1 8 17 22 24 26 36 45 72 82 90 190 192 219 201 220 225 230. W Watching 68. Warts 29 82 87 230. Weariness 13 15. Wens 230. Wind 12 32 43 48 50 51 63 79 81 82 89 91 215 232 235. Witchcraft 14 65. Whites, 1 7 14 18 34 37 74 205 206 207. 91. beest Whitloes 20. Worms, 5 7 24 29 43 54 69 91 202 211 215 225. Womb 17 20 50 89 233. Wounds 1 2 7 9 15 17 20 22 23 24 26 31 35 36 37 38 39 43 45 47 50 52 56 60 65 69 74 75 79 80 84 85 90 190 191 200 204 213 214 215 217 219 220 224 229 230. Wry Necks 46. Wrinkles 62. Y Yellow Jaundice 10 21 49 53 57 61 66 67 74 76 207 211 215 223 239. FINIS.
