D2785 08696477 41562
THE SONGS TO The New Play OF DON QUIXOTE. As they are Sung at The Queen's Theatre IN DORSET GARDEN. Part the First. Sett by the most Eminent Masters of the Age. All Written by Mr. D'urfey. Decies repetita placebunt. LONDON, Printed by I. Heptinstall for Samuel Briscoe, at the corner of Charles-street, Covent-Garden. 1694.
TO MY Much Honoured and Ingenious Friends (Lovers of MUSICK) That frequent the Rose, Chocalate-house, Coffee-houses, and other places of Credit in and about Covent-Garden; and Particularly, To the late Worthy Members of the Witty Club. These two Books of Songs, Sung in the First and Second Part of Don Quixote, are with all Venerati∣on most humbly Dedicated, By, Gentlemen, Your much obliged and most Humble Servant, T. D'urfey.
Advertisement of New Books. THE Satyr of Titus Petronius Arbiter, a Roman Knight: with its Fragments re∣cover'd at the Siege of Belgrade, 1688. which makes it intire. Made English by Mr. Buraby of the Middle-Temple, and another Hand. A Collection of Letters of Love and Gallantry, and several other Subjects. Writ∣ten by Ladies, and printed by their direction; Vol. II. With a Dialogue between Love and Reason, shewing the Reasonableness and Unreasonableness of Love, the Memoirs of the Fair Eloisa a Nun and Abelard a Monk, and her passionate Letter to him: The Character and Pictures of several Ladies and Gentlemen; with other diverting Letters that past betwixt both Sex in Town and Countrey, dedicated to the Beaux. Where the First Volume is also to be had. Lives of the Twelve Caesars, the First Emperors of Rome: written in Latine by C. Suetonius Tranquilus: Translated into English by several Eminent Hands; with the Heads of the Emperors on Copper Plates. The Compleat Captain, or an Abridgment of Iulius Caesar's Commentaries, with Political Remarks on his Wars with the Gauls, the Britains, the Spaniards, the Africans, and the Civils Wars; with the Political Maxims of War now in use; with a Comparison betwixt the Ancient and Modern way of making War, with Reflections on both. Translated from the Copy printed at Paris, and dedicated to the French King, by Henry Duke of Rohan. The Young Lawyer's Recreation; being a choice Collection of several pleasant Tryals, Cases, Passages and Customs in the Law, both Profitable and Diverting. All Printed for S. Briscoe, at the corner of Charles-street, in Russel-street, Covent-Garden.
PROLOGUE For the First Part of DON QUIXOTE: Spoken by Mr. Betterton. IN hopes the Coming Scenes your Mirth will raise To you, the Just pretenders to the Bays; The Poet humbly thus a Reverence pays. And you, the Contraries, that hate the Pains Of Labour'd Sence, or of Improving Brains: That feel the Lashes in a well-writ Play, He bids perk up and smile, the Satyr sleeps to Day. Our Sancho bears no Rods to make ye smart; Proverbs, and Merry Jokes▪ are all his Part. The Modish Spark may Paint, and lie in Paste, Wear a huge Steinkirk twisted to his Waste; And not see here, how foppish he is Dress'd. The Country Captain; that to Town do's come, From his Militia Troop, and Spouse at home, To beat a London-Doxies Kettle-Drum: One, who not onely th' whole Pit can prove, That she for Brass Half-crown has barter'd Love: But the Eighteen-penny Whore-masters above, With his Broad Gold may Treat his Pliant Dear, Without being shown a Bubbled Coxcomb here. Grave Dons of Bus'ness, may be Bulker's Cullies, And Crop-ear'd Prentices set up for Bullies, And not one Horse-whip Lash here, flaug their Follies; Nay, our hot Blades, whose Honour was so small, They'd not bear Arms, because not Colf neis all: That wish the French may have a mighty Slaughter; But wish it safely,╌on this side o'th' Water. Yet when the King returns, are all prepar'd, To beg Commissions in the Standing-Guard; Even these, the Sons of Shame and Cowardice, Will 'scape us now, tho' 'tis a cursed Vice. Our Author has a famous Story chose, Whose Comick Theme no Person do's expose, But the Knights-Errant; And pray where are those? There was an Age, when Knights with Launce and Shield, Would Right a Ladies Honour in the Field: To punish Ravishers, to Death would run; But those Romantick Days╌alas, are gon; Some of our Knights now, rather would make one, Who finding a young Virgin, by Disaster, Ty'd to a Tree, would rather tie her faster. Yet these must 'scape too; so indeed must al▪ Court-Cuckold-makers now not Jest do's maul; Nor the horn'd Herd within yon City-Wall. The Orange-Miss, that here Cajoles the Duke, May sell her Rotten Ware without rebuke. The young Coquet, whose Cheats few Fools can dive at, May Trade, and th' Old, Tope Kniperkin in private. The Atheist too, on Laws Divine may Trample, And the Plump Jolly Priest get Drunk for Church-Example.
EPILOGUE To the First Part of DON QUIXOTE. By Sancho Riding upon his Ass. 'MOngst our Fore-fathers, that pure Wit profest, There's an old Proverb, That two Heads are best. Dapple and I have therefore jogg'd this way, Through sheer good Nature, to defend this Play: Tho' I've no Friends, yet he (as proof may shew,) May have Relations here for ought I know. For in a Crowd, where various Heads are addle, May, many as Ass be, that ne'er wore a Saddle. 'Tis then for him that I this Speech intend, Because I know he is the Poet's Friend; And, as 'tis said, a parlous Ass once spoke, When Crab-tree Cudgel did his Rage provoke; So if you are not civil, 'sbud, I fear, He'll speak agen,╌ And tell the Ladies, every Dapple here. Take good Advice then, and with kindness win him, Tho' he looks simply, you don't know what's in him: He has shrewd Parts, and proper for his place, And yet no Plotter, you may see by's Face; He tells no Lyes, nor does Sedition vent, Nor ever Brays against the Government. Then for his Garb he's like the Spanish Nation, Still the old Mode, he never changes Fashion; His sober Carriage too you've seen to day, But for's Religion, troth, I cannot say Whether for Mason, Burgis, Muggleton, The House with Steeple, or the House with none; I rather think he's of your Pagan Crew, For he ne'er goes to Church╌no more than you. Some that would, by his Looks, guess his Opinion, Say, he's a Papish; others, a Socinian: But I believe him, if the truth were known, As th'rest of teh Town-Asses are, of none; But for some other Gifts╌mind what I say, Never compare, each Dapple has his Day, Nor anger him, but kindly use this Play; For should you with him, conceal'd Parts disclose, Lord! how like Ninneys, would look all the Beas. FINIS.
The First Song in the 2d. Act. Sung at the Knighting of Don-Quixot: Set by Mr. Purcell SIng, sin╌g, all ye Muses, sin╌g, sing, Sing, sin╌g, all ye Mu╌ses sing, your Lutes strike, strike, strike a╌roun╌ sing, your Lutes strike, strike, strike a╌roun╌d,  your Lutes strike a-round; when a Soldier's the sto╌ry, when a ╌d, your Lutes strike around; when a Soldier's the sto╌ry, when a Soldier's the sto╌ry, what Tongue can want sound; when a Soldier's the sto╌ry, what Soft. Soldier's the sto╌ry, whrt Tounge can want sound; when a Soldier's the sto╌ry, what Soft.
Tongue can want sound; who danger disdains, who danger disdains, woun╌ds, wounds, Tounge can want sound; who danger disdains, who danger disdains, woun╌ wounds, bruises and pains, when the honour of Fighting is all that he gains; Rich ╌ds bruises and pains, when the honour of Fighting is all that he gains; profit comes ea╌sy, comes ea╌sy, ea╌sy in Cities of store, but the Gold is earn'd hard where the Rich pro╌fit comes ea╌sy, ea╌sy in Ci╌ties of store, Cannons do ro╌ar, but the Gold is earn'd hard where the Cannons doe but the Gold is earn'd hard where the Cannons doe ro╌ar, do
Brisk-time. roar; yet see how they run, how they run, how they run, how they run at the storming, the roar, yet see how they run, how they run, at the storming the storming, the storming, the storming, the storming a Town, thro' Blood and thro' Fire, to storming, the storming, the storming, the storming a Town, thro' Blood and thro' Fire to Soft. take the Half Moon, thro' Blood and thro' Fire to take the Half Moon; they Soft. take the Half Moon, thro' Blood and thro' Fire to take the Half Moon; sca╌le the high Wall, they sca╌le the high they sca╌le the high Wall, the high
Wall, whence they see others fall, fall, fall, fall, fall, whencethey see others Wall, whence they see others fall, fall, fall, fall, fall, whencethey see others fall; their hearts precious darling, bright glo╌ry, bright Slow. fall; their hearts precious darling, bright glo╌ry, bright glo╌ry pur╌suing, tho' Death's un╌der Foot and the glo╌ry pur╌suing, tho' Death's un╌der Foot and the Mine is just blowing. It springs, it springs, it springs, it Mine is just blowing, up they Fl╌y,
springs up they fl╌y, they fl╌y, yet springs, it springs, it springs, it springs, up they fl╌ more, more, more, more, more, yet more still sup╌ply, as Bride-grooms to ╌y, yet more, more, more, yet more still sup╌ply, as Bride-grooms to Marry, they has╌ten, they hasten to die; till Fate claps, Marry, they has╌ten to die, they hasten to die; till Fate claps, claps, claps her Wings, till Fate claps, claps, claps her Wings, and the glad Tydings brings, of the claps, claps her Wings, till Fate claps, claps, claps her Wings, and the glad Tydings brings, of the
Breach being enter'd, and then, then, then, then, then, then, then they'r all Kings: Then Breach being, and then, then, then, then, then, then, then they'r all Kings: happy She whose Face can win, then hap╌py's She whose Face can win, can win a Then happp's She, then happy's She whose Face can win, can win a Soldier's Grace, they Range about in State, they Range about in State, like Gods, like Soldier's Grace, they Range about in State, they Range about in State, like Gods, like Gods dis╌posing Fate; no Lux╌u╌ry in Peace, nor pleasure in ex╌ Gods dis╌posing Fate; no Lux╌u╌ry in Peace, nor pleasure in ex╌
╌cess can par╌ra╌lell the joys, can par╌ra╌lell the joys, the ╌cess can par╌ra╌lell the joys, can par╌ra╌lell the joys, the Mar╌tial, Martial He╌ro Crown when flush'd with Ra╌ Mar╌tial, He╌ro Crown when flush'd with ╌ge, and forc'd by want, forc'd by want, he Stor╌ Ra╌ge, and forc'd by want he Stor╌ms, ╌ms, he Stor╌ms a Wealthy Town. he Stor╌ms a Wealthy Town.
The 2 Song▪ Sung by a young Shephardess in the 2d. Act. Set by Mr. Iohn Eccles. Slow. YOUNG Chry╌sostome had Ver╌tue, Sense, Renown, and Manly Grace, yet all a╌las were no defence a╌gainst Marcella's Face: His Love that long had ta╌ken Root, in doubts, in doubts cold bed was lay'd, where She not warming it to Shoot, the lovely, love╌ly Plant decay'd, the lovely, love╌ly Plant de╌cay'd. II. Had Coy Marcella own'd a Soul, Half Beauteous as her Eyes; Her Judgment had her Scorn controul'd, And taught her how to Prize: But Providence that form'd the Fair, In such a charming Skin, Their outside made their only care, And never look'd within.
The Dirge, or 3d. Song in the 2d. Act. Sung by a Shepherd and Shepherdess. Set by Mr. Iohn Eccles. Symphony. 1 Flute. 2 Flute. 3 Flute. 1 Voice. 2 Voice. SLee╌
╌p, poor youth, slee╌p, poor youth, sleep in peace poor youth, poor youth,
sleep in peace, sleep in peace reliev'd from Love and mortal care; whilst we that pine in Life's disease un╌
╌cer╌tain bless'dless happy are, while we that pine in life dis╌ease, un╌cer╌tain bless'dless hap╌py are.
Cou╌ch'd in the dark and si╌lent Grave, Cou╌ch'd in the dark and si╌lent Grave, no ills of Fate, no ills of Fate thou now can'st fear; in vain wou'd Tyrant Pow'r en╌slave,  or scornfull Beauty be se╌vere, or scornfull Beauty be severe, or scornfull Beauty be se╌vere. She. Wa╌rs,
Wa╌rs, Wars that do Fa╌tal Storms dis╌perse, far, far, far from thy happy, happy Mansion keep; Earth-quakes that sha╌ke, that sha╌ke  the U╌niverse: can't Ro╌ck, can't Ro╌ck, can't Ro╌ck  thee in╌to sounder sleep. sleep.
With all the Charms, the Cha╌rms of With all the Charms, the Cha╌rms pea╌ce, pos╌sest se╌cure from life's Torment or Pain. of peace pos╌sest se╌cure from life's Tor╌ment or Pain. Sleep and in╌dulge thy self, sleep, sleep and indulge thy self, sleep, Sleep and indulge thy self, sleep, sleep and indulge thy self, sleep and in╌dulge thy self with Rest, nor dream thou e're shal't rise a╌ sleep: In╌dulge thy self with rest, nor dream thou e're shal't rise a╌╌gain;
Sleep, and indulge thy self, sleep, sleep and indulge thy selfe ╌gain; Sleep and in╌dulge thy self, sleep, sleep and in╌ sleep, sleep and indulge thy self, sleep, sleep and in╌dulge thy ╌dulge thy self, sleep, sleep and indulge thy self, sleep and indulge thy self with rest; nor dream thou e're shal't rise a╌gain. self with rest; nor dream thou e're shal't rise a╌gain.
CHORUS. Past is the fear of fu╌ture doubt, of fu╌ture Past is the fear of fu╌ture doubt, the Sun is from the Dy╌al gone; the Sands are su╌nk, the doubt, the Sun is from the Dy╌al gone; the Sands are su╌nk, are sunk
sands are su╌nk, the sands are the sands are su╌╌nk, the Glass is out, the fol╌ly of the farce is done. sunk, the Glass is out, the fol╌ly of the farce is done.
The 4th. Song, Sung by a Galley-Slave in the 3d. Act. Set by Mr. Henry Purcell. WHen the World first knew cre╌a╌tion, a Rogue was a top, a Rogue was a Top pro╌fession; when there were no more in all Nature but Four, there were two of them in trans╌gression, and the Seeds are no less, since that you may guess, but have in all As╌ges been growing a╌pace; there's Lying and Theiving, Craft, Pride and de╌cei╌ ving, Rage, Murder, and Roar╌ing, Rape,
In╌cest, and Whoring, Branch out from one Stock, the rank Vi╌ces in Vogue, and make all Mankind one Gy╌gan╌ti╌cal Rogue. View all human Generation, You'l find in every Station, Lean Vertue decays, whilst Interest sways, Th'ill Genius of the Nation; All are Rogues in degrees, The Lawyer for Fees, The Courtier Le cringe, and the Alderman squeez; The Canter, the Toper, The Church-Interloper, The Punk, and the Practise of Piety Groper; But of all, he that fails our true Rites to maintain, And deserts the Cause Royal is deepest in grain. He that first to mend the matter, Made Laws to bind our Nature, shou'd have found a way, To make Wills obey; And have Moddel'd new the Creature, For the savage in Man, From Original ran, And in spight of Confinement now raigns as 't began: Heres Preaching and Praying, and Reason displaying, Yet Brother with Brother, is Killing and Slaying; Then blame not the Rogue that free-Sense does enjoy, Then falls like a Log, and believes╌he shall lye. The 5th. Song for Cardenio in the 4th. Act. Set by Mr. Henry Purcell. LET the dreadfull Engines of e╌ter╌nal will, the Thun╌der  Ro╌ar and crook╌ed  Lightning kill, my Rage is hot, is hot, is hot, as
theirs as fa╌tall too, and dares as horrid, and dares as horrid, horrid ex╌e╌cution do: Or let the Frozen North its ran╌cour show, within my Breast far, far grea╌ter  Tempests grow; despaire's more cold, more co╌ld than a╌ll the winds can blow. Can nothing, can no╌thing warm me, can nothing, can nothing warm me? yes, yes, yes, yes Lucinda's
Eyes▪ yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, Lucinda's Eyes; yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, Lucinda's Eyes; there, there, there, there, there Et╌na, there, there, there, there Ves╌╌suvio lyes, to fur╌nish Hell with flames, that mount╌ing,  mounting reach the Skyes; can nothing, can nothing warm me, can nothing, can nothing warm me? yes, yes, yes, yes▪ Lucinda's Eyes; yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, Lucinda's Eyes; yes,
yes, yes, yes, yes Lucinda's Eyes. Ye pow'rs I did but use her name. and see how all, and see how all the Meteors flame, blew lightning flashes round the Court of Sol, and now the Globe more feircely burns than once at Phaeton's fall. Slow. Ah!╌ah!╌where,  where are now, where are now, where are now those Flow╌r'y Groves, where Zephir's fragrant winds did play? ah! where are
now, where are now, where are now those flow╌r'y Groves, where Zephir's fragrant winds did play? where guarded by a Troop of Loves, the fair, the fair Lu╌cin╌da sleeping lay, there Sung the Nightingale, and Lark, around us all was sweet and gay, we ne're grew sad till it grew dark, nor nothing fear'd but short╌ning day. I glow, I glow, I glow, but 'tis w'th hate, why must I burn, why must I
burn, why, why must I burn for this in╌grate, why, why must I burn for this in╌grate; Coole, coole it then, coo╌le  it then, and raile, since nothing, no╌thing will pre╌vaile. When a Woman Love pretends, 'tis but till she gains her ends, and for better, and for Worse, is for Marrow of the Purse, where she Jilts you o're and o're, proves a Slattern or a Whore; this hour will teize, will teize and vex, will teize, will teize and
ver, and will Cuckold ye the next; they were all contriv'd in spight, to tor╌ment  us, not de╌light, but to scold, to scold, and scratch, and bite, and not one of them proves right, but all, all are Witches by this light; And so I fair╌ly bid e'm, and the World good night, good night, good night, good night, good night, good night.
The 6th. Song for Sancho in the 4th. Act. Set by Mr. Iohn Eccles. 'TWAS early one morning, the Cock had just Crow'd, Sing hey ding, hoe ding, langtridown der╌ry; my ho╌lyday Clothes on, and face newly Mow'd, with a hey down, hoe down, drink your brown Ber╌ry; The Sky was all painted, no Scarlet so Red, for the Sun was just then getting out of his Bed, when Te╌re╌sa and I went to Church to be sped, with a hey ding, hoe ding, shall I come to Wooe thee; hey ding, hoe ding, will ye buckle to me, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding derry, derry, derry ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, hey langtudown derry. II. Her Face was as fair, as if 't had been in Print; Sing hey ding, &c. And her small Ferret Eyes, did lovingly Squint, With a hey down, &c. Yet her Mouth had been damag'd with Comfits and Plumbs, And her Teeth that were useless, for biting her Thumbs, Had late like ill Tennants, forsaken her Gums; With a hey ding, hoe ding, &c. III. But when night came on, and we both were a bed; Sing hey ding, &c. Such strange things were done, ther's no more to be said, With a hey down, &c. Next Morning her head, ran of mending her Gown; And mine was plagu'd, how to pay Piper a Crown, And so we rose up, the same Fools we lay down; With a hey ding, hoe ding, &c.
The 7th. Song for Montesmò an Inchanter, and Mellissa and Vrganda Inchantresses. Sung in the 5th. Act of the first Part of Don-Quixot. Set by Mr. Henry Purcell. Violine. Soft. Montesmò. WIth this, this sacred charm╌ing Wand, I can Heav'n, can Heav'n and Earth command, command, command, command, com- ╌mand, hush, hush, hush, all the Winds that cur╌le the an╌gry
Sea, and make the row╌ling  Waves o╌bey. Urganda. I, I from the Clouds can Con╌jure down the Rain, I from the Clouds can Con╌jure down the Rain, can Con╌jure
down the Rain; and make it De╌luge, and make it De╌ Mellissa. ╌luge once, once a╌gain: I, when I please, I, when I please, make Na╌ture smile, smile, smile, as ga╌y, as ga╌y,  as at first she did on, as at first she did on her Cre╌a╌t'on day; Groves with E╌ter╌nal sweets, shall
fra╌grant grow, shall fragrant, fra╌grant grow, and make a true E╌li╌zium, and make a true E╌li╌zium  heer be╌low. CHORUS. Groves with E╌ter╌nal sweets shall fra╌grant grow, shall fragrant, Groves with E╌ter╌nal sweets shall fra╌grant gro╌w, Groves with E╌ter╌nal sweets shall fra╌grant grow, shall fragrant,
fra╌grant grow; and make a true E╌li╌ and make a true E╌li╌zium, and make a true E╌li╌zium, and make a true E╌li╌zium here be╌ fra╌grant grow, and make a true E╌li╌zium, and ╌zium,  a true E╌li╌zium, here be╌╌low. make a true E╌li╌zium here be╌low.  Ritornello.
Mellissa. I can give Beauty, make the aged young, and Love's dear momentary rapture long; Love's dear momentary rapture long. Vrganda. Nature re╌store, and life, and life when spen╌t  re╌new; Nature re╌store, and life, and life when spen╌t  re╌new: all this, all this by Art, all this by Art can great, can grea╌
╌Ur╌gan╌da doe; can great; can grea╌t  Ur╌gan╌da doe. Mellissa. Urganda. Why Why then, why then will Mortals dare Art all can doe all, all can doe; Why, then, why then, why then will Mortals dare, to urge a Fate, to urge a to urge a Fate, to urge, a Fate, to urge a then will Mortals dare, to urge a Fate, to urge a Fate,
Fate: why then, why then will Mortals dare, to urge a Fate, to urge a Fate; why then, why then will Mortals dare, to urge a Fate, to urge a Fate why then, why then will Mortals Fate, to urge a Fate, to urge a Fate, to urge a to urge a Fate, to urge a Fate, to urge a Fate, to urge a Fa╌ dare to urge a Fate, to urge a Fate, to urge a Fate, and Jus╌tice so se╌vere? ╌te, and Jus╌tice so se╌vere? Fate, to urge a Fate, and Justice so se╌vere? See, see there a
Wretch in his own o╌pi╌nion Wise; Laugh╌s at our Charms, Laugh╌s at our Charms, and mocks, and mocks our Mellissa. My╌ste╌ries. I've a lit╌tle Spirit yonder, where the Clouds do part a╌sunder,  lyes, basking his Limbs, in the warm Sun-beams, shall his Soul from his Bo╌dy plunder, speak, speak, shall it be so? shall it be so, shall it be, shall it be, shall it be so? shall it be, shall it be, shall it be so?
Urganda. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no; no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no; that Fate's too high, too high, that Fate's too high; I'le give him, give him one more low, I'le give him, give him one more low.
Mellisa. Let it be so, let it be so, let it be so; Urganda. Let it be so, let it be, let it be so, let it be so; let it be, let it be, let it be so; let it be, let it be, let it be, let it be, let it be so; let it be, let it be, let it be so. let it be so. Appear, appear, appear, appear ye fat Fiends that in Limbo do groan, that were, when in flesh, the same Souls as his own; you that
always, you that always in Lu╌ci╌fer's Kitchin re╌side, 'mongst Sea-cole and Kettles, and Grease newly fry'd; that pamper'd, that pamper'd, each day with a Garbidge of Souls, broyl Rashers of Fools for a Break╌fast on Coals, this Mortal from hence to con╌vey, to con╌vey  try your skill; thus Fate's, thus Fate's, and our Ma╌gi╌cal orders ful╌fill, thus Fate's, thus Fate's, and our Ma╌gi╌cal orders ful╌fill.
CHORUS. Violins the same. Ap╌pear, ap╌pear, ap╌pear, ap╌pear, ye fatt Fiends that in Ap╌pear, ap╌pear, ap╌pear, ye fatt Fiends that in Ap╌pear, ap╌pear, ye fat Fiends that in Lim╌bo do groan, that were, when in flesh, the same Souls as his own; you that Lim╌bo do groan, that were, when in flesh, the same Souls as his own; you that Lim╌bo do groan, that were, when in flesh, the same Souls as his own; you that always, you that always in Lu╌ci╌fer's Kitchin re╌side, 'mongst Sea-cole and always, you that always in Lu╌ci╌fer's Kitchin re╌side, 'mongst Sea-cole and always, you that always in Lu╌ci╌fer's Kitchin re╌side, 'mongst Sea-cole and
Kettles, and Grease new╌ly try'd; that pamper'd, that pamper'd, each Kettles, and Grease new╌ly try'd; that pamper'd, that pamper'd, each Kettles, and Grease new╌ly try'd; that pamper'd, that pamper'd, each day, with a Garbidge of Souls, broyl Ra╌shers of Fools for a day, with a Garbidge of Souls, broyl Ra╌shers of Fools for a day, with a Garbidge of Souls, broyl Ra╌shers of Fools for a Breakfast on Coals, these Mortals from hence to con╌vey, to con╌ Breakfast on Coals, these Mortals from hence to con╌vey, to con╌ Breakfast on Coals, these Mortals from hence to con╌vey, to con╌
╌very shew your skill; thus Fate's thus Fate's and our Ma╌gi╌cal ╌vey shew your skill; thus Fate's thus Fate's and our Ma╌gi╌cal ╌vey shew your skill; thus Fate's thus Fate's and our Ma╌gi╌cal or╌der ful╌fill. fill. or╌der ful╌fill. fill. or╌der ful╌fill. fill. FINIS.
THE SONGS TO The New Play OF DON QUIXOTE. As they are Sung at The Queen's Theatre IN DORSET GARDEN. Part the Second. Sett by the most Eminent Masters of the Age. All Written by Mr. D'urfey. Decies repetita placebunt. LONDON, Printed by I. Heptinstall for Samuel Briscoe, at the corner of Charles-street, Covent-Garden. 1694. Price One Shilling Six Pence.
The first Song to a Minuet at the Duke's Entertainment of Don Quixote in the first Act. IF you will Love me be free in Ex╌pres╌sing it, and henceforth give me no cause to com╌plain; or if you hate me be plain in con╌fes╌sing it, and in few words put me out of my pain. This long de╌laying, with sighing and praying, breeds on╌ly de╌caying in life and A╌mour, Cooing and Wooing, and dai╌ly pur╌suing, is Damn'd sil╌ly doing there╌fore I'le give o're. II. If you'l propose a kind method of Ruling me, I may return to my Duty again; But If you stick to your old way of Fooling me, I, must be plain I am none of your Men; Passion for passion on each kind occasion, With free inclination does kindle Loves Fire, But Tedious prating, Coy folly debating, And new doubts creating still makes it expire.
The Ladys Answer. The 2d. Song to a Minuet at the Duke's Entertainment of Don Quixote in the first Act. YOU Love, and yet when I ask you to Mar╌ry me, still have recourse to the tricks of your Art; Then like a Fencer you cunning╌ly par╌ry me, yet the same time make a Pass at my Hheart. Fye, fye, de╌ceiver, no lon╌ger en╌dea╌ver, or think this way e╌ver the Fort will be won; no fond Ca╌ressing must be, nor un╌lacing or tender em╌bra╌cing 'tillth' Parson has done. II. Some say that Marriage a Dog with a Bottle is, Pleasing their humours to rail at their Wives; Others declare it an Ape with a Rattle is, Comforts destroyer and Plague of their lives: Some are affirming, A Trap 'tis for Vermin, And yet with the Bait tho' not Prison agree, Ventring that Chouse you, Must let me Espouse you If e're my dear Mouse you will Nibble at me▪
The 3d. Song in the 2d. Act. Sung by Mrs. Ayliff, dressed like a Milk-maid. Set by Mr. Iohn Eccles. YE Nymphs and Slyvian Gods, that Love green Fields and Woods when Spring newly born her self do's a╌dorn, with Flowers and Blooming Buds; come Sing in the praise, whilst Flocks do graze, in yon╌der pleasant Vale, of those that choose their sleeps to loose, and in cold Dews with clout╌ed Shooes, do car╌ry the Milking Pail. II. The Goddess of the Moon, With blushes they adorn, And take the fresh Air; Whilst Linnets prepare A Consort on each green Thorn, The Ousle and Thrush, On every Bush; And the Charming Nightingale In merry Vain, Their Throats do strain, Go entertain The Jolly train That carry the Milking Pail. III. When cold bleak Winds do Roar, And Flow'rs can spring no more, The Fields that were seen, So pleasant and green, By Winter all Candid o're, Oh! how the Town Lass, Looks with her white Face, And her Lips of deadly Pale▪ But it is not so, With those that go, Through Frost and Snow, With Cheeks that glow, And carry the Milking Pail.
IV. The Miss of Courtly mould, Adorn'd with Pearl and Gold, With washes and Paint, Her Skin does so Taint, She's wither'd before She's old, Whilst She in Commode, Put's on a Cart-load; And with Cushions plumps her Tayle; What Joys are found, In Russet Gown, Young, Plump and Round, And sweet and sound, That carry the Milking Paile. V. The Girles of Venus game, That venture Health and Fame, In practising Feats, With Colds and with Heats, Make Lovers grow Blind and Lame, If men were so Wise, To value the price, Of the Wares most fit for sale, What store of Beaus, Wou'd dawb their Cloaths, To save a Nose, By following those, That carry the Milking Paile. The 4th. Song. Sung by Mrs. Hudson in the 3d. Act. Set by Coll. Pack. DA╌mon let a Freind ad╌vise ye, fol╌low Clo╌ris tho' she flyes ye; tho' her Tongue your Suite is slighting her kind Eyes you'l find in╌vite╌ing: Wo╌mens Rage, like shal╌low Water, does but shew their hurt╌less Nature, when the stream seems Rough and frowning, there is still least fear of drowning. II. Let me tell the advent'rous Stranger, In our calmness lyes our danger; Like a River's silent Running, Stillness shews our depth and Cunning: She that Railes ye into Trembling, Only shews her fine dissembling; But the Fawner to abuse ye, Thinks ye fools, and Sot will use ye.
A Dialogue in the 4th. Act of the 2d. Part of Don Quixote, for a Clown and his Wife. Sung by Mr. Reading and Mrs. Ayliff. Set by Mr. Henry Purcell. He. SINCE Times are so bad, I must tell you sweet Heart, I'me thinking to leave off my Plough and my Cart, and to the fair Cit╌ty a Journey will goe, to better my Fortune as other folk doe; Since some have from Ditches and course Leather Breeches, been rais'd, been rais'd to be Ru╌lers and wallow'd in Ri╌ches, prithee come, come, come, come from thy Wheel, prithee come, come, come, come from thy Wheel, for if Gypsies don't lye▪ I shall, I
shall be a Governour too, e're I dye. She. Ah! Col╌lin ah! Collin, by all, by all thy late doings I find with sorrow and trouble, with sor╌row and trouble the Pri╌de of thy Mind, our Sheep now at random dis╌or╌der╌ly run, and now, and now Sundays Jacket goes e╌ve╌ryday on; ah! what dost thou, what dost thou, what dost thou mean? ah! what dost thou, what dost thou, what dost thou mean?
He. To make my Shoos clean and foot it, and foot it to the Court, the King and the Queen, where shewing my parts I preferment shall win; She. Fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, 'tis better, 'tis better for us to Plough and to Spin; for as to the Court when thou happen'st to try, thoul't find nothing got there unless thou can'st buy; For Money the Devil, the De╌vil and all's to be found, but no good Parts minded, no, no, no, no good Parts
minded without the good Pound. He. Why then I'le take Arms, why then I'le take Arms, I'le take Arms, and follow, and follow Allarms, hunt Honour that now a╌days plaguei╌ly charms: She. And so lose a Limb by a Shot or a Blow, and curse thy self af╌ter, for lea╌ving, for lea╌ving the Plough. He. Suppose I turn Gamester? She. So Cheat and be bang'd: He. What think'st of the Road then? She. The High╌way to be Hang'd; He. Nice Pimping how╌
e╌ver yields profit for Life, I'le help some fine Lord to a╌nother's fine Wife: She. That's dan╌ge╌rous too, amongst the Town Crew, for some of 'em will doe the same thing by you; and then I to Cuckold ye may be drawn in, faith Col╌lin 'tis better I sit here and Spin, faith Collin 'tis bet╌ter I sit here and Spin. He. Will nothing prefer me, what think'st of the Law? She. Oh! while you live Collin keep out of that Paw: He. I'le
Cant and I'le Pray. She. Ah! there's nought got, ah! there's nought got that way, there's no one minds now what those black Cattle say; let all our whole care be our Farming af╌fair, He. To make our Corn grow and our Ap╌ple Trees bear. 2 Voice. Ambition's, Ambition's a Trade, a Trade no Contentment can show, so I'le to my Ambition's, Ambition's a Trade no Contentment can show, Distaff; Ambition's, Ambition's a Trade, a Trade no Contentment can and I to my Plough; Ambition's, Ambition's a Trade no Contentment can
show, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, show, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no contentment can show, no, no, no, contentment can no, no, no, no, no, no, no, contentment can show, no, no, no, no, no, no contentment can CHORUS. show. Let all our whole care be our Farming af╌fair, to make our Corn grow and our show. Let all our whole care be our Farming af╌fair, to make our Corn grow and our Ap╌ple Trees bear; Ambition's, Ambition's a Trade, a Trade no contentment can show, so Ap╌ple Trees bear; Am╌bi╌tion's Am╌bi╌tion's a Trade no contentment can show,
I'le to my Distaff; Am╌bi╌tion's, Ambition's a Trade, a Trade no con╌ and I'le to my Plough; Ambition's, Am╌bition's a Trade no con╌tentment  can show, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, ╌tentment can show, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no contentment can no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no contentment can show, no, no, no contentment can show. show, no, no, no, no, no, no contentment can show.
The 6th. Song in the last Act of the 2d. Part of Don Quixote, Sung by Mr. Freeman and Mrs Cibber. Set by Mr. Purcell. Trumpet. Mr. Freeman. GEnius of England from thy pleasant Bow'r of bliss a╌ri╌se and sprea╌╌d thy sa╌cred Wings; Guard, guard from Foes the Brittish State, thou on whose smile does wait th'╌uncertain hap╌py Fate of Monarchies and Kings.
Trumpet. Mrs. Cibber. Then follow brave Boys, then follow brave Boys to the Wars, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow brave Boys to the War╌╌s,
follow, follow follow brave Boys to the War╌╌s' the Lawrel you know's the prize, the Lawrel you know's the prize: who brings home the
noblest, the no╌blest, the no╌╌blest Scars looks fine╌est  in Ce╌lia's Eyes; then sha╌ke off the Sloth╌full
ease, let Glory, let Glory, let Glo╌ry in╌spi╌re your Hearts; re╌member a Soldier in War and in Peace, re╌member a
Soldier in War, in War and in Peace is the no╌╌blest of all other Arts: Re╌mem╌ber a Soldier in War and in Peace, re╌member a Soldier in War, in War and in
Peace is the no╌╌blest of all other Arts. The 7th. Song in the last Act. Sung by Mrs. Brase-girdle. Set by Mr. Iohn Eccles. I Burn, I burn, I burn, I burn, I burn, I burn, I burn, I burn, I burn, I burn, my
Brain consumes to Ashes, each Eye-ball too, like Lightning Fla╌╌shes, like Lightning Fla╌╌shes with╌in my Breast; there glows a so╌lid Fire, which in a Thousand, Thousand A╌ges can't ex╌pire: Blo╌w, blo╌w, blo╌w, blow, blow the Winds great Ru╌ler blow, bring the Po and the
Gan╌ges hither, 'tis Sul╌try, sul╌try, sul╌try Weather; pour 'em all on my Soul, it will hiss, it will hiss, it will hiss like a Coal, but ne╌ver, ne╌ver be the cooler. 'Twas Pride, hot as Hell, that first made me Re╌bell, from Love's awe╌full Throne, a Curst An╌gel I sell; And mourn now the Fate which my self did cre╌ate, Fool, Fool that con╌sider'd not when I was
well; And mourn now the Fate which my self did create, Fool, Fool that con╌╌sider'd not when I was well. A╌dieu, a╌dieu trans╌╌port╌ing Joys a╌dieu, a╌dieu trans╌port╌ing joys; off, off, off ye vain Fan╌tas╌tick Toyes, off, off ye vain fan╌tas╌tick toyes, that drep'd this Face and Bo╌dy to al╌lure, bring, bring me Daggers, Poyson, Fire, Fire, Daggers, Poy╌son, Fire, for
scorn is turn'd in╌to de╌sire, all Hell all Hell feels not the rage, which I, poor I, which I, poor I en╌dure. The 8th. Song, in the Fifth Act. DE Foolish English Nation, dat former Conquest brag on, make strang a Discourse of St. George and his Horse, and de Murd'ring of de Dragon; But shou'd de French In╌vade 'em, and bold╌ly cross de
Wa╌ter, how de Wil╌lia╌mite here voud trembla for fear of de Iack grand Roymon Maitre. II. Yaw boast of your Fifth Henry, Dat once in France did Forrage; But to answer dat same Doe but read Nostredame, Garzoon will cool your Courage; Our Gold will take your City, Tho' Fighting ne're can get one, Veel on Salsburg-Plain Bring on Millions of Men, D'en╌Wheiw╌vere is Great-Brittain. FINIS. Advertisement of New Books. THE Satyr of Titus Petronius Arbiter, a Roman Knight: with its Fragments re∣cover'd at the Siege of Belgrade, 1688. which makes it intire. Made English by Mr. Burnaby of the Middle-Temple, and another Hand. A Collection of Letters of Love and Gallantry, and several other Subjects. Writ∣ten by Ladies, and printed by their direction; Vol. II. With a Dialogue between Love and Reason, shewing the Reasonableness and Unreasonableness of Love, the Memoirs of the Fair Eloisa a Nun and Abelard a Monk, and her passionate Letter to him: The Character and Pictures of several Ladies and Gentlemen; with other diverting Letters that past betwixt both Sex in Town and Countrey, dedicated to the Beaux. Where the First Volume is also to be had. Lives of the Twelve Caesars, the First Emperors of Rome: written in Latine by C. Suetonius Tranquilus: Translated into English by several Eminent Hands; with the Heads of the Emperors on Copper Plates. The Compleat Captain, or an Abridgment of Iulius Caesar's Commentaries, with Political Remarks on his Wars with the Gauls, the Brittains, the Spaniards, the Africans, and the Civils Wars; with the Political Maxims of War now in use; with a Comparison betwixt the Ancient and Modern way of making War, with Reflections on both. Translated from the Copy printed at Paris, and dedicated to the French King, by Henry Duke of Rohan. The Young Lawyer's Recreation; being a choice Collection of several pleasant Tryals, Cases, Passages and Customs in the Law, both Profitable and Diverting.
