e2129 12774702 93739
The Parliaments ANSWER TO The two petitions of the Countie of Buckingham, as they were presented to both Houses by Knights, Esquires, Captaines, and Gentlemen, with a number of Free-holders: Presented with a number of the same Shire in be∣halfe of Mr. Iohn Hambden, the Lord Mandevile, Mr. Pym, Mr. Densill Hollis, Sir Arthur Hasil∣ridge, and Mr. Stroud. With the manner of their comming thorow the City of London to the Parliament House, with Papers in their hands: and of the manner of their presenting the said Petition to the House. Printed for H. F. 1641.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, The house of Peeres now assembled in PARLIAMENT: The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the Countie of Buckingham. Sheweth, THat whereas we hoped upon the happy As∣sembling of this present Parliament, wee should have had a speedy redresse of those great pressures we had for many yeares beene under; but have hitherto beene in great measure frustrate of our hopes, by the strong counter-working of a ma∣lignant faction, whereby the perfecting of Reforma∣tion is hindered, the endevours of the House of Com∣mons in great part successelesse, our dangers growne upon us, by iterated plots, Priests and other delin∣quents unpunished, to the incouragement of others: Ireland neere lost by practised counsels, whiles thou∣sands are butchered by many cruelties, and to cut off all hopes of future Reformation, the very being of Parliament endangered, by high and unexampled breach of Priviledges, which by our Protestation lately taken, we are bound by our lives and estates to maintaine, and in respect of that late attempt upon the honorable House of Commons, we are now come to offer our serice to that end, as resolved in their iust defence to live and dye. And doe therefore humbly pray, that this most honourable House will co-operate with the House of Commons, in most speedy perfecting the most neces∣sary worke of Reformatlon: Bringing to condigne
and examplary punishment, both wicked counsellers and other plotters and delinquents, that Ireland may be speedily relieved, the Priviledges of Parliament fortified against all future attempts, and the whole Kingdome put into such a present posture of defence, that we may be safe both from all practizes of the malignant party at home, and the endeavours of any ill-affected States abroad. And they shall pray, &c. TO THE HONOVRABLE THE Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons now assembled in Parliament. THat whereas for many yeares past, wee have laine vnder many great pressures, which are clearly set forth in the late Remonstrance of the house of Com∣mons, the redresse thereof, which hath for a long time beene by you endeavoured, with unwearied paines, though not with answerable successe, having still Your endeavours frustrated, or retarded, and we depri∣ved of the fruit thereof, by a malignant faction of Popish Lords and Bishops, and others; and now of late to take from us all that little hope was left of a future reformation, the very being of the Parliament shaken, and by the mischievous practizes of most wic∣ked counsellours, the Priviledges thereof broken in a desperate and unexpected manner, and the Mem∣bers thereof unassured of their lives; in whose safety
the safety of us and our posterity is involved, we hold it our duty, acccording to our late Protestation, to defend and maintaine the same persons and privi∣ledges to the utmost power of our lives and estate. To which purpose wee are now come, to make the humble tender nf our service, and remaine in expecta∣tion of your command and Order, to the execution whereof we shall with all alacrity addresse our selves to live by you, or to dye at your feet, against whom∣sover shall illegally attempt upon you. May it therefore please this Honorable Assembly to assist the ardent prayers of your Petioners, that Po∣pish Lords and Bishops may be forthwith outed the House of Peeres, that all Priviledges of Parliament (Yours and Our posterities inheritance) may be con∣firmed to you; avd that all evill counsellours, the A∣chans of this Common-wealth, may bee given up to the hands of Iustice; without all which your Petiti∣oners have not the least hope of Israels peace, or to reap those glorious advantages which the fourteen moneths seed-time of your unparalled ende have given to their unsatisfied expectations. avours Add they shall daily pray, &c.
THE PARLIAENTS ANSWER to the Petition of Buckinhingham-shire. AFter this fore-mentioned Petition was delivered up to the House of Commons, they ioyfully re∣ceived it, and with great affection to the same. Buck∣ingham shire men standing and pressing towards the doore, did all wait in expectation of an answer, two or three houres at the least: when at length they were called, but had no plenarie answer then, in regard that they had no concurrent conference with the House of Peeres. But report being made to the upper House of the said Petition, they gave their ossent thereunto, so that it was respectively voted in both Houses, that the said Mr. Iohn Hambden, the Lord Mandevile, Mr. Denzil Hollis, Sir Arthur Hasleridge, Mr. Pym, and Mr. Stroud, should not be committed to the Tower, or any other place of custody whatsoever, untill the Parliamentall Processe of Law had passed upon them: and withal the House of Commons themselves affirmed, that they were partly confident, that they were all innocent of the Articles of High Treason. Whereat the Buckingham-shire men were ready to shout in acclamations, they were filled with great ioy: and most dutifully gave the Parliament all pos∣sible thanks, that may be conceived: promising to de∣fend and assist their Honours to the uttermost of their lives, and fortunes. Then the Parliament graciously accepted their Petition, and gave them thanks for their so free a Demonstration of their dutie towards them. Thus all Buckinghamshire men being fully satisfied in their desires, departed with all allacrity to their lodging in London.
THE MANNER OF THEIR COM¦MING IN TO THE CITIE OF London with papers in their hands to the Parliament House. AFter intelligence was given to Buckingham-shire, that Mr. Hambden being Knight of that Shire, the Lord Mandevile, Mr. Pym, Sr. Ar∣thur Hasilrige, Sr. Densil Hollis, and Mr. Stroud, were impeached of High Treason by His Maiesty▪ Moreover that His Maiestie was intended to have them committed to the Tower thereof: They were all unanimously resolved to Petition both to the King and Parliament, on behalfe of them all. The Newes was transported into the Shire: but last Fri¦day, late at night, and warants being given out to cer∣tifie the Countrey of the same: five thousand, or ve∣rie nigh that number, were presently assembled, and presented them submissively ro goe with the Petiti∣on to London: and if they had had longer time, there would have beene three times more. But the Petiti∣on being made, and these men ready attending the fame, approached neare the aspect of the Citie of London, where they came through Leonard Shore∣ditch, through Bishops-gate, and so through Cheap∣side, onward to Westminster: where there was above three thousand on Horse-back, every man with a Pa∣per in his hand, intimating that they had a
Petition to present to the Honourable Court, and the other were on foot: but they reached in all from the Exchange to Newgate, three and foure in a rank. Comming to Westminster, they acquainted the House of their Petition, and humbly presented it un∣to them, where they had afterward at the conference of both Houses, a correspondent answer given them respectively, as is aforementioned. FINIS. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
