F1707 12927416 95580
Imprimatur, C. Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Lond a sacris Dornest. 16. Nov. 1685.
THE Great Wickedness, And Mischievous Effects of Slandering, Represented in a SERMON PREACHED AT St. GILES without Cripplegate, On Sunday Nov. 15. 1685. By EDWARD FOWLER, D. D. Together with a Preface and Conclusion In his Own VINDICATION. Thou shalt not bear False Witness against thy Neighbour. They are Grievous Revolters Walking with Slanders,Jer. 6. 28. LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pidgeons against the Royal-Exchange in Cornhill. 1685.
THE PREFACE. IF the Readers of the Following Sermon knew how very little Time I had for the Composing of it, They would not be Offended with its Plainness: Nor Those that are Ingenuous, Cri∣tical in observing Faults or Over-sights. The Conclusion of the Sermon, which contains the Occasion of my Penning and Preaching it, I have here Publisht with some small Additions, which I think fit to men∣tion, because those of whose Humanity I have had such plentiful Experience, will be forward enough, I presume, to give out, upon their finding any Passa∣ges they did not hear from the Pulpit, that I have Lyed in the Title-Page. The Design of this Preface is to Vindicate my self from a great Slander of theirs (and I am prepared to do the like, as to all the Other I have heard of) which notwithstanding my Endeavours, both by Word of Mouth and Letters, to Clear my Self of, doth (as I understood the Last Week) still stick upon me: And 'tis this, That I should give, about a Year and three Quarters since, to a certain Fanatick, a Knavish Cer∣tificate, to bring him off, in a Court of Iustice, from
an Indictment of so Scandalous a Crime, as the Depra∣ving of the Common-Prayers. And in short, That I Cer∣tified him to be a good Church-Man, whereas he never came to the Communion but once, in order to his being Qualified for the Office of Common-Council-Man. And if I ever gave to any such Person such a Certificate, I will freely acknowledge, I was a Knave indeed. But before I proceed farther, I will say this, That I know not that I ever Repented of any Certificate I gave in my Life, except of One that two of my grea∣test Enemies, before they discovered their Malice to∣wards me, did unawares draw me into; which was to this Effect, and, to the best of my remembrance, in these very Words, That for ought I know, they were Men of Peaceable and Christian Spirits; which Certifi∣cate was of their own Penning. I must Confess, I then shrewdly suspected that they were not Men of such Spirits, but because I had no certain Knowledge of the Contrary, upon a little deliberation I Subscribed it. But within a few dayes. I was made sensible what a Trapan this was, being informed, That these very Men had Represented me, at White-Hall, as an Encourager of Fanaticks in our Freedom-Vestry. This was told me by a Person of Honour, who had it from Mr. Se∣cretary Ienkins. But I Appeal to the present Recorder of London, and to the Alderman of our Ward, whe∣ther, in their Presence, I did not abundantly Clear my Innocence, as to this Charge. The Latter of these Gentlemen, meeting me in, or near, Cornhill, some dayes after the Hearing which we had in the Recorders Cham∣ber, desired me to Pardon the Chief Man of them; and the Recorder, at the Conclusion of the Hearing, I think before most of the Vestry-Men were gone out (for there
was a full Appearance of them too) was pleased to Declare (my Self standing by him, and divers Others) That he would justify my Honesty (that was, with re∣spect to my Proceedings in the Vestry) on any Ground in England. My Adversaries thus failing of their Design, they, with one or two more, have, almost ever since that time to this, turned every Stone to Ruine me: And London Rings of their Carriage towards me. Nor hath it Satisfied them to abuse Me in the grossest manner, but they have put an intolerable Abuse upon a Great-Man or Two; for when they have been Expostulated with, for making my Life so Vneasy, they have En∣deavoured to remove all Blame from themselves, by pretending that what they had done, was in meer Obedience to their Commands. And when it was replyed (as once it was by my Self, to this Effect) You first instigate Great Persons by your wretched Stories, and then Hypocritically pretend that my Troubles Origi∣nally proceed from them; there was no Answer, but perfect Silence. It might make a Competent Volume, to give an Ac∣count what Slanders they have devised, and Methods they have taken, from time to time, to do Me Mis∣chief. I have a Narrative by me of the Molestations they have given me, to about Half a Year since, which I intended then to Publish, but upon Second Thoughts I judged it more prudent to hold my hand for some time longer. But to return to this Knavish Certificate; The Person I certified for, was one Mr. R. W. who is one of my nearest Neighbours. The Occasion of the Certificate was This, Two of these Three or Four Men, who have
so long been my Adversaries, accused this Man to me before his face (which fair play they rarely use) of having called the Common-Prayers an Innovation, upon a Motion to have them Read, at the meeting of their Quest, in the Quest-House. Mr. W. Professed that he only called the Reading of them upon That Occasion so, for that never any such thing had been done before, that ever he heard of in this Parish: And that he op∣posed the bringing up of such a Custome, for the Poors sake, because he presumed they would pay the Reader out of the Purse, that at That Meeting annu∣ally was made for Them. But he told me he decla∣red to them, that if they would pay the Reader out of their Own Purses, they might have the Prayers in the Church with all his heart; and acknowledged then that he gave them a Proverbial Saying, which they made a mighty business of, that signified no more than that every Body might have his Liberty, either to go, or to stay away; which, though it might be decently enough used in most Cases not relating to Religious Affaires, yet I told him it was Irreverendly done of him to use it in this Case; And though I could not impute it to his Disaffection to the Prayers (he having ever since I came to this Parish, and I understand, for some Years before was a constant attender on them upon Sundayes) but to meer Rashness and Inconside∣ration, they being then in the heat of Passion; yet at that time, and more then once since, I rebuked him for it with severity enough. And I further Re∣proved him before these Men, for not being as for∣ward as any to so good a Motion; though it was evident enough, that the Motion was not made from so good a Principle, as that of true Love to the Wor∣ship
of God, but upon a design that was very Obvi∣ous. I farther added, that to encourage the Reading of the Prayers, at this Yearly Meeting, I would My self first read them at their Meeting again the next Year, and so for the future, which accordingly I did the last Christmas. They had another Story of a most indecent Scoff at our Church Musick, but this he utterly denied, and persists in doing so; and the Truth is I never Believed it, but now, for a reason I won't mention, I disbelieve it. After all the Passionate Fending and Proving was o∣ver, and I had, as I said, smartly enough reproved Mr. W. I told them 'twas evident, he did not call the Prayers an Innovation, but only the Reading them in the Quest-House, or upon that Occasion, and then Exhort∣ed them to more Christian behaviour towards one ano∣ther, and to be Friends again; Having heard that there was an elder Grudg between one or both of these Men, and this Mr. W. And that the Difference did not begin now: Although one of them had been some∣time before his great Intimate, and he Constantly gave Mr. W. the Title of his Master. Hereupon they Drank to each other, more than once, and shook hands. But the Next News I heard of them, which surprized me much, was, that they had made a Complaint of him to Mr. Recorder, and that the Constable had carried him away to Guild-Hall, and that there he was bound over to answer for his Depraving the Common-Prayer; upon these Mens Oaths, at the Kings Bench Barr. Where∣upon this Mr. W. signified to me, That the Lord Mayor had advised him, to get a good Petition drawn up to my Lord Chief Iustice, and as good a Certificate as his Minister and other Creditable People of the Parish, could give him;
and that His Lordship promised him to present both with his own hand, and accordingly He performed that Promise. Hereupon I again Reproved him, and told him I hoped this would be for the future a Warning to him; and finding him much dejected, I said I would willingly certifie for him whatsoever I knew to be true of him. And the Certi∣ficate I gave him was this, That he was a Constant Attender on the Prayers of the Church, a Frequenter of the Holy Communion, in the way of the Church of Eng∣land, and a forward man to Publick good Works in the Parish, and particularly at that time, to the Repairing of our Church and Steeple. And in the close, I ex∣pressed how far I was from going about to excuse his fault; but in what Words I did this, I don't now re∣member. This is the plain and Naked Truth of this matter, and I am yet to learn where lay my fault. Nay I am still fully satisfied in my Conscience, that I did nothing but what I might Lawfully do, nay nor any thing but what I was bound in Common Iustice to do. For I never knew him other, than a Constant atten∣der on the Prayers of the Church, nor than a Frequen∣ter of the Holy Communion, I mean upon his Knees and at the Rayles. And, whatsoever Faults he may have been guilty of, I have found no one Parishioner more Publick Spirited, both in reference to the Church and Parish. And he was one of the best Church-Wardens (I finding him in that Office when I first came hither) that I believe the Parish ever knew. It hath been Objected to me, that he behaved himself Disloyally at the Election of Sheriffs, and therefore this Certificate was taken the Worse at my hands. But I need make no other Reply, than that this was more than I Knew.
I have but little Acquaintance in this Parish to this Day, and had less then, so that I might very well be a stranger to his Behaviour at that Election. For my part, I never perceived any Disloyalty in him, but the Contrary, when he hath come to me, which he does very rarely, but when Business brings him, though he lives close by me. And had he discovered Disaf∣fection to the Government, either in Church or State to Me, What is commendable in him should not have made with Me an Atonement for it. But there is no end of these my Obliging Friends Stories; I hope though, for the future they'l be more Innocent ones; I mean, that their Tongues will be no Slander. The worst thing I knew of this man was, that he would be too easily Provoked, but as soon (that I'le say for him too) Pacified. But why should I better know what this W. was, than what These Men were? I was I confess often told what Two of them were, but I would not believe it, till they did me the kindness to make me understand them whether I would or no; and since I have been sufficiently upbraided with my Charitable In∣credulity. But in order to the more Blackening of Me, One or More of my good Friends have reported, That he was upon the Scaffold when the King was Mur∣thered. I never heard of This till this very day, but I concluded 'twas a Wicked Lye, before I sent for him to ask him the Question. His Reply was, that he was then but a Boy about sixteen Years Old, (as any one may believe that knows him) and that he was at that time Fourscore Miles from London. In short, Mr. Attorney General had a full Hearing of the forementioned Cause, was fully satisfied of the Baseness of it, and gave Mr. W. a Noli Prosequi.
My Enemies after this, made an Article against me of this Certificate, at Doctors Commons, and it was thrown out again with Contempt enough. And yet, it is still made a hainous Crime in me, and if it must be so for the future, after this pains I have taken to clear my self of being faulty therein, so let it. Per∣vicaciae nullum opposuit remedium Deus.Tertul. But I de∣clare farther, that if I had refused to certifie what I knew to be true of this Man, I had not only been Vnjust, but highly Dis-ingenuous. For at my first com∣ing to this Parish, though he was a meer Stranger to me; and I never once heard of him before; he high∣ly obliged me by standing up for my Right to Houses that were Built on the Church-Yard Ground, and which I recovered without going to Law, and by no Mans Assistance more than by his. And so much for That. I am accused too of this very Whiggish Trick, and in My mind a More Knavish one, than the pretended Certificate, viz. That the Lord Mayor, or some Great Man (no body knows who) sending to me to give my Iudg∣ment of Persons fit to be chosen Common-Council-Men, and to do my best towards procuring the Choyce of Loyal Persons, I recommended Fanaticks, or at least Whigs, and stickled for them. But the Reader shan't need to be scared with the fears of another tedious Tale, for a Word or Two will do this business, viz. I solemnly pro∣fess both upon the Word of a Christian and a Divine, That I never concerned my self, either directly or in∣directly, in that Affair, nor ever was defired by any Mortal to Meddle in it. But yet this Goodly com∣plaint of me, was told me by no less a Man than a Lord, this last week. And I am not to seek to under∣stand,
why just at This Nick of time, (I mean with∣in this Week or Fortnight) there are such Strenuous but Secret Endeavours used by these Men, to make me all that's naught to our GOVERNOVRS. It may be expected I should here Clear my self of Discouraging my Church-Wardens from Presenting Dis∣senters, which they made an Article of, but I need to say no more than this to it, That as they could make nothing like a Proof of it in the Court, so the contrary appeared there, by the Deposition of the Principal of their own Witnesses. And I had full Evidence ready to prove, That I only Charged them to Present Im∣partially, and not to Gratify any ones Revengeful Piques, but it was not produced because 'twas needless. And I had, after a full Hearing, Ten Pounds Costs given me against them. And now my Hand is in, a Word or Two to their Grand Article, That I gave the Commu∣nion to two of my Church-Wardens together, Who were Excommunicated in the Court, near a Year and half since. But as I had Leave to Defer the Publishing of that Ex∣communication, so the Sacrament was given them be∣fore 'twas Publisht; and I had then great Assurance, That Excommunications can take no Effect till they are Publisht; and what I did, was done upon the best Ad∣vice I was capable of having, and I Relyed upon the Authority of more than One Ecclesiastical Iudge; and the same Article had been Exhibited against many o∣ther Divines besides my self, had they been so unhap∣py as to have had in their Parishes any People of such Venomous Spirits, as those Few I am infested with. So that, if this were a Fault in me, it was a Fault of most Excuseable, if I may not say Invincible, Ignorance. I no way Consulted mine own Interest in doing this
thing, and I Abominate the breaking of any Order of the Church to Gratify any Person whatsoever. There is one thing more which I ought not to omit, viz. That whereas I might say (but that it may be replied, I live far from Neighbours) that no Man could live more Peaceably than I have done in this place, nor have been more forward to Oblige all Men, I have wondred sometimes, and so have others too who know my Conversation, how I should happen to have in my Parish such Bitter Enemies, though, I thank God, I have but a very few that I know of. But I have been for some time satisfied, that my Impartiality in Preach∣ing hath netled some, and particularly my frequent ex∣posing certain Vices of some among us, who value them∣selves mightily upon their Loyalty and Conformity, whom I have plainly told, That they are a Disgrace both to the King and the Church; and it may be I have but seldom dealt Severely with the Fanaticks, and Men of Factious, Seditious, and Rebellious Principles, but I have had a Bout with them too. Now this is a Fault I will not make the least Excuse for, and if it be a Fault, I believe most of the good Service I have done here to the King and Church, hath been principally Owing to it. A Second Cause of my Troubles I am too sure (and I que∣stion whether I can name a Third) is, My Refusing to part with Mr. S. after all Endeavours that have been used to Set me against him. And for my great Avers∣ness to Gratify his Enemies herein, I will Exercise my Readers Patience with this short Apology. viz. That, besides one Personal Pique, I soon perceiv'd, the Bottom of the Emnity against him, to be some Ser∣mons he Preached of the Absolute Necessity of Restitu∣tion,
that grievously Galled some, who were too well known, to have Wronged the Poor, together with his declaring his Mind Else-where with some Severity, against several unjust Practices, before I had any Relation to this Parish. And it would have lain heavy upon my Conscience, while I had a Day to Live, should I have Joyned with Those against him, who, I was Satisfied, did Set themselves in Oppositi∣on to him, for the Zeal he had expressed upon so high∣ly Commendable an account, as that of endeavouring to do Right to Those who are not in a Capacity of Righ∣ting Themselves. Besides, should I have dismissed Mr. S. I could not but expect the Curses of Hundreds of Needy Families, for, excepting two Noted Citizens, I know not his Fellow for bestirring himself, to get Re∣lief for Poor People. I am Confident, That never was a Parish so obliged to a Curate, as this Parish hath been, for many Years, to Him, as Ill as he hath now, for a long time by some few, been Requited for it. And, to speak my Conscience, I am certain this Parish could very much better spare my Self, than it can Him. I Confess, at my first coming, there was some Mis∣understanding between Him and Me, which some hoped would have ended in a settled Enmity like to Theirs: But in a very short time, We came to know each Other Better, and then immediately all That Vanished, and hath never been in the least Revived to this Day. And, as to his Preaching up Loyalty, and Con∣formity to the Church, I know not a Divine in Lon∣don that is, or, ever since I came hither, hath been more Zealous; as many Hundreds, I may say some Thou∣sands, can bear me Witness. I will make no other A∣pology for troubling the Reader with this long Scrib∣ble,
than this very short one, viz. Meer Necessity hath, sorely against my Inclination, Compell'd me to it. But, for all that, I expect to have the old lame Distick flung in my Dish, viz. Hoc mihi pro certo est, quòd si cum stercre Certo, Vinco, seu vincor, Certè Ego Maculor. And if I have this Wipe, I'le take it Patiently, though of all Gibes, I confess, I Most hate True Ones. St. Giles Cripplegate, Nov. 16. (85.)
THE Great Wickedness, And Mischievous Effects of SLANDERING Represented. Psalm. 101. 5. Whoso privily Slandereth his Neigh∣bour, him will I Cut off. I Shall not detein you with any thing of Preface, but fall immediately upon the Business I designed in the choice of these Words, for my Present Subject. The Just and Pious KING, who was the Pen-Man, spends this short Psalm in declaring to his People, how he was resolved to man∣nage himself, in reference to the encourage∣ment of Piety and Virtue among them; and the
discouragement of Vice and Wickedness. And among other particular Vices which he tells them should by no means escape Punishment, that of Slandering their Neighbours comes in, in the Words of my Text. Nor is here any one Vice which he expresseth so great an ab∣horrence of, or so severely Threatens, as this of Slandering. For, whereas he saith, A fro∣ward Heart shall DEPART FROM ME: I will not KNOW a Wicked Person: And him that hath a High Look, and a Proud Heart will not I SUFFER: And he that Worketh Deceit shall not DWELL WITHIN MY HOUSE: And he that telleth Lies shall not TARRY IN MY SIGHT; He makes Slandering their Neighbours, a Capital Crime, and declareth That Whoso Slandereth his Neigh∣bour, him would He CUT OFF. First, I will endeavour to shew, what is here Meant by Slandering ones Neigh∣bour. Secondly, Upon What accounts we may pre∣sume this Good King did thus Threaten those that should be Guilty of this Practice.
I. What is here Meant by Slandering ones Neighbour. Thus to do, is either to Devise a Tale of another and then Tell it; That is, Such a Tale, as tends to the bringing of a Blot upon the Person of whom 'tis invented and told: Or to tell a false Story from other hands as true, and with a design to have it Believed without sufficient Evidence of the truth of it. Now although this Latter way of Slandering be a very Great Sin, as pro∣ceeding from great want of Charity, and be∣ing perfectly opposite to that Golden Rule of our Saviour, What you would that Men should do to you, do you even the same to them, (than which no Maxim in Morals is more plainly taught by the Law of Nature, i. e. Right Reason unassisted by Divine Revelation, and which a Pagan Prince gives us in Negative Terms, viz. Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris. Whatsoever thou wouldst not have done to thy self, do not offer to do to another: I say, as this Latter way of Slandering is for these reasons a very Great Sin, and consequently will meet with, where it is not timely repented of, very Sore Punishment from Gods hands) yet the Former way, viz. Slandering by Inventing of Stories to
the Blemishing of any ones Good-Name, is a Greater Sin, (as is evident at first hearing) and therefore deserves Greater Punishment. And the more the Tale Blackens his Reputation of whom it is told, and the greater, or more useful the Person is in the World who is defamed, as also the greater the Injury is that is designed him in telling it of him, the greater still is this ex∣ceedingly great Sin. Now the Slanderers that King David must needs mean here in the Text, and whom he threatneth with being Cut off, are such as shall Devise and Invent Lies to the Injuring of their Neighbours, i. e. of any Persons, be their Rank and Quality what it will; which the word Neighbour doth import. And they are only such Slanderers as these which must be here thus threatned, because the other Sort (viz. Such as do not Invent, but only Rashly give Credit to and Report Lies of their Neighbours) though They are great Sin∣ners too, yet we cannot think that the King would doom them to so great a Punishment. For in all Places, there are too many of these Offenders to be made Obnoxious to so severe a Sentence. And besides, it is not so easy a matter for the Magistrate to find Evidence suf∣ficient
in such a case as this, to found such a Sentence as that of Death upon it. II. I come to shew upon what Accounts this Good King did thus threaten such as Privily Slandered their Neighbours. There is very great reason for his being thus Incensed against them. First, Because Inventers of Slanders are in the number of the most Injurious and Mischievous People in the World. 1. They are most Mischievous to those Per∣sons who are the Objects of their Slanders; None are more so, except those Instruments of Satan, who by drawing others to Sin destroy their Souls. After the Divine Graces and Virtues, which are necessary to Qualify for the Heaven∣ly Happiness, a Man's Good-Name is the most highly Valuable. It is not only Better than pre∣cious Oyntment, and rather to be chosen than Silver and Gold (as the Wise Man saith) but 'tis to be prefer'd before all Temporal Enjoyments whatso∣ever, not excepting Life it self. For who can take any Comfort in his Life, (unless he be de∣vested of all Humanity, and strangely sunk into the Brutish Nature) that is sensible of having Out∣liv'd his Good-Name? And as for those that are
so sunk, it would be much better for themselves as well as for the World, if they were out of Being. And as it is Natural to those Men who have any thing of Generousnes and Ingenuity in their Tempers, above all things to Covet a Good-Name; So there is this great reason why they should, namely, Because it is the chief Thing that makes Men useful in the World; and there are no such unprofitable or insignificant Creatures upon God's Earth, as those are who have lost their Reputation, or had never any to lose. I mean by a Good-Name and Reputation, that of a Good-Man: Of a Man that hath imbibed good Principles, and is true to them: Of a Man Re∣vering the Great God, and Fearing to break wilfully any of His Laws. That which either in the Sacred Writings, or in the Books of the Philosophers is called a Good-Name, is wholly Founded upon Good Morals. A Large Under∣standing, shrewdness of Wit and Parts, High Titles of Honour, &c. have, 'tis Confessed, acquired to their Owners Great Names, but these alone never made any Man the Possessor of a GOOD-Name. Now so far as any Man's Reputation, in reference to his Morals, is Eclipsed, so much the less Capable doth he immediately become
of being Serviceable in his Generation. The less of a Good-Name any one hath, the fewer Opportunities and Advantages will he have, of being Beneficial to his Fellow-Creatures, either in their Temporal or Spiritual Concerns, but especially in their Spiritual. And as it is cheifly upon this account that a Good-Name ought to be so Highly esteemed; So to Esteem it upon any other account, separate from this, is nothing better than a Gratification of Animality or Fond Fancy. But this Consideration makes it highly reasonable to prize a Good-Name above Rubies, and above the Wealth of both the Indies, and to reckon our Sufferings herein in the number of the greatest Worldly Sufferings. So, it is manifest, King David did, by divers Passages in his Psalms: As particularly in Psal. 35. 11, 12. saith he, False Witnesses did rise up against me, they laid to my charge things which I knew not (or which I was altogether Guiltless of) they rewarded me evil for good (or this Evil of Slander for all the good Services I have done them) to the spoiling, or (as 'tis in our Old Translation) to the great discomfort of my Soul. And Psal. 69. 19, 20. he thus Complaints; Thou hast known my Reproach and my shame and my Dishonour, mine Ad∣versaries
are all before thee, Reproach hath broken my heart and I am full of Heaviness. So that a Slan∣derer being a Robber of that which is deser∣vedly so Precious, or at least he alwayes being so in his Endeavour, there was great reason why this Holy King should so Abominate him, as we find by our Text he did: But, 2. As the Slanderer is thus highly Injurious to Those who are the Objects of his Slanders, so is he the most Pestilent Creature to the Community of which he is a Member. Those who invent Slanders, are the greatest Pests and Plagues to a Body Politique. They are conti∣nually stirring up Strife and Contention, Ani∣mosities and Emulation: And where these are, St. Iames tells us, There is Confusion, and every evil Work. One of these is sufficient to set a whole Neighbourhood together by the Ears, and a Few of them are enough to enflame a whole City, nay a whole Kingdom. King Solomon saith, Prov. 16. 27. An ungodly Man diggeth up Evil, and in his Lips there is a burning Fire. And St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 20. brings in Swellings and Tumults immediately af∣ter Backbitings and Whisperings. Which he had good reason to do, since those are the Natu∣ral Consequents and Effects of these. For
they not only sow Seeds of Division among the People, but beget a mutual Mis-understan∣ding between them and their Governours. These Backbitings and Whisperings render Governours jealous of their People, and the People as jealous of their Governours. Princes see with other Mens Eyes, as they Act by other Mens Hands; and therefore 'tis the most difficult Thing, and e∣ven next to impossible for them, ordinarily to discern between Calumnies and True Stories. They have greater Matters alwayes to mind, than to have Leisure to Dive to the bottom of those Reports that are brought to them. And therefore, no wonder if they are frequently Abused and Imposed upon; and so, perswaded to take some for their Worst, who are in the number of their Best Subjects; and others for their Best, who are really their Worst. And while the Slanderers are as Cunning and Dex∣trous as they are Wicked and Malicious, What can alwayes prevent this, and the horrible Mis∣chiefs occasioned thereby, but such a degree of Wisdom and Knowledg, as no where resides but in GOD himself? Now King David had great reason to re∣solve upon doing his Utmost towards the Root∣ing
out of his Kingdom such People as These, when he knew them to be the great Instru∣ments of their Father the Devil, in making his Subjects uneasy to himself, and to one another, and himself too as uneasy unto them: When he knew that all good Order and Government, was inconsistent with the Encouragement, or Toleration of such a Crew of vile Miscreants. When he was so well aware, that let such pre∣tend to what Loyalty they pleased, 'twas im∣possible for him to have Naughtier Subjects than These are. Let us Consider what St. Iames saith of a Slandering Tongue, Ch. 3. v. 5. The Tongue is a lit∣tle member, and boasteth great things; behold how great a matter a little fire kindleth! And the Tongue is a Fire, a VVorld of Iniquity. So is the Tongue (or a Calumniating Backbiting Tongue) a∣mong our Members, that it defileth the whole Body, and it is set on Fire of Hell. Secondly, As Inventers of Slanders are the most Mischievous and Destructive sort of People; so, whilst they are neglected and let alone, they are the most Successful in their wicked De∣signs. They are so Successful, that what our
Proverb saith of a Flayl, is much truer of a Slan∣dering Tongue, that, There is no Fence against it. If any thing be a sure Protection from it, one would think the most Spotless Innocence, and the most Exemplary Virtue needs must, but the Example of our Blessed Saviour assures us of the Contrary. No Man ever arrived to His Innocence or Vertue; but for all that, never was any one so strangely Wronged in his Good-Name as He. Though no Man more Practi∣sed or Taught Loyalty, yet was He Represented as an Enemy to Caesar. Though never had the Devil such an Enemy, yet was he Calum∣niated as a Great Wizzard, in league with Beel∣zebub the Prince of the Devils. Though never was the Breast of any one so possessed with Divine Love, nor any man's Mind with so great a Reverence and Veneration of the Di∣vine Majesty, yet was He Stigmatized with the Blackest of all Marks and Characters, viz. That of a Blasphemer. And as the most horrid Slan∣ders were invented and published to the World of Him, so were they generally believed too. There is Nothing we are Owners of that's so Exposed to the Mercy of others, as are our Good-Names. Whosoever hath a Tongue in his
Head, if he be but Wicked enough, and not Universally known to be a Wicked Man, can, when he pleaseth, do our Names a mischief. The Wise man saith, Prov. 25. 18. that A Man that beareth false Witness against his Neighbour, is a Maul, and a Sword, and a Sharp-Arrow. That is, He is made up and Compounded of all fatal Mischiefs. A Maul cannot give greater Bruises, nor more effectually Fell to the ground, than this sort of Weapon: Nor a Sword pierce deeper, or Cut and Slash more Cruelly: Nor a sharp Arrow wound at a greater distance, no nor at nothing so great a distance; for there is no get∣ting out of the Reach of a Slandering Tongue; nor is there any where to be found Security against it: I mean, besides the Special and Ex∣traordinary Providence of God. St. Iames tells us in the fore-mentioned Chapter, ver. 7. &c. that Every kind of Beasts, and of Birds, and of Serpents, and things in the Sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed of Man-kind; But the Tongue (viz. The Tongue of a Slanderer, as is plain by ver. 9.) can no Man tame, it is an unruly Evil, (such an Evil as there is no dealing with it) full of deadly Poison: Such as is too strong for the most Sovereign An∣tidote.
Many (saith the Son of Syrack) have fallen by the Edge of the Sword, but not so many as have fallen by the Tongue: Well is he that is defended from it, and hath not passed through the Venome there∣of. Who hath not drawn the Yoke thereof, nor hath been bound in its bands? For the Yoke thereof is as a Yoke of Iron, and the bands thereof as bands of Brass. The death thereof is an evil death, the Grave were better than it. So that the Slanderer being an E∣nemy, against whose Assaults the greatest Hu∣man Power, Policy or Wisdom, cannot whol∣ly defend us; well might King David conceive so high a displeasure against him, as he here expresseth. And the like displeasure doth he declare against him, Psalm. 120. 2, 3, 4. De∣liver my Soul, O Lord, from lying Lips, and from a deceitful Tongue. What shall be given unto thee, or what shall be done unto thee thou false Tongue? Sharp Arrows of the Mighty, with Coals of Iuniper. Or, with hot burning Coles, according to the other Translation. I proceed now to make some Application of what hath been said; And it shall be This. First, This little we have discoursed on this Argument, is abundantly enough to render the
Sin of Slandering our Neighbour most abominable in our Eyes. I mean, 1. The Sin of Devising and Inventing Defa∣mations and Slanders. This indeed is such a wick∣edness as one would think it should be need∣less to caution those against it, I will not say, who profess Christianity, but who have not bid adien to all Humanity. It is such a Black, such a Hellish Sin, as that the Devil hath both his chief Names and Characters from it. , i. e. This Name Devil, signifies the Slanderer. Satan signifies the Spiteful Enemy. The chief Characters we meet with in Scripture of the Devil, are these two, The Father of Lies, and The Accuser of the Brethren. And therefore nothing can denominate us more per∣fectly like the Devil, than this forging of Lies and Calumnies against our Brethren. And we see, Psalm. 50. 19, &c. with what severity the Great God expresseth himself against those that dare to commit This Sin. Saith He, Thou givest thy Mouth to Evil, and thy Tongue frameth Deceit. Thou sittest and speakest against thy Brother, thou slan∣derest thine own Mothers Son. These things hast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thy self: But
I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine Eyes. And v. 16. He asks such as These, What they had to do to declare his Statutes, or that they should take his Covenant into their Mouths: Or to make profession of his Religion, or indeed of any Religion. And v. 22. He threatens them that He would tear them in Pieces, and there should be none to deliver, if they would not con∣sider what he now had said, and lay it to heart. King Solomon putteth this Practice of Slan∣dering, in the number of those Sins, which God Abominates in a more Especial manner. Prov. 6. 16. &c. These six thing doth the Lord hate, yea seven are an Abomination to him. A Proud Look, a Lying Tongue, and Hands that shed Innocent Blood: An Heart that deviseth Wicked Imaginati∣ons: Feet that be swift in Running to Mischief: A False Witness that speaketh Lies: And he that soweth Discord among Brethren. And indeed all these Seven things, except the first, are such as make the proper Character of This sort of Slan∣derers I am now exposing. And Rev. 22. 15. Whosoever loveth and maketh a Lie, is reckoned with Dogs and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murtherers, and Idolaters; who are to have their
Portion in the Lake that burneth with Fire and Brim∣stone. 2. Let us no less hate the Practice of Ta∣king up Evil Reports against any, that that of Inventing them. We learn from Psal. 15. 3. That This also will exclude us the Kingdom of Heaven; in that 'tis here said, that among those that shall abide in Gods Tabernacle, and dwell in his Holy Hill, He is one that Backbiteth not with his Tongue, nor doth Evil to his Neighbour, nor taketh up a Reproach against his Neighbour: Or doth not without Good Evidence give credit to it, and much less spread and propagate it. The Wise Man maketh him a VVicked doer, who giveth heed to false Lips; and a Lyar, who giveth ear to a naughty Tongue. Prov. 17. 4. This is as much a Transgression of the forementioned Golden Rule, Of doing as we would be done unto, as is Devising and Forging Slanders. I doubt there is not much less Malice in this Practice, but I am sure it savours of every whit as little Charity, as that other Practice doth. I can have no Charity for that man, against whom I am forward to believe and report whatsoever of evil I chance to hear of him. Nay, VVhisperers and Backbiters, as well as Inventers of Evil things, are reckoned by Saint
Paul, among those obdurate Sinners, of whom he Pronounceth, That God had given them over to a Reprobate mind, Rom. 1. 29, 30. Hasty Believers and Spreaders of false Re∣ports, are the Tools and Instruments of those that invent them, for the doing of the Mischief they design by them. And it is almost whol∣ly Long of these, that Those wicked People are in a Capacity of doing any Mischief by their Forgeries. We are Bound therefore by the strictest Bonds, by the Bonds of Charity, of Iustice, and of Self-Preservation, to be extremely Cautious of lend∣ing our Ear to Tale-Bearers, lest we be Invol∣ved in their Guilt, and so brought to share with them in their dreadful Punishment. Since this is an express Law of God, Thou shalt not go up and down as a Tale-bearer among thy People, Lev. 19. 16. Surely 'tis as much a Law of His, That we should not give incouragement to those whom we know to be Tale-bearers, by Listning to their Tales. Nay, We are obliged to be so far from Believing a Report against our Neighbour, meerly from the Information of any One or a
Few Persons, of whose Integrity, and of certain Knowledge of the Truth thereof, have not great Assurance, that we may not nether conclude any Man Guilty, from his being Accused by the Generality. There is indeed a common saying, Vox-Populi est vox Dei, The Voice of the People is the Voice of God. And in a certain Sence it may well pass for a true Pro∣verb. But as it is vulgarly understood, The Voice of the People is not the Voice of God, as we of this City and Kingdom have often found by sad Experience. All Wise and Honest Men cannot be, at this time of day, to seek for Con∣viction, What great Sufferers, even our Gover∣nours themselves have been Wrongfully made to be, by the Voice of the People. And I dare Af∣firm, That he who now takes the common Vogue for unquestionable Evidence, had he lived in the Dayes of our Blessed Saviour, would have been made One among that wicked Crew, who applauded the Sentence pronounc'd a∣gainst Him. And there is this weighty Reason, why Com∣mon Fame it self is not to be Confided in, viz. For ought we can tell this Fame might first arise from but One Man, and that Man a Liar
too; and this we Certainly know, that the Ge∣nerality are so void of Charity, as hastily to Catch at Scandalous Stories, and are much more easily perswaded to think and report Evil Things upon very slight Grounds, than good and com∣mendable Things, upon the most evident and ap∣parent Ones. And none have so sad Experience of the Truth of this, as Those of whose Repu∣tation we are obliged to be the most tender. I mean our Governours in Church and State. But suppose we have certain Assurance, that such an ill Report did take its first Rise from not a few, yet we may not be sure but that these might be United in one common Interest and Design; but in this Case, the Report of many carryes no whit stronger Evidence with it, than if it came but from One Mouth. And this was the very Case of our Blessed Lord: They were many who first divulged vile Slanders of Him, but they were All acted by one and the same Principle, viz. That of Malice; and by the same Design, viz. That of Disgracing Him among the People, and Incencing of King Herod and Pontius Pilate against Him. But Lastly, Suppose we could be certain, That the many 'first Reporters of Bad Stories
were not Linked together by one Common Tye, yet even in this Case too we are bound to use Caution and Deliberation, before we give them undoubted Credit. Especially if those Stories relate to Words or Actions that are capable of a two-fold Interpretation. The same Actions may be Faulty or Commendable, according to the Circumstances wherewith they are attended. And the same Words may be so too, according to the Occasion or Connexion of them. But People are generally, even those who have no Malici∣ous Intention, Rash, and Heady in judging of Actions without weighing Circumstances; and in running away with half Sentences; or with whole ones, without Considering, What went be∣fore, or followed after. So that, I say, as we would not fall under the Guilt of that Sin, the exceeding Heinous∣ness of which I have been representing, Look we to it, that we be not Hasty in taking up Evill Reports of any Body, let them come to us from never so many. If this be warrantable, as I have already intimated, the joyning with those who ran down our Saviour, and at last Nailed Him to the Cross, had been very Ex∣cuseable, not to say Defensible.
And let us believe as well as, without offering Violence to our Reason, we can of all Men; and chuse much rather in our Judging, and in our Reports of Men, to offend on the Right than on the Left hand. I am certain, thus much is implied in those two Precepts of our Lord, viz. Iudg not that ye be not Iudged; for with what Iudgment ye Iudge ye shall be Iudged, and with what Measure ye mete, it shall be meted to you again. Matth. 7. 1, 2. And Iudge not accord∣ing to the appearance, but judg Righteous Iudgment, John 7. 24. 2. Ought the Slandering of our Neighbour to be so detested by us, then what an Abomina∣ble thing is it, to Slander, and injure the Good-Name and Reputation of the Kings Majesty, and of those that under Him have Authority over us! 'Tis an express Law of God, Exod. 22. 28. & repeated by St. Paul, viz. Thou shalt not revile the Gods, nor Curse (or speak evil of) the Ru∣ler of thy People. And as to the King, 'tis so great a wickedness to defame Him, or say any thing to the lessening of his Honour, that the Wise Man thus chargeth us, Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought.
And 'tis as much the Peoples interest, as it is the Kings, that He be not Slandered▪ or Spoken Evil of. For Seditious and Rebellious Practi∣ces do usually arise from Mens first taking this Wicked Liberty; as we have all known by ve∣ry woeful Experience. And we know by the like experience, that the King suffers not more by those leud Practices, than the People necessarily must. It was a good saying, as I remember, of Aristotle, , VVhosoever defames the Prince, is Inju∣rious to the Common-VVealth; or Mischiefs his Sub∣jects. And as for those that take liberty to Invent or Tell Stories reflecting upon their Ecclesiastical Governours, Pastors, or Teachers, they are in a special manner injurious to the Souls of Men. For nothing so tends to the prejudicing of their People against their Doctrine, as their having an Evil Opinion of their Persons. And for this Reason, I think none are so much concerned to keep their Good-Names as unspotted as they can, and to clear themselves of whatsoever As∣persions are cast upon them, as They are.
The Conclusion. ANd now I will take this Occasion to inform you, That Some having greatly concerned themselves of late, to carry Tales of Scanda∣lous Passages which they pretend to have heard from the Pulpits of divers of my Brethren in this City, there are Others who have very lately done the like good Office for My self. I am too well aware Who they are, I will tell you who they are Not; I am very confident, they are not Papists, at least not Professed ones. But you of this Parish may have a shrewd guess within a very few; for you must needs know some to have long expressed as bitter and im∣placable enmity against me, as if we had been of two Churches and Contrary Religions: And that without the least provocation on My part. And I doubt not there are many of the Roman Re∣ligion, from whom I should have had much more Iust, Fair, and Christian Treatment. As silent as I have been hitherto, this is not the first nor second time neither, that I have been in the self-same manner most vilely abused by These People, as in due time, I trust in God will be made
manifest. My last Accusation was this, (or at least the last I have heard of) That I vent∣ed in this Pulpit, on All-Saints-Day, viz. This day Fortnight, a Bitter Curse against the Papists, together with all those (for which I trust to the Memory of an Extraordinary Person) who give them encourage∣ment. And the Curse I understand was worded to this Effect; I wish their Names and Memories may Rot Eternally. Whatsoever the Express Words were, I hear they perfectly Agreed in the self-same, which is so far from Evidence of their telling Truth of me, that 'tis a much stronger Argu∣ment of their being Conspirators against me. But may this Curse, instead of falling upon the Papists, or those that Encourage them, light up∣on my Own Name and Memory, if I either Pronounced It, or any Curse like it against ei∣ther the One or the other, or any Curse at all a∣gainst either. And as I solemnly Appeal to God Almighty, so I Appeal to You my Auditors, Whether there were the least Appearance or Sha∣dow of an Occasion given by me, for such an Information as this against me. I Appeal to You also, Whether you can think it Possible, that such an Accusation as this could arise from meer Mistake. I am Confident, That All who
minded my Sermon, will pronounce, that nei∣ther this Charge, nor any Charge that hath the least likeness to it, be it Worded how it will, must be nothing better than pure Invention; which we have shewn is the most Horrible way of Slandering. I prevailed with a most Worthy Prelate to hear that Sermon read out of my Notes word for word, and I cannot call to mind my having said above three or four Words more than are in my Notes, and those I acquainted his Lord∣ship with, meerly that I might truly say, That He had nothing of the Sermon Concealed from Him. And after it was read, not one Bit of a Sentence could be fixed upon, that might put my Enemies in mind to Invent such a Slander as this of me, unless it were this, viz. If we do not justify to all the World (meaning, as before was expressed, we Divines of the Church of Eng∣land) the Representations we have made of that Re∣ligion (viz. the Roman) to our People, let our Names stink, and our Memories be covered with Eternal shame. And these words next follow, 'Tis a most wicked thing to Slander a particular Person, and much more to Slander and Be-lye a whole Church, and that so Ex∣cellent and Famous a Church, as that of Rome once
was. So that if I had been Accused of Curse∣ing my Self, or my Brethren, instead of the Pa∣pists, and those that Encourage them, there had been a much more Colourable Pretence for such a Calumny. I know I han't lived such a Life as that af∣ter so Solemn Appeals as I have now made, my perfect Innocence, as to this Charge, should be in the least Questioned by those, who have the least Knowledge of me. Bur as for those that are Acquainted with me, I am certain they need no such Appeals to Satisfy them, that I could not be Guilty of so Un-Christian a thing, as the Cursing of any Man, upon any account; and much less, as the Cursing of any Sort of Men, upon the account of their being of a different Religion from my Self. For as to all such, I have very rarely been blamed for any Defect of Charity towards them; but I have of∣ten been Censured as being in the other Extreme, viz. Of the Excess of Charity, which I have alwayes concluded to be much the safest. Good Lord, That any, who profess them∣selves Christians, should be so depraved, as to at∣tend our Preaching God's holy Word, with no better a Design, than to be Spyes upon Us,
and to catch at all advantages (and when they can find none, to make them) for the Ruining of us and our Families; Nay, and which is worse, if worse can be, that such should dare to receive the Holy Communion, and that at Their hands too, against whom they are alwayes Contriving of Mischief. God Grant that such People may at length se∣riously lay to heart, the wretched State they are in, and consider what a severe Reckoning, they shall one day be called to for such Practices. And that, if timely Repentance prevent it not, there will most certainly be Bitterness in the Latter End. I have sometimes e'ne Trembled to think, what horrid Crimes the Devil in time may draw such into, who are so forsaken of the Divine Grace, as to be Able to do such things as These. I have long Remembred my Adversaries par∣ticularly in my Daily Prayers, that God would be pleased to give them true Repentance for the many great Injuries they have done me, and for their other Sins, that their Souls may be saved in the day of the Lord Iesus. I am under a greater necessity than you are a∣ware of, thus to clear my Innocence; and what I have now done, hath not been without the best Advice.
Thanks be to God, His Majesty is so Just and Gracious a Prince, as instead of readily crediting ill Stories of us, to give us Opportunities for the clearing of our Innocence: And very willingly Condescends, Audire alteram Partem, to the hear∣ing of our Vindications. Nor is His Majesty less forward to the receiving of Satisfaction concern∣ing our Innocence, than Patient in Hearing Complaints against us. Which Grace of His lays a Farther Obligation upon us, to Pray for His Majesties Long and Happy Reign over us. I will now Conclude, with that most Christian Petition of our Church in the Litany. We beseech thee Good Lord, That it may please Thee to forgive our Enemies, Persecutors and Slanderers, and to turn their Hearts. And with the Intercession of our Blessed Saviour upon the Cross, for his Bloody Enemies: Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. FINIS.
