f2545 13791553 101852
A further ACCOUNT, OF THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE REBELS in the West of ENGLAND; Who on the 10th. of September, 1685. To the Number of Two-Hundred Fifty One Received Sentence of Death, at Dorchester for High-Treason Of which Number 67. were ordered to be Execu∣ted at Lyme, Bridport, Weymouth, Melcom-Re∣gis, Sherborn, Pool, and Wareham, and the Re∣mainder respited till farther Order, September the 11th, 1685. IT might have been reasonably ima∣gined that former Examples should have been sufficient, to have put a stop to those Factious Spirits; who have all along made it their business to disburb the Peace of this Nation, but 'tis Evident, (either transported with Malice, or a desire to advance themselves upon the Ruin of their Country;) they have been of late, more and more restless, pulling off by degrees the Veil of dissimu∣lation, and in the end, divers of them; to their Shame and Confusion, have drawn that ruin upon themselves which they in∣tended to others, by enterprizing an un∣natural Rebellion against the best of Prin∣ces, though altogether without success; for on the 6th, of July last being utterly broken and subdued; a great part of them there, or soon after taken Prisoners:
Those that were taken, were secured in divers Prisons, of which, these whose Names follow having been put into the hands of Justice, divers of them upon their Arraignments confessed the Indict∣ments, and the rest putting themselves upon Tryal were found Guilty of theHigh-Treason as layd in their Indictments, it appearing they were either taken on the 6th. of July last, upon the defeat of the Rebels Army near Bridgewater, or soon after; and they having nothing materi∣al to offer in their own behalf, received Sentence of Death for High-Treason, on the 10th of this Instant September, 1685. Sixty Seven of them were at that time, ordered to be Executed at Seven adjacent Towns, as thus, At Lyme in the County of Dorset twelve, viz. Abraham Holms. Josia Askew. William Hewling. John Hays. John Kidd. John Marders, Con∣stable of Crookhorn Sampson Lark. Christo. Battiscomb. Leonard Jackson. Henry Wats. Benjamin Temple. Robert Matchet. The first Nine of these Persons, came from the Prison of Newgate and the Gate-House. Thirteen to be Executed at Bridport; the Sheriff to see Execution done according to his Orders, viz. Robert Bull and John Bull of Axminster. Benjamin Sandford of Combepine. John Lee of Buckrel. William Quinten of Shute. Thomas Clap of Side∣mouth, Thomas Cook of Kil∣lington. George Collier of Ʋp∣lime. Robert Fawn of Cor∣stombe. John Beamont, Sen. of Lyme. John Sprake and A∣zarias Pinney, of Axminster. Malachie Malacke order'd likewise to be Executed at Bridgport, but since Reprieved. Twelve order'd to be Executed at Wey-mouth and Melcombe-Regis, viz. Thomas Forte. John Beavis. Tristram Elliot. Robert Slade. William Lancaster. John Burridge. John Hartley. George Smith. George Willmot. John Robins. Edward Leggit. Roger Satchell. Twelve order'd to be Executed at Sher: born; the Sheriff to see it done likewise according to his Order, viz. Samuel Glisson. William Hart. John Leggit. Francis Skinner. William Alstone. George Puckeridge. Henry Rowe. John Lawrence. Michael Abbot. Richard Hall. John Savage. Robert VVhorwood. The first of these were brought from New∣gate. Twelve ordered to be Executed at Pool; the Sheriff to see Execution done; but no certain day assigned, viz. William Dilling. Andrew Tozier. William Hardiman. Thomas Jenkins. Robert Salter. Thomas VValdron John Pulling. Andrew Ellis, alias Cozens. Josias Restrick. Phillip Cocks. William Martin. Nicholas Hoar. At Wareham Six were ordered to be Ex∣ecuted; the Sheriff to see Execution done; but no day appointed, viz. Samuel Robins. William Cock Sen. John Holloway. Adam Hawley. Thomas Tyler. and Tho. Lawrence who is since reprieved The Persons that received Sentence with the former, and no place nor time then or∣dered for their Execution, were to the Number of 184. viz. John Smith. Edward Lewther. John Downs. John Edwards. Nathaniel Swapper. John Winniby. Benjamin Bryan. Henry Plotworthy. John Loe. VVilliam Pippin. John VVhite. James Pomray.
Robert Shaw. Thomas Gammidge. Stephen Cook. Thomas Bennet. John Manning. John Fisher. Robert Lumber. VVilliam Watfield. George Plumley. Richard Keach. Thomas Allen. John Reason. George Speering. Mathew Porter. Robert Spurway. Peter Row. John Lovering Robert Foard. John Beamont Ju. Eliah Stephens. Daniel Parker John Bridle. Thomas Parsons. Nicholas Palmer. John Davis Thomas Williams. Mathew Hutchins. Nicholas Smith. — Mallet. John King. Edward Towel. Edward Lane. John Vincent. John Pits. Evan Gammidge. Andrew Robson. VVilliam Cozens, Thomas Townsend Jasper Diamond. Thomas Gregory. John Allen. Robert Hellier. Thomas Allen. Thomas Hellier. Thomas Best. John Marke. John Mitchel. John Madders. Thomas Hallet. John Alsop. George Massey. John Pinney. Charles Strong. VVilliam Pead. VVilliam Sanders. James Spence. John VVillson. Edward Adams. John Adams. Anthony Billing. Arthur Lusher John Hutchins. John Lawrence. Thomas Bovet. Henry Beesley. Robert Baker. John Duran. James Fowler. John White. Francis Langley. Thomas Moor. John Moggridg. Thomas Quick. Nicholas Salter. Francis Smith. Richard Green. VVilliam Marters. John Pacey. Thomas Greenway. John Prew. Richard Daniel. Peter Kent. John Skinner. Adam Clark. Christopher Jewel. Abraham Thomas. John Baker. Daniel Pitson. Robert Gough. George Hempton. Andrew Tosier Samuel Dollier. Peter Baggwell. Benjamin VVhicker. John Whicker. John Bagwell. Oliver Hob. John Ipsley. John Itchcock. Nicholas Betts. Thomas Fosset William Gyles: Joseph Gay. Thomas Perry. John VVinnely. VVilliam Grove. Samuel VValden. John Bulling. Robert Mulling. Roger Bryan. Charles Broughton. Richard Parker. John Hayn. Joseph Downing. John Cornet. Matthew — John Glover. Emanuel Collins. Roger Hobbs. John Gay. John Trottle. Chri. Marriot. Joseph Hallet. Nath. VVebber. Edward Morton. James Salter. VVilliam Lowrey. Ambrose Ashbourn. Roger Prince. Joseph Belts. Nicholas VVarren. Robert Sandey. VVilliam VVills. John Pryer. VVilliam Tucker. VVilliam Brown. Samuel Lawrence. John Hutchins. Zachariah Brown. William Clark. John Brown. Thomas Dolling. Edward Mash. George Tucker. John Eastman. Robert Burridge. John Allenbridg. Henry Tucker. Thomas Burridge. Thomas Cornelius. William Burridg. Humphrey Moulton. A— Lacy. Ro. Dale. Edward Willmot. William Williams. Thomas Marshal. Richard Paul. Hugh Willmot. John Johnson. Joseph Paul. Richard Allen. James Hock. John Gadbey. Edward Ben. Richard Pine. Thomas Pester. William Cox. Jun. Richard Cox. Peter Troket. John VVellman. John Samm. Henry Sing. William Deale. William Clark. Walter Osborne. Richard Hore. William Hayns. Thomas Franckling. Thomas Lawrence. John Jones and Joseph Strong, were set aside. All which were carryed back to be kept in safe Custody till further Orders are taken for their disposal: And thus by their rash and unadvisedness they brought themselves to disgrace, who otherwise might have lived peaceably and happy in their Stations and been profitable to their Country. By this it is to be perceived how much Loyalty and Obedience is to be prefered before Disloyalty and Stubbor∣ness, how much a calm and peaceable Temper exceeds a restless and unsatisfied
Disposition, such a one, as commonly pre∣dominates in these kind of People, whom no mildness can win nor favours oblige, even to be kind to themselves; for what more can be expected by Subjects than to live in Peace and Tranquillity under a gracious Prince, whose benign influence dispences to all good Men an entire sa∣tisfaction, encouraging them cheerfully to proceed in those measures that conti∣nue and increase their good repute and felicity, making them detest and abhor that Itch of Rebellion which has ever transported the Faction to a degree of dis∣quiet and discontent, though it is plain that God has often blasted their wicked machinations and contrivances in private and publick, and given them tokens of his displeasure, though hardned in them∣selves, they have refused all reproof, not∣withstanding their pretensions are Con∣science and Religion, but what share or just claim they have to either, they have made apparent to the World, and out∣done in their attempts (to promote their wicked purposes) the very Mahometans, who though Infidels hold their Prince sacred, that their Governours ought to be obeyed, and the peace of the Govern∣ment they live under preserved inviolate amongst themselves, as far as their en∣deavours are capable of rendering it hap∣py, and keeping matters in good order; and in that far out doing our pretended Zealots. This may be Printed, R. L. S. September the 17th. 1685 LONDON' Printed by E. Mallet in Black Horse-Alley in Fleet-street, near Fleet-Bridge.
