G1003 11844545 49809
Johannes Godartius OF INSECTS. Done into English, and Methodized, with the Addition of Notes. The Figures Etched upon Copper, by Mr. F. Pl. YORK. Printed by Iohn White, for M. L. 168.
To the Reader. I Am not satisfied, that ever Goedartius in∣tended to publish these Papers: or that He aimed at any thing more, then to please and gratifie his Fancy, and the excellent skill he had in Limning. And this appeares from the almost totall neglect of descriptions, which he had sufficient oppertunity, to have well per∣formed; and the many references to the Colours in his Deigns, which Calcography, or Printing could not represent; besides the tumultuous order, we have them first published in, after his Death: above all, the little advancement he seemes to have made, in his Skill, in the nature of Insects, after 40. Yeares (as he says himselfe) daily conversing with them: so that he seemes rather, to have diverted with them, then to have given himselfe the trouble of well understanding them. And yet after all this, you will find him eve∣ry where very just, and true in his Observations: but in many places very short, and hardly Intelli∣gle. Again, as he most industreously fed them, and
observed their Changes; so he committed little or nothing to Writing or Designe, but what suc∣ceeded with him, and (as he understood it) had its right Change: Which is more, than any man ever did before him; So that we need not admire, that so long, and pertinatious an Industry produced so few Historys: For he Designed not all, that came to hand, but such only, as it was his good fortune to Feed, and bring up to Change. And yet in these few Historys, you will have something of all the severall Genus's of Insects, that are in Nature. He left his Papers in Dutch, which were at severall times, and that by divers hands, put forth in Latin: His Latin Interpreters have added Comments, indeed; but were Men wholy ignorant in Naturall History; and their Comments are meere Rapsodies, and altogether impertinent to the Ex∣plication of any one History of Godartius: As he, who shall attentively consider them, will plainly find: wherefore in this our Translation; I have o∣mitted them, and have Printed the Authors words only, and have here and there used the freedom of animadverting, upon what is not agreeable to my owne experience in these matters: besids I have Methodised the Historys, according to the Se∣verall natures of the Insects they treat about; and;
(where I could understand him) I have explained many things, that might be doubted of: And those who injoy a sutable leasure may hereby be put in a ready way, to pursue the History of these long neglected Animals. Also I have taken great care of the Designes, in transferring them upon Copper Plates; which I dare promise are Exquisitly performed, by the best of our English Artists: which was my expence; and which the Book-sellers were not willing to Reim∣burse me; so that this Impression consists but of a 150. Coppys, which were intended only for the curious. And upon this occasion I must needs say, that Naturall History is much injured, through the little incouragement, which is given to the Artist, whose Noble performances can ne∣ver be enough rewarded; being not only necessary, but the very beauty, and life of this kind of learn∣ing. If the Reader shall yet desire to be informed, why the Comments go no farther, then the greater part of the work only; let him know, that the Transla∣tion lay by me unfinished, and in the first draught for above Seven Years, and had so done long enough, had not my very good Friend Mr. T. K. of Cowk∣reig, very Obligingly undertaken to Transcribe and perfect it. So that the humour of Comment∣ing
being past me, and the notions I once had of these things, being lesse fresh in my memory, I had little leisure to instruct my selfe againe, but suffered it to go in that particular, as he found it. M. L.
Section I. Of Butterflyes, sitting with erect Wings: all whose Chrysoli's are Angular: of which there are VIII. Species. Number. 1. Godar. Part 1. Tab. 1. THE Catterpillar, N. 1. is prickle Haired; it hath its birth from an Egg, which the Butterfly (N. 1.) haveing eyes in its Wings, like those in Peacocks eathers, doth lye upon Netles. This Cattarpiller I took up the 14 day of May, 1635. And I fed it with the Leaves of Netles, untill the 11. of Iune, of the same Year. Then it composed it selfe for change, with its head hanging downwards, as you may see in the Table. It remaind in this forme 19 dayes. When a most elegant Butterfly came forth. At the first coming forth of the Butterly, its wings were like wet Paper; Off of which fell certain watery dropps: But that, which did seem to me worthy Ob∣servation, they became in halfe an houre dry, expanded, and fit for flight. This Butterfly feeds on sweet things, as Sugar, and the Honey of flowers: Also it is mainly delighted in rotten fruits, for which they fight among them selves.
In winter time they hide them selves within the Chim∣nies of poor Cottages, from whence I have forc't them with a good blazing fire. Also they are found lying hid in hollow Trees. It is well Observed by our Author that this Cat∣terpillar, hath its beginning from the Egg of such a But∣terfly; and so probably have all Catterpillars whatsoe∣ver their beginning from the Eggs of their respective But∣terflys. The Butterfly is the Mother Insect in perfection, and the Catterpillar, its Aurelia, or Chrysalis are but certain Disguises for a time, wherewith one and thesame Animal is by nature invested for divers ends. viz, that of the Cat∣terpillar to eat such and such food; This of the Aurelia to perfect and arden its limbs. Number. 2. Goda. Part 1. Tab. 12. Although our Fingers suffer and are stung by Net∣tels, yet the Catterpillar marked N. 2. delightes to feed on them: Neither doth it make ready for the change, or obstaine from food, whilst this Plant flour∣ishes. It began to change the 23. of Iune, and the 9th. of Iuly came forth the Butterfly marked with beautifull colours, Figured in N. 2. These Butterflyes are to be found all Winter in Stables, where Beasts stand. These Catterpillars are exceeding Voratious.
Here is wnting the Figure of the Chrysolis. We have noted in the foregoing Number, the use of the dis∣guises of Butterflyes: and I shall here Observe, that cat∣terpillers feed of course and arsh food, such as the substance of the leaves of Plants; whereas the Butterflyes feed of the Honey of Flowers, and liquid meats. This is contrary to what is naturall in sangvincons and more perfect Animals; who in the Embryo feed of a Prepared Chyle, but after birth have a yet more courser food to nourish them: And yet more course as they grow older, and to maturity. Number. 3. G. P. 1. Tab. 7. The nourishment of the Catterpillar N. 3. are the leaves of the Elme. When the time of the change groes near, they betake themselves to Houses, and fix their hinder parts to a wall, hanging down with their heads, that they may more easily come forth of their shell or Chrysalis, when the time of change is compleated. Before the Catterpillar changes its shape for that of a Chrysalis, and puts off its old skin, it seems to be very much troubled, turneth, shaking, and tossing its body every way, and trembling as if it had an Ague. At length rising, and falling often with his body it conducts its body into a circle, upon which it swells so, that the skin cracks all the length, and so by little and little it falls off, a new skin growing underneath. And at that time they rest a while.
This is very notable in these Catterpillars, that where the back of the Catterpillar was, there are the belly and feet of that Animal it's changed into; and the con∣tray, where the belly and feet of the Catterpillar were, there now the back of that Animal is, which was pro∣duced by the change of the Catterpillar. And this change is produced in a very short time; so that it may distinctly be een and observed: For as soon as the old skin is layed aside, this Transfiguration manifestly ap∣peares. The Catterpillar of Number 3. Began to change the 21st. of Iune and the 30th. day of the same Month it was changed into a very fair Butterfly, which I have also exactly delineated Number, 2. Immediatly after the change, its wings were like mois Paper, but in halfe a quarter of an hower they dryed, were expended and made fit for Flight. Afterwards the Butterfly let fall from his Taile four dropps of blood; and after halfe an hower one drop of cleer liquor, like Fountain Water. It lived a Butterfly 19 dayes without food. Another Catterpiller of the same Species composed it selfe for Change the 13th. of Iuly, and that change being come to perfection▪ there broke out of the Back, (of the Catterpillar) 82 Flyes, as in Number 3. So that out of one and the same Species of Catterpillars, a Butterfly is produced, and 82 Flyes. Note, That I believe the Author was mistaken in his Observation of the Back of the Catterpillar being the Belly of Butterfly, and the Chrisolis might well enough I conceive turn its body within a dry, and loose skin, in the act of through∣ing it off, and cause this mistake; especially, when it was so much troubled and concerned in the cracking of it, as is noted by our Author.
2. Concerning the Catterpillars fixing his Body to a Wall, it is to be Noted, that this is done by a single thred cross the midle, thus, (for I have more then once actually seen it in doing) This is done, before it appeares in the disguise of an angular Chrysolis. The Catter∣pillar doubles its head backwards, and touching the place, where it would suspend it selfe, it fixes a thred on both sides its body, drawing it a crosse, and then reduing its head and laying it selfe in a pendulous posture, it tosses it selfe and cracks the skin of the Cat∣terpillar, which flying off, it appeares a Chrysolis, hanging as is described. 3. I have my selfe often Observed that Red liquor fall from the Butterfly Number, 2. And also an equiva∣lent one, though not Red, from many flyes hatching from Chrysalises: and tis by the means of this liquor, they swell their Bodies and crack their Shells of their respective Chrysalises. A sprinkling also of this liquor makes their wings so moist, when they first come forth. See in the Life of Peireskius of the Reining of Blood, rferred hither. 4. the 82 Flyes here mentioned were the brood of the Ihneumon Fly, conveed into the body of the Cat∣terpillar. I confess I am not yet acquainted with the manner of the conveying them; but I am perswaded that it is done by the Ichneumon parent. This I can affirm, that these bold Animals do frequently lay their Yong in the very Egg-cake of Spiders. Again I have sen them perforating the excrescencies of trees with a tongue from their mouth, as with a winble; without doubt either to destroy and feed on the Maggot within the excres∣cence; or else to impregnat them with their owne kind More I have spoken to this matter in one of the month∣ly Transactions of Mr. Oldenbourgh: However these Flys most certainly are a By-birth only, It is farther remark∣able in this Number, that these 82 Flyes did break forth of the Chrysalis, which also is unusuall.
Number 4. G. P. 1. Tab. 2. Some times I have observed the Changes of Insects to be made into moe beautifull Animals; then I ex∣pected; as in the Catterpillar N. 4. I fed him with Elme leaves, in which he delighted. He hath a very deformed and ugly head, whereas in in most other Catterpillers the head shineth like a Look∣ing Glass. He purgeth himselfe and beginneth to change into the forme N. 4. The 7th. of Iune, and the 20th. of the same Month came orth a most beautifull Butterfly, marked with most elegant colours. These Butterflyes continue alive all Winter, unlesse other little Animals devour them, or Spiders strangle them in their webs. Our Author hath diligently observed all alonge, that Cat∣terpillars exactly Purge themselves of all their excrements before they change, and are in the disguise of Chrysalises. We have said that the use of the disguise of a Catterpillar is, to eat a different ood, and that which the Butterfly can∣not eat: And therefore it is but reasonable, that the Catterpiller should quite and cleane empty it selfe of all the old food, when it is about to become a new feeder. I am oreover conceited, that the change of a Catterpillar is not superficial only, but goes deeper yet, and that the intestines are in some sort changed also, as well as the Organes of the mouth. The inside of the Gutts being indeed an outside too in all Animals.
Number. 5. G. P. 2. Tab. 29. I gave this Catterpillar N. 5. Many plants to eat but he refused them all: At length it came into my minde, that he might be delighted with Netles, which when I had brought to him, he to my great admiration rubd his Head against them, and shewed signes of glad∣ness, and eat them greedily. After he had been fed some time with Netles, he composed himselfe for change October, 3. In the forme expressed N. 3. Under a Glass, to which he fixed himselfe with his Head downwards. If you touched the Chrysalys, it moued it selfe so strongly as made the Glasse ring like a Bell. Out of this change came the 1st. of December, a very faire Butterfly, Peacock-like Eyed. The Butterfly lived 40 Dayes without food, and dyed, for I knew not what to feed him with. This Catterpiller sayes 'our Author', refused to eat of many sorts of plants offered him, and would feed of none but Netles: I add, and he would have undoubtedly starved first: This is not an effect of the different make of the Organ of their mouthes, (as above said betwixt the feeding of a Catterpillar and a Butterfly) but verily the delicatenss of the Palate and taste: which perhaps might be improved to good pose in discover∣ing the vertue of Plants.
I am perswaded there is no better way to know what kind of wood is best, for Sheathing of Ships, than to essay certain poished pieces thereof like Tallies tyed to a Buy In the wa∣ters and streames much infested by the worme. For that sort of wood, which they shall refuse, is in all reason to be chosen for the use desired. And the Indies are stored with greater variety of Timber, then Europe, so that it would be very probable there may be some found, which that kind of River worme will absolutely refuse to Eat. Number. 6. G. P. 3. Tab. 4. The Catterpillar marked N. 6. Leads a peacefull Life: But is exceeding fearfull, it is moreover hairy, and very sensible, It feeds on the leaves of Carduns Benidictus the softer part of which leaves they greedily eat; but the more sticky and harde nerves they do not touch. About evening they make themselves Webbes in which they deend themselves against the cold of the night. They are of a Black colour, and have sharpe pricles mixt with yellow. This Catterpillar began to change the 19th. of Iuly 1665. The change was of a pretty Figure, and as it were Guilt. Out of the Chrysalis came the 7th. of August, a most elegant Butterfly and marked with divers couolrs. It lived with out Food, untill the 11th. of the same month.
The midle state or disguise of a Butterfly is called by the Greeks Chrysalis, or a thing gilt, as the word importeth: The Latin hath left us no name, that I know off: we have Translated it Aurelia. The Latines however call the Cat∣terpillar Eruca: which is a word (as I guesse from a place in Vitruvius) which signifies in the old Tuscan Language Viride aeris, and thence borrowed to signifie a Catterpillar; for some Catterpillers there are, which I have seen in Languedoc feeding on a certain Common Tithymal, very notably painted with a sea green colour, or Blew. So that as the guilding of some few Chrysalises, gave a denomination to all; in like manner the Blew Colour of some one Catterpillar gave the Name to all the rest. As for the Guilding it selfe, I take it to be nothing else, but the Sum of an evaporated juice between the Skin of the Catterpillar, and the shell of the Chry∣salis, which last it covers. Number. 7. G. P. 1. Tab. 11. Few Catterpillars love Cabbage, and yet the Cat∣terpillars which are designed in the 7th. Table: eat white Cabbage, but will not touch the Red Cabbage. Cold and moist weather is a very great enemy to them and soon destroys them, and they wither to nothing, but skin. They have a double time of change; if that happen in Summer, it is at an end soone, but if it begin in Au∣tumne, it lasts untill the following Summer; I have ex∣periend both changes. One of the Catterpillars of the 7th. Table changed the First of Iuly, and the 12th. of August, the white
Butterfly came forth, represented in this Table; Ano∣ther of the same species, changed the 17th. of December and remained a Chrysalys, till the 15th. of May the Year following; when a Butterfly came forth; the very same with the former. But another Year it happened, that I observed in the same Catterpillars a wonderfull thing, I tooke a cer∣tain number of these Catterpillars, at the same time: I fed them untill they of their own accord left their meat, and betook themselves to rest and for generation: after they had lain still 4 dayes, and did not move, I saw break forth of the Skins of each Catterpillar, on both sides the Animall 40. in some, 50. in some 52 little Wormes, which Wormes as soon as borne, made themselves little Netts: (or Baggs) of yellow Silk, beginning from the Taile to the Head, and shut themselves up in those Ntts in those Baggs they defend themselves from the cold of Winter. The Catterpillar (out of whose Skin I said those Worms came) kit all their little Netts together on a bunch that they might not be scattered, but that they might be turned into Flyes in Summer, in one place, and at once. The Catterpillar notwithstanding all these wounds, out of which 40, or 50 Wormes did break forth, lived without Food in my Closset from the 24th. of Sep∣tember, untill the 28th. of the same Month the 19th. of October the above described Worms turned into so many little Flyes, and all of them dyed within 6 Dayes. Another Catterpillar of the same Species after its Change, and that it had laine in it 14 Dayes, 2 Worms broke out of the forehead of it, and those two Wormes, in my sight in the space of an hour and a halfe, were changed into Eggs of an Amber colour: and 13 Dayes after that, out of each Egge came a middle sised Fly. These things I have had the experience of, and have Observed them, not without admiration, because it
seems besides, if not against the usuall course of Na∣ture, that from one and the same Species of Animals, an Offspring of different Species shoud be gendred, and that one and the same Animal shoud procreate after divers manners, which thing yet is made manifest in these Catterpillers, as I have in few Words de∣clared. A double time of Chang] The reason may be, for that those Catterpillars, as is Observed by our Author, are very tender; so that they which Change not, till the cold Weather come on, continue in the middle state or disguise, till the Spring follow∣ing: otherwise shoul'd they then change into Butterflyes and lay their Eggs, the Brood would perish with the Cold: Others there are to my knowledge, that are constantly hatch'd Catterpil∣lars the ltter end of Summer, and not having time and Food to bring them up to a full growth, in order to their change, do club for a web amongst themselves, and continue a very small  all winter, and when the leaves begin to break forth, they again come forth, feed a new, grow great ones, and Change: as the common Hedg Catterpillar, &c. 2. The numerous Rase are Ichneumon's. the two others are a sort of Flesh-fly: Both these I say are By-births, and not at all generated by the Catterpillar, but by their respective Parents: the Catterpillar which boe them, serving only as ood to them, not a Mother. It's to be Oserved that the Flesh-Flyes, did feed upon the very substance of the Catterpillar, or Chrysalis, as they would upon Carion. That the Ichnenmos did not destroy the Mother, and love not corrupt meat, possibly the ve∣ry food of the Catterpillar digested by her, was their nourish∣ment
and not her bowels, who many days survived the strainge eruption of that brood; I have opened many Cat∣terpillers of that very Species, in which I have found of these worms, but how and when they are conveyed into their Bo∣dies, I do not yet understand. 3. That is very curious and particular, if there be no mistake in the thing, that our Author sayes: The Catterpil∣lar her selfe knit all the little Netts into one bunch, as though she acknowledged this Brod to be her owne: and yet this is no proofe they are so; For we see in Birds, the like instance, the little Bird called the Hedg Sparrow will carefully and most affectionatly, bring up, as well as Hatch, the young Cuck∣ow. Number. 8. odrt. Part 1. Tab. 7. When Savoy Cabbages and Colliflou'rs begin to knit, often are seen about them certain Butterflyes which lay their Eggs upon those Plants, which Eggs by the heat of the Sun, are Attracted and set in an up∣right Posture, and at length Catterpillars break forth of those Eggs and devower the Plants. These Catterpillers easily endure the heat of the Sun, but not at all lasting Raines, which soone maketh them abid and nothing but Skin. The Catterpillar of this 8th. Table, purged itselfe and changed the 3d. of August, and the 17th. of the same Month came forth the Butterfly here represented; This Butterfly is but slow and not nimble, though it be some∣times found to live over the winter and longer.
I have verily Observed the Butterfly in the very act of laying her Eggs upon a cabbidg leafe; which is thus done, the Butterfly sitts upon the edge of the leae, and bending her tayle under the leafe-she fixes (by touching the leafe with the point of her taile) one Egge, and then an other, and so a 3d. untill she hath layd as many as she list  But all these Eggs are in that moment fixed with the small end up∣wards, and not laid sidewayes, and afterward turned up∣wards, by the heat of the Sun, as our Author seems to say. Section II. Of Butterflyes sitting with lat Wings, whose Cat∣terpillers want the middle Leggs, and from there man∣ner of going in Loops, are by some called Geometrae. Number. 9. G. P. 1. Tab. 31. The Catterpillar of the 9th. Table comes of Seed or Eggs, hard to be found out or met with, I at length with much dilligence Observed them, laid upon cer∣tain leaves, and covered with haire and downe, Animall like, and so are preserved safe from cold, opening those leaves I found a Green seed, or Eggs. These Catterpillars feed on Gooseury-laves, also of Red and White Curran-berries. They are wont to change about the end of Iune as the 22. The change is elegant, whose Figure you have
in this Table. It remained in the chang to the 13th. of Iuly, on which day came forth a small white Butterfly with black spots. If you take the Moth in your hands, or suffer it to fall, it seems dead a while and moves not, Here is a great mistake in this History, of Catterpillars laying of Eggs, and therefore I have amended it in the very Text, beliving it an escape of the Latin Translation. This Catterpillar feeds not only upon the leaves, but on the very green Fruit of the Apricock, as I have Observed. It was from the change of one of these Catterpillars that I imagined I had a small green Beetle, but more of this in another place. Number. 10. G. P. 2. Tab. 34. The Catterpillar of the 10th. Table: was put into my hands by a couple of friends, the 14th. day of Octo∣ber, with intreaty that I would observe its way of live∣ing and change, I undertook to do what lay in my pow∣er, I knew not what it fed on, and therefore I took much paines to find it out, to that end I put before it leaves of divers Herbs and other things, which I knew Catterpillars to feed off, but it would not so much as taste of any of them. Then from its colour, which was not much unlike theleave of Elder, I began to suspect, that those leaves might not be ungratefull to it, being
by experience taught, that some Catterpillars, are colo∣ured some what like the Herbs and leaves they are nouri∣shed with: I gave it Elder leaves to eat, it devowred those willingly as I thought, but yet once a day only. At evening after Sunset, when it began to be darke, it eat hale an hour together, when it once fell on, and being full it stretched it selfe right out, and in that posture it looked like a stick out of a Faggot, for I coud see no leggs at first look, and yet was not without them, wherefore I have drawn the feet of the forepart of the Body, in that part also was a rising bunch; by the halfe of which it so fastned it selfe, ucking continually like a Leech, that it cou'd arce be plucked away, and wo'd rather suffer it selfe to de plucked in pieces, then be separated from what it stuck to. Also the binder part of his body was very tenatious: it represents a Glpsmiths Forciples, with the which he is wont to take a Crucible out of the fire, he shutting his hinder, feet as those forciples are to be shut, and in that posture if you shake him, and tumble him never so much, he will rest and not move, like a dead thing; sometimes a whole day together, but when he crept forward, he took long strides, stretching out himselfe at full length right forwards, drawing up the binder part of his body to his ore part, like a Loop, or the Buckle of a Belt, and thus he walked. The 25 of th. October, he put off a Skin, as many other Catterpillars use to doe, when they are about to change, and hung with his head downwards, from fix a Clock in the morning, untill eight at night, at which time he was alwayes wont to creep abroad, he eat at nights and slept in the day time. Now when the Elder leaves were fallen, and being dry, had lost their former taste and virte, he refsed to eat any more, the 19th a November. he fasted all Winter, doing nothing else but shifting his
place every Night; one Night hanging with his head downewards, and another with it upwards, alwayes his body at its full stretch and length, and thus he passed the time away. All the time I had him by me I could never perceive any signs of life in him 'th day time, except that Day when he was put into my Hands, and those small Signes that were, I Observed by the benifit of a Light. The 20th. of March, the Year following, I set before him the Buds of Elder, if now perchance he had a mind to eat, after so long lasting, but he would not tast them. The second of May, I gave him the full grown leaves of Elder and at lenght I found him eating of them. But so it was, that 3 Dayes before he fell to eating a∣gaine, he had drawn a Thred along the and, which I layed for him, out of the Saliva of his mouth, and that thred was a long one, and much small Sand stuck to it, like so many threded Beades, by the help of his Foreet he drew this thred to his mouth againe, and swallow∣ed the sand, as I guessed to change his sick stomack, as certain Eels swallow Prickley small Fish for their sto∣macks ake. And that also was worth the noting in him, that he was grown a third part biggar in thickness and length, since he eat, then he was, when I first had him, that he also roled his body in the Sand, and tued him there, as oft as he eat. The 16th. of May, he fastened the hinder parts of his body to the Glasse, which I kept him in, his head hang∣ing downewards, and he clothed himselfe with leaves, and a Web woven by him round about his body, in the forme of a little Bag or Net: into which Bag, (changing) he put off his Skinn, and let go his hold from the Glasse, to which, with his hinder part of his body he held fast, he let himself fall with his whole body, and in this posture he betook himself to change. The day after he had that forme, which is expressed
in that Table: the 24th. of Iune, came orth an unusuall and wonderfull Butterfly, of a Yellow Colour, golden haired, which (very much shaking its Body) dyed the 5th. of Iuly. It was well our Author lighted upon the leaves that these Catterpillers would feed on: though that was done by imagination, more then reall resemblance. It seemes reasonable to me, that he who would effectually prevent the Worme eating of Ships, should well understand the History of what Insect it is, that infests them; and par∣ticularly the manner of its feeding. Wormes, most certainly have Peculiar palats, as well, as the more perfect Animalls, and will rather die, than eat such and such an Herb, or Wood: so that the Wood that by experience, they shall be found, to refuse to eat: that is the Wood▪ which is the proper materiall to Sheath, or Plank Ships with. And this being so grand a Desideratum, it would be worth trying all the numerous varietyes f Timber Trees which Europe, or the Indies afford, which might be easilie done by Tallies of them fastened to a Buoy, in the most dangerous Rivers, or Bays, as I have noted above. Numbr. 11. God. P. 2. Tab. 43. The Catterpillr of the 11th. Tables eats Pare tree-leaves, but is most delighted with Roe-tree leaves, they are not very greedy, and eating by intervalls they lie quiet, and sometimes extend themselves, having fast hold of the leae, with the hinder part of their body. Being full, they rest in the forme you see exprest in the Table: They care not much to change their place, and go not from
leae to leae, as is the way of many Catterpillars, they willingly leave not the leae or twig, before they have devowred all: They are elegantly coloured, the upper part of their body being darke, the under yellowish, but not so faire after meat, as before; because they are of a very thin skin, and the Green food, they take, is seen through, and doth obscure the various colours, which addorne them. Beore they betake themselves to Change, the upper part of their body often turns redish. This Catterpillar ed by me some time, began its change the 19th. of Iune, in that very Forme, which you see him expressed in. The 27th. of November came orth a lesse beautifull Butterfly, marked with many black spots in the Back, like a Marbled Book, as the Fashion now is; This lived a hungry life for 4 Dayes, I not knowing what to eed it with. I had another of these Catterpillars; out of the hin∣der part of whose Body, before he betook himself to change, 2 little worms crawled forth the 18th. of May, of a duskey colour; within 2 Hours they took the orme of Eggs, coloured like the Mother Catterpillar. The 9th. of Iune, the same Yeare, came orth of these Eggs, two Flyes, which within two Dayes, shaking and trembling, died and about that time also dyed the Catterpillar it self. After that the Catterpillar had spawned those worms she dwinled away, pined, and never eate more. Thee a Wormes, I say, were the disguises of certain Ich∣nenmones, and not Flesh-Flyes, for the very reason, that the Catterpillar survived their ruption, Flyes feeding on Carrion or Ptrified bodies.
Number. 12. G. P. I. Tab. 35. The Catterpillar, of the 12th. Table feeds on the leaves of the Black-curran-bush, it is of another shape then the ordinary Catterpillar, which are wont to have feet in the middle of their Bodies  but this has them at the extre∣mities, and are very strong with them, when they change place, and creep from bough to bough, they firmly lay hold of the bough with their feet, and lift up their body like a Snake, ad so try for another place to re∣move to, they hold so fast by their feet, that you can scarse pluck them from the thing, they adhear to. This Catterpillar changed (having first exactly pur∣ged its Body) the first of Aprill, and the 24th. of Iuly, came forth the Butterfly, expressed in the 1th. Table: tender, and a short lived Animal. Numbr. 13. G. P. 3. Tab. . . This green Catterpillar, of the 13th• Table, eats the Leaves of the Elder-Tree. When its full, it extends its Body orcibly the whole length, and in that posture rests untill the next day. As it creeps, it joyes its hinder parts to its ore-parts, like a Loop, and then extendsit ele for∣wards, and then gathers it selfe up againe, and so on to its journeys end. It changed the 6th. of October, 1663. And the first of May, the Year following, 1664. It appeared in the shape of a most beautifull Butterfly expressed in the 13th. Table, I chose the most Elegant of them to designe that by,
because there is some difference in such, as are bread of this Catterpillar. This Butterfly was very nimble, and of a swift flight. Numbr. 14. G. P. 2. Tab. 21. The Catterpillar of the 14th. Table, exprest to the life, are great Lovers of green Garden Lettice, but will not (like many other Catterpillars) touch the Plant withered. This Catterpillar began its change the 8th. of Iune, in the Forme expressed. About the beginning of August, came forth a Butterfly, hoary colour, having a long Stinge in his fore-head, or an extended Ray, which lived but one day fasting, I knew not what to seed him with. But I have Observed this kind of Butterfly to fly about Flowers, dipping that long Sting, or Tongue into the flowers, and so to suck out the Honey, or sweet juice, not setling or lighting upon the Flower, but doing of it as they fly; for if they setled, their Legs were two short to suffer them to use their Tongue; and this I take to be the cause, of their constant taking their nourishment in flight, and not alighting, or setling upon the flower, There is a sort of Gnatts, bread in Trees, which in like manner are armed with long Stings, and can use them siting, because they have long Feet, especially in the hind∣most feet, so that he can fasten his Sting where, and how he pleases; but the naturall short feet of these Butterflyes, hinder their feeding, save when they are upon the Wing.
This Butterfly is an exceeding swift flyer, he is very frequent in Iuly, in Gardens amongst Gilly-flowers and Pinks. I didonce take a small Specis, of them exceeding beautifull; in Morgans Garden in London: I us't to call them the Hawk-Flye, for their exceeding swiftnesse. Our Author, in my opinion has well assigned the reason of their Feeding Flying, to the disproportion betwixt their Legs and Tongue, or Pipe. Numbr. 15. G. P. 3. Tab. P. The Catterpillar of the 15th. Table, runs swiftly; for every stride is the whole length of his body, going like a paire of Compasses. It is found for the most part about the Thlaspi kind of Plants, which kind of Herbs it greedily devowers: It feeds by Night only, and moves not by day; and although you do disturb and molest it, yet it will keep it selfe quiet without any manifest motion. It changed the 11th. of August, 1664. And the first of September it appeared again, in the shape of the Buut∣terfly, expressed in the 7th. Table, of a rapid flight, which yet it wou'd not be brought to, but by the light of a Candel, or some such Artificall Light. In Flying it vsed a strange motion of its Body, as though it was perpetually circumvolved, with its Head downwards, and in a Circle.
It Feeds by Night only:] These Animalls, as well as others, have a naturall in stinct, to preserve themselves, and feed only, when they are most secure, and the Insectivorous Birds at Rost. Number. 16. G. P. 2 Tab. 16. The Catterpillar of the 16th. Table, eateth Hyssop, and is ound chiefly about that Plant, when in flower, but if you touch the Plant, it falls to the ground, and thus hides it selfe. After I had a long time ed this Catterpillar, with Hy∣sop, it changed the 7th. of August, and when it had been some dayes in that condition, Three Wormes broke out through the skin of it; which in a very short moment were changed into Three Eggs. And out of every one of these Eggs, the 8th. day of September, came forth a Fly, as I have expressed them exactly in the 16th. Table, the Fly lived not above three dayes. These were Flesh-flyes, and consequently the Chrysalis was Rotten, and this History not finished; because we have not the Butterflyes, which in reason e ought to ex∣pect, the disguise declaring as much to us. I am at a losse
how it comes to pass, that in our Northen parts of Europe, where such Plants as Hyffop, &c. Doe not naturally grow, there should be found Insects to feed on them; we must either say, that they came into our parts by degrees, that is the Plant being cultivated at first, not far off the place, where its Native Soile is, the Butterfly strayed, and found it out there, and so on; or, (which is most probable) this Catterpillar will feed of other Plants, as well as Hy∣ssop, and so the Catterpillar is no Stranger to the Soyle, though the Plant be; This I say is more probable, then that the Butterfly and Plant shou'd both be Strangers, for I cannot think, that this or any Animall else is Spontane∣ously produced by the Plant, or any cause else whatsoever, but the Animall Parant. Number. 17. G. P. 1. Tab. 71. The Catterpillar of the 17th. Table, is all green, like the Curran-tree leaves it feeds on: it Eats those leaves, begin∣ing in the middle, where it greedily feeds, but touches not the outsides of the leaves, when full, they lift them∣selves up, and then extending themselves they rest; con∣tinuing in this posture three Hours, untill the meat be digested, then they excerne, what has been put over, and fall too againe; they never drink as many other Catterpillars do, that I cou'd observe, therefore must you feed them with fresh leaves constantly, if you wou'd know what they will come to. It purgeth its selfe from all its excrements (as is the custom of Catterpillars) and began its change, gathering some leaves I had given it, Glewing them together by a Slimy humour, (from its mouth) about its body. This (Catterpillar) expressed in the Table, remain∣ed
without motion, from the 4.th of Iune▪ till the 5th of May, the Year following, that is a 11 Months and a Day: at which time came forth a Fly, with a Black body, all but the upper part of the Taile Yellow. This as soon as it came to Light, rested a while, untill the aire had dryed and hardened it, and then it pruned its Wings and slicked its Body over, and prepared its selfe for Flight, Our Country-people call these kinds of Catterpillars, Surveyours (Geometrae) because of their Gate, which is like a Pole turned over and over, as when one measurs Land. This Fly, is one single prett large Ichneumon, or Slen∣der Waspe, and therefore this History, as well as the precedent, are imperfect; because these are but By Birhs and not the Butterflyes, which ought to be expected, and of which these Catterpillars, and their Chrysalis are but the disguises.
Section. III. Of Butterlyes sitting with Hanging Wings, and clapt to their Bodies, like the Wings of Birds. This 3d. Section of Butterflyes is very large and con∣taines the History of a numerous Tribe: I should have had great satisfction, if I could have taken the Subordinate Genuses, from any differences remarkable in the Butterflyes themselves, and not have been forc'd to order them by ceraine common Notes Observable in the Disguises of the Catterpillars: But the want of Particular discriptions, which our Author has wholy o∣mitted, has necessiated me to this method; from the bare Figures, little of certainty can be gather'd. We in∣deed Observe the Atenn, of some Butterflyes to be small like Wiers, others Plumous: Again some to be very full of Feathers upon their Shoulders, others upon their Heads &c. But these differances are neither certain nor com∣mon enougn: These of the Catterpillr on the contrary, are more not able, such as their be Honed, Hary, Naked, Great, Little, &c. At present we mst be content with these, wich is most pardonable, then the puting the Ca∣terpiller in one Chapte (as Muset has done) and the Butterflyes in another, as though they had little relation to one another. Number. 18. God. P. . Tab. 1. The Catterpillar of the 18th. Table, is to be found in El∣der Groves, so long as the leaves are tender, and full of juyce, but when they begin to be hard and Withered
by the heat of the Sun, it leaves them and frequents o∣ther places, it seemes to be peaceable and Tame, for it resists not, but flyes if it be injured. It began to Change the 6th. of October, and the 25th. of Aprill, the Year following 1664. It appeared in the shape of a Blew Catterpillar, mixt with a Redish bown, in the Hinder-parts, of his Body. It lived from the 25th. of Aprill, untill the 2d. of May, without moving its Body from the place, and so it died. But before it died, it layd certain Eggs, of a notable Green colour, which our Peope call Spanish-Green. The Eggs of Butterflyes, are to be found in their bodies whilest they are in the Disguise of a Chrysalis, and there∣fore are undoubtedly essentiall parts o the Female, as much as her Legs and Wings, and in no wise generated by the Male. As soone as they have thrown off all manner of Dis∣guise, they are ready for Copulation with the Male; but if they chance to be Unmasked alone; and not in the company of a Male, they lay instantly their Eggs without Copulati∣on; though probably such Eggs are not Feconde and will not come to hatch. Number. 19. G. P. 3. Tab. L. The Catterpillar of the 19th. Table eates the Succu∣lent and fresh gathered leaves of Oziers, these leaves that are white and long. It is a slow goer. He changed the 10th. of October, 1663. Ad the first of May, of the Year following 1694. A very great But∣terfly came forth. This Butterfly, toucht with a Pin, fell down Precivitately, like one dead, and wiho motion, so that I thought him dead, of which that I might be certain, I stuck him through with a Pin, and yet he shewed no fignes of life, bt by and by he Expanded his Wings and endeavoured to Fly away, but he had not strength, he ivid untill the 11th. of May, 1664.
Number. 20. G. P. 1. Tab. 65. The Catterpillar of the 20th. Table, feeds slowly of the leaves of the Willow, and is slow of gate, it abstained from Meat the 24th. of August, and began to Weave certain Threads, but desisted, and often changed its place, untill the 14th. of October, at which time it changed its Green Colour, into a brown one and dyed. I think that this Catterpillar abideth in hollow Willow Trees, and is turned into a Butterfly in Spring: but guesses are uncertain, and as yet I could make noe experiment. Again of the same. N. 20. B. G. P. 3. Tab. C. The Catterpillar expressed in Number 20th. Eats Night and Day of the Whitest leaves of the Willow, and supper over; he withdraws, and hides his Head like a Tortoise within his body, least the night Aire or Raine should hurt him, after that I had observed him to abstaine from his ordinary food, I put him into a Glasse halfe filled with Earth, throwing in some Fragments of Willow leaves, these leaves he forthwith crumbled to dust, and so kneaded them with the Slimy juice of his Body, that he made him a very convenient place for the Change, the House was like Willow-wood, but harder far, so that it could scarse be pierced with a knife, and one would hardly guesse a Catterpillar was within it.
Before the change, in the space of two hours, he lost the beauty of his Colour, and was then of a Liver Co∣lour brownish: As though he was to dye. He remained in this Change from the 20th. of August, 1663. untill the 11th. of Aprill 1664. And then came forth of that most harde Shell, a Butterfly of an Ash Colour diluted, whilst he lived, he scarse moved, and yet run thorough with e Needle, he lived untill the 24th. of May. Again of the same N. 20. c.G. P. 2. Tab. 37. This is a Rare and unusuall Catterpillar, he is for the most part to be found on the Sand Hills, which lie along the Coasts of Holland and Zealand, and feeds on the leaves of a kind of Palme (called by our People Duin-Palme,) (perhaps Myrtus Brabanticae,) this Herb was very gratefull to him, but I that dwelt far off the Sands, could hady get it, wherefore I taught him to feed of certain Oies or Willows, which seemed to be soma thing like the Plant, in Colour; and drynesse. This Catterpillar had two Tayles and when he was Vexd, out of each▪ Taile he pu forth a Red Sting, which he bent and brandished, trembling as though angury▪ and again drew them in, and also he could conningly draw up his Head, and hide it like Tortoises. He changed the 4th. of September, under certain Willow leaves, which he had knit close together by certain Threds of his own Spinning▪ in the former of five little Cells, as you see in it expressed in the Table, which when It ued with a Knife, it felt as harde, as a Stone. In this manner he lay and moved not, or shewed any signes of Life in Nine Months, and Fifteen Dayes, for the 20th.
of Iune, the Year following, out of the five Cells came forth five Flyes: which Cells when I had opned I found nothing at all in them, not so much as a Skin, or the Taile or Feet, I wondered all was consumed, I kept these Flyes for some time alive, and when I expressed one of them in the Table, I gave them their libertie, not thinking it necessary to Paint the rest. These three Tables of our Authors, I have made one, and put the Histories together: because in my judgment they are about one Species of Butterfly. (2) We must commend the industry of our Author in this place, because not having succeeded, when he first kept the Catterpillar, he (the next time he lighted upon it) supplyed it with Earth and fragments of Leaves, in order to its more convenient change, and it must be observed, that many Catterpillers require a Forrian matter to make a Foliculus of; for the security of the Chrysalis, as Leaves, Earth, &c. Though indeed, others Spinn themselves one, out of their owne Bowels; or use their Haire for that purpose. (3) The History is compleate in the second History▪ where are the two Disguises of the Butterfly it selfe. The 3d. History presents us with a By-birth, but indeed a very Rare and curious one: here we note that these five Cells were the Workman-stip of the five Ichnumon Wormes, and very probably they made use f the Catter∣pillar for stuffe to make them Foliculi out off: Iust as he sayes in the 2d. History, the Catterpillar crumbled the Fragments of Leaves and Earth, and Kneaded them into a Foliculus, of a strange hardness. He hath not Figured hat Foliculus in the 2d. Table, but took the Chrysalis ot of it, and Painted that alone.
We now come to treat of, or order all the not Harie and Tuberous Catterpillars, of our Author, and such as have Hooks, and Hornes, or Bunches any where about them. Number. 21. G. P. 3. Tab. E. The Catterpillar which you see expressed in the 21th. Table, feeds on Alder leaves; Upon its back stands up two yellow; Hooks, the rest also of his body is eged of a pale Yellow; but before the changed, he put on an ab∣scure Green colour, and the two Hooks fell within his body, so that now he was every where plain and smooth. He began to change the 6th. of October, 1663. And appeared in the forme of a Butterfly the 27th. of Aprill, the year following, which for the great diversity of co∣lours, I could scarse describe, it was most lively, and flew the nights through almost without ceasing, it lived untill the 5th. of May, when it died with extended wings. These sorts of Catterpillars, with Hooks on the middle of their bodies, I do not know that I have yet met with, and cannot therefore guesse at the use of them, if it be not for de∣fence only, as the Author expresses it in the next Histo. ry.
Number. 22. G. P. 2. Tab. 38. This Catterpillar of the 22d. Table, was found in Flan∣ders at de Groeds, a Village over against Flushing, upon a Willow bough, in that very posture it is expressed in the Table, it feeds of Willow leaves, but eats very sloly, and after eating composeth it selfe again, in the posture you see it Figured, in the hinder part of its Body represents the Head and Beard of a, Goat, and it doubls or draws back its foreparts, of or to the hinder parts; when you touch it, it strikes at you with Head and Taile, as though it was angry: In the Back it has two Hooks, with which it stoutly defends it selfe, so that it scares all Creatures, that sees it: when it eats, you would say its head was bound to its body, by a slender thred, not unlike the body of a Spider. The Ist. Of September, it rested and began to change, in the forme expressed in the Table, and after 22 Dayes, came forth a Butterfly, distinguisht with variety of co∣lours, Elegantly. This Butterfly, before its death, layed its Eggs of a Green colour, in divers figures and fashons expressed in the Table, otherwise then the rest of Catterpillars doe. It lived with me from the 21st. of September, untill the 3d. of October.
This Butterfly, layd its Eggs in certain broken Linkes, or Chaines, as is exprest in the Table; But I suppose she would have layed them in another manner, if the Male had first made them Proliffick, however I affirme nothing: having observed certain Butterflyes Eggs, wrapt and wound in Spirall Lines, about a Twig; aud moreover the Eggs of Froggs, and of some Fish, are Spawned in Chaines. Number. 23. G. P. 1. Tab. 33. The Catterillar of this 23d. Table, feeds upon the leaves of the Sallow, it is rare to be met with, and I nevercou'd find any, but that one only: it daily required fresh food. After that I had fed it a whole Month, the knit certain leaves together like a Net, in which he hid himselfe. And then he changed, as I have expressed it in the Table. After he had had his fill of leaves, (as I said) he chang∣ed the 19th. of Iuly, and the 3d. of August came forth a Butterfly painted also in the Table: which lived six Dayes without food.
Number. 24. G. P. 3. Tab. O. The Green Catterpillar, of the 24th. Table, feeds on Sallow Leaves, untill the end of Smmer. It begins to Eat at break of Day, and eats with great greediness 5. or 6. Hours without ceasing, or other imployment: It ne∣ver voids its excrements, unless when new food drives out the old. It cleaves so fast to the Sallow leaves, that it can scarce be plucked from them; but will suffer it selfe first to be pluckt in pieces. In the hindmost part of its Bo∣dy it has a sharp Pinn or Sting, and Venemous, which it vses (as soon as it is troubled) to defend it selfe with, with a swift agitation, and every where; that it may Wound them that hurts it, with the motion of the Sting. The Male Catterpillars are Green (as we said) and want those round sports which look like Eves; the Females are not so Beautifull, but of a more Grayish colour. Before that these Catterpillars change, they move long and much, and exactly clean themselves of all Excrements: they make themselves no covering (as all other Catter∣pillars are diligently wont to doe) but puting off their Hackle, they are changed into Chrysalis's as is expressed in the Table. This change happned the 19th. of September, 1663. and the 5th. of May, the Year following 1664. came forth a lusty Butterfly, which lived till the 14th. of May fasting. I could never Observe from these kind of Catterpillars a perfect and compleat Butterfly, but with contracted, and as it were scorched Wings, not to be expanded, or fit for flight. They are wont to lay their Eggs before they dye.
(1.) I note particularly the observation of our Author of New food driving out the Od, which must be ei∣ther that the intestines are not so very long, and many as in Sanguineous Animalls; or this is done upon the account of a New fermentation. (2:) Its a curious Note, the distinion of the Male, and Fele Catterpillars: this would be certainly known in order to the compleating their Historys, for as Malpigius observes, the Eggs are of one colour, when layd after Cop∣plation and of another without it. (3ly.) A probable reason why our Author, never could have a compleat Butterfly, of this Kind, was, because he did not furnish the Catterpillar, with convenient mat∣ter for a Foliculus, and so in some measure starved it. Number. 25. G. P. 1. Tab. 14. The Catterpillar of the 25th. Table, feeds of Sallow leaves, it is armed both before and behind, in the forehead it has a kind of hard Shield, but no Eyes, that I could Observe, and in the hindermost part of the body, it has a Prick or sting, hard and stiffe, it is of a Green colour mixed with Blew, I take it to be Venomous: if it be touched, it moves that part of the body, which has the Sting, and does as though it did defend it selfe with it. It cleansed it selfe, and began to change the First of Aprill, in the form expressed in the Table, in which con∣dition
it remained for 55 Dayes, not obscurly, represent∣ing the Face of a Man with a Beard, and in the other parts a Child in Swadling Cloathes. The 25th. of May, broke forth a Butterfly, figured in the Table. This Catterpillar, feeds also of Ligustrum or Primp leaves, and is to be found about Primp hedges, with us in England: It is a most beautifull Creature. Number. 26. G. P. 3. Tab. Y. I v'st to call the Catterpillar of the 26th. Table the Ela∣phant because of its Snout, it feeds of Vine leaves, when it has done feeding it draws up its Head within its Body, and hides it selfe like a Trtoise, its very fearefull, for being touched never so lightly, it trembles and is asto∣nished, enough to cause the same affections in the be∣holders. It can turn its Snout very dexterously every way, and what its layes hold of with it, its hardly to be got from it, for it hath great strength: Its very quick of hearing, for at the least noise it feares and contracts it selfe, as I have often tryed. The time of its change approaching, it abstaines from meat, and seeks a fit place to rest in, and to that pur∣pose I put it some bits of Wood and Vine leaves, of which and the juice of its Body mixt, it made it selfe a House, and changed in it, the 4th. of September, 1665. And lived in it untill the 16th. of Aprill and longer, which thing I observed by mine Eye and Touch, being uncer∣tain what wou'd become of it.
When I touched it, and put it in the hollow of my Hand, I observed it as cold as Ice, and yet moved most strongly. This is most certain (this Animall) did live without food from the 4th. of September, 1665. untill the 16th. of Aprill, 1668. To which its coldnesse and continuall rest, did seem to conduce very much, from which and the Te∣naciousness of its juice, it would be long in wasting, which thing is also frequently experienced in other Creatures, which rest in winter, and eat not till the Spring or summer. This History is imperfect, there being only the Disguises and not the Butterfly: I am apt to believe the Chrysalis dyed, by being taken out of its Foliculus, and therefore in vain the Author expected to see it hatched, or a Butterfly breakforth. As to its coldnesse; I can witnesse that in the depth of Winter, and in the very deep Snow, I have found both Cat∣terpillars and Hexapode Worms, lying upon the Snow, and therefore have crawled out upon it. I say these Catterpillars were so hard Frozen that thrown against a Glasse, they made a sound like stones; but put under the Glasse and set before the Fire, did quickly crawl about, and bestir them∣selves nimbly to get away. Number. 27. G. P. 3. Tab. V. This kind of Catterpillar expressed in the 27th Table: Is amongst Corne, and there feeds, of a certain Bind-weed, (Haedera minor, called in Dutch, Wee winde)
and is at least two Hours at one meale: Its excrements are of a determinate figure, expressed in the Table, it is of divers colours, with two black Lines on its back, be∣twixt which two, is there one of Green, the rest of its Body is Greenish, in the hinder part of its Body is there a Red and crooked sharp Horne, and in some places is there a mixture of White and Blew, it is of a quick Eare and touch, for upon the least noise, it will not move of a long time. The Author prevented by Death left no more. This History is confessedly imperfect, there being no∣thing but the Disguises of a Butterfly expressed. I cou'd have wished the Author had taken all along the pains he has here shewed, in more carefully describing in words the Painting of the Catterpillar, but he relyed upon his excellent pencill too much, for he had e'se leisure and opportuuity enough to have done it. This Catterpillar is Cornigerouse, and therefore we put him amongst his like. 2. As for the determinate Figure of the Excrements of this Catterpillar; if the Author had well observed it, he might have found that particular common to many Species of Catterpillars. I take the cause of it to be▪ the Figure of some parts of the Colon, or Gut wherein these excrements are baked and molded. Number. 28. G. P. 3. Tab. Z. The Butterfly, of the 28th. Table: was sent from Paris to the Author, for its beauty and vastnesse, in which it far exceeds all others, to the end upon occasion, he might
find out his Origin. It was taken in the Kings Garden, and given to Dr. Borellius, the States Embassador: Who carefully transmitted it to him. In my Iudgment this Butterfly will be found to have a Disguise, like some of the next precedent: And to have been changed rom one of the Cornigerous Catterpillars: but it is improper to talke here of Origin, because it is perfect of it selfe, and is the Mother of the Catterpillar, which it is changed from. We Proceed in the Histories, of the smooth and not Hairy Catterpillars. Number. 29. G. P. 3. Tab. F. The Catterpillar of the 29th. Table, feeds of Colly-Flowers. One in a corner hid under a Paper was found dead, out of whose Body the 10th. of September, 1663. 12. Wormes came forth, which in the space of about four Hours were turned into so many Eggs, the 2d. of Iuly,
the Year following 1664 out these 12 Eggs, came 12 Gray Flyes [one of them expressed in the Table.] Another died the 12th of September, whose relicks were changed into a Worme the 17th. of the same Month, which Worme broke forth of the skin of the said Catterpillar, with great strength and force. A 3d. Catterpillar of the same Species, changed the 25th. of September▪ 1663. and the 8th. of May, the Yeare following, it appeared in the forme of a Butterfly, of a slow gate, and no pleasant colour, it lived fasting Nine Dayes. Note the First Catterpillar, our Author plainly say, Died, and the Carcase undoubtedly was Fly-blown, so that the 12 Wormes were Maggots, of some small Flesh∣flyes and accordingly they proved, one of them being Figured in the Table. Againe we believe the same of the Worme, which broke out of the dead Body of the other, but the Author being silent, what became of it, we shall not concerne our selves to guesse of what Race it was. Number. 30. G. P. 1. Tab. 67. The Catterpillar of the 30th. Table, feeds o divers Herbs, amongst the rest, it chiefly delighted in Ground Ivy, but it is delicate and choice in its meat, fr it will eat none but fresh gathered: it changed its Skin of times, for it seemed so hard, that the Body being notably en∣creased
in bulk, it was necessary that the skin shou'd be broken; and another grew under it. Its skin being cast, it did not move for one whole day. nor cou'd it feed, because of the tenderness of the new skin which was hardened by the Aire. It changed the 5th. of August, as is exprest in the Table, and the 26 of the same Month came forth a Butterflys figured in the Table. These Butterflye, are wont to fly about chiefly in the night, but are careful to avoid the flame of Fire and Candle which thing happens otherwise to the rest of Butterflyes. This Butterfly, Lived 6 Dayes without food. Note here our Author gives a good reason of the casting of the skins of Catterpillers, saying that it grew hard and was not urther to be extended, so that of necessity the growth of the Animall cracks it: The like I have observed in Spiders: This also holds good in the Hornes of Animalls, which caste them, as Staggs: Which when they are at their full growth are deprived of all further nou∣rishment, become hard, and are suceeded by others which pullulate; the like is observed in the Hair of Animalls, and the leaves of Plants. It is no lesse certain that all the Skins are one under the other, each successively Pullulating, as in the leaves of Plants. Number. 31. G. P. 3. Tab. 25. I have often observed the seed of Hliotropium sh upon the ground, to be, preserved all Winter, thoug never so Colde and to Germinate in the Spring: The Cat∣terpillar,
of the 31st. Table, eats this Herbe, it lyes under ground ith Day, and comes not out untill the Evening to seek food, I kept this Catterpillar under a Glasse, but I experienced that it never moved, or eate any thinge ave ith evening. After that it had duly cleansed it selfe, it began its change the 17th. of August, & remained in that condition, untill the 9th. of Iune, in the Year following, so that it was like a dead thing without food almost 10 Months. Afterwards came forth a Butterfly, marked on each Winge, with the Letter O. And Figured in the Table. Here we must note, how necessary it is, in order to the compleating of Naturall History, that our Naturallist shou'd be well skilled in Plants: Viz. The Food of most Insects. Heliotropium, is a Name given to many Plants, as to one Species of Tithemall, also to the great Indian Ma∣rigolde; again to other Plants, Famous for Dying a Blew Colour, &c. So that the Author has left us in the Darke for the Food of this Insect; for want of a more particular Title of this Plant. Number. 32. G. P. I. Tab. 42. As soon as Mulbury-leaves are spred, the Catterpillar (called Bombyx) of the 32 Table, is Hatched, and feeds on them, although in their Infancy they will Eat Wilde
chory and Lettice, for the Mulbury is late in putting forth its leaves. Before that these Catterpillars makes Silke, they cleanse themselves from all Excrements. One Hundred and Threescore Catterpillars (160.) are wont to make one Ounce and 80. Graines of Silke. The Catterpillar, Figured in the Table, changed the 14th. of September, and the 24th. of the same Month, that is in the space of 10 Dayes, it broke forth a white Butterfly. Before these Butterflys Couple, both Male and Female are exactly purged, and then they are exactly Coupled by the Tayles end; after that the Female layes a 160. Egges which are all Infaecund, and wither to nothing unless the Female couple with the Male. Sometimes they do againe Couple after Laying, but they Lay no Eggs, for the Butterflys are wont to Dye within Fourteen Dayes. See MALPIGIVS DE BOMBYCE. Number. 33. G. P. 2. Tab. 20. The Catterpillar of the 33d. Table, Eats Plumiree leaves its a little eater, and sleeps much, you will often finde Two of them together at rest with their Heads inward bent to the middle of their Bodies. Both of them two companions began to change the 25th. of May, as is expressed in the Table, and from each of them came forth a Butterfly, after 31 Dayes, that is the 26th. of Iune, of a Yelloish colour, and which wou'd not fly in the Day time.
These kind of Butterflyes, seem to be weak fighted; they care not for flying, but runn swiftly, and they runn into some darke corner, not caring for the light. They live of Honey gathered out of Flowers, and therefore have a long Tongue to fetch it out of the Bot∣toms of flowers. This Tongue they carefully, when they runn, roll up, to preserve it from injuries, they lye in darke places in Winter time. Number. 34. G. P. 2. Tab. 24. The Catterpillar of the 34th. Table, Eats of the leaves of that Worm-wood chiefly, which grows upon the Sea banks, I found it sitting upon that Plant, in an Island of Flanders, near Axella, and Nevza, they are their whole Body throughout, exactly of the colour of Sea Worm- wood, they are fierce, and Subtle and strike at whatever touches them, they hold not very fast, they runn swift∣ly where they feed they scatter much Worm wood leaves, and when they are neverso lightly touched (of which they are exceeding impatient, tremble and feare) they cast themselves down also, and hide themselves there, where you can scarce discern them; because they are most exactly coloured like the Plant they feed on: they save their Head by covering of it with the hinder part of their Body: in the Face they are tender (as I have experienced) and soon killed with a small hurt in that part, and therefore are very carefull of it. Again I do wonder at their so well enduring of colde
and wet that you can carce kill them, and although they seem to be quite stormed, yet they will revive, for I cast some of these Catterpillars into cold water, and kept them 12 Hours in it, then I took them forth stiffe with colde and extended, so that I cou'd not discerne the least signes of Life or motion in them; but exposing them to the Sun, within halfe an houre they came to themselves and cou'd not be discerned from their fellows that had not beeu steeped. If you in like manner Drown Flys, in Bear or Water, and let them lye in it all Night, and having taken them out, sprinkle them well over with the Powder of Chalke, they will by and by creep away, which seemed Dead, the heate of the Chalke which I look upon as a kind of unquenched Lime, put Life into the Flyes, as the heat of the Sun into the Catterpillars, the Sun causing the Vitall juice to returne into, and passe the benummed Members. Further it is to be observed, that this steeping in cold Water, gaine these Catterpillars a good stomack, and made them eat more greedily then their fellows which were not served so, as men seem to have better stomacks in Winter, then in the heat of Summer. These Catterpillars, make themselves commodious nests to change in, of Worm-wood scattered upon the ground, and shutting up themselves, they change therein. This Catterpillar changed the 4th. of September, and lay in that condition (figured in the Table) 10 Months, 18 Days. And the 19th. of Iuly, came forth a Butterfly, of a wonderfull shape, and accouterment: it lived not above foure Dayes, for I knew not what to feed it with, that it wou'd Eate.
Number. 35. G. P. 2. Tab. 27. The Catterpillar, of 35th. Table, delights to feed of Brambles, and of the Vine, he is slow of motion and gate, and yet will seeme displeased if yov injure him, and de∣fend himselfe against violence; I fed this the space of foure Months, which time being over, he made himselfe a little House of fair Paper, the leaves of Balme and Spit∣tle of his owne, to change more safly in. He changed the 12th. of September: and remained in that condition Figured in this Table, Eight Months com∣pleat no more nor lesse: for the 12th. of May, the Year following came forth a Butterfly, not unbeautifull, but impatient of Hunger, for I knew not what to Feed it with, and Dyed within one Day. Number. 36. G. P. 2. Tab. 28. The Catterpillar of the 36th. Table, is not given to any peculiar food, as most other Catterpillars are, but Eats of every Herbe you give it, it greedily Eats Rose leaves, Mints, wilde Awrache, and many other Herbs; he never stired ith Day time, but as oft as I observed him at night, I found him Eating, and he seldom left any thing of that I gave him: He retired when, he had done Eating under a Dry leafe, rather then a Green one.
This Catterpillar when he had spent a whole Day in Creepeing about, he rested under certain leaves; and there changed the 23d. of September, and remained in that condition, Figured in the Table, 9 Months and 4 Days; for the last of Iune, the year following, came forth a most beau∣tifull Butterfly, painted with divers colours wonderfully. There are some of these Catterpillars, twice as big and as long as others, I took a lesser Catterpillar of this sorte, and I fed it long, but as the season of the Year de-clined, and leaves grew harde, he could not Eat them, he not withstanding had endeavoured to change, but no∣thing came of him, and I left my experiment. But standing at my Doors, set about with Elmes, I saw a great company of Catterpillars upon an Elme bough up∣on which without doubt their Mothers had laid them. These little Catterpillers let themselves down, by cer∣tain single Threds out of their mouthes, they were all exceeding Green, and Pelluced, I took them and fed them with Elme leaves under a Glass, they all Housed themselves with houses of Sand and Spittle, against the cold and of winter. In Spring I let them seek their own food. I have not all the satisfaction I cou'd wish, in Translat∣ing this History, I find it so imperfect and disordered: undoubtedly the Latin Translator is much to blame, I have mended the Text, where it speakes of the great Catterpillars being the Mother of the little ones; then which nothing can be more absurd: again we have here an Aurelia, put for a Butterfly &c. If it were matter of Fact and possi∣tively asserted by our Author, as his observation, I shou'd not have alter it, but its expressed, as a conceit only.
Number. 37. G. P. 2. Tab. 31 The Catterpillars of the 37th. Table Are rare: I found this in a Sand-hill, the 23d. of Iune, sitting upon Grasse, which grows there (called in Dutch Duin grass) and I took it home with me to try what cou'd become of it. The Day after a Little Animall like a Beetle, crept forth of the hinder parts of its body, Figured in Table, 37. The Catterpillar after this refused all food, and con∣tracting and winding its body, it changed at length. The little Animall lived, but stirred not much, only shaked it selfe, it changed snake like, and the skin being cast, it was of a Golden colour on the fore part of its Body, and russet the hinder, it had six Feet, and two lit∣tle Hornes, it eat Rose leaves, and the flowers of Elder. The Catteryillar, the Mother of this Beetle, changed the First of Iuly, and remained in that condition untill the 21st. of the same Month, then a beatifull Butterfly came forth which lived 9 Dayes fasting. The birth of this Beetle, is an odd Phenomenon, I am of the Opinion that here is a great mistake, because the like once happened tome: That I thought to have observed a Beetle borne of a Catterpillar; but I question my owne observation. The Catterpillar came to good; and here is the Butterfly perfect. I guesse this Beetle might well be by accident, and unobserved brought in, and layed in the same place, where the Catterpillar was kept; and so I formerly thought of my owne observation: But I affirme nothing.
Number. 38. G. P. 2. Tab. 32. The Catterpillar of the 38th. Table fed of Marigold leaves, or flowers it puts off its skin foure times, and in the scarcity of Food they Eat one another; I have in∣deed Observed other Catterpillars, to Eat one the o∣ther, but those do it greedily. After I had Fed this 14 Dayes, and that he had clen∣sed himselfe of excrements, he changed the 9th. of August, as is Figured in the Table, and after 18 Dayes, the 27th. of August, came forth a Butterfly, having six Golden spots upon his Foure Wings: The Foure lesser Spots were up∣on each wing one, the 2 bigger Spots on the upper paire of wings only: This Butterfly lived a Hungry Life untill the 6th. of September, I not knowing what to give it to eat. We observe in this History that Butterflyes, when Cat∣terpillars, are unlike themselves, not only in the disguise, but manners two; they then Eat one the other, but are eery peacefull, when in a Perfect state, and unmaskt, Spiders will Eate Spiders, &c. I say again I cou'd have wished the Author had taken the care of discribing to us the Paintings and Colour of the Insects, which he delineated with his Pencill.
Number. 39. G. P. 2. Tab. 33. The Catterpillar, of the 39th. Table: Hath his Origin from rotten Willow, and is found lying in the Bodies of those Trees. In this Tree is found a certain fat juice, not unlike Turpentine, for of the Saw-dust of Willow a Vernis is wont to be made by boyling. This Catterpillar lives of this fat juice, and is to be found in the marrow of that Tree, both Summer and Win∣ter, for our Dutch-Boors, when they cleave them in Win∣ter, often light upon them: But to have their change they must either keep them in a warmer place, or not take them out of the Wood. These Catterpillars are of a redish colour, like boil∣ed Cray-fish, and they smell ranke. In the Months of Iune and Iuly, I have met with them creeping in the High-wayes, then seekeing out a conve∣nient place for to change in; which choice is an old decayed Willow, for its softness, and for its food. Concerning the manner of the Propogation of these Catterpillars, it is obscure, and not fully known to me, and cannot easily be found out, for on the outside of the Tree are no chinks or cracks, no (not small) holes, and yet Catterpillars are to be found within. This is most certain, that I have found these often in the Pith of Willows, and it is likely they are there gene∣rated of corrupt Wood by heate, as other Animalls, which are spontaneousely begot. Also haveing very often tryed to keep them to know what would become of them, they all Dyed, and when I did stop up their Dead Bodys in Juggs, I had a mul∣titude of little Flyes, which I say without doubt were Generated of heat and corrupted matter.
When these great Catterpillars are at their full growth and bigness, they seek out where to rest, in order to their change, it changed in an Old and dryed Willow Tree the begining of Iune, as is Figured in the Table, and the 23d. of Iuly, came forth a great Butterfly, which moved not out of its place, it was Hatched in; and Dyed there after Eight Days, shutting its Wings. This very Catterpillar, I have also found in the Body of an Oake Tree, new Feld and Sawn a sunder, wherein it makes holes, you may turn your Finger in: The Romans had a way to feed these Fat, and did eat them as a delitious Food, they called them Cossi. It has a very rank and strong smel, is a little hairy, and of a Reddish, but pale colour. 2d. The remarke of Willow Sawdust affording a refine, is curiouse and the first time, that I met with it in any Author, Pliny (lib. 16. c. 18.) sayes the Gaules had a way of extracting a Bitumen from Birtch, which is as im∣probable, however to this purpose some of the Old Trees we dig up out of our Mountanous Mosses in the West-rideing of York-Shire, are certainly no other then Birtch, and when dry do Bvrne with as lasting a Flame, like Firr-Tree splin∣ters, which gives the occasion of calling them Firr-wood. 3d. As to the Spontaneous Generation of this Catter∣pillar, and other Insects, I have declared my opinion in the Negative. This is most certain, that these Cossi are hatched of Eggs layd by their Animall Parents, and that these very little Worms are capable of piercing the Tree, by little and little, that is as they Eat, that probably these little Holes grow up againe, after they are once fully entered, at least so as not to be visible, but to a very dilligent enquiry. Again pro∣bably they change not, but are in the Disgvise of a Catterpil∣lar, for many Years, which is agreable to my own observati∣ons, all which things render the Observation very tedious, but I little doubt, the truth of it, and that this Catter∣pillar
is propagated by its Animall parents, the Butterflys: as all other Catterpillars are. Number. 40. G. P. 2 Tab. 3 The Catterpillar. of the 40th. Table.: I took the 13th. of December, and fed it with Sallow leaves (its usuall Food) as long as I could find any of them; but when I cou'd get no more of those leaves it fasted all Winter; but it Daiely shefted its place, its life and motion were so weake, as scarcely perceiveable. The 24th. of March, I offered it the tender Buds of Sallow, but it Eat not: the 2d. of Aprill, I put again before it Sallow leaves, and then it Eat them, for then they were bigger, and more Nourishing; the same thing I observed in other Catterpillars, not one only; that they abstained from tender young Herbs; but eat them greedily, when a little more grown up. The 6th. of Aprill, holding fast by the feet upon the edge of a piece of Paper, it crept out of its skin; that I seemed to have a Catterpillar upon the Paper, for it was just like (as to colour) the skin it crept out off. When it cast this skin it parted with an Egg of the same bigness, that Ants Eggs are usually of. The 14th. of May, is cast another skin, and again parted with another Egg: Both the Eggs came to nothing. The Catterpillar changed the 13th. of June, as is Figured, and after 10 Days came forth a Butterfly, which fasted Seven Days, and Dyed. Note, that is no unusuall thing with these kind of Ani∣malls; I meane Catterpillars, to goe on, or suspend their Eating, and consequently their groth, as was observed.
2d. Here indeed is a perect change, and a By-birth besids, I guesse the By-birth to be the Chrysalis of Ichneu∣mons, because the Catterpillar lived: And perhaps from this Observation we may guess something of the place of Ichneu∣mons Wormes eeding; which is probably not within the Body of the Catterpillar, but betwixt the skin or the Exuviae only. For here every time the Catterpillar casts a skin, it par∣ted with an Ichneumon, and the reason (why these Ichneu∣mon Chrysalis are Figured as Foliculi, and so first appear∣ed: whereas others most usually Pierce the Catterpillar in the forme of Wormes, and change afterwards) may I say well, be the Catterpillars fasting all Winter: so that the Catterpillar not haeving cast all the skins to the last, these Worms could not break forth: Or were not fit and ripe so to do, but spun themselves Foliculi within the Catterpillar, before their time, and so came to nothing. Thus far the smooth and not Hairy Catterpillars whose Histories are more perect, that is having both the Disguises Figured and the Butterfly two. Here follow the lesse per∣ect Histories (those in which the Figurs of the Aurelia's are only omitted) of the large sort of smooth Catterpillars. Number. 41. G. P. 1. Tab. 14. The Catterpillar of the 41st. Table, feeds on the Leaves of Bursa Pastoris and Senecio: Although most Catterpil∣lars feed on the leaves of Herbs, and are therefore to be found upon them, yet this Catterpillar of the 41st. Table, lyes hid underground oth day time, and comes not out
untill the Evening; and Eats as much ith night, as is sufficient for all the day, like Batts. This Catterpillar changed the 28 of Aprill, and re∣mained so untill the 9th. of Iune, when a Butterfly came forth which appears not in the Day, but seeks his food in Gardens amongst the Flowers. History. 42. G. P. 1. Tab. 30. The Catterpillar, of the 42th. Table. eats the Leaves of Violets. If it happen (when two or more are fed together) that one of them change early before the rest, and there be a want of meat, the Catterpillar not yet changed will deuower the (Aurelias) which it may well doe, these being not in a condition to resist and move. This Catterpillar changed the 13th. of October, and continued in tat condition untill the 6th. of Iune the year following, at which time came forth a Butterfly of a Blewish colour Figured in the Table. Number. 43. G. P. I. Tab. 37. Although flowers are not much infested with Catter∣pillars, yet are they not free from them, the Catterpillars of the 3d. Table. chiefly Eats Gilliflowers, I know by experiance that the Catterpillar lyes under ground all Day, and comes not out before Sun sets. He changed the 30th. of Iuly, and continued so untill the 23d. of September, and then a Butterfly came forth of a Redish colour,: Figured in the Table. Naked Catterpillars, are a more acceptable Food to Birds, then such as are Hairy, as I have ound by experience in
feeding Red-breasts: I guesse the reason to be, that the Hair is noxious to their stomacks. And indeed, it is my opinion, that the Vesicateing faculty of Insects is much more in the Haire; then in any other part: I haveing Blown into my Boxes, where sometimes I kept a sort of Hairy Cimices, had in a few Minuts after all my Face Blistered. These Naked and therefore more inocent Catterpillars, by the instinct of Nature seek to preserve themselves, by getting under Ground in the Day time, when the Birds are stirring. Number. 44. G. P. 1. Tab. 56. The Catterpillar of the 44th. Table, feeds of Dogs∣mercury, as soon as i perceives any thing it is not u'st to, it casts it selfe upon the ground, and lyes round in Ball, as though it was Dead.—It changed the 30th. of Iuly, and the 26th. of August, came forth a Butterfly, fig in the Table, of a rare shape and colour; the fore part of its Body was Hooded as it were, it lived long without Food, and was very fearfull. What the Plant Mercurialis may be I cannot guesse, many there are that bear that name, as Bonus Henricus, Dogs mercury, &c. Number. 45. G. P. 1. Tab. 56. The Catterpillar, of the 45th. Table, Eats the leaves of Lovage, only ith Night, never o'th Day-time, I found it lying in the cracks of a Chery-tree, it changed the site of its Body often in the Day time, it us't to lift up its body, as though it looked about it watchflly.
Before it changed, it cast its skin, with great difficulty, Sweating all over small watery drops: having a new skin it rested for a time, and changed the first of Iune, and the first of Iuly came forth a darke coloured Butterfly. Malpigius, hath well compared the casting of skins in Catterpillars, to the breeding of Teeth in Children; because both are often accompanied with dreadfull Symptoms. Number. 46. G. P. 1. Tab. 60. The Catterpillar of the 46th. Table, I Fed the space of two Months, with Ground Ivy in Dutch Onderhave. Before it began to change, It purgeth it selfe, and chang∣ed the 28th. Day of Aprill, and a very Beautifull But∣terfly came forth the 26th. of May, Figured in the Table, it had so elegant a luster, that it cou'd not be Painted without Guilding, it bears two equally long Plumes upon the Head, it is wonderfully adorned about the Eyes, and Armed, under the Eyes appear two Teeth, it Lived Three Days without food. I understand not what our Author, means by the two Teeth under the Eyes of the Butterfly; This is a mistake I guess: Butterflyes, indeed have a Tongue, Trunk, and hollow Pipe by which they Feed on Flowers: But I am yet ignorant of their haveing Teeth. Number. 47. G. P. 1. Tab. 61. The Catterpillar, of the 47th. Table: Is very curious and delicate in its Food, which are the leaves of the Cherry∣Tree. It changed the 6th. of Iune, and the 14th. of the same Month came forth a Butterfly Figured in the Table, of an unpleasant colour, and Beggar-like dress, it lived not long, sad and moving little.
This is a very quick change, the Butterfly throwing of the disguise of an Aurelia in Eight Days, this was in the heat of Summer, Malpigius observes, the Butterfly of the Silk-Worm, not to doe it in the hottest season in lesse time then 10 Days, I wou'd have it tryed whether or no it wou'd succeed, that if a Chrysalis, change late ith Year, was put in a warme place, immediatly after its change, it wou'd soon throw off that disguise, and become a Butterfly, the place might be insted of an Elaboratory, or Glasse∣house: All the parts of the Butterfly are budded in the Chrysalis; But are not sprouted, Explicate, and hardned. We come in the next place to such Historys, of the large smooth Catterpillars, where we find either the change im∣perfect, that is some by birth, Figured in stead of the But∣terfly, or the Catterpillar, only, and no Aurelia, by Birth or Butterfly at all. Number. 48. G. P. 1. Tab. 18. The Catterpillar of the 48th. Table: Eats Violet∣leaves, it can hardly endure the Sun beames, and therefore gets under Ground, it can hardly be found because it is green, like the leaves it feeds on, it creeps fast enough; save that when it perceives any thing, it is not us't to; it moves not, but lyes as though it were Dead. After that it had exactly cleansed it selfe of all excre∣ments, it changed, the 4th. of September, and abode in that condition without Meat or motion, to the 9th. of May, the Year following, at which time came forth a Fly, Figured in the Table.
This is an ordinary Flesh-fly, and therefore the Aurelia was Carrion and putrid, when the Fly fed upon it. To know when a Chrysalis is alive, is by touching the Tale of it, for although it have no locall and progressive motion, while in that state, yet it can wag that part very briskley: As to Aurelia's fasting so long; as such they must fast having no Organs to eat, and being in disguise; but whether thy are not Fed, by a nourishment equivalent to that of Infants in the Womb, Is to be inquired after. Number. 49. G. P. 1. Tab. 19. The Catterpillar of the 49th. Table: I fed 13 Dayes with the Leaves of Willow trees, when it began to Ab∣stain from Meat, it turned and tossed every way with great anxiety, and labour, and then it gently reposed and changed the 17th. Day of Iuly, and the 20th. Day of August, came forth a Yellow Fly, not unlike a Bee: Figured in the Table. We have said that Ichneumons arc of the Wasp kind, it is therefore no wonder that some sort of Wasps or Bee, neare alike in shape to that which we vulgarly own & call Wasps, shou'd be nurished after the same manner, that is, shou'd make the bodies of Catterpillars, the place of their nourish∣ment, if not the matter too, as in this By-Birth: This is yet a great mistery to us after what manner, and on what these Wasp-Wormes feed within the Bodys of Catter∣pillars; the Anxiety of the Catterpillar in its change argued the troublesom Guest, it had in its Body.
Numbr. 50. G. P. 1 Tab. 58. The Catterpillar of the 50th. Table: I for some time fed it with Elme leaves, when it creeps, it is twice as long, as when it rests. It changed the 9th. of September, and did continue in that condition untill the 24th. of May, the Year follow∣ing, at which time came orth an odd shaped Fly. This Fly is a very ierce enemy to Spiders, and by a singular antipathy persues and kills them; whereas other Flyes are taken in Spiders webs and eaten by them: I have experienced that these kind of Flyes, whilst Spiders are in the middle of their Nets, and there expect the com∣ing of Flyes, they seise upon the Spiders and wound them mortally; the Spider himselfe thus wounded, cast him∣selfe upon the Ground by a thred; this Fly follows, and breaks every leg of the Spider, one after the other, then he glories in a full Victory, and often goes above the Spi∣ders body as it were rejoycing, I have Observed this thing thrice in doing, and then I saw the Fly carry away the Spider on its Wing. This By-birth is an Ichneumon: That is, a Wasp with a slender body: its killing the spider is very remarkable, and I have elsewhere (in the Philosophicall Transactions) Registred an observation of these kinde of Waspes, laying their Eggs within the cakes of Spiders Eggs, and that when Hatched, the Wasp-worms do feed upon the substance of the Spiders Eggs, and do inprocesse of time, in the same Spiders webbs change into Aurelia's, and are thencc changed into Ichneumons of their own Species, from whence we learne the confidence of these kind of Insects: Which are secure from Spiders, and therefore may well
put other Insects, such as Catterpillars, lesse able to defend themselves, to what service, and use they please, making their Bodys Nurseries of their Young. Number. 51. G. P. 2. Tab. 25. The Catterpillar of the 51st. Table: Feeds of wilde Aurach, and is of the (Green) colour of the Plant; its very slow in eating and creeping, and every way a slug∣gish Animall: It casts its skin like Serpents, or the Silk∣worme foure times, and had four severall shapes, upon its casting its skin, which happened thus, viz. When it had don eating, out of the body of the Catterpillar came a not-very-little worme, somewhat flat, and shaped like a Flesh aggot: the worme crept forth the 12th. of Febru∣ary, about oure in the after noon, this Worne incessantly crept up, and down without eating or drinking for Four∣teen Hours; but in the mean time by little and little lost its colour, and its skin grew harder, for defence perhaps against the coolness of the aire and enemies; and now creeping no longer, it rold its bent body, and put on an obscure colour, and then languishing, it seemed to fall of eating, but not greedily: the next day it seemed to Die, there being no signes of life, or motion in it; but it continually rested till the later end of September: At which time came forth a Fly, rarely to be met with; with longh legs, and flat feet: I believe this an Amphibious creature, and to live in the Water as well as in the Aire: this Fly had a great Head, of an unusuall shape, it laid mosty on its back, and therefore I have so Figured him; he eat no∣thing that I offered him, and died the 3d. of October. It will be a hard matter, for any man to make sence of this History, and undoubtedly the diligent Author, had
much wronge done him, by the ignorance of the Lattin In∣terpreter, for to omit other things, what shall we make of the XXII. Calends. October. The truth is the Animall is very odly described, and Figured, it shou'd be a Waspe by all circumstances, and especially in that it has 4 Wings. Again it cou'd be no Flesh-Maggot; because the Cat∣terpillar was not carrion; but alive, at that time of the eruption of this Worme. The Author hints, a solution by thinking it an Anomalous, or Amphibious Creature. I affirme nothing, but that it was a By-birth; so the casting of Foure Skins is false. Number. 52. G. P. 1. Tab. 62. I cou'd find nothing that this Catterpillar of the 52d. Table wou'd eat, perhaps because he had left off feed∣ing, and was ready to change. He began very Anxiously to tosse and roule, turning and winding his body every way: by and by, there was an eruption of certain drops of water or sweat out of his, body all which drops, I saw change in the space of 12. Hours, into living Catterpillars (Erucas) but they all perished with their Mother, for my want of knowledge of their food in one dayes time. Its very frequent with our Author, to think that Dead which sensibly moves not: I am of the opinion that this By∣birth were the wormes of an Ichneumon: And that these Wormes after eruption changed into Aurelia's: Which was perhaps the way they perished; compare this History, with the Cabbage Catterpillars above, History the 7th. of our method.
Number. 53. G. P. 3. Tab. T. I fed the Catterpillar of the 53d. Table: with Alder and Paretree leaves from the 28th. of May: when it had Eaten enough, it fastned it selfe to the sides of a leafe, lifting up his head, at Sun set it drew in its head and slept all night; but some of these Catterpillars, will sleep 17. or 18. hours together, on the contrary others will creep up and down two Days and two Nights without food or rest∣ing; the hinder or lower parts of this Catterpillar Bo∣dy are pellucid, they fight desperatly together some times; [The Author left no urther. We have now done with all the greater sorts of Smooth Cat∣terpillars, as well which the Author left us perfect, as the more imperfect Historys also. Here follow in the nex place, the lesser Species of smooth Catterpillars, and we shall ob∣serve the same order in them, which we have done in greater, that is, first to range the more perfect and compleat Histo∣rys, where we find the Butterfly, and both the Disguises Figured. Number. 54. G. P. 1. Tab. 9. The Catterpillar, of the 54th. Table Feeds of the leaves of Ragwort: It is a Black and Yellow colour and smooth, in the month of Iuly, it cleaves to Bents or straws, and hides it selfe in a skin, for matter, like Yellow Silke. After that I had fed him with the said herbes 8 Days, he changed the 24th. of Iuly, and lay as dead in that condi∣tion, untill the 8th. of May, the year following, and then came forth a Butterfly partly Black, and partly Read, not unelegant, Figured in the Table: the Butterfly, retained
the colour of the Catterpillar, save that the Yellow in the Catterpillar was changed into Red in the Butterfly, it lived without meat 23 Dayes, and dyed after having ejaculated its Seed. This Catterpillar is common and well known, I have had some of them out of whose bodies broke forth certain small Ichneumon Worms, spining very  white Foliculi. Number. 55. G. P. 1. Tab. 68. The small Catterpillar of the 55th. Table: Feeds on Elder leaves, and roles up those leaves like a Funnell, making it selfe a House in them against Raine, Sun, and Birds, and for this reason also feeds only in the night time. It changed the 22 of November, 1657. And continued as is Figured in the Table, untill the 21st. of Iuly, 1658. Then came forth a Butterfly, Figured also in the Table, very pretty and elegantly marked. Number. 56. G. P. 2. Tab. 1 The Catterpillar of the 56th. Table: Feeds upon the leaves of Winter Roses, but will not touch any flowers or leaves else, this is a nimble Catterpillar, and very sen∣sible and crafty, I speak nothing but what I have seen and tryed. This Catterpillar, (as I have often tryed) wou'd not be moved at all, if the Winde blew the leaves it fate upon; but if I moved the aire with my hand it wou'd immediatly cast it selfe down upon the ground, by a thred of its mouth, for to save its selfe from the fall. Amongst the leaves, it eeds of, it is wont to make it selfe a House, elegantly knit of its owne Weaving and
in this it changeth, which it did the 20th. of May, as is Figured in the Table, and so continued untill the 12th. of Iune; then there came forth a Butterfly, which lived fasting to the first of Iuly. Number. 57. G. P. 2. Tab. 4. The Catterpillar of the 57th. Table, is wont to feed of Elme leaves, it makes it selfe a pretty kind of Nest, fastn∣ing a thred to the one side of the leafe, and then to the o∣ther, and so brings both sides together, Knitting them close leaving an open passage at both ends; it creeps both backwards and forwards alike: If you touch it, it casts it selfe upon the ground swiftly by a thred, and do's Dart its Body swifter then an Eale, perhaps to strike terror into those Enemies that follow him. I have two Catterpillars of the Species, one of them changed the 2d. of Iune, as is Figured in the Table, there came forth a Butterfly Figured in the Table, the 9th. of Iuly, which lived fasting 10, Days, I guess this to be a Male the other bigger bodied Catterpillar lived untill the 3d. of Iune, it was full of little Wormes, which without doubt were the death of it. As Wormes are the Death of Children, according to the opinion of both Antient and Modern Phisitians; So 2. Little Wormes, broke forth of the dead Body of it: The 5th. of Iune, each of which Wormes as soon as out of the Body of the Catterpillar, fell to work and made themselves a Net, under which each made it selfe an Egg of its own Weaving. The 19th. of Iuly, out of these Eggs came forth 32 little Flyes, which I kept alive a long time with Suggar: But at length I gave them their liberty suspecting that I shou'd else kill them, if these Eyes had been a little biggar, I had Figured them in the Table, but they were scarce visible.
These Flyes were a By-birth, and undoubtedly Ichneu∣mons, because they Spun, as soon, as they came to light. Number. 58▪ G. P. 2. Tab. 7. The Catterpillar of the 58th.  Table, are very noxious, and feed of tender Rose buds, they eat out the substance of the Bud, and do knit the leaves together very artifi∣cially, for shelter against the Sun: This Worm is from a fat juyce Hatched by the Sun and Dew: After long ob∣servation, and many unsucsesfull tryalls (for this Cat∣terpillar is not easily brought to change by our feeding) I found that it changed as is Figured in the Table: The 1st. of Iune, and was covered as with a white sheet, the 21st-of Iune came forth a Butterfly, which as soon as borne stood with erect wings, then it set a running swift∣ly with wings aloft, then it leaps up like a Grass-hopper, and at last rested quietly, it dyed within five Days for want of Food. It is ill guessed of our Author, to think any thing can be begot of a fat juice, &c. There is but one way, that of Animall Parents. Number. 59. G. P. 2. Tab. 9. The Catterpillar of th 59th. Table, feeds of Bramble leaves, they come of Eggs, Hatched the beginning of May,, and lived upon thedry leaves of Bramble, by the Butterfly their Mother: For an Egg so layed, produced the Catterpillar Figured in the Table, which I fed as soon as Hetched with Bramble leaves, from the 6th. of May, untill the 3d. of Iune, when it began to change, making it
selfe a place to secure it lelfe in, of laeves knitted and then changed, the next Day, as is Figured in Table: The 20th. of Iune came forth a Butterfly, wich new Hatched, lay like a dead creature, but by and by flew like an Arrow out of a Bow. These Butterflyes, are hard to be taken abroad, being of a swist and cunning flight: they sit under the leaves when weary: They abide cole well; for I have also found them in the middle of Winter under Bramble leaves, this But∣terfly lived 18 Days fasting with me. Number. 60. G. P. 2. Tab. 12. The small Catterpillr of the 60th. Table, are ever found almst within the Flowers, or Blossoms of the Cherry, Apl or Pareee, and destroy much, and cannot easiy be driven thence, but by showers, they can endure both heare, and cold, and well know how to defend them∣selves from the harme of either; they Knit and close up the Blossoms they eat, and feed most in the coole of the Evening or Morning, and that for 14 Days at least. They are bread by a moist winde, and as soon as borne do destroy, and eat the said Blossoms like a Gangreen; the watter out of which they are bread, is a moist cloud like Honey dew, which by the scorching of the Sun, and the native heat of the Trees, is turned into live Wormes, which our Dutch Boors call Woolves. The 18th. of May, this Catterpillar changed, and the 10th. of Iue came forth a Butterfly, quiet for two hours after it was borne: which as soon at its wings were dry, let fall one drop of water and flew away. In the Morning you will finde of these Butterflys, sit∣ting on Paretree flowers, and sucking Dew thence, but in Winter they hide themselves in Stables, and Grainaries
for warmth, they are very fearfull, and scarce fly away unless much urged: This Catterpillar was of old called by the Dutch Boors▪ De Woolfe. Our Author here also follows the vulgar opinion, as well as name, concerning the breed of these Wormes; but his own Observation of the suruiving of these Butterflys all Winter, were enough to evince the contrary, that they breed the Wormes: Compendious expedients to rid a Fruit Tree of them, were well worth the invention; in the meane time, it is as well worth our pains, the picking these out of Blossoms betimes, as the weeding of Corne is. And my reason is, because they are bred but once in a season or about a time; and therefore if you rid the Fruit once of them, the Fruit is secure of them ever after. But of these I purpose to say more in an other place. Number. 6. P. 3. b. 13. The Catterpillar of the 61st. Table, feeds only on the Herbe Calaminha, it is alwayes wet, and leaves a shine∣ing slimy tract after it, where it has, crept like a Snaile: its a fearfull and timerous Animall, and hides it selfe under the leaves of Mint, and often changes its station, it feeds ith night, but never ith Day time, and with its body in an erect posture, as one that is very circumspect and wattchfull to avoid danger: when it goes, it makes hast. The Titmise, or little Birds (Pari) devower these Insects, and therefore they seldom appear, and are not to be driven from the places they hide themselves in, but by violence. The Catterpillar Figured in the Table, abstained from meat the 15th. of October, and made it selfe a little house of sand and slime, and loosing its colour it changed the 26th. of March, as is Figured in the Table, and the 13th. of Iune, came forth a Butterfly very notably marked with spots, which after 8 Days fasting dyed.
I conceive there is but little difference betwixt the Saliva of Insects, and that of Spiders, Snailes, and Catterpillars, being very much akin. The reason why the Spiders and Cat∣terpillars, for me the Thread of their Saliva, and the Snail not, is very probably, the Organs or Pipes, through which this juice passes, which are not given to the Snaile. Number. 62. G. P. 1. Tab. 72. The Catterpillar of the 62. Table, fed of the putrified Stone of a Mountaine Duck, and was bread thence, and lived in that stone as long as any thing remained to feed on. It change the 29th. of May, 1659. As is Figured in the Table, they undergo the like change in the Fethers of Duck, wrapt up and hid therein, that nothing but a little hole was left for the Butterfly to go out of. The 7th. Day of Iune, 1659. came forth a Butterfly, or Moth Figured in the Table, this Moth is beautifull and delights in flying, wherein it uses strange motions and windings. These Moths live long unlesse they be taken in Spiders webs. They shun the light and hide themselves in obscure places, and sometimes in Gardens, under the leaves of Plants: They feed on the Sweet Dews on Flowers, as o∣ther Flyes; they hide themselves in winter in Houses, &c. From this History, some have doubted whether the Cat∣terpillar was ever perfectly formed before its change, but was rather borne after the change, because that untill the change it remained in the place of its birth, and took its nourishment there as Children do in the Womb, and Chickens in their Eggs. The Butterfly living abroad in summer, and returning into Hovses in Winter, is enough to satisfy the manner of this Catterpillars birth, which is from the Animall Parent▪
and not of putrified flesh, also it was in disguise in the rot∣ten flesh, not as in the Womb, but as in a place where store of food was to be had; sutable to its nature, and for this the Mother Butterfly was Caterer; so that however the parts of the Butterfly are altered, from what they were, when in the disguise of a Catterpillar, yet do's the But∣ly retaine a sense of that meat, which she once fed off her selfe and do's not crelessy drop her Eggs; but there only where she finds sutable food for them to eat, as soon as they shall be hatched. Here follows the less perfect Histories, of the lesser Spe∣cies of smooth Catterpillars; That is to say; where either one or the other of the Disguises are not Figured in the Table, or a By-birth only instead of the Butterfly. History. 63. G. P. 1. Tab. 15. The Catterpillar of the 63d. Table feeds on Thorne tree leave as long as there are any to be had, it goes back∣wards ad fore wards, as it pleases and that swiftly, when these Catterpilars, change, they get together into oue place, and every one hangs by his own proper thread. This Catterpillar, chauged by little and little, he 5th. of Iune, and the 27th. of the same Month, came forth a Moth Figured in the Table, which Moth haunts Thornes, and layes it Seed upon them which (Spawn) hangs there∣on untill the begining of the Year following, for Catter∣pillars appear not till there be food for them. I have seen the change of this Catterpillar, (see my Notes.)
Number. 64. G. P. 1. Tab. 16. The Catterpillar of the 64th. Table, feeds of Sallow leaves, they shelter themselves from the Sun, in boughs and leaves knit together, they creep swiftly, and as soon as they perceive anything that is not usuall, and not fa∣miliar to them, they suddenly cast themselves down by a thred for their security. This Catterpillar changed the 53th. of Iune, and a nim∣ble Butterfly Figured in the Table broke forth the 21st. of the same month. Number. 65. G. P. 1. Tab. 40. The Catterpillar of the 65th Table, feeds of the leaves of the Ashtree (which are Infested by this and many other Animalls) it very cunningly rowles up the leaves, and shelters it selfe against the Sun. This Catterpillar purged it selfe and changed the 24th. of Iune, and the 26 of September, came forth a Moth Figured in the Table. Number. 66. G. P. 1. Tab. 46. The Catterpillar of the 66th. Table, was bread in a Sugar Pear, and feeds thereof, it changed the 3d. of Au∣gust, and the Second of Iuly, the Year following, that is, after a 11 Months (in which space it lay without motion or food, and as I thing dead) came forth a Butterfly, Figured in the Table. We must think that Fruits, as well as leaves, are not the Equivocall Parents of any Insects: But the Butterfly only of Catterpillars, &c.
Not withstanding the opinion of Aristotle (de Plantis) and lately of Signior Read, concerning Plantigenous Animals. In the next place we shall range the Historys of the lesse Smooth Catterpillars, which are imperfect, that is where there is a By-birth only, and no Butterly Figured. Number. 67. G. P. 3. Tab. B. The Catterpillar, of the 67th. Table, greedily Eats the the leaves of Sallows, there are great numbers of them: Also these Catterpillars drink much and longe, especially any sweet things: If you touch them, they defend them∣selves moving very swiftly the hinder part of their body. this Catterpillar changed the 1th. of September, 1663. and continued so untill the 22 of August, 1664. And then came forth a Fly, which lived fasting untill the 30th. of the same month. In the very middle of the change, is seen a black Egg, to which this Fly owns its birth. This is the By-birth of some Flesh-fly, and our Author is very diligent in that he has here, once for all, observed to us, that he found, in the very middle of the Chrysalis of the Eruca, the Chrysalis of the Fly; which he calls a black Egg: The Catterpillars Chrysalis was undonbtedly Car∣rion, and then Fly-blown.
Number. 68. G. P. 1. Tab. 28. The Catterpillar of the 68th. Table, Eates the leaves of Roses, and I feed him also with the leaves of Province Roses, as often as I neglected to feed him, he prepared for change, but because that I had often observed that from an untimely change, ugly, miserable, and imperfect Butterflys came, therefore I gave this meat as long as he woud eat, and that he willingly changed: He clensed himselfe from all excrements, and changed the 14th. of August, and the 17th. of Iune, the Year following came forth a Yellow Fly, which is Figured in the Table, this Fly was slow and weake: This Catterpillar lay in the change, more then 10 Months, like a dead thing without motion and feeding. Number. 69. G. P. 1. Tab. 29. The Catterpillar of the 69th. Table, delights to feed of the leaves of the Red Crran-tree: That only when the Day breaks, after having quickly cleansed its body, it began to change the 12 of Iuly, and continued in that condition untill the 14 of August, at which time came forth a Fly, Figured in the Table: A very swift Flyer but Dyed within Foure Days. These two last are By-births, and of the Waspking▪ being something more grosse and thick bodycd, then we usually find Ichneumons to be: however they are of kin, and I little question, but our Author might have found in these Chry∣salis's the Ichneumons Chrysalis's; or the Nimph's of Wasps eclosed, if he had had the hap to have sought for them. By the Figure of the Catterpillars they seem to be of one
and the same Species, and our Author not distinguishing betwixt By-births and such as are Genuine, he seems in some few places, to have multiplied Species unnecessarily. Number. 70. . G. P. 1. Tab. 39. The Catterpillar, of the 70 A. Table, feeds on the leaves of the Elme, and is to be found on the very top of these trees: it leaps from place to place, like a Grasshoper: cold destroys it. Having clensed its body, it changed he 28th. of August, within a net which it had made before its changed, and which was as bright as Siluer, it continued in the change till the first of Iune the Year following, about 9 Months, at that time came forth a Fly Figured in the Table. This By-birth, is a Waspe, as appeares by the Figure. Number. 70. B. G. P. 2. Tab. 8. This Catterpillars ds of Elme leaves, their sleep ex∣tending 10 hours, and then cleanse and eat againe, when they are about to change, they let themselves down from the Tree by a Thread for safet, as soon as they come to the ground they seek a dry Elme leaf and having found one they creep into it, and Artificially Knitting it toge∣ther else on all sides, covering their bodies besides with a silver coloured and bright Net: In this manner changed the Catterpillars, the 26 of May, as is Figured in the Table, and Foure Days after came forth a Fly, Figured also to the life in the Table: It lived with me also fasting Six Dayes.
This is an other History, of the same Catterpillar, and this is a By-birth also; but a Flesh-fly, and Viviparous, if I mistake not. Number. 71. G. P. 1. Tab. 48. The Catterpillar of the 71st. Table. feeds of the leaves of the Cherry-tree, they are for the most part to be found under the leaves, shaded from the Sun. This Catterpillar cleansed it selfe, and changed the 22d. of Iuly, and the 4th. of August came forth a Fly. This By-birth (by the Figure) is a Waspe; having a short, thick body, and Foure Wings. Number. 72. G. P. 1. Tab. 49. The Catterpillar of the 72d. Table. eats the tender leaves of the Ash, leaving nothing but the skins; it is of a shining colour, as black as Pitch; it grows no bigger, then it is Figured: I called this the black Crab, because its hinder parts are like a Crab. It changed the 28th. of Iuly, and there came forth a Fly, Figured also in the Table. This By-birth is a Flesh-fly, as appears by the Figure; and therefore we suppose the Chrysolys was Carrion. Number. 73. G. P. 2. Tab. 2. The little Catterpillar, of the 73th. Table. eats the green leaves of Worm-wood; and its bred of a certain hu∣mour,
as a seed, which some Mother Fly laid upon that Plant, Whence comes this Catterpillar: When it is newly hatched, it is of a white colour: When it begins to creep upon the ground, it forthwith makes it selfe a shelter, a∣gainst the scorching heat of the Sn: After that it has once attained to its full growth, it is incomparable swift, and not easily to be taken, at the least noise it runs out of its shelter or lurking place to escape the Birds, it is then somthing like the colour of the Earth, it falls on. When it begins to change, it gnaws in two a sprig of Wormwood, that it may the more conveniently knit it selfe therein a House, to change in. This Catterpillar, changed the 4th. of Iune, as is Figu∣red in the Table; the 9th.-of the same Month came forth a Worme, which the 13th. of the same Month appeared in the shape of an Egg; out of which Egg came a Fly (Figured in the Table) The 26th. of the same Month; which in less then a quarter of an hour, became as big again, as when first hatched: I nourished this Fly along time with Sug∣gar and Water; it made a wonderfull loud noise in flying, though but little of body. This Bybirth, is a Flesh-fly, which are well known to fill a Room with noise, when they fly about it: Here are some unintelligible mistakes in the Latin Coppy. Number. 74. G. P. 2. Tab. 3. The Catterpillar, of the 74th. Table, eats the Leaves of the Rose-tree; for the most part it feeds in the night only, for fear of Birds perhaps: It creeps slowly, and if touch∣ed, it slowly rowles it selfe it up: When it is full, it stretches it self out as though it slept: It made it selfe a House to change in, like a little Net, very pretty.
It changed therein (as is Figured in the Table) the 16th. of September: And the 14th. of May, the Year following came forth a Black Fly, which lived 7 Days fasting. The By-birth here is an Ichneumon, as appeares by the Figure. Number. 75. G. P. 2. Tab. 5. The Catterpillar of the 75th. Table, would eat nothing but a cerain Rush or Grasse, growing on the Banks of Dches: It ed but slowly, and crept as slowly after it had done feeing, and when it was full, it was a third part less, then in the time of its feeding. The 2d. of Iune, came forth of this Catterpillar, a Worm, ou of which Worm, the 9th. of the same Month cme a Fly, which was so very small, that I could not Figure it in the Table. This Catterpillar changed in the forme of a Tobacco-Roll, as is Figured in the Table. The 1st. of August, came forth thence a Fly, whose wings were so clear and Transparent, and clapt so close to its body, that it seemed to be without wings: This Fly was like a great Pismire, and ran swiftly, and not with Expanded wings, but with them clapt close to its body, it lived with me fasting 14 Days. Tis rare that one Catterpillar should nourish two By-births; but this History, seems to be an instance, that it i so, and that both of them are Ichneumons. Number. 76. G. P. 2. Tab. 6. The small Catterpillar of the 76th. Table eats Columbine leaves, and cleaves so fast to the edges of those leaves,
that you may sooner pull them in pieces, then take them off: they eat like a spreading Cancer, what ever Plant, be it Roses, &c. they light on; for the most part you find them great and small together; they are just of the colour of Columbine leaves: they fear no weather: touch them and they vibrate their tail wonderfully. This Catterpillar, changed the 8th. of Iune, as Figu∣red in the Table: And the 21st. of Iune, came forth a Black Fly, Figured also in the Table; these kind of Flyes I have often seen sitting upon Bryonie, (Vuae vrfinae) lived two Days without meat. This By-birth is a kind of Flesh-fly; and the Chrysalis is the change of a Flesh-fly; and therefore here is some escape in the observation. Number. 77. a. G. P. 1. Tab. 64. The Catterpillar of the 77th. Table, Marked a. eats but once a Day, and that sparingly, the leaves of Sallow, and when it has done eating, it rowles up its body in a round, like a (Snake) dog, and then about noon the next day a little more food, and then to rest in the said posture: this I observed it to doe (and it is a most wonderfull History) untill the last day of September, 1653. and it rested without changing the posture of its Body, or mo∣ving untill the 24th. of October, 1655. I touched its body daily with a little Feather, that I might certainly know whether it was a live or no, and I observed it a∣live, and at every light touch to move and contract its bo∣dy, two whole Years and 24 Dayes, and that with∣out any food, or so much as locall motion, I saw no change in it, but that its body through long fasting was manifestly lessened.
Number. 77. b. G. P. 2. Tab. 17. The Catterpillar in this 77th. Table, fed for most part on Columbine, and some times on Rose leaves; when full, it roled it selfe up like a Hedg-hog, as is Figured: I kept some of these Catterpillars, some whole Years, formerly by me, and fed them, but they constantly dyed without changing: without doubt, because somthing was wanting necessary to their change; which thing when I had thought on, I shut one of them up in a Glass Violl, filled with Earth and fed it therein, after a while, I found that it crept within the Earth, and that he made himselfe a large House in the bottom of the Glass, by the slime of of his mouth, Arched over head, and covered himselfe with Earth, that he seemed a lump of Clay, and thus he did, as I guess, for safety: Also within this Earth, he knit himselfe a Net for yet greater safety. The 27th. of Iuly, this Catterpillar rested in order to its change, as is Figured in the Table, and remained therein 7 Days without stirring, the 5th. of August, came forth a Fly, and the day after another Fly, both which after they had rested a little while, did couple in order to the propagation of their Species. I have often seen these Flys lay their seed upon the leaves of Columbines, which is a Green and fat juice, and so small, that one must have good Eyes who discernes it. These Flys I fed for some time with Water and Hony, at length depriving them on purpose, of their Water, they Dyed. This is the 3d. time our Author has made two Histo∣rys of one Animall. Here are indeed many things worth nothing, and dffi∣cultly
explainable: In the first History, the ong suspending its Change, even for above two Years, is very remarkable. In the Second History, the diligence of our Author, in supplying it with Earth is very commendable. Again the two By-births are Ichneumons, as appears by the Figure: Their coupling is extraordinary; theAu∣thor, never yet having observed it; though some Scores have been born together. He also tells us of the Seed or Eggs of these Ichneumons, which he sayes (from frequent observation) is extreamly small, not to be seen, but by very good Eyes, but that I suspect an errour in this observation, (this fat and Green juice, may rather be an excrement then Eggs) I shou'd think that possible the Ichneumons Flys Eggs, may be licked up, and swallowed down by Catterpillars in feeding, and escape digestion, and hatch within the Catterpillars body: but I affirme nothing not having yet seen the Seed, or Eggs of any one Ichneumon layd. Hitherto of the smooth Catterpillars, both Small and Great: In the next place we shall Range the Historys of the Hairy Catterpillars. Number. 78. a. G. P. 2. Tab. 29. The Catterpillar of the 78th. Table, marked a. feeds on Alder leaves, I nourished two of them, to see what wou'd come of them; the one was a little brighter coloured, then other.
One of the two changed as is Figured in the Table, the 15th. of Iune, and the 15th. of Iuly, came forth a Butterfly Figured in the Table, very brisk and sportive, I kept him alive 1 Days. I had a Third of these kind of Catterpillars, which seemed to be sick, it had no stomach to its meat, and its Hair trembled, as though it shook with an Ague. It not withstanding changed (just as the first is Figured to have changed) the 20th. of Iune, and out of that change came forth a Fly the last Day of Iune; Figured also in the Table: This Fly was very nimble in running, and very sportive with its Wings and Hornes, it eat Honey ex∣ceedingly, and immoderatly, I let it goe, now well knowing to what it ows its Birth, and what comes of its Seed layed upon Alder leaves, and Hatched by the heat of the Sun. Number 78. b. G. P 2. Tab. 30. The Catterpillar, Companion to the first, (and of which we said came of Butterflys Figured in the Table,) changed the 19.th. a Iune. just as Figured of the change of the first. The 2d. of Iuly, came forth a wonderfull Animall, without Wings, having the hinder part of its body very thick, and full of Eggs, and covered with a thin skin, so that the Eggs were almost viible through it, the Day after its Birth, it layed all its Eggs, and having that thin skin of its Tail, full ofDown orWool, like the leaves of Moth-Mullein, it pll'd of that Down, and covered its Eggs with it for security, and then when it had emptied it self, there was  left, it but the forepart of its Bo∣dy and Leggs, and it appeared then much like a Spider: it lived fasting 18 Days. The very day that it Dyed the Eggs were hatched and the little Catterpillars crept a∣bout, I suffered them to provide food for themselves, not
being willing to be troubled with the feeding of them, especially knowing what they wou'd come to. Note that all that is related in the 1st. History, is agree∣able to our observations, there being an Ichneumon from the Chrysalis, of an Eruca: also besides the By-birth, there is the Butterfly, viz. The Genuin and Legitimate off spring. In the 2d. History, there are two things very singular▪ The First is the birth of a Monster, or a Butterfly, with∣out Wings, this I say is no By-birth,, but a Monster in Na∣ture, such as the birth of a Bird wou'd he without Wings. The Second is yet more wonderfull; that this she Monster should lay her Eggs (which thing is common to all the But∣terfly kind as soon as horn) without the Copulation of a Male, and that (which is most remarkable) these Eggs shou'd be Hatched, that is Proliffick, without the Male, (Vid. Mapigium de Bombyce) where one of the best ob∣servations in that piece is the change of colour in the Eggs, of such Females as have admitted the Male; and that such Eggs as are layd without the admittance of the Male, doe not change into that colour, and are not Proliffick; This I can affirme that I had a Butterfly which layd her Eggs in a Box, and that these Hatched therein after a certain time, but whether the Butterfly had admitted the Male before I took her, I cannot say. Number. 79. G. P. 1. Tab. 59. The Catterpillar of the 79th. Table, feeds upon Plum∣tree leaves, it is a wonderfull Figure, on the back it has Four Yellowish Brushes, or Tufts of hair, out of the Fore-head grow two other Tufts, like Snail hornes, on each side are two other Tufts like Oars, the one Black,
the other Yellow, on the hinder part of the Body they look like Feathers; but all is Hairy; it changes its skin with great anxiety, wiping its sweaty Body with the Fether∣like tufts: all the Day, after the shifting of its skin, it rests without food; and all its body is very tender and soft. After it had cleansed it self well, it change the 20th. of Iune, and abode in it untill the 30th. of the same Month, and then came forth a wretched creature, neither But∣terfly, nor Catterpillar: the reason of the defect was, that it abstained from meat before its time, its Body not being arrived to that perfection, requisite to its change. The Authors words must be favourably interpreted, for it is plaine in the Table, that the Animall was a Butter∣fly; but as he wll notes a starved thing; many of which I have had, whose Wings were yet imperfect, or at least not in a condition to be expanded. Number. 80. G. P. 1. Tab. 36. The Catterpillar of the 80th. Table, is found about the Sand hills, along the Sea shore, where it feeds of various Herbs bu I could not find one Herb that it wou'd eat off: upon the back of it grows Five Bunches of hair, two upon the head like Hornes, and one upon the Taile; and out of these Bunches grows some Haires longer then the rest, as ornaments: I forthwith designed this Catterpillar, because it hastened to changed, making a web for it self of its own Hair. It changed the 10th. of Iuly, and the 8th. of August came forth a Butterfly, which as soon as borne hid (as it were) its eyes with its fore feet, as not being yet able, to endure the light.
Number. 81. G. P. 3. Tab. S. The Catterpillar, of the 81st. Table, was taken in an Apricock tree: And sent to me from Bergenopsone, &c. After I received it, it wou'd not feed, but changed the 7th. of October, 1664. And the 2d. of May the year fol∣lowing came forth a gray Butterfly, which so covered with its Fore-feet the whole Head, that it was not to be seen. It seemed to be a Female from the heaviness and thic∣nesse of its body: It lived fasting 10 Dayes, and before it dyed, it layed many Eggs; but which for want of the Seed of the Male were not Faecund. How much this opinion, of Infaecond Eggs agrees with the Observation of the 78th. History, Let others Iudge. Number. 82. G. P. 1. Tab. 50. The Catterpillar, of the 28th. Table, feeds only of a certain Grasse; it sleeps in the Day time, but ith night is in perpetuall motion, its very thirsty, when it drinks, it dipps its Head in the water, and lifting up the forepart of its body, it drinks like a Hen, often sipping. When it had cleansed it self, it changed the 7th. of Iune, and abode so untill the 3d. of Iuly, and then came forth a Butterfly; a pretty big one, of a yellowish colour, marked with a red Line cross each Wing, as Figured in the Table. Number. 83. The Catterpillar of the 83th. Table,G. P. 3. Tab. G. wou'd eat nothing that I gave it; it is a slow goer, not unlike that slow
paced Animall, well known to the West Indians, by the Name Haut: It was wont to wipe and cleanse its whole body, with a dark coloured Feather on its taile, and likewise defend it self with the same, if touched: It is very quiet, before its change; it changed the 2d. of October, 1663. It composed it self for change thus: It first made a Net, round about its body, of its own juice; and within that Net another, yet lesse and of a finer thread; which touch∣ed not the outward Net, but hung like a Bell in it, and was so thick and compact that no body cou'd see through it; and within this it changed. The second of May, 1664. Came forth a lusty White Butterfly, I stuck him throw with a pinn, that he might not Dissipate its excellent Whitnesse, and so he lived 4 Days. Number. 84. G. P. 2. Tab. 50. The Ruf Catterpillars, of the 84th. Table. Eats gree∣dily the green leaves of the Artichoke plants; and when its belly is full, it creeps into the Earth. This Catterpillar put off its skin the 30th. of August: and fasted, untill the Haire was grown again, and that it co'd ea; that is for foure or five Days, sooner or latter. The 9th. of September, it changed, as is Figured in the Table. The 1st. of May the Year following, came forth a White Butterfly,  never moved for two Days; but then grew wild and furious; and at length dyed for want of Food. Number. 85. G. P. 3. Tab. H. The Catterpillar, of the 85th. Table, eats Alder leaves; all its body is Rough and Hairy; if you touch these
Hairs, it Vehemently strikes its Head with its Tail; in one Night it lost all its greenesse, and became wholy Black: I cou'd well see a change of colour with my Eyes; it shook the Haires and moved them with a notable force, and cleerly without changing at all its skin. It changed the 6th. of October, 1663. As is Figured in the Table. The 30th. of Iune, the Year following, came forth a duskish coloured Butterfly, marked with white spots, as is Figured in the Table: It lived untill the 10th. of Iuly. Number. 86. G. P. 3. Tab. D. This Catterpillar, of the 86th. Table. creeps swiftly from place to place, and eats almost any kinde of Herbs, Tresoile, wild-time, Elme, and Willow leaves, and many others; and yet most other Catterpillars will starve be∣fore they will feed of any thing, but their ordinary food: For colour it was of a shining jett Black: if touched, it rould it self up round like a Ball. It changed the 13th. of September, 1963. And the 25th. of May, the Year following, came forth a very beauti∣full White Butterfly, having its body distinguished, with three rows of Black Spots; it lay without motion. It is worth Noting, that from a Cole black Catterpillar that had no White, but about its mouth, there shou'd be born a White Butterfly. From another of the same Species of Catterpillar, the 13th. of Iune, 1664. A Long Legged Fly came forth, which lived not above one Day. Number. 87. G. P. 1. Tab. 3. The Catterpillar of the 78th. Table, feeds on Poplar, and Willow leaves, which two are of a like nature: These Catter∣pillars
come of a Seed, as most do, which did stick to the Poplar leaves, they are seen a far off, abiding in the tops of those Trees, because of their notable whiteness, Figured in the Table. It changed the 6th. of Iune, and continued so 14 days, and then came forth a White Butterflys Figured in the Table. The Butterfly, laid its Seed after some Dayes time, and lived, without food, 24 Days. Number. 88. G. P. 1. Tab. 7. The Catterpillar of the 88th. Table, Feeds upon the leaves of Brambles and Oziers. It changed the 13th. of Iune, and so remained untill the 14th. of Iuly, and then came forth a dark coloured Butterfly, Figured in the Table: It is of a brownish colour, upon each wing it has a round white spot; I found it dead after two Days, though it seem'd to be of a strong nature. Number. 89. G. P. 1. T. 10. The Catterpillar of the 89th. Table, feeds of Sallow leaves; which are dry and astringent, and therefore it drinks much; which are singular to it; for almost all others eat green leaves, and drink not. Its birth is from a Ring of little Eggs, cleaving so Tena∣tiously to the tender twiggs of trees, that it can scarce be gtten off, but with a Knife; these Eggs abide the sharp∣est Winters, and are htched by the heat of the Sun in the Spring, when the leaves put forth, that their meat may be ready for them, as soon as born. This Catterpillar changed the 2d. of Iune, and conti∣nued so untill the first of Iuly; and then came forth a Butterfly Figured in the Table. It dyed after it had layd its Eggs; but the Eggs dryed, for want of having been besprinkled with the Seed of the Male.
Observe the Elegant Posture of the laying of the Eggs, of this Butterfly; in the fashion of a Ring, Circling a Twig; as for their being in faecud, for want of the Male, it agrees not with other, this Authors Observations, as is above noted. Number. 90. G. P. 1. Tab. 13. The Catterpillar, of the 90th. Table, feeds on Haw-thorn leaves, and Pear-tree leaves: As soon as Autumne comes, they gather together, and Club for a Web; for that purpose they knit together the tops of the yet tender boughs with their leaves; and therein preserve themselves, as soon as the weather is favorable to them, that is about the be∣ginning of Aprill, they begin to eat againe; they leave a Hole open, out of which they may goe and come in a∣gaine; in cold weather they exactly shut that Hole: Rain never stands upon the web, but slides off, as though it was greasie: Titt-birds, eats them greedily. This Catterpillar, changed the 2d. of Iune, and the 30th. of the same Month came forth a White Butterfly marked with a Red spot on each wing. Number. 91. b. G. P. 1. Tab. 13. The Catterpillar, of the 91st. Table, eats Haw-tree, and Cherry-tree leaves, &c. It is wont to ly under the shade of the leaves; as hardly induring the heat of the Sun. Before it changed, it cast its skin thrice, each time, rest∣ing on eay until its Head hardened, for immediatly after its skin casting, the Head, and all the Body is soft, and weak; and by little and little grows stronger and hardens. It changed the 12th. of Iune, enclosed in a Bagg, as is Figured in the Table,: And the 4th. of Iuly, came forth an elegant White Butterfly, Figured in the Table.
Number. 92. G. P. 1. Tab. 22. The Catterpillar of the 92d. Table, feeds on the leaves of Cherry, Pear, Plums, and Almond trees: I could never find the feed it came off: It is admirably beautifull in the variety of colours; when it is first Hatched, it is like a little Snail, moist, Glutinous and shining; then it waxes by little and little, untill it casts it skin, and then appears its colour, and after that it again and again casts its skin. It changed the 22d. of September, in leaves Knit toge∣ther; and the 12th. of Iuly, the Year following, came forth a Butterfly Figured in the Table,; it lived, but two Days, though it had laid 9 Months, and 20 Days in the change. Number. 93. G. P. 1. Tab. 23. Te Catterpillar of the 83d. Table, eats the leaves of Labrusca, (perhaps Bryonie) although with the smoak of that Herb Mice are said to be killed: They eat not, as I have experienced of the Herb, before its Berryes come, and then they feed on the leaves untill the Berries grow Red and fall off; and then the leaves seem no longer fit to nourish them, This Catterpillar, changed the 24th. of September; it continued in its change untill the 13th. of Iune, the Year following, because Winter came on; and Flowers out of which Butterflys take their food, began to faile: the 13th. of Iune, I say came forth a Butterfly, a of Yellowish colour, Figured in the Table. Here the reason of the Noneruption of the Butterfly all winter is, well assigned, to be the want of Food, and the aproaching cold.
Number. 94. G. P. 1. Tab. 32. The Catterpillar, of the 94th. Table, We fed with Tobacco leaves only; and it loves those leaves, which are largest and dry; and the smaller moist, and tender leaves, in the Wings of the greater, he cares not for. He having cleansed his body, changed the 3d. of August and the 17th. of the same Month came forth a beautifull Butterfly, which is wont to haunt Garden flowers; puts a long sting into them, and is swift of flight. This Butterfly is frequent in July, to be Observed when July Flowers are in their prime; but is dificult to be taken by reason of its sudden and swift flight. Number. 95. G. P. 1. Tab. 34. The Catterpillar of the 95th. Table, in great numbers at Ozier leaves, it is of an elagent colour, viz. Yellow distinguished with Black lines, as is Figured in the Table. It changed, the 8th. of August; and the Year follow∣ing came forth a Butterfly, Figured in the Table. Of a Robust Body, and yet it lived but two days. Of this also see my Notes. Number. 96. G. P. 1. Tab. 38. The Catterpillar, of the 95th. Table, delights in Ozier leaves, as many others do; to me the reason seems to be the dry temper of them; which corrects the moisture
of Catterpillars If touched, it coyles up its body, like a Ball; but you may put him out of that fearfull fit. After it had well eaten, and well purged its body; it changed the 10th. of September; and the 10th. of Iune, the Year following, came forth a White Butterfly, marked with Black Spots upon the wings. Number. 97. G. P. 1. Tab. 63. The Catterpillar, of the 97th. Table, eats Rose leaves, and Clary: It changed the 20th. of Iuly, as is Figured in the Table; the 2d. of August, came forth a various co∣lored Butterfly, which I kept alive a while with Hony. Number. 98. F. P. 1. Tab. 8. The Catterpillar of the 98th. Table, eats divers Plants, and are found upon the Sand-hills; it changed the 12th. of Iuly, and the 5th. of September, came forth a Butterfly Figured in the Table: This Butterfly was tender and weake; which I took to proceed from the Catterpillars, being deprived too early of its food. We found this Catterpillar, on the Sandy Downs above Calice: See my Notes. Number 99. G. P. 1. Tab. 17. The Catterpillar, of the 99th. Table: Willingly feeds on Lettice and Clary leaves; it is very Hary, as soon as it perceives any thing unusuall to it, it rowles i selfe up,
like a Ball, and moves not: It sets up its Bristles, like a Hedghog; and if you take hold of its Haire, it easily suffers them to be pluckt off. Sparrows, and other Birds eat not these Catterpillars; but seem to abhor them, whence some guess they are poisonous. It changed the 30th. of Iune; and the 22d. of Iuly, a large and beautifull Butterfly came forth marked with di∣vers colours. These Butterflys lay their Eggs before winter; and because he Catterpillrs are hatched late, about October, they therefore hide themselves in the Ground, chinks of Walls, and in other places, and live without food, untill the beginning of Summer, as I have had experience. Number. 100. G. P. 2. Tab. 23. The Catterpillar, of the 100. Table, eats the leaves of Earth Nuts; with whih I kept him long: After his belly was fallen (perhaps for digestion sake) he ever crept long about the Glasse, I kept him under. It changed the 3d of August, as is Figured in the Table, the 2d. of Iune, the Year following, came forth a Butter∣fly, to which I never saw the like; Its wings were as White as Snow, its Body Yellow, and bright; it flew swiftly; first clening its body of a certain humour; it dyed after 5 Days keeping under a Glass, where it seemed to have been stifled, for want of a free Aire. Number. 101. G. P. 2. Tab. 26. The Hairy Catterpillar, ofthe 101st. Table, eats wil∣lingly the leaves of Heliotropium, as its usuall food: They fight amongst themselves desperatly, and make the
Haire Fly: They are very fearfull, and rowl themselves up when touched, sleeping Doggs-sleep. It changed as is Figured in the Table: The 10th. of September▪ in a bag of leaves knit together; the 10th. of Iune the year following, came forth a Butterfly; which seemed to sleep ith Day, but was very swift and nimble ith night, Bat like: I let it go, not knowing, how to keep it. Numbr. 102. G. P. 3. Tab. N. The Catterpillar of the 102d. Table, having had its fill of Ozier leaves, betook it self to a corner for change, as I thought: But in stead of that I Observed a Green Worm, to break forth of each side its body; this was done with great anxiety, and contortion of its Body: The first Worm, as soon as borne, fastned upon the wound, it came out off, and suckt up all the juice, and substance of the Mother Catterpillar; so that nothing but skin was left: The other Worm through the firsts greediness, being desti∣tute of all food, dyed in the wound, out of which it was coming: Whose body also, the Mother being evacu∣ated, was consumed and drawn dry by the first Worm. This first Worm being now satisfied, with the Bodies of Mother and Brother, rested moveless, and without any other food, untill the 15th. of October, 1664. And then changed into a Black Egg: The 18th. Day of May, the Year following, 1665. Came forth two Flys, One of of which is Figured: in the Table, in which History it is worth nothing: That of one Egg came two Flyes; that by this meanes, the losse of two Worms, might be restor∣ed: Which as I said, did make up the body of one. Thus we have done with all the Historys of Butterflys, I find in all the industrious Labours of Johais Goe∣dartius: I should not question the truth of this last Histo∣ry,
nor of the Faithfullness of the Translator. Mey being e∣very where as modest, as the other is old and impertinent: I am willing to confess that this is the only puzzel which I have yet met with in all the experiments of the Author; yet it may be, that two Ichneumon Wormes, might club for a common Foliculus; which he calls a Black Egg, as well as five, as in the 20th. History, aboue to be Noted. and yet that is, but a bare conjecture of mine, and which this History (to say the truth) dos not countenanc; for it sayes, that one Worme only, was remaining alive, which changed, into this black Egg. Thus also you see the Butterfly kind, takes up near two thirds of the Book; but yet this was not the Authors choice, but his chance: which will appear, to him who shall consider that this kind of Insect, is for the most part laid, Hatched, and fed openly, and obviosly upon Herbs, and Trees: where∣as the nesting, education, and food of most other kinds of Insects, whilst in Embrio, and in their severall disguises, is in darke and secret corners of the Rocks, or within Trees, and Plants, or under ground, or at the bottom of Lakes and Rivers: So that, unless diligetly searched for, they are not easily to be found. Section. 4. Of Butterflys with Transparent wings, known by the name of Draggon Flyes, in English. There is another kind of Insect, which the Ancients have left nameless: the more modern Authors, have called them Libellae, Perlae, &c. These Insects I reckon among the Butterflys, at least for some affinity betwizt them, I put
them nex after them: they all have Foure Wings, stife, brittle, and Transparent; they are of a fierce nature, and pray upon Flys, which they take in sight, as Hawks do the little Birds: Some perhaps may think better to put them after or next the Beetles; because the Worms of both are Hexapod: our Order will e agree well enough with both; and it is sufficient that we do not confound them; as be∣ing a peculiar Tride of Insects of their own kind. Number. 103. G. P. 3. Tab. R. The Hexapode Worms, of the 103d. Table, when first Hatched are very small, like Gnats; but in time grow great: They are found in Ditches, and have no other food, then that the greater feed upon the lesser; in a very short time I saw one of the three Large ones Figured in the Table, devower six Lesser ones of the same Species: Hence it is, that these creatures are wonderfull timerous, for if a Lesser meet a Greater they fly a way with all the speed possible, but in vaine. I find no more amongst the Authors Papers, but that of one of the Hexapode worms Figured in the Table, a Sky colour Winged Insects; Figured also in the Table, was Pro∣duced; but I find not any one circumstance of the mattrr of the Change. Number. 104. G. P. 2. Tab. 14. The Hexapode worm of the 104th. Table would not eat neither Bread nor Meal, nor Sugar, nor divers Herbs which I set before it: Nor would drink water: I then bethought my self of giving it to eat dead Pismierss
Beeles, and other dead Insects; I therefore put it up with a dead Beetle, into an Ivory Box, having learnt by ex∣perience, that these kind of Insects will perforate Wood∣en boxes; this Beetle it fedd on eating out all its bowels, and creeping into the shell of the Beetle; wherein it wou'd conveniently turn it self about every way: This Worme is slow footed: its an angry creature, and bold; keeping its station, unlesse you vex it overmuch: It hath a painted Taile, which is shining, with which it defends it self, that it cannot give back, and then it contracts its body, and with its toothed Forcipes, it strongly defends it self, against any violence done to it. This Worm lay in the body of the Beetle, it had fed on, from the 18th. of August, untill the 8th. of Iune, the Year following; then out came a winged Insect, beauti∣full, and elegant. The wings were very remarkable, but so tender, that I could scarce draw them with a Pencill, and shining bright as Mother of Pearl. Its two eyes glisterd like Gold; its body was of a Sea-green colour. He flew with his head erected, and the rest of his body hanging downwards, with his wings spread, but not agitated; which perhaps he cou'd scarce do, as I guess from the bigness of them, but was carried by the Wings through the Aire, he lived but two Days fasting, for I knew not what to feed it with.
Section. 5. of Bees In the 5th. SECTION, we put the Bee-kind, which have (as all the former Insects) Four Naked Wing. Number. 105. G. P. 2. Tab. 46. You have one of the great sort of Bees, (called Bombi∣li, by the Greek) Figured in the 106th. Table. This Bee chooses mostly a deep and dry soyle; to house in; not a stiff Clay, which wou'd not easily be wrought into; nor one two light, and Sandy, which wou'd be apt to fall in: also a deep soile they love, that the water may not soak thorough, and trouble them. In such an earth they dig holes, to breed in; sometimes three, and sometimes three foot and a halfe deep, and a foot square within: into these holes they carry fine, and dry Grass, and cover that over with Wax,, no other∣wise then Swallows coat their Nests with Clay; but these Bees make their Nests Transparent, and sull of holes; and do coat them over, very neatly, with coverings made of Wax; that they may be safe from Rain; which might o∣therwise soake through the Earth and get into them. In this Nest they make a Theca, or small Cell, like the halfe of an Egg, and the bignes of a Pea, divided in 2. parts. Every Bee lay 9. little Worms in this Theca, or Cell, of the bigness of a Mustard seed, but as white as milke, and Pelld. Then they shut up this Theca, that it may
be like a compleat Egg: This Cell now to the Sense is moderatly hot, as an Egg sat on by a Hen. I Observed the lesser Bees often to creep over, and a∣bout this Theca, or Cell; as though they had a mind to keep it warme, and so hatch it; and again I saw them scratch it, as though they wou'd make a crack or opening in it; but they made it softer by scratching it. The Worms included in this Egg-like Cell, daily grew biger and biger; in the mean time the lesser Bees did not cease their indeavours to hatch it, nor did they leave it off, untill it was broke asunder; also the Worms with∣in by the continuall agitation and motion of themselves, did help forwards, this work of breaking it open; and they growing; the heat also increased, which made the Wax yet more soft. The Worms hatched from this Egg or Theca lay quiet a whole Day, and then the great or Old Bee coming, de∣vowered all the Wax, of which the Theca was made, and in which these Worms were included; that this Wax be∣ing again liquified in her body, might serve, as the mate∣riall, of another Theca. Now when these Worms (thus hatched out of the first Theca) have layn a whole Day, quiet without moving at all, and lke dead things, they weave each for himself an Egg, of the bigness of a Bay-berry, of a certain spittle, destilling from their mouth, and body. And being now made, they are indeed, moist and soft; but in time they dry and become hard. These Eggs are all glued together in a Bunch by these Worms; and out of each Egg comes a Bee, as is Figured in the Table; where the Eggs or Foliculi is opened at one end, that the Bee may be seen, which comes of the Worme, Figured also in the Table; This done the Great Bee comes again, and makes a new Egg; and puts therein 5 Worms of her own laying, and then a nother Bee do's the like, and 3d Bee, and so the rest
follow, doing in like manner; untill all the work be finihed and made like a bunch of Grapes, in forme and Figure. And yet whether one and the same Bee perfect this work, and lay Wormes in all the Theca's, or Cells of the Bunch; or whether they are divers, and many Bees, at this work, making, and filling the Theca's, with Worms, we are not certain; but we judg it likely, that one and the same Bee re∣quires the making of the whole bunch of Theca's; and fills them with her Worms only, for with these Eyes we have seen one Bee, which alone layed 33. Worms, and put them into the Theca's. This is also Observabe, every Bee in the making of every Egg, is buied, before that be finished, for 28 hours in a continued labonr almost, yet some get their work done sooner, others later a little, as it is with Work men, which are more handy some then others. The Worm Figured in the Table, changed, the 11th. of Iuly, and so continued, untill the 17th. of August, when it appeared in forme of the Bee, Figured in the Table. when these Young Bees have, by biteing, opened the Wax cases, and are come forth of them, they are wont to rub their Eyes, with their foremost feet, and by this means of rubing, they seem to open their Eyes, or at least to rouse themselves from sleep; in the fore part of their body, they are Wite, Yellowish also, and Black, their wings ly upon their backs, and are not yet expanded, and they are moist; but are soon dry, by the Air; that in a quarter of an hour, they can expand, and extend them. These little Bees, new hatched, are not yet fit for worke; but yet they cove to get up into the open air; but are a hinderance to the greater Bees, which are busily employ∣ed, who therefore drive them down, as often as they come up; also they run too and fro, as though they were drunk, after three Days that they have been hatched, then they are able to carry Earth, to the nests, which the old Bees Arch over, with Earth heaped together, which Hollow Arch, they draw over with a coat of Wax, as
Brick layers Servants carry Morter, and Bricks with which they build Walls: In like manner, these Young Bees serve the Old ones; but they do not carry Earth for∣wards; but like Hens scratch it backwards, and those Young Bees which were first hatched and are elder then the rest, are imployed about the more master-like works; for they make Wax, dig holes, and Arch them; the Younger geting Earth; The elder eat Wax and soften it in their stomacks, and throw it up againe, by little and little Liqui∣ied; and of this Liquid Wax and Earth mixed together, they make Nests; not unlike Swallows, and finish their work with theirfore Feet complicated, and the Younger help them in bringing and ramming the Earth. This commonality also has its Kings or Captaine as the Noble Bees, by whom they are governed, and this Bom∣bylius orMaster Bee is very old, and in body Greater, then the rest, like as the King of the little Bees do's excell the rest in magnitude, and shew: But this is destitute of Wings and Hair, where the rest abound, with White, Yellow, and Black Hair, and are rough; this is alltoge∣ther Bald, like naked Birds, or as is painted on the back part of the Head; moreover he is Black and shining, as Polisht Ebony; sometimes he coms to look upon the Works in which the Commonality is busied, and to ex∣plore whether they are made of a just measure, as well Latitude, as Altitude, conveniently creeping into the Nest, and creeping out; Ascending, and Descending, he do's seem, to measure as Architects are wont to take an exact account of the work, which the Work-men make: the lesse Bees when they meet this Old Bee, do not ex∣hibit a little honour to him, as to the King; they do run about him every way; they stroke him once and again; in the mean time playing with their wings ex∣panded, embraceing him with the Anteriour eet, as with armes, even as we gratulate him we meet, therefore
the Bees are an example to us, of giving honour to old men. When this Captain Bombylius has explored whether the work answeres the Rule; he doth descend into the Latibulum, and every one of the younger does anew set upon each his work. In the Morning these come late to the work, and un∣less these little creatures, which daily in the morning creep upon them and about them, did not excite them, they would come later. They have also amongst them another Bombilius, who like the Drummer, do's beat to the Souldiers, to come to the Gardes, or to move the Camp, or to March, or to Fight with the sound of the Drum, so also do's he excite them to work. This about 7 a Clock ith morning, do's ascend to the top of the work, to be built, and with the halfe of his body, looking out of the hole, doth vibrate and agitate his wings, and by the benefit of them, doth excite a streperous noise in the hollow Latibulum, not unlike the noise of a Drum, which mostly is heard a whole quarter of an hour. I, an expert person, and an Ear witnesse, do comme∣morate these things; Yea and an Eye witnesse, and toge∣ther with Me, many others have heart it more then once, the Vibrating and Streperous wings of that Drum∣mer of the Bombilii: I say, Persons, which for the hearing of this curiosity have visited me. Beides, and to these, there is one that doth Watch, for when sometimes I did beat the nest, this Forth with did ascend out of the Latibulum, as one struck and asto∣nished, and did Discurre every where, as one that did ex∣plore what matter was without: but suboderating noe danger, again he soon descended. More then once I have with admiration seen that. Sometimes also, I have put upon the stick, a Domestick Bee; but having spyed this,
forthwith out he came, and snatcht the Bee as one in wroth, and left it not, till it was killed. Furthermore I have found these Bombilii, to coat with Wax the Cells, out of which their fellow Bees had gone, to fill ten with honey; to seal them up with Wax, lest the Thieves entering into them, should wast the Honey. For amongst these are to be found idle Drone, Thieves and sow Bombilii: Yet we have seen those, with the rest going abroad to collect Honey, did make a shew to fly out with them, but they did not goe out of the Chamber, in which I did keep them; but did only fly a few rounds, and that being done they did returne into one of the Glass bottles: (For I hadplaced two in the Chamber) in the which they had built their Combs: And each one returned into the Bottle out of which they came orth; when the rest flew out into the Fields, and Meddows, and afterwards did returne home, some loden with Honey, others with Wax, and some with Water, these Droans did returne empty into the Hives: and moreover did devour the Combs made by others, and the Honey gathered for winter. These are the idle Cattle which do not imploy them∣selves in the gathering of Honey; but do consume the aliments gotten together, by their fellows, concerning which the Ancients have said much, &c. Perhaps you will aske what was the end of this Old Bombylius, which I did think to be the King or Captain: Him I saw near dying early ith morning before the Drummer did Vibrate, as he was wont, his wings, and did excite a noise to them, creeping out of the House: But wholy horrid and Trembling in body; hither come, as it were tired, he lay down and without Convultion of the feet, sweetly did expire; neither did that seem a wonder to me, for his feet were long since numbed with Old age. The King being dead, the number of the other Bomb∣lii,
did daily decrease, at last I did see a Bombylius creep∣ing out of the Cmbs, whose Head was pluckt from the shoulders: A body without a name. I beheld this Trunk palpitating, and lying alive two Days, and then expiring, hence it was easie to guesse, all things within to be troubled and done inordinatly and ill, and the Bombylii to doe as they list, and to fight iercely the King being dead; for from that time the Drummer beat not any more, as he was wont, the King being alive. It is also worth admiration, about the birth of these Bombylii from one Old Bee of this kind, when he do's compose himself to propagate his Specis, Sometimes to come a Hundred and Twenty Worms, yet sometimes fewer, and sometimes more; but one only sometimes, to have bred at once, there are many Eye witnesses be∣sideds my self, who have wondered, one of these little Bees to be so fruitfull, as to be able to constitute a Bee King∣dom, and an intire swarme. Section. 6. of Beetles. Number. 106. G. P. 2. Tab. 5▪ Betwixt the bark and the body of an Oak, growing in the Island Wallacria in our Zeland, I found this Worm boar∣ing it; though soft, knew how by the benefit of a pecu∣liar organ, as with a wimble to perforate a very hard wood; and this kind of Worms use their mouth, out of which a sharp and hard Instrument doth stick for a Wim∣ble. Also they are not a little strong, in protracting the hinder part of the body to the head wards: Moreover
they do affix the Podex in the excrements, and so they are placed betwixt the Wood and excrements, as it were squeesed in a Press; so that they may force with their mouth and boar, and in this posture they do preorate the Oke, and do live of the marrow and fattish matter, which they boare out. Being fed to satiety, they do extend themselves straight, when he Ventricle has done its office, they do exonorate the belly, and at the same time they do, by little and little, more and more contract the body, and draw it up, as much as may be; so that al∣ways the voided excrement is found very close to the body: And so pressed they force into the wood. This did give it self to Transmutation, the 28th. of October, placed upon the bark of the Oak, on which I had found it sitting, together with many other little ones; yet I judging it alive (for I saw them wag fre∣quently) the▪ Year following the 13th. of Ianuary, it did produce an odd Animall, of a Hoairy colour, varie∣gated with black spots; but yet stout and fierce; in the Forehead, it was Armed with Horns, which it did draw back, when it was angry or did move forwards; but did joyn them, when pleased; did not suffer it self to be in it closed in a wooden box, for it did throughly bite into the wood, and that quickly, and so broke out, and o did she from what kind it sprang; for I cou'd not explore of what aliment it did live, and therefore cou'd not keep it alive, but I suffered it to starve. Number. 107. b. G. P. 1. Tab. 66. The Worms of Table. 107. b. are most bitter enemies of Catterpillars: The fore part of the body has two open claws; whichshut and open like Pincers; by these claws they pinch the bellies of Catterpillars, and hang upon
them; the Catterpillars feelig the pain of the wound, do move and agitate the body every way, that they may free themselves: In the mean time the Worm, like one dead, the body being extended, doth quiesce without motion, and by how much more the Catterpillar doth move, and toss; by so much more is it hurt, and the belly is burst; after that the Worm has let go, the wound doth forthwith swell, which seems to indicate a venome. This Worm, well armed by nature, is Yellow; and of a splendid colour: it cannot easily be hurt of the Cat∣terpillars; it cannot live above grond above two Days. I put upon the ground one of the Worms described almost dead; which forth with recovering spirit, pene∣trated by boaring the ground. In winter time diging, I found one of these Worms, the Ground being Frozen, aboue two foot deep, (they easi∣ly abide cold,) together with a certain Bee, which I placed near the Worm, that I might observe how they agreed. The Worm, forthwith set upon the Bee, and took hold of his head with his Pincers, and so long agitated, untill the Bee very much tired, did endeavour to get away; but his wings being frozen, could not. A little battle I saw at the same time betwixt a Bee and a Catterpillar; which I had then also dug out of the Ground. Number. 107. a. G. P. 2. Tab. 19▪ The two Worms exprest in the Table, are plainly of the same nature, and cast upon the fire, do conslagrate like Oyle. Now I shall relate the Metamorphosis of them.
One of the Worms, when he lay still for Transforma∣tion, it was the 2d. of Iune, and he continued in that posture till the 24th. of September, in which posture he is expressed in the Table. But that same day he brouhgt forth an Animall, like to a Chrysalis: as that Worm had a pair of Pincers, so this Animall was in like manner armed with Pincers, very per∣nicious, for with them he pierces and breakes the Eggs of Ants, and Gryllotalpae; wherever he finds them: He is equally as malicious, as the Worm, from which he is chang∣ed: Also he fiercely fights with his like; and especially after three Days hunger; for then he fights most stoutly with his Princes, &c. When you do cast him Ants or Gryllotalpae's Egg; forth∣with he doth Exuge them boared through with his beake. As this Animall is an enemy, to all Insects, and do's endeavour to devour them; So also it ha's its enemies and indeed very Infest; to wit, the Gryllotalpae, for these every where near their nest, make covered Bur∣rows in which they do wait in Ambush, and observe which they may devour. As these are wont to kill Cat∣terpillars, so to them is returned, what they have given to others: Yea as these have treated the Gryllotalpae, not yet excluded and hidden in the Eggs; so also the adult Gryllotalpae, do treat these, and prevaile over them. These Worms are two years old, when they change; neither do they change the Hackle: But when they change forme, then Snake like they put off the Skin, and grow Whitish; and also on each side the beginning of the wings is then beheld to come forth, but the Head and Feet obtected with a certain thin membrane, or skin, which by little and little doth excresce with the Feet, and at length doth fall off. And this membrane doth seem only given to them for the conservation of their members, when they are in the state of Transformation; and now when these Worms
are plainly Transmuted as dead, yea void of all motion, they ly upon the ground fixed, and there appears no igne of life in them. Number. 108. G. P. 1. Tab. 6. The Worm represented in Table 108. Was bred from the sweet Root called Skirrets. In the same Root in which it was bred, it composed it self for change the 9th. of August, and the 25th. of the same month came forth a Black creature depicted in the Table: it is of a slow gate, as the Worm from which it was bred, when this little beast was first seen, it was covered with a Yelowish colour very pale; the Fore-part was Reddish, but afterwards it became exactly Yellow, and then of an Amber colour; and at length elegantly Black. I kept him alive some Days with sweet juices. Number. 109. G. P. 3. Tab. M. This Species of Tcredo is wont to be found while yet it is little, betwixt the Bark, and the Okewood, or also in the very Bark; and there it is procreated of Seed; but now having got more strength, it do's boar into entire Trees; by its most sharp mouth, and doth inferre great damage to them: it doth seem a wonder, or at least worth the Observation, a worm so soft, little, and tender, to penetrate so great and most hard trees, and boaring the trees do's follow after the fat, and oleaginous juice with which it is Nourished. It is necessary that the Anteriour parts of the Mouth, to be not only hard, but also subtle, and sharp; by which they may penetrate to the intimate parts of the
Trees, and to comminute their substance, although wood, and most hard, into a most fine Powder; which in eve∣ry Species of Teredo may be observed. It composed it self to change the 10th. of November, 1663. And the 6th. of Aprill, the Year following 1664. the Red creature presented it self to our Eyes designed in this Table. I kept it alive with Sugar untill the 5th. of May. Number. 110. G. P. 1. Tab. 79. The Worm, of the 110th. Table, was brought in a cer∣taine Ship from New Zeland, in the West Indies, into this Country. I found it in the bark of wood, of which Chests are wont to be made, in which is wont to be brought Sugar, out of the Indies; from that bark it hath its Originall, and doth seek nourishment; it began to undergoe the change the, 7th. of September, and remained in it to the 19th. of October, and at that time changed the skin; and with the skin the shape; by little and little, the colour, members and all the rest. The manner of the change (as I Observed it) I have set forth in the Table, and at length, the Transformation being compleated, an Insect, (perhaps never seen in these Regions) came forth, of a wonderfull structure and shape, much unlike to the first which it had; which I have also delineated exactly. Number. 111. G. P. 1. Tab. 78. The Worm, of the 111th. Table, is in Dutch called the Corne Worme; because it consumes the roots of Corne; it is ound also in Gardens and Orchards.
I took this Worm the 22d. of August, 1659. And I kept it a whole Year in a Glasse bottle, with Earth put in the bottome: To which I injected the seed of Henbite, with a White flower. (for there is another Herb of that name with Purple flowers) and I observed in the evening the Worm to be wont to come forth, up from the bottom of the Bottle, that it might feed upon the Herb, and Flower, before described; this being done, again it hid it self within the Earth; for never or very seldom, it do's ap∣pear, in the Day time, above ground. After the Wormes of this kind have eaten enough, and have come to the just Magnitude of body, they seek high places; that they may safely quiesce, and that they may pleasingly compose themselves to Transformation, which they expect. This Worm seems to come from the seed of those Bee∣tles, which eat the leaves of trees, and which is very fre∣quent in Holland upon the tops of Trees in May, for then their nourishment every where abounds. This kind is wont to stay above ground two whole Months, or a little more, the rest of the Months of the Year, it lyes hid under ground and useth no nourish∣ment; like to a dead thing, and it do's always, unmov∣ed, plainly quiesce; but touched with a hot hand, or otherwise, it forthwith stirrs; as I have often tryed. And this also of this kind of Beetle, never to be found two or more joyned under ground; but alwayes Solitary. Before the Worms hither to described, were transformed into Beetles, they had lived over the forth Year. The Worm of this Table, did begin to change it's forme on the 3d of September, 1658. and I have described the manner of it's Transmutation; and in May, 1659. from that came a Beetle deplcted also. It lives long, provided it be not starved; for want of food; or through the vehemence of the cold.
Number. 112. G. P. 2. Tab. 18. This Kind of Worm, I found creeping upon Green∣corne; and in vaine have sought it other where: They are pernicious creatures, for they eat the green Ears or Sheathings of Wheat: They swiftly ascend, and descend, as soon as they perceive the Corn to be touched with a Stick or the Hand, (The like is above noted of an Eruca) forthwith they cast themselves upon the ground, be they little or greater; the lesse swiftlier, then the greater; for that these are not so Tenacious of the Corne as those, which are Armed in the hinder parts with Clikers, by the help of which, they hold hard upon the Corne; be∣ing fallen upon the ground they creep into it, and ly hid under it. One of these, affixed to a stalke of wheat, being about to change into a new forme, the 22d. of Iuly, as is depict∣ed. On the 8th. of August, came forth an Animall very thirsty, for as soon, as it came forth, it drunk much, and often. I learnt by experience, (and all that I have writ I have proved so) this Animall may very long be kept alive with water, and Sugar; but destitute of water; it lives not above four or five Days. Number. 113. G. P. 2. Tab. 15. These Animalls for the Elegancy of them, are called Lady-clocks; they owe their Originall to the Seed which their Parents shed and put upon the Curran-bush leaves; and which the heat of the Sun hatches. These Eggs like seeds layd close in a round, as loaves in an Oven, the 20 of May, first did look black: But the
29th. of May, did grow greenish at the bottome; and the Second of Iune, every one of these Eggs, had a black spot, or point in the middle; and the 5th. of the same month, Animalls were hatched out of these Eggs; partly yellow∣ish, and partly black; in which no touch of life did ap∣pear, unlesse breathed on, then they moved, or rolled, to and fro. But the 6th. of Iune, when now their feet are grown, and hardened with the benefit of the aire, they creep a∣bout; then run about; but about evening, and when the aire was cooler, they run together, and kept close; either for company, or for heating one another; and in this situation, and posture, they remained till 16 ith Morning of the day following; then every one set out to seek food, and that, the dew which useth to fall upon the leaves from the skie, and endued with a peculiar force of Aliment, well knowne to those, and other In∣sects, for food; for they feed on it, &c. About the 13th. of Iune, these Insects did put off their skins, Ser∣pent like; which being done, they are Yellowish and Blackish. The Day after, viz. The 14th. or about it, they change forme another time, and colour, so as to grow Yellow and Reddish. They begin the 3d. change, two Dayes after the Se∣cond change, in that very posture, and with a Black and Red colour. The 4th. Transmutation they are wont to undergo, he 3d. Day after the 3d. Metamorphosis. And this is the last change which they suffer, and by it they get their last skin, partly Black and Red, and where it is Red, variegated with Black spots, or points, as is depicted. Tis worth the noting, as often at they cast their skin, they fix their feet fast to the Leafe or Paper, they chance to be on, and when they have fixt them, they creep out
of the skin, and leave it standing so, that seeing of it, you woul'd say it was verily one of those Animalls standing, &c. I sustained these Creatures for some time with dew, collected before Sun-rise from the Curran-bush leaves, un∣till I saw them to have attained to their full Magnitude, and perfection, nor to make any further change, and then I set them at liberty to provide for themselves. Number. 114. G. P. 2. Tab. 41 With this sort of Worm, Skins and all things made of skins, are much infestd. This I found upon the Feathers of the dryed body of a Duck, eating the fat and skin thereof, and perhaps they are bred of it, because they feed of it, as many Insects e∣xist from that, with which they are nourished, as the Philo∣sophers Write. They creep very swiftly, as soon as they per∣ceive any thing, which may trouble them; they hide them∣selves forthwith under the Feathers, so that they may not easily be found. This deserves Admiration, these Worms to cast 10 Skins, before they change; and as oft to cleanse, as they cast their skins. Their Excrement is like a slender Thred twisted, yet firmly compacted, a Span long, and which may be exten∣ded, for it is Viscons, and hard to break, and under dirt, they are wont to ly hid. I tryed this Worm to have fed, from the 10th. of Iune, to the first of September, when it did desist from eating, it began its Transmutation, as is depicted Number 114. and the 20th. of October, to have bred first a Hair coloured Animall; which then put on a Red, and lastly a Black colour. which was Yellowish, in the middle of the body. You may keep these Anmalls, as long as you please if
you give them Walnuts to feed on; but take their ood from them, and they live not above four days. No Insects are so fearfnll as these are, for let them have the least perceivance of any thing, that may hurt them, and they presently counterseit themselves dead for fear of being killed; and indeed, it is so with all kind of Animalls, who naturally fly things hurtfull. Another Worm of this kinde I fed, not unlike in co∣lour to the other, Figured in the same Table. Which the 3d. of September, composed it self for change, in the Figure depicted, it remained in that state to the 20th. of November, on which day it boar Twins a Male ou of the right, and a Fe-male out of the left side. But you'l ask, how knew you to distinguish Male and Fe-male? I answer, both these within a quarter of an houre after their birth copulated, and shewed me which was Mae, and which Fe-male. The Male was longer, and slenderer, then the Fe male; which was shorter aud rounder, the one delighted in the others company exceedingly; but I let them go together at liberty into the Fields. I was an eye witnesse of this secret of Nature, from one and the same Species, two specifically different Ani∣malls to have been bred, from the one, One; and from the other two a Male and a Fe-male; I saw this Trans∣mutation with my own Eyes, and coul'd not find the reason of it. Number. 115. G. P. 2. Tab. 10. I find by Accurate search, that about the midle of Iune, a Greasie and Fat substance doth drop out of, both the upper, and the under side of the leaves of Moth∣mullen. Sometimes sooner, sometimes later; but the 15th. of Iune, I found out this thing.
This fat juice did become a living Animall, the 20th. of Iune, to wit, a little Worme; which was in the middle of the Body pellucid, like water; was of a Saphire co∣lour, Greenish, which slowly and gently was agitated by the Suns heate; but the 24th. of Iune, it became of a Yellowish colour, and the 27th. of the same Month, I did distinctly see on the hinder part of the Body, which was Yellowish, 32 Black spots, and forwards on the body 8 more. These Animalls feed of the down onely growing on the leaves of Mullen; and this wool, or down mixed with Venice Turpentine, and used by way of suffumigation in smoke, cures the Piles; which I have tryed. This little Animall did give it self to change, the 30th. of Iune, the same Year; but because nothing par∣ticularly came from it, I have not depicted the forme of the Sheath, or Chrysalis; for only after it had given it self to rest, it grew in its roundnesse, as though it would change, and the 8th. of August, it did creep out of its skin, as out of its Shell, Yellowish distinguished with Black spots, and round in Figure. It is worth observing, that these Creatures, when they first grow Yellow, ever before they have feet, are be∣seiged by their enemies; and they are certain little Spiders; which are of the same colour with them, and bigness; and without doubt, deceive them, upon the likeness of them. These Spiders are bred of the same Leaf with them. Moreover there is another Creature of a Black co∣lour with Pincers in his Forehead, which he opens and shuts, as he lists; with which he kills these Worms, and Spiders: This also I guess is bred from the same Leaf, &c. All of them feed of the Down growing upon Mullen. This Down is pellucid like Chrystall.
Number. 116. G. P. 1. Tab. 43. This little Annimall feeds on a Thistle. Hee began to be Transformed the 9th. of Iuly: The manner of the change is depicted, for its singular elegancy; The upper part represent the Figure of an Imperiall Crown, under which the Image of a humane Face offers it selfe: In the middle you have the Image of some ensign. The state of that Transformation continued in this manner 12. Days; after that appeared a great Animall, having six Feet; which also I painted. Number. 117. G. P. 1. Tab. 44. This Worm is not much unlike the former; Melissa Yields it aliment; whose juice drunk with Wine, is be∣lieved, to mitigate the pain of the Stone. In creeping appears, near thee xtream parts of the Body, a thin skin; which do's seem to refrigerate it by con∣tiualy fanning it. It began to change the 7th. of Iune, and after 10 Days it received the forme of the Insect, depicted. Number. 118. G. P. 1. Tab. 45. The Worms depicted in the 118 Table, I found upon the leaves of the Willow, in a certaine order; as it were, disposed in Battle Aray, and with the bodies erected. And when they had come to their just Magnitude, their bodies being inclined, they began to eat, and to
abrade the tender particles of the leaves, soe that no∣thing was remaining, besides a certain dried skin. They appear Yellow in the beginning, afterwards they become black. They composed themselves for change, the 7th. of Iune, and the 18th. day of the same moneth appeared the Animalls depicted. These Animals have a certain glew, near the Tail; by whch they do adhere to all things so Tenaciously, that they can scarce be shaked of. Number. 119. G. P. 1. Tab. 6. For Gryllotalpae or Field Crickets, I know them by many experiments to be very rebust, and of a firm life. I cut off the head of one of them; which after 2 dayes was wholy eaten by another Field Cricket: onely 2 little Nerves being left, yet the head lived 12 hours after. I hanged another Field Cricket by a string in the heat of the Sun, so that it became wholy Black: yet it died not, before the 7th. day. They are very ingenious in building their nest: for that end, they do elect a certain Glebe of earth firm and Tenacious: and therein they make themselves a hole to go in and out at; within they make a great cavitie, in the which they depose more then 100. Sometime 150. eggs. This being done: he hole of the ingresse they accura∣tely shut up, and they strengthen the Glebe as much, as may be; for that being broken, all the eggs perish, and are consumed of certain Black Flyes; which ly hid under ground; therefore they are very anxious and solicitous of conserving, and making firm this Glebe; therefore they perpare for themselves a certain subteraneous Du∣ctu,
round about the Glebe, that they may go round a∣bout this Glebe, and preserve it: besides, about this Glebe they have other holes, and hiding places; whither in time of necessity they may Fly. Again, they know how to raise up their nests, by a wonderfull industrie, in a hot and dry season, that they may almost touch the superficies of the earth: that by so much the better and sooner, the egs may be cherished with the heat of the Sun, and hatch; on the contrary, the air enclining to cold and humiditie, they do sink lower into ground their nests. I have observed also the Field Crickets to have wings, but not to fly: but for ornament; that with them they may cover, and preserve the very tender hinder part of the body. In the Island Wallachia of Zeland, there are many Field Crickets, and they do much hurt to the young and tender corne, which they sa in two with their mouth and cut the roots. The Gardiners, that they may remove them, put into the ground little pots, that the upper lips may be equall with the superficies of the ground, the Field Crickets falling into these cannot get out. Or their nests are to be broken, and the eggs spoiled Number. 120. a. G. P. 2. Tab. 42. The Animall depicted in the 120th. Table, a. is ugly. Beetle-like, and mostly lyes hid underground; it has no wings, it feeds of the leaves of Anemone, or the garden Ranunoulus. This I put into a Big Glasse, the 5th. of May, filled with new earth; the 11th. of the same moneth it thrust it self, wih the hinder part of the body into the earth;
at first I did not observe that hole was by it, but take∣ing it out, I made all plain again. The next time I looked at it, I observed, that it had thrust its body again into the earth, and I took it out a∣gain; but the 3d. time seeing it again in the hole, I let it aoe, & did observe not-a-few Eggs; which it had layed in the hole, Yellowish Eggs, like grains of Sand, thick compacted, as in the Table, they are depicted. When this Animall had layed its seed, it was as little again, as it had been, just before; for it cou'd scarce draw its load∣en and big body, and now it became more Agill, and eat more meat, and greedilier, then before: also in a night, the hinder part of the body was extreamly shrunk up, and shortned by the halfe; it slept at the least 1 hours daily, as oft as it awaked, it devoured its usuall food, which I gave it, greedily. And the 2d. of Iune, I found it again crept with the hinder part of the body into the earth, continually beat∣ing the earth therewith, that it might more easily lay its seed &c. After this manner it placed its seed upon the earth the 2d. time, in the same form as the first; but that being done, it lived not long after; for when the leaves of Anemony did wither, it died with hunger, without doubt. From the seed of this Animall, which was first layed, many very little Wormes were hatched, not thicker, then horse-hairs: But the 21th. of Iune, the crept swiftly, and were as big as Mustard-seed, had six feet and 2 hos. The greatest part of these Worms being numbred, I found them above Two Thousand: but I believe there were 3 Thousand. The seed which it layed the Second time, the 29 of Iune produced also many Worms, just like the former; but not so many in number, to satisfie my curiosity, I took them up on my Pencill point, a little wetted, one
by one, and put them into a glass, and thus I counted 906. but many I lost in the telling. I took great pains to find out a gratefull food for these Worms; but to little purpose, I gave them honey, dead earth Worms, Ants Eggs, Sugar, Bread, divers green herbs; but I cou'd not bring them up to a just bignesse with all these. But by means of a Microscope, I Painted to the life one of them, in the form you see it in the Table. This and others I kept alive, and found that yearly they changed colour▪ the 2d. year brownish, the 3d. year black. And thus much for the female Beetle I shall observe something of the Male of this kind. Number. 120. b. G. P. 1. Tab. 74. I found the Worm expressed in this Table, b. under an Iron Pot: it is fierce, and devours all other Worms, even those that are wont to eat Catterpillars: I put him (for the experiment sake,) with 4 other Worms, such as are wont to devour Catterpilears, into a China-Cup, he forthwith snatched one of them up with his Pincers, and sucked out all his Juice, and although the Yellow Worm, did much Strive to get away; yet this kept fast hold, till he had killed them all. Number. 120. . G. P. 1. Tab. 17. Also again I noted about the Female of this Species in the Table. c. that it was of a slow motion, and crept, and rested by turns. It is wont to live in the darke un∣der-ground,
and also above ground in obscure places. It is nourishd with Worms only that it finds, and devoures, it tears open the belly of the Worm it kills, and sucks the guts, and eats them, lifting up its head, and now and then setling its feet upon the body of the Worm: I have observed the guts of the Yellow Worms, which it had plucked out, to have the thicknes of the hair of a mans head, now when it is full, it sleeps 5 hours, without any motion; and drawing its head almost un∣der its body, it lyes upon a side. And because this Beetle is of a very slow motion, and lives not, but of other Worms, it has wings; these wings are as long as its body, and yet do not appear, or can be seen, unless it produce them; so accuratly are they rolled up and folded, and thus hid, are not dirtied, and marred by creeping underground. Section. 7. OF GRASSHOPPERS. Number. 121. G. P 2. Tab. 40. Many years I desired to konw, whence Grasshoppers were bred, and did use muchdiligence in the matter. I have had 40. years experience, and do attest the Grasshopper depicted, in the 121 Table, yearly to be found, the moneths of November, and Decmeber. in our
Island of Zeland, about old Lime-trees, and to live for some time of a certain humour they suck from these trees. For winter coming on, they all dye which come from this Lime-tree, and it seems proable, they must desert those Trees; because they afford them no longer nou∣rishment. Whilst they are Worms, they live of and in the wood of the Lime-tree; but when they become Grashoppers, they have need of other nourishment then the leaves and humour of these trees. The Worm depicted lying in the state of Transmuta∣tion, is not easily found, unlesse when by the force of winds, the Trees are torn up by the roots, or when the wood is felled. About that time this Worm light into my hands, ha∣ving entered into the state of Transmutation and re∣sting in it, so that I cannot exactly tell the very time of its entry into the Transmutation, for it had placed it self in the very interiour pith of the Tree, and I found it in the dissected wood the first Ianuary. As soon as I had got it, I placed it in its own earth, in a warm place near the fire. And the 31th. of the same month it brought forth a Grashopper, which cast its shin first, and then changed its colour. For 14 dayes I gave it Sugar, Apples and Pairs; but these not being its meat, it dyed.
Section. 8. OF FLYES. Number. 122. G. P. 1. Tab. 53. The Worm of the 122 Table, was bred of the Putrid flesh of a certain Bird; which I kept under a glass, untill it did begin to be transformed, the 30 of May, and the 14th. of Iune it had the shape of a big Fly depicted. When it first came forth of its worm, or egg, no wings did appear: but in the space of halfe an hour, it seemed bigger by halfe, and the wings were spread and smooth. Number. 123. G. P. 1. Tab. 54. The Worm of the 123d. Table, was bred of a Flan∣ders Pica, dead, and corrupted. Having sought a Place to hide it self in, after the manner of Insects, which change; it began its change the 12 of Iune; and, the 27 of the same month, it put on the forme of a Fly, depicted.
Number. 124. G. P. 1. Tab. 55. The Worm of the 124. Table. had its originall from the corrupted brain of the Water-Hen. When the time of Transformation comes, it boars a hole in some wood, and hides it self in it. It boared open all the wooden boxes in which I en∣devoured to keep it; so that I was forst to keep it in a glass. It began to change the 12th. of August: and it had the form of a Fly, the 26th. of the same month, de∣picted. Number. 125. G. P. 1. Tab. 69. The Worm of the 125th. Table, had its originall from Wheat-bran putrefied; which I kept mixt with water, till it grew sower, and began to putrefie. From this Putrefaction came many Little Wormes; which begun to take a new forme, altogether the 22d. day of Iune: and the d. of Iuly in the same year, they all changed into Flyes; which lived without any food, till the 16th of the same moneth. The following Flys make a distinct Genus, remarke∣able for their Quick and Steddie flight. Number. 126. G. P. 1. Tab. 2 The worm of the 126th. Table: is bred in Iakes, Privies, of sincks; its Long Taile serves, that it rolls not in creep∣ing,
for that it has a round body without Legs; as it rolls it ballances it self with its taile. It composed it self for change the 26th. of August, for which end, these Worms seek hiding places in the chinks, and clefts of old walls. It remained in its change 17th. days, depicted in the Table, then came forth a Bee. When this Bee was first hatched, I thought it want∣ed wings; for in the place of them, I cou'd Animadvert nothing; but 2 white points like Pin-heads; but the Bee forthwith began to spread those white spots, with its hinder feet; and within 2 hours fitted them so, that they were fit fo fly with. The nourishment of this Bee, is a certain sweet juice; which it draws from the flowers of Carduus Benedictus it also feeds on Sugar, and may be kept long alive with it. It uses little Aliment, for it lived 21 days without any food. By the Bee, is to be understood a Fly; that is, a Two winged Insect; the Bee kind having ever Four wings. Number. 127. G. P. 1. Tab. 4. The Worm, of the 127th. Table, is found in Privies; and is bred of Mens Excrements; it is a very slow creature. It composed it self for change the 28th of September: and remained therein to the 22d. of October. And at that time was born a Fly, depicted in the Table. These Flyes are wont to abide about the places where they are bred, and I cou'd not keep it alive with Sugar.
Number. 128. G. P. 1. Tab. 4. The Worm depicted in the 128th. Table, was bred of rotten dryed Fish called Scate. Nature cannot be idle; the corruption of one is the generation of another; and from rottennesse, especially in a hot and moist matter (which seems to be most apt for generation,) divers Animalls are produced. I experienced this Worm the 26th. of May; to be changed into an egg; and a Great Fly to be bred of that egg the 21st. of Iune, depicted in the Table. Number. 129. G. P. 1. Tab. 50. The Worm represented in the 129th. Table, is bred in the fruit of that Shrub, which in Dutch is called the Speen appell; and the virtues which are ascribed to the fruit; are also of the white worm bred within it, to wit, for the Piles, and burning Fevours, and for these ends, the fruit is gathered about the 16th. of October, for the little White worm remains therein, to the mid∣dle of Iune of the year following; and at that time is turned into a Fly, making a hole to get out at. Number. 130. G. P. 1. Tab. 51. I had a mind to try, what wou'd become, of the pu∣trid and corrupted Vrine of a man; I made a Funnell of paper, and so folded it, that no Fly or other Ani∣mall cou'd get into it: having infused into it oft times
humane Vrine; I ound some Worms to be bred in the folds, where the feces stayed. I reserved one of them, for the experiment sake, which composed it self for change, the first of March: and the 14th. of the same moneth, it had the forme of a Fly, depicted in the Table: its head was Rd, the body Black, and the hinder-parts Yellowish. Number. 131. G. P. 1. Tab. 52. This Worm was bred of Barey flower; which yet it did corrode into smaller particles: this flower being moist, putrefied, and this Worm was bred form the putrefaction; for the corruption of one, is wont to be the generation of another. I cou'd not observe this Worm to live; but yet it began to be changed the 8th. of August, and 23d. of the same month it received the form of an Oblong fly. Number. 132. G. P. 1. Tab. 73. The little Worm of the 132th. Table, was bred of Rotten Cheese, mixed with Cummin; with which also it is nourished, and kept alive. These Worms do not creep so much, as (the body being gathered up) they suddenly Spring, and Leap Locust-wise. Before they do compose themselves for change, they do quiesce 3 dayes. This Worm began to change the 28th. of November, 1658. and the 10th. of May the year following, a little Fly appeared, whcih lived 8 days without food.
The Worm the Chrysalis, and the Fly, are all de∣picted in the Table. Number. 133. G. P. 1. Tab. 41. The Worm of the 133d. Table, is wont to be found upon the leaves of the Curran-bush, which are blasted: under those leaves I have descried to lie hid, a great Number of little Animalls like Pediculi, the Worms of this Table eat them. For whilst these Worms do quiesce, without any manifest motion, and that the Animalls do creep about and upon them, they sting them with their beak, and eat them. It began to change the 19th. of Iune, and the 30th. of the same Month it appeared under the forme of a Fly; and so in the space of a 11 Days a Fly is bred of a Worm. Those Pediculi are very probably Cimices Number. 134. G. P. 1. Tab. 47. The Worm of the 134th. Table, feeds of little crea∣tures, which they call Green Lice; and do lick the fat of Roses; so that it is very manifest, not the least Animalls are safe from enemies; but the Less are food for the greater. This Worm do's stick to things, and keeps it self im∣moveable by the bigger and obtuse parts of the Body; but the acute and slender part, which is like a Pro∣boscis, it tosses every way, and moves it, that it may
take some of the Foresaid little Creaturs, and having caught them, it lifts them up, lest they should stick or adhere to any thing, and sucks them so lifted up, untill nothing remaine but a every thin Skin Wings and Feet. Also these Worms seem to love Ants; for they are often with them, but hurt them not. It began to Change the 14th. of Iuly, under the Figure of an Egg: and the 21st, of the same Month, it received the forme of a very long Fly. This was a By-birth, and an Ichneumon-Wasp; the true birth should have been a Fly, like the last aescri∣bed. Number. 135. G. P. 2. Tab. 11. There are many of these Worms to be found upon the leaves of the Elder; for they are bred of the Seed which the Fly their Mother layes upon them in the Month of Iune, and Hatched by the heat of the Sun. They well know by instinct (which is admirable) that there will be food ready, as soon as their Young ones are Hatched, this instinct is Analagous to reason, and comes near it: So that there they lay their Eggs, where they know the little Brood, as soon as Hatched, will find meat; for the Ants do depose a sertain fat and faecund humour, upon the extreme boughs of the Elder, Apple, Cherry Pre-tree; and upon the leaves of the Curran-bush, from which little Creaturs of a Green, and somtimes of a Black colour, are bred; from
the hinder part of whose Body, an humour is wont to distill, which these Creatures vehemently covert; as Fishes Water, and greedily sup up. And when these Flyes know, that these little crea∣tures are bred, a future meat for their Young ones; they do inject their Seed upon the leaves. These little Creaturs have six Feet, and long Winges, yet I never found them to fly; bnt are a food to these Worms. These Worms know how to Counterfeit dead, and to lie amongst them; for that the innocent little Crea∣tures creep over the Bodies of the Worms; which when the Worms feel, they take them with their sharp bills, and snck them; lifting up their Proboscis like Hens, when they drinke. These Worms feed of these little Creatures, and the Birds feed of the Flyes, they are changed into, and we of the Birds. As soon as these little Creatures perceive the Worms, forthwith they fly them, and run away. When this Worm has fed to its fullnesse for twenty four hours it is wont to rest and sleep; from Eight¦ith Morning till Nine the next Day, and when he a∣gain feels these little Creatures to run about him, he Eats as much of them as he has a mind, and now full again, it rests, and seems as Dead. And the 12th. of Iune, this Worm affixed to a leaf did compose it self for change, as is Depicted. But the 15th. of Iuly, a Fly was Borne; which as soon as come forth, in halfe a quarter of an hour be∣came as big again, and lived four Days without Food. These Little Creatures are a numerous Brood of Cimices.
Number. 136. G. P. 2. Tab. 47. The 30th. of August, I took up a Ripe Mushrome; and puting it under a Glasse, I exposed it upon the Pavement to the Sun. The Day following, that Little Mushrome was full of little Black Worms; but the 11th. of September, the greatest part of it was turned into Blark water, like Ink; except that part, which was called the Stoole, or Foot, being the Root. In this impure Water I numbred 63 worms; which the Day following did betake themselves to change; but 7 Days after the 10th. of September, they were all turned to Living Flyes, very swift and nimble, with Red Heads, and Black Bodies; some of these were of an Elegant colour; and had on each side a little hammer, with which they did beat and excite them∣selves. Some of these had Black heads; but one was of a different colour from the rest, and of a bigger bo∣die. &c. You may keep these (if you please) long alive with a Sweet Liquor; I speak this by experience, as all things else; for I fed many of them from the 10th. of September, to the 24th. of December the year follow∣ing; and I cou'd have easily kept them longer, if it had been to any purpose. Number. 137. G. P. 2. Tab. 22. We may very often see, upon the leaves of Oziers, and other Trees, certaine Little green creatures, and
so tender-skined, that they are crushed with the lea touch, and the humour squeezed out of them is green. These are bred from a certain humour, which the Ants lay upon the said leaves, and with the sun, hatches into little creatures: they spoile the boughs they are bred on; for they corrupt the wood, knitting upon it a net: under which lying-hid they grow up; and in the mean time do suck up all the moisture; so that the boughs being deprived of that humour which is owing to them, do become lean, tender, and black barked; not like the rest of the wood. When they are new hatched, the Ants are seen to creep amongst them, and as it were to cleanse them. The Worm depicted Table 137th. eats these little creatures, as soon, as they are grown up: yea it fills it self with these, that it can hardly stir; and being so filled, it rests quiet in the same place it laid it self down in, to the next morning; and then, when the yes∣ter-dayes meat is digested, it begins to devour the re∣maining creatures, or seeks a new bough, better fur∣nished, and on which more of these small creatures sit, and of them it fills its hungry belly, as before. This Worm gave it self to change the 10th of Iune, in that form and Posture as is depicted, and it re∣mained in that state 20 dayes, so that the 29th. of Iune, a Fly came forth, which (wonderfull!) most suddenly came to its perfect bignesse; for within a quarter of an hour, it bacame as big again, as it was, when it was hached, and as big again as the egg from which it broke out. I knew not what to give it, that it wou'd tast, and so it dyed, the 5th. of August.
Number. 138. G. P. 2. Tab. 45. The Worm of the 138th Table, is mostly upon the leaves of Elder; for the most part it is on elegant whitish colour, and yellowish; which afterwards becomes blackish. It feeds of the little creatures, which are often to be found on the extream twigs of the Elder: these are the offspring of Ants; bred of a humid seed, lay∣ed by the Ants npon the extream boughs of the Elder, and, by the heat of the Sun, cherished and brought to maturitie; that these little creatures might be bred of it. Also the Ants are continually at hand, to defend them against this Worm. &c: It you wou'd know whence this Worm is bred, I an∣swer that it is bred of such a Fly, as is depicted in the Table, which is wont to lay its seed upon the leaves of the Elder, well knowing these little creatures to be there, which may serve it for food, and from the seed of this Fly, this Worm cherished by the heat of the Sun, doth come. When I had fed this for 13 dayes with its due food, it left eating, as though it wou'd have begun its change, but Two dayes after it put on the glorious colour before named; which done, it again devoured the lit∣tle creatures; and last of all, the 26th Iune it did compose it self for change, and did remain in that state, to the 13 of Iuly, on which day came forth a Fly, very like that of the 130th Table above, but a little bigger, and Yellow on the forepart, it lived fasting till the 17 of Iuly.
Number. 139. G. P. 2. Tab. 44. The Worm depicted in the 139th Table, is seldome found, for that it lyes in stony, and moist grounds; and sometimes it is in Gardens, for the gardiners complaine that this Worm doth hurt their herbes not a little; nor is it easily to be taken, for it knows how to hide it self under ground, as soon, as it feels any thing to stir. It feeds on all sorts of herbs, and eats their roots, it is very voracious, so that filled it is twise as big, as when it is hungry. It peeps out of the ground onely with the head; which it forthwith draws in again, as soon, as it doth perceive any noise; you must take it with a Spade. Having taken it, I put it in a glasse, filled with earth, and did expose it to the open aire; in a place mode∣rately hot of the Sun; and I provided it with meat and drink; In this glass it composed it self for change, in that posture in which it is Painted; the 29th of May: and the 25th of Iune following, it bred a crea∣ture furnished with 2 wings, and 6 long Feet called by us when boyes, the Tayler. These Tayler Flyes are very eacherous; there are double Number of males, for one female; for this you will experience with me, if you mind as I have done often, when the male Couples with the female most∣ly 5 or 6 males Fly about them, each of which stay their course of coupling, and endevour to hinder the former; To whom it is given first to couple, he re∣mains affixt to her 2 dayes together; and the male, loose, not very long after dyes; but the female lives. And when the Seed of the Female is ripe for laying, in infixes its Taile in the ground, and layes its seed
in it; from which this mischeivous Worm is bred, which is not fit to breed Tayler-slyes till it be Three Year old: if it were not for this Three Years unfit∣nesse to breed, and that there are more Males then Females; this Worme wou'd do great mischiefe, in which, God's providence is much to be admired. These Flyes are those with very Long Legs, and which by our People are called Drummers. It is re∣markable, that they lay Violet-coloured Eggs; all the Species as them, which I have yet seen, and have I seen at least Five sorts with us in England. Of the Originall of GNATS. This is also a new Genus of Flyes Number. 140. G. P. 3. Tab. 10 I have sought with great diligence, what was the generation of Gnats, and from what principle &c. I Observed Gnats to retire to Cisterns in great Numbers; and especially about the begining of De∣cember; thither they carry their Seed, and after the same manner, as I have often learnt by my own proper Experience; for they are wont to sit upon the surface of the Raine-watter, contained in Cisterns, the hinder part of the their Bodies being inclined
downwards; and to excerne their Seed, and that Seed so dejected, doth forthwith sinck to the bottom and after a little time, is converted in Red, and (as it were) Bloody little Insects. These Little Bloody Worms are nourished of cer∣taine little Creatures swimming in the Water, which I have been wont to call Water Lice, because they have almost the same forme with the paper Lice, and they stay there 11 Months, and they do make themselves little Cells of their own juice, mixt with the particles of Lime, within which they hide themselves, against the extream cold. But the time of the Naturall change being at hand, they do convene in great numbers, and the heads of all being joyned, the hinder parts of their Bodies, are long much tossed, too and fro, and do excite a great motion of Water, with which motion, I have Observed a great plenty of a certain Tenacious juice, in which they compose themselves for undergo∣ing a change. The 30th of Iune, and 13th of Iuly, I Observed many Gnats to flie out of the foresaid Juice: The Males have light Fethers on the Head, but not the Females; but do swel with Eggs, nor yet can so vehemently prick our skins as the males. As Gnats do arise from bloody little Worms, so they do vehemently desire Humane blood; for that end they enter into our Honses about Night, even by the Chimneys, and other hidden places, if they find not the Doors and Windows open, then they thrust their Trunks, or Darts into the parts of the skin: Where they may find an open passage to the Blood; which  they suck and are mightily delighted in: They Draw it with very subtle and sharp Darts, made of as it were three small Hairs, contex∣contexed;
but hollow within like Pipes, and adapted to draw blood upwards. I have sometimes Observed, that a Gnat well filled with blood, not to recede from our Skin, untill a drop of Water, had been rejected out of her Bodie: Which I guesse to be the Serum; and in so short a time to be seperated from the Blood, and rejected as an ex∣crement. When the Gnats, new bred, do ascend from the bottom of Cisterns, they are White, and do seem to want Feet, and Wings; but these do appear in the space of a quarter of an houre, and they are wont so long to adhere to the sids and walls of the Cisterns; untill the wings are now enough expanded, are hard, and are fit for flight. But some will Object, how I cou'd so accuratly Ob∣serve, what Gnats do in the bottom of Cisterns; to whom I Answere, I Observed all things in a Glass Vessel made for that end, into which I put all those things, which are wont to be found in Cisterns, to wit Lime, little Stones, Earth and Rain Water, to which I put the above described Red worms. Also I was forced to place that Vessell in a cold place; also often to renew the Water, and to admit the fresh aire. For experience taught me, those little Worms, for defect of Coolnesse and fresh and well tempered Aire, all soon to Die: Therefore by meanes of the pellucid Glasse, I Daily and diligently observed, what was Daily done in it, and what changes hap∣pened therein.
Section. 9. OF MILLEPEDS. Number. 141. GP. 2. Tab. 36. All this History of the Authors is Founded upon a mistake; as thinking these Jüly, or Millipeds (of all which He has given Vs the Figured, Table 141.) were bred of the Thigh bone of a Man; when indeed, they were only lodged therein, in the depth of Winter; the whole thing is impertinent and not worth the recitall. Number. 142. G. P. 2. Tab. 48. Besides what I said of Mushrooms Number 136. I saw also when the aforesaid Worms were changed into Flyes, and when I had placed the water, from whence they came, before the Sun; it was filled with exceeding little Animalls, which moved themselves, and were therefore alive; which after I had taken out of the water, by the help of a Pin, and had view∣ed
them in a Microscope; I found them to be very little Serpents, or Snakes; and indeed, Multitudes of them did move so swiftly, and did mix themselves so together, that they cou'd not be counted. I kept many of these two Years, and I found them marked in their Bodies; some with Black, some with Green, and others with Brown spots; but the great∣est of them which I kept, was of the Size and shape, and variegated with Brown spots, as is delineated in this 142 Table: It was very swift and nimble, for as soon as I laid it down on the Ground, it crept into it, and I had lost it, if I had not presently dug it up, by the help of a little Spade, I had in my hand. I kept this little snake long in a Glass, filled with Earth and water; but at length through the great heat, and want of Water, he died, which I was very sorry for having kept him so long.
Section. 10. OF SPIDERS. Number. 143. G. P. 2. Tab. 49. In the before mentioned Matter, from whence the Flyes and Snakes come, I saw also and found a certain kind of Chrystalls; like in forme to small Sands, but but there grew out Feet to them, and by degrees they grew greater; till in three Years space, they were full grown, and attained the forme of the Spider De∣picted in the 143 Table. Of the Mushrooms, growing out of the Roots of the Poplar Tree, is wont to breed another kind of spider; of an oblong forme, a Yellow colour, and stinking. From Rotten Mushrooms, another Race of Spiders do's proceed, and they are Reddish, there is another kind of Mushroom, which rises from the Earth, which first of all appears shut, but in a days time is open, and then it represents the forme of a Mushroom, with a round dish, or little house, like the cup out of which the Oake Acorns are taken; in this Cup is found Five round grains of of seed, of the size of Raddish-seed, but pellucid, as Christall; after these grains fall out of the cup on to the superfi ies, or into the chinks of the earth; they are cherished by the heat of the
sun, till they begin to live, after wards they get feet; and in three years time they attain to their full growth, all these things I tryed twice Two years to∣gether. These Spiders deight  be about the herbe Blm; and in Summer time  shaddow themselves under it; but in winter they y hid in the Chinks of walls, or wooden fences. The foremntioned Spider, which has its originall of Mushrooms, (which many esteem a delicate) has long feet, which I have exhibited  you, in its birth, pro∣gression, encrease, and perfection, in this 143d. Table. where Figure 1 represents it, at it's first appeareance, Figure 2 at the space of halfe a year: Figure, 3 at two years: Figure 4 Three years growth; when it has attain∣ed its full size; which it keeps till it dye, by a natural or a violent death. These Spiders are rarely found on the superficies of of a smooth wall, but commonly in the fissures there∣of; but so as they have their feet exerted out of the Wall, and in my opinion to this purpose; that if any humour come from the Wall, they may take it with their feet, for with this all their feet are embrewed, and they first move their fore-feet to their Mouths, and then the rest; which they successively brush tho∣row their Mouths, by the help of their Forcipes, and so lick off the Nitrous humour, sticking thereto, by which they live. On the Day time these Spiders are wont to rest, unless you drive them away; but in the Night time they play together; for then they are often seen to take hold of one anothers feet, and so to fall upon the ground, and when they play thus together, they do not hurt themselves; for when they fall on the ground their long feet being streched our, they fall on them like Cats: As soon as they fall they presently rise again, and stradling with their Thighs, they asend
the Wall with a Stilt-like motion: They often also Fight so, that they kill one another; for they are very tender, and are easily killed; and this is well seen in them from an instinct of nature; therefore with their legs contracted and affixed to both sides they sit, and defend themselves; for then their bodies being de∣fended on every side with their Feet, as Ten with Pales, they sit safe, prevailing against the Spiders, that assault them, with their own strength; in this posture one of them cannot kill another at one assault; what do they then will you say? The more strong en∣tange the Feet of the more weak with a wonderfull dexterity, and hold them so bound, like the small tendrells you see on vines, which wreath about and encircle the branches, and embrace them; and then they hold their Feet so ensnared with theirs, and break them one after another; nor do they cease, till they have pulled off foure or five of them, this being done, they leape upon them, and bite them, and suck the wound, and leave nothing, but an Exanguious skin, suckt dry, and the rest of the Feet. One of this kind of Spiders I kept long, with Water of Saltpeeter and Lime mixt; he was very fierce, he alwayes overcame all the Spiders I offered him, al∣though he found some amongst them, which took him up much time, and gave him some danger of recover∣ing his health, which he cou'd not overcome, but with much difficulty; at length he remained Victor of all, viz. Thirty in number, which I gave him one after another. I placed before him two Pots; in the one I gave him Meat, in the other Drink; but he put his Feet into one, and the dry Carcasses of the Spiders he had killed. Having eaten these Spiders, he grew great, and put on a Black Colour; at length he dyed, no doubt of the a∣bundance of the juice, which he sukt from the Spiders,
Number. 144. G. P. 1. Tab. 70. The Worm of the 144th Table, is most worthy of admiration; which I took the Third Day of Aprill 1658. I never cou'd observe (though I was very diligent) whether it eat or drunk; neither cou'd I animadvert whether or noe it had any Eyes, or any a∣perture in its body; by which it might either receive nutriment, or eject excrement: it wants Feet; it always rests, immoveable, and rather rejoices in cold then heat; for I placed it in the Sun beams, and presently it sought for a skadow and shelter, and afterwards moved not. sometimes it turned its body, so that it lay on its back, but presently contracting its body into a round, it kept its former habit, as is Figured in this Table. I had this Worme alive with me at home, from the third of Aprill 1658, to the 28th of August 1659, without any food, and on that Day it dyed, afterwards (which is worthy to be observed,) there lived always near this Worm three White Animalls, lesse then com∣mon and; which always stuck on the belly, or back of the Worm, and after this manner they lived Nine Months without any food that I observed, at length, two of these Animalls on the Head, and the third on the Back of the Worm, dyed. FINIS.
