G1826A 99827124 31538
THE VOYCE OF TRUTH OR THE HICH WAY LEADING TO TRUE PEACE Composed in Latine by M. G. and translated into Inglish by F. G. Discite a me quia mitis sum, & humilis corde: & invenietis Requiem animabus vestrisMatth 11. 29. Learne of mee, because I am meeke, and humble of hart: and you shall find rest to your soules.Matth 11 29. AT GANT, Printed by Robert VValker, at the signe of the Annuntiation of our Blessed LADY, 1676.
To the most vertuous and Honorable lady MARY KNATCHBVLL Abbes∣se of the Inglish Dames of the order of S. Bene∣dict in Gant. MADAME MY wishes to your lady. and Community, are of a most happy Christ∣masse and to the end they may not prove meere empty ones, that passe with the breath that con∣vayes them to the eare, they goe accompanied
with a smale trea∣tise, which may helpe to furtherthe happinesse I wish both you, and them. I present you with The voice of truth, the An∣gel of peace who giving him∣selfe vnto us, gave the first happy Christ-masse, and peace on earth to men of good will. First fruites seldome have their due maturity: yet their beeing first supplyes this want, & makes them the most acceptable. I hope these being my first (in this kind) will, if not merit a gratfull acceptance, at least pleade a gra∣tious pardon for. Your ladps most humble servant F. G.
THE IRST CHAPTER. hat Peace the greatest good of Man Living on earth, is only to bee found in God. SOnne I say'd vnto my Disciples Peace I leave vnto you, my peace I give vnto you; nor did I give a ale ng, when I gave peace. For peace, d tranquillity of mind, is the geatest of happinesses, this would  afford. All labour for this a∣e, that they may live in quiet,  peaceably passe their dayes. e who you will Riches, Pleasu∣, and Honours, if hee enjoyes  peace hee will
still bee miserable.Peace of minde is a comfort in labours, a buckler against misery, a antidote against feare, a schoole  vertues. Without peace neyther Kings, nor Princes, can bee happy, and on the other side either in sicknesse, Poverty, torments, or death it selfe, if you enjoy but peace of mind you are happy; and none of earth can bee more happy then you, vnlesse hee enjoy a greater peace, and more tranquillity. Learne therefore Sonne of mee this science of Saints, heare mee, and Ile' teach thee what this Peace is, and where it is to bee found. Peace is a tranquillity of minde by which man rests content, ac∣cording to true Reason with what soever happens, and desires no∣thing but what hee has. This is the complete peace, and most perfect
possession of the blessed, who havenothing to feare, or wish for, because they doe securely, and fully enjoy all good according to the measure God is pleased to impart. You must not expect this peace on earth, but shall enjoy it in heaven when death shall bee swolloed vp in victory, and mv Father shall wype a way all teares from your eyes that you may contemplate the face of God. Yet there is an other peace much to bee wished for, where vnto by Gods grace you may attaine. For though your will cannot bee fully satiated in this life, nor perfectly at rest, (for as long as you doe not possesse the supreame good, where vnto you were created, the minde is still wavering among the incertaintyes of hope and feare) yet you may enjoy a secondary kind of peace or lesse perfect; which consist's in this, that you only feare, hope, and seeke one
thing, to wit, God; and regard all other things with a quiet and serene minde. And this is the peace of Saints living in this banishment. Which as it is much surpassed by the peace of the Blessed, soe does it alsoe farre surpasse the peace of Sinners. Seeke therefore deare Sonne this peace which leads to heaven. Then shall you bee at rest, when you only rely on mee; for as long as you doe not leave mee, let what will befale you, you shall ever enjoy the supreame good, if not in a sure possession, at least in tranquill hopes, and sincere love, which is the greatest happinesse any man can enjoy in this life: nor is there any thing more pleasing then my conversation that has noe bitternesse. All creatures (though you enjoyed them at your will)
cannot quiet thee soe muchas I, the Creator of them all, that infinitely surpasse all good imagina∣ble. Creatures may feede thy senses, but because they doe not reach the soule, leave it empty. I interiourly replenish the soule with my selfe, and shew it all good in mee. Seeke therefore mee and my peace, and Ile' take care of thee; leave not mee, and Ile' not forsake thee, but comfort thee in all adversityes, and not only give thee peace, but make thee sitt at my table; and though not for a permanency (because thou must bee tryed) yet passing Ile' serve thee with heavenly Comfort. Remember the comfort you have receaved, and you will see what I say is true. Behold my Martirs and Confessors exulting in the midst of torments, and you will vnder∣stand, how much the interiour
con∣solation which I afford, does sur∣passeall the joyes of the world. All joy of the world is overcome by any smale paine: but my joy overcomes all the paines of the world. When the worldlings over∣floe with delights, and swimme in the midst of pleasures, if their head ake, if a feaver distemper them, all their joy is lost, and they poore soules sigh and lament. Soe easily is all the joy of the world overcome with the least sufferance or paine. On the contrary my ser∣vants in the greatest paines and ad∣versityes, in the most grievous tor∣ments, and death it selfe rejoyce; and replenished with my joy despise the torments. As therefore the sor∣row of the world does incompara∣bly exceed its joy, soe does mv joy in an infinite manner surpasse all the sorrow and paines of
the world. Many heare the name of my peace,and the words of Those that Evan∣gelize peace and see the Goodly feete of the Saintes; but few vnderstand what they see or heare, of their internal joye. And therefore con∣ceive it not because they have not tasted of it. What a difference is there betweene my joy, and the joy of the world? Heaven does not soe much exceed the earth, as my peace doth surpasse all comfort, or content, that is to bee found out of mee. Taste and see what the abundance of my sweetnesse is: for if you taste it not, neither will Your eye see, nor eares heare, nor shall it ascend into your hart, what things God has prapared for those that love him. Therefore few vnderstand, because few have tasted how sweet I am. They will not seeke the permanent good, but follow their owne inventiones: And
therefore I deliverthem vp to the desires of their hart, and passions of ignominy, that they may vanish in their cogitationes. None of all these shall find peace: because they seeke, where it is not; that is, they seeke it out of mee, who only am able to comfort my Crea∣ture, when I will, and in what measure I will. Sonne let this there∣fore bee thy final conclusion, that all peace and tranquility of minde consists' in the possession of good; nor can man's will rest else where but in good. Wherefore of neces∣sity you must judge the supreame peace to consist in the perfect pos∣session of the supreme good in hea∣ven. The next degree of peace, which is the greatest good of this life, does wholy consist in making towards the supernall peace, that is; towards the enjoying God as soone, and se∣curely as possible, and here
enjoy: allmighty God not yet face to face but through A looking glasse and in a riddle. You are a Pilgrimme and cannot possesse a perfect peace till you come to your journeys end. Yet you may enjoy the tranquillity of minde a travaler has, when you see your selfe to goe on in the right way with out danger. Neither is this more propper to you, then to all other creatures. The greatest happinesse of all creatures is to rest in their final end, and the next, to tend with all speed there vnto. Thus the maine appetite and li∣nation of the Elements is to in their center, and the next, to move towards the center; for all other places are violent, Thus the brute beasts enjoy their chiefe happinesse when they feede their senses, and the next to this when they are in readiness to receave this pleasure.
In the same manner you may say of your selfe and all men; the chiefe felicity of man is to enjoy and possesse God, the next is to seeke God; for there is nothing soe good, after the possesing God, as the ap∣proching towards God. And besides these, there is nothing that may bee truely termed good to man: for what soever is good ever perfects the thing, vnto which it is good, and nothing perfects man, that does not place him in his end, or at least premote him towards it: as on the contrary nothing is justly to bee termed evil, but what hinders him of his end. Sonne if you vnderstand this you may live peaceably, nor shall any evil affection touch you as long as you stick to this maxime. For all inordinate affectiones that de∣stroy peace, proceed from a salfe
representation of good or evil: soe that who soe ever is perswa∣ded that nothing is good but what leads to God, nor evil but what separats from him, may have a tran∣quil mind, and peacebly rest in his Lord and God, by the assitance of devine grace; since hee sees it is in his free will and power, to want all evil, and possesse all good. For noe man looses God that wills not, and noe man that wills but enjoyes him. And on the contrary who soever doe not tend towards God, besides that they are deprived of the hopes of this happinesse, and runne into certaine mischiefe, they are troubled with many other af∣fections. They are vexed with the desire of many things, they feare & hope many things, which though they would never soe faine, they cannot
obtaine, nor retaine when they have obtained them. They leave the only true good, and are car∣ryed away with an vnsatiable avi∣dity of false apparent goods; and soe are justly served, whilst they are illuded with false goods, that neglect the true and maine good. If some times they seeme happy, and fully to rest, and desire nothing else, whilst they take their pleasure, yet they are not happy. Noe man can bee happy and miserable at once; and who soever hastens to eternal misery is miserable; vnlesse you thinke him happy, that beeing con∣demned to death is lead hood winkt to the precipice; but such, therfore seeme happy because they are drunke with pleasure, and this is the hap∣pinesse of drunken men, that whilst they are over heated with wine, through the defect of the braine they seeme to bee happy. Truely
the felicity of such men is farre in∣feriour to the happinesse of the brutish beasts; for they can take the same pleasures more freely with out daunger of health, anxiety, or feare. But in these there, is noe peace, or satiety of the will; but rather a certaine dullnesse of mind, that makes evil appeare in the like∣nesse of good, and soe come to bee coveted. As it vses to happen to those that are sicke of a feavor, who through their distemper de∣sire what is hurtfull, and loath nothing more then wholsome mea∣tes. If these things bee true of those that have pleasures at their will; what may bee sayd of the misera∣ble lot of those who seldome at∣taine, and possesse even for a short time, this vaine and imaginary fe∣licity, which they soe much
labour for, and buy with the losse of anaeternity, and the ruine of their soule. But because they doe not re∣gard devine pleasure, nor rayse their minds to heavenly things, they therefore justly beginne their pu∣nishment with their smnes, and walking In a circle beeing deceived bv on creature they passe on to another to borrow comfort. Rayse thy mind to thy creator, love him alone, him a lone feare, regard all things in him alone, and to him a lone direct all things. Thus laysed, relving on the Onni∣potent, despise the Creatures vnder you. Then all things shall cooperate to your good; when you referre all things to their author, from whome, both you, and they take their of∣fpring. You shall have peace; if you take all things from God, and referre them to him againe; what
else soever you doe, you goedisorderly to worke, and shall ne∣cessarily loose your peace. CHAPTER II. How a Soule relying on God may have Peace both in adversity and Prosperity. LOrd it is as you say: peace is only to bee had in you. All other things are im∣perfect & defective goods, if they are to bee caled goods, and not rather evils, which fill the minde with soe many evils, which provoke the Appetite, but doe not satiate, rayse thirst, but doe not extinguish it; puffe vp, but neither doe nor can nourish: for as the body is
not nourished with spiritual food, soe is not the soule delighted with cor∣poral pleasures. I now therefore re∣turne to thee ô Lord, I have sought rest in all other things, Ile' now at last, by they leave, make my a boad in they inheritance, that I may sleept and rest in peace. Because thou Lord hast singulary settled mee in hope, ile only seeke thee an infinite good, where with the whole capacity of my soule can bee filled, a permanent good that cannot bee taken a way from me vnles I will, an endlesse good that can make those that love it happy for an aeternity. Ile only seeke thee I say; for when soever I have sought after other things I have found my selfe deluded. I now know that peace is only to bee sought in thee, but know
not how it is to bee had. Teach meetherefore a Lord yet farther, how I may come to persever in a con∣tinual peace in thee, with out distur∣bance; for though I doe seeke thee, yet adversityes doe not cease to befale mee, which destroy the peace of my mind. Yea even when things fale out properously, I am presently for∣getfull of my selfe, and insteede of the peace which I ought to have in thee, I place it in creatures; which peace is not sinsere; and ends in grievous warre. Sonne you would faine know how you may in all accidents proceed with such indifferency, that you doe not over much rejoyce in prospe∣rity, or give way to bee vnprofita∣bly contristated in adversity, where in the summe of my peace does consist, which that you may obtaine, Consi∣der thus with mee.
Mans' nature is such, that whatsoe ever the vnderstanding repre∣sents as good, the will presently embraces, and what is represented vnto the vnderstanding as evil, that the will presently avoyds, shunnes, and hates. Soe that of necessity the affectiones of joy and sadnesse must vary, as long as the vicissitude of good and evil last. (And by conse∣quence the peace, and indifferency of mind bee lost) noe man can have a perfect, or imperfectly happy peace, but hee, vnto whome always what is good happens. Nor doe any sort of goods quiet and satisfy the mind; but only those, that are such as the will covets according to right rea∣son. How then shall you come to possesse peace of mind? To the end you may always have what you wish, you must have an in∣differency to all things, and it must bee all one, what soever happens
to you, without your fault. For seeing you cannot rule things as you will, you must accomodate your will to things, if you will have your will agree with them, which you must obsolutly wish for, to enjoy peace, which consists in the wills acquiess∣ing with content, to what soe ever happens. You must not therefore more covet pleasures then paine, nor preferre ease to labour, nor rather wish life, then death; but keepe your selfe in an aequal ballance of indiffe∣rency to all things. Now, you cannot bee indifferent to all things, vnlesse they all appeare aequaly to bee desi∣red. For as long as you judge one thing more to bee desired then another, soe long you shall rather incline to one thing then another, and soe loose your indifferency. Now to the end that all things may appeare
aequaly to bee desired, harken to anabbreviated word, wherin the hap∣pinesse of Pilgrimmes is consumma∣ted, and the content of all Saints consists, and this is the word my sonne, Consider all things in mee, and not in themselves. This is the art of arts, the gate of the kingdome of heaven, and the source of peace. Consider all things in mee and not in themselves, that thou mayst have peace in all things. If you rightly Consider all things, you shall see they proceed from mee, and perceive that nothing happens vnto you, but what the in∣finit goodnesle, and wisdome has out of an aeternal love, ordered for your greater good. If you Consider all things in this love, they shall all seeme good, all aequaly to bee desired, and soe by consequence you shall have an indifferency to all, and shall wish most for what happens,
because you will not Consider things in themselves, but in mee, and judge it more fitting, my will bee done, then thine, because it ought to bee soe, and it is most expedient for thee. Noe other consideration, but this will afford thy soule peace. For if you Consider poverty, if contumely, if labour, if sicknesse if death, or any thing that happens of adversity in it selfe, you cannot beare them without great trouble and afflicion of mind, because soe they are all contrary to nature. If you doe consider these things as proceeding from your, or their sinnes, they will yet seeme more intollerable; because the manner of punishment will torment the minde as much, as the inflicted evil in like manner when you see the just per∣secuted, and the wicked exalted, you will bee
enraged against triumphingimpiety, and will not bee able to containe your selfe from the desire of revenge. But if you recale all these things to their first of spring, you will bee able to behold them without disturbance. You shall vn∣derstand all, when you read all in the booke of devine providence, where in the reasons of all things are. And what weyghed in the ballance of humane reason appeares vnjust, shall bee found in the scales of the devine wisdome just and most fitting. All things serve for this only affaire of aeternity, the salvation of the elect. If the Turkes presse, if He∣riticks are multiplyed, if the wicked domineere, tis not for the Turks, nor hereticks, nor the wicked sake, but for the elect that by patience they may enter into the Kingdome of heaven. If there were any
thing that did not conduce to the goodof the elect, God would have erred in his worke, who only made or permitted all things, that they should cooperate to the good of the elect▪ This is Pauls minde. All things▪ cooperate vnto good to those that are caled according to purpose Saints. What is given to one of the least of these whome God has chosen is of soe great moment, that it is noe wayes to bee omitted, and King∣domes and empires are rather to perish, and the whole earth, and heaven it selfe, rather to bee anni∣hilated, then that one of the elect should bee lost. Soe great a thing, it is, to see the face of God. Ney∣ther will this seeme strange if thou Consider mee who when I was in the forme of God did robbe my selfe, to the end that by my death I might open the way to heaven for each of these little ones.
Consider therefore Sonne all thing in mee, and beholde mee in things working as I will; to glory, and thy salvation, and of ▪ That will cooperate with my gra and though you doe not percei how I compasse this in all thing yet firmly beleeve I doe soe, in eve thing, and soe deliver your will in my hands, most certainly know it▪ that I shall wisely and forcibly pe¦fect my worke, and that Ile' neith doe, or permitt any thing, th shall not bee for your good, an promote you towards the designe Bravium if that you will but mak vse of my grace. Who soever shall root this trut well in his mind, shall never be uoyd of peace of mind, and shal looke adversity, and prosperity vn∣ davntedly in the face
without any change of affection, because the motive of his affection shall never vary. Hee shall all ways rejoyce because hee shall ever finde the good, which hee only seekes for; and hee shall always rejoyce in the same manner, because hee shall ever finde the same reason of good in all things; to wit my glory, joy∣ned with his welfare. Sonne I doe not say you shall ever as long as you live, come not to feele the acrimony of griefe, or allurement of pleasure. But I say that the soule that is solidly settled in mee may soe commaund these af∣fections, that shee shall not loose her tranquillity in adversity, though shee groane vnder the wound of the doctor, nor rejoyce in prospe∣rity, as prosperity, but in my will which shee acknowledges as the only true
measure, of good and evil. This only consideration ofmy will, shall soe swallow vp, all other Considerations that they shall not appeare, and though they strike the sence, they shall not move the judgment, nor cast the will out of her Imperial Throne; but as a poore man chosen out of a Cottage to a faire Kingdome is full of joy, which does not cease, or is diminished, though the Cot∣tage fale to the ground at the same moment, nor would bee encreased though the Cottage should bee made greater: because his thoughts are wholy employed vpon the gained Kingdome. Soe who soe∣ver labours for Eternity makes Gods glory and his owne salva∣tion his only businesse, and thinkes this affaire soe much to surpasse all others, that hee cannot find leasure to thinke of them, much lesse to
rejoyce, or bee saddefor these toyes of mortals. And truely as this poore man assumed to a Kingdome would deserve to bee laughed at, if hee were still sollicitous for his Cottage: much more does the man deserve to bee laughed at, or rather lamented who beeing made heire of God, will not accept of this Kingdome, but cast himselfe a way vpon childish follyes, and only seeke a temporal convenience, in things ordred for gaining an eternity. But this pro∣ceeds from the great weaknesse of humane vnderstanding though there bee an infinite Kind of dis∣tance, between temporal & eternal things, yet it prefers them before these: because it only beholds heavenly things as it were a farre of through a cloude, and handles earthly things, it comes to passe that the most excelent things
beeingonly conceived in a drousy dead manner doe not move the soule, and the sensual and perishing goods, though very smale in themselves, because they are more lively repre∣sented, and have a greater propor∣tion with corrupt nature, doe wholy take the minde, and in∣flame the will. Now seeing it is certaine the mind is most carryed a way with those things that have the greater appearance of good; the chiefest industry and labour of a wise man, ought to bee to en∣deavour to conceive those goods as greatest, and most lively to propose them to the will; which truely in themselves are greatest, and effect, that all other things which are not realy good, appeare sor∣did, and vile, at the first aspect. Who soever
shall doe this shall not love any good more then heeought, but aequaly empart his af∣fection to each, according to the dictate of right reason; and soe at last come to live in true peace; not leaving in himselfe any motion of the will not regulated. But this is not the worke of one day; long labour, and much me∣ditation is necessary to instruct and helpe the mind, to blott out the false Ideas it has conceived, and begette true notiones of things, and such as shall of theire owne accord prevent the will, and soe rayse it to contemplate the eternal good in every thing, as now the carnal appetites doe incline to the seeking of temporal convenience. Nor is me∣ditation alone sufficient to per∣forme this, vnlesse it bee accom∣panied with a continu practise added thereunto; for meditation only conceives, but it is practise
that brings forth; and vnlesse action follow contemplation, it is not ver∣tue, but vanity that shall encrease. Therefore Sonne to the end you may obtaine my peace, and put in execution what you have concei∣ved, you must doe thus. First if what you are about, bee a good, convenient to nature (as are sleepe, meate, recreation ho∣nour, and what soever other goods of nature) consider it to have a twofold manner of good∣nesse one natural, and the other supernatural. The natural good∣nesse is that congruence which the thing has with our body and soule, and the supernatural is the ordina∣tion of the thing to doe Gods will, and for his glory, and your salva∣tione, for which ends you must certainly beleeve all things in the
world are either done, or per∣mitted.I call this Kinde of good supernatural to distinguish it from the other. Now having considered these two Kinds of good, though nature doe never soe much propend towards the natural goodnesse, yet you ought to judge the thing to deserve much more to bee coveted for its supernatural goodnesse. Ney∣ther does the whole sea more exceed a droppe of water then this super∣natural goodnesse does surpasse the natural. For the natural goodnesse does proceed from an imperfect Limited, and corruptible object, and the supernatural draws its goodnesse from the most perfect, infinite, and Eternal object. This judgment being presuposed, the will is to bee stirred vp, not to desire that good for its natural goodness which is soe smale that it ought not to bee arded, but for that which is
infinitly more deserving, that is, for the supernatural goodnesse; nor ought you to beginne any action before you find your selfe to bee moved to doe it, because it is my will. What is say'd of your actions is to bee vnderstood of all other natural goods. Thus when any con∣gratulate with you for any good parts in you, you must keepe your will, from beeing carryed a way with the natural goodnesse, and endeavour to rayse it, to rejoyce in this congratulation and accept of it, as a gift of God, whereby God intends to worke his glory and your salvation. You must alltogether take great care, not to take delight in crea∣tures; for there is not any more deadly enimy of true peace, then this joy
and content. For who so∣ever place their joy in creaturesshall not rejoyce long; for all crea∣tures passe a way, and none can stand long that relyes on them. If you rejoyce at the possession of a thing you see is soone like to pe∣rish you must needs bee contrista∣ted at the losse thereof. Doe not therefore serve two masters, God, & the Creature, but serve God only, & bee above all other things. Never let your joy rest in any creature, but what soever joy or comfort you finde in any; embrace it, be∣cause that is my will: who did vouchsafe to mingle some corporal delight with your actions, that you might come to mee with the more alacrity. Take therefore the delight and joy which some times arises from creatures, as comming from my hand, and returne it againe to mee, least your joy prove vaine and deceitfull. And this is the
firstprecept to bee carefully observed in things that please nature. The second, which is not vnlike to this, ought to bee as carefully observed in adversity. When there∣fore any thing of adversity happens, enter into your selfe, and you will perceive the thing may bee consi∣dered two ways alsoe. Considered in it selfe it is evil, and con∣trary to nature: but if that you re∣flect, that adversity proceeds from mee, you will see it containes soe much good, as ordained to my glory, that it shall consume with its goodnesse all manner of evil, as the rodd of Moyses devoured all the other rodds. You must not therefore bee terrifyed at this evil which is but smale, but encouraged and comforted with the good. For if labours, paines, and wounds can bee joyfully borne in this life, with
the hopes of some reward that will ensue, of a temporal good; how much more reason is there, that, any labour or paines should bee vndergone joyfully, where the good proposed for reward is infinite. Truely if you had but eyes to see what an immense good it is to suffer for God, there is nothing you would soe much covet as to bee dayly afflicted; you would esteeme it the greatest joy, to fale into tentationes, you would re∣joyce that you were thought wor∣thy to suffer contumely for my name; for certainely there is no∣thing more holy or glorious, more profitable or secure, then to suffer tribulationes. I came into the world, to suffer for thee, and you came, into the world to suffer for mee, that soe you may
bee Crow∣ned by me. This is the professionof Saints to rejoyce in tribulati∣ons, this is the distinctive signe of my Church, to groe in the midst of persecutions. O That you did know, how pleasing a patient soule exercised, and tryed, with various afflictions is! you would then much more covet to bee contemned then honored, You would repute laughter an errour, and say to joy why are you deceived to noe purpose. If you did well consider, what daunger there is in prosperity, and how scure, and great gaine there is in adversity; beleeve mee all that is bitter would become sweet, and all that is sweet bitter. You would preferre ignominy before honor, and greife before joy. You would feare least whilst men did applaude, you should fale in soe slippery a passage, and soe offend mee: and when any creature did please you, you
would bee sorrythat your affection were devided, and not as yet wholy placed on mee; and loved any thing besides mee, though not contrary to mee. You would bee glad and rejoyce when adversity did befale you, to drinke of my chalice, you would desire to beare my crosse, and become pertaker of my goodly inheritance by the devine digna∣tione. Then lastly shall your peace bee with out disturbance, when ad∣versity shall become more pleasing to you then prosperity, when you shall rejoyce in griefe, and still desire to suffer more. But even this desire must not passe the bounds of indifferency: but you must bee soe affected, that though you bee equaly prepared to receave all things from my hands, on your part you desire to suffer (if it bee my holy will)
because it is soe pleasing before myfather who wills this for his glory, to the end you should imitate my passion, and in your patience pos∣sesse your soule. This then ô Lord is your doc∣trine (to the end I may enjoy an vndisturbed peace) that all things, and especialy adversityes, are to bee imbraced as meanes ordained for thy glory, and my salvation. I give thee a thousand thankes that thou hast vouchsafed to deale soe mercifully with mee, as not to permitt any thing either in, or a∣bout mee, but what conduces to help mee to thee. If eyther man or Angel had such care of mee as to assist mee in all my actions I ought to bee thankfull. But now that you the Lord of all things, and my God, and Creator, are pleased to ordaine
all my actiones, what shall I doe but wholy deliver myselfe vp to your will, and willingly accept of what soever you shall ordaine. I therefore ô Lord wholy deliver my selfe vnto thee, and entirely resigne my selfe vnto thy will. I can feare nothing vnder soe good a master: But if I did, the be∣nigne Providence wherewith you have governed mee from my in∣fancy would reproch my diffidence: for you a lone ô Lord have always assisted mee, by sea and Land, you have preserved mee in several Pro∣vinces and countryes. My father and mother have forsaken mee; but you have embraced mee, and I have founde none that have taken care of mee, but thee ô Lord, or for thee: nor doe I complaine of this, but rejoyce, and wish with my whole hart that I may know none, nor none know mee, that I may love none, nor none love mee, but you,
and for you, whome in all things I desire to seeke, and confide in above all things. CHAPTER III. That some Principles for Peace are to bee drawen from the knowledge of ones selfe SOnne you have now Learnt the first principle of peace, which in all events can afford a tran∣quility of minde. For hee that con∣siders God in all things, and all things in God, findes all in peace, and enjoyes
perpetuall tranquillity. This a lone is enough to affordpeace and without this nothing will suffice. You must therefore labour for this, and when you arrive to the hight of charity, you shall enioy the most perfect peace. If you cannot on a suddaine fly high at least clyme dayly as high as you can, that you may at last come to the hight of peace and perfection. The more you come to consider all things in God, the more peace you shall find, and the more you faile of it, and betake your selfe to consider creatures in themsel∣ves, the more disquiet shall you experience. Worldly things are like a torrent, which may bee securely looked on, but not trusted, for if you are once engolfed there is noe retiring backe, but are forced on to your ruine Consider there∣fore God in Creatures,
yet doe not trust your selfe to Creatures,but beholding God in all, as you see the Sunne in water, take care you bee not drowned. Know that the lesse you have of worldly things, the more you shall enjoy heavenly. Rid thy selfe therefore of the love of creatures, that thou mayst beginne to love the creator: vse thy selfe to have nothing that thou mayst possesse all things. Thou shalt bee soe long deceived, as thou doest confide in creatures; thy griefe shall ever equal the joy found in Creatures; and thou shall loose as much of true liberty, as thou hast of tye and affection to Creatures. True liberty does not only free from necessity but rids of all tyes of selfelove, and leaves the will in a perfect indifferency ready to follow Gods pleasure in all things.
And this is the first principleof peace drawen from the con∣templation of God. The next must bee gathered from the know∣ledge of your selfe. Study there∣fore the knowledge of your selfe if thou desire peace, for next vn∣to God, all your peace and hap∣pinesse depends chiefly of your selfe. And that knowledge of your selfe shall most conduce to your peace, whereby inordinate af∣fections are cutt of, that trou∣ble and disturbe the mind. This is the perfect knowledge of your owne basenesse whereby you will cast of your selfe, and all selfe confidence, wholy placeing your hopes on mee, to the end you come not to build on sand, but on a firme Rock, an indeficient peace. Lord you bid mee consider my selfe, to find peace; and when I
doe soe, I am much disturbed and full of Confusion: where soever I turne my selfe, I finde miseryes and daungers on all sides. I am a Pilgrimme in my nothing, and goe on for an incertaine space of time, in a daungerous jorney to eter∣nity. It is common to all men to bee Pilgrimmes as well as mee; yet the peril becomes not lesse, by the greater multitude that runne the hasard, but feare is rather encreased by the frequent examples of those that perish. All men in this world are travalers walking on the slippery declivity of a most deepe precipice, at the bottome where of hell is seated, and heaven at the toppe: but heaven lyes hid with a cloud, and hell is covered with the pleasant amaenity of greene and delitious
meddoes, soe that allmost all, not coringheaven, nor hell, as they ought, are easily carryed whither the alluring pleasures inuite. And if any one by reason, find out the deceit∣fullnesse of our sences, and disco∣ver the ambuish, what shall hee doe? shall hee clime vp? but his weake feet slipp away, but the path is cragged and inaccessible to human sense, but the darke and thick cloud threatens tempest and daunger of shipwracke. Thus all things drive downe-wards, the flesh, the world, and the devil, all hinder the assent, the thorny and difficult way, the travalers weaknesse, and the imminent tem∣pest. Yet wee must ascend, wee must clyme vpwards. But with what forces? ô Lord not ours, but thine: this is the worke of thy mercy which makes that possible by grace, which is impossible to
nature.I am not able of my selfe to worke my salvation vnlesse you that com∣maund, give mee forces to doe what you ordaine. Now if I looke into my soule, alas how poore and miserable am I? The vnderstanding capable of little, knowes very few things. If I run∣ne over all creatures I have not knowledge of the hundered thou∣sand part of them; and if an vn∣profitable knowledge is a Kind of ignorance, what a deale of what I know is wholy vnprofitable? Or even sometimes hurtfull. A gaine a mong those few things I know, if I examine each in particuler I shall clearely see I know noe one thing, I say not perfectly, & as to the essence but even superficially in order to the vses it was given for. As for heavenly things, which it were only fit to know, I doe almost
allwayes erre by a certaine Kind of necessity: for as a Mathemati∣ciane that does vse instruments that are not exact or well proportioned cannot chuse but erre: Soe for the most part my soule making vse of the sences of the body which have noe proportion with spirituall and heavenly things, judges nothing rightly but generaly allwayes erres, where it is not led by the conduct of devine faith. I inquire after the enormity of sinne and find noe measure for it, for I have offended God more then any humane thought can conceive. I seeke what Eternity is, and measure it by time, because I have noe other measure of Eternity: for though time bee not the measure of Eternity yet it is more like it, then other things that have noe similitude, the∣rewith: I
seeke to vnderstand thehappinesse of the Blessed, and I define all according to a sensible love, where as that happinesse sur∣passes all sense, witnesse the Apostle who teaches that Neyther eye ha seene, nor eare heard, nor hath it ∣cended into the hart of man, what things God has prepared for those that love him. Thus am I ignorant of all things, and what is the greatest weaknesse of my vnderstanding, is, that in all this palpable obscurity and dark∣nesse, I am ignorant of my owne ignorance, and if I find others more absurd then my selfe, I presently cloake my ignorance with the faire name of wisdome; I will not compare my selfe with many that excelle mee, least I should come to the knowledge of my owne weakenesse, but with a
few which I judge inferiour, that others greatermadnesse may flatter my phrensy, and I seeme to know the more, the lesse I doate. And this is that great Idole which does soe puffe vp my poore vnderstanding, that it is not capable of other things. These are the distempers of the vnder∣standing: now how much more da∣ungerous are the diseases of the will? O what a civil warre doe I suffer with in my selfe, whilst soe many several contrary affections, and passions each draw their way? The sea is not soe toren with con∣trary winds as my mind is rent, and tost toe and froe with contrary desires. The flesh and spirit each draw their way, hope and fea▪ anger and pusillanimity, avarice and luxury; and the mind is devi∣ded on the one side with the la∣bour of acquiring glory, and on the
other with the shame of loos∣ing it. O raving ambition! o cruell torment! yet but a just pu∣nishment of thy selfe. How much more happy should I bee, if con∣tent with a mediocrity, I did cast a way all hope or feare of humane things? For now that I seeke hu∣mane prayse, and feare disprayse, I am ouerwhelmed with a multi∣tude of disagreeing passions which only serve, to hinder mee from obtaining the peace I soe much seeke after. These o Lord are the things that passe my hart, when you my peace, my joy, and my Crowne are ab∣sent. And there is yet another great evil that praedominates which is inconstancy. O how weake is my will? I seldome beginne to doe well, but I presently come to faile. I not sooner resolve
great matters, and make great purposes, but at thefirst occation of difficulty all my fervour is lost, and like an infant I am puffed vp with a smale good, and cast downe againe with as smale an evil; and in the meane time, live in noe smale daunger: for though the fale bee easy, the ruine is aeternal. In the midst of tentations I live dayly in daunger of being overcome, with Idlenesse, anger, pride, pusilanimity, or pre∣sumption, of faling through the concupiscence of the flesh or eyes, into sinne, beeing surrounded with infinite occations. And if I offend in one, I am guilty of all, and the fale is erreparable if death seases on mee offending. If one might dye twice, and live as often; At least the second life might bee rightly ordered, and the soule better in∣formed of the truth
of things, would abhorre the daunger the secondetime, but now that the blind vnder∣standing leads a blind will, I am forced to feare Least they both fale into the pitt. If I must Iudge my selfe by the memory of my past life, my feare does much increase. Alas, woe is mee! how have I spent my time? where are the dayes of my life, how ill have I garded my sences? How have I sinned both interiourly and exteriourly? How seldome have I corresponded with devine grace? of all my actions, for soe many yeares, among soe many helpes, in the world or Religion, I have hardly performed any soe, but there has beene some thing to repent. Some times performed with sloth and negligence, some times I have been puffed vp with good successe, some times contristated at evil events; and never intirely cooperated with
devine grace. This I have been, such does my memory represent mee; and this and worse shall I bee for the future, if thou Lord doest not prevent mee, with thy grace. Banisht, poore, ignorant, inconstant, feeble, sick, infirme in spirit, and more infirme in flesh, blind in the vnderstanding, blinder in the will, prone to sinne by nature, proner by evil custome, I live a scandall to my brethren, a prejudice to Religion, and dangerous to my selfe. There is noe creature whose injuryes I am not exposed to, there is noe member of my body that is not subject to innumerable mi∣seryes, noe sense but that eternal death may enter by, not a day, not an hower, not a moment, but that I am in great daunger of loosing an aeternity.
Lord whilst I consider these thingsI cannot chuse but bee much trou∣bled, and ceased with feare and trem∣bling. How then ô Lord doe you say that the knowledge of my selfe does contribute to peace of mind? Loe how even this imperfect knowledge of my selfe, makes mee a weary of my Life, and have noe mind to any thing, but to lament and weepe: If then I did fully know my selfe, and clearely see my bas∣nesse what other should I find, but most bitter bitternesse and vncon∣solable griefe? Sonne doe not thinke you loose your peace by the knowledge of your selfe. This thought is not with out paine and griefe, and there∣fore worldings fly it as a disturber of quiet. The knowledge of ones selfe takes a way sloath and pu∣sillanimity, but not peace. Peace cannot consist
without security, norsecurity without a feare, that pro∣ceeds, from the knowledge of ones selfe. The feare of God is the begin∣ning of wisdome, and the knowledge of ones selfe the beginning of the feare of God. Vnlesse all things bee rightly ordred in you, you can have noe peace, nor can you have any thing rightly ordered in, or concerning, vnlesse you know your selfe. There are three chiefe princi∣ples, or maximes conducing to peace, to bee drawen from the knowledge of your selfe. The first is, not to place any confidence in your selfe, but cast all your hopes in Allm: God, who soever confides in himselfe, shall bee deceived, and restlesse. Doe not presume of your selfe neither in great, little, or even the least things; for of your selfe you can
doe nothing. If in your dayly actions you doe relye, on your owne forces, you will necessarily fale, when assaulted with a strong tentation: For on the one side your forces are not sufficient, and on the other, not beeing vsed to make your recourse to God, you will not bee able to hope, for his helpe: soe that you will come to bee left voyd of all helpe. The affaire of your salvation must bee perfited by God, and your selfe, and as God will not doe any thing with out you, soe can not you doe any thing at all with out God. Doe not therefore confide in thy selfe least God leave thee to thy selfe: but begg of God that hee will vouch∣safe powerfully to prevent thee, that soe thou mayst bee able to doe all things, in him that strengthens thee.
The best counsaile you can fol∣low, is to enter into the abysse of your owne basenesse before you beginne any affaire, even the least, to see, vnderstand, and confesse, that you can doe nothing with∣out mee, and when you have rightly considered the abysse of your no∣thing then ascend vnto the hight of my mercy, which is above all my workes, and soe let one abysse invoke another abisse, and Ile' open the cataracts of heaven, and power∣forth my grace vpon you. When you have thus humbled your selfe aske what you will, and it shall bee done. The exinanition of ones selfe is the most efficatious prayer. Lessen first your pride, and then bend your knee in prayer. As often as you shall humble your selfe in any of your actions, soe often
shall I assist you with my ommi∣nipotencythat you may want nothing. Loe therefore Sonne, what great good there is contained in the knowledge of your selfe. If you know your selfe, you will humble your selfe, and make your recourse to mee, and if you have recourse to mee, Ile' help you, and labour with you: and what can you feare when you have the Om∣nipotent to assist you, who can as easily doe great matters, as the smalest things. You ought to feare nothing, but only confiding in your selfe: for as long as you place your confidence in God, you shall aequaly overcome all, because you relye on him, who can with the same case doe all things either alone, or with you. God therefore left man, naked, needy, and vnable to rayse him
selfe towards his end, because hee would himselfe, out of his infinite love allways assist him, with his wisdome rule him; with his power defend him: and replenish him with grace mediately floeing from himelfe. If you doe rightly vnderstand these things you have lay'd a solide foundation of true peace. And if you are come to know your nperfections you have made a great steppe towards perfection▪ and this is the first fruite you must reape from the knowledge of your selfe, which being well vnderstood, you will easily obtaine the two following. The second fruite then is, that this knowledge of your selfe cutts a way all vaine hopes by the rootes. Why doe you beginne with vaine hopes what of your selfe you are not able to effect? for whome doe
you heape vp treasures who are but a passenger that must leave them all to morrow? Eternity is at the dore, which will force thee to bid a long adieu to thy desires, what will then become of the honour you soe dearly bought, and soe carefully cherished, when you shall sleepe in dust, and bee noe longer thought on? but graunt that all did prayse you after death, what then? shall not the wormes stil feede in the same manner on thy corps? shall not thy soule bee tormented a like? perhappes many have praysed, you in your life time which you knew not of, what were you the better for this vnknowen prayse? Many alfoe have disprayed you which you were ignorant of, and what are you the worse? It will bee just soe after death, when neyther prayse, nor disgrace shall move you absent, now and insensible.
If you did know your selfe you would curbe your ambition and live in a most profound peace. Doe not labour and take pains that others may know you, but endeavour to bee fully knowen to your selfe, and God. You are, what you are in the sight of God, and not what men Iudge you. Doe not compare your selfe with others, but beholde your selfe, in the presence of God, that you may allwayes humble your selfe. If you compare your selfe with others, to bee sure your per∣fections of body or mind, will not reach to a mediocrity, and la∣bour what thou will, you shall find your selfe surpassed by a great many. Bee therefore content, that as many surpasse you in guifts of nature as God has preferred, and only endea∣vour in matter of good will, and vertue (whereby a mans worth is
only to bee measured) to bee a mong the first. If you bee in this or that office, if you bee prefer∣red before this or that person, if this, or that man prayse you. Does not the burdone encrease with the honor? Does not solicitude the punishment of ambitious encrease with theire prayses? Prayse and envy allwayes goe hand in hand, mirth and sorrow are twinnes, nor has any seene the day of glory, that has not beene seconded by a night of ignominy. This is the nature of the world that all strive to pull downe those that preceed them. Many compas∣sionate him falen, whome raysed with prosperity, and ayming at great matters they shall strive to keepe downe. If noe man did envy you, if you could easily gaine, and retaine
honour, yet you oughtnot to accept of it, if you did rightly know your selfe; for you were not created to seeke this humane day, if you had beene crea∣ted for to bee renouned among men, God would have furnished you with other helpes for obtai∣ning the glory of the world. Con∣clude therefore from your Imbe∣cility and weakenesse, that you were not made to bee great in this world, but in heaven, nor must you seeke to bee glorious before men, but God. Knowing therefore your selfe cutt of all vaine hopes, and cast away all abi∣bition, and only minde, covet, and strive to have God for witnesse of your actions, bee satisfyed to have him a lone for your spectator, who when you have lawfully contended, only can give you the
rewarde. Let this bee the secondefruite of the knowledge of your selfe, that being poore, banished, abject and infirme, you ought not to presume great matters, but all wayes sett in the last place, and ayme at nothing that is great in this world, that you may find all things in the next. The third fruite of this knowledge is Patience. If you know your selfe to bee a man, you know with what an innumerable multitude of afflic∣tions you are encompassed on all sides, and if you remember your sinnes you will allways expect just punishment. You cannot being a man live without miseryes, and being a sinner, you ought not. It is therefore just, and necessary that you should always suffer. It is a foolish presumption to expect to find noe adversityes. Prepare your selfe then
from this moment andknow for certaine you must dayly suffer. If you have already suffered some thing, you will doe wisely to beleeve you shall yet suffer much more. When you goe about any thing Consider your weakenesse, that you wonder not if any misfortune happen in the event. There is ney∣ther creature you love, nor per∣sone you deale with, from whome you must not suffer. Expect there∣fore a crosse in every thing, that soe it may become the lighter by expectation. As there is nothing more frequent in this life then tri∣bulations, soe is there nothing more necessary then patience. You must suffer from all, but chiefely from your selfe. For your owne frailty is the heavvest crosse, which taken a way, it would bee easy to beare the rest. Let then your frailty admonish
you, of your want of ability, thatyou doe not presume of your selfe, but when soever by devine grace you desire to doe good, you propose it vnto mee with feare, and if that after your purpose (which you thought very firme and efficatious) you fale into your former faults, have patience, and purpose a gaine with greater feare of your selfe, and more confidence in mee. And if you fale againe what wonder if a staffe of reed bee broken? Beginne a new, and forgetting what is past, lay hold on your good purposes, not as if you would force victory and with one lumpe rise to the highest perfection, but by little and little dayly endeavoring to ad∣vance with patience and longani∣mity. This is your infirmity that you finde a will to good, but find not how to compasse it: knowing therefore your selfe doe
not won∣derif you fale, but when you have falen confesse your sinnes against your selfe, humble your selfe, and doe pennance, and Ile a gaine rayse you, that you may goe on as though you had never falen. Sonne loe here the three things which you will learne from the knowledge of your selfe. First to diffide in your selfe, and place all your confidence in mee. Secondly to seeke nothing in this exile, nor desire to bee praysed or esteemed great; and finaly dayly to expect, considering your owne vnhappi∣nesse, a Crosse in, and from all things. If you observe these things you shall not bee soe easily distur∣bed, because you will cut of the rootes of disquiet. For all disquiet arises from these three heads, either to much confidence in one selfe; Avaine desire of worldly things; Or impatience in adversity.
CHAPTER IV. Some points conducing to peace that ought to bee consi∣dered in things. ILe' yet speake to thee Lord, though I am but dust and ashes, thou hast taught mee two maxi∣mes of peace, to wit, the know∣ledge of thee, and the knowledge of my selfe, whereof, all peace and perfection depends. There are yet two things remaining, towards the compleating your instruction, to wit concerning the things, and persons I deale with, that I may know how to conserve a lasting peace in all events. Teach mee there∣fore
O Lord yet farther what soe euer more is necessary to find true peace in all things. Sonne the first thing you must deepely print in your mind concer∣ning things, is to know you must allways labour, allways bee doeing some thing. Peace and Idlenesse can never agree, nor is there any thing soe opposit to the tranquility of mind, as lithernesse and sloath. A∣mong all things created that are active there is nothing soe active as the soule of man, and therefore nothing can bee more opposit and contrary to it then doeing nothing at all. Examine your selfe if when you refraine from all action, and are vvholy Idle, you doe not find a tediousnesse and loathing. There is nothing does more strengthen, and comfort the soule then to see
it selfe make progresse, nor anything oppresse it more then to bee wholy forced to cease from all acti∣on. Desires kill the slothfull. How doe they kill? By gnawing and consuming the very soule; they alsoe kill by delivering into the hands of many tormenters. For Idlenesse is the seminary of all vices, the receptacle of all wandering evils, the devils table where vnto the evil spirits are rather invited, then come by chanse, the deadly enimy of all vertues, the scoole of wicked∣nesse, the sinke of vices, where vnto all filth gathers. There are two things vvholy inconsistent with Idlenesse: Wisdome, and Chastity. Loe how the slothfull man is killed by his desires, who beeing rob'd of the chiese ornaments of soule and body, (for vvisdome is the grace of the soule, and Chastity of the body) becomes an enimy of
vertue, and is exposed to as many miseryes, as there are deceits of the world, the, flesh, & the devil. There is noe vice soe full of mischiefe as Idlenesse, none soe vngratfull and fruitlesse; for an Idle persone is vse∣full to noe body, and always dis∣pleasing to him selfe. There is no∣thing soe like Idlenesse, as foolish∣nesse; for both render people vn∣fit for all things. And there is no∣thing soe agreable to peace as a hardy, but moderate labour, where with life is ceasoned, and time spent in tranquility. Adam was placed in Paradice to manure it; and you are caled to Religion to cultivate your soule by manfully working in it. A Religious life, is the worke of God, And cursed hee that does the worke of God negligently. You shall have your reward accor∣ding
to your workes, even in thislife as well as the next. Labour therefore in my vineard and you shall have a double reward, peace of mind in this life, and glory in the next. This is the fust conclusion con∣serning the things one is to doe that intends to live a pious and quiet life, hee must always la∣bour. Now Sonne harken where in you are to labour. Allways doe that which you shall not repent, but wish to have done, and you will find peace. But what things are these O Lord? Sonne they are those things which God requires and exacts of you. But who shall tell mee what God requires of mee? O happy man that has God for the directour of his actions and heares God saying this is the way, walke
in it, that you may goe streight to aeternall Salvation.Truely hee were inexcusable that should decline from the way, that has God for his guide. Tis true Sonne, there is noe greater hap∣pinesse, then to have God for master, directour, and assistent in all actions Neyther Kings nor Princes have such a Counceler; yet you enjoy this praerogative of Saints, that you euer know the will of God in all your actions. I tould you interiourly when I spake in your hart, and caled you to Reli∣gion; and now I tell it you a∣gaine that I commaund what soe∣ver your Superiours order. You know my will, when you know the will of your Superiur, that cyther now is, or shall bee for the fature. And seeing I have given your Superiour my place, it belongs to mee to provide that hee shall commaund what I
will have; andif I did not take care of this, my Providence would bee defectiue, which is indeficient and cannot faile. The day you made your vowes to mee, and promised to obey your Superiour in all things; That very day did I take you into my care, and ordered in the councell of my wisdome, certaine actions, which I have in part al∣ready let you know, and in part shall declare, wherin I have, and yet will have you exercise your vow, which I declare by your Su∣periour. I doe not say your Supe∣riour is infallible, but I say that what soever your Superiour com∣maunds (that is not a sinne) I com∣maund the very same, and Ile soe direct you, that if you obey as you ought, what soever your Su∣periour commaunds, shall conduce
to your salvation. This is an in∣finiteconfort of Religious persons that they allways heare mee speak∣ing in the Superiour, and soe are more sure they doe the will of God, then if an Angel did reveale it to them. For they may doubt of the Angel, but ought not to doubt of the commaund of the superiour: because I have constituted him in my place, and Ile' soe guide him, that though hee doe not thinke of it, or will not, hee shall doe my will. That is, hee shall commaund that, which I resolved to com∣maund, when you offred your selfe vnto mee. Doe not therefore de∣liberate any longer, but know that will. That is, hee shall commaund that, which I resolved to com∣maund, when you offred your selfe vnto mee. Doe not therefore de∣liberate any longer, but know that when you heare your superiour speake you heare my will For it is truely my will to governe thee as the supertour shall commaund, whome I now feresee; though
you doe not yet know, who, or where they are.there are many and hard commaunds that expect you, which you shall vnderstand how hard they are when you shall heare them, but I now tell you of them that when they happen you should remember that I have tould you, that this is my will, which you ought to fulfill, for your great comfort and conso∣latione. Lord I now see that the chiefe and maine rule, or chusing things for obtaining, peace, is to chuse nothing but wholy depend on obedience, that I may always doe thy will, which is to bee cove∣ted above all things. Lord give mee thy grace that I may always doe thy will, because I know this to bee best and most profitable for mce; and let mee never seeke my owne. And now because it often happens that there is some time left free to mee, I alsoe desire to know
what even then I am to doe: For superiours doe not soe employ vs but there is some time left ouer∣plus. Sonne when you find any such time (which will often happen if you bee diligent) come to mee, and open your mouth, and I will fill it. I say betake your selfe to God in prayer and contemplation. It is the most proper duty of man to con∣template the Devinity, there is nothing on earth more sublime then prayer, but the frequenting Sacra∣ments. It is an vnspeakable dignity of man that hee can speake with God, and lay open all his miseryes and necessityes in his presence. If any had soe free an accesse to a king as you have to God, to pro∣pose what you will, and when you will; hee would think him selfe most happy. Doe not therefore soe much neglect your good, but make
your recourse to God with confi∣dence as often as you can, and take it as a great favour that I have pro∣vided thee this time. If you doe not willingly converse with God by meditation, you are in great daun∣ger of leaving your vocation; for who soever does vnwillingly re∣collect himselfe, gives an evident signe that hee little regards his pro∣gresse, and hee that does not re∣garde his progresse cannot stand long. Now to the end you may with constancy and profit converse with god in the recolection of your selfe, be sure to have always some thing in readinesse wherein to employ your selfe with zeale. Now consi∣der the excellency of God, now his love towards you, now your end, & the terrible passage of death, some times looke in to your past
actions, and others againe fore∣east your future; knowing that the more you weigh each in the sight of God the more profitable and tol∣lerable they will become: the chiefe point of humane wisdome consists in this, that a man comparing fu∣ture with the past, doe rightly order his actions in the sight of God. And hee that will not take time, to fore∣cast what is to bee, can never be∣have himselfe well in occations. Meditation is the rule of life, and prayer is the key of heaven; the one disposes to Paradice, the other opens heaven, the one teaches what is to bee done, the other gives forces to put in execution both illuminate, both inflame, both conduce to make the burden light, and Putrify the yoke at the face of oile.
Sonne, betake your selfe there∣foreto meditate and pray as often as your obedience will permitte, and when you can, write downe what I suggest vnto you, that it may the longer remaine in your mind, and soe your comfort bee more permanent. Let it bee your exercise, to gather scrappes from your Lords table, wherewith to feed your hunger, when afterwards you are in deso∣lation. All have some private ex∣ercise wherein they spend their time; doe you chuse this, which is the most excellent, most profita∣ble and secure, and if you doe but vse your selfe to it, it will become the most sweet and pleasing. There is nothing can more conduce to peace of mind, then this internal conversation, which frees the soule from the dependance of all other things, and persons.
For hee that can tell how to converse alone,with God alone, carryes his com∣forter with him, and needs not begg comfort from Creatures: such doe neyther regarde place nor of∣fice, because they find free accesse to their God in all places, and employments, and deeme his con∣versatione the greatest good. All seeke their comfort in some thing, but hee is happy that makes prayer and meditatione his employment, for hee shall have God for his com∣forter. But because humane frailty is such that it cannot long continue in any exercise without wearinesse and irkesomnesse; prayer ought not to bee to much continuated, but the mind must bee released from to serious application. Now what re∣laxation, a religious personne is to take, and when, is not to bee doubted, this alsoe beeing to bee
ordered by the prescript of obedi∣ence as well as all other things. Relaxation of mind 15 to bee takē in such sort, that it bee not em∣braced for it selfe, but to the end that you may afterwards betake your selfe more vigorously to se∣rious matters. There are some stu∣dyes which delight with their variety, and conduce not only to avoyd Idlenesse, but if vndertaken with a good intention, alsoe helpe to serve God the better. and thus much as to the things that are to bee done. Now Sonne Ile' say some what of the manner of doeing them. In the first place consi∣der for whome you doe things. Whether therefore you eate or drinke, learne or teach, or what soever else you doe, doe all things in the
name of the Lord. rayseyour mind, that your eye beeing cleare your whole body may bee light; you will performe this, if you ruminate well what I have say'd: first that God ought to bee considered in all things, that as all things floe from him, soe all things should againe returne vnto him. Secondly of the know ledge of your selfe, to Consider who it is that does them, for reflecting on the weackenesse of the agent, you will easyly resigne your selfe to all events: thirdly to Consider what you doe, and regard things as they are, fading mortal, and not able to satiate. Considering the nature of things thus, your mind will acquiesce to all accidents, as you will see descending to particulars. Tis a hard thing to loose a friend, yet if you consider a friend to bee what hee is,
you will find your selfe separated from one,whose company was only lent you till a future separation, nor will you take it heynously that a mortal man shall dye, nor that God take backe what hee had lent. Tis a harder thing to see familyes and Kingdomes destroyed; but consider that Kingdomes are assem∣blyes of men who as they beganne, soe must they end; nothing hu∣mane can bee everlasting. There is noe Kingdome that has conti∣nued from the beginning of the world, nor any now in beeing that was not built on the ruines of a former; nor is there any like to last till the latter day. God has weighed in the Counsel of his Eternity the sinnes of all shates, Kingdomes and Empires and resol∣ved to punish them being come to such a measure. If therefore the destruction of some happen in
your dayes, adore the Iustice of God, and you will not won∣der the workes of men shall pe∣rish. There is nothing more grieu∣ous, then to see the Church op∣pressed, and that fire extinguished which I kindled. Yet looke on this very oppression as the safty of the elect, and any persecution what soe∣ver will seeme tollerable. Consider alsoe with your selfe that Gods elect dispersed in all ages, and clymats, doe suffer more or lesse, according as God decreed before all ages, as it is written. When the highest devidel, the nations, When hee sepa∣rated the sonnes of Adam, hee appoin∣ted the limus of people according to the number of the children of Israel (that is the number of the elect) for not all that are of Israel they bee Israelits: nor they that are the children of the flesh, but those that walke
according to faith, and for these God made all things, Soe that though the Church seeme to bee extinguished in this, or that place: yet it is not extinguished; but seeing there will bee, noe more elect in such, or such a place, the light of faith is withdrawen from the reprobate, by their demerit: Yett God ever affords them sufficient grace to salvation: and this is not to bee wondred at. Consider the∣refore thus each thing to bee what it is, and you will not wonder at any thing that hap∣pens. And allthough this conside∣ration bee very profitable in the occations themselves yet it is much better to dispose the mind before hand: for in the occations, or after wards there is need of great vio∣lence to suppresse a raysed passion. Hee that foresees all things will bee prepared for all events:
No∣thingcan come suddaine or vn∣expected to him. And who soe∣ver considers things as they are, will love them as hee ought. The only way to keepe a quiet and settled mind in all events prospe∣rous or adverse, is to give each a just proportion of love. Things that are immutable, are to bee loved with an vnalterable affec∣tion, and those that are changable with a changable one. The im∣mutable goods are God and his will, and then the salva∣tion of men, which is contained in the will of God. Wherefore these are the only things which are to bee loved vnalterably, all∣wayes, and by all. All other goods, either of body or soule, of parents, of friends, ones Country, or of the whole earth, are mutable goods and limited,
for there is none ofthese things that faile not, none that doe not deceive their lovers. Yet they are all goods in their way, if you doe but know how to make vse of them. You must only lend, and not give them your affection, you must not place your whole affection on them; but afford each their proportion, more or lesse, according as they are better and more permanent. Yet you must soe impart to each, that you doe not derogate from the chiefe affection to the vnchang∣able good, which will bee, if you love all other things in order to that immutable good, there beeing nothing truely good but in order to that. If therefore you desire not to bee disturbed with any thing which you eyther doe or suffer, bridle your affections soe that they
doe not to much adhere to anything but give each a just propor∣tion, according to theire merite and deserts. CHAPTER V. Certaine things to bee Obser∣ved concerning the Per∣sons wee deale with, for preserving the Peace of mind. LOe here my Sonne the hardest lesson of all; how to have peace with men. O what a many things are to bee observed not to displease men? you are oblidged to love all, but not to bee beloved by all, nor will you
bee able to effect it, yet youmust Provide good things not only before God, but alsoe before all men, if it may bee, to which end you must observe many things. In the first place if you desire to live in true peace among men, let your chiefe care bee not to commu∣nicate your selfe to freely to men; but keepe at a just distance with all people. Familiarity according to the ould Proverbe breeds contempt. For whilst familiarity does wholy expose men, and discover the most hidden secrets, it manifests many vices with few vertues: and vices and defects doe hinder love, towards the person they are in: and if they doe not be∣gett a hatred, they at least breed contempt. More over a frequent conversation with the same person∣nes causes a satiety and that a loath∣ing. If therefore you desire to have a friendship
long lasting with anyone, doe not commnuicate to fre∣quently with them, nor ever wholy, for the lesse freely you impart your selfe to others the more pretious shall your friendship bee. How com's it to passe that soe many beginne friend∣ships with soe much fervour and af∣fection, which are soe soone lost? There are many reasons, where of this is not the least. Because when they have wholy delivered themsel∣ves to each other, and exposed their most hidden secrets love not finding how to encrease, like vnto the flame having consumed the flax perishes with the fewel; soe the love of these not beeing able to encrease consumes it selfe. This is soe natural to man. that neither the vnderstanding nor will, can rest, but still seeke to goe on tell they come to the possessi∣on of an infinity: and if they are not permitted to passe on
in any thing,they presently loath it and seeke an other. Thus they that heape vp riches stil desire to encrease the heape; Thus they that swimme in pleasures stil thirst for others. Thus they that are the most Learned stil desire a greater knowledge; nor can any of these rest, as long as riches, plea∣sures, or knowledge have certaine bounds, which they ever will find. Yet as long as they labour in the pur∣sute of these goods, though they doe not rest (for noe man rests in that which hee labours to obtaine) not∣withstanding they delight in the progresse; and man's mind is more pleased with a progresse in smale things, then to stoppe at great. This is the reason why you never ought wholy to impart your selfe vnto your friends; But make a mo∣derate distribution, that love may stil find place to encrease. And soe much as to this.
There are yet many other rea∣sons which if well Considered will more powerfully withdraw you from to much familiarity with men. For as friendship is the strongest and sweetest band, soe does it alsoe most easily captivate, and hinder them from enjoying themselves, and God, with a true freedome. All love of Creatures that has not its of spring from true charity is opposite to the love of God; and there is nothing does soe dead devine love, as the love of men. The love of Gould makes men avaritious, that of honour ambitious, but the love of men heapes all vices together. Many would overcome theire owne vices, vnlesse they were overcome by those of others, and drawen into mischiefe by keeping their friends Company, most sinnes are com∣mitted, because men live accor∣ding
to example and none dare recale others from sinning, but are rather ashamed not to follow those that lead to sinne. O hard slavery of friendship which obliges to live according to the wayes of others and those generaly euil? there is yet a nother evil in familiarity, that most betray them selves to theire friends, you laugh and disclose your selfe to your friend, and hee noe Sooner has receaved your secret, but recom∣mends it to another friend, oblidg∣ing his fidelity to bee most faithfull in the secret; and thus your secret wanders, till at last it becomes Publicke. This is a great mischiefe of Familiarity, but ineuitable; for to conceale any secret, is to re∣nounce friendship, and to disclose it even to your most familiar is to divulge it. And you doe most un∣justly exact another should
keepe the secret you could not conseale, for how can you with reason comitte that to an others trust which you were not faithfull to your selfe in. Though this were the only evil of friendship that it discouers what ought to bee kept secret, this a∣lone might justly withdraw you from the familiarity of men, but there are a thousand other wayes whereby men erre and offend by familiarity. When you deale with strangers you seldome slip in your words, and hardly ever deale with your familiars but you speake many things which you repent to have vttered: Soe that errours are co∣mitted on all sides in frindship; now you find fault with others actions, now you discover your owne faults, now you make new frindshipps, now you betray
Secrets, now yours are betra∣yed; now you are infected withyour friends disease, now you im∣part your owne, you always offend God, and always returne worse from your friends. Lord if this bee the condition of a friend with his friend, it is better to have noe friend. And if one man bee soe prejudiciall to another wee must fly the company of all men, and live retired, placeing our hopes in silence and solitude. Sonne this is your weakenesse that as soone as you find difficulty in any thing, you presently fale on the contrary. You must not therefore wholy leave all humane conversa∣tion, because there are errours committed in friendship; for though it bee hard to live among men vprightly: Yet it is much better to live soe, then to live in solitude. Errours are
oftener committed in a Community, but they are moreDangerous in solitude; and if ver∣tue bee more peaceable in solitude, yet it is greater and stronger in a community, you must not there∣fore fly company, but the vices of company. As for what appertaines to particular frindship, it is Danger∣ous. If you can live without a frind you will bee much more quiet, and you shall almost auoyd the enmitys of all, if you avoyd Frindships. Yet it is sometimes necessary for some to have a frind, to whome they may ease themselves, and by whome they may bee directed in their doubts; which though it is profi∣table to all, yet it is more neces∣sary for the younger. If you be, wise you will take your Superiour, and him that rules your conscience instead of this frind: and vse your selfe soe much to their company, that you bee not asshamed to dis∣cover
your infirmityes vnto them, and aske their counsaile in all things, knowing for certaine, that I will rule you by them, and direct them soe, that as long as you obey their voice sincerly, whatsoever they advise, shall cooperate to your good. As to what concernes others live soe as neither to have friend, nor enimy; which you shall effect, if you be∣have your selfe like a Pilgrimme and a stranger, as you ought to doe, if you desire to live quietly. Have a care then not to bee to familiar with any, but more per∣ticularly with the imperfect, and above all with women, whose con∣versation though never soe holy is subject to danger. If you will needs have a friend, let him bee such an one as you could wish your selfe most perfect, that soe his life may bee the model of your actions.
But doe not presently judge any one such, till the long experience of many yeares have made his vertue knowen in several occasions. If you can meete with such an one, insi∣nuate your selfe into his company if you can, and deeme your selfe to have found a treasure. In the meane while, live content with mee alone. Fly all familiarityes, and you shall the more freely en∣joy God, and your selfe: and this is the first advice, that you doe not easily contract friendship with any, til you meete with some body very perfect, and in the meane time esteeme all others, but mee, and your selfe, as passangers and stran∣gers; which if you performe, you will avoyd the greatest part of those things, which among men vse to disturbe the peace of mind; and if you doe not; you shall find
as many disturbers of your peace as you have friends. Now Sonne doe not only heare, how you are to take heed of men, but alsoe how you are to gaine the love of all, and live quietly with them. Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy selfe. There is nothing where by you shall gaine the love of all more, then by loving all. Love is the goulden hooke wherewith men are taken. To much familiarity and private frindship, besides the evils wee have already spoke of, has an∣next vnto it, that it generally dis∣pleases all; where as common charity which imbraces all, is gratefull to all, and displeasing to none. Doe therefore live soe, that you love all, and that all may see they are loved by you, and you shall alsoe bee loved by all. Now to the end this love bee solid,
it must beegrounded vpon vnchangable, and aeternal motives. Love because I love, love because it is fitting: for love if well placed, is the most no∣ble production of the minde. Love for the interjour worth of each, for man is the worke of God, capable of an infinity, and cannot bee to much loved, if but rightly. Love all for these motives, as if they were thy brethren. Endeavour to behave your selfe soe, that all may perceive, you are not lead by private obligati∣ons, but that you are ready to ac∣comodate your selfe to each in par∣ticular, as farre, as the aeternal mo∣tives will permitte. Of all the acts which love produces, the giving honour, is the chiefe, and most efficatious to winne peoples hartes. Honour therefore, if
you desire to bee honoured; all love honour, & himthat honours them. Yet let not your honour be servil but, generous, let it not flatter, but respect, let it not feare, but love, and let it bee always such, that it please God, whether it please man or noe; and soe you shal bee sure not to loose your reward. Nor indeed, need it bee feared that you shall not please men, as long as you honor them. For there are but few that are of such abject and servil spirits, that are not deligh∣ted with honour, nor ought you to leave the common high way for a few. Doe what you ought, and if others misconster your proceedings, doe not therefore desist but follow the tract, true reason dictat's. This honour and love which you are to afford your neighbour is per∣ceived in two things; to wit, words, and deeds. First you must not doe any thing that is injurious to ano∣ther vpon any account whatsoever.
Nevther ought you only doe this, for even heathens and publicans doe the same. But for my sake, you shall endeavour to yeald of your owne right, rather then to per∣mitte, that others should suffer any inconvenience, that you can re∣dresse, nay you shall even seeke oc∣cations to exercise charity towards your neighbour. This the Evange∣lical law requires of you, which I was pleased to ground on fraternal Charity: and this does your vocation exact which you cannot comply with, but by exercising charity in all occations. I have caled you to bee wholy employed in helping your neighbours and wholy bent on their good. And if you are ready to vnder goe any labours for your neigh∣bours in generall, and even death it selfe, what
ought you to doe for your brethren with whomeyou live, and of the same profession with you. If you did know what a glorious thing it is, to bee caled & bee a companion of IESUS, you would beare each of them great Re∣verence, and love, and study how to please, and serve mee, in my com∣panion, though with never soe great inconvenience; for whatsoever you doe to the least of these my companions, is done to mee, you must therefore have great care that you doe not contristare mee in my companion, by doeing any thing whereby your brother, and mine may justly bee offended. Neyther must you thinke it suffi∣cient not to offend, but you must endeavour to oblidge each, with most singular charity. If you can not expresse this charity in effects and deeds, at least let it appeare in a
sincere expression of words.Words are the instruments, where with the soules of men converse, with one another, and make a mutuall exchāge of their thoughts: a word is soone spoken, and there is nothing lighter; but once vttred it is irrevocable, and workes great things; for whilst the voice perishes in the ayre, it leaves behind an impression in the harts of the hearers, which some times noe art, or labour can weare away. What wars has an inconsideratly vttred word beene cause of? noe man can tame a toungue, neyther are you or any other free from this inquiet evil; yet the better you commaund your toungue the more quietly you shall live, both to your selfe and others. When you speake you must not bee morose, or to sadde. Yet
you must take greater heed, of faling into such an effusion of toungue, that you regard not what you say, soe you gaine the laughter and plause, of people: For it is better bee sad then ridi∣culous, there being nothing more vnworthy, and vnbeseeming then to see a Religious man like a jester doe nothing else but seeke to pro∣voke people to laughter by the absurdity of his sayings. Such persons neyther have any sence of devotion, or Solidity in them, nor can they profit eyther themselves or others. Doe you therefore not only avoyd doeing any such things your selfe, but even the conver∣sation of such, least you seeme by your company, and patience to authorise their folly, Persuade your selfe most certainely that there is noe peace to bee founde
with such, but by flying them. There are but few such, nor are you to thinke any such, vn∣lesse hee shew himselfe to bee soe, but you must treat all hono∣rably not with a sordid compli∣ment but a sincere charity. You must not disprayse any, nor speake of those things which you know they are vnwilling to heare, vnlesse necessity oblidge, or the duty of your office require it. You shall not contend with any, but rather chuse to holde your toungue to preserve peace, then overcome by contending. Those that dispute much about every thing, and alwavs defend their opinion gene∣rally want judgement, and if they were but soe wise as to judge rightly they would not doe it. They are alsoe often blinded with the
affection of a perverse willand persuade people that things are as they would have them, not as they know them to bee. Whether they erre in will, or vnderstāding, doe not oppose them, but when you have delivered your opinion, leave them in their errour, whether it bee that they will not, or cannot see the truth. Avoyd complaints which preju∣dice charity & gauld the mind of the plaintife. If you find nothing prayse worthy, doe not disprayse, but bee silent: if you see any thing prayse worthly prayse with moderation, for the excesse of prayse does great pre∣judice; as well because it shewes the imperfect judgemēt of him that pray∣ses, as that it deceives the praysed: and finaly because that hee, that gives great prayses to meaner things has nothing to adde to greater: and besides a moderate prayse gets
cre∣dit,which the immoderat looseth. Prayse therefore those that are prayse worthy with moderation, and ac∣cording to their desert, but never prayse your selfe: for who soever prayses him selfe rayses envy need∣lesly: for all men endeavour to suppresse the arrogant, nor is there any thing more apr to begette con∣tempt then an itching desire of prayse, expressed by the commenda∣tion of ones selfe. It is better, and much more wisdome to say nothing of ones selfe, but let deeds speake. If you have abilityes, there will not want occationes wherein to shew them: expect therefore a while, and vertue or wisdome will appeare more pleasing, the lesse exspected. Boasting does even lessen good actions, and makes great things seeme smale; because they were greater in expec∣tation. If you will prejudice any future action, you cannot effect it
in a more compendious way, then if you prevent and fill peoples minds with great promises which cannot bee performed. For men beeing frus∣trated of their expectation become passionat judges, and desire to find fault and condemne every thing. Prayse not therefore your selfe, nor preferre your selfe before any: but bee as kind and indulgent to others as you can. Prayse what you can according to its desert, make the best of what is doubtfull, that love may appeare every where which pleases all; and let not Insolency, pride, Anger, neglect, or a meane oppinion of your neighbour, appeare any where, or any thing that may breed aversion: and doe not that to another you would not have done to your selfe, and soe you will fulfill my commaundement. Thou shall love thy neighbour as thy
selfe.But seeing it is very hard to be∣have ones selfe as on ought in all events, especially when wee are to deale with others, observe these two following rules which will very much conduce to your peace of mind. The first is not to intrude your selfe into the imployments of others. Let each doe their duty, tis their owne deeds must make them stand or fale. It is good to bee willing to help others, but it is very troublesome to meddle in others dutyes. you are not a Censor to pry into others lives and acti∣ons, nor shall you bee iudged for the actions of others, but your owne. If there bee any thing a∣misse in your neighbour, let him mend it. What is that to you? doe not you passe your bounds because another has
transgressed his, youmake your selfe miserable to no purpose while you afflict your selfe with the cares of others. Suppose therefore every body to doe their duty, & doe you in like manner per∣forme yours If your neighbours, fault is manifest; first see if there bee noe body else vnto whome it belongs to reprehend, and correct, which if there bee, you are not to meddle with it. If there bee noe such personne, then consider a gaine, whether, what you may say is like to doe good; and doe not easily persuade your selfe it will: for all reprehensions are vngratfull, even from a superiour, and from an aequal, or inferiour intollerable to all, but those that have a perfect abnegation of themselves. But if you certainely see your words will doe good, you ought not to refuse your neighbour this charity.
The second rule is. That in all you doe, or say of your neigh∣bour, you make the most favorable construction. For since you must, al∣most of necessity incline to one side or other of the ballance, it is much better you should incline rather to indulgence, then to much severity. For to much indulgence is easily monded, but to much severity once vsed is hardly ever forgott. In∣dulgence or condecendency is a hu∣mane errour, and deserves love, but severity is cruelty, and rayses hatred and envy. Yet this is not soe to bee vnderstood, as though you were any-wise, eyther out of love or in∣dulgence to deviate from what is right: for such indulgence is very prejudicial, and rather deserves the name of cōtempt of good discipline, then fraternal charity. But where there is any
doubt, you had bettererre twice out of to much cha∣rity, then once out of two much rigour. Sonne these are the things, which you may doe for love of your neigh∣bour, to fulfill my will in all things. Yet when you have done them; you must not presently thinke you shall bee in peace with your neighbour; for though you have done your part, yet it is not in your power to hinder, that none shall oppose you, and soe dis∣turbe your peace. You must there∣fore lastly learne how to beare in∣juryes when they happen, soe that they doe not disturbe your peace of mind. If that you doe but rightly conceive and retaine what has beene sayd there is noe more to bee added. But because there is nothing harder then to beare inju∣ryes and contumelyes as
one ought,I will say some what that may much conduce there vnto. When soever then (which doubt∣lesse some times will fale out) it shall happen that any one provoke you by injuryes, or calumnyes, you must endeavour most carefully to passe over your injury as if you were not wronged. They that provoke you, often desire noe more, then to move you to anger; doe not therefore pleasure them soe farre, as to let them see you are offended. T'is very convenient to dissemble your beeing offended, and it can doe noe good to publish it. It is wis∣dome when you are offended to bee silent, & very dangerous to speake. What you doe not now speake of, you may afterwards when you please take notice, but you can∣not recale what once is vttred. The greater sense you have of an injury,
the more you ought to dissemble it, and take heede, your vnbesee∣ming passion doe not appeare in publick. Know that if it bee hard to suppresse and dissemble anger; it is yet much harder not to ex∣ceede the bounds of modesty, and reason, if you once beginne to speake in anger. When your mind is well settled and free from passion you can hardly speake, that you doe not repent, somthing that you have vttered; how then shall you expect to containe your selfe in reason when you are disturbed with anger. If what you were a bout to speake bee necessary, you may speake it af∣terwards: and in the meane while you have the advantage of overco∣ming your passion. When therefore it shall happen (which you must allways expect) that any on shall injure you in word or deede, or
prove vnfaithfull to you, dissemble it for a while, and passe it over, as though you did not resent it. And then as soone as you can come to mee in the Church, and there com∣me morate your sufferings in my pre∣sence, and advise with mee whe∣ther they ought to be borne; or noe: If they bee such as you con∣fide you may bee able to beare, doe not loose the occation of imitating my passion, but offer them mee, that they may bee layd vp in my wounds in memory of you; for you ought to desire such crosses, there beeing nothing in the world better then adversity, well borne. And if you complaine of smale and easy things what will you doe when greater evils shall befale you? If the injury or difficulty bee soe great that you feare your forces are not able to beare it, or that it ought not to
beesuffered Consider in my presence what you can doe to avoyd it, and that doe; neyther ought you to ex∣pose your selfe to tentatione, but helpe your selfe by all lawfull mea∣nes, that may secure you. For though it bee allways good, and to bee wish∣ed to suffer, yet it is contrary to all reason, and the will of God alsoe, to expose your selfe to grievous tenta∣tions, which probably you shall not master; or are such things which justly ought not to bee borne with. For it is incomparably better to fly tentations, then to be overcome by them, wherfore it is not only lawfull but necessary to apply fitt remedyes in these cases. Only take heed you make not passion but reason your counceller, & doe not what flesh & bloud shall suggest, but what my father that is in heaven shall
reveale vnto you, for as long as you followpassion, and obey the desires of the flesh, you doe disorderly, & shall bee disquieted: but as long as you doe not seeke your selfe or any other Creature, but desire accor∣ding to right reason, to doe the will of my heavenly Father, soe long shall you find in all things eyther prosperous, or advers, the wished peace. Your peace shall bee the greater, the better you are, you will the better, the greater progresse you make, you will make the greater progresse, the more you are vnited to mee, you will bee the more vnited to mee, the more you are sequestred from all Creatures, and you shall bee the more sequestred from Crea∣tures the lesse you seeke your selfe. Endeavour therefore to leave seek∣ing your selfe, and vse
violence to your selfe, for the King∣domeof heaven suffers force and the violent lay holde of it. The more opposition nature makes, the greater violence you must vse to ouercome your selfe in occations. And though at the beginnings you find it hard and difficult to over∣come your selfe, feare not, but make your recourse to mee, and I pro∣mise you shall finde my joke is sweet, and burden light. The first degree then to perfection and peace is to leave your selfe: and the highest, which you must always ayme at, is in all things to adhere to mee: which when you shall attaine to, imagine you have found true peace. FINIS. Imprimatur, Actum Gandavi 19. Decembris 1675. P. de MEY C. L. C. G.
