H1701 (ENTIRE WORK) 12706619 66032
AFFAIRS OF CHURCH and STATE IN ENGLAND, During the Life and Reign OF QUEEN MARY. Heb. 11. 35, 36, 37. 35. Some of them were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better Resurrection. 36. And others had triall of cruell mockings and scourgings; yea moreover of bonds and imprisonment. 37. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword; they wandred about in Sheep-skins and Goat-skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, &c. Vell. Paterc. Lib. 2. Hujus temporis fortunam ne deflere quidem quispiam satis dignè potuit; nemo ex∣primere verbis potest. Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum. LONDON, Printed for H. Twyford, T. Dring, J. Place, and W. Palmer. Anno 1660:
The Parentage, Birth, and first Fortunes of the Princesse MARY, The Eldest Daughter of K. Henry the Eighth, before her comming to the CROWN. With a brief Narrative of her Mother's Misfortunes, from the first Agitating of the Divorce, till the time of her Death; and that which followed thereupon. MARY, the eldest Daughter of King Henry the Eighth, and of Katherine his first wife,An. 1516. daughter of Ferdinand and Issabella Kings of Spain, was born at Greenwich on the 18 th day of February, Anno 1516. Her Mother had before been married to Arthur Prince of Wales, the el∣der Brother of King Henry; but whether bedded by him or not, (more than as to some old Formalities of Court, on the like occasions) was not commonly known: But he dying within few months after, King Henry the Seventh, the father of the deceased Prince, was secretly dealt with by the Agents of the said Ferdinand and ssabella, to proceed unto a second Marriage between Hen∣ry Duke of York, his now onely son, and their daughter Katherine. To which King Henry readily condescendeth, upon divers reasons; partly to be assured of the assistance of the Kings of Spain, against all practises of the French; and partly that so great a Treasure, as the Rents and Profits of the Princesse's Joyn∣ture might not be carried out of the Kingdom, as needs must be, if she should be married to a Prince of another Nation. This being agreed on by the Pa∣rents of either side, Pope Julius the 2 d. is sollicited for a Dispensation: to the Grant whereof he willingly yielded, knowing how necessary it was to the Peace of Christendom, that those Kings should be united in the strictest Leagues of Love and Amity. Which comming to the knowledge of the Prin∣cesse Katherine, who understood her own condition better than her father or mother, she caused those words, vel forsan conitam, to be inserted into the Bull or Dispensation; and this she did for the preventing of all such disputes as might arise about the validity of the Marriage, in case the consummation of it should be openly known; though afterwards those words were used as the shrewdest Argument for the invalidating of the Marriage, when it came in question. And some such thing was thought to have prevailed with King Hen∣ry
the seventh, for deferring the advancement of Henry his second son to the Style, Title, and Dignity of Prince of Wales, that he might first be well assu∣ed, that no child was likely to be born of the former Marriage, to whom that Title might more properly and of right belong. The Dispensation being thus granted, Prince Henry, being then eleven years of age, or thereabouts, is solemnly contracted to the Princesse Katherine, who must needs have a very great stock, as well of Christian-Prudence, as of Virgin-Modesty, to wait the growing up of a Husband being then a child, and one of whose affection to her, when he should come to Man's estate, she had no assurance; and so it proved in the event: For Henry had no sooner finished the fourteenth year of his age, when, either by the compunction of conscience, the perswasion of some that wish'd him well, or upon consideration of the dis∣proportion of age which was then between them, (the Princesse being eight years the elder) he resolved upon the breaking and annulling of the said Con∣tract, in which his Parents had engaged him. To which end, making his ad∣dresse to Doctor Richard Fox, then Bishop of Winchester, he openly renoun∣ceth the said Contract, not by word onely, but by the subscription of his name to a Legall Instrument, containing the effect of that Renunciation, his Resolution never to proceed any further in it, and his Reasons for it. Which Instrument he published in the presence of John Read, a publick Notary, (the Bishop sitting then at Richmond, as in Court or Consistory) and witnessed un∣to by Miles Dabeny, Lord Chamberlain to King Henry the seventh, and fa∣ther of Henry Earl of Bridgwater; Sir Charls Sommerset Banneret, created af∣terwards Earl of Worcester; Dr. Nicolas West, after Bishop of El; Dr. Thmas Rowthall, after Bishop of Durham; and Sir Henry Maini. The Instrument it self, extant in the History of John Speed, may be there consulted. And in pursuance of this Act, he waived the Consummation of the Marriage from one time to another, till the death of his father, which happened on the 22 of April, An. 1509. he being then within two months of the age of eighteen years. But being now come unto the Crown by the death of his father, Reason of State prevailed so far beyond that of Conscience, that he consented to the consummation of the Marriage, which before he had solemnly renounced, and did accordingly celebrate those unhappy Nuptialls (the cause of so much trouble both to him and others) on the second of June, and caused her to be Crown'd with him on the 24 th. of the same month. This Marriage was blest within the year by the birth of a son, whom the King caused to be Christned by the name of Henry; and five years after with another, who lived not long enough to receive his Baptism. But Henry,1519. the first-born, not living to be two months old, the King re∣mained childlesse till the birth of this daughter Mary, the presumptive Heir of his Dominions; committed in her Infancy to the care and charge of the Lady Margaret, daughter of George Duke of Clarence, and by the King (in re∣ference to her discent from the house of the Montacutes) advanced unto the Style and Title of Countesse of Sarisbury, An▪ 1513. And herein it was thought, that the Queen had a particular aim beyond that of the King, and that she rather chose to commit her daughter to the care of that Lady, than of any other in the Kingdom; to the end, that some affection growing to her by any of the Countesse's sons, her daughter's Title to the Crown might be cor∣roborated by the Interesse of the House of Clarence. And so far her design suc∣ceeded, that the Princesse Mary always carried such a dear affection to Regi∣nald Ple, her second son, (best known by the name of Cardinal Pole in the following times) that when she came unto the Crown, she would have made choice of him for her husband before any other, if the necessity of her affairs, and some artifices used to illude that purpose, had not changed her mind. She had scarce liv'd to the third year of her age, when she was promised in marriage to the Daulphine of France,1519. with a Portion of 333000 Crowns, to be paid by her Father, and as great a Joynture to be made by the French King Francis,
as ever had been made by any King of that Country. And so far did the busi∣nesse seem to be acted in earnest, that it was publickly agreed upon in the trea∣ty for the Town of Tournay, that the Espousals should be made within four months, by the said two Kings, in the name of their children; in pursuance whereof, as the French King sent many rich gifts to some leading men of the Court of England, to gain their good liking to this League, so he sent many costly Presents to the Princesse Mary, the designed wife (if Princes could be bound by such designations) of the heir of France. But war beginning to break out between the French and the Spaniards, it was thought fit by Charles the fifth,1522. being then Emperour of Germany, and King of Spain, to court the favour of the English; for the obtaining whereof, his neer∣nesse to Queen Katherine, being sister to the Queen, his Mother, gave him no small hopes. Upon this ground he makes a voyage into England, is royally feasted by the King▪ installed solemnly Knight of the Order of the Gar∣ter, in the Castle of Windsor, and there capitulates with the King amongst other things, to take to wife his daughter Mary, as soon as she should come to the years of marriage; it was also then and there agreed, that as soon as she was twelve years old, the Emperour should send a proxie to make good the con∣tract & espouse her per verba de praesenti in the usual form▪ that in the mean time the King of England should not give her in marriage unto any other, that a dis∣pensation should be procured from the Pope, at the charge of both Princes, in regard that the parties were within the second degree of consanguinity; that within four months after the contract, the Princesse should be sent to the Em∣perour's Court, whether it were in Spain or Flanders, at the sole charge of the King of England, and married within four dayes after her comming thither, in the face of the Church; her portion limited to 400000 crowns, if the King should have no issue male, but to be inlarged to 600000 crowns more, if the King should have any such issue male to succeed in the Kingdom. A jointure of 50000 crowns per annum, to be made by the Emperour, the one part there∣of to be laid in Flanders, and the other in Spain; and finally, that if either of the said two Princes should break off this marriage, he should forfeit 400000 crowns to the party injured. And now who could have thought but that the Princesse Mary,1525. must have been this Emperour's wife, or the wife rather of any Prince, then one that was to be begotten by this Emperour, on another woman, though in conclusion so it hapned. As long as Charles had any need of the assistance and friendship of England, so long he seemed to go on really in the promised marriage, and by all means must have the Princesse sent over presently to be declared Em∣presse, and made Regent of Flanders. But when he had taken the French King at the battel of Pavia, sackt Rome, and made the Pope his prisoner, he then conceived himselfe in a condition of seeking for a wife elsewhere, which might be presently ripe for marriage, without such a tedious expectation, as his tarrying for the Princesse Mary must needs have brought him. And thereupon he shuts up a marriage with the Lady Issabell, Infanta of Plugull, and daughter to another of his Mother's isters. For which being questioned by the King, he layes the blame upon the importunity of his Council, who could not patiently permit him to remain unmarried, till the Princesse Mary came to age; and who besides had caused a scruple to be started, touching her ille∣gitimation, as being born by one that had been wife to his elder brother. King Henry thereupon proceeds to a new treaty with the French, to whom his friendship at the time of their King's captivity had been very useful; which is by them as cheerfully excepted, as by him it had been franckly offered. She had before been promised to the Daulphin of Franc, but now she is design'd for the second son, then Duke of Orleance, who afterwards, by the death of his el∣der brother, succeeded his father in the Crown. But whilst they were upon this treaty, the former question touching her legitimation, was again revived by the Bishop of Tarbe, one of the Commissioners for the French, which though it
seem'd not strong enough to dissolve the treaty which the French were willing to conclude (as their affairs then stood) upon any conditions; yet it occasi∣oned many troubles in the Court of Engand, and almost all Christendome besides. For now the doubt being started a second time,1526. and started now by such, who could not well subsist without his friendship, began to make a deep im∣pression in the mind of the King, and to call bak such passages to his remem∣brance, as otherwise would have been forgotten. He now bethinks himselfe of the Protestation which he had made in the presence of Bishop Fox before re∣membred, never to take the Lady Katherine for his wife; looks on the death of his two sons, as a punishment on him for proceeding in the marriage; and casts a fear of many inconveniences, or mischiefs rather, which must inevitably be∣fall this Kingdome, if he should dye, and leave no lawful issue to enjoy the Crown. Hope of more children there was none, and little pleasure to be taken in a conversation; which the disproportion of their years, and a greater in∣equality in their dispositions, must render lesse agreeable every day then other. In this perplexity of mind, he consults his Confessor, by whom he was advi∣sed to make known his griefs to Cardinal Wolsie, on whose judgement he relied in most other matters; which hapned so directly to the Cardinal's mind, as if he had contrived the project. The Emperour had lately cross'd him in his suit for the Popedome, and since denied him the Archbish prick of Tledo, with the promise whereof he had before bound him to his side. And now the Cardinal resolves to take the opportunity of the King's distractions, for perfecting his revenge against him. In order whereunto, as he had drawn the King to make peace with France, and to conclude a marriage for his daugh∣ter with the Duke of Orleance; so now he hopes to separate him from the bed of Katherine, the Emperour's Aunt, and marry him to Madam Rhinee, the French Queens sister, who afterwards was wife to the Duke of Ferrara. About which time the picture of Madam Margaret, the sister of King Francis, first married to the Duke of Alanzon, was brought amongst others into Englan, by Thomas Boln, Viscount Rochford, at his return from the Frenh Court, where he had been Ambassador for the King of England: which firt occasioned areport in the common people, and afterwads a mistake in our common Chronicles, touching this Ladie's being designed by Wolsie for a wife to his Master; whereas she was at that time actually married to the Count of Abret, King of Navarre in title, and in title only. But Rochford brought with him out of France another Piece,1527. which more excelled the picture of the Dutchesse of Alanzn, then that Dutchesse did the ordinary beauties in the Court of France; that is to say, his daughter Anne; whom he had bred up for a time in the house of the Dutchesse, which render'd her an exact mistresse of the gaities and garb of the great French Ladies. Ap∣pearing in the Court of England, she shewed her selfe with so many advantages above all other Ladies about the Queen, that the King easily took notice of her. Whether more captivated by the Allurements of her beauty, or the face∣tiousnesse of her behaviour, it is hard to say; certain it is, that he suffered himselfe to be so far transpoted in affection towards her, that he could think of nothing else, but what might tend to the accomplishment of his desires; so that the separation from the bed of Katherine, which was but coldly follow∣ed upon case of Conscience, is now more hotly prosecuted in the heat of Concu∣piscnce. In the mean time the King adviseth with the Cardinal, and the Car∣dinal with the most learned men in the Realm of England. By whom it was modestly resolved, that the King had a very just ground to consult the Pope, and to  lawful means for extricating himselfe out of those perplexities, in which this marriage had involved him. The Pope had been beholden to the King, for procuring his liberty, when the Imperialists held him prisoner in the Fort of St Angel, and was in reason bound to gratifie him for so great a be∣nefit. But then withall, he neither was to provoke the Emperour, nor hazard
the Authority and Reputation of the See Apostolick, by running on the King's errand with more hate then speed. He therefore goes to work like a Pope of Rome, and entertains the King with hopes; without giving the Em∣perour and his adherents, any cause of despair. A Commission is therefore granted to two Cardinals, that is to say, Cardinal Thomas Wolsi, Archbishop of York, and Laurene Campgius, whom Henry some few years before, had made Bishop of Saisbury; both beneficiaries to the King, and therefore like enough to consult more his interest, then the Queen's contentment. Of the erecting of a Court Lgantne in the Convent of the Black Friers in1528. London, the citing of the King and Queen to appear before them, the Kings pa∣theticall Oration in the bemoaning of his own misfortunes, and the Queen's Appeal from the two Cardinals to the Pope, I shall now say nothing; leaving the Reader for those passages to our common Annals. Suffice in this place to note, that while the businesse went on favourable in the King's behalfe, Wolsie was given to understand of his desperate loves to Mistrisse Bollen, which repre∣sented to him two ensuing mischiefs, not to be otherwise avoided, then by slackning the course of these proceedings. For first, he saw that if the King should be divorc'd definitively from his present wife, he should not be able to draw him to accept of Madam Rhenee the French Queens sister, which was the mark he chiefly aimed at. And secondly, he feared that Mistrisse Anne had brought so much of the Lutheran with her, as might in time become destructive1529. to the Church of Rome. Of this he certifies the Pope, the Pope recals Cam∣pegius, and revokes his Commission; leaving the King to cast about to some new wayes to effect his purpose. And at this time it hapned, that Dr Thomas Cramer (who afterwards obtained to the See of Canterbury) discoursing with some of the Kings Ministers, about the intricaenesse and perplexity of this great affair; declared, for his opinion in it, that it were better for the King to govern himselfe therein, by the judgement and determination of the Univer∣sities beyond the seas, then to depend upon the shifts and Artifices of the Court of Rome. Which being told unto the King, he dispatcheth Cramner unto Rome, in the company of Rochford, now made Earl of Wilshire, to main∣tain the King's cause by disputation; and at the same time employs his agents to the Universities of France and Italy, who being under the command of the French King, or the power of the Pope, gave sentence in behalfe of Henry, condemning his marriage with the Lady Katherine, the Relict of his brother, to be simply unlawful in it selfe, and therefore not to be made valid by a di∣spensation from the Popes of Rome. The putting the King upon this course, proved the fall of Wolsi; who grow∣ing every day lesse then other in the King's esteem, was brought within compasse of a Pramunire, and thereby stript of all his goods to an infinite va∣lue; removed not long after unto York, and there arrested of High Treason by the Earl of Northumberland, and committed to the custody of Sir William Kingston, being then Lievtenant of the Tower. By whom conducted to∣wards London, he departed this life in the Abby of Leicester:1530. his great heart not being able to endure so many indignities, as had been lately put upon him, and having cause to fear much worse then his former sufferings. But the re∣moving of this Rub, did not much smooth the way to the King's desires. The Queen's appeal unto the Pope, was the greatest difficulty, from which since she could not be removed, it must be made unprofitable and ineffectual, for the time to come. And thereupon a Proclamation is set forth on the 19 of September, 1530. in these following words, viz. The King's Highnesse streightly chargeth and commandeth, That no manner of person, of what e∣state, degree or condition, he or they be of, do purchase, or attempt to pur∣chase, from the Court of Rome, or elsewhere, nor use, nor put in execution, divulge or publish, any thing heretofore within this year passed, purchased, or to be purchased hereafter; containing matter prejudicial to the High Authority, Jurisdiction, and prerogative Royal of this his said Relm, or to
the lett, hinderance, or impeachment, of his Grace's Noble, and Vertuous in∣tended purposes in the premises; upon pain of incurring his Highnesse's in∣dignation, and imprisonment, and farther punishment of their bodies, for their so doing, at his Graces pleasure; to the dreadful example of all others. This was the Prologue to the downfall of the Pope in England, seconded by the Kings taking to himselfe the Title upream Head of the Churches of England and Ireland, acknowledged in the Convocation, and confirmed in Parliament, and ending finally in an Act intituled, An Act for extinguishing the authority of the Bishops of Rome. And in all this the King did nothing but what he had example and Authority for, at that very time; for in the year 1520 (being but ten years before the setting forth of this Proclamation) Monseiur a' Lautreth, Governour for the French King, in the Dukedome of Millain, ta∣king a displeasure against Pope Leo the tenth, deprived him of all his jurisdi∣ction within the Dukedom.Vt praefecto sacris Bigoranno Episcopo, omnia sine Romani Pō∣tificis authori∣tate administra∣rentur. Thuan. And that being don, he so disposed of all Ecclesia∣sticall affairs, that the Church there was supremely governed by the Bishop of Bigorre (a Bishop of the Church of France), without the intermedling of the Pope at all. The like we find to have been done by the Emperour, Charles the fifth, who being no lesse displeased with Pope Clement the eighth, abolished the Papal power and jurisdiction, out of all the Churches of his Kingdome in Spain, which though it held but for a while (till the breach was closed) yet left he an example by it (as my Author noteth) that there was no necessity of any Pope or supreme Pastor in the Church of Christ.Ecclesiasticam disciplinam ci∣tra Romani no∣minis authori∣tatem posse con∣secrari. And before either of these Acts or Edicts came in point of practice, the learned Gerson, Chancellor of the University of Paris (when the Popes power was greater far, then it was at the present) had writ and published a discourse, entituled, De auferibilitae Papae, touching the totall abrogating of the Papall Office. Which certainly he had never done, had the Papall Office been found essentiall, and of intrin∣secall concernment to the Church of Christ. According unto which position of that learned man, the greatest Princes of those times did look upon the Pope, and the Papall power, as an Excrescence at the least in the body mysticall, subject and fit to be pared off, as occasion served. And if they did, or do per∣mit him to retain any part of his former greatnesse, it is permitted rather upon selfe-ends, or Reasons of state, or otherwise to serve their turn by him as their requireth, then out of any opinion of his being so necessary, that the Church cannot be well governed, or subsist without him. But leaving these disputes to some other place,1531. we must return unto the Queen. To whom some Lords are sent in the end of May, an. 1531. decla∣ring to her the determinations of the Universities, concerning the pretended rriage betwixt her and the King. And therewith they demanded of her; whe∣ther, for quieting the King's conscience, and putting an end to that debate, she would be content to refer the matter to four Bishops, and four temporall Lords. But this she absolutely refused, saying, She was his lawful Wife, that she would stand to her Appeal, and condescend to nothing in that par∣ticular, but by the counsel of the Emperour, and the rest of her friends. This answer makes the King more resolute, more open in the demonstration of his affections to the Lady Anne Bollen, whom he makes Marchionesse of Pembrook, by his Letters Patents,1532. bearing date the first of September, 1532. takes her a∣long with him to Callis in October following, there to behold the glorious en∣terview betwixt him and the French King; and finally, privately marrieth her within few dayes after his return, the divorce being yet unsentenced be∣twixt him and the Queen. Not long after which, it was thought necessary to the King, to call a Parliament, wherein he caused an Act to passe, that no person should appeal for any cause out of this Realm, to the Pope of Rome; but that all Appeals should be made by the party grieved from the Commissary to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and from the Archbishop, to the King, as had been anciently observed amongst the first Kings of the House of Normandy. It was also enacted in the same, that all causes Ecclesa∣ticall
Cognisances, in which the King himself was a Party, should be deter∣mined finally in the Upper-House of Convocation, without being bound to make recourse to the Court of Rome. During the sitting of which Parliament it is declared by Proclamation, that Queen Katherine should no longer be called Queen, but Princesse Dowager, as being the Widow of Prince Arthur, not the Wife of King Henry. Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, in the mean time dying, Cranmer is de∣signed for his Successor in that eminent dignity; which he unwillingly ac∣cepts of, partly in regard that he was married at that time, and partly in refe∣rence to an Oath which he was to take unto the Pope at his Consecration. But the King was willing, for his own ends, to wink at the one, and the Pope was not in a condition (as the case then stood) to be too peremptory in the other. So that a Protestation being admitted, of not being otherwise bound to the Pope, than should be found agreeable to the Word of God, and the Laws and Statues of the Realm, he takes his Oath, and receives the Episcopall Conse∣cration, the 30th. of March, 1533. the Parliament still sitting which before we spake of. At his first entrance into the House of Convocation, he pro∣pounds two Questions to be considered and disputed by the Bishops and Cler∣gy; the first was, Whether the marrying of a Brother's wife, carnally known, though without any issue by him, be so prohibited by the Will and Word of God, as not to be dispenc'd withall by the Pope of Rome. The second was, Whether it did appear, upon the Evidence given in before the Cardinalls, that Katherine had been carnally known by Prince Arthur, or not. Both Que∣stions being carried in the Affirmative, though not without some Opposition in either House, in the first especially; it was concluded thereupon in the Convocation, and not long after in the Parliament also, That the King might lawfully proceed to another Marriage. These preparations being made, the Marriage precondemned by Convoca∣tion, and all Appeals to Rome made ineffectuall by Act of Parliament, the new Archbishop (upon his own desire & motion, contain'd in his Letters of the 11th of April) is authorised by the King, under his Signe Manuall, to proceed definitively in the Cause. Who thereupon, accompanied with the Bishops of London, Winchester, Wells, and Lincoln, and dives other persons to serve as Officers in that Court, repaired to Dunstable in the begining of May; and having a convenient place prepared in the form of a Consistory, they sent a Ci∣tation to the Princesse Dowager, who was then at Amptill, (a Mannor-house of the King's about six miles off) requiring her to appear before them at the day appointed; which day being come, and no appearance by her made, either in Person, or by Proxie, (as they knew there would not) she is called peremptorily every day, fifteen days together; and every day there was great poasting betwixt them and the Court, to certifie the King and Cromwell (a principall stickler in this businesse) how all matters went. In one of which, from the new Archbishop, extant in the Cottonian Library, a Resolution is sig∣nified to Cromwel for comming to a finall Sentence on Friday the 18 th. of that Month, but with a vehement conjuration both to him and the King, not to divlge so great a secret, for fear the Princesse Dowager on the hearing of it, either before, or on the day of passing Sentence, should make her appearance in the Court: For (saith he) if the noble Lady Katherine should, upon the bruit of this matter, either in the mouthes of the Inhabitants of the Country, or by her Friends, or Counsell, hearing of this bruite, be moved, stirred, counselled, or perswaded to appear before me, in the time, or afore the time of Sentence, I should be thereby greatly staid and let in the Pro∣cesse, and the King's Grace's Councell here present shall be much uncertain what shall be then further done therein. For a great bruite and voice of the people in this behalf, might perchance move her to do the thing, which per∣adventure she would not if she hear little of it. And therefore I pray you to speak as little of this matter as you may, and to move the King's High∣nesse
so to do, for consideration above recited. But so it hapned to their wish, that the Queen, persisting constant in her Resolution of standing to the Judgment of no other Court than the Court of Rome, vouchsafed not to take any notice of their proceeding in the Cause. And thereupon, at the day and time before designed, she was pronounced to be Contmax for defect of Appearance; and by the generall consent of all the Learned men then present, the Sentence of the Divorce was passed, and her Marriage with the King de∣clared void, and of none effect. Of all these doings, as the Divorced Queen would take no notice, so by her Officers and Attendants she was served as in her former capacity. Which comming to the King's knowledge, he sends the Duke of Suffolk and some others in the month of July, with certain Instructions given in Writing, to perswade her, to submit to the Determinations of the King and State, to lay aside the Title of Queen, to content her self with that of the Princesse Dowager; and to remove her from the Bishop of Lincoln's house at Bayden, where she then remained, to a place called Somesham, belonging to the Bishop and Church of Eli. To none of which when she would hearken, an Oath is tendred to her Officers and the rest of her Houshold▪ to serve her onely in the capacity of Princesse Dowager, and not as formerly in the noion of a Queen of Eng∣land. Which at the first was generally refused amongst them, upon a Resoluti∣on which had been made in the Case by Abel and Berker, her two Chaplains; that is to say, That having already took an Oath to serve her as Queen, they could not with a good conscience take any other. But in the end, a fear of losing their said places, but more of falling into the King's displeasure, so prevailed upon them▪ that the Oath was taken by most of them; not suffered from thenceforth to come into the Queen's presence, (who looked upon them as the betrayers of her Cause) or to perform any service about her Per∣son. Some Motives, to induce her to a better conformity, were ordered to be laid before her; none like to be more prevalent, than that which might con∣cern the Interest of her daughter Mary. And therefore it was offered to her consideration, That chiefly, and above all things, she should have regard to the Honourable, and her most dear Daughter, the Lady Princesse; from whom, in case the King's Highnesse (being thus enforced, exagitated, and moved by the unkindnesse of the Dowager) might also withdraw his Princely estimation, goodnesse, zeal, and affection; it would be to her no little re∣gret, sorrow, and extream calamity. But the wise Queen knew well enough, that if she stood, her Daughter could not do amisse▪ whereas there could be nothing gained by such submissions, but the dishonour of the one, the Bastar∣dising of the other, and the exluding of them both from all possibility of being restored in time to come to their first condition. Finding small hopes of any justice to be done her in the Realm of England, and not well able to endure so many indignities as had been daily put upon her, she makes her complaint unto the Pope, whom she found willing to show his teeth, though he could not bite. For presently hereupon a Bull is issued, for accursing both the King and the Realm; the Beaer hereof not daring to proclaim the same in England, caused it to be set up in some publick places in the Town of Dunkirk▪ (one of the Haven Towns of Flanders) that so the roar∣ing of it might be heard on this side of the Sea▪ to which it was not safe to bring it. But neither the Pope nor the Queen Dowager got any thing by this rash adventure, which onely served to exasperate the King against them, as al∣so against all which adheared unto them. For in the following Parliament, which began on the 25 th. of January, and ended on the 30 th. of March, an Act was pass'd, inhibiting the payment of First-fruits to the Bishop of Rome, and for the Electing, Consecrating, and Confirming of the Archbishops and Bishops in the Realm of England, without recourse unto the Pope, cap. 20. Another Act for the Attaindure of Elizabeth Barton, commonly called the holy Maid of Knt, with many other her adhearents, for stickling in the cause of
the Princesse Dowager, cap. 12. and finally, of Establishing the Succession in the Crown Imperiall of this Realm, cap. 22. In which last Act, the Sentence of the Divorce was confirmed and ratified, the Princesse Mary delared to be illegi∣timate, the Succession of the Crown entailed on the King's Issue by Queen Anne Bollen, an Oath prescribed for all the Subjects in maintenance of the said Statute of Succession, and taken by the Lords and Commons at the end of that Parliament, as generally by all the Subjects of the Kingdom within few months after. For the refusall whereof, as also for denying the King's Supre∣macy, and some suspition of confederacy with Elizabeth Barton, Doctor John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, not many days before created Cardinall by Pope Paul the 3 d. was on the 22 of June beheaded publickly on the Tower∣hill, and his head most disgracefully fixed upon a Pole, and set on the top of the Gate on London-Bridge. And on the 6 th. of July then next following, Sir Thomas Moor, who had succeeded Wolsie in the place of Lord Chancellor, was beheaded for the same cause also▪ But I find him not accused, as I do the other, for having any hand in the Conspiracy of Elzabeth Barton. The Execution of which great persons, and of so many others who wish'd well unto her, added so much affliction to the desolate and disconsolate Queen, that not being able longer to bear the burden of so many miseries, she fell into a languishing sicknesse; which more and more encreasing on her, and finding the near approach of death, (the onely remedy now left for all her sor∣rows) she dictated this ensuing Letter, which she caused to be delivered to the King by one of her Women, wherein she laid before him these her last re∣quests, viz. My most dear Lord, King and Husband (for so she called him.) THe hour of my death now approaching, I cannot chuse but, out of the love I bear you, advise you of your souls health, which you ought to prefer before all conside∣rations of the world, or flesh, whatsoever: For which yet you have cast me into many calamities, and your self into many troubls. But I for give you all, and pray God to do so likewise. For the rest, I commend unto you Mary our daugher, beseeching you to be a good Father unto her, as I have heretofore desired. I must enreat you also to respect my Maids, and give them in Marriage, which is not much, they being but three. And to all my other Servants a yeas pay, besides their due, lest otherwise they should be unprovided for. Lastly, I make this Vow, That mine Eyes have de∣sired you above al things. Farewell. Within few days after the writing of which Letter, that is to say, on the 8 th. of January then next following, she yielded her pious Soul to God at the King's Mannor-house of Kimbolton, in the County of Hutingon, and was solemnly interred not long after in the Abbey of Peterborough. The rea∣ding of her Letter drew some tears from the King, which could not but be much encreased by the news of her death. Moved by them both to such a measure of commiseration of her sad condition, that he caused the greatest part of her goods (amounting to 5000 Marks) to be expended on her Funerall, and in the recompencing of such of her servants as had best deserved it. Never so kind to her in the time of her life, as when he had rendred her incapable of receiving a kindnesse. The Princesse Mary is now left wholly to her self, declared illegitimate by her Father, deprived of the comfort of her Mother, and in a manner forsa∣ken
by all her friends, whom the severe proceedings against Moor and Fisher had so deterred, that few durst pay her any offices of Love or Duty. Of any proceedings in the Match with the Duke of Orleance, we hear no more news, all further prosecution of it being at a stand by the misfortunes of her Mother; nor was she sought in Marriage by any other Prince in the life of her Father, bu onely by James the 5 th. of Scotland; but finding himself deluded in it by King Henry, he thought it best to strengthen himself by a Match with France, where he was first married to Madam Magdaleene, the first daughter of K. Francis, and afterwards to Mary daughter of Claude of Lorrain, Duke of Guise, by whom he had one onely daughter called Mary also. In which condition, the poor Princesse had no greater comfort than what she could gather from her Books, in which she had been carefully instructed by Doctor John Voisie, aliâs Harman, appointed her Tutor by the King; and, for his good performance in that place of trust, advanced by him to the Sea of Exon, An. 1529. and after∣wards made Lord President of Wales; which sell out better for the Tutor, than it did for the Pupill; Who being left destitute of the counsell of so grave a Man, began to give way more and more to her grief and passions, which brought her at the last to such an aversenesse from the King, and such a ma∣nifest disaffection to his Person and Government, that he was once upon the point of sending her prisoner to the Tower; and had so done, if Cranmer had not interposed some powerfull reasons to disswade him from it. During which time of her aversenesse, the King sent certain of the Lords to remove her to Hatfield; who having no authority to treat her by the name of Princesse, but onely to execute the King's commands, gave her occasion thus to signifie her discontentments, My Lords (said she) as touching my re∣moving to Hatfield, I will obey his Grace, as my duty is, or to any other place that his Grace will appoint me. But I protest before you, and all other that be here present, that my conscience will in no wise suffer me to take any other than my self for Princesse, or for the King's Daughter, born in lawfull Matrimony; and that I will never wittingly or willingly say or do, whereby any person might take occasion to think, that I agree to the contrary. Nor say I this out of any ambition or proud mind, as God is my Judge; but that if I should do otherwise, I should in my conscience slander the Deed of our Mother, the holy Church, and the Pope, who is the Judge in this matter▪ and none other; and also should dishonour the King my Fa∣ther, the Queen my Mother, and falsly confesse my self a Bastard, which God defend that I should do, since the Pope hath not so declared it by his Sentence definitive, to whose finall Judgment I submit my self. In pur∣suance of which claim to the Title of Princesse, together with the Priviledges and Preheminences thereunto belonging, she writes this following Letter to the King her Father, on a like occasion. IN most humble wise I beseech your Grace of your daily blssing. Pleaseth it the same to be advertised, that this morning my Chamberlain came and shewed me, that he had received a Letter from Sir William Paulet, Controller of your House: the effect whereof was, that I should with all diligence remove unto the Castle of Hertford. Whereupon I desired him to see the same Letter, which he shewed me; wherein was written, That the Lady Mary, the King's Daughter, should remove to the place before-said, leaving out in the same the name of Princesse, Which when I heard, I could not a little marvail, trusting verily, that your Grace was not privy to the same Letter, as concerning the leaving out of the name of Princesse; for asmuch as I doubt not in your goodnesse, but that your Grace doth take me for your lawfull Daughter, born in true Matrimony. Wherefore if I should agree to the contrary, I should in my conscience run into the displeasure of God, which I hope assuredly, that your Grace would not that I so should. And in all other things, your Grace shall have me always as humble an obedient Daughter and Handmaid, as ever was child to
th father, which my duy bidoth  to; as knoweth ur Lord, Who have your Grace in his most holy tuiion, with much honor and long life, to his pleasure. From your Mannor of , Octob. 2▪ By your most humble Daughter▪ MARY Princess. And on these tearms she stood, from the Divorce of her Mother till the At∣taindure of Queen Anne Bollen, against whom she thought it did concern her to bear up to the highest, as she did accordingly. But growing into better hopes by the death of the aid Queen Anne, the Annulling of the Marriage also, and the Bastardiing of the Princesse Elizabeth her onely daughter, she began to cast about again, writes her submissive Let∣ters to the King her father, and humbly craves some testimonies of his love and goodnesse: Which so prevailed, that the Duke of Norfolk is sent to treat with her upon certain Instructions; so neessary to the knowledge of her af∣fairs, in this Conjuncture, that they deserve a place here, and are these that follow. Certain Articles and Injunctions, given by the King's Highness to his right Trusty and right entirely beloved Cousen and Counsellor, the Duke of Norfolk; whom, with certain others in his company, His Majesty sendeth to the Lady Mary his Daughter, for the Purposes ensuing. FIrst, whereas the said Lady Mary hath sundry ways, with long continuance, shewed her self so obstinate towards the King's Majsty, her Soveraign Lord and Father, and so disobedient to his Laws, conceived and ade upon most just▪ ver∣tus, and godly grounds, that as the wilfull disobedience thereof seemeth a monster in Nature; so, unlesse the mercy of his Highnesse had been most abundantly exten∣ded unto hr, by the course of his Grace's Laws, and the force of his Justice, sh en∣dgred her self so far, that it was greatly t his Highnesse's regret and hearty sorrow, to see and perceive how little  estemeth the same; extending to the losse of his favour, the losse of her honour, the losse of her life, and undoubedly to the indignation of Almighty God. For that she neither obeyeth her Father and Sove∣raign, nor his just and vertuous Laws aforesaid. And that of late neverthelesse cal∣ling to remembrance her transgressions and offences in this prt towards God, her Fa∣ther and Soveraign Lord the King's Highnesse; she hath writtn to the same three sudy Letters, containing a declaration of her repentance conceived for the Premi∣ses, with such an humble and simple submission, as she appeareth not onely to submit hr slfwholly, and without exception, (especially by the last Letter) to the Laws, but also for her state and condition, to put her self onely to his Grace's mercy; nothing desiring but mercy and forgivenesse for her offences▪ with a reconciliation to his Grace's favour. Albeit his Majesty hath been so ingrately handled and used by her, as is afor declared, that the like would enforce any private person t abndon for ever such an unkind and inobedient child from their grace and favour; yet, such is his Maje∣sties gracious and divine nature, such is his clemency and pitty, such his mercifull inclination and Princely heart, that, as he hath been ever ready to take pitty and compssin of all offenders, repentantly calling and crying for the same; So, in case he may throughly parceive the same to be in the said Lady Mary's heart, which she hath put in pen and writing, his Highnesse considering the imbecillity of her sex▪ being the same is frail, inconstant, and easie to he perswaded by simple counsell, can be right well contented to remit unto her part of his said displeasure▪ And therefore hath  this time, for the certain knowledge of her heart and stomack, st unto her his said Cousen, with others, to demand and enquire of her certain Questions. Her Answes whereunto his pleasure is they shall require, and note in writing, which
sall throughly decipher, whether she be indeed the person she pretendeth, or for any respect hath with generall words laboured to cloak the speciall matter, which is re∣pugnant and contrary to that, which his Majesty hath gathered and conceived of the same. 1. And first, after their Accesse and Declaration of the Premises, they shall for their first Question demand of her, Whether she doth recognise and knowledge the King's Highnesse for her Soveraign Lord and King, in the Emperiall Crown of this Realm of England, and will and doth submit her self unto his Highnesse, and to all and singuar the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, as becommeth every true and faithfull Subject to do. 2. Also, whether she will with all her power and qualities, that God hath endu'd her withall, not only obey, keep, and observe all and singular Laws and Statutes of this Realm; but also set forth, advance, and maintain the same, to the utmost of her power, according to her bounden duty. 3. Also, whether she will recognise, accept, take, and repute the King's High∣nesse to be supream Head in Earth, under Christ, of the Church of England, and utterly refuse the Bishop of Rome's pretended Power and Jurisdiction, heretofore usurped in this Realm, according to the Laws and Statutes of the same, made and ordained in the behalf of all the King's true Subjects, humbly received, admitted, obeyed, kept, and observed: And also will and do renounce, and utterly forsake, all manner of Remedy, Interesse, and Advantage by the said Bishop of Rome's Laws, Processe, or Jurisdiction to her in any wise appertaining, or that hereafter may by any Title, Colour, or Mean, belong, grow, succeed or appertain, or in any case may follow or ensue. 4. And whether she will and doth, of her Duty and Obedience towards God, her Alleigance towards the King's Highnesse, and the Laws of this Realm, and also of the sincere love and zeal that she beareth towards the Truth, freely and franckly recognize and knowledge, without any other respect, both by Go's Law and Man's Law, the Marriage heretofore had between his Majesty and her Mother, to be un∣lawfull. 5. Also, Be she enquired or examined, For what cause, and by whose motion and means she hath continued and remained in her obstinacy so long; and who did e∣bold, or animate her thereto, with other circumstances thereof appertaining? 6. Also, What is the cause, that she at this present time, rather then at any other heretofore, doth submit her selfe? To these six Articles, she was required to give a plain and positive answer: Which plainly shews the doubtfulnesse and uncertainty of her present condi∣tion, in being either forced to confesse her selfe to be illegitimate, or running on the last hazzard of the Kings displeasure, if she should do otherwise. But wisely considering in her selfe, whom she had to deal with, she thought it sa∣fest to strike sale, and to submit her selfe to him, with whom it was not law∣full for her to dispute that point, if she had been able. She therefore makes a cleer acknowledgement of the four first Articles, by the subscribing of her name; but craved leave to demur on the two last, because some persons were concern'd in them, whom she was not willing to discover. And by this means she gain'd so far upon the King, that from that time forwards, he held her in the same ranck with the rest of his children; gave her her turn in the succession of the Kingdome; assigned her portion of ten thousand pounds, to be paid at her marriage, and in the interim, three thousand pounds per annum, for her perso∣nal maintenance. And more then this he did not do for his daughter Eliza∣beth; notwithstanding the esteem and affection which he bare to her mother; for bringg whom into his bed, he had cancelled all the bonds of his former marriage. Little or nothing more occurreth of her in the time of King Hen∣ry, because there was little or nothing altered in the face of Religion, which might give her any cause of publick or personall dislike. But when the great alterations hapned in the time of King Edward, she then declared her selfe more
openly (as she might more safely) in opposition to the same: concerning which she thus declared her selfe in a Letter to the Lord Protector, and the rest of the Council, dated at Kenninghall, June 22. An. 1549. My Lord, I Perceive by the Letters which I late receiv'd from you, and other of the Kings Majesties Councel, that you be all sorry to find so little conformity in me, touching the observation of his Majestie's Laws; who am well assured I have offended no law, unlesse it be a late law of your own making, which in my conscience is not worthy the name of Law, both for the King's honors sake, and the wealth of the Realm, and giving the occasion of an evil bruit throughout all Christendome, besides the partia∣lity used in the same, and (as my conscience is very well perswaded) the offending God, which passeth all the rest. But I am well assured, that the King his Fa∣thers Lawes, were all allowed and consented to, without compulsion, by the whole Realm, both spiritual and temporal, and all the Executors sworn upon a book to ful∣fil the same, so that it was an authorized Law. And that I have obeyed, and will do with the grace of God, till the King's Majesty my brother, shall have sufficient years to be a judge in this matter himself. Whereto (my Lord) I was plain with you at my last being in the Court, declaring unto you at that time, whereunto I would stand; and now do assure you all, that the only occasion of my stay from a tering of mine opinion, is for two causes. One principally for my conscience; the other, that the King my brother shall nor hereafter charge me to be one of those that were agree∣able to such alterations in his tender years. And what fruits dayly grow by such changes, since the death of the King my Father, to every indifferent person, it well appeareth, both to the displeasure of God, and unquietnesse of the Realm. Notwithstanding, I assure you all, I would be as loath to see his Highnesse take hurt, or that any evil should come to this his Realm, as the bes of you all; and none of you have the like cause, considering how I am compelled by nature, being his Majesties poor and humble sister, most tenderly to love and pray for him, and unto this his Realm (being born within the same) with all wealth and prosperity to God's honour. And if any judge of me the contrary for mine opinions sake, as I trust none doth, I doubt not in the end, with Gods help, to prove my selfe as true a natural and humble Sister, as they of the contrary opinion with all their divices, and altering of lawes, shall prove themselves true Subjects; I pray you my Lords, and the rest of the Councel, no more to unquiet and trouble me with matters touching my conscience, wherein I am at a full point with Gods help, whatsoever shall happen to me, intending with his grace, to trouble you little with any worldly suits, but to bestow the short time I think to live, in quietnesse; and I pray for the King's Majesty, and all you, heartily wishing, that your proceedings may be to God's honour▪ the safeguard of the King's person, and quietnesse of the whole Realm. And thus, my Lords▪ I wish unto you, and all the rest, as well to do, as my selfe. Upon such passages of this Letter, which seemed most to pinch upon them, the Lords returned their Glosse or Comment, but such as had more in it of an Animadversion, then an Explication. They signified withall, how well they understood their own Authority; how sensible they were of those inconve∣niences, which the example of her inconformity to the lawes established, was likely to produce amongst the rest of the subjects. No favour being otherwise to be hoped for from them, the Emperour is moved to intercede in her behalfe by his Ambassador, then residing about the Court▪ Upon whose earnest soli∣citation,1550. it was declared by the King, with the consent of his Councel (as appeareth by their letters to her, of the 25th of December) That for his sake, and her own also, it should be suffered and winked at, if she had the private Masse used in her own closet for a season, untill she might be better informed▪ but so that none but some few of her own chamber should be present with her, and that to all the rest of her houshold, the Service of the Church should be only used▪ For the abuse of which indulgence, in saying Masse promis∣cuously
(in her absence) to her houshold servants, Mallet and Barkley two of her Chaplains, are seized on, and committed prisoners, which first occasio∣ned an exchange of Letters betwixt her and the King, and afterwards more fre∣quently between her and the Councel; for which, consult the Acts and Mon. fol. 1213. 1214. A proposition had been made about the surrendry of Bl∣oigne, for a marriage betwixt her and the Prince of Portugall; and the like motion made in favour of the Duke of Brunswick, whilst the other treaty was depending. But neither of the two succeeding to the wish of the party, a plot was laid to passe her over into Flanders▪ shipping provided to transport her, some of her servants sent before, and a commotion practised in the County of Essex; that in the busle she might be conveyed away without any discovery. But this plot being happily prevented by the care and diligence of Sir John Gates, one of the Captans of the Gents a'armes (then lately ranged under the command of the Marquess of Nrthampton) she was by him conducted much against her will, to the Lord Chancellors house at Leezdi, from thence to Huns∣don, and at last to Westminster. Much troubled at her comming thither▪ upon the apprehension▪ of Sir Robert Ruchestr, Sir Walgrave, and Sir Francis Inglfield, servants of special trust about her, and all suspected to be privy to the design, for conveying her over into Flanders. Much care was taken, and many endeavor used by the King and Councel, to win her to good conceit of the Reformation. But her interest was bound up with that of the Pope, that no perswasions could prevaile with her to desert that cause, on which her own legiimation, and the validity of her mothers marriage, did so much depend. As much unprofitable pains was ta∣ken by the Emperours Agents, in labouring to procure for her, the exercise of her own Religion; mingling some threats with their intreaties, in case so great a Prince should be refused in so small a suit. Which when it could not be obtained from the King, by the Lords of the Councel, nor by the media∣tion of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of London, (whom the Lords imployed to move him in it); the Emperour laid aside the prosecution of a cause, which he perceived he could not carry. And the King slackned by degrees, his accustomed diligence▪ in labouring be perswasions to work on one▪ who was resolved before hand not to be perswaded. So that being weary of the Court, and the court of her, she was permitted for a time to remain at Hunsdon, in the County of Hartford. To which place (being in the Diocesse of London) Bishop Ridley had recourse unto her, and at first was kindly enter∣tained.1552. But having staid dinner at her request, he made an offer of his service, to preach before her on the Sunday following; to which she answered, That the doors of the Parish Church adjoining, should be open for him, that h might preach there if he lited; but that neither she nr any of her srvants, would bher hear him. Madam, said he, I hope you will not refuse to hear Gods word. To which she answered, That she could not tell what they called Gods word; that which was now called th rd of God,  having been accounted such in the yes of her father. After which, falling into many different expressions against the Reli∣gion then established, she ismissed him thus. My Lord, said she▪ For your gentlenesse to come and see me▪ I thank you; but for your offer to preach before me, I thank  nt. Which said, he was conducted by Sir Thmas Warton, one of her principall Officer▪ to the place where they dined, by whom he was pre∣sented with a cup of wine; which having drank, and looking very sadly on it, Surely, said he, Which words he spake with such a vehemency of spirit, a made the hair of some of those which were pre∣sent▪ to stand an end, as themselves afterward confessed. Of this behaviour of the Princesse,1553. a the Bishop much complained in other paes, so most especially in a Sermon preached at St Paul's Crosse▪ on the
sixteenth of July;An. Reg. Mar. 1. 1553. in which he was appointed by the Lords of the Council, to set forth the title of Queen Jane, to whom the sccession of the Crown had been transferred by King Edward, at the solicitation and procurement of the Duke of Nrthmbeland▪ who served himself of nothing more, than of her ob∣stinate aversnesse from the reformed. Religion, then by law established. The cunning contrivance of which plot, and all that had been done in pursuance of it, hath been laid down at large in the Appendix to the former book▪ Suffice in this place to know, that being secretly advertised of her brothers death, she dispatched her letters of the ninth of July, to the Lords of Council, re∣quiring them not only to acknowledge her just title to the Crown of this Realm, but to cause prolamation of it to be made in the usual form; which though it was denied by them, as the case then stood, yet she was gratified therein by the Mayor of Norwich, who firs proclaimed her Queen, on the fourth day after; as afterwards was done in some other places, by those who did prefer the interest of King Henry's children, before that of the Dudy's. But hearing of the great preparations which were made against her, and find∣ing her condition in a manner desperate, when she first put her self into Fra∣mngham Castle, she faithfully assureu the Gentry, and other inhabitants of the County of Suffolk, that she would not alter the Religion which had been setled and confirmed in the Reign of her brother. On which assurance, there was such a confluence to her from those parts of the Kingdom, that in short space she had an army of fourteen thousand fighting men to maintain her quarrel. The newes whereof, together with the risings of the people in other places on the same account, wrought such an alteration in the Lords of the Council, whom she had before solicited in vain to allow her title, that on the nineteenth of July, she was solemnly proclaimed Queen at Cheapside Crosse; not only by their general and joint consent, but by the joyful accla∣mations of all sorts of people. But as Mariners seldome pay those vows which they make in a tempest, when once they are delivered from the danger of it; so Mary once established in the Royal Throne, forgot the services which she received from those of Suffolk, together with the promises which she made unto them in the case of Religion. Insomuch, that afterwards being petitioned by them in that behalf, it was answered with more churlishnesse than could be rationally expected in a green Estate, That members must obey their Head, and not look to rule it. And that she might no more be troubled with the like Petitions, she caused one Dobb. a Gentlemen on Windham side, who had presumed to put her in remembrance of her former promise, to be punished by standing in the Pillory three dayes together, to be a gazing stock to all men. But such is the condition of our humane nature, that we are far more ready to require a favour, when we stand in need of it, than willing to ac∣knowledge or requite it, when our turn is served. Of which we cannot easily meet with a cleerer evidence, than the example of this Queen; who was so far from gartifying those who had been most aiding to her in the time of her trouble, that she persecuted them, and all others of the same perswasions, with fire and faggot, as by the sequel of her story will at large appear.
The Life and Reign of QUEEN MARY. An. Reg. Mar. 1. A. D. 1553. 1554. THe interposings in behalf of the Lady Jane being disrelish∣ed generally in most parts of the Kingdome, Mry the eldest sister of King Edward the sixt is proclaimed Queen by the Lords of the Council, assied by the Lord Mayor of London, and such of the Nobility as were then resident about that City, on Wednesday the nineteenth day of July, Ann 1553. The Proclamation published at the Crosse in Chep, with all slemnities accustomed on the like oc∣casions; and entertained with joyfull acclamations by all sorts of people, who feared nothing more, than the pride and tyranny of the Duke of Northumber∣land. To carry which news to the Queen at Framingham, the Earl of Arundel, and the Lord Paget, are dispatched immediately by the rest of the Council, and Letters are speedily posted by some private friends to the Duke at Cambridg. Who understanding how things went, without expecting any order from the Lords at London, dismist the remnant of his Army, and presently repairing into the Market place, proclaimed the Queen, crying, God save Queen Mary, as loud as any, and flinging up his cap for joy, as the others did. Which ser∣vice he had scarce performed, when Rose a Pousuivant of Arms comes to him with instructions from the Lords of the Council, subscribed by the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor Goodrick, the Lord Treasurer Pau∣let, the Duke of Suffolk, the Earl of Bedford, Shrewsbury, and Pembrook, the Lord Darsie, Sir Robert Cotton, Sir William Peter, and Sir William Cecil, the two principall Secretaries, Sir John Cheeck, Tutor to the last King, Sir John Baker, Chancellor of the tenths and first fruits, Sir John Mason, Master of the Requests, R. Bowes, Master of the Rolls. Most of which had formerly subscribed the answer to a Letter which came to them from the Princesse Ma∣ry, on the ninth of July, and were all pdoned for so doing, except Cranmer only. Now the Tenor of the said , was as followeth.
In the name of our Soveraign Lady Mary the Queen, to be declared to the Duke of Northumberland, and all other his Band, of what degree soever they be. YOu shall command and charge in the Queens Highness name, the said Duke to disarm himselfe, and the cease all his men of war, and to suffer no part of his army to do any villany, nor any thing contrary to the peace: and himself to for∣bear his comming to this City, untill the Queens pleasure be expressedly declared unto him. And if he will shew himselfe like a good quiet subject, we will then continue as we have begun, as humble suitors to our Soveraign Lady the Queen's Highnesse, for him and his, and for our selves. And if he do not, we will not fail to spend our lives in subduing of him and his. Item, Ye shall declare the like matter to the Marquesse of Northampton, and all other Noble men, and Gentlemen, and to all men of war, being with any of them. Item, Ye shall in all places where ye come, notifie it: If the Duke of Northum∣berland do not submit himselfe to the Queens Highnesse, Queen Mary; he shall be ac∣cepted as a Traytor. And all we of the Nobility, that were Counsellors to the late King, will to the utmost portion of our power, persecute him and his to their after∣confusion. The Pursuivant having communicate his Instructions, found none more ready to obey them, then the Duke himselfe, who had before dismist his forces, and now prepared for his departure from that place, though to what he knew not. But as he was pulling on his boots, he was first slaid by some of the Pensioners, who being drawn into the action against their wils, resolved to have him in a readinesse to bear witnesse to it; and after taken into custody by Slegg, a Serjeant. The businesse being in dispute, another Packet comes from the Lords of the Council, by which all parties were required to depart to their severall dwellings; the benefit whereof the Duke laid claim to for himself, and was accordingly left by them at his own disposal. And so he passed that night in some good assurance, that he should fare no worse than the rest of the Council, who had engaged him in the same cause, and by whose order he had undertaken the command of that Army. In the mean time, the Earl of Arun∣dell had done his errand to the Queen, to so good a purpose, that he was pre∣sently dispatched with Order to seize upon him. Who coming to Cambridge the next morining, found him preparing for his journy, laid hold upon him, and committed him to the charge of some of the Guard. It is reported, that the Duke had no sooner seen the Earle of Arundell, but he fell down upon his knees, and besought him to be good unto him, humbling himselfe before him with more abjectednesse, than formerly he had insulted over him with pride and insolence. By safe, but easie journies, he is brought unto the Tower on the 25 day of July, together with the Earl of Warwick, the Earle of Hunting∣ton, the Lord Hastings; the Lord Ambrose, and the Lord Henry Dudley, two of Northumberlands younger sons; Sir Andrew Dudly, the Duke's brother, Sir John Gates, and Henry Gates his brother, Sir Thomas Palmer (who formerly had served his turn in the destruction of the Duke of Sommerset), and Dr Sandys Vice Chancelor of the University of Cambridge, Followed the next day after by the Marquesse of Northampton, Dr Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of London, the Lord Robert Dudley, another of Northumberland's sons, and Sir Robert Corbet; who having made their Applications to the Queen at Framingham, found there no better entertainment, than if they had been take in some act of Ho∣stility. The 27 day brings in Sir Roger Chomley, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and Sir Edward Mountague, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; the Duke of Suffolk, and Sir John Cheek on the morrow after shutting up the Arrer. But the Duke of Suffolk stayed not long: for being considered in
himself as an easie person, of whom they were to fear no danger, and other∣wise no more in fault than the rest of the Council, he was released again within three dayes after, to the great comfort of his daughter, the late queen Jane, who would have died dayly for her Father, though but once for her self. But so it fared not with the Duke of Northumberland, a more dangerous person; who, together with John Earl of Warwick, his eldest son, and William Marquesse of Northampton, was brought to their tryal on the eighth of August, before Thomas Duke of Norfolk, then sitting as Lord High Steward in West∣minster Hall. The Duke being brought unto the bar, humbled himself with great reverence before his Peers, professing his faith and allegiance to the Queen; against whom he confessed he had so grievously offended, that he in∣tended not to speak any thing in his own defence. But having been trained up to the study of the Laws in his younger dayes, he desired the judgement of the Court in these two points. First, Whether any man doing any act by Autho∣rity of the Princes Councel, and by warrant of the Great Seal of England, and do∣ing nothing wtht the same, might be charged with treason, for any thing which he might do by warrant thereof. And secondly, (which pinched then his Judges to some purpose) Wheher any such persons as were equally culpable in the crime, and those by whose Letters and Commandments he was directed in all his doings, might sit as Judges, and passe upon his trial as his Peers. Whereunto it was answered by the Court, with advice of the Judges. First, That the Great Seal which e preended  his warrant, was not the Seal of the lawful Queen of the Realm, but th Se of  surper, who had no authority, and therefre could b no warrant to him. And secondly, That if any were as deeply to be touched in the case as himself; yet so long as n attainder was upon Record against them, they were looked upon by the Law, as persons capable of passing upon any tryal, and not to b challenged by any in that respect▪ but only at the Prince's pleasure. Which being delivered by the Court in point of Law, the Duke conceived that it would be to no purpose for him to plead Not Guilty, and thereupon confessed the Indictment, as the other two prisoners also did; they all received judge∣ment in the usual form. On the pronouncing whereof, he besought the Lords to move the Queen, that she would be gratious to his sons, who might be able to do good service in the time to come; considering that they went not with him of their own free will, but only in obedience to his commands, who was their Father; in which as his desires were granted by the Lords, so the Lords were gratified in them by the Queen; none of his sons being executed (though all condemned) except Guilford only, whose case was different from the others. The like judgement also pass'd on the morrow after, on Sir John Gates, Sit Henry Gates, Sir Andrew Dudley, and Sir Thomas Palmer, who confessing the Indictment also, submitted themselves to the Queens mer∣cy, without further tryal. In that short interval, which past between the sentence, and the execution, the Duke was frequently visited by Dr Nicholas Heath, then newly restored un∣to the See of Worcester. It was another of the requests which he made to the Lords, that some godly and learned man, might be licenced by the Queen, to repair unto him, for the quiet and satisfaction of his conscience; and the resol∣ved to send him none (as she did to others in like case) but one of her own, under a pretence of doing good unto their sols, by gaining them to a right understanding of the faith in Christ. According to which purpose, Heh bestirs himself with such dexterity, that the Duke, either out of weaknesse, or hope of life, or that it was indifferent to him in what Faith he died, who had shewn so little while he lived, retracted that Religion which he had adorned in the time of King Edward, and outwardly professed for some years in the Reign of King Henry. And hereof he gave publick notice when he was on the scaffold, on the 22 of that monh. In the way towards which, there passed some words betwixt him and Gates, each laying the blame of the late action on the
other; but afterwards mutually forgiving, and being forgiven, they died in good charity with one anoher. Turning himself unto the people, he made a long Oration to them, touching the quality of his offence, and his fore-passed life, and then admonished the spectators, To stand to the Religion o their An∣cestrs, rejecting that of ler date, which had occasioned all the  of the fore∣going thirty years; and that for prevention for the future, if they desired  present their souls unspotted in the ight of God, and were truly affected to their Country▪ they should expel those trumpets of Sedition, the Preachers of the reformed Religion; that for himself▪ whatever had otherwise been pretended, he professed o other Re∣ligion than that of his Fathers, for testimony whereof, he appealed to his good friend, and ghstly father, the Lord Bishop of Worcester; and finally▪ that being blinded with ambition, he had been contened to make a rack of his conscience, by teporising, for which he professed himself sincerely repentant, and so acknowledged the justice of his death. A declaration very unseasonable, whether true or false; as that which render'd him less pitied by the one side, and more scorned by the other. With him died also Gates and Plr, the rest of the condemned prisoners be∣ing first reprieved, and afterwards absolutely pardoned. Such was the end of this great person, the first Earl of Warwick, and the la Duke of Northumberland, of this Name and Family. By birth he was the el∣dest son of Sir Edond Sutton, alias Dudley, who together with Sir Richard Empson, were the chief instruments and promoters under Henry the 7th. for putting the penal lawes in execution, to the great grievance and oppression of all sorts of subjects. For which, and other offences of a higher nature, they were both sacrificed to the fury of the common people, by King Henry the 8th. which possible might make him carry a vindicative mind towards that King's children, and prompt him to the dis-inheriting of all his Progeny. First trained up (as his Father had also been before him) in the study of the com∣mon Laws, which made him cunning enough to pick holes in any mans estate, and to find wayes by which to bring their lives in danger. But finding that the long sword was of more estimation than the long Robe, in the time of that King, he put himself forwards on all actions, wherein honour was to be ac∣quired. In which he gave such testimony of his judgement and valour, that he gained much on the affections of his Prince. By whom he was created Vis∣count Lise, on the 15th. of March, An. 1541. installed Knight of the Gar∣ter, 1543. and made Lord Admiral of England. Imployed in many action a∣gainst the Scots, he came off alwayes with successe and victory; and having said this, we have said all, that was accounted good or commendable in the whole course of his life. Being advanced unto the Title of Earl of Wrwick, by King Edward the 6th, he thought himself in a capacity of making Queens, as well as Richard Nevil (one of his Predecessors in that Title) had been of setting up and deposing Kings; and they both perished under the ambition of those proud attempts. Punished as Nevil also was, in having no isse male remaining to pre∣serve his name. For though he had six sons, all of them living to be men, and all of them to be married men, yet they went all childlesse to the grave, I mean as to the having of lawful issue, as if the curse of Jeconiah had been laid upon them. With him died also the proud Title of Duke of Nrthberland, never aspired to by the Percies, though men of eminent Nobility, and ever since the time of King Henry the first, of the Race of Emperours: Which Family, as well in reference to the merit o their Noble Ancestors, as the intercession of some pow∣erful friends, were afterwards restored to all the Titles and Honours, which be∣longed to that House, in the persons of Thomas and Henry, Grand children to Henry the 5th. Earl thereof, An. 1557. The matters being thus laid together, we must look back upon the Queen. Who seeing all obstacles removed betwixt her and the Crown, dis∣solved her Camp at , consisting of fourteen thousand men; and prepared for her journey towards London▪ Met on the way by the Princesse Elizabeth her sister, attended with no fewer than 1000 horse, She made her
entrance into London, on the third of August, no lesse magnificent for the Pomp and bravery of it, than that of any of her predecessors. Taking possessi∣on of the Tower, she was first welcomed thither by I , the old Duke of Norfolk, Ann Dutchesse of Sommerset▪ Edward Lord Coney, eldest son to the late Marquesse of Excester, and Dr Stephan Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester; all which she lifted from the ground, called them her prisoners, graciously kis∣sed them, and restored them shortly after to their former liberty▪ Taking the Great Seal from Dr Goodrick, Bishop of Ely, within two dayes after, she gave it for the present, to the custody of Sir Nichls Hare, whom she made Master of the Rolls▪ and afterwards committed it, on the 23d. of the same month, together with the Title of Lord Chancellor, on the said Dr Gardier, then actually restored to the See of Wchestor. Having performed the obse∣quies of her brother, on the 9th. and 10th. she removes her Court unto Whitehall, and there contines, till it was within two or three dayes of her Coronation. Which time now drawing neer at hand, she passed by water to the Tower, on the 27th. of September, accompanied by her Sister, the Princesse Elizabeth, and a great train of Noble Ladies; made her return through the principal streets of the City, on the last of the same month, in most tately manner▪ and the next day proceeded with the like magnificence, to the Abby Church▪ where she was met by three lver Crosses, and eighty singing men, all in rih and gorgeos Coaps, (so sudden a recruit was made of these saced Vestments); amongst whom went the new Dean of Westminster, Dr. Westo▪ and divers Chaplains of her own, each of them earing in their hands some Ensign or other. After them marched ten Bishops (which were as many as remained of her perswasion) with their Miers, rich Coaps, and Crosier staves. The Ser∣mon was preached by Dr ay, whom she had restored to the See of Chichester, and the solemnity of the Coronation, celebrated by the new Lord Chancellor: Craner, Archbishop of Canterbury, being then commited▪ and otherwise con∣ceived unworthy of so great an honour. Till this time, none more dear to her then her Sister Elizabeth, whom she alwayes took with her by the hand, where∣soever she went, and seldome dined or supped without her. But this solem∣nity being passed over (as if she were now freed from all the feas of a compe∣tition) she estranged her self from her in such a manner, as shewed that she had formerly desited her company for some by-respects, and not out of natu∣ral affection. More gratefl unto other persons, who deserved well of her; she preferred Henry Ratcliff, Earle of Sssex, (Commander Generall of her Army) to the Society of the Gatter, which Honour she conferred on his son Thomas after his decease▪ and to be covered in her Presence, at all times and places, tending to the custome of the Grandees in the Realm of Spain. Which privi∣ledge not being very frequent in the Politie of the Realm of England, I find to be recorded in these following words, viz. Mary by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; and of the Church of England and Ireland, in earth the Supream Head; o all, to whom this present writing shall come, sendeth Greeting in our Lord everlasting. Know ye, that We do give and pardon to Our wel-beloved and trusty Cosen, and one of Our Privy Council, Henry Earl of Sussex, and Viscount Fittz∣water, Lord Egremond and Burnel, Liberty, Licence and Pardon, to wear his Cap, Coyfe, or Night-cap, or two of them at his pleasure, as well in Our presence, as in the presence of any other person, or persons within this Our Realm, or any other place of Our Dominions whatsoever, during his life; and these Our Letters shall be his sufficient Warrant in this behalf. Given under Our Sign Manuall, at Our Pal∣lace of Westminster, 2. Octob. 1 Regni. With the like Royal gratitute, she advance the Earl of Arundel, who had deserved as well of her in the Council, as the Earl of Sussex in the Camp, to the Place or Office of Lord Steward; investing him with all those powers and pri∣viledges,
which had been formrly exercised by the Lord Great Master▪ whom he succeeded in Authority, though not in Title. Sir Edward Hastings, who came over to her with 4000 men, she first made Master of the Horse, and Knight of the Garer, and afterwards Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold, and Lord Hastings of Louthborough. Sir John Williams, who had done her very good service in Buckingham and Oxford hires, she honoured with the Title of Lord Williams of Jae; of which more hereafter. Sir Hnry Jerninham▪ who first appeared in Norfok for her, she preferred to be Captain of her Guard, a∣soon as she came unto the Crown; and toward the latter end of her Reign, Sir Thomas Threm was created Lord Prior of the Order of St Johns of Jeru∣salem, and consequently according to the old pretension, the first Baron of England. And as for her domestique servants who had suffered with her, she thought it no unfit decorum, that they should in part Reign with her also. To which end she preferred Hopon her old Chaplain, to the See of Norwich, R∣chester to be Comproller of her Houshold, Ingfield to be Master of the Wards, and Wlgrave to be Master of the Wardrobe, which is sufficint o delre, that she was willing to comply with all obligarion, and not to b too long in debt to her greatest subjects, but much lesse to her mnial servants▪ But in gard that all these were considered for their peronal merits, not in refe∣rence only to their zeal for the Catholick Cause, she was to shew some act of favour unto those of tha party, which might create a confidence in them of her good affections. To which end she made choice of Sir John Gage (a man most zealously addicted to the Church of Rome) to be Lord Chamberlain of r Houshold, when she came first to the Tower, to the great satisfaction of all those of that Religion. And that she might in some meaure also obge the rest of her sujects, and make the entance of her Reign the more pleang to them, her Coronation was accompanied with a general pardon, at the least in shew. Out of which all prisoners in the Tower, such as remained in the Fleet, together with sixty other, being excepted, and the retrictions and pro∣viso's (with which it was in all parts clogged) being well observed, there were not many, especially of those whom it most concerned, that could create unto themselves any benefit by it. Thus was the Civil State established on a right foundation, and the successi∣on setled most agreeably to the Laws of Nature, according to the last Will and Testament of King Hery the 8th. and the Laws made in that behalfe. But we shall see the pillars of the Church removed, the very foundation of it shaken▪ and the whole abrick of Religion so demolished, that scarce one stone thereof did seem to stand upon the other; without regrd unto the Laws, and contrary to the will and purpose of King Edwd the 6th. At the Queens first entrance into London, on the thid of August, she discarged Gardinr of the Tower, as she did Bner of the Marshelsey, and Bishop Tstall from the Kings Bench within two dayes after. To make way to whose restitution to their former Sees, Bishop Ridley is removed from London, Bishop Poict from Winchester, and an Act of Parliment pocred for the restoring of the Church of Durham, to all its Lands▪ Preheminences, and Juridictions▪ of which it stood divested by the lte Act of Dissolution, made in the last year of the King deceased. By the like power, was Coverdale displaced from the See of Exon, Sory from that of Chichester▪ and Hooper dispossessed of that Jurisdiction, whih he held as the Commendatory of the See of Worcester; to which See, , Day, and Heath, were again restored. The like course also followed, for the depriving of all Dea, Dgns, and Parochial Ministers, who had succeeded into any of those preerments, during the Reign of the two last Kings▪ the old incumbets whereof were then ound living, and able to supply their places. Which though it could not be objected against Dr Cox, either in rference to his Denry of hrist Church, or that of  (both which he held at the same time) yet being brought unto the Marshaley, on the 5th. of , he was unjustly spoied of both, to make room for Dr Richard
Marshall in the one, and Dt Hugh Weston in the other. And all this done without so much as any shew of legal processe, or the conventing of the per∣sons whom it did concern or any satisfaction given unto the Laws, (which in some cases favour possession more than right) so strangely violated. But greater was the havock which was made amongst them, when there was any colour or pretence of Law, as in the case of having wives, or not confor∣ming to the Queens pleasure in all points of Religion; conidering how for∣ward and pragmatical too many were, to run before the Laws in the like par∣ticular. The Queen was zealous in her way, and by her interesse, strongly by∣assed to the Church of Rome. But it concerned her to be wary, and not to presse too much at once upon the people, which generally were well affected to the Reformation. Of this she had a stout experiment, within very few dayes after her first entrance into London. For so it hapned, that Dr Bourn, Arch-Deacon of London, and one of the Prebends of St Paul's, preaching a Ser∣mon at the Crosse, on the 13th. of August, inveighed in favour of Bishop Bonner, who was present at it, against some proceedings in the time of the late King Edward. Which so incensed the people, that suddenly a great tumult arose upon it; some pelting him with stones, others crying out aloud, pull him down, pull him down, and one (who never could be known) flinging a dagger at his head, which after was found sticking in a post of the Pulpit. And greater had the mischief been upon this occasion, if Mr Bradford and Mr Ro∣gers, two eminent Preachers in the time of King Edward, and of great credit and esteem with the common people, had not endeavoured to appease the enraged multitude, and with great difficulty secured the Preacher in the School adjoining. By reason of which tumult, an Order was taken by the Lords of the Counil, with the mayor and Aldermen of London, that they calling the next day following a Common Council of the City, should thereby charge every housholder, to cause their children and Apprentices, to keep their own Pa∣rish Churches, upon the Holy dayes, and not to suffer them to attempt any thing to the violating of the common peace. Willing them also to signifie to the said Assembly, the Queens determination uttered to them by her Highnesse, the 12th. of August, in the Tower. Which was, that albeit her Grace's conscience was staid in matters of Religion; yet she gratiously meant to compel or strain other mens, otherwise than God should (as she trusted) put into their hearts a perswasion of that truth which she was in, through the opening of his word unto them, by godly, vertuous, and learned Preachers; that is to say, such Preachers only, as were to be hereafter licenced by the Queen's authority. But yet for fear that these instructions might not edifie with the common people, Order was taken for preventing the like tumult on the Sunday fol∣lowing. At what time the Sermon was preached by Dr Watson (who after∣wards was Bishop of Lincoln, but Chaplain only at that time to the Bishop of Winchester). For whose security, not only many of the Lords of the Council, that is to say, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Privy Seal, the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of Pembrook, the Lords, Wentworth and Rich, were severally desired to be there present; but Gerningham, Captain of the Guard, was appointed with two hundred of his stourest Yeomen, to stand round about him with their Halberts. The Mayor had also taken Order, that all the Companies in their Liveries should be present at it, which was well taken by the Queen. And because the comming of the Guard on the one side affrighted some, and the Order of the Lords above mentioned had restrained others from comming to those publick Sermons; it was commanded by the Lord Mayor, that the An∣cients of all Companies should give attendance at those Sermons for the time to come, lest otherwise the Preachers might be discouraged at the sight of so thin an Auditory. The safety of those publick Preachers being thus pro∣vided for by the Lords of the Council, there next care was, that nothing should be preached in private Churches, contrary to the Doctrine which was,
and should be augh at the Cross by them which were appointed to it. Whereupon it was further Ordered, that every Alderman in his Ward, should forthwith send for the Curates of every Church within their Liberties, and warn them not only to forbear preaching themselves; but also not to suffer any other to preach, or make any open or solemn reading of Scripture in their Churches, unless the said Preachers were severally licensed by the Queen. To which purpose Letters were directed also to the Bishop of Norwich, and possi∣bly to all other Bishops in their several Diocesses. But nothing more disco∣vers the true state and temper of the present time, than a Proclamation pub∣lished by the Queen, on the 18th. of August. The Tenor of which is as fol∣loweth. The Queen's Highnesse well remembring what great inconvenience and dangers, have grown to this her Ream in times past, through the diversities of opinions in Questions of Religion; and hearing also that now of late, sithence the beginning of her most gratious Reign, the same contentions be again much revived, through cer∣tain false and untrue reports, and rumors spread by some evil-disposed persons, hath thought good to give to understand to all Her Highnesse's most loving subjects, her most grrtious pleasure in manner following. First, Her Majesty being presently by the only goodness of God, setled in her just possession of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and other Dominions thereunto belon∣ging, cannot now hide that Religion, which God and the world knoweth she hath ever proessed from her infancy hitherto. Which at her Majesty is minded to observe and maintain for her self by God's grace, during her time; so doth her Highness much desire, and would be glad the some were of all her subjects quietly and charitably en∣tertain'd. And yet she doth signifie unto all her Majestie's loving subjects, that of Her most gratious disposition and clemency, Her Highness mindeth not to ompel any Her said subjects thereunto, until such time as further Order by common assent may be ta∣ken therein: Forbidding nevertheless all her subjects, of all degrees, at their perils, to move seditions, or stir unquietness in her people, by interpreting the Laws of this Realm, after their brains and fantasies, but quietly to continue for the time, till ( before is said) further Order may be taken, and therefore willeth, and strightly chargeth and commondeth, all her good loving subjects, to live together in quiet sort, and Christian Charity, leaving those new found devilish terms, of Papist and Heretick, and such like; and applying their whole care, study and travail, to live in the fear of God, exercising their conversations in such charitable and Godly doing, as their lives may indeed express the great hunger and thirst of God's glory▪ which by rash talk and words, many have pretended: And in so doing, they shall best please God, and live without danger of the Laws, and maintain the tranquility of the Realm. Whereof as her highness shall be most glad, so if any man shall rashly pre∣sume to make any assemblies of people, or at any publick, assemblies, or otherwise, shall go about to stir the people to disorder or disquiet, she mandeth according to her duty, to see the same most severely reformed and punished, according to her High∣nese's Lawes. And furthermore, for asmuch as it is well known, that sedition and false rumours have been nourished and maintained in this Real, by the subtilty and malice of some evil-disposed persons, which take upon them without sufficient authority, to preach and to interpret the word of God, after their own brains, in Churches, and other pla∣ces, both publick and private, and also by playing of Interludes, and Printing of false fond Books, and Ballads, Rimes, and other lewd Treatises in the English Tongue, con∣teining Doctrine in matter now in question, and controversies touching the high points and mysteries in Christian Religion; which Books, Ballads, Rimes, and Treatises, are chiefly by the Printers and Stationers, set out to sale to her Graces sub∣jects, of an evil zeal for lucre and covetousnesse of vile gain: Her Highnesse there∣fore streightly chargeth and commandeth all and every of her said subjects, of what∣soever state, condition, or degree they be, that none of them presume from hence∣forth,
to preach, or by way of reading in Chrches, or other publick or prvate places, except in Schools of the University, to interpret or teach any Scriptures, or any man∣ner of points of Doctrine concerning Religion. Neither also to Print any Bok, Mater, Ballad, Rime, Enterlude, Processe or Treatise, nor to play any Enterlude, except they have her Graces special Licence in writing for the same, upon pain to incur her Highnesse indignation and displeasure. It cannot be denied▪ but that this Proclamation was very cautiously and cunningly penned; giving encouragement enough to those which had a mind to outrun the Law, or otherwise to conform themselves to the Queen's Reli∣gion, to follow their own course therein, without dread or danger; and yet commanding nothing contrary to the Lawes established, which might give trouble or offence to the other party. For hereupon many of the people shew∣ed themselves so ready for receiving their old Religion, that in many places of the Realm, before any Law was made for the same, they erected again their Altars, and used the Masse, and Latin Service, in such sort as was wont to be in King Henry's time. Which was so well taken by the Queen, that all such as stood upon the Lawes which were made to the contrary before, had a mk of displeasure set upon them. Which being observed by some of the Clergy, they were as forward as the rest, in setting up the Pageants of St Catherine, and St Nicholas, formerly erected in the Chancels, and to set forth their Processions, (which they celebrated in the Latin tounge) with their old solemnities, con∣trary to the Lawes and Ordinances of King Edward's time. All which irregu∣lar activities in the Priest and People, were sheltred under the name of setting forward the Queens proceedings. And by that name the official of the Arch-Deacon of Ely, gave it in charge amongst the Articles of his visitation, that the Church Wardens should present all such as did disturb the Queen's proceedings, in letting the Latin Service, setting up of Altars, saying of Mass, &c. But more particularly at Cambridge, the Vicechancellor, challenged one Pierson, on the 3d. of October, for officiating the communion in his own Parish Church, in the English tounge; and on the 26. displaced Dr Madew, Master of Clare Hall, for being maried, though they had both as much authority on their side, as the Lawes could give them. In like manner some of the Popish party in King's Colledge (not tarrying the making of any Law) on the 28th. of the same, officia∣ted the Divine Service in the Latin tounge; and on the 6th. of November then next following, a Sermon is preached openly at St Michaels, contrary to the Lawes in that behalf, not as then repealed. Not altogether so eager on the scent at Oxon, as they were at Cambridge, though with more difficulty brought at first to the Reformation. Only it pleased Dr Tresham, one of the Canons of Christ Church, of the last foundation, to cause the great bell there to be new cast, and christned by the name of Mary; much comforting himself with the melodious found thereof, when it toll'd to Mass; which Marshall the new Dean, by his help and counsel, had again restored. But these were only the Essays of those alterations, which generally were intended in all parts of the Church, assoon as the times were ripe for them, and the people fitted to receive them; in order whereunto, it was not thought sufficient to displace the Bishop, and silence the Old Protestant Preachers al∣so unless they brought them under some exemplary punishment, that others might be terrified from the outward profession of that truth, out of which they could not be disputed. Of Ridley's being brought prisoner to the Tower, and of Coxe's committing to the Marshaley, we have spoke before. On the 22d. of August Letters are sent from the Lords of the Council, commanding Bishop Coverdale, and Bishop Hooper, to appear before them. By whom (after two or three appearances) committed to their several Prisons; the one reserved for the stake, the other sent upon request to the King of Denmark. On the 5th. of September, the like Letters are dispatched to old Bishop Latimer, committed close prisoner to the Tower, on the 8th. day after; followed the next morning
by Archbishop ranme, whose Story doth require a more particular account, of which more anon. Harley of Hereord (to which he had been conecrated in May foregoing) and aylor of Lincoln, another of the lt of King Edward's Bishops, were present at the opening of the Parliament on the 10th of October. But no sooner was the Mass began (though not then restoed by any Law) than they left the Church. For which the Bishop of Lincoln being first examined, and making profession of his Faith, prevented the malice of his enemies by a timely death. And Harley upon information of his marriage, was presently exluded from the Parliament House, and not long after from his Bshopick also. Which being observed by Bishop Barlow of Wells, and Scory of Chihster, they withdrew themselves beyond the Seas; followed not long after by Bishop Point of Winchester. But Barlow made not so muh haste, as not to be com∣mitted to the Flet, by the Lords of the Council, from whence upon some satisfaction given to the Lord Chancellor Gardiner, by his discreet and mo∣derate Answers, he was not long after set at liberty, and so crossed the seas; resolved to trust himself no more o a second hazard, having with so much diffi∣culty escaped the first. How it succeeded with the rest, we shall see hereafter. Upon which smiting of the Shepherds, it is not to be wondred at, i their floks sattered. Now as concerning the Archbishop, the substance of his story is briefly his. He had been a chief instrument in King Henry's time, of setting forward the divorce; and in King Edward's, of advancing the Reformation The Queen conceived hereupon such a high displeasure (It had been malice in another) against the man, that nothing but his death could appease the same. His death is therefore fully resolved upon, by Gardiner, Banner, and the rest of the Popish Prelates. Of which the first had posecuted the Divorce as far as any; and the second was as forward as the best in the Reformation, as long as Cromwel lived to perfer and countenance him. But their standings out, and sufferings for it in King Edward's time were thought sufficient explations for their former errors, when the good Offices which Cranmer had done for her in her Fathers tie, were worn out of memory. Die then he must; but by what law he was to die, proved a knot more difficult, than could be speedily untied. It was ad∣vised to charge him with High Treason, as being privy to the plot of the Duke of Northumberland, for excluding the Queen from the succession. But against this it was objected, that he was the last of the Council who subseribed unto it; and that the Council would be wary of making that a Capital offence in him, of which they were all equally guilty. In the next place it was propounded, to proceed against him in case of Heresie, that being the most likely way to con∣tent the Ppe, whose favour was to be procured by all means immaginable. But the worst was, that the Statutes made in the time of King Richard 2d. and King Henry 4th. for putting Hereticks to death, had been abrogated in the time of king Henry 8th. as that of the six Articles, more terrible than either of the other two had been, repealed by the late King Edward the 6th. No better course therefore, than to find some occasion for laying him up in some safe pri∣son; and when they had him there, to proceed against him as time and oppor∣tunity should administer some fit matter for it. About this time a bruit was raised, that Cranmer to ingratiate himself with the Queen, had promised to celebrate the Exequies of the deceased King, ac∣cording to the Romsh manner. To clear himself of which reproach, he drew up a Manifest, declaring in the same, that he was ready to maintain the Arti∣cles of Religion, set forth by his procurement in the time of King Edward, to be consonant to the word of God, the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the pra∣ctice of the best and prest times. These papers lying in the window in his pri∣vate chamber, were seen and liked by Bishop Scory, by whom they were tran∣scribed and communicated to many others. Coming at last unto the know∣ledge of the Council, the Archbishop is commanded to appear before them. Interrogated about the papers, and prompted by Bishop Heath, who was then
amongst them, to let them know whether he were not sorry for it. To which the Archbishop made reply, that as he did not deny himself to be the author of those papers, so he must needs confesse himself to be sorry that they went from him in such sort as they did. For I had purposed, saith he, to set out the Manifest in a more large and ample manner; and to have it set upon St Paul's door, and the doors of all the Churches in London, with my own Seal affix∣ed unto it. Upon which stout and honest answer, they thought fit to dismiss him for the present: it being conceived by some of the more moderate spirits, that it would be punishment enough to deprive him only of his Bishoprick, and to assign him sufficient maintenance upon the exhibiting of a true Inven∣tory of his whole estate, with a commandment to keep his house without medling in matters of Religion. But those who better understood the mind of the Queen, so ordered it, that on the 14th. of September, he was sent to the Tower, where he remained prisoner till the 3d. of November. At what time he was arraigned in the Guild Hall of London, together with the Lord Guilford Dadley, the late Queen Jane his wife, and others; all of them being attainted and condemned of Treason, as before was said. And he lay under this attain∣ture till the year next following, when the old Statutes for putting Hereticks to death, were revived in Parliament. Which having furnished his adversaries with a better ground to proceed upon, to the contentment of the Pope and the Queen together, they waved the prosecuting of the Attaindure, to an Execution, and wholly fixed themselves on the point of Heresie. At the hearing whereof, he was right well pleased, because the case was not now his own, but Christs; not the Queens, but the Churches. The severity of this beginning against the Natives, gave a sufficient warning to all such strangers, who had tool sanctuary here in the time of King Edward, to provide betimes for their departure. Amongst whom, none more openly aimed at than Peter Maryr, because none of them had given wider wounds than he to the Catholick Cause. Tresham, a senior Canon of Christ Church, had held some points against him at his first coming thither; and now he took the benefit of the times, in causing both that house, and many others in the University, to put some publick scorn upon him. Not finding any safety there, he retires to Lambeth, where he was sure of as much safety as that place could give him. A consultation had been held by some of the more fiery spirits, for his com∣mitment unto prison. But he came hither (as it was well known) on the pub∣lick Faith, which was not to be violated for the satisfaction of some private persons. It was thought fit therefore to discharge him all further imploy∣ment, and to licence him to depart in peace, none being more forward to fur∣nish him with all things necessary for his going hence, than the new Lord Chancellor; whether in honour to his Learning, or out of a desire to send him packing, shall not now be questioned. But less humanity was shewed unto him in his wife, whose body having been buried in the Church of St Frideswide, was afterwards by publick order taken out of the grave, and buried in a com∣mon dunghil. About the same time also such strangers as were gathered toge∣ther into the Church of John Alasco, not only were necessitated to forbear their meetings, but to dissolve their Congregation, and to quit the Countrey. Such a displeasure was conceived against them, by those which governed the affairs, that it was no small difficulty for them to get leave for their departure; and glad they were to take the opportunity of two Danish ships, and to put themselves to sea in the beginning of winter, fearing more storms in England, than upon the Ocean. And so farwel to John Alasco. It was an ill wind which brought him hit her, and worse he could not have for his going back. The like haste made the French Protestants also. And that they might have no pretence for a long stay, command was sent unto the Mayor of Rie and Dver, on the 16th. of September, to suffer all French Protestants to cross the seas, ex∣cept such only, whose names should be signified unto them by the French Am∣bassadors. But notwithstanding these removes, many, both Dutch and French,
remained still in the Kingdom, some of which being after found in Wiat's Army, occasioned the banishing of all the rest, except Denizens and Mer∣chants only, by a publick Edict. At which time many of the English depar∣ted also, as well Students as others, to the number of 300. or thereabouts; hoping to find that freedome and protection in a forein Country, which was denied them in their own. The principal of those which put themselves into this voluntary exile, were, Katherine, the last wife of Charls Brandon Duke of Suffok, Robert Bertye, Esquire, husband to the Dutchess; the Bishops of Winchester and Wells, Sir Richard Morison, Sir Anthony Cook, and Sir John Cheek, Dr Cox, Dr Sanays, and Dr Grindall, and divers others, of whom we shall hear more hereafter on another occasion. Of all these things, they neither were, not could be ignorant in the Court of Rome, to which the death of Edward had been swiftly posted on the wings of fame. The newes of the succession of Queen Mary, staid not long behind, so much more welcome to Pope Julius 3d. who then held that See, because it gave him some assurance of his re-admission into the power and jurisdiction of his predecessors in the Realm of England. For what less was to be expected, considering that she was brought up in the Catholick Religion, interessed in the respects of her mother, and Cosen in the first degree unto Charles the Em∣perour? In the pursuance of which hopes, it was resolved that Cardinal Pole should be sent Legate into England, who being of the Royal blood, a man of eminent learning, and exemplary life, was looked on as the fittest instrument to reduce that Kingdome. The Cardinal well knowing that he stood attainted by the Lawes of the Land, and that the name of Henry was still preserved in estimation amongst the people; thought it not safe to venture thither, before he fully understood the state of things. He therefore secretly dispatcheth Com∣mendonius, a right trusty Minister, by whom he writes a private Letter to the Queen. In which commending first her perseverance in Religion in the time of her troubles, he exhorteth her to a continuance in it in the days of her happiness. He recommended also to her, the salvation of the souls of her people, and the restitution of the true worship of God. Commendonius, having diligent∣ly inform'd himself of all particulars, found means of speaking with the Queen. By whom he understood not only her own good affections to the See Aposto∣lick; but that she was resolved to use her best endeavours for re-establishing the Religion of the Church of Rome in all her Kingdomes. Which being made known unto the Cardinal, he puts himself into the voyage. The newes where∣of being brought to Charls (who had his own design apart from that of the Pope) he signified by Dandino, the Pope's Nuncio with him; that an Aposto∣lick Legate could not be sent into England as affairs then stood, either with safety to himself, or honour to the Church of Rome; and therefore that he might do well to defer the journy, till the English might be brought to a better temper. But the Queen knowing nothing of this stop, and being full of expectation of the Cardinals coming, had called a Parliament to begin on the 10th. of October. In which she made it her first Act, to take away all Statutes passed by the two last Kings, wherein certain offences had been made High Treason, and others brought within the compass of a Premunire. And this she did, especially for Pole's security, that neither he by exercising his Authority, nor the Clergy by submitting to it, might be intangled in the like snares, in which Cardinal Wolsie, and the whole Clergy of his time had before been caught. It was designed also to rescind all former Statutes which had been made by the said two Kings against the jurisdiction of the Pope, the Doctrine and Religion of the Church of Rome, and to reduce all matters Ecclesiastical to the same estate, in which they stood in the beginning of the Reign of the King her Father. But this was looked upon by others as too great an enterprise to be attempted by a wo∣man, especially in a green estate, and amongst people sensible of those many be∣nefits, which they enjoyed by shaking off their former vassalage to a forein
power. It was advised therefore to proceed no further at the present, than to repeal all Acts and Statutes which had been made in derogation to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in the time of her brother; which being passed in his minority, when all affairs were carried by faction and strong hand, contrary to the judgement of the best and soundest part of the Clergy and Laity, might give a just pretence for their abrogation, till all particulars might be conside∣red and debated in a lawful Synod. According to which temperament, the point was carried, and the Act pass'd no higher than for Repeaing certain Sta∣tutes of the time of King Edward; by which one blow she felled down all which had been done in the Reformation in seven years before. For by this Act, they took away all former Statutes for Administring the Communion in both kinds; for establishing the first and second Liturgie; for confirming the new Ordinal, or form of consecrating Archbishops and Bi∣shops, &c. for abrogating certain Fasts and Feastivals which had been for∣merly observed; for authorizing the marriage of Priests, and Legitimation of their children; not to say any thing of that Statute (as not worth the naming) for making Bishops by the King's Letters Patents, and exercising their Episco∣pal jurisdiction in the King's name only. So that upon the matter, not only all things were reduced to the same estate in which they stood at Edward's com∣ing to the Crown, but all those Bishops and Priests which had maried by au∣thority of the former Statutes▪ were made uncanonical, and consequently ob∣noxious to a deprivation. So that for want of Canonical Ordination on the one side, and under colour of uncanonical Mariages on the other, we shall presently find such a general remove amongst the Bishops and Clergy, as is not any where to be parallel'd in so short a time. And because some affronts had been lately offered to such Priests as had been forward in setting up the Mass in their several Churches, and that no small danger was incurred by Dr Bourn above mentioned, for a Sermon preached at St Paul's Cross; an Act was pas∣sed for the preventing of the like for the time to come, Entituled An Act against offenders of Preachers, and other Ministers, in the Church. Which two Acts were no sooner passed, but they were seconded by the Queen with two Proclamations on the 5th. of December. By one of which it was declared, That all Statutes made in the time of the late King Edward, which concerned Religion, were repealed by Parliament; and therefore that the Mass should be said as formerly, to begin on the 20th of that month: And by the other it was commanded, that no manner of person from thenceforth, should dare to disturb the Priests in saying Mass, or executing any other divine Office, under the pains and penalties therein contained. According unto which appointment, the Mass was publickly officiated in all parts of the Kingdome, and so conti∣nued during the Reign of this Queen, without interruption. There also past another Act, wherein it was Enacted, That the mariage be∣tween King Henry the 8th. and Queen Katherine his first wife, should be defi∣nitively, cleerly, and absolutely declared, deemed, adjudged to be, and stand with God's Laws, and his most Holy word, and to be accepted, reputed and taken of good effect and validity to all intents and purposes whatsoever; that the Decree or Sentence of Divorce heretofore passed between the said King Henry the 8th, and the said Queen, by Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, should be deemed, taken, and reputed to be void and null; with a repeal of all such Statutes or Acts of Parliament, in which the Queen had been declared to be illegitimate. The making of which Act, as it did much conduce to the establishment of the Queen's estate; so did it tacitly and implicitly ac∣knowlege the supremacy to be in the Pope of Rome, which could not be attain∣ed explicitly and in terms expresse, as affairs then stood. For since the mariage neither was nor could be reputed valid, but by the dispensation of Pope Julius the 2d. the declaration of the goodness and validity of it, did consequently in∣fer the Popes authority▪ from which that dispensation issued. And therefore it was well observed by the Author of the History of the Council of Trent, that it
seemed ridiculous in the English Nobility, to oppose the restitution of the Popes supremacy, when it was propounded to them by the Queen in the fol∣lowing Session; considering that the yielding to this demand was virtually con∣tained in their assent to the Mariage. There also past another Act, in which there was a clause for the invalidating of all such Commissions, as had been granted in the time of the late Queen Jane; and one in confirmation of the attainders of the late Duke of Northumberland, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, &c. Which shews, that there was somewhat in the said proceedings not so cleer in Law, but that there seem'd necessity of calling in the Legislative power to confirm the same, for the indempnity of those who had acted in them. Toge∣ther with this Parliament, the Queen was pleased to summon a Convocation, to the end that all matters of Religion might be first debated and concluded in a Synodical way, before they were offered to the consideration of the other Assembly. In the writs of which summons, she retained the Title of Supream Head on earth of the Church of England, &c. the want whereof in those of the present Parliament, occasioned a dispute amongst some of the members, Whether they might lawfully proceed or not, in such publick businesses as were to be propounded to them in that Session. Archbishop Cranmer had been be∣fore imprisoned in the Tower of London, and was detained there all the time of this Convocation, so that he could not do that service to God and the Church, which his place required. This took for a sufficient ground to trans∣far the Presidentship of the Convocation upon Bonner of London, privileged in respect of his See, to preside in all such Provincial Synods, which were either held during the vacancy of the See of Canterbury, or in the necessary absence of the Metropolitan. The lower house of the Clergy also, was fitted with a Prolocutor, of the same affections, Dr Hugh Weston, then newly substituted Dean of Westminster in the place of Cox, being elected to that Office. On Wednesday the 18th. of October, it was signified by the Prolocutor, that it was the Queens pleasure, that they of the House should debate of matters of Reli∣gion, and proceed to the making of such constitutions as should be found ne∣cessary in that case. But there was no equality in number between the par∣ties, and reason was of no authority where the major part had formerly resol∣ved upon the points. So partially had the elections been returned from the several Diocesses, that we find none of King Edward's Clergy amongst the Clerks; and such an alteration had been made in the Deans and Dignitaries, that we find but six of that ranck neither to have suffrage in it, that is to say, James Haddon Dean of Exeter, Walter Philips Dean of Rochester, John Philpot Arch Deacon of Winchester, John Elmer Arch Deacon of Stow, in the Diocess of Lincoln, Richard Cheny Arch Deacon of Hereford. One more I find, but with∣out any name, in the Acts and Mon▪ who joined himself to the other five in the disputation. Nor would the Prolocutor admit of more, though earnestly desired by Philpot, that some of the Divines which had the passing of the Book of Articles in King Edward's time, might be associated with them in the defence thereof. Which motion he the rather made, because one of the points proposed by the Prolocutor, related to a Catechism set forth in the said Kings time, intitu∣led to the said Convocation in the year 1552. Of which it was to be enqui∣red, whether or no it was the work of that Convocation. But that matter be∣ing passed lightly over, the main point in debate concerned the manner of Christs presence in the blessed Sacrament. It was not denied by Philpot, and the rest of the Protestant party, that Christ was present in his Sacrament, rightly ministred according to his institution, but only that he was not pre∣sent after the gross and carnal manner, which they of the Popish party had before subscribed to. Six days the disputation lasted, but to little purpose; for on the one side it was said by Weston and his associates, that their adversa∣ries were sufficiently confuted, and all their Arguments fully answered. And on the other side it was affirmed by the Divines of King Edward's time, that
neither any satisfaction had been given to their Arguments, nor that any right judgement could be made in the points disputed, where the adverse party late as Judges in their own concernments. Many checks had been given by Weston to the ix Divines, but especially to the Arch-Deacon of Winchester; and there was much disorder otherwise in the disputation (though certain great Lords were present at it) which hindered it from producing any good effect. So that being weary at the last of their own confusions, it was thought fit to put an end to the dispute. Which Weston did accordingly in these following words. It is not (saith he) the Queens pleasure that we should spend any longer time in these debates, and ye are well enough already, For you (saith he) have the Word, and we have the Sword. So powerful is the truth, that may times it will find some means to vent it self, when we least intend it, and sometimes also when we most labour to suppress it. The Parliament and Convocation had thus concluded on the point, and lit∣tle question would be made, but that such Bishops as disliked the alterations in the time of King Edward, will be sufficiently active in advancing the re∣sults of both. But Bonner will not stay so long; he is resolved to go along with the Parliament, if not before it. For after the ending of the Even song on St. Katherine's day, before the consultations of the Parliament had been confirmed by the Royal assent, he caused the Quire of St. Paul's to go about the steeple, singing with lights after the old custome. And on St Andrew's day next following, he began the Procession in Latine, himself, with many Parsons and Curates, and the whole Quire, together with the Lord Mayor, and divers of the Aldermen, the Prebends of the Church attired in their old gray Amises (as they used to call them) in which manner they continued it for three dayes after. In setting up the Mass, with all the Pomps and Rites there∣of at the time appointed, it is not to be thought that he could be backward, who shewed himself so forward in the rest of his actings. And therefore it can be no news to hear that on the 14th. of January, he restored the solemn Sun∣days Procession about the Church, with the Mayor and Aldermen in their Clokes; the Preacher taking his benediction in the midst of the Church, ac∣cording to the ancient custome; or that he should send out his Mandates to all Parsons and Curates within his Diocess, for taking the names of all such as would not come the Lent following to Auricular confession, and receive at Easter; or finally, that he should issue out the like commands to all Priests and Curates, which lived within the compass of his jurisdiction, for the abo∣lishing of such Paintings and Sentences of holy Scripture, as had been pensiled on the Church walls, in King Edward's dayes. He knew full well, that as the actions of the Mother Church would easily become exemplary to the rest of the City, so the proceedings of that City, and the parts about it, would in time give the law to the rest of the Kingdom; and that there was no speedier way to advance a general conformity over all the Kingdom, than to take begin∣ning at the head, from whence both sence and motion is derived to the rest of the body. Which makes it seem the greater wonder, that he should be so back∣ward in advancing Images (if at the least his actings in that kind have not been misplaced) as not to go about it till the year next following; unless it were that he began to be so wise as to stay until the Queen's affairs were better set∣led. But no sooner was her marriage past, when we find him at it. For having by that time prepared a fair and large Image of our Saviour, which they called the Rood, he caused it to be laid along upon the pavement of St Paul's Quire, and all the doors of the Church to be kept close shut, whilst he together with the Prebends, sung and said divers prayers by it. Which done, they anointed it with oyl in divers places, and after the anointing of it, crept unto it, and kissed it, and after weighed it up, and set it in its accustomed place; the whole quire in the mean time singing Te Deum, and the bels publishing their joy at the end of the Pageant. After which a command is given to Dr Story (who was then Chancellor of his Diocess, and afterwards a most active instrument in
all his butcheries) to visit every Parish Church in London and Middlesex, to see their Rood lots repaired, and the Images of the Crucifix with Mary and John to be placed on them. But it is time that we return to the former Parliament; during the sitting whereof, the Queen had been desired to mary, and three husbands had been nominated of several qualities, that she might please her self in the choice of one. That is to say, Edward Lord Courtney, whom she had lately restored to the Title of Earl of Devon, Reginald Pole, a Cardinal of the Church of Rome, descended from George Duke of Clarence; and Philip the eldest son of Charles the Emperour. It is affirmed, that she had carried some good affections to the Earl of Devonshire, ever since she first saw him in the Tower, as being of a lovely personage and Royal extraction, the Grandson of a Daughter of King Edward the 4th. But he being sounded afar off▪ had declined the matter. Con∣cerning which there goes a story, that the young Earl peitioning her for leave to travel, she advised him to mary and stay at home, assuring him that no Lady in the land how high soever, would refuse to accept him for an husband. By which words though she pointed out her self unto him, as plainly as might ei∣ther stand with the Modesty or Majesty of a Maiden Queen; Yet the young Gentleman not daring to look so high as a Crown, or being better affected to the person of the Princess Elizabeth, desired the Queen to give him leave to mary her sister. Which gave the Queen so much displeasure, that she looked with an evil eye upon them both for ever after; upon the Earl for not accept∣ing that love which she seemed to offer, and on her sister as her Rival in the Earls affections. It was supposed also, that she might have some inclinations to Cardinal Pole, as having been brought up with him in the house of his Mo∣ther, the late Countess of Salisbury. But against him it was objected, that he began to grow in years, and was so given unto his book, that he seemed fitter for a Coul than to wear a Crown; that he had few dependances at home, and fewer alliances abroad; and that the Queen's affairs did require a man both stout and active, well back'd with friends, and able at all points to carry on the great concernments of the Kingdom. And then what fitter husband ould be found out for her, than Philip Prince of Spain? A Prince in the verdure of his years, and eldest son to the most Mighty Emperour, Charles the 5th. by whom the Netherlands being laid to England, and both secured by the assistance and power of Spain, this nation might be render'd more considerable both by sea and land, than any people in the world. To this last Match the Queen was carefully sollicited by the Bishop of Winchester, who neither loved the person of Pole, nor desired his company, for fear of growing less in power and reputation, by coming under the command of a Cardinal Legate. To which end he encouraged Charles the Emperour to go on with this mariage for his son; not without some secret intimation on his Advice, for not suffering Pole to come into England (if he were suffered to come at all) till the Treaty were concluded, and the Match agreed on. Ac∣cording whereunto▪ the Lord Lamoralle Earl of Edgmond, Charles Earl of La∣lain, and John  Mount Morency, Earl of Horn, arrived in England as Ambassa∣dors from the Emperour. In the beginning of January they began to treat upon the mariage,1553/4;. which they found so well prepared before their coming, that in short time it was accorded upon these conditions. 1. That it should be lawful for Philip to assume the Title of all the Kingdoms and Pro∣vinces belonging to his wife, and should be joint Governour with her over those Kingdoms; the Privileges and Customes thereof always preserved inviolate, and the full and free distribution of Bishopricks, Benefices, Fa∣vours and Offices, alwayes remaining intire in the Queen. 2. That the Queen should also carry the Titles of all those Realms, into which Philip either then was, or should be afterwards invested. 3. That if the Queen sur∣vived Philip, 60 thousand pounds per annum should be assigned to her for her joynture, as had been formerly assigned to the Lady Margaret, Sister to
King Edward the 4th. and Wife to Charles Duke of Burgundy. 4.An. Reg. Mar. 1. 1553/4;. That the Is∣sue begotten by this mariage, should succeed in all the Queens Dominions, as also in the Dukedom and County of Burgundy, and all those Provinces in the Neatherlands, of which the Emperour was possessed. 5. That if none but daughters should proceed from this mariage, the eldest should succeed in all the said Provinces of the Neatherlands, provided that by the Counsel and consent of Charles (the son of Philip, by Mary of Portugal his first wife) she should make choice of a husband out of England or the Neatherlands, or o∣therwise to be deprived of her right in the succession in the said estates, and Charles to be invested in them; and in that cafe convenient portions to be made for her and the rest of the daughters. 6. And finally, That if the said Charles should depart this life without lawful issue, that then the Heir surviving of this mariage, though female only, should succeed in all the King∣doms of Spain, together with all the Dominions and Estates of Italy there∣unto belonging. Conditions fair and large enough, and more to the advan∣tage of the Realm of England, than the Crown of Spain. But so it was not understood by the generality of the people of England, ma∣ny of which out of a restless disposition, or otherwise desirous to restore the reformed Religion, had caused it to be noised abroad, that the Spaniards were by this accord, to become the absolute Lords of all the Kingdom; that they were to have the managing of all affairs; and that abolishing all the ancient Laws of the Realm, they would impose upon the land a most intolerable yoke of servitude, as a conquered Nation. Which either being certainly known, or probably suspected by the Queen and the Council, it was thought fit that the Lord Chancelor should make a true and perfect declaration of all the points of the Agreement, not only in the Presence Chamber to such Lords and Gen∣tlemen as were at that time about the Court and the City of London; but also to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and certain of the chief Commoners of that City, purposely sent for to the Court upon the occasion: Which services he perform'd on the 14th▪ and 15th. days of January. And having summarily reported all the Articles of the capitulation, he shewed unto them how much they were bound to thank God, That such a Noble, Worthy, and Famous Prince, would vonchsafe so to humble himself, as in this mariage to take upon him rather as a subject than otherwise. Considering that the Queen and her Council were to Rule and Govern all things as they did before; and that none of the Spaniards or other strangers, were to be of the Council, nor to have the custody of any Castles, Forts, &c. nor to have any office in the Queen's house, or elsewhere throughout the Kingdom. In which respect it was the Queens request to the Lords and Gen∣tlemen, That for her sake they would most lovingly receive the said Prince with oy and honour: and to the Lord Mayor and the Citizens, That they would behave themselves to be good subjects with all humility and rejoycing. Which declaration notwithstanding, the subjects were not easily satisfied in those fears and jealousies, which cunningly had been infused into them by some popular spirits, who greedily affected a change of Government; and to that end sowed divers other discontents amongst the people. To some they secretly complained, That the Queen had broke her promise to the Suffolk men, in suppressing the Religion setled by King Edward the 6th. to others▪ That the mariage with the Prince of Spain, was but the introduction to a se∣cond vassalage to the Popes of Rome; sometimes they pitied the calamity of the Lady Jane, not only forcibly deposed, but barbarously condemned to a cruel death; and sometimes magnified the eminent vertues of the Princess Elizabeth, as the only blessing of the Kingdom; and by those Articles, pre∣pared the people in most places for the act of Rebellion. And that it might succeed the better, nothing must be pretended but the preservation and de∣fence of their Civil Liberties, which they knew was generally like to take both with Papists and Protestants; but so that they had many engines to draw such others to the side, as either were considerable for power or quality. The
Duke of Suffolk was hooked in, upon the promise of re-establishing his daugh∣ter in the Royal throne; the Carews, and other Gentlemen of Devonshire, upon assurance of marying the Lord Courtney to the Princess Elizabeth, and setting the Crown upon their heads; and all they that wished well to the Reforma∣tion, upon the like hopes of restoring that Religion which had been setled by the care and piety of the good King Edward, but now suppressed, contrary to all faith the promise, by the Quee and her Ministers. By means of which suggestions and subtil practices, the contagion was so generally diffused over all the Kingdom, that if it had not accidently broke out before the time ap∣pointed by them, it was conceived by many wise and knowing men, that the danger might have proved far greater, the disease incurable. For so it hapned, that the Carews conceiving that the deferring of the exe∣cution of the plot thus laid, might prove destructive to that cause, or other∣wise fatally thrust on by their own ill destiny, began to leavy men in Cornwal, which could not be so closely carried, but that their purpose was discovered, and the chief of them forced to flye the Kingdom. The news whereof gave such an allarum to the confederates, that they shewed themselves in several places before the people were prepared and made ready for them. Insomuch, that the Duke of Suffolk, together with the Lord Thomas Gray, and the Lord Leonard Gray, having made Proclamation in divers places on the 25th. of that month, against the Queens intended mariage with the Prince of Spain, and finding that the people came not in so fast unto them as they did expect, were forced to dismiss their slender company, and shift for themselves, upon the first news that the Earl of Huntington was coming toward them with 300 horse. An action very unfortunate to himself and to all his family. For first, The Queen finding that she was to expect no peace or quiet as long as the Lady Jane was suffered to remain alive, caused her and the Lord Guilford Dudley, to be openly executed on the 12th. of February then next following. His daughter Katherine ormerly maried to Henry Lord Herbert, eldest son to the Earl of Pembrook, (but the mariage by reason of her tender years, not coming unto a Consummation by carnal knowlege) was by him repudiated and cast off, and a mariage presently made betwixt him and another Katherine, a daughter of George Earl of Shrewsbury. His brothers, John and Thomas, committed priso∣ners to the Tower; of which two, Thomas suffered death about two months after. And for himself, being compelled to hide his head in the house of one Underwood, whom he had preferred unto the keeping of one of his Parks, he was by him most basely and treacherously betrayed to the said Earl of Huntington, on the 11th. of February. Arrained on the 17th. of the same month, and be∣headed on the 23d. Nor fared it better with the rest, though they of Kent, conducted by Sir Thomas Wiat (the chief contriver of the plot) were suddenly grown conside∣rable for their number, and quickly formidable for their power. The newes of whose rising being swiftly posted to the Court, the Duke of Norfolk was appointed to go against him, attended with few more than the Queen's ordi∣nary Guards, and followed by 500 Londoners newly raised, and sent by water to Graves End, under the charge of Captain Alexander Bret. With which few forces he intended to assault the Rebels, who had put themselves into Roche∣ster Castle, and fortified the bridge with some pieces of Canon. But being ready to fall on, Bret with his Londoners fell off to Wiat, and so necessitated the old Duke to return to London in great haste, accompanied by the Earl of Arundel and Sir Henry Gerningham, with some few of their horse, leaving their foot, eight pieces of Canon, and all their ammunition belonging to them, in the power of the enemy. This brings the Queen to the Guild Hall in Lon∣don, on the first of February, where she finds the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, and many of the chief Citizens in their several Liveries. To whom she signified, That she never did intend to marry, but on such conditions, as in the judge∣ment of her Council should be found honourable to the Realm, and profita∣ble
ble to her subjects; that therefore they should give no credit to those many calumnies, which Wiat and his accomplices, who according to the guise of Rebels, had purposely dispersed to defame both her and her government; but rather that they should contribute their best assistance for the suppressing of those, who contrary to their duty, were in arms against her. And though she had as good as she brought, that is to say, fair promises for her gracious words; yet understanding that many in the City held intelligence with the Kentish Rebels, she appointed the Lord William Howard (whom afterwards she crea∣ted Lord Howard of Effingham) to be Lieutenant of the City, and Pembrook General of the field. The event shewed that she followed that Counsel which proved best for her preservation. For had she trusted to the City, she had been betrayed. Incouraged with his success, and confident of a strong party amongst the Londners, on the 3d. day of February, he entreth Southwark, where he and his were finely feasted by the people. But when he hoped to have found the way open to the rest of the City, he found the draw-Bridge to be cut down, the bridge-Gate to be shut, and the Ordinance of the Tower to be bent against him, by the appointment and direction of the Lord Lieutenant. Two dayes he tri∣fled out in Southwark to no purpose at all, more than the sacking of Winchester House, and the defacing of the Bishops Library there, unless it were to leave a document to posterity, that God infatuates the Counsels of those wretched men, who traiterously take up arms against their Princes. And having liberally bestowed these two dayes upon the Queen, the better to enable her to provide for her safety, he wheels about on Sunday the 6th. of the same month to King∣ston bridge. And though the bridge was broken down before his coming, and that the opposite shore was guarded by 200. men, yet did he use such diligence, that he removed away those forces, repaired the bridge, past over both his men and Canon, and might in probability have surprised both the Court and City in the dead of the night, if the same spirit of infatuation had not rested on him. For having marched beyond Brainford in the way towards London, without gi∣ving or taking the allarum▪ it hapned that one of his great piecs was dismoun∣ted by the breach of its wheels. In the mending and mounting whereof, he obstinately wasted so much time, notwithstanding all the perswasions which his friends could make unto him, that many of his men slipped from him, and some gave notice to the Court, not only of his near approach, but also what his pur∣pose was, and what had hindred him from putting it in execution. On this Ad∣vertisment the Earl of Pembrook arms, and draws out his men to attend the mo∣tion of the Rebels, who about 10 of the clock came to Chearing Cross, and with∣out falling on the Court, (which was then in a very great amazement) turn up the Srand to Temple Bar, and so toward Ludgate, the Earl of Pembrook fol∣lowing and cutting him off in the arreir upon every turn. Coming to London, (when it was too late for his intendments) he found the Gates fast shut against him, and the Lord William Howard in as great a readiness to oppose him there, as when he was before in Southwark. So that being hemmed in on both sides with∣out hope of relief, he yields himself to Sir Morris Berkley, is carried prisoner to the Court, from thence committed to the Tower, arraigned at Westminster on the 15th. of March, and executed on the 11th. of April, having first heard, that no fewer than 50 of his accomplices were hanged in London, and Bret, with 22 more in several places of Kent. It can not be denied but that the restitution of the Reformed Religion, was the matter principally aimed at in this Rebellion, through nothing but the Match with Spain appeared on the outside of it. Which appears plainly by a Book writ by Christopher Goodman (associated with John Knox, for setting up Presbytery and Rebellion in the Kirk of Scotland) in which he takes upon him to shew How far Superior Magistrates ought ot be obeyed. For having filled al∣most every Chapter of it with railing speeches against the Queen, and stirring up the people to rebel against her, he falleth amongst he rest upon this expression,
viz. Wyat did but his duty, and it was but the duty of all others that pro∣fess the Gospel, to have risen with him for maintenance of the same. His cause was just, and they were all Traytors that took not part with him. O Noble Wyat▪ thou art now with God, and those worthy men that dyed in that happy enterprise. But this Book was written at Geneva, where Calvin reigned. To whom no pamphlet could be more agreeable, than such as did re∣proach this Queen; whom in his Comment upon Amoz, he entituleth by the name of Porserpine, and saith, that she exceeded in her cruelties all the de∣vils in hell. Much more it is to be admired, that Dr John Poynct, the late Bi∣shop of Winchester, should be of Counsel in the plot, or put himself into their Camp, and attend them unto the place where the carriage brake. Where when he could not work on Wiat to desist from that unprofitable labour in re∣mounting the Cannon, he counselled Vauham, Bret, and others, to shift for themselves, took leave of his more secret friends, told them that he would pray for their good success, and so departed and took ship for Germany, where he after died. The fortunate suppressing of these insurrections, secured the Queen from any fear of the like dangers for the present. And thereupon it was advised to make use of the opportunity for putting the Church into a posture, when the spirits of the opposite party were so crush'd and broken, that no resistance could be looked for. Articles therefore are sent into every Diocess, and let∣ters writ unto the several and Respective Bishops, on the 3d. of March, to see them carefully and speedily put in execution. The Tenour of which Ar∣ticles were as followeth. 1. That every Bishop and his Officers, with all other having Ecclesiastical juris∣diction, shall with all speed and dilgence, and all manner of ways to them possible, put in execution all such Canons and Ecclesiastical Laws, heretofore in the time of King Henry the 8th. used within this Realm of England, and the Dominions of the same, not being directly and expresly contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. 2. That no Bishop, or any his Officer, or other person, hereafter in any of their Ec∣clesiastical writings, in processe, or other extra-judicial acts, do use or put in this clause or Sentence, Regia Auhoritate fulcitus. 3. That no Bop, nor any his Officers, or other person, do hereafter exact or de∣mand in the admessien of any person to any Ecclesiastical Promotion, Order or Office, any Oh touching the primacy or succession, as of late few years past hah been acc∣stomed and used. 4. That every Bishop and his Officers, with all other persons, have a vigilant eye, and use special diligence and foresight, that no person be admitted or received to any Ecclesiastical function, Benefice, or Office, being a Sacramentary, infected or defa∣med with any notable kind of Heresie, or other great crime; and that the said Bishop do stay, and cause to be staid, as much as lyeth in him, that Benefices and Ecclesiasti∣cal promotions, do not notably decay or take hinderance, by passing or confirming of unreasonable Leases. 5. That every Bishop, and all other persons aforesaid, do diligently travail for the reprssing of Heresies and notable crimes, especially in te Clergy, duely correcting and punishing the same. 6. That every Bishop, and all other persons aforesaid, do likewise travail for the condemning and repressing of corrupt and naughty opinions, unlawful Books, Ballads, and other pernitious and hurtful devices, engedrig hatred and discord amongst the people. And that Schoolmasters, Teachers, and Preachers, do exercise and use their offices and duties, without Teaching, Preaching, or setting forth any evil and corrupt doctrine, and that doing the contrary, they may be by the Bishop and his said Officers, punished and removed. 7. That every Bishop, and all other person aforesaid, proceeding summarily, and with all celerity and speed, may, and shall deprive, or declare deprived, and remove ac∣cording to their learning and discretion, and such persons from their Benefices and
Ecclesiastical promotions, who contrary to the state of their Order, and the laudable custome of the Church, have maried and used women as their wives, or otherwise notably and slanderously disordered or abused themselves, sequestring also, during the sayd processe, the fruits and profits of the said Benefices and Ecclesidstical pro∣motions. 8. That the said Bishop and other persons aforesaid, do use more lenity and clemen∣cy with such as have maried, whose wives be dead, than with others whose women do yet remain alve. And likewise such Priests as with the consent of their wives or women, openly in the presence of the Bishop, do professe to abstain, to be used more fa∣vourable. In which case, after th Penance effectually done, the Bishop according to his discretion and wisdome, may upon just consideration, receive and admit them again to their former administrations, so it be not in the same place, appointing them such a portion to live upon, to be paid out of their Benefice, whereof they be deprived, by the discretion of the said Bishop or his Officer, as he shall think may be spared of the same Benfice. 9. That every Bishop and other person aforesaid, do foresee that they suffer not any ligious man, having solemly professed chastity, to continue with his woman, or wife, but that all such persons after deprivation of their Benefice, or Ecclesiastical promotion, be also divorced every one from his said woman, and due punishment other∣wise taken for the offence therein. 10. Item, That every Bishop and all other persons aforesaid, do take Order and direction with the arishioners of every Benefice where Priests do want, to repair to the next Parish for divine Service, or to appoint for a convenient time, till other better provision may be made, one Curate o serve alienis vicibus, in divers Parishes, and to allot the said Curae for his labour, some part of the Benefice which he so serveth. 11. That all, and all manner of Processions in the Church, be used frequently, and continued after the old Order of the Church, in the Latin tougue. 12. That all such holy-dayes and fasting-dayes be observed and kept, as were observed and kept in the latter time of King Henry the 8. h. 13. That the laudable and honest Ceremonies which were wont to be used, fre∣quented and observed in the Church, be hereafter frequented, used and observed; and that children be Christned by the Priest, and confirmed by the Bishop, as hereto∣e hath been accustoed and used. 14. Touching such persons as were heretofore promoted to any Orders, after the new sort and  of Oders, considering they were not Ordered in very deed, the Bishop of the Diocesse finding otherwise sufficient ability in these men, may supply that thing which wanted in them before, then according to his discretion admit them to mini∣ster. 15. That by the Bishop of the Diocesse, an uniform doctrine be set forth by Ho∣mlies, or otherwise, for the good instruction and teaching of all people. And that the said Bishop, and other persons aforesaid, do compel the parishioners to come to their se∣veral Churches, and there devoutly to hear divine Service, as of reason they ought. 16. That they examine all Schoolmasters, and Teachers of children, and finding them suspect in any wise, to remove them, and place Catholick men in their rooms▪ with a special commandment to instruct their children, so as they may be able to an∣swer the Priest at the Masse, and so help the Priest at Masse, as hath been accusto∣med. 17. That the said Bishops, and all other the persons aforesaid, have such regard, respect, and consideration of and for the setting forth of the premises, with all kind of vertue, godly living, and good example, with repressing also, or keeping under of vic and unthriftinesse, as they and every of them, may be seen to favour the restituti∣on of  Religion, and also to make and honest account and reckoning of their office and cre, to the honour of God, Our good contentation, and profit of this Our Realm, and the Dominions of the same. The generality of the people not being well pleased before with the Queen's
proceedings,An. Reg. Mar. 1. 1554. were startled more than ever at the noise of these Articles; none more exasperated than those whose either hands or hearts had been joyned with Wiat. But not being able to prevail by open army, a new device is found out to befool the people, and bring them to a misconceit of the present go∣vernment. A young maid called Elizabeth Crofts, about the age of eighteen years, was tutored to counterfeit certain speeches in the wall of a house not far from Aldersgate, where she was heard of many, but seen of none, and that her voice might be conceived to have somewhat in it more than ordinary, a strange whistle was devised for her, out of which her words proceeded in such a tone, as seemed to have nothing mortal in it. And thereupon it was affirmed by some of the people (great multitudes whereof resorted dayly to the place) that it was an Angel, or at least a voice from Heaven, by others, that it could be nothing but the Holy Ghost; but generally she pass'd by the name of the Spirit in the wall. For the interpreting of whose words, there wanted not some of the confederates, who mingled themselves by turns amongst the rest of the people, and taking on them to expound what the Spirit said▪ delivered many dangerous and seditious words against the Queen, her mariage with the Prince of Spain, the Mass, Confession, and the like. The practice was first set on foot on the 14th. of March, which was within ten days after the publishing of the Articles, and for a while it went on fortunately enough, according to the purpose of the chief contrivers. But the abuse being searched into, and the plot discovered, the wench was ordered to stand upon a scaffold neer St Paul's Cross, on the 15th. of July, there to abide during the time of the Ser∣mon, and that being done, to make a publick declaration of that lewd impo∣sture. Let not the Papists be from henceforth charged with Elizabeth Barton whom they called the Holy made of Kent; since now the Zuinglian Gospellers, (for I cannot but consider this as a plot of theirs) have raised up their Eliza∣beth Crofts, whom they called the Spirit in the wall, to draw aside the people from their due Allegiance. Wiat's Rebellion being quenched,1554. and the Realm in a condition capable of holding a Parliament, the Queen Convenes her Lords and Commons on the 2d. of April, in which Session the Queens mariage with the Prince of Spain, being offered unto consideration, was finally concluded and agreed unto upon these conditions, that is to say, That Philip should not advance any to any publick office or dignity in England, but such as were Natives of the Realm, and the Queens subjects. That he should admit of a set number of English in his houshold, whom he should use respectively, and not suffer them to be injured by foreiners. That he should not transport the Queen out of Eng∣land, but at her intreaty, nor any of the issue begotten by her, who should have their education in this Realm, and should not be suffered but upon ne∣cessity and good reasons, to go out of the same, not then neither but with the consent of the English. That the Queen deceasing without children, Philip should not make any claim to the Kingdom, but should leave it freely to him to whom of right it should belong. That he should not change any thing in the Lawes, either publick or private, nor the immunities and cu∣stomes of the Realm, but should be bound by oath to confirm and keep them. That he should not transport any Jewels, nor any part of the War∣drobe, nor alienate any of the revenues of the Crown. That he should pre∣serve our Shipping, Ordnance and Muition, and keep the Castles, Forts, and Block Houses, in good repair, and well maned. Lastly, That this Match should not any way derogate from the League lately concluded between the Queen, and the King of France, but that the peace between the English and the French should remain firm and inviolate. For the clearer carrying on this great business, and to encourage them for the performance of such further services as her occasions might require; the Queen was pleased to increase the number of her Barons. In pursuance whereof, she advanced the Lord William Howard, Cosen German to Thomas
Duke of Norfolk, to the Title of Lord Howard of Essingham, on the 11th. of March, and elected him into the Order of the Garter within few months after; whose son called Charls, being Lord Admiral of England, and of no small re∣nown for his success at the Isle of Gades, was by Queen Elizabeth created Earl of Nottingham, Anno 1589. Next to him followed Sir John Williams, created Lord Williams of Tame on the 5th. of April; who dying without Issue Male, left his Estate (though not his Honors) betwixt two daughters; the eldest of whom, called Margaret, was married to Sir Henry Norris, whom Queen Elizabeth created Lord Norris of Ricot, in reference perhaps to his fathes suf∣fering in the cause of her mother; from whom descended Francis Lord Norris, advanced by King James to the Honors of Viscount Tame, and Earl of Berk∣shire, by Letters Patens bearing date in January, Anno 1620. After him on the 7th. of April, comes Sir Edward North, created Baron of Chareleg, in the Country of Cambridge, who having been Chancellor of the Court of Aug∣mentations in the time of King Henry, and raised himself a fair Estate by the fall of Abbyes, was by the King made one of his Executors, and nominated to be one of the great Councill of Estate in his Son's Minority. Sir John Bugis brings up the rear, who being descended from Sir John Chandois, a right noble Banneret, and from the Bottelers Lords of Sudley, was made Lord Chandois of Sudley on the 8th. of April, whih goodly Mannor he had lately purchased of the Crown, to which it was Escheated on the death of Sir Thomas Seymour, Anno. 1549. the Title still enjoyed, though but little else, by the seventh Lord of this Name and Family; most of the Lands being dismembred from the House by the unparallel'd Impudence (to give it no worse name) of his el∣der brother. Some Bishops I find consecrated about this time also, to make the stronger party for the Queen in the House of Peers; no more Sees actually voided at that time to make Rome for others, though many in a fair way to it, of which more hereafter. Hooper of Glocester commanded to attend the Lords of the Council on the 22 of August, and committed prisoner not long after, was outed of his Bi∣shoprick immediately on the ending of the Parliament, in which all Conse∣crations were declared to be void and null, which had been made according to the Ordinall of King Edward the 6 th. Into whose place succeeded James Brooks Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Fellow of Corpus Christi, and Master of Bliol Colledge in Oxon; employed not long after as a Delegat from the Pope of Rome in the proceedings against the Archbishop of Canterbury, whom he condemned to the stake. To Jaylor (of whose death we have spoken before) succeeded Doctor John White in the See of Lincoln, first School-master, and after Warden of the Colledge near Winchester; to the Episcopall See whereof we shall find him translated Anno 1556. The Church of Rochester, had been void ever since the removall of Doctor Story to the See of Chichester, not suf∣fered to return to his former Bishoprick, though dispoiled of the later: But it was now thought good to fill it, and Maurice Griffin, who for some years had been the Archdeacon, is consecrated Bishop of it on the first of April. One suffrage more was gained by the repealing of an Act of Parliament, made in the last Session of King Edward, for dissolving the Bishoprick of Durham; till which time, Doctor Cuthbert Tunstall, though restored to his Liberty, and possibly to a good part also of his Churches Partimony, had neither Suffrage as a Peer in the House of Parliament, not could act any thing as a Bishop in his own Jurisdiction. And with these Consecrations and Creations I con∣clude this year.
An. Reg. Mar. 2o An. Dom. 1554, 1555. THe next begins with the Arrivall of the Prince of Spain,An. Reg. Mar. 2. 1554. wafted to Eng∣land with a Fleet of one hundred and sixty sail of Ships, twenty of which were English, purposely sent to be his Convoy, in regard of the warrs, not then expired, betwixt the French and the Spaniards. Landing at Southampton on the 19 th. of July (on which day of the month in the year foregoing the Queen had been solemnly proclaimed in London) he went to Winchester with his whole Retinue on the 24 th. where he was received by the Queen with a gallant Train of Lords and Ladies; solemnly married the next day, being the Festival of St. James, (the supposed Tutelary Saint of the Spanish Nation) by the Bishop of Winchester; at what time the Queen had passed the eight and thirtieth year of her age, and the Prince was but newly entred on his twenty seventh. As soon as the Marriage-Rites were celebrated, Higueroa the Em∣perors Embassador, presented to the King a Donation of the Kingdoms of Naples and Cicily, which the Emperor his father had resigned unto him. Which presently was signified, and the Titles of the King and Queen Pro∣claimed by sound of Trumpet in this following Style. PHILIP and MARY, by the grace of the God, King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; Princes of Spain and Cicily, Arch-Dukes of Austria, Dukes of Millain, Burgundy, and Brabant, Counts of Ausperge, Flan∣ders, and Tirroll, &c. At the proclaiming of which Style, (which was per∣formed in French, Latine, and English) the King and Queen showed themselves hand in hand, with two Swords born before them, for the greater state, or in regard of their distinct Capacity in the publick Government. From VVinche∣ster they removed to Basing, and so to VVindsor, where Philip on the 5 th. of August was Installed Knight of the Garter, into the fellowship whereof he had been chosen the year before. From thence the Court removed to Richmond by land, and so by water to Suffolk-place in the Burrough of Southwark, and on the 12 th. of the same month made a magnificent passage thorow the prin∣cipal streets of the City of London, with all the Pomps accustomed at a Co∣ronation. The Triumphs of which Entertainment had continued longer, if the Court had not put on mourning for the death of the old Duke of Norfolk, who left this life at Framingham Castle in the month of September, to the great sorrow of the Queen, who entirely loved him. Philip thus gloriously received, endeavoureth to sow his Grandure, to make the English sensible of the benefits which they were to partake of by this Marriage, and to engratiate himself with the Nobility and People in all generous ways. To which end, he caused great quantity of Bullion to be brought into England, loaded in twenty Carts, carrying amongst them twenty seven Chests, each Chest containing a Yard and some inches in length, con∣ducted to the Tower on the second of October, by certain Spaniards and Eng∣lish-men of his Majesties Guard. And on the 29 th. of January then next fol∣lowing, ninety nine Horses and two Carts, laden with Treasures of Gold and Silver, brought out of Spain, was conveyed through the City of the Tower of London, under the conduct of Sir Thomas Grosham the Queens Merchant, and others. He prevailed also with the Queen for discharge of such Prisoners as stood committed in the Tower, either for matter of Religion, or on the ac∣count of Wya's Rebellion, or for engaging in the practice of the Duke of Northumberland. And being gratified therein according unto his desire, the Lord Chancellor, the Bishop of Ely, and certain others of the Councill, were sent unto the Tower on the 18 th. of January, to see the same put in execu∣tion; which was accordingly performed, to the great joy of the Prisoners, amongst which were the Archbishops of York, ten Knights, and many other per∣sons of name and quality. But nothing did him greater honour amongst the
English, than the great pains he took for procuring the enlargment of the Earl of Devonshire, and the Princesse Elizabeth, committed formerly on a suspition of having had a hand in Wya's Rebellion, though Wyat hettly disavowed it at the time of his death. It was about the Feast of Easter that the Earl was brought unto the Court, where having obtained the leave to travell, for which before he had petitioned in vain, he pass'd the Seas, cross'd France, and came into Italy; but he found the air of Italy as much too hot for him, as that of England was too cold, dying at Padua in the year 1556. the eleventh and last Earl of Devonshire, of that noble Family. About ten days after his enlarge∣ment, followed that of the Princesse Elizabeth, whose comming to the Court, her entertainment with the Queen, and what else followed thereup on, we shall see hereafter. But we have run our selves too far upon these occasions, and therefore must look back again on that which followed more immediately on the Kings reception; the celebrating of whose Marriage opened a fair way for the Car∣dinals comming, so long expected by the Queen, and delayed by the Empe∣rour, by whom retarded for a while when he was in Italy, and openly detained at Dilling, a Town in Germany, as he was upon his way towards England. From thence he writes his Letters of Expostulation, representing to the Emperor the great scandal which must needs be given to the Churches enemies, in detaining a Cardinal-Legat, Commissioned by his Holinesse for the peace of Christendom, and the regaining of a Kingdom. Which notwithstanding, there he stayeth, till the Articles of the Marriage were agreed on by the Queen's Commissioners, and is then suffered to advance as far as Brussells, upon con∣dition, that he should not passe over into England till the consummation of the Marriage. The Interim he spends in managing a Treaty of Peace betwixt the Emperour and the French; which sorted to no other effect, but onely to the setting forth of his dexterity in all publick businesses. And now the Marriage being past, the Emperour is desired to give him leave to come for England; and Pole is called upon by Letters from the King and Queen to make haste unto them, that they might have his presence and assistance in the following Par∣liament; and in the mean time, that they might advise upon such particulars as were to be agreed on, for the honour and advantage of the See Apostolick. Upon the Emperor's dismission he repairs to Calais, but was detained by cross winds till the 24 th. of November; at which time we shall find the Parliament sitting, and much of the businesse dispatched to his hand in which he was to have been advised with. The businesse then to be dispatched was of no small moment, no lesse than the restoring of the Popes to the Supremacy, of which they had been disposses∣sed in the time of King Henry For smoothing the way to which great work, it was thought necessary to fill up all Episcopall Sees, which either Death or Deprivation had of late made vacant. Holgate Archbishop of York had been committed to the Tower on the 4 th. of October, Anno 1553. from whence re∣leased upon Philips intercession on the 18 th. of January: Marriage and Heresie are his crimes, for which deprived during the time of his imprisonment. Doctor Nicolas Heath succeeded him in the See of York, and leaves the Bi∣shoprick of VVorcester to Doctor Richard Pates, who had been nominated by King Henry the Eighth, Anno 1534. and having spent the intervening twenty years in the Court of Rome, returned a true servant to the Pope, every way fitted and instructed to advance that See. Goodrich of Elie left his life on the 10 th. of April, leaving that Bishoprick to Doctor Thomas Thurlby, Bishop of Norwich, (one that knew how to stand his ground in the strongest tempest) and Doctor John Hopton, heretofore Chaplain and Controuler of Queen Ma∣ry's Houshold, when but Princess onely, is made Bishop of Norwich. Barlow of VVells having abandoned that dignity which he could not hold, had for his Successor Doctor Gilbert Bourn Arch-Deacon of London, and Brother of Sir John Bourn, principal Secretary of Estate. Sufficiently recompenced by
this preferment, for the great danger which he had incurred the year before, when the Dagger was thrown at him, as he preached in St. Paul's Church-yard. Harley of Hereford is succeeded by Purefew (otherwise called Wharton) of St. Asaph; who had so miserably wasted the Patrimony of the Church in the time of King Edward, that it was hardly worth the keeping, For the same sins of Protestantism and Mariage, old Bujh of Briow, and Bira of Chester (the two first Bishops of those Sees) were deprived also; the first succeeded to by Holiman, once a Monck of Reading; the last by Coles, sometimes Fellow of Magdalen, and afterwards Master of Baliol College in Oxon. Finally, in the place of Doctor Richard Sampson Bishop of Coventry and Lihfield, who lest this life on the 25th. of September, Doctor Radolph Bayne, who had been Hebew Reader in Paris in the time of King Francis, was consecrated Bishop of that Church; a man of better parts, but of a more inflexible temper than his Pre∣decessor. And now the Parliament begins, opened upon the 11 th. of November, and closed on the 16 th. of January then next following. It had been offered to consideration in the former Session, That all Acts made against the Pope in the Reign of King Henry might be declared null and void, for the better encou∣ragement of the Cardinal to come amongst us. But the Queen had neither eloquence enough to perswade, nor power enough to awe the Parliament, to that Concession: Nothing more hindred the designe than general fear, that if the Popes were one restored to their former power, the Church might challenge restitution of her former possessions; Do but secure them from that fear, then Pope and Cardinals might come and welcome. And to secure them from that fear, they had not onely the promise of the King and Queen, but some assurance underhand from the Cardinal-Legat, who knew right well, that the Church Lands had been so chopped and changed by the two last Kings, as not to be restored without the manifest ruine of many of the No∣bility, and most of the Gentry, who were invested in the same. Secured on both sides, they proceed according to the King's desires, and passe a general Act for the repealing of all Statutes, which had been made against the Power and Jurisdiction of the Popes of Rome. But first they are to be intreated to it by the Legate himself; for the opening a way to whose reception, they prepa∣red a Bill, by which he was to be discharged of the Attainture which had pas∣sed upon him in the year 1539. restored in Blood, and rendred capable of enjoying all those Rights and Privileges, which formerly he stood possessed of in this Kingdom. For the passing of which Bill into Act, the King and Queen vouchsafed their presence, as soon as it was fitted and prepared for them, not staying till the end of the Session as at other times, because the businesse might not suffer such a long delay. It was upon the 24 th. of November that the Cardinal came first to London, and had his Lodgings in or near the Court, till Lambeth -house could be made ready to receive him. Having reposed himself for a day or two, the Lords and Commons are required to attend their Majesties at the Court, where the Cardinal, in a very grave and eloquent speech, first, gave them thanks for be∣ing restored unto his Country; in recompence whereof he told them, that he was come to restore them to the Country and Court of Heaven, from which, by their departing from the Church, they had been estranged. He therefore earnestly exhorts them to acknowledge their errors, and cheerfully to receive that benefit which Christ was ready by his Vicar to extend unto them. His Speech is said to have been long and artificial, but it concluded to this pur∣pose, That he had the Keys to open them a way into the Church, which they had shut against themselves, by making so many Laws, to the dishonour and reproach of the See Apostolick; on the revoking of which Laws, they should ind him ready to make use of his Keys, in opening the doors of the Church unto them. It was concluded hereupon by both Houses of Parliament, that a Petition should be made in the name of the Kingdom, wherein should be
declared how orry they were, that they had withdrawn their obedience from the Apostolick See, and consenting to the Statutes made against it; promising to do their best endeavour hereafter, that the said Laws and Statutes should be repealed; and beseeching the King and Queen to intercede for them with his Holiness, that they may be absolved from the Crimes and Censures, and be received as penitent children into the bosom of the Church. These things being thus resolved upon, both Houses are called again to the Court on St. Andrews day; where being assembled in the presence of the King and Queen, they were asked by the Lord Chancellor Gardiner, whether they were pleased, that Pardon should be demanded of the Legat, and whe∣ther they would return to the Unity of the Church, and Obedience of the Pope, Supream Head thereof. To which, when some cryed Yea, and the rest said nothing, their silence was taken for consent; and so the Petition was presented to their Majesties in the name of the Parliament. Which being publickly read, they arose, with a purpose to have moved the Cardinal in it; who meeting their desires, declared his readinesse in giving them that satis∣faction which they would have craved. And having caused the Authority gi∣ven him by the Pope to be publickly read, he showed how acceptable the re∣pentance of a snner was in the sight of God, and that the very Angels in Heaven rejoyced at the conversion of this Kingdom. Which said, they all kneeled upon their knees, and imploring the mercy of God, received absolu∣tion for themselves and the rest of the Kingdom; which Absolution was pro∣nounced in these following words: Our Lord Jesus Christ, which with his most precious blood hath redeemed and wash'd u from all our sins and iniquities, that he might purchase unto himself a glorious Spouse, without spot or wrinckle; and whom the Father hath appointed Head over all his Church, He by his mercy absolve you. And we by Apostolick Authority given unto us (by the most holy Lord Pope Julius the 3d his Vicegerent here on earth) do absolve, and deliver you, and every of you, with the whole Realm and the Dominions thereof, from all Heresie and Schism, and from all and every Judgment, Censures and Pains, for that cause incurred. And also we do restore you again unto the unity of our Mother, the holy Church, as in our Letters more plainly it shall appear; In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Which words of his being seconded with a loud Amen by such as were pre∣sent, he concluded the days work with a solemn Procession to the Chapel, for rendring Prayers and Thanks to Almighty God. And because this great work was wrought on St. Andrews day, the Cardinal procured a Decree or Canon to be made in the Convocation of the Bishops and Clergy, that from thenceforth the Feast of St. Andrew should be kept in the Church of England for a Majus Duplex, as the Rituals call it, and celebrated with as much so∣lemnity as any other in the year. It was thought fit also, that the actions of the day should be communicated on the Sunday following, being the second of December, at St. Paul's Crosse, in the hearing of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and the rest of the City. According to which appointment, the Cardinal went from Lambeth by water, and landing at St. Paul's Wharf, from thence proceeded to the Church, with a Cross, two Pillars, and two Pole-axes of sil∣ver born before him. Received by the Lord Chancellor with a solemn Pro∣cession, they arried till the King came from Westminster; Immediately upon whose comming, the Lord Chancellor went into the Pulpit, and preached up∣on on those words of St. Paul, Rom. 13. Fratres, scientes quia hora est jam nos de somno surger, &c. In which Sermon he declared what had been done on the Friday before, in the submission which was made to the Pope by the Lords and Commons, in the name of themselves and the whole Kingdom; and the Ab∣solution granted to them by the Cardinal in the name of the Pope. Which done, and Praiers being made for the whole Estate of the Catholick Church,
the company was for that time dismissed. And on the Thursday after, being the Feast of St. Nicholas day, the Bishops and Clergy then assembled in their Convocation, presented themselves before the Cardinal at Lamboth, and kneeling reverently on their knees, they obtained pardon for all their Perju∣ries, Schisms, and Heresies: From which a formal Absolution was pronoun∣ced also, that so all sorts of people might partake of the Pope's Benediction, and thereby testifie their obedience and submission to him. The news whereof being speedily posted over to the Pope, he caused not onely many solemn Pro∣cessions to be made in Rome, and most parts of Italy, but proclaimed a Jubile to be held on the 24th. of December then next comming. For the anticipating of which solemnity, he alleged this reason, That it became him to imitate the father of the Prodigal child; and having received his lost son, not onely to expresse a domestical joy, but to invite all others to partake thereof. During this Parliament was held a Convocation also, as before was inti∣mated, Bonner continuing President of it, and Henry Cole, Archdeacon of Ely, admitted to the office of Prolocutor. They knew well how the Cards were plaid, and that the Cardinal was to be entreated not to insist on the re∣storing of Church Lands, rather to confirm the Lords and Gentry in their pre∣sent possessions. And to that end, a Petition is prepared to be presented in the name of the Convocation, to both their Majesties, that they would please to intercede with the Cardinal in it. Which Petition being not easie to be met withall, and never printed heretofore, is here subjoyned, according to the tenour and effect thereof in the Latine Tougne. WE the Bishops and Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, assembled in Con∣vocation during the sitting of this Parliament, according to the antient cu∣stom, with all due reverence and humility do make known to your Majesties, That though we are appointed to take upon us the care and charge of all those Churches, in which we are placed as Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Parsons, or Vicars; as also of the Souls therein committed to us, together with all Goods, Rights and Privileges thereunto belonging, according to the true intent and meaning of the Canons made in that behalf; and that in this respect we are bound to use all lawfull means for the recovery of those Goods, Rights, Privileges, and Jurisdictions, which have been lost in the late desperate and pernicious Schism, and to regain the same unto the Church, as in her first and right estate; Yet notwithstanding, having took mature deliberation of the whole matter amongst our selves, we cannot but ingenuously con∣fesse, that we know well how difficult a thing, if not impossible, it is, to recover the said Goods unto their Churches, in regard of the manifold unavoidable Contracts, Sales, and Alienations, which have been made about the same; and that if any such thing should be attempted, it would not onely redound to the disturbance of the pub∣lick peace, but be a means, that the unity in the Catholick Church, which by the good∣nesse of your Majesties had been so happily begun, could not obtain its desired effect, without very great difficulty. Wherefore preferring the publick good and quiet of the Kingdom, before our own private commodities, and the salvation of so many souls, redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, before any earthly things what∣soever, and not seeking our own, but the things of Jesus Christ, we do most earnestly and most humbly beseech your Majesties, that you would graciously vouchsafe to intercede in our behalf with the most reverend Father in God, the Lord Cardinal Pole, Legat à Latere, from his Holinesse, our most serene Lord, Pope Julius the third, as well to your most excellent Majesties, as to the whole Realm of England, that he would please to settle and confirm the said Goods of the Church, either in whole or in part, as he thinks most fit, on the present occupants thereof, according to the powers and faculties committed to him, by the said most serene Lord the Pope; thereby preferring the publick good before the private, the peace and tranquillity of the Realm before sutes and troubles, and the salvation of Souls before earthly trea∣sures. And for our parts, we do both now, and for all times comming, give consent to all and every thing, which by the said Lord Legate shall, in this case, be finally
ordained and concluded on; humbly beseeching your Majesties,An. Reg. Mar. 1. 1553/4. that you would gra∣tiosly vouchsafe to perswade the said Lord Cardinal in our behalf, not to show him∣self in the Premises too strict and dfficult. And we do further humbly beseech your Majesties, that you would please, according to your wonted goodnesse, to take such course, that our Ecclesiastical Rights, Lberties, and Jurisdictions, which have been taken from us, by the iniquity of the former times, and without which we are not able to discharge our common duties, either in the exercise of the pastoral Office, or the cure of souls committed to our trust and care, may be again restored un∣to u, and be perpetually preserved inviolabe both to us and our Churches; and that all lawes which have been made to the prejudice of this our jurisdiction, and other Ecclesiastical liberties, or otherwise have proved to the hindrance of it, may be repea∣ted, to the nour of God, as also to the temporal and spiritual profit, not only of your said most excellent Majesty, but of all the Realm; giving our selves assured hope, that your most excellent Majesties, according to your singular piey to almighty God, for so many and great benefits received from him, will not be wanting to the necessi∣ties of the Kingdom, and the occasions of the Churches, having cure of souls, but that you would consider and provide as need shall be, for the peace thereof. Which Petition being thus drawn up, was humbly offered to the Legate, in the name of the whole Convocation, by the Lord Chancellor, (who was pre∣sent at the making of it) the Prolocutor and six others of the lower house. And it may very well be thought to be welcome to him, in regard it gave him some good colour for not touching on so harsh a sting, as the restoring of Church lands. Concerning which, he was not ignorant that a message had been sent to the Pope in the name of the Parliament, to desire a confirmation of the sale of the lands belonging to Abbies, Chanteries, &c. or otherwise to let him know that nothing could be granted in his behalf. And it is probable, that they recei∣ved some fair promises to that effect, in regard that on the New years day then next following,1554/5. the Act for restoring the Pope's supremacy, was passed in both houses of Parliament, and could not but be entertain'd for one of the most welcome New years Gifts which ever had been given to a Pope of Rome. What the Pope did in retribution▪ we are told by Sleidan, in whom we find that he confirmed all those Bishops in their several Sees, which were of Catholick perswasions, and had been consecrated in the time of the Schism, as also that he established such new Bishopricks which were erected in the time of King Hen∣ry the 8th. and made good all such mariages, as otherwise might be subject un∣to dispute. He adds a confirmation also, (which I somewhat doubt) of the Abby lands, and telleth, that all this was ratified by the Bull of Pope Paul the 4th. He dispensed also by the hand of the Cardinal, with irregularity in seve∣ral persons, confirmed the Ordination and Institution of Clergy men in their Callings and Benefices; legitimated the children of forbidden mariages, and retified the processes and sentences in matters Ecclesiastical. Which general favours notwithstanding, every Bishop in particular, (except only the Bishop of Landaff) most humbly sought, and obtained pardon of the Pope for their former errour, not thinking themselves to be sufficiently secured by any gene∣ral dispensation, how large soever. And so the whole matter being transacted to the content of all parties, (the poor Protestants excepted only) on Friday the 25th. of January, being the Feast of the Conversion of Saint Paul, there was a general and solemn Procession throughout London, to give God thanks for their conversion to the Catholick Church. Wherein (to set out their glori∣ous pomp) were ninety Crosses, one hundred sixty Priests and Clarks, each of them attired in his Cope; and after them eight Bishops in their Pontificalibus, followed by Bonner, carrying the Popish Pix under a Canopy, and attended by the Lord Mayor and Companies in their several Liveries. Which solemn Procession being ended, they all returned into the Church of St Paul, where the King and Cardinal, together with all the rest, heard Mass▪ and the next day the Parliament and Convocation were dissolved.
Nothing now rested, but the sending of a solemn Embassery in the name of the King and Kingdom,An. Reg. Mar. 2. 1554/5. to the Court of Rome, for testifying their submission to his Holiness, and receiving his Apostolical benediction. To which employment were designed Sir Anthony Brown, who on the 2d. of September had been crea∣ted Viscont Mountacute, in regard of his descent from Sir John Nevil, whom King Edward the 4th. advanced unto the Title of Marquisse Mountacute, as be∣ing the second son of Richard Nevil Earl of Sarisbury, and Alce his wife, daughter and heir of Thomas Mountacute, the last and most renowned Earl of Sarisbury, of that Name and Family. With whom was joined in Commission an another Ambassador extraordinary, Dr Thomas Thurlby, Bishop of Ely, to∣gether with Sir Edward Kar, appointed to recide as Ordinary in the Papal Court. On the 18th day of February, they began their journy, but found so great an alteration when they came to Rome, that Pope Juus was not only dead, but that Marcellus, who succeeded him, was deceased also; so that the honour and felicity of this address from the King of England, devolved on Cardinal Caraffa, (no great friend of Poles) who took unto himself the name of Paul the 4th. on the first day of whose Papacy, it chanced that the three Am∣bassadors came first to Rome. It was in the first Consistory also, after his inau∣guration, that the Ambassadors were brought before him: Where prostrating themselves at the Pope's feet, they in the name of the Kingdom, acknowledged the faults committed, relating them all in particular, (for so the Pope was pleas'd to have it) confessing that they had been ungrateful for so many bene∣fits received from the Church, and humbly craving pardon for it. The pardon was not only granted, and the Ambassadors lovingly imbraced; but as an over∣plus, the Pope was pleas'd to honour their Majesties with the Title of Kings of Ireland. Which Title he conferred upon them, by the authority which the Popes pretend to have from God, in erecting and subverting Kingdoms. He knew right well that Ireland had been erected into a Kingdom by King Henry the 8th. and that both Edward the 6th. and the Queen now reigning, had al∣wayes used the Title of Kings of Ireland in the style Imperial: But he concei∣ved himself not bound to take notice of it, or to relinquish any privilege which had been exercised in that kind by his predecessors. And thereupon he found out this temperament, that is to say, to dissemble his knowlege of that which had been done by Henry, and of himself to erect the Island into a King∣dom; that so the world might be induced to believe, that the Queen rather used that Title as indulged by the Pope, than as assumed by her Father. And this he did according to a secret mystery of Government in the Church of Rome, in giving that which they could not take from the possessor; as on the other side some Kings to avoid contentions, have received of them their own proper goods, as gifts; and others have dissembled the knowledge of the Gift, and the pretence of the Giver. These things being thus dispatched in publick, the Pope had many private, discourses with the Ambassadors, in which he found fault that the Church goods were not wholly restored; saying, that by no means it was to be tole∣rated, and that it was necessary to render all, even to a farthing. He added, that the things which belong to God, could never be applied to humane uses, and that he who withholdeth the least part of them, was in continual state of dam∣nation; that if he had power to grant them, he would do it most readily, for the fartherly affection which he bare unto them, and for the experience which he had of their filial obedience; but that his authority was not so large as to prophane things dedicated to Almighty God; and therefore he would have the people of England be assured, that these Church lands would be an Anathema, or an accursed thing, which by the just revenge of God would keep the Kingdom in perpetual infelicity. And of this he charged the Ambassadors to write immediately, not speaking it once or twice only, but repeating it upon all occasions. He also told them that the Peter-Pence ought to be paid assoon as might be, and that according to the custome he would send a Collector for
that purpose,An. Reg. Mar. 2. 1555. letting them know, that himself had exercised that charge in England, for three years together; and that he was much edified by seeing the forwardness of the people in that contribution. The discourse upon which particular he closed with this, that they could not hope that St Peter would open to them the gates of Heaven, as long as they usurped his goods on earth. To all which talk the Ambassadors could not chuse but give a hearing, and knew that they should get no more at their coming home. At their departure out of England, they left the Queen in an opinion of her being with child, and doubted not but that they should congratulate her safe delivery, when they came to render an account of their imployment; but it proved the contrary. The Queen about three months after her mariage, be∣gan to find strong hopes, not only that she had conceived, but also that she was far gone with child. Notice whereof was sent by Letters to Bonner, from the Lords of the Council, by which he was required to cause Te Deum to be sung in all the Churches of his Diocess, with continual prayers to be made for the Queen's safe delivery. And for example to the rest, these commands were executed first on the 28th. of November, Dr Chadsey one of the Prebends of Paul's preaching at the Cross, in the presence of the Bishop of London, and nine other Bishops, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen attending in their scarlet Robes, and many of the principal Citizens in their several Liveries. Which opinion gathering greater strength with the Queen, and belief with the people, it was Enacted by the Lords and Commons then sitting in Parliament, That if it should happen to the Queen otherwise than well in the time of her travel, that then the King should have the politick Government, Order and Admi∣nistration of this Realm, during the tender years of her Majestie's issue, toge∣ther with the Rule, Order, Education and Government of the said issue. Which charge as he was pleased to undergo at their humble sute, so they were altogether as forward to confer it on him; not doubting, but that du∣ring the time of such Government, he would by all wayes and means, study, travail, and imploy himself to advance the weal, both publick and private, of this Realm, and Dominions thereunto belonging, according to the trust re∣posed in him, with no less good will and affection, than if his Highness had been naturally born amongst us. Set Forms of Prayers were also made for her safe delivery, and one particularly by Weston, the Prolocutor of the first Convocation; in which it was prayed, That she might in due season bring forth a child, in body beautiful and comey, in mind noble and valiant. So that she forget∣ting the trouble, might with joy, laud and praise, &c. Great preparations were also made of all things necessary, against the time of her delivery, which was supposed would fall out about Whisun tide, in the month of June, even to the providing of Midwives, Nurses, Rockers and the Cradle too. And so far the hopes thereof were entertained, that on a sudden rumour of her being delive∣red, the bels were rung, and bonfires made in most parts of London. The like so∣lemnities were used at Antwerp, by discharging all the Ordnance in the Eng∣lish ships; for which the Mariners were gratified by the Queen Regent with 100 Pistolets. In which, as all of them seem'd to have a spice of madness in them, so none was altogether so wild as the Curate of St Anns neer Aldersgate, who took upon him after the end of the Procession, to describe the proportion of the child, how fair, how beautiful, and great at Prince it was, the like where∣of had never been seen. But so it hapned, that notwithstanding all these triumphs, it proved in fine, that the Queen neither was with child at the present, nor had any hopes of be∣ing so for the time to come. By some it was conceived, that this report was raised upon policy only, to hold her up in the affection of her husband, and the love of her subjects, by others, that she had been troubled with a Timpany, which not only made her belly swell, but by the windiness of the disease, pos∣sess'd her with a fancy of her being quick. And some again have left in writing, that having had the misfortune of a false conception, which bred in her a
fleshy and informed substance, by the Physicians called a Moa, the continual increase whereof, and the agitation it made in her, occaioned her to believe what she most desired, and to report what she believed. But this informed lump being taken from her with no small difficulty, did not onely turn her supposed joy to shame and sorrow, but made much game amongst some of the Zunglian Gospellers, (for I cannot think, that any true English Protestant could make sport thereat) who were so far from desiring that the Queen should have any Issue to succeed in the Throne, that they prayed God by shortning her days to deprive her of it. Insomuch that one Rse, the Minister to a private Congregation in Bow Church-yard, did use to pray, That God would either turn her heart from Idolatry, or else shorten her days. On which occasion, and some others of the like ill nature, an Act was made in the said Parliament, for punishing of traiterous words against the Queen; in which it was enacted, That the said Praiers, and all others of the like mischievous quality, should be interpreted to be high treason against the Queen. The like exhorbitances I find too frequent in this Queens Reign, to which some men were so trans∣ported by a furious zeal, that a Gun was shot at one Doctor Pendleton, as he preached at St. Paul's Cross on Sunday the 10th. of June, Anno 1554. the Pellet whereof went very near him; but the Gunner was not to be heard of. Which occasioned the Queen to publish a Proclamation within few days af∣ter, prohibiting the shooting in Hand-guns, and the bearing of weapons. Be∣fore which time, that is to say, on the 8th. of April, some of them had caused a Cat to be hanged upon a Gallows, near the Cross in Cheapside, with her head shorn, the likeness of a Vestment cast upon her, and her two fore-feet tied together, holding between them a piece of paper in the form of a Wafer▪ Which tending so apparently to the disgrace of the Religion then by Law established, was showed the same day, being Sunday, at St. Paul's Crosse, by the said Doctor Pendleton; which possibly might be the sole reason of the mis∣chief so desperately intended to him. Such were the madnesses of those People; but the Orthodox and sober Pro∣testant shall be brought to a reckoning, and forced to pay dearly for the fol∣lies of those men, which it was not in their powers to hinder. The Gover∣nours of the Church exasperated by these provocations, and the Queen charging Wyat's Rebellion on the Protestant party, she both agreed on the re∣viving of some antient Statutes made in the time of King Richard the 2d. King Henry the 4th. and King Henry the 5th. for the severe punishment of obstinate Hereticks, even to death it self. Which Act being passed▪ the three great Bi∣shops of the time were not alike minded for the putting it in execution. The Lord Cardinal was clearly of opinion, that they should rest themselves con∣tented with the restitution of their own Religion; that the said three Statues should be held forth for a terrour onely, but that no open persecution should be raised upon them; following therein, as he affirmed, the counsell sent unto the Queen by Charls the Emperour, at her first comming to the Crown, by whom she was dvised to create no troubble unto any man for matter of con∣science, but to be warned unto the contrary by his example, who by endea∣vouring to compell others to his own Religion, had tired and spent himself in vain, and purchased nothing by it but his own dishonour. But the Lord Chancellor Gadinr could not like of this, to whom it seemed to be all one, never to have revived the said three Statutes, as not to see them put in exe∣cution. That some blood should be drawn in case of refractorinesse, and an in∣corrigible non-conformity, he conceived most necessary. But he would have the Ax laid onely to the Root of the Tree▪ the principal supporters of the He∣reticks, to be taken away, whether they were of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, or the Lay-Nobility; and some of the more pragmatick preachers to be cut off also; the rest of the people to be spared, as they who meerly did depend on the power of the other. Let but the Shepherds be once smitten, and the whole flock will presently be scattered, without further trouble.
Well then, said Bonner to himself, I see the honour of this work is reserved for me, who neither fear the Emperor's frows, nor the peoples curses. Which having said, (as if he had been pumping for a reolution) he took his times to make it known unto the other two, that he perceived they were as willing as himself, to have the Catholick Religion entertained in all parts of the King∣dom, though neither of them seemed desirous to act any thing in it, or take the envy on himself; that he was well enough pleased with that reservednesse, hoping they did not mean it for a precedent unto him or others, who had a mind to shew their zeal and forwardness in the Catholick cause. Have I not seen (saith he) that the hereticks themselves have broke the Ice, in putting one of their own number (I think they called him by the name of Servetus) to a cru∣ell death. Could it be thought no crime in them, to take that more severe course against one of their brethren, for holding any contrary doctrine, from that which they had publickly agreed amongst them? And can they be so silly, or so partial rather, as to reckon it for a crime in us, if we proceed against them with the like severity, and punish them by the most extream rigour of their own example? I plainly see, that neither you my Lord Cardinal, nor you my Lord Chancellor, have any Answer to return to my present Argument, which is sufficient to encourage me to proceed upon it. I cannot act Canoni∣cally against any of them, but such as live within the compasse of my juris∣diction, in which I shall desire no help nor countenance from either of you. But as for such as live in the Diocesse of Canterbury, or that of Winchester, or otherwise not within my reach in what place soever, let them be, sent for up by order from the Lords of the Council, committed to the Tower, the Fleet, or any other Prison within my Diocesse, And when I have them in my clutches, let God do so, and more to Bonner, if they scape his fingers. The Persecution thus resolved on, home goes the bloody Executioner, armed with as much power as the Law could give him, and backed by the Authority of so great a King, taking some other of the Bishops to him, con∣vents before him certain of the Preachers of King Edwards time, who former∣ly had been committed to several prisons; of whom it was demanded, Whe∣ther they would stand to their former doctrines, or accept the Queens Pardon and Recant? To which it was generally and stoutly answered, That they would stand unto their doctrines. Hereupon followed that Inquisition for blood which raged in London, and more or less was exercised in most parts of the Kingdom. The first that led the way was Mr. John Rgers, a right learned man, and a great companion of that Tyndal, by whom the Bible was translated into English in the time of King Henry: After whose Martyrdom, not daring to return into his own country, he retired to Wittberge in the Dukedom of Saxonie, where he remained till King Edward's comming to the Crown, and was by Bishop Ridley preferred to the Lecture of St. Pauls, and made one of the Prebends. Nothing the better liked of for his Patron's sake, he was con∣vented and condemned, and publickly burnt in Smithfield on the 4th. of Fe∣bruary. On the 9th. day of which Month, another fire was kindled at Glo∣cester for the burning of Mr. John Hooper, the late Bishop thereof, of whom, sufficient hath been spoke in another place; condemned amongst the rest at London, but appointed to be burnt in Glocester, as the place in which he most had sinned, by sowing the seeds of false doctrine amongst the people. The news whereof being brought unto him, he rejoyced exceedingly, in regard of that excellent opportunity which was thereby offered, for giving testimony by his death to the truth of that Doctrine, which had so oft sounded in their ears, and now should be confirmed by the sight of their eyes. The Wrra for whose burning was in these words following, as I find it in the famous Li∣brary of Sir Robert Cotton. Whereas John Hooper, who of  was called Bishop of Worcester and Go∣cester, is by due order of the Laws Ecclesiastical condemned, and judged for a
most bstinate, false, and detestable Heretick, and committed to our Secular Power, to be burned, according to the wholsome and good Laws of our Realm, in that case provided: Forasmuch as in those Oities and Dicesses thereof, he hath in times past preached and taught most pestilent Heresies and Doctrine to our Subjects there, We have therefore given order, that the said Hooper, who yet persisteth obstinate, and refuseth mercy when it was graciously offered, shall be put to execution in the said City of Glocester, for the example and terrour of others, such a he hath there se∣duced and mis-taget, and because he hath done most harm there. And will that you, calling to you some of reputation, dwelling in that Shire, such as you think best, shall repair unto your said City, and be at the said execution, assisting our Mayor and Sheriffs of the same City in this behalf. And for asmuch as the said Hooper is, as other Hereticks, a vain-glorious person, and delighted in his tongue, to persuade such as he hath seduced to persist in the miserable opinions that he hah sown amongst them, our pleasure is therefore, and we require you to take order, that the said Hoo∣per be neither at the time of his execution, nor in going to the place there, suffered to speak at large, but thither to be led quietly, and in silence, for eschewing of further infection, and such inconveniences as may otherwise ense in this part. Whereof fail ye not, as ye tender our pleasure, &. The like course was also taken with Bishop Earrar, but that I do not find him restrained from speaking his mind unto the people, as the other was: A man of an implausible nature, which rendred him the less agreeable to either side; cast into prison by the Protestant, and brought out to his death and martyr∣dom by the Popish party. Being found in prison at the death of King Edward, he might have fared as well as any of his ranck and order, who had no hand in the interposing for Queen Jane, if he had governed himself with that discre∣tion, and given such fair and moderate Answers, as any man in his condition might have honestly done. But being called before Bishop Gardiner, he behaved himself so proudly, and gave such offence, that he was sent back again to prison, and after condemned for an obstinate Heretick. But for the sentence of his condemnation, he was sent into his own Diocess, there to receive it at the hand of Morgan, who had supplanted and succeeded him in the See of St. Davids. Which cruell wretch having already took possession, could con∣ceive no way safer for his future establishment, than by imbruing his hands in the blood of this learned Prelate, and to make sure with him, for ever claiming a restitution, or comming in by a Remitter to his former estate; in re∣ference whereunto he past sentence on him, caused him to be delivered to the Civil Magistrate, not desisting till he had brought him to the Stake on the third of March, more glad to see him mounting unto Heaven in a fiery Chariot, than once Elisha was on the like translation of the Prophet Elijah. I shall say no∣thing in this place of the death and martyrdom of Dr. Rowland Taylr, Rector of Hadey in the County of Hartford, and there also burned, Febr. 9. Or of John Cardmaker, Chancellor of the Church of Wells, who suffered the like death in London on the last of May; Or of Laurence Sanders, an excellent Preacher, martyr'd at Coventry, where he had spent the greatest part of his Ministry, who suffered in the same month also, but three weeks sooner than the other; Or of John Bradford, a right holy man, and a diligent Preacher, con∣demned by Bonner, and brought unto the Stake in Sithfield on the first of July; though he had deserved better of that bloody Butcher, (but that no cour∣tesie can oblige a cruel and ungrateful person) in saving the life of Doctor Bour his Chaplain, as before was showed: Or finally of any of the rest of the noble Army of Martyrs, who fought the Lords Battels in those times; onely I shall insist on three of the principal Leaders, and take a short view of the rest in the general Muster.
Anne Reg. Mar. 3. A. D. 1555, 1556. BEing resolved to wave the writing of a Martyrlogy,An. Reg. Mar. 3. 1555. which is done already to my hand in the Acts, and Monuments, I shall insit only upon three of most  ranck, that is to say, Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Latimer, and Bishop Ridley, men of renown, never to be forgotten in the Church of England. Of whom there hath so much been said in the course of this History, that no∣thing need be added more, than the course of their sufferings. Committed to the Tower by several Warrants, and at several times, they were at once dischar∣ged from the Tower of London on the 10th. of April, Anno 1554. Removed from thence to Windsor, and at last to Oxon. where they were to combare for their lives. A combat not unlike to that of St Paul at Ephus, where he is said to fight  beasts after the manner of men; the disputation being managed so tu∣multuously with shous and out-cries, and so disorderly without rule or mo∣desty, as might make it no unproper parallel to St Pa's encounter. The per∣sons against whom they were to enter the lists, were ulled out of the ablest men of both Universities, commissionated to dispute, and authorized to sit as Judges. And then what was to be expected, by the three Respondents, but that their oppostes must have the better of the day, who could not be supposed to have so little care of their own reputation, as to pass sentence on them∣selves. Out of the University of Oxon were selected Dr Weston, Prosocutor of the Convocation then in being, Dr Tresham, Dr Cole, Dr Oylthrp, Dr Pie, Mr , and Mr Feckam; with whom were joined by the Lord Chan∣cellor Gardiner, (who had the nomination of them) Dr Young Vice-Chancel∣lor of Cambridge, Dr Gyn, Dr Seaton, Dr Watson, Dr Sedwick, and Dr Aikin∣son, of the same University. The Questions upon which the Disputants were to try their fortune, rela∣ted to the Sacrament of the blessed Eucharist, and were these that follow. 1. Whether the naural body and blood of Christ be really in the Sacrament, after the words spoken by the Priest, or no? 2. Whether in the Sacrament after the words of conscration, any other substce do remain, than the substance of the body and bood of Christ? 3. Whether the Mass be a sacrifice propitiatry, for the sins of the quick and the dead? Which having been propounded in the Convocation at Cambridge, and there concluded in such manner, as had been generally main∣tained in the Schools of Rome, the Vice Chancellor, and the rest of the Dispu∣tants which came from thence, could have no power to determine otherwise in the points, when they should come to sit as Judges. Nor is it to be thought, but that as well the Cambridge as the Oxon Disputants, came well prepared, studied and versed in those Arguments on which they intended to insist▪ ha∣ving withall the helps of books, and of personal conference, together with all other advantages which might flatter them with the hopes of an easie vi∣ctory. But on the other side, the three Defendants had but two dayes of pre∣paation allotted to them, debarred of all access unto one another; not suffered to enjoy the use of their own books and papers; and kept in such uncomforta∣ble places, as were but little different from the common dngeos. But out they must to try their fortune, there being no other choice left them, but to fight or yield; and which made most to the advantage of the other side, they were to try their fortune single, each of them destinated to a several day, so that they could not contribute to the assistance of one another, if their occa∣sions had required it. Cranmer begins on the 16th, of April, Ridley succeeds upon the next, and Laimer brings up the arreir on the morrow after; each man an army in himself, and to encounter with an army, as the cause was managed. At the first meeting, when the questions were to be propounded and disputed op▪ Weston, by reason of his place, enterains the Auditory with a short Orati∣on,
wherein he was to lay before them the cause of their assembling at that place and time. But such was his ill luck, as to stumble at that very threshold, and to conclude against himself in the very first opening of the disputation, which he is said to have begun in these following words, Convnst hodie atres profli∣gauri Haeresin, de veritate corporis Christin Sacrament, &c. That is to say, Ye are assembled hither brethren this day, to confound that detesta∣ble Heresie, of the veity of the body of Christ in the Sacrament, &c. Which gross mistake, occasoned no small shame in some, but more laughter in many. It was observed of him also, that during the whole time of the disputation, he had alwayes a cup of wine, o some other strong liquor standing by him, and that having once the pot in his hand, when an argument was urged by one of the Disputants, which he very well liked of, he cried aloud to him, urge hoc, hoc, nam hoc acit pro nobis. Which being applied by some of the spectators to his pot of drink, occassoned more sport and eiment than his first mistake. But let them laugh that win, as the Proverb hath it, and Weston is resolved to win the race, whosoever runs best. The tumult and disorder of this dputati∣on hath been touched before, and may be seen at large, with all the Argu∣ments and Answers of either side, in the Acts and Mo. Suffie it in this place to know, that having severally made good their appointed dayes, they were all called together on Fiday the 20th. of that month, Weston then sitting with the et in the nature of Judges, by whom they were demanded, whether they would subscribe or not? which when they had severally refused to do▪ their sentence was pronounced by the Prolocutor in the name of the rest, in which they were deolared to be no members of the Chruch, and that therefore, they, their patrons and followers, were condemned as Hereticks. In the reading where∣of, they were again severally asked whether they would turn or not; to which they severally answered, read on in God's name, for they were resolved not to turn. And so the sentence being pronounced, they were returned again to their several prisons, there to expect what execution would ensue upon it. And execution there was none to ensue upon it, ill the end of the Session of Parliament then next following, because till then, there was no saw in force for putting Hereticks to death, as in former times. During which interval, they excrcited themselves in their private studies, or in some godly meditati∣ons, wring consolatory Letters unto such of their friends as were reduced by the iniquity of the times, to the like extremity; amongst which, as they un∣derstood their dear brother Mr John Hooper, Bishop of Glocester, to have been marked out for the slaughter; so that intelligence revived in Bishop Rdley's thoughts, the remembrance of that conterovesie which had been between them (concerning the Episcopal habit) in the time of King Edward, There is no question to be made, but that they had forgotten and forgiven that quarrel long before; yet Ridley did not think he had done enough, if he left, not to the world some testimony of their mutual charity, as well as their consent in do∣ctrine, such as might witness to the world, that they maintained the spirit of uni∣ty in the bond of peace. Concerning which he writes to him in this manner following, viz.—But now dear Brother, forasmuch as I understand by your books which I have but superficially seen, that we throughly agree, and wholly consent together in those things which are the grounds and substantial points of our Religion, against the which the world so furiously rageth in these our dayes, however in times past in ceain by-matters and circumstances of Religion, your wisdom and my simplicity (I must confesse) have a little jarred, each of us following the aboun∣dance of his own spirit. Now I say be assured, that even with my whole heart, God is my witnesse, in the bowels of Christ I love you in the truth, and for the truths sake which abideth in us, as I am perswaded, and by the Grace of God shall abide in us for ver more. And because the world, as I perceive, brother, ceaseth not to play his pa∣geant, and busily conspireth against Christ our Saviour, with all possible force and power, Exalting high things against the knowlege of God: Let us join hands toge∣ther in Christ, as if we cannot overthrow, yet to our power, and as much as in us lyeth,
let us shake those high Altitudes, not with carnal, but with spiritual weapons; and withall, brother, lt us prepare our selves to the day of dissltion, by that which after the short time of this bodily affliction, by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall triumph together with him, in eternal glory. Comforted with reciprocal letters of this holy nature, they both prepared themselves for death, in which Hooper had the honour to lead the way, as be∣ing more in Bnner's eye when the Act past for reviving the Statutes before mentioned in the case of Heresie. But Hooper having led the way, and many ther godly and religious men following the same tract which he had made, it came at last unto the turn of these reverend Prelates to pass through the same to the Land of Promise. In order whereunto, a Commission is directed from the Pope to Dr. James Broks, Bishop of Glocester, by which he is autho∣rized as Subdelegate to his Holiness, to proceed in the cause of homas Cran∣mer, Archbishop of Canterbury. The like Commission is directed to Dr Mar∣tin, and Dr Story, to attend the business, as delegated thereunto by the King and Queen, before whom convented in St Mary's Church on the 12th. of September he did his reverence to the two Doctors, as Commissioners for the King and Queen, but could not be perswaded to shew any respect to the Bi∣shop of Glceste, because commissionared by the Pope. He had before ab∣jur'd the Popes supremacy in the time of King Henry, and would not now submit unto it in the Reign of Queen Mary, desiring the Bishop not to interpret it an affront to his person, to whom otherwise he should gladly pay all due regards, had he appeared in any other capacity than the Popes Commissioner. Not being able to remove him from that resolution, they pro∣pounded to him certain Articles concerning his having been twice maried, his denyal of the Pope's supremacy, his judgement in the point of the blessed Sacrament, his having been declared an Heretick by the late Prolocutor, and the rest of the Commissioners there assembled. To all which Articles he so an∣swered, as to deny nothing of the charge in matter of fact, but only to stand upon his justification in point of Doctrine. The whole proceeding being sum∣med up, he is cited to appear before the Pope within 80 dayes. To which he said that he was most willing so to do, if the King and Queen would please to send him. And so he was returned to the prison from whence he came, and there kept safe enough from making any journy to Rome, remaining in safe ∣stody till he was brought out to suffer death, of which more hereafter. On the 28th. of the same month, comes out another Commission from the Cardinal Legate, directed to John White, Bishop of Lincoln, James Brooks, Bishop of Glocester, and John Holyman, Bishop of Bristow, or any two of them; ina∣bling them to proceed to the degradation of the other two Bishops, if they re∣tracted not those doctrines, for holding which they had been formerly de∣lared to be Hereticks. But they couragiously adhering to their first opini∣ons, and otherwise expressing as little reverence to the Substitutes of the Car∣dinal Legate, as Cranmer had done to the Commissioners of the Pope, the sen∣tence was pronounced upon them to this effect; that is to say. That foras∣much as the said Nichosas Ridley, and Hugh Latimer, did affim, maintain, and stubbornly desend certain opinions and Heresies contrary to the Word of God, and the received faith of the Church; as first, In denying the true and natural body of Christ, and his natural blood to be in the Sacrament of the Altar. 2. In affirming the substance of bread and wine to rmain after the words of the con∣secration. And 3. In denying the Masse to be a lively sacrifice of the Church for the quick and the dead, and by no means could be reduced from the same: that therefore they said John of Lincoln, James of Glocester, and John of Bristol, did adjudge and condemn them the said N. Ridly, and H. Latimer as Hereticks, both by word and deed, to be degraded from the degree of a Bishop, from Prieshood, and all other Ecclesiastical Orders; declaring them moreover to be no members of the Church, and therefore to be committed to the secular powers, to receive due punishment according to the Tenor of the temporal
Laws. According to which Sentence, they were both degraded on the 15 th. of October, and brought unto the Stake in the Town-ditch over against Baliol College on the morrow after, where with great constancy and courage they endured that death, to which they had been pre-condemned before they were heard. Cranmer was prisoner at that time in the North-gate of the City, called Bocardo, from the top whereof he beheld that most dolefull spectacle; and ca∣sting himself upon his knees, he humbly beseeched the Lord to endue them with a sufficient strength of Faith and Hope; which he also desired for himself, whensoever he should act his part on that bloody Theater. But he must stay the Popes leisure before he was to be brought on the Stage again. The Queen had been acquainted with such discoutses, as had pas∣sed betwixt the Pope and her Ambassadors, when they were at Rome; and she appeared desirous to have gratified him in his demands. But the Kings absence, who set sail for Calais on the fourth of September, and the next morning took his journey to the Emperor's Court, which was then at Buxels, ren∣dred the matter not so feasible as it might have been, if he had continued in the Kingdom. For having called a Parliament to begin on the 21 of October, she caused many of the Lords to be dealt withall touching the passing of an Act for the restoring of all such Lands as had belonged unto the Church, and were devolved upon the Crown, and from the Crown into the hands of privat per∣sons, by the fall of Monasteries, and other Religious Houses, or by any other ways or means whatsoever. But such a general aversess was found amongst them, that she was advised to desist from that unprofitable undertaking. Cer∣tain it is, that many who were cordially affected to the Queens Religion, were very much startled at the noise of this Restitution, insomuch that some of them are said to have clapt their hands upon their swords, affirming, not without some Oaths, that they would never part with their Abbey-Lands as long as they were able to were a sword by their sides. Which being signified to the Queen, it seemed good to her to let fall that sute for the present, and to give them good example for the time to come, by passing an Act, for re∣leasing the Clergy from the payment of first Fruits and Tenths, which had been formerly vested in the Crown in the Reign of her Father. Against which when it was objected by some of the Lords of the Council, that the state of her Kingdoms and Crown Emperial could not be so honourably maintained as in former times, if such a considerable part of the Revenue were dismembered from it; she is said to have returned this answer, That she prefetted the salvation of her Soul before ten such Kingdoms. She procured another Act to be passed also, which very much redounded to the benefit of the two Universities, inhibiting all Purveyors from taking up any provisions for the use of the Court within five miles of Oxon or Cambridge; by mean whereof, those Markets were more plentifully served with all sorts of Pro∣visions than in former times, and at more reasonable rates than otherwise they could have been, without that restraint. In her first Parliament, the better to indear her self to the common subject, she had released a Subsidie which was due unto her, by an Act of Parliament made in the time of King Edward the sixth. And now to make her some amends, they gave her a Subsidie of four shillings in the Pound for Lands, and two shillings eight-pence in the pound for Goods. In the drawing up of which Act, an Oath, which had been formerly prescribed to all manner of persons, for giving in a just account of their estates, was omitted wholly, which made the Subsidie sinck beneath expectation. But the Queen came unto the Crown by the love of the people, and was to do no∣thing to the hazard of their affections, which she held it by. At the same time was held a Convocation also, for summoning whereof, a Writ was issued in the name of the King and Queen, to the Dean and Chap∣ter of the Metropolitical Church of Canterbury, the See being then vacant by the attaindure of Archbishop Craer. Bonnr presides in it as before, Boxhall then Warden of Winchester preacheth (though not in the capacity) at the open∣ing
of it, and Doctor John Christoperson, Dean of Norwich, is chosen Prolo∣tor for the House of the Clergy. But the chief businesse done therein was the granting of a Subsidie of six shillings in the pound to be paid out of all their Ecclesiastical Promotions in three years then following. Nor was it without reason that they were enduced to so large a grant; The Queen ad actually restored unto them their First-fruits and Tenths, though at that time the Crown was not in such a plentiful condition, as to part with such an annual income. And she had promised also, (as appears by the Records of the Con∣vocarion) to render back unto the Church all such Impropriations, Tithes, and portion of Tithes, as were still remaining in the Crown. For the disposing of which Grant to the best advantage, the Cardinal-Legat, at the Queens desire, had conceived an Instrument, which was then offered to the consideration of the Prolocutor, and the rest of the Clergy; it was proposed also by the Bishop of Elie, that some certan learned men might be chosen out of the House, to review all the antient Canons, to fit them to the present state of the Church; and were they sound any thing defective in them, to spply that defect, by making such new Cnons and Constitutions, as being approved of by the Lords, should be made obligatory to the Clergy, and the rest of the Kingdom. This was well mov'd, and serv'd to entertain the time; but I find nothing in pursuance of it. But on the other side, the Prolocutor bringing up the Bill of the Subsidies in the end of October, propounds three points unto their Lordships, which much conduced to the establishment and advantage of the prejudiced Clergy. The first was, That all such of the Clergy as building on the common report, that the Tenths and First fruits were to be released in the following Parlia∣ment, had made no composition for the same with her Majesties Officers, might be discharged from the penalty inflicted by the Laws in that behalf. The second, That their Lordships would be pleased to intercede with the Lord Cardinal-Legat, for setling and confirming them in their present Benefices by some special Bull. The third, That by their Lordships means, an Act may be obtained in the present Parliament, for the repealing of the Statute, by which the Citizens of London, which refused to make payment of their Tithes, were to be ordered at the discretion of the Lord Mayor of that City; And that from thenceforth, all such censures as concerned Tithes might be heard and determined by the Ordinary, as in other places. To all which Propositions the Bishops cheerfully consented, and so adjurned the Convocation from St. Pauls to Westminster, that they might have the better opportunity of consul∣ting the Lord-Cardinal in the businesse; of whom it was no hard matter to ob∣tain the second, and by his power to secure the Clergy in the first; but as for the removall of the Cognisance of the London Tithes from the Lord Mayor unto the Bishops, there was nothing done, that Statute still remaining as be∣fore it did, to the continual impoverishing and vexation of the City Clergy. Nothing else memorable in this Convocation, but the comming in of the two new Bishops, which had never voted there before; Purefew the Bishop of St. Asaph, being translated unto Hereford in the former year, had made such ha∣vock of the Patrimony of the Church of St. Asaph, that it lay void above a twelve month before any became Suter for it. But being a Bishoprick, though impoverished, and consequently a step to some richer preferment, it was desired and accepted by Mr. Thomas Goldnel, a right zealous Romanist, consecrated Bishop hereof in the beginning of October, Anno 1555. not many days before the opening of the Parliament and Convocation. And being Bi∣shop here, he procured many Indulgences and other Graces from the Pope then being, for all such persons of each sex, as went on Pilgrimage, or for health, to St. Winifrids Well. The like havock had been made of the Lands and Patrimony of the Church of Bangor, by Buckley the present Bishop of it, preferred unto this See Anno 1541. and continuing on it till this year; who not content to alienate the Lands, and weaken the Estate thereof, resolved to
rob it of its Bells, for fear perhaps of having any Knell rung out at the Churches Funetal. And not content to sell the Bells, which were five in number▪ he would needs satisfie himself with seeing them conveyed on ship∣board, and had searce given himself that satisfaction, but he was pesently struck blind, and so continued from that time to the day of his death. To whom succeeded Doctor William Glyn, a Cambridge man, but one of the Dis∣putants at Oxford, who received his Episcopal Consecration (if I guesse aright) on the same day with Bishop Goldne. And now it will be time to look back on Cranmer, whom we left under a Citation to the Court of Rome, without which, nothing could be done; for by an antient privilege, no Judgment could be past upon the person of a Me∣tropolitan, before the Pope have taken cognisance of the cause; and eighty days had seemingly been given to Crnmer for making his appearance in the Court of Rome. And though the Pope knew well enough, as well the Arch∣bishops readiness to appear before him, if he were at liberty, as the impossibili∣ty of making any such appearance as the case then stood; yet at the end of the said eighty days, he is pronounced by the Pope to be contumacious, and for his contuacy to be Degraded, Excommunicated, and finally delivered over to the Secular Magistrate. According unto which Decree, a second Commis∣sion is directed to Edmond Bonner Bishop of London, and Thmas Thoriby Bi∣shop of Ely, to proceed to the Degradation of the said Archbishop: In which Commission it was said with most horrible falshood, That all things had been so indifferently examined in the Court of Rome, that is to say, as well the Articles laid unto his charge, as the Answers which he made unto them, to∣gether with the Allegations, Witnesses, and Defences, made or produced by the Counsel on either side, so that nothing had been wanting which was ne∣cessary to his just defence. According to which supposition, the said two Bi∣shops being commanded to proceed against him, caused him to be Degraded on the 14 th. of February, notwithstanding that he appealed from the Pope and them to a General Council, and caused the said Appeal to be drawn and offe∣red in due form of Law. During the interval between his degradation and the time of his death, great pains was taken by some learned men in the Univer∣sity to perswade him to a Retractation of his former Opinions; in which un∣happy undertaking, no man prevailed so far as a Spanish Ftier, by whom it was suggested to him, How acceptable it would be to the King and Queen, how pleasing to the Lords, who most dearly loved him, and how gainfull to him∣self, in regard both of his soul and his temporal being; assuring him (or at least putting him in good hope) that he should not onely have his life, but be restored again to his antient dignity, and that there should be nothing in the Realm which the Queen would not easily grant him, whether it pleased him to make choice of Riches and Honors, or otherwise should desire the sweet re∣tirements of a private life, without the charge and trouble of a publick Mini∣stery; and all this to be compassed without putting himself to any more pains, than the subscribing of his name to a piece of paper, which was made ready for his hand. By these temptations, and many others of the like alluring and deceitfull nature, he suffered himself to be prevailed upon so far, as to sign the Writing, in which were briefly comprehended the chief points of Doctrine defended in the Church of Rome, and by him formerly condemned both in publick and private. The obtaining whereof occasioned great joy amongst the Papists, and no lesse sorrow and astonishment in the hearts of those, who cordially were affected to the Reformation. But all this could not save him from being made a sacrifice to revenge and avarice; The Queen had still a vindicative▪ spirit against him, for the injury which she conceived had been done to her mother; and the Cardinal, who hitherto had enjoyed the profits of the See of Canter∣bury as an usu-fructuary, was altogether as solicitous for getting a right and title to them as the sole Proprietary; No way to pacifie the one, and satisfie
the desires of the other, but by bringing him (when he least looked for it) to the fatall Stake. And to the fatall Stake they brought him on the 21 of March, when he had for some time flattered himself in a conceit, like the King of Amaleck, that the bitternesse of deah was past. Finding the contrary, he first re∣tracts his Retractarion, and after punisheth that hand which had subscribed it, by holding it forth into the flame, and suffering it to be consumed before the rest of his body had felt the fire. The residue of his body being burnt to ashes, his heart was found entire & untouched in the midst of the sinders; Which possibly may serve as a witnesse for him, that his heart stood fast unto the Truth, though with his hand he had subscribed some Popish Errors: Which whether it were done out of human frailty on the hope of life, or out of a de∣sire to gain the more time, for finishing his Book against Bishop Gardiner, whih he alledged for himself in a Letter to one of his friends; Certain it is, that it had too much in it of a sinful compliance, so much as might have blasted both his fame and memory to all times succeeding, if he had not taken off the scan∣dal, and expiated the offence in so brave a manner. And thus he dyed, leaving an excellent example to all posterity, as well of mans infirmity in so strange a fall, as of Gods infinite grace and mercy, by which he was enabled to recover his former standing. These goodly Cedars of the Forest being thus ut down, it was not to be hoped that any favour could be shown to the Shrubs and Underwoods, which were grubbed up and felled without any distinction, as well the yourg Sapling, as the decayed and withered Tree; but more in some parts than in others, ac∣cording to the sharpness of the Tools and the edge of the Woodman. The waste so great in no place as in Bonner's wak, who seemed to be resolved, that what∣soever could not serve for Timber (toward the builing or re-edifying of the Papal palace) should be mark'd for Puel. No fewer than two hundred are re∣ported to have been burnt within three years, by this cruel and unmerciful Tyrant, without discrimination of sex or age; his fury reaching from John Fetty, a lad of eight years old, by him sourged to death, even to Hugh Lavecork, a cripple sixty eight years old, whom he caused to be burned. The most emi∣nent of all which number was Mr. John Philpot, Archdeacon of Winchester, who though of Gardiners Diocesse, was condemned by Bnner, Gardiner being well enough contented to find out the Game, and leave it to be fol∣lowed by that bloody Hunter: His rage not slackned by the interposings of Al∣phonso a Spanish Frier, inveighing sharply, in a Sermon before the King, against the savage and unprofitable cruelty of the English Bishops; but as it seems, he measured all the rest by that London-Tyrant, though in most other places they were far more moderate: He that came nearest to him was Doctor John Christo∣pherson, Bishop of Chichester, who is recorded to have burnt no lesse than ten in one fire at Lewis, and seventeen others at several times in sundy places. But still the nearer London, the more the hea; insomuch that Harpsfield Arch∣deacon of Canterbury, and Thornton the Suffragan of Dover, are said to have poured out blood like water; As was also done by Griffin of Rochester, and Downing Chancellor of Norwich, (though somewhat further off from the scene of cruelty) in their several Diocesses. Which character I find of Bishop Bain of Coventry and Lichfield; the gentle birth and breeding of Mrs. Joyce Lewis not being too high for him to reach at, nor the poor condition of Joan Wast, a blind woman in Darby, too low for him to stoop too, whom he con∣demned unto the fire, as he did many faithfull Ministers, and others of the Masculine sex. But on the other side, in all the Province of York, I find none brought un∣to the Stake but George March of Chester, condemned thereto by Bishop Coles; and not much more to have been done in the four Welch Diocesses; in which, besides the burning of Bishop Farrar at Carmarthen by Bishop Mor∣gen; and of Rawlins and White at Cardiff by Bishop Kitching; no extraordinary cruelty seems to have been acted. In the Diocesses of Exceter, Wells, Peter∣borough
and  (though this last the greatest in the Kingdome) I find men∣tion but of one apiece; of two in that of Ey, and of no mote than three apiece at Bristol and Sarisbury. In those of Oxon, Glocester, Worcester and He∣reford, I find none at all, which made those Counties look like the land of Go∣shen, where there was nothing but fair weather, when there was so much thun∣der and lightning in the rest of Aegypt. Nor were these storms and tempests in other places, of a short continuance, but held on more or less till the death of the Queen, as appeareth by those five persons which were burnt at Canter∣bury on the 10th. of November 1558. being but one full week before the day of her own dissolution. The difference was, that these poor wretches were consumed by the rage of fire, whereas she was caried out of the world in a de∣luge of water; falling into a Dropsie in the time of her supposed childing, of which she was never perfectly cured till she came to her grave. Nor were these all that suffered in the fury of this persecution. For besides those that suffered Martyrdome in the sight of the world, many are thought to have been made away in prison; but many more, to the number of some scores or hun∣dreds, supposed to have been killed by starving, stinks, and other barbarous usages in their several Jayls. To which if we should add a Catalogue of all those who fled the Kingdom, and put themselves into a voluntary exile, amoun∣ting to the number of 800. or thereabouts, I suppose it may be well conclu∣ded, that though many persecutions have lasted longer, yet none since Diocle∣sian's time ever raged so terribly. So terribly it raged in one particular, that no persecution of the ten can aford a parallel. Katherine Gouches, a poor widdow of St. Peter's Port in the Isle of Guernsy, was noted to be much absent from the Church, and her two daughters guilty of the same neglect. Upon this they were presented before Jaques Amy, then Dean of the Island, who finding in them that they held opinions contrary to those then allowed, about the Sa∣crament of the Altar, pronounced them Hereticks, and condemned them to the fire. The poor women on the one side pleaded for themselves, that that doctrine had been taught them in the time of King Edward; but if the Queen was otherwise disposed, they were content to be of her Religion. This was fair, but this would not serve; for by the Dean they were delivered to Eli'er Gosling, the then Bayliff, and by him unto the fire, July the 8th. 1556. One of the daughters (Perotine Massey she was called) was at that time great with child; her husband a Minister being in those dangerous times fled the Island; In the middle of the flames and anguish of her torments, her belly brake in sun∣der, and her child, a goodly boy, fell down into the fire, but was presently snatched up by one W. House, one of the By standers. Upon the noise of this strange accident, the cruel Bayliff returned command, that the poor infant must be cast again into the flames; which was accordingly performed; and so that pretty babe was born a Martyr, and added to the number of the Holy innocents. A cruelty not parallel'd in any story, not heard of amongst the Nations. But such was the pleasure of the Magistrate, as once in the Massacre of the youn∣ger Maximinus, viz.Canis pessimi¦ne catulum re∣linquendum. that not any issue should be left of an Heretick Pa∣rent. But to go back again to Cranmer, it is to be observed, that as his death ope∣ned the way for Pole to the See of Canterbury, so it was respied the longer out of a politick design to exclude him from it. That Gardiner loved him not, hath been said before, and he knew well that Cardinal Carraffa (now Pope Paul the 4th.) loved him less than he. This put him first upon an hope, that the Pope might be prevailed with to revoke the Cardinal (who had before been un∣der a suspicion in the Court of Rome, of having somewhat of the Lutheran in him) and to bestow the Cardinal's Cap, together with the Legantine power, upon himself, who doubted not of sitting in the chair of Canterbury if he gai∣ned the rest. Upon which ground he is supposed to have hindered all procee∣dings against the three Oxon Martyrs, from the ending of the Parliament on the 26th. of January, till the 12th. of September then next following, the Pope
not sending out any Commission in all that interval,An. Reg. Mar. 3. 1555/6. without which Cranmer was not to be brought to a condemnation. But at the last, not knowing how much these procrastinations might offend the King, and perhaps prest unto it by Karn, the Queen's Ambassadour, he found himself under a necessity to di∣spatch Commission, though he proceeded not to the execution of any part of the sentence, till more than ten weeks after the 80 dayes, which had been given for his appearance in the Court of Rome. During which time, death puts an end to Gardiners projects, who left his life at Whitehal on the 12th. of November. From whence conveyed by water to his house in Southwark, his body was first lapt in lead, kept for a season in the Church of St Mary Over-Rhe, and afterwards solemnly interred under a fair and goodly Monument in his Cathedral. The custody of the Great Seal, together with the Title of Lord Chancellor,1555/6. was upon New years day conferred on Dr Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of York, a man of great prudence and mo∣deration; but the revenues of the Bishoprick were appropriated to the use of the Cardinal Legate, who purposed to have held it in Commendam with the See of Canterbury, to which he received consecration on the very next Sun∣day after Cranmer's death. But Dr John White Bishop of Lincoln, having been born at Winchester, and educated in that School, of which he was afterwards chief Master, and finally Warden of that College, ambitiously affected a translation thither. And so far he prevailed by his friends at Court, that on the promise of an annual pension of 1000 l. to the use of the Cardinal, he was permitted to enjoy the Title with the rest of the profits. Which I have mentioned in this place, though this transaction was not made, nor his tran∣slation actually performed till the year next following. No other alteration made amongst the Bishops of this time, but that Voysie of Exon, dies in some part of the year, 1555. and Dr James Turbervile succeeds him in the beginning of the year 1556. A man well born, and well befriended, by means whereof he recovered some lands unto his See, which had been alienated from it by his predecessor; and amongst others, the rich and goodly Mannors of Credinson, or Kirton, in the County of Devon, (in former times the Episcopal seat of the Bishop of Exon) though afterwards again dismembred from it in the time of Queen Elizabeth, by Bishop Cotton. It is now time to take into consideration the affairs of State, nothing the better cemented by the blood of so many Martyrs, or jointed any whit the stronger by the secret animosities and emulations between the Lord Chancel∣lor and the Cardinal Legate. Though Wia's party was so far suppressed, as not to shew it self visibly in open action yet such as formerly had declared for it, or wish'd well unto it, had many secret writings against the Queen, every day growing more and more in dislike of her Government, by reason of so ma∣ny butcheries as were continually committed under her authority. Upon which ground as they had formerly instructed Elizabeth Crofts to act the spirit in the wall; so afterwards they trained up one William Cunstable, alias Feather∣stone, to take upon himself the name of King Edward, whom he was said to have resembled, both in age and personage. And this they did in imitation of the like practice used in the time of King Henry the 6th. by Richard Planta∣genet, Duke of York, who when he had a mind to claim his Title to the Crown, in regard of his descent by the House of Mortimer, from Lionel of Antwerp Duke of Clarence, he caused one Jack Cade (a fellow altogether as obscure as this) to take upon himself the name of Mortimer, that the might see how well the people stood affected unto his pretensions, by the discovery which might be made thereof on this false allarum. And though this Featherstone had been taken and publickly whip'd for it in May last past, and thereupon banished into the North, where he had been born; yet the confederats resolved to try their fortune with him in a second adventure. The design was to raise the people under colour of King Edward's being alive, and at the same time to rob the Exchequer, wherein they knew by some intelligence or other, that 50000. l.
in good Spanish money had been lately lodged. Few persons of any quality appeared in it, not thinking fit to shew themselves in any new practice against the Queen, till made prosperous by some good success. The chief whom I find mentioned to be privy to it, were Henry Peckam, the son of that Sir Ed∣mond Peckam, who had been caterer of the houshold to King Henry the 8th. one of the Throgmotons, and Sir Anthony Kingston. But the first part of the plot miscaried by the apprehending of Featherstone, who was arraigned and ex∣ecuted on the 13th. of March; and the last part thereof discovered on the 28th. by one of the company. On which discovery Sir Anthony Kingston being sent for, died upon the way; the said Throgmorton, with one Udall, were exe∣cuted at yburn on the 28th. of April, one Stanton on the 29th. of May; Ro∣sededike and Bedell, on the 8th of June; Peckam and Daniel at the Tower hill, on the 8th. of July. Andrew Duchesne makes the Lord Gray, and one of the Howards, to have a hand in this conspiracy; and possibly enough it is, that some of greater eminence than any of those before remembred, might be of counsel in the practice, though they kept themselves out of sight as much as they could, till they found how it would succeed amongst the people. In this unquiet condition we must leave England for a time, and look on the estate of the English Churches on the other side of the sea, That many of the English Protestants had forsook the Kingdom, to the number of 800. as well Students as others, hath been said before; who having put themselves into several Cities, partly in Germany, and partly among the Switzers, and their confederates, kept up the face and form of an English Chruch, in each of their several congregations. Their principal retiring places amongst the last, were Arrow, Zurick, and Geneva, and in the first, the Cities of Embden, Stralsburge, and Franckfort. In Franckfort they enjoyed the greatest privileges, and there∣fore resorted thither in the greatest numbers, which made them the more apt unto Schisms and factions. At their first coming to that place, which was on the 27th. of June, Anno 1554. by the power and favour of John Glauberge, one of the Senators of that City, they were permitted to have the use of one of their Churches, which had before been granted to such French exiles, as had re∣paired thither on the like occasion; yet so, that the French were still to hold their right; the English to have the use of it one day, and the French another, and on the Lords day so to divide the hours between them, that the one might be no hinderance unto the other. It hath been said also, that there was ano∣ther condition imposed upon them, of being conform unto the French in Do∣ctrine and Ceremonies. Which condition if it were imposed by the Magi∣strates, not sought by themselves, must needs be very agreeable to the temper and complexion of their principal Leaders; who being for the most part of the Zuinglian-Gospellers, at their going hence, became the great promoters of the Puritan faction at their comming home. The names of Whittingham, Williams, Goodman, Wood and Sutton, who appeared in the head of this congregation, de∣clare sufficiently of what Principles and strain they were, how willing they would be to lay aside the face of an English Church, and frame themselves to any Liturgie but their own. On July the 14th. they first obtained a grant of their Church, and on the 29th. took possession of it. The interval they spent in altering and disfiguring the English Lyturgie, of which they left nothing but the reading of the Psalms and Chapters. Those comfortable interlocutories between the Minister and the People, were no longer used, as savouring in their opinion, of some disor∣der in the course of the ministration; the Letany and the Surplice they cast aside, as having too much in them of the Church of Rome; the Confession they had altered so, as they conceived most agreeable to their present condition; and for the Hymns which intervened between the Chapters and the Creed, they changed them for such Psalms in the English Meerer, as had been made by Sternhold and Hopkins in the time of King Edward. The Psalm being done, the Preacher goes into the Pulpit, in which the Minister prayed for the assistance
of God's Spirit, and so proceeded to the Sermon. Which done, an other Prayer was made for all orders and estates of men, but more particularly for the wel∣fare of the Church of England; composed in imitation of the Prayer for the Church Militant here on earth, but ending (as that did not) with the Pater¦noster. After which (most extreamly out of order) followed the rehearsal of the Articles of the Christian Faith, another Psalm, and finally the dismission of the people, with The Peace of God. This was the form devised for that Con∣gregation, for the imposing whereof on all the rest of the English Churches, they did then use their best endeavours, and for obtruding which on the whole Church of England they raised such tumults and commotions in the follow∣ing times. Growing in love with this fair Babe of their own begetting, they write their Letters of the second of August to such of the English as remain∣ed at Stralsburge and Zurick, inviting them to repair to Franckfort, and unite themselves unto that Church, which had been there erected with the leave of the Magistrate. But they had heard in both places of those Alterations which had been made at Franckfort, in the form of Gods publick Service, and there∣upon refused to accept of the invitation, though it seemed to promise them some advantages by the commodious situation of that City in respect of England, the great resort of strangers thither at the yearly Marts, plenty of Books, and other helps in the way of study, which were not to be found in the other two Cities. From Stralsburge modestly, from Zurick resolutely, but from both it was plainly signified, that they resolved to maintain the Order of the Church of England. The like Letter had been writ to the English at Embden, of which Congregation Doctor Scory, the late Bishop of Chichester, was the Super-intendent; and we may readily believe, that they received the like repulse from his Church at Embden, as they had from Gryndal, Sandys, and Haddon, or who had the constituting of the Church of Stralsburge; or from Horn, Chambers, Parkhurst, and other of the Students which remained at Zurick. The noise of this new Church at Franckfort occasioned Knox, who after proved the great incendiary of the Realm and Church of Scotland, to leave his Sanctuary in Geneva, in hope to make a better market for himself in that Con∣gregation. He had not long before published a seditious Pamphlet, entituled, The first blast of the Trumpet, in which he bitterly inveighed against the Go∣vernment of Women, aiming there especially at the three Queen Maries, that is to say, Mary Queen of England, Mary Queen of Scots, and Mary of Lor∣rain Queen Regent of Scotland. By which seditious Pamphlet, he had made not onely his own Country too hot for him, but could assure himself of no safety in France or England. To Geneva therefore he retires, and from thence removes to Franckfort, as the itter Scene for his intendments, hoping to get as great a name in this new Plantation, as Calvin had gotten in the old. It was about the end of September that he came to Franckfort, where he took the charge of that Church upon him, Whittingham and the rest submitting unto his Apostleship. This gave a new dis-satisfaction to the English at Stralsburge and Zurick, who knew the spirit of the man, and feared the dangerous con∣sequents and effects thereof. Nor was the condition of affairs much bettered by the coming of Whitehead, (who afterwards refused the Archbishoprick of Canterbury) though far the more moderate of the two. New Letters are reci∣procated between Franckfort and Zurick; from Franckfort on the 15th. of November, in open defiance as it were to the English Liturgy; from Zurick on the 28th. in defence thereof, and of their constancy and resolution for ad∣hering to it. The breach growing every day more wide than other, Gryndal and Chambers came from Stralsburge to attone the difference, by whom it was pro∣posed unto them, That the substance of the English Liturgy being retained, there might be a forbearance of some ceremonies and offices in it. But Knox and Whittingham were as much bent against the substance of the Book, as against any of the circumstantials and extrinsicals which belonged unto it. So that no good
effect following on this interposition, the Agents of the Church of Stralsburge return back to their brethren, who by their Letters of the 13th. of December expostulate in vain about it. In these distractions, some of the Franckfort Schismaticks desire, that all divine Offices might be executed according to the order of the Church of Ge∣neva; which Knox would by no means yield unto, thinking himself as able to make a Rule for his own Congregation, as any Calvin of them all. But that the mouths of those of Stralsburge and Zurik might be stopped for ever, he is content to make so much use of him, as by the authority of his judgment to disgrace that Liturgy, which those of Zurick did contend for. He knew well how he had bestirred himself in quarrelling the first Li∣turgy of King Edward the 6th. and nothing doubteth, but that the second (though reviewed on his importunity) would give him as little satisfaction as the other did. To this intent, the Order of the English Liturgy is drawn up in Latine, transmitted to him by Knox and Whittingham, by this infallible judg∣ment to stand or fall. The Oracle returns this answer on the 31 of January, (In Liturgia Anglcana qualem mihi describitis multas vido tolerabiles ineptias) That in the Book of England as by them described,1554/5; he had observed many to∣lerable fooleries. Whih last words being somewhat ambiguous, as all Oracles are, he explicates himself by telling them, Non est ea pu∣rtas quae op∣tada oret. That there wanted much of that purity which was to be desired in it;Faecis Palpi∣sticae reliquas. that it contained many relicks of the dregs of Popery; that being there was no manifest impiety in it, it had been tolerated for a season, because at first it could not otherwise be admitted: But howsoever, though it was lawful to begin with such beggarly rudi∣ments, yet it behoved the learned, grave, and godly Ministers of Christ to endeavour farther, and set forth something more refined from filth and rustinesse. This being sent for his determinate sentence unto Knox and Whittingham, was of such prevalency with all the rest of that party, that such who ormerly did approve, did afterwards as much dislike the English Liturgy; and those who at the first had conceived onely a dislike, grew afterwards into an open detestation of it. Those who before had been desirous that the Order of Geneva should be entertained; had now drawn Knox and Whittingham unto them, Mr. John Fox (the Author of the Acts and Monuments) contributing his approbation amongst the rest. But in the end, to give content to such as remained affected to the former Liturgy, it was agreed upon, That a mixt. Form, consisting partly of the Order of Geneva, and partly of the Book of England, should be digested and received till the first of April; consideration in the mean time to be had of some other course which should be permanent, and obliging for the time to come. In this condition of affairs, Doctor Richard Cox, the late Dean of Christ-Church and Westminster, first Schoolmaster, and after Almoner to King Edward the sixth, putteth himself into Franckfort March 13. accompanied with many English Exiles, whom the cause of Religion had necessitated to forsake their Country: Being a man of great learning, of great authority in the Church, and one that had a principal hand in drawing up the Liturgy by Law established; he could with no patience endure those innovations in it, or rather that rejection of it, which he found amongst them. He thereupon first begins to answer the Minister contrary to the Order there agreed on, and the next Sunday after causeth one of his company to go into the Pulpit and read the Letany. A∣gainst which doings of his, Knox in a Sermon the same day inveigheth most bitterly, affirming many things in the Book of England not onely to be im∣perfect, but superstitious, For the which he is not onely rebuked by Cox, but forbidden to preach. Wherewith Whittingham being much offended, deals with some of the Magistrates, from whom he procureth an Order of the 22 of March, requiring, That the English should conform themselves to the Rules of the French. Knox had not long before published a seditious Pamphlet, en∣tituled, An Admonition to Christians, containing the substance of some Sermons
by him preached in Engand, in one of which, he affirmed the Emperor to be no lesse an enemy to Christ that the yrant Nero. For this, and several other pas∣sages of the like dangerous nature, he is accused by Cox for Treason against the Emperor; the Senate made acquainted with it, and Knox commanded there∣upon to depart the City, who makes hs Farewel-Sermon on the 25th. of March,1555. and retires himself unto Geneva. Following his blow, Cox gets an order of the Senate, by the means of another of the Glaberges, by which Whittingham and the rest of his faction were commanded to receive the Book of England. Against which order, Whitingham for a time opposeth, encou∣raged therein by Goodman, who for the love of Knox (with whom afterwards he associated in all his practices) had left the grave soiety of those of Strals∣brge, to joyn himself unto the Sectaries of . But finding Cox to be too strong for them in the Senate, both they and all the rest who refused con∣formity, resolved to betake themselves to some other place, as they shortly did. Cox thus made Master of the field, begins to put the Congregation into such order, as might preserve the face and reputation of an English Church. He procures Whitehead to be chosen for the principal Paor, appoints two Mi∣nisters for Elders, and four Deacons for aistants to him, recommends Mr. Robert Horn (whom he had drawn from Zurick thither) to be Hebrew-Reader, Mullings to read the Greek Lecture, Trahern the Lecture in Divinity, and Chambers to be Treasurer for the Contributions, which were sent in from time to time by many godly and wellaffected persons, both Dutch and English, for the use of that Church. Having thus setled all things answerable to his own desires, he gives an account thereof to Calvin, subscribed by fourteen of the chief men in that Congregation, partly excusing themselves that they had pro∣ceeded so far without his consent, and partly rejoycing, that they had drawn the greatest part of that Church to their own opinions. Calvin returns his An∣swer on the last of May, which puts his party there on another project, that is to say, to have the whole business referred to some Arbitrators, equally chosen on both sides. But Cox was already in possession, great in esteem with the chief Magistrates of the City, and would by no means yield to refer that point, which had already been determined to his advantage. With these debates the time is taken up till the end of August, at what time Whitingham and the rest of the faction take their leave of Franckfort; Fox with some few others go to Basil, but the main body to Geneva as their Mther-City, where they make choice of Knox and Goodman for their constant Preachers; under which Ministry they reject the whole frame and fabrick of the Reformation made in England, conformed themselves wholly to the fashions of the Church of Gene∣va, and therewith entertain also the Calvinian Doctrines, to the discredit of the state of the Church of England in King Edwards time, the great grief of the Martyrs and other godly men in the reign of Queen Mar, and to the raising of most unquenchable combustions in all parts of the Church, under Queen Elizabeth. It was not long after the setling of the Liturgie, before Whitehead left the Ministry of the English Congregation, which Cox obtained for Mr. Horn, whom he knew to be a man both of courage & constancy. And that being done, he left the Congregation, and so withdraws himself to ralsburge, there to enjoy the com∣pany of Peter Martyr, with whom he was intimately acquainted while he lived in Christ-Church. By his departure, a new gap is opened to another dissen∣tion. Some words had passed at a supper, intended rather for increase of chari∣ty, than the breach of friendship, betwixt Horn and Ashey; Horn the chief Pastor of the flock,1555/6. and Ashey a Gentleman of good note in the Lay part of it. Some three dayes after being the 16th. of January, Ashleyis is cited to appear at the house of one of the Elders, to answer for some words which he had spoken in contempt of the Ministry. But from the Elders, he appeals to the Congre∣gation, amongst whom he prevails so fat, that they send a message by two of
their company to the Pastor and Elders, requiring them to proceed no further in the cause. Horn being backed by Chambers, the publick Treasurer, excepts against this message, as decreed at a private Conventicle, not by the general suffrages of the Congregation, and thereupon resolves to stand to that Au∣thority which formerly had been conferred on him and the rest of the Elders, by the Rules of their Discipline. Ashley and his adhrents on the other side, declare their former private meeting not to be a onventicle, protest against the Pastor and Elders, as an adverse party, and therefore not in a capacity to sit as Judges in the present case, and set themselves upon the making of a Book of Discipline, for the curbing the exorbitant power (for such they thought it) of the Pastor and Elders. The Pastor and Elders thereupon forsake their Offi∣ces, and on the 5th, of February, being the next day of publick meeting, take place amongst the rest as private persons; The Congregation full, but the Pulpit empty, which put the rest upon a humour of electing others to take the publick charge upon them. The noise of these disorders awakes the Magistrates, who command Horn and Chambers to forbear the congregation, until further Order, and afterwards restoring them to their former authority by publick E∣dict, were contradicted in it by Ashley's party, who having got some power in∣to their hands, were resolved to keep it. In the mean time, a Book of Discipline had been drawn and tendered to the Congregation, on the 4th. of February. According to the Rules whereof, the supreme power in all Ecclesi astical causes was put into the hands of the Con∣gregations, and the disposing of the publick monies committed to the trust of certain Officers, by the name of Deacons. This makes the breach wider than before, Horn and his party labouring to retain the old, the other to establish the new Discipline of their own devising. The Magistrates not able to agree the difference, dispatch their Letters unto Sralsburge of the 3d. of April,1556. de∣siring Dr Cox and Dr. Sandys, together with Robert Bertie, Esq to undertake the closing of the present rupture. To their arbitrement each party is content to submit the controversie, but differ in conclusion, in the terms of their Re∣ference. Much talk, and no small scandal groweth upon these divisions, not made the less by the Pen-combats between Horn and Whitehead. In the end, a form of reconciliation is drawn up by some of the English, who more endea∣voured the peace of the Church, than the interess of either party. But those who stood for the new Discipline being grown the stronger, refused to submit themselves to any establishment, by which the power of the diffusive body of the Congregation might be called in question. Whereupon Horn and Chambrs depart to Stralshurge, from whence Chambers writ his Letters to them of the 20th. of June, and after, of the 30th. of July, but to no effect. They had before proceeded to the election of some new Ministers, March the 22d. Against which, though Horn and his opposed, yet they concluded it for the present, on the 29th. and now they mean to stand unto the conclusion, let Horn and Cham∣bers go or tarry, as best pleased themselves. Such were the troubles and disorders in the▪ hurch of Franckfort, occasioned first by a dislike of the publick Liturgy, before which they preferred the nakedness and simplicity of the French and Genevian Churches, and afterwards continued, by the opposition made by the general body of the Congregation, against such as were appointed to be Pastors and Rulers over them. Hence the beginning of the Puritan faction, against the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church; that of the Presbyterians against the Bishops, of Episcopal Government; and finally that also of the Indepen∣dents, against the superintendency of the Pastors and Elders. The terrible ef∣fects, whereof will appear hereafter, if God shall give me means and opportuni∣ty to carry on the History of those disturbances which have been raised by the Pritans or Presbyterians, against the Orders of this Church, and the peace of Christendome. But sorrows seldome go alone, the abberrations from the Government, and Form, and Worship, established in the Church of England, drew on and altera∣tion
also in point of Doctrine. Such of the English as had retired into Geneva,An. Reg. Mar. 4. 1556/7. imploy themselves in setting out a new Translation of the Bible in the English Tongue, which afterwards they published with certain marginal Notes upon it, most of them profitable for the understanding of the Text, but so that some were heeodox in point of Doctrine, some dangerous, and seditious, in refe∣rence to the Civil Magistrate, and some as scandalous in respect of Episcopal Government. From this time the Calvinian Doctrine of Predestination began to be dispersed in English Pamphlets, as the only necessary, Orthodox, and sa∣ving truth. Knox publisheth a book Against an adversary of God's predestina∣tion, wherein it is declared, That whatsoever the Ethnicks and ignorant did attri∣bute to Fortune, by Christians is to be ssigned to God's heavenly providence; that we to judge nothing to come of Fortune, but that all cometh by the determinate counsel of God; and finally, that it would be displeasing unto God, if we should esteem any thing to proceed from any other; and that we do not only behold him as the prin∣cipal cause of all things, but also the author, appointing all things to the one or the other by his only counsel. After comes out a Book first written in French, and afterwards by some of them translated into English, which they called A brief Declaration of the Table of predestination, in which it is put down for a principal Aphorism, that in like manner, as God hath appointed the end, it is necessary also, that God should appoint the causes leading to the same end; but more particularly, that by vertue of God's will all things are done; yea, even those things which are evil and execrable. In another book Entituled Against a privy Papist, it is main∣tained more agreeably to Calvin's Doctrine, That all evil springeth of Gods Ordi∣nance, and that Gos predestination was the cause of Adam's fall, and of all wicked∣nesses. And in a fourth book published by Robert Crowley, who afterwards was Rector of the Church of St Giles's nere Cripple-gate, Entituled The confutati∣on of 13 Articles, &c. it is said expresly, That Adam being so perfect a creature, that there was in him no lust to sin, and yet so weak, that of himself he was not able to withstand the assault of the subtil Serpent; that therefore there can be no remedy, but that the only cause of his fall, must needs be the predestination of God. In which book it is also said, That the most wicked persons that have been, were of God ap∣pointed to be even as wicked as they were; and finally, that if God do predestinate man to do things rashly, and without any deliberation, he shall not deliberate at all, but run headlong upon it, be it good or evil. By which defenders of the ab∣solute decree of reprobation, as God is made to be the Author of sin, either in plain terms or undeniable consequence; so from the same men, and the Ge∣nevian Pamphlets by them dispersed, our English Calvinists had borrowed all their grounds and principles on which they build the absolute and irrespective decree of Predestination, contrary to the Doctrine publickly maintained and taught in the time of King Edward. Anno Reg. Mar. 4. A. D. 1556, 1557. IT is now time that we set sail again for England, which we left flaming with the fire of Persecutions, and the whole body of the State not a little inflamed with a spirit of treason and sedition; the last ill spirit well allayed by the execution of the chief Conspirators, the other fire not quenched by the blood of the Martyrs, which rather served as oyle to nourish, than as water to extinguish the outragiousness of it. But the Queen hoped to salve the matter on her part by some works of piety, as the restoring of such Church Lands as were in the Crown, for the endowment of some new Convents of Moncks and Friers. But first she thought it necessary to communicate her purpose unto some of the Council, and therefore calling to her the Lord Treasurer Paulet, Inglefield Master of the Wards, Rochester Comptrouler of her Houshold, and Master Secretary Peter, who seemed to be most concerned in it, by their several places, she is said to have spoken to them in these following words:
Yu are here o Our Counsel,An. Reg. Mar. 4. 1556. and We have willed you to be be caled to Us, to the intent you might hear of me my conscience, and the resoltion of my mind, concern∣ing the Lanas and Possessions, as well of Monasteries, as of other Churches whatso∣ever, being now presently in my possession. First I do consider that the said Lands were taken away from the Churches aforesaid, in time of Schism, and that by unlaw∣ful means, such as are contrary both to the Law of God and of the Church; For the which cause my conscience doth not suffer me to detain them. And therefore I here expresly refuse either to claim or retain the said Lands for mine, but with all my heart freely and willingly without all paction or condition, here and before God, I do surrender and relinquish the said lans and possessions, or inheritances whatsoever, and do renounce the same with this mind and purpose, that order and disposition thereof may be taken, as shall seem best liking to our most holy Lord the Pope, or else his Le∣gate, the Lord Cardinal, to the honour of God, and wealth of this our Realm. And albeit you may obect to me again, that conidering the State of my Kingdom, the dig∣nity thereof, and my Crown Imperial, cannot be honourably maintained and furnish∣ed without the possessions aforesaid; yet notwithstanding (and so she had affirmed before, when she was bent upon the restitution of the Tenths and first Fruits) I set more by the salvation of my soul, than by ten such Kingdomes; and therefore the said possssins I utterly refuse here to hold, after that sort and title, and give most hearty thanks to Almghy God, which hath given me an husband likewise minded, with no lesse good affection in this behalf, than I am my self. Wherefore I charge and command that my Chancellor (with whom I have conferred my mind in this matter befre) and you four to morrow do resort together to the most Reverend Lord Legate, and do signifie to him the premises in my Name; and give your attendance upon him, for the more full declaration of the State of my Kingdom, and of the aforesaid possessions accordingly, as you your selves do understand the matter, and can inform him in the same. Upon this opening of her mind, the Lords perceived it would be to no pur∣pose to perswade the contrary, and therefore thought it requisite to direct some course wherein she might satisfie her desires to her own great honour, and yet not alienate too much at once of the publick Patrimony. The Abby of Westminster had been founded in a Convent of Benedictines, or black Monks, by King Edward the Confessor; valued at the suppression by King Henry the 8th. at the yearly sum of 3977. pounds, in good old rents, Anno 1539. At what time having taken to himself the best and greatest part of the Lands thereof, he founded with the rest a Collegiat Church, consisting of a Dean and secular Canons; Benson the last Abbot, being made the first Dean of this new erection. To Bnson succeeded Dr Cox, and to him was substituted Dr Weston, in the first of this Queen. And being preferred unto the place by her special favour, 'twas conceived to be no hard matter to perswade him to make a surrendry of his Church into the hands of the Queen, that so it might return to its former nature, and be erected into a Convent of Benedictines, without any charge unto the Crown. And this they thought would be the easier brought to pass, because by the preferment of Dr Owen Oglthorp to the See of Carlisle, the Deany of Windsor would be void, which was considered as a suffi∣cient compensation, if bestowed on Weston, for his surrendry of the other. But they found a greater difficulty in it than was first imagin'd, Weston appearing very backward in conforming to the Queens desires, partly out of a dislike which he had of the project (he being one that never liked the profession of Monkery) and partly out of an affection which he had to the place seated so opportunely for the Court, and all publick businesses. But at the last he yielded to that opportunity which he was not able to resist, and thereby gained so much displeasure from the Cardinal Legate, that before the end of the next year, Anno 1557. he was outed of his Deanry of Windsor, and all his other Ec∣clesiastical promotions, upon an information of his being taken in the act of adultery, which otherwise perhaps might have been pardoned or connived at in
him, as in many others. But willing or unwilling he had first surrender'd the Church of Westminster, which the Queen stocked with a new Convent of Bendictines, consisting of an Abbot and fourteen Monks, which with their offi∣cers, were as many as the Lands then left unto it could well maintain. And for the first Abbot, she made choice of Dr John Fecknam, a learned, grave, and mo∣derate man, whom she had formerly made Dean of St Paul's, in the place of Dr William May, and now made choice of Dr Henry Cole, Arch-Deacon of Ely, and Prolocutor of the Convocation, Anno 1555. to succeed him in it. It was upon the 21 of November, that the new Abbot and his Monks entred on the possession of their ancient Convent, which they held not fully out three years, when it was once again dissolved by Act of Parliament, of which more hereafter. Which fate befel the rest of her foundations also, two of which cost her little more than this at Westminster. A Convent of Observants (being a reformed Order of Franciscan Friers) had been founded by King Henry the 7th. neer the Mannor of Greenwich, and was the first which felt the fury of King Henry the 8th. by reason of some open opposition made by some of the Friers in favour of Queen Katherine, the mother of the Queen now reigning. Which moved her in a pious gratitude, to re-edifie that ruined house, and to restore as many as could be found of that Order, to their old habitations; making up their Corporation with some new Observants, to a competent number. She ga∣thered together also a new Convent of Dominicans, or black Friers, for whom she provided an house in Smithfield, in the City of London, itting the same with all conveniences both for divine Offices, and other necessary uses. And having done this, she was at no more charges with either of them; for both the Observants and Dominicans being begging Fryers, might be resembled not unfitly to a swarm of Bees, which being provided of an hive, are left to make their combs, and raise themselves a livelyhood by their natural indu∣stry. But so she went not off in her other foundations, which were to be provi∣ded of some proportionable endowment out of the revenues of the Crown, towards their support. A Sion nere Brentford, in the Country of Middlesex, there had been anciently a house of religious women, Nuns of the Order of St Bridget, dissolv'd as were all teh rest, by King Henry the 8th. Most of the old ones dead, and the younger maried. Yet out of such of the old Nuns as remained alive, and the addition of some others, who were willing to embrace that course of life, a competent number was made up for a new Plantation; but seated as before at Sion, which the Queen repaired, and laid unto it a suffi∣cient estate in Lands for their future maintenance. Which house being after∣wards dissolved also by Queen Elizabeth, came first to the possession of Sir Thomas Perrot, who gave it to his wife, the Lady Dorothy, one of the daughters of Walter Divereux, Earl of Essex; by whom, being after married to Henry Lord Percy, Earl of Northumberland, it was left for a retiring house to that No∣ble Family, who do still enjoy it. At Sheen on the other side of the water, there had been anciently another religious house, not far from a mansion of the Kings, to which they much resorted till the building of Richmond. This house she stock'd with a new Convent of Carthusians (corruptly called the Charter-hose-Moncks) which she endowed with a revenue great enough to maintain that Or∣der, which profest more abstemiousness in diet, and sparingness of expence in all other things, than any others which embraced a Monastical life. And the next year having closed up the West end of the Quire or Chancel of the Church of St Johns neer Smithfield (which was all the Protector Sommerset had left standing of it) she restored the same to the Hospitalry of Knights of St John, to whom it formerly belonged, assigning a liberal endowment to it for their more honourable subsistence. Over whom she placed Sir Thomas Tresha for the first Lord Prior, a Gentleman of an ancient Family, and one that had deserv'd exceeding well of her, in defence of her claim against Queen Jane, who on the 30th. of November, 1557. received the Order of the Crosse at Westminster,
and took possession of his place; which having scarce warmed, he was taken from it by the stroke of death, and left it by the Queen to be disposed of to Sir Rchard Shellie, the last great Master of that Order in the Realm of Eng∣land. But this expiring with the rest, within two years after, there remained no∣thing of all Queen Mary's foundations, but her new Hopital in the Savoy. An Hospital had formerly been founded in tha House by her Grandfather King Henry the seventh, for the relief of such pilgrims, as either went on their Devotions to the shrine of St. Thomas Becket of Canterbury, or any other emi∣nent Shrine or Saint in those parts of the Kingdom. On a suggestion made to King Edward the sixth, that it served onely for a recepracle of vagrant per∣sons, it was surrendred to him in the last year of his Reign by the Master and Brethren of the same; out of the Lands whereof he assigned the yearly Rent of seven hundred Marks for the maintenance of his new working house of Bridewel, which he had given for ever to the Lord Mayor and City of London, as hath been signified before in the life of that King, (together with all the beds, bedding, and other furniture, which were found in this Hospital.) And though this Grant bare date on the 26 of June, in the last year of his Reign, Anno 1553. yet the Lord Mayor and Aldermen entred not on the possession of it till the month of February now last past, Anno 1555. But having took possession of it, and so much of the Lands of this Hospital being setled on it, the Hospital in the Savoy could not be restored to its first condition, but by a new Endowment, from such other Lands belonging to Religious Houses which were remaining in the Crown. But the Queen was so resolved upon it, that she might add some works of Charity unto those of Piety, or else in honour of her Grandfather, whose foundation she restored at Greenwich also, the Hospital was again refounded on the third of November, and a convenient yearly Rent allotted to the Master and Brethren for the entertainment of the Poor, according to the tenour and effect of the first Institution. Which Prince-like Act so wrought upon the Maids of Honor, and other Ladies of the Court, that for the better attaining of the Queens good grace, they furnished the same at their own costs with new beds, bedding, and other necessary fur∣niture, in a very ample manner. In which condition it continueth to this very day, the Mastership of the Hospital being looked on as a good preferment for any well deserving man about the Court; but for the most part given to some of their Majesties Chaplains for the encouragement of learning, and the re∣ward of their service. How far the Queens example, seconded by the Ladies about the Court, countenanced by the King, and earnestly insisted on by the Pope then being, might have prevailed on the Nobility and Gentry for doing the like, either in restoring their Church Lands, or assigning some part of them to the like Foun∣dations, it is hard to say; most probable it is, that if the Queen had lived some few years longer, either for love to her, or for fear of gaining the Kings dis∣pleasure, (who was now grown too great to be disputed with, if the point were questioned) or otherwise out of an unwillingnesse to incur the Popes curse, and the Churches censures, there might have been very much done that way, though not all at once. For so it was, that Philip having past over to Calais in the month of September, Anno 1555. And the next day departing to the Emperors Court, which was then at Brussels, where he found his father in a resolution of resigning to him all his Dominions and Estates, except the Em∣pire, (or the bare title rather of it) which was to be surrendred to his brother Ferdinand; not that he had not a design to settle the Imperial Dignity on his Successors in the Realm of Spain, for the better attaining of the Universal Monarchy, which he was said to have aspired to, over all the West, but that he had been crossed in it by Maxiilian the eldest son of his brother Ferdinand, who succeeded to his father in it, and left the same hereditary in a manner to the Princes of the House of Austria of the German Rate. For Charls grown
weary of the world, broken, with warrs, and desirous to apply himself to i∣vine meditations, resolved to discharge himself of all civil employments, and spend the remainder of his life in the Monastery of St. Justus, situate among the Mountains of Extremadura, a Province of the Realm of Castile. In pursuance whereof, having called before him the principal of the Nobility and great men of his several Kingdoms and Estates, he made a Resignation of all his hereditary Dominions to King Philip his son, on the 25th. of October, Anno 1555. having then scarce attained to the 55 year of his life, to the great admiration of all the world. After which act, he found himself so abandoned by all his followers, that sitting up lae at night in conference with Seldiu his brothers Embassador, he had not a servant within call to light the Gentleman down stairs. Which being observed by the Emperor, he took the candle into his hands, and would needs in his own person perform that offie; and ha∣ving brought him to the top of the stairs, he said unto him, Remember Seldius, that thou hast known the Emperour Charls, whom thou hast seen in the hed of so many Armies, reduced to such a low estate, as to perform the office of an ordinary servant to his Brothers Minister. Such was the greatness to which Philip had attained at the present time, when the Queen was most intent on these new foundations. As for the Pope, he had published a Bull in print at the same time also, in which he threatned Excommunication to all manner of persons without ex∣ception, as kept any Church Lands unto themselves; as also to all Princes, No∣blemen, and Magistrates, as did not forthwith put the same in execution: Which though it did not much edifie at the present in the Realm of England, yet it found more obedience and conformity in that of Ireland, in which a Parliament being called toward the end of this year, (that is to say, in the month of June, Anno 1557.) there past a Statute for repealing all Acts, Ar∣ticles, and Provisions made against the See Apostolick, since the 20th. year of King Henry the 8th. and for abolishing of several Eccelesiastical possessions conveyed to the Laity, as also for the extinguishment of First-fruits and Twentieth parts, (no more than the yearly payment of the twentieth part having been laid by Act of Parliament on the Irish Clergy) in the first and last clause whereof, as they followed the example of the Realm of England, so possibly they might have given a dangerous example to it in the other point, if by the Queens death following shortly after, as well K. Philip as the Pope had not lost all their power & influence on the English Nation; by means whereof, there was no farther progresse in the restitution of the Abbey-Lands, no more re-edifying of the old Religious Houses, and no intention for the founding of any new. Such as most cordially were affected to the interest of the Pope of Rome, and otherwise were very perfect at their Ave Maria, might love their Pater nster well, but their Penny better. Thus have we seen how zealously the Queen proceeded in her way, towards the re-establishing of the Papal greatness. Let us next look on the proceedings of the Cardinal Legat, not as a Legat a latere from the Pope of Rome, but as Legatus natus, a Metropolitan, or Archbishop of the Church of England. As Cardinal-Legat he had been never forward in the shedding of blood, declaring many ways his aversnesse from that severity, which he saw divers of the Eng∣lish Bishops, but especially the Butcher of London, were so bent upon. And when he came to act as Metropolitan, he was very sparing in that kind, as far as his own person was concerned therein; though not to be excused from suf∣fering the under Officers of his Diocess to be too prodigal of the blood of their Christian brethren. He had been formerly suspected for a favourer of the Lu∣theran Doctrins, when he lived at Rome, and acted for the Pope as one of his Legats in the Council of rent. Gardiner and Bonner, and the rest of the sons of Thunder, who called for nothing less than fire, (though not from heaven) were willing to give out, that he brought the same affections into England al∣so; and therefore somewhat must be done to keep up his authority and repu∣tation,
both at home and abroad.An. Reg. Mar. 4. 1556/7. To which end, he inserteth some particulars amongst the printed Articles of his Visitation, to witnesse for him to the world, that he had as great a care for suppressing the growth of Heresie, as any Prelate in the Kingdom, who would be thought more zealous because more tyrannical; of which sort are the 14, 15, and 17th. Articles which concerned the Clergy, that is to say, Whether any of them do teach or preach erronious do∣ctrine, contrary to the Catholick faith, and the Unity of the Church; and whether any of them do say the divine Service, or d minister the Sacraments in the English tongue, contrary to the usual order of the Church? Of which sort also were the first of those touching the Laity, viz. Whether any manner of persons, of what estate, degree, or condition soever they be, do hold, maintain, and affirm any Here∣sies, Errors, and erronious Opinions, contrary to the Laws Ecclesiastical, and the unity of the Catholick Church? Which general Article was after branched into such particulars, as concerned the Carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, the reverent esteem thereof, the despising of any of the Sacramentals, and the decrying of Auricular Confession by the word or practice. And somewhat also of this sort was the 17th. Article, by which it was enquired, Whether any of the Priests or Clergy, that having been married under the preence of Lawful Matri∣mony, and since reconciled, do privily resort to their pretended wives, or that the said women do privily resort to them. Nothing material or considerable in all the rest, but what hath been in use and practice by all the Archbishops, Bi∣shops, and other Ecclesiastical Judges in the Church of England, since the first and best times of Queen Elizabeh; all of them seeming to have took their pattern from this reverend Prelate,'s and to have precedented themselves by the Articles of his Visitation. In two points onely he appeared to be some∣what singular, and therefore found no followers in the times succeeding; the first whereof was, The Registring of the names of the Godfathers and God∣mothers, as well as of the child Baptized; which why it should be laid aside I can see no reason, the Rubrick of the Church allowing none to perform that office, before they have received the holy Communion. The second was, an Enquiry, whether the Parsons, Vicars, and Curats were diligent in teaching the Midwifes how to Christen children in time of necessity, according to the Canons of the Church; which seemed sufficiently necessary to be put in pra∣ctice, as long as Baptism was permitted to Midwives or any other persons not in holy Orders. But though he seemed more favouable than any of the rest of the Bishops, towards those which were living, he was content to exercise the utmost of his power upon those that were dead; nor was he without hope, that by the pu∣nishment and disgrace of those which were not sensible of eiher, he might be thought to manifest his greatest zeal towards the maintenance of the Doctrins of the Church of Rome, as if he had inflicted the like censures on them when they were alive. This prompts him to a Visitation of the University of Cam∣bridge, partly to rectifie the Statutes of it, which in many points were thought to stand in need of a Reformation; but principally to exercise some more than ordinary rigour on the dead bodies of Martin Bucer and Paulus Fagius: Of these, the first, having been the publick Reader in Divinity in the time of King Edward, was solemnly interred in the Church of St. Maries; the other having been Hebrew-Reader at the same time also, was buried in the Church of St. Michael. In order to this Visitation, he Delegates one Ormanete an Italian, honored with the title of the Popes Daary, Doctor Cuthbert Scot, then new∣ly consecrated Bishop of Chester, Doctor Watson Mr. of St. John's College, and Lord Elect of Lincoln, and Doctor Christopherson, Master of Trinity Col∣ledge, and Dean of Norwich, Lord Elect of Chichester, and Doctor Henry Cole Provost of Eaton College, and Dean of St. Pauls. With these were joyned as Commissioners Doctor Andrew Pern, Master of Peterhouse, and Vice-chancellor, some Doctors of Divinity, Sir James Der then the Recorder of the Town, and certain others, in the name of the King and Queen, It must be
some great business doubtlesse, that must require so many hands, and exercise the wits of so many persons, Bishops, Deans, Doctors in Divinity, Canonists, common Lawyers, Knights, and Gentlemen. But what the business was, and how little it required such preparations, we are next to see. The Cardinals Commissioners came to Cambridge on the 9th. of January, where they found the rest ready to receive them, and the next day they inter∣dicted the two Churches above mentioned, for daring to entertain the dead bodies of such desperate Hereticks. I pretermit the eloquent speech made by Stoaks the University-Orator, the Answer thereunto by Sot, then Bishop of Chester, the Latine Sermon preached by Peacock against Sects and Hereticks, together with the Solemn Mass, with which this weighty businesse was to take beginning. Which preparations being past over, a Petition is presented to the Cardinals Delegates in the name of the Vice-chancellor, and Heads of the University, for taking up the bodies of the said Martin Bucer and Panlus Fa∣glus, to the end that some legal proceedings might be had against them, to the terrour of others, in regard of those many dangerous and heretical Doctrines by them formerly taught. The Petition being granted, and the dead bodies condemned to be taken out of their graves, a publick Citation is set up at St. Mary's Church, the Market-place, and the common Schools, requiring the said Martin Bucer and Paulus Fagius, or any other in their names, or in their behalf, to appear before the Lords Commissioners on Monday the 18th. of that Month, to answer to such Articles as then and there should be objected against them. But the dead bones not being able to come unless they were carried, and no body daring to appear as their Proctor or Advocate, they might have been taken pro confessis, but that the Court was willing to proceed by Witnesses; and to that end they took the Depositions of several persons, touching the Doctrine taught by the said two Hereticks; and then upon ma∣ture deliberation they condemned them of Heresie, ordered them to be taken out of their graves, degraded from all holy Orders, and delivered to the secular Magistrate. Of all this, an account is given to the Cardinal-Legat, who is de∣sired to take some course that the ordinary Writ (de comburendo Haeretic) for the burning of Hereticks, might be taken out, and sent unto the Mayor of Cambridge, without which, nothing could be done, in order to the execution of the rest of the Sentence. The Writ accordingly comes down, and Saturday the sixth day of February is appointed for the burning of the two dead bodies; which being taken out of their graves, and laid in their coffins on mens shoul∣ders, are carried to the market place with a guard of men, well arme and weaponed, for fear of making an escape; chained unto several posts, as if still a∣live, the wood and fire put to them, and their bodies burned, together with as many of their Books as could be gotten, which were cast into the same flames also. And because one University should not mock the other, the like cruelty was also exercised upon the dead body of Peter Martyr's wie at Oxford, a god∣ly, grave, and sober matron while she lived, and to the poor people there ex∣ceeding charitable. It was supposed, that Oxon stood as much in need of a Vi∣sitation as Cambrige did. A Commission is therefore granted by the Cardinal-Legat to Doctor James Brooks Bishop of Glocester, Ormanete the Popes Datary, Cole and Wright Doctors of the Civil Law, &c. to rectifie such things as they foundamiss in that University, or in any College of the same. It was given them also in charge amongst other things, that they should take the body of this good woman out of her grave, into which she had been laid Anno 1552. and to consume the same with fire, not doubting but she was of the same Religion which her husband had professed before. But when the Commissio∣ners came to execute that part of their business, they could find no witnesse to depose any thing for certain touching her Religion, such as were brought before them agreeing generally in this answer, That they did not understand her Language, and therefore could not tell of what Religion she was. It was
therefore signified to the Cardinal, that for want of legal evidence against her, they could not lawfully proceed in burning her body, as they had done the bodies of Bucer and Fagius, against whom there was evidence enough to be found in their writings, beides that which was given in from the mouthe of Witnesses. The Cardinal thereupon gives order to Doctor Marshal Dean of Christ-Church, to take up her body (which had been buried near to that of St. Frideswide) and to lay it out of Christian burial; who very readily obeyed, took up the bones of that vertuous woman; and most prophanely buried them in a common dunghil. But long they lay not in that place, for Queen Elizabeth comming to the Crown within two years after; gave order, that this body should be decently interred, as became the quality of her person, and the reverence due unto her husband; as also that Bucer & agius should in the other University be publickly restor'd to their former honors. In obedience unto whose commands, the body of the one is taken out of the dunghil, and laid into the grave of St. Frideswide, their bones so intermingled with one another, that there could be no fear of offering the like inhumanity to them for the time to come. And that the like honour might be done to Bucer and agius, a solemn commemoration of them was held at Cambridge, the Sermon preached by Mr. James Pilkington, who not long after was preferred to the See of Durham; the Panegyrick made by Ackworth Orator of that University, who spared no part of a good Orator, in setting forth their due praises, and deserved commendations. But we must now look back again on the Reign of Queen Mary, in which we find little more to do than the magnificent reception of Osep Napea, Em∣bassador from the great Duke of Muscovy, upon this occasion: The English Merchants at the sollicitation of Sebastian Cabot, had furnished out some ships for the discovery of a North-East passage towards the rich Countries of Ca∣thai and China; in which they made so good a progress, that they attained as far as the Port of St. Nicholas, one of the principal Port-towns of the Empire of Russia, and laid the first foundation of a wealthy Trade with that mighty Empire. For their encouragement therein, the Privileges of the Easterlings, commonly called the Merchants of the Stilyard, (who before had managed all the Trade of the North East parts) were seized on by King Edward the 6th. and the way thereby laid open to the Merchant-Adventurers, to encrease their shipping with their wealth. For the continuance of which Trade betwixt the Nations, the Emperor John Basiliwits sends his Ambassador above named, imbarked in one of the English ships, under the conduct and government of Richard Chancellor, the most expert Pilot of that age. But so it hapned, that the rest of the ships being scattered by a strong tempest on the coast of Norway, the ship which carried the Ambassador was wreckt upon the coast of Scotland▪ the lading for the most part lost, amounting to twenty thousand pounds and upwards, besides many rich presents sent from the Russian Emperor to the King and Queen. The Ambassador with much ado was preserv'd from drowning, but the Pilot lost, who by labouring to preserve the life of the other, neglect∣ed the best opportunity to save his own. The news wherof being brought to the Merchants of London, (who by this time were grown into a Company of 140.) they procured Letters from the King to the Regent of Scotland; for the courteous entertainment of the said Ambassador, and the restoring of such goods as had escaped the wreck: and having furnished him with mony and all other necessaries, caused him to be conducted towards the Court. Taking his leave of Scotland on the 14th. of February, he is brought by easie journeys within twelve miles of London, honorably entertained in all places as he past along, and there received by four-score of the Russian Merchants in their chains of gold, Furnished with Gold, Velvet, Silk, and all other things, he is by the whole Company of the Russian Merchants magnificently brought into London on the last of that month; met on the way by the Lord Viscount Montacute, attended with a gallant train of three hundred Horse, at the Queens command, and received at Smithfield-bars by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
in their scarlet Robes. Conducted to his lodgings in F-Church street, he was there presented in the Queens nae, with a piece of cloth of Tissue, two pieces of cloth of gold, one whereof was raised with Crimson Velvet, with ma∣ny other pieces of the like rich making, which very thankfully he received. Abiding at his lodging till the Kings coming back from Flander, which was not till the 21 of March, he was brought upon out Lady day by water to the Court at Westminster; received at his landing by six Lords, he was by them brought into a chamber, where he found the Lords Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal, Admiral, Bishop of Ely, and other Counsellors. Who having exchanged salu∣tations with him attended him to the King and Queen, sitting under a rich Ca∣nopy or cloath of State in the great Hall there. Having presented his Letters of Credence, exprest himself unto their Majesties in a short Oration, which was interpreted to them both in English and Spanish, and presented them with two timber of Sables,1557. which with much diligence had been recovered out of the wreck, he was by them remitted to his lodging with the like solemnity. At∣tended shortly after by the Bishop of Ely, and Mr Secretary Peter; who after much Communication, and several Treaties, setled at last a friendly enter∣course and commerce betwixt the Nations; the Articles whereof engrossed in parchment, were afterwards presented to him, raified and confirmed by the Great Seal of England. On the 23d. of April he was brought again into the Court, where having seen the Pomps and Orders of St George's Feast, the Ser∣vice of the Royal Chapel, and the magnificent Procession of the Knights of the Garter, he takes his leave of the King and Queen, is re-conveyed unto his lodging, and on the 3d. of May embarks for Russi, accompanied with four good ships well frought with Merchandise most proper for the trade of that Country to which they were bound. The costly presents sent by him from the King and Queen to the Russian Emperour, and those bestowed upon him∣self, I leave to be reported by him at his coming home, and the relation of John Stow in his Annals of England, fol. 630▪ Nor had I dwelt so long upon these particulars, but to set forth the ancient splendor and magnificence of the State of England, from which we have so miserably departed in these latter times. Worse entertainment found an agent from the French King at his coming hither, because he came on a worse errand. Stafford an English Gentleman of a Noble Family, having engaged himself in some of the former enterprises a∣gainst this Queen, and finding no good fortune in them, retired with divers others to the Court of France; from whence they endeavoured many times, to create some dangers to this Realm, by scattering and dispersing divers scanda∣lous Pamphlets, and seditious papers, tending to the apparent defamation of the King and Queen. And having got some credit by these practices amongst the Ministers of that King▪ he undertakes to seize upon some Fortress or Port Town of England, and put the same into the hands of the French. In prosecution of which plot, accompanied with some English Rebels, and divers French Adventu∣rers intermingled with them, he seizeth on the strong Castle of Scurborough, in the Conty of York. From thence he published  most traiterous and seditious Manifest, in which he trayterously affirmed the Queen, neither to be the Right∣ful Queen of this Realm, nor to be worthy of the Title, affirming that the King had brought into this Realm the number of twelve thousand Spaniards, who had possess'd themselves of twelve of the best Holds in all the Kingdome; upbraiding the Queen with her misgovernment, and taking to himself the Ti∣tle of Protector of the Realm, of England. But the Queen being secretly ad∣vertised of the whole design, by the diligence of Dr Nicholas Wotton, Dean of Canterbury, who was then Ambassador in that Court, Order was taken with the Earl of Westmorland, and other Noble men of those parts, to watch the Coasts, and have a care unto the safety of those Northern Provinces, By whom he was so closely watch'd, and so well attended, that having put himself into that Castle on the 24th, he was pulled out of it again on the last of April;
from thence brought prisoner unto London, condemned of Treason, executed on the Tower Hill, May 28. and on the morrow after three of his accomplices were hanged at Tyburn, cut down and quartered. But as it was an ill wind which blowes no body good, so this French Treason, so destructive to the chief conspiratours, redounded to the great benefit and ad∣vantage of Philip. He had for three years borne the Title of King of England, without reaping any profit and commodity by it. But being now engaged in war with King Henry the 3d. though in pursute rather of his fathers quarrels, than any new ones of his own, he takes this opportunity to move the Queen to declare her self against the French, & to assist him in his war against that King, for the good of her Kingdoms. It was not possible for the Queen to separate her interest from that of her husband, without hazarding some great unkindness, if not a manifest breach between them. She therefore yields to his desire, and by her Proclamation of the 7th. of June, chargeth that King in having an hand not only in the secret practices of the Duke of Northumberland, but also in the open rebellion of Wat, and his confederates. She also laid unto his charge, that Dudley Ashton, and some other male contents of England, were entertained in the house of his Ambassadors, where they cotrived many treasons and con∣spiraies against her and her Kingdom; that flying into France, they were not only entertained in the Court of that King, but relieved with pensions. Fi∣nally, that he had aided and encouraged Stafford with shipping, men, mony, and munition, to invade her Realm, thereby if it were possible, to dispossess her of her Crown. She therefore gives notice to her subjects, that they should forbear all traffick and commerce with the Realm of France: from which she had received so many injuries, as could admit no reparation but by open war. And that she might not seem to threaten what she never intended, she causeth an army to be raised consisting of one thousand horse, four thousand foot, and two thousand pioners, which she puts under the command of the Earl of Pem∣brook, and so dispatcheth them for Flanders, to which they came about the mid∣dle of July. King Philip had gone before on the 6th. of that month, and all things here were followed with such care and diligence, that the army staid not long behind; but what they did, falls not within the compass of this present year. All which remains to be remembred in this present year, relates unto such changes and alterations, as were made amongst the Governors of the Church, and the Peers of the Realm. It hath been signified before, that White of Lincoln had prevailed by his friends in Court, to be translated unto Winchester, as the place of his Nativity and Education. To whom succeeded Dr Thomas Watson, Master of St John's College in Cambridge, and Dean of Durham, elected to the See of Lincoln, before Christmass last, and acting by that name, and in that capaci∣ty, against the dead body of Martin Bucer. To Day of Chichester, who deceased on the 2d. of Aug. in the beginning of his year, succeeded Dr John Christopherson, a right learned man, Mr of Trinity College in Cambridge, and Dean of Norwich, elected about the same time when the other was, and acting as he did against Bucer and Fagius, as also did Dr Cuthbert Scot, who at that time was actually invested in the See of Chester, upon the death of Dr oats, the preceding Bi∣shop. And finally, in the place of Aldrick Bishop of Carlisle, who died on the 5th. of March, 1555. Dr Owen Oglethorp, President of Magdalen College in Oxon, and Dean of Windsor, receives Consecration to that See, in that first part of this year; but the particular day and time thereof I have no where found. Within the compass of this year (that is to say the 4th. year of the Reign of this Queen) died two other Bishops, Salcot or Capon Bishop of Salisbury, and Chambers the first Bishop of Peterborough; to the first of which there was no successor actually consecrated or confirmed, for the reasons to be shewed anon in the Reign of this Queen. But to the other, succeeded Dr David Pool, Dr of both laws, Dean of the Arches, Chancellor to the Bishop of Lichfield, and Arch-Deacon of Derby, elected before the end of this year, but not conse∣crated
till the 15th of August,An. Reg. Mar. 5. 1557. in the beginning of the next. Some alterations hapned also amongst the Peers of the Realm, in the cre∣ation of one, and the destruction of another. A Rebellion had been raised in the Norh upon the first suppression of Religious Houses, Anno 1536. in which Sir  homas Percy second so to Henry the fifth Earl of Northumberland of that name and family, was thought to be a principal stickler, and for the same was publickly arraigned, condemned, and executed. By Eleanar his wife, one of the daughters and heirs of Sir Giscard Harotle, he was the father of Thoas and Henry, who hitherto had suffered under his Attaindure: But now it pleased Queen Mary to reflect on their Fathers sufferings, and the cause thereof, which moved her not onely to restore them to their blood and ho∣nors, but also to so much of the Lands of the Percies as were remaining in the Crown. In pursuance whereof, she advanced Thomas the elder brother, on the last of April, to the Style, Title, and Degree of Earl of Nothumberland, the remainder to his brother Henry, in case the said Thomas should depart this life without Issue male. By vertue of which Entail, the said Henry afterwards succeeded him in his Lands and Honors, notwithstanding that he was attain∣ted, condemned, and executed for high Treason in the time of Queen Eli∣zabeth, Anno 1572. Not many weeks before the restitution of which noble Family, that of the Lord Sturton was in no small danger of a final destruction, a Family first ad∣vanced to the state of a Baron in the person of Sir John Sturton, created Lord Sturton in the 26th. of King Henry the 6th. and now upon the point of ex∣piring in the person of Charls Lord Sturton, condemned and executed with four of his servants on the 6th. of March, for the murder of one Argal and his son, with whom he had been long at variance. It was his first hope that the murther might not be discovered, and for that cause had buried the dead bo∣dies fifteen foot under ground; his second, that by reason of his zeal to the Popish Religion it might be no hard matter to procure a pardon. But the Murder was too foul to be capable of any such favour, so that he was not one∣ly adjudged to die, but condemned to be hanged. It is reported of Marcus Antonius,Aanasdem Armniae Re∣gem, fraude de∣ceptum, Catenis, sed ne quid ho∣nori dsst, au∣raeis vicit Antoius. that having vanquished Artanasdes King of Armenia, he led him bound in chains to Rome; but for his greater honor, and to distinguish him from the rest of the prisoners, in chains of gold: And such an honour was vouchsafed to this noble Murderer, in not being hanged as his servants and accomplices were, in a halter of hemp but in one of silk. And with this fact the Family might have expired, if the Queen, having satisfied Justice by his exe∣cution, had not consulted with her mercy for the restoring of his next Heir both in blood and honor.Vell. Paterc. An. Reg. Mar. 5o An. Dom. 1557, 1558. WE must begin this year with the success of those forces which were sent under the command of the Earl of Pembrock, to the aid of Philip; who having made up an Army of 35 thousand Foot, and 12 thousand Horse, be∣sides the Forces out of England, sate down before St. Quintin the chief Town of Piccardy, called by the Romans, Augusta Veromandnorum, and took this new name from St. Quintin the supposed tutelaty Saint and Patron of it; a Town of principal importance to his future aims, as being one of the Keys of France on that side of the Kingdom, and opening a fair way even to Paris it self. For the raising of which Siege, the French King sends a puissant Army under the command of the Duke of Montmorancy, then Lord High Constable of France, accompanied with the Flower of the French Nobility. On the 10th. day of August the Battels joy, in which the French were vanquished, and their Ar∣my routed; the Constable himself, the Prince of Mantua, the Dukes of Mont∣pensier and Longaville, with fix others of the prime Nobility, and many others
of less note, being taken prisoners: The Duke of , the Viscount Turin, four persons of honorable ranck, most of the Foor Captains, and of the com∣mon Soldiers to the number of 2500 slain upon the place. The news whereof struck such a terrour in King Henry the 2d. that he was upon the point of for saking Paru, and retiring into Langedock, or some other remote part of his Dominions; In the suddenness of which surprise, he dispatcht his Curriers for recalling the Duke of Guise out of Ialy, whom he had sent thither at the Popes inigation with a right puissant Army for the Conquest of Naples. But Philip knowing better how to enjoy than to use his victory, continued his Siege be∣fore St. Quintin, which he stormed on the 18th. of that month, the Lord Hen∣ry Dudley one of the younger sons of the Duke of Northubr land (who lost his life in the Assault) together with Sir Edward Windsor, being the first that scaled the walls, and advanced their victorious Colours on the top thereof. After which gallant piece of service, the English finding some neglect at the hands of Philip, humbly desire to be dismist into their Country, which for fear of some fuher inconvenience was indulged unto them. By which dismission of the English (as Thuans and others have observed) King Philip was not able with all his Spaniards to perform any action of importance in the rest of the War. But the English shall pay dearly for this Victory, which the Spaniard bought with no greater loss than the lives of 50 of his men. The English at that time were possessed of the Town of Calais, with many other pieces and orts about, as Guisuesse, Fanim, Ardres, &c. together with the whole Territory cal∣led the County Oye, the Town by Caesar called Portus Iccius, situate on the mouth or entrance of the English Chanel, opposite to Dover, one of the five principal Havens in those parts of England, from which distant not above twenty five miles, a Town much aimed at for that reason by King Edward this 3d. who after a Siege of somewhat more than eleven months, became Master of it, Anno 1347. by whom first made a Colonie of the English Nation, and after one of the Staple Towns for the sale of Wool. Kept with great care by his Successors, who as long as they had it in their possession, were said to ca∣ry the Keys of France at their girdle; esteemed by Philip de Comin for the goodliest Captainship in the world, and therefore trusted unto none but per∣sons of most eminent ranck both for courage and honour. A Town which for more than 200 years had been such an eye-sore to the French, and such a thorn in their sides, that Monsieur de Cordes, a Nobleman who lived in the Reign of King Lewis the 11th. was wont to say, that he could be content to lie se∣ven years in hell, upon condition that this Town were regained from the Eng∣lish. But the French shall have it now at an easier rate; The Queen had broke the Peace with France, and sent a considerable Body of Forces to the aid of Philip, but took no care to fortifie and make good this place, as if the same Garrison which had kept it in a time of peace, had been sufficient to maintain it also in a time of war. For so it hapned, that Francis of Lorain Duke of Guise, one of the best Sol∣diers of that age, being called back with all his forces from the war of Ialy, and not well pleased with the loss of that opportunity which seemed to have been offered to him for the conquest of Naples, resolved of doing somewhat answerable unto expectation, as well for his own honor as the good of his Country. He had long fixed his eyes on Calais, and was informed by Senarpont Governor of Bolloigne, and by consequence a near neighbour to it, that the Town was neither so well fortified, nor so strongly garrisoned, but that it might be taken without any great difficulty. For confirmation whereof, Mon∣sieur, a' Strozzie one of the Marshals of France, under the favour of a disguise, takes a view of the place, and heartneth on the Duke with the feasibility of the undertaking. Philip, who either had intelligence of the French designes, or otherwise rationally supposing what was like to follow in the course of War, had often advised the Queen to have a care of that Piece, and freely offered his
assistance for deence thereof. But the English over wisely jealous left Philip had a practice on  it lying commodiously for his adjoyning Neatherlands, neglected both  advice and proffer. Nay, so extreamly careless were the Council of England in looking to the preservation and defence of this place, that when the Duke sate down before it, there was not above 500 Soldiers, and but two hundred fighting men amongst the Townsmen,1557/8 although the whole number of Inhabitants amounted to 4200 persons. On New years day the Duke of Guise sate down before it, and on Twelfth-day, had it surrendred up unto him by the Lord Deputy Wentworth, who had the chief command and government of it. The noise of the thundring Canon heard as far as Antwerp, could not but rouse the drousie English to bethink themselves of some relief to be sent to Calais, and they accordingly provided both ships and men to per∣form that service. But the winds were all the while so strong and so cross against them, that before the English ships could get out of their Havens, the French were Masters of the Town. Some greater difficulty found the Duke in the taking of the Castle of Guisnesse, where the Lord Gray, a valiant and expert Soldier, had the chief command. But at length the Accessories follow∣ed the same fortune with the Principal, both Guisnesse and Hanine, and all the other Pieces in the County of Oye, being reduced under the power of the French within few days after. There now remained nothing to the Crown of England of all its antient Rights in France, but the Islands of Gernsey, Jersey, Sark, and Aldernay, all lying on the coast of Normandy, of which Dukedome heretofore accounted members. Held by the English ever since the time of the Norman Conquest, they have been many times attempted by the French, but without successe; never so much in danger of being lost as they were at this present. Some of the French had well observed, that the Island of Sark (an Island of six miles in compass) enjoyned the benefit of a safe and commodious Haven, but without any to defend it but a few poor Hermites, whom the privacy and solitariness of the place had invited thither. The Island round begirt with Rocks, lying aloft above the Sea, and having onely one streight passage or ascent unto it, scarce capable of two abreast. Of this Island the French easily possest them∣sevles, dislodged the Hermites, fortifie the upper part of the Ascent with some pieces of Ordnance, and settle a small Garrison in it to defend the Haven. But long they had not nested there, when by a Gentleman of the Neatherlands, one of the subjects of King Philip, it was thus regained: The Flemmish Gen∣tleman with a small Bark came to Anchor in the Road, and pretending the death of his Merchant, besought the French that they might bury him in the Chapel of that Island, offering a present to them of such Commodities as they had aboard. To this request the French were easily entreated, upon con∣dition, that they should not come to shore with any weapen, no not so much as a Pen-knife. This leave obtained, the Flemming row'd unto the shoar with a Coffin in their skiff for that us purposely provided, and manned with Swords & Arcubusses. Upon their landing, and a search so strict and narrow, that it was impossible to hide a Pen-kife, they were permitted to draw their Coffin up the Rocks, some of the French rowing back unto the ship to fetch the Present, where they were soon made fast enough and laid in hold. The Flemmings in the mean time which were on the land had carried their Coffin into the Chapel, and having taken thence their weapons gave an Alarum unto the French, who taken thus upon the suddain, and seeing no hopes of succour from their fel∣lows, yielded themselves, and abandoned the possession of that place. A Stra∣tagem to be equalled,Quod vetera extollimus, ve∣nientium incuriosi. if not preferred, unto any of the Antients, either Greeks or Romans, did not that fatal folly, reprehended once by Tacitus, still reign amongst us, that we extol the former days, and contemn the present. The losse of this Island gave a new Alarum to the Council of England, who thereupon resolved to set out a right puissant Navy,1558. as well for the securing of the rest of the Islands, as to make some impression on the Main of France.
It was not till the month of April that they entred into consultation about this business, and so exceeding tedious were they in their preparations, that the month of July was well spent before they were ready to weigh Anthor. During which time the French hd notice of their purpose, and understanding that they had an aim on Brest in Breagn, they took more care in fortifying it against the English, than the English did for Calais against the French. It was about the middle of July that the Lord Admiral Clynton set sail for France, with a Fleet of one hundred and forty ships, whereof thirty . Finding no hopes of doing any good on Brest, bends his course for Conqu, an open Sea-town of that Province; at this place he lands his men, takes and sacks the Town, burns it together with the Abbey, and having wasted all the Country round about, returned with safety to his ships. But the Flemish somewhat more greedy on the spoil, and negligent in observing Martial Discipline, are valiantly encountred by a Nobleman of that Country, and sent back fewer by five hundred than they came on shoar. This was the sum of what the English did this year, in order to the recovery of the honour which they lost at Calais; and possibly they might think they had done enough in the spoil of Breagn, to satisfie for the loss of a Town in Piccardy; whereas in truth, the waste which they had made in Breagn might be compared to the cutting off a mans hair, which will grow again; the loss of Calais to the dismembring of an arm or leg, never to be again united to the rest of the body. Either by reason of these wars, or that men were not then so prompt to Sutes in Law, the Lawyers found but little work in Westminster-hall, inso∣much that at the King's Bench  there attended but one man of Law called Foster, and but one Serjeant onely called Bouloise of the Common-Pleas, both having little more to do than to look about them, and the Judges not much more to do than the Lawyers had; but certainly, that great leisure which the Lawyers found for doing nothing, proceeded rather from the noise of the wars, in which the voice of the Law cannot easily be heard, than from the quietness & disposition of the times, in which the number both of Sutes and Pleaders had been much encreased, as may be gathered from the words of Heiwood the old Epigrammatist, and one much made of by the Queen, who being told of the great number of Lawyers, and that the number of them would impoverish the whole Profession, made answer, No, for that always the more Spaniels there were in the field, the more was the game. Not so much elbow-room in the Hall, though possibly not much more business for them in the Term next following, by reason of the Parliament which began on the 20th. of January, and held on till the seventh of March, in which I find no Act which concerned Religion, no any thing which had relation to the Clergy; more than the confirmation of their Grant of Subsidies. It was a military time, and the Acts had something in them of that temper also, that is to say, an Act, proportioning what num∣ber of Horse, Arms, and Weapons every man should be charged withall in his several station, cap. 2. an Act for the due taking and observing of Musters, cap. 3. that Accessaries in Murder, and such as were found guilty of divers Felonies, should not have their Clergy, cap. 4. for the quiet behaviour of such French-men as had purchased the privilege of being Denizens, cap. 6. and finally, for granting a Subsidy and Fifteen by the Temporality towards the defence of the Realm, and carrying on the War against those of France, Nothing else memorable in this Session, but that Fecknam the new Abbot of Westminster, and Tresham the new Prior of St. Johns of Jerusalem, took place amongst the Lords in the House of Peers. At the Convocation then holden for the Province of Canterbury, Harpsfield Arch-Deacon of London, is chosen and admitted Prolocutor for the House of the Clergy. Which done, the Cardinal-Archbishop offers it to the confide∣ration of the Bishops and Clergy, that some course might be thought upon for the recovery of Calais, then lately taken by the French. Which whether it were done to spur on the Parliament, or to shew their good affections to the
publick service, is not much material, considering that I find nothing acted in pursuance of it. As little was there done in order to another of his propositi∣ons, touching the revieuing and accommodating of the Statutes of the new foundations, though a reference thereof was made to the Bishops of Lincoln, Chester, and Peterborough, together with the Deans of Canerbury, Worcester, and Winchester. Some desires also were agreed on to be presented to the Prelate Cardinal, in the name of the Clergy, as namely▪ 1. That request may be made to the Queens Majesty, That no Parson, Vicar or Curate, be pressed by any Captain to go to the wars. 2. That where two Benefices being con∣tiguous, are so small that they are not able to find a Priest, the Bishop of the Diocess may give them in commendam to some one man to serve them alter∣ns vicibus. 3. That the Paishioners which have Chapels of ease, and yet want Priests to serve the Cure, may be compelled to come to the Parish Churches, until some Curate may be gotten to serve the same. And 4. That every Bishop may be authorised by the Pope to give Orders extra tempora praescripta, that is to say, as well at any other times, as on the Sundayes after the four Ember weeks. And finally taking into consideration the great ne∣cessities of the State, and preparation of the enemies, they granted first unto the Queen, a Subsidy of eight shillings in the pound, to be paid in four years, beginning after the last payment of the former grant; and because the Laity at that time had charged themselves with horse and armour for defence of the Realm; the Clergy also did the like according to their several Orders and abilities. For the imposing whereof upon the rest of the Clergy, they had no recourse at all unto the Midwifry of an Act of Parliament, but acted the whole business in their own Synodical way, without contradiction. But the main business of this year, in reference to the concernments of ho∣ly Church related to the Cadinal Legate; against whom the Pope had borne an inveterate grudge, sharpned by the suggestions of Bishop Gardiner, as be∣fore was signified. Being of himself a rigorous man, and one that was ex∣treamly wedded to his own opinion, he had so passionately espoused the quar∣rel of the French against the Spaniard, that he intended to divest Philip of the Realm of Naples, and to confer it on the French. For this cause Francis Duke of Guise with a puissant army is drawn into Italy for the subduing of that King∣dom, but suddenly recalled again, upon the routing of the French before St Quintin, wherein the English forces had appeared so serviceable. Which gave the Pope so much displeasure, that he resolved to let his greatest enemies feel the dint of his spirit. But not daring upon second thoughts to fall foul with the Queen, he turned his fury against Pole, by whose perswasion it was thought that the Queen had broke her league with France to take part with her husband. In which humour he deprives him of the Legantin power, confers the same on Frier Peitow an English man by birth, but of good descent, whom he designs also to the See of Salisbury, then vacant by the death of Capo. Karn the Queens Agent with the Pope, advertiseth her Majesty of these secret practices, which the Queen concealing from the Cardinal, endeavoureth by all fair and gentle means to mitigate the Pope's displeasure, and confirm the Cardinal in the place and power which he then enjoyed. But the Pope not a man to be easily altered, Pole in the mean time understanding how things went at Rome, laid by the Cross of his Legation, and prudently abstaineth from the exercise of his Bulls and Faculties. Peitow the new Cardinal Legate, puts himself on the way to England, when the Queen taking to her self some part of her fathers spirit, commands him at his utmost peril, not to adventure to set foot upon English ground; to which he readily inclined, as being more affected unto Cardinal Pole, than desirous to shew himself the servant of another mans passion. In the end, partly by the Queens mediation, the intercession of Ormaenete, the good successes of the French in the taking of Calais, but principally by the death of Peitow in the April following, the rupture was made up again, and Pole confir∣med in the possession of his former powers.
The fear of running the like hazard for the time to come, made him appear more willing to connive at his under Officers, in shedding the blood of many godly and religious persons, than otherwise he would have been. Whereup∣on followed the burning of ten men in the Diocess of Canterbury, on the 15th of January, whereof two suffered at Ashford, two at Ri, and the other six in his own Metropolitan City; and possibly the better to prepare the Pope towards this Attonement, the Queen was moved to issue her Commission of the month of February, directed to the Bishop of Ely, the Lords, Windsor, North, and seventeen others, by which the said Commissioners, or any the, or more of them, were impowred to enquire of all and singular Heretical opinions, Lollardies, Heretical and seditious books, concealents, contempts, con∣spiracies, and all false tales, rumours, seditious or slanderous words, &c. As also seize into their hands all manner of Heretical and seditious Books, Let∣ters and Writings, wheresoever they, or any of them should be found, as well in Printers houses, and shops, as elsewhere, willing them, and every of them, to search for the same in all places according to their discretions. And finally to enquire after ll such persons as obstinately do refuse to receive the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, to hear Mass, or coe to their Parish Churches, and all such as refuse to go on Procession, to take holy bread, or holy water, or otherwise misuse themselves in any Church or hallowed place, &c. The party so offending to be proceeded against according to the Ecclesiasti∣cal Lawes, or otherwise by fine or imprisonment, as to them seemed best. But the Commissioners being many in number, persons of honour and im∣ployment for the most part of them, there was little or nothing done in pursu∣ance of it, especially as to the searching after prohibited books; the number whereof increasing every day more and more, a Proclamation was set forth on the 6th. of June, to hinder the continual spreading of so great a mischief. Which Proclamation was as followeth, viz. Whereas divers books filled with Hersie, Sedition, and Treason, have of late been dayly brought into this Realm out of forein Countries and places beyond the seas, and some co∣vertly printed within this Realm, and cast abroad in sundry parts thereof; whereby not only god is dishonoured, but also incouragement given to disobey lawful Princes and Governours; the King and Queens Majesties for redress hereof, do by their present Proclamation, declare and publish to all their subjects, that whosoever shall after the Proclamation hereof, be found to have any of the said wicked and seditious books, or finding them, do not forthwith burn the same, without shewing or reading the same to any other persons, shall in that case be reputed and taken for a rebel, and shall without further delay be executed for that offence, according to the order of Martial Law. Which Proclamation though it were very smart and quick, yet there was somewhat of more mercy in it, than in another which came out in the very same month, at the burning of seven persons in Smithfield, publish∣ed both at Newgate, where they were imprisoned, and at the stake where they were to suffer; whereby it was straightly charged and commanded, That no man should either pray for, or speak to them, or once say God help them. A cruelty more odious than that of Domitian, or any of the greatest Tyrants of the elder times, in hindering all entercourse of speech, upon some jealousie and distrusts of State between man and man. Which Proclamation notwithstanding, Bentham the Minister of one of the London Congregations, seeing the fire set to them, turning his eyes unto the people, cried and said, We know they are the people of God, and therefore we cannot chuse but wish well to them, and say God strengthen them; and so boldly he said, Almighty God for Christs sake strengthen them. With that all the people with one consent cryed Amen, Amen, the noise whereof was so great, and the cryers so many, that the Officers knew not whom to seize o, or with whom they were to begin their accusation. And though peradvnture
it may seem to have somewhat of a miracle in it,An. Reg. Mar. 5. 155. that the Protestants should have a Congregation under Bonner's nose; yet so it was, that the godly people of that time were so little terrified with the continual thoughts of that bloody Butcher, that they maintained their constant meetings for religious offices, even in London it self; in one of which Congregations, that namely whereof Bentham was at this time Minister, there assembled seldome under 40. many times 100. and sometimes 200. but more or less as it stood most with their conveniency and safety. The Ministers of which successively were Mr Ed∣ward Scambler, after Bishop of Peterborough, Mr Thomas Foule, of whom I find nothing but the name, Mr John Rough, a Scot by Nation, convented and con∣demned by Bonner, and suffering for the testimony of a good conscience, December 20. After whom followed Mr Augustine Bernher, a moderate and learned man; And finally, Mr Thomas Bentham before mentioned, who conti∣nued in that charge till the death of Queen Mary, and was by Queen Elizabeth preferred to the See of Lichfield, Anno 1589. By the encouragement and con∣stant preaching of which pious men, the Protestant party did not only stand to their former principle, but were resolved to suffer whatsoever could be laid upon them, rather than forfeit a good conscience, or betray the cause. They had not all the opportunity of such holy meetings, but they me frequently e∣nough in smaller companies, to animate and comfort one another in those great extremities. Nor sped the Queen much better in her Proclamation of the sixth of June, concerning the suppression of prohibited Books; but notwithstanding all the care of her Inquisitors, many good Books of true Christian Consolation and good Protestant Doctrine, did either find some Press in London, or were sent over to their brethren by such learned men as had retired themselves to their several Sanctuaries, their places of Retreat, which not improperly may be cal∣led their Cities of Refuge, which we have seen already; amongst which, I find none but Embden in the Lutheran Countries, the rigid Professors of which Churches abominated nothing more than an English Protestant, because they concurred not with them in the monstrous Doctrine of Ubiquity, and their device of Consubstantiation. Insomuch thatIn summo cum ess oio, quod Anglos pro hospi∣tio suscrat, &c. P. Mart. Epist. Ubi vocifra∣tur quidam, Martyres An∣glicos, esse Martyres Dia∣b, In epist. octob. 8. Peter Martyr telleth us of a friend of his in the Dukedom of Saxony, that he was generally hated by the rest of Country-men, for being hospitable to some few of the English Nation, who had been forced to abandon their native soil. And it is further signified by b Ph. Melancthon with no small dislike, in an Epistle of this year, that many of those rigid Lutheans could find no other name but the Devils Martyrs, for such as suffered death in England in defence of Religion; so that they seemed to act the part of Diotrephes in St John, not only prating against us with malicious words, and refusing to receive the brethren in the day of their trouble, but for∣bidding and condemning them that would. But John Alasco and his company had been lately there, where they spoke so reprochfully of Luther, the Augu∣stan Confession, the Rites and Ceremonies of their Churches, as rendred them uncapable of any better entertainment than they found amongst them. And by the behaviour of these men coming then from England, the rigid Lutherans passed their judgement on the Church it self, and consequently on all those who suffered in defence thereof. For stopping the course of which unchari∣table censures, it was thought fit by some of the Divines in Embden, that Archbishop Cranmers book about the Sacrament▪ should be translated into La∣tin, and forthwith published in Print, which was done accordingly. Some of the Lutherans had given out on the former ground, that the English had deservedly suffered the greatest hardships both at home and abroad, because they writ and spake less reverently of the blessed Sacrament; and it was hoped that by the publishing of this book, they would find the contrary. The like course taken also at Geneva by the English exiles, by publishing in the Latin tongue, a dis∣course writ by Bishop Ridley on the self same Argument, to the end it might appear unto all the world how much their brethren had been wronged in these odious calumnies.
An. Reg. Mar. 6o An. Dom. 1558, 1559.An. Reg. Mar. 6. 1558. BUt in the middest of all these sorrowes, I see some hope of comfort coming by the death of Queen Mary, whose Reign polluted with the blood of so many Martyrs, unfortunate by the frequent insurrections, and made inglorious by the loss of the Town of Calais, was only commendable in the brevity or shortnesse of it. For now to bring it to an end, a dangerous and contagious Feaver began to rage in most parts of the land, insomuch that if the whole Realm had been divided into four parts, three parts of the four would have been found infected with it, so furiously it raged in the month of August, that no former plague or pestilence was thought to have destroyed a greater number, so that divers places were left void of Justices and men of worth to govern the Kingdom. At which time died also so many Priests, that a great number of Parish Churches in divers places were unserved, and no urats could be gotten for mony: Much corn was also lost in the field for want of la∣bourers and workmen to get it in; both which together seemed to threaten not onely a spiritual but a temporal famine; though God so ordered it, that by the death of so many of the present Clergy, a door was opened for the preaching of sounder Doctrine, with far less envy and displeasure from all sorts of people than it had been otherwise: Nor were the heats of the disease abated by the coldness of the winter, or the malignity of it mitigated by me∣dicinal courses. It took away the Physicians as well as the Patients, two of the Queens Doctors dying of it not long before her, and spared not more the Pre∣late than it did the Priest, insomuch that within less than the space of a twelvemonth, almost the one half of the English Bishops had made void their Sees; which with the death of so many of the Priests in several places, did much facilitate the way to that Reformation, which soon after followed. This terrible disease, together with the said effects which followed on it▪ and the Queens death which came along with it, though not caused by it, may seem to have been prognosticated or foretold by a dreadful tempest of thunder, hapning on the 11th. of July near the Town of Nottingham, which Tempest as it came through two Towns, beat down all the Houses and Churches, the Bells were cast to the outside of the Church-yard, and some sheets of Lead four hundred foot into the field, wrihen like a pair of gloves. The River of Trent running between which two Towns, the water with the mud in the bottom was carried a quarter of a mile and cast against the trees, the trees plucked up by the roots, and from thence cast twelve-score paces; al∣so a child was was taken forth of a mans hand, and by the fury of it carried an hundred foot, two spears length from the ground, and so fell down, broke its arm, and dyed. Five or six men thereabouts were slain, and neither flesh nor skin perished; at what time also there fell some Hailstones that were fifteen inches about, &c. But neither that terrible disease, nor this terrible tempest, nor any other publick signe of God's displeasure, abated any thing of the fury of the Persecution, till he was pleased to put an end unto it by the death of the Queen. It was upon the tenth day of November that no fewer than five at once were burned at Canterbury. The Cardinal and the Queen both lying on the bed of sickness, and both dying within seven days after. It had been prayed or prophesied by those five Martyrs when they were at the stake, that they might be the last who should suffer death in that manner, or on that oc∣casion; and by Gods mercy so it proved, they being the last which suffered death under the severity of this persecution. Which Persecution, and the carriage of the Papists in it, is thus described by Bishop Jewel, You have (saith he) imprisoned your brethren, you have stript them naked, you have scourged them with rods, you have burnt their hands and arms with flaming torches, you have famished them, you have
drowned them, you have summoned them being dead to appear before you out of their graves, you have ripped up their buried carcases, burnt them, and thrown them out upon the Dughil, you took a poor Babe falling from its mothers womb, and in most cruel and barbarous manner threw it ino the fire. By all which several ways and means, the Martyrs in all parts of the Kingdom amounted to the number of two hundred seventy seven persons of all sorts and sexes; But more particularly there are said to have perished in these flames five Bishops, twenty one Divines, eight Gentlemen, eighty four Artificers, one hundred Husbandmen Servants and Labourers, twenty six Wives, twenty Widows, nine Virgins, two Boys, and two Infants; the one springing out of his mothers womb as she was at the stake, and most unmer∣cifully flung into the fire in the very birth. Sixty four more in those furious times were presented for their faith, whereof seven were whipped, sixteen peri∣shed in prison, twelve buried in Dunghills, and many more lay in captivity condemned, which were delivered by the opportune death of Queen Mary, and the most auspicious entrance of Queen Elizabeth, whose gracious go∣vernment blotted out the remembrance of all former sufferings; the different conditions of whose Reigns, with the former two, may seem to have some∣what in them of those appearances which were presented to Elijah in the Book of Kings, in the first Bok and ninteenth Chapter, wherein we find it written, That a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord, but the Lord was not in the wind; and after the wind an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake; and after the earthquake a fire, but the Lord was not in the fire; and finally after the fire a still small voice, in which the Lord spake unto his Prophet: So in like manner it may be feared, that God was neither in that great and terrible wind, which threw down so ma∣ny Monasteries and Religious houses in the Reign of King Henry; nor in that Earthquake, which did so often shake the very foundations of the State in the time of King Edward; nor in the Fire, in which so many godly and religious persons were consumed to ashes in the days of Queen Mary; but that he shewed himself in that still small Voice, which breathed so much comfort to the souls of his people, in the most gracious and fortunate Government of a Vir∣gin-Queen. For now it pleased God to hearken to the cry of those his Saints which lay under the Altar, and called upon him for an end of those calamities, to which their dear brethren were exposed. The Queen had inclined unto a Dopsie ever since the time of her supposed being with child; which inclination ap∣peared in her more and more, when her swelling fell from the right place to her lower parts, increasing irrecoverably in despight of Physick, till at last it brought her to her death. But there are divers other causes which are sup∣posed to have contributed their concurrence in it; Philip, upon the resigna∣tion of his fathers Kingdoms and Estates, had many necessary occasions to be out of the Kingdom, and yet she thought, that he made more occasions than he needed, to be absent from her; This brought her first into a fancy that he cared not for her, which drew her by degrees into a fixed and setled melan∣cholly, confirmed, if not encreased, by a secret whisper, that Philip entertain∣ed some wandring Loves when he was in Flanders. Her Glasses could not so much flatter as not to tell her, that she had her fathers feitures with her mo∣thers complexion; and she was well enough able to inform her self, that the e∣verity of her humour had no great charms in it, so that on the point she want∣ed many of those natural and acquired attractions, which might have served to invite or reward affection▪ Fixed on this melancholy pin, the death of Charls the Emperour, which hapned on the 2 of September, comes to help it for∣ward; a Prince, upon whose countenance and support she had much depend∣ed, both when she was in disgrace with her father, and out of favour with her brother. But that which came nearest to her heart was the loss of Calais, first lost for want of giving credit to the intelligence which had been sent her by
her Husband; and secondly by the loss of that opportunity which might have been taken to regain it. Monsieur ' Termes who was made Governour of the Town, had drained it of the greatest part of the Garison to joyn with some other forces, for the taking of some Towns in Flander; But in a Battel fought near Graveling on the 13th. of July, he lost not onely his own liberty, but more then five thousand of his men; the fortune of the day falling so heavily on the Soldiers of Calais, that few of them escaped with life▪ So that if the Queens Navy, which had done great service in the fight, had showed it self before the Town, and Count Egmond who commanded the Flemmings had sate down with his victorious Army to the Landward of it, it might have been recovered in as few days as it had been lost. This opportunity being neglected, she gave her self some hopes of a resti∣tution upon an agreement then in treaty between France and Spain. But when all other matters were accorded between those Crowns, and that nothing else was wanting to compose all differences but the restoring of this Town, the French were absolutely resolved to hold it, and the Spaniards could in honor make no Peace without it. So the whole Treaty, and the deceiptful hopes which she built upon it, came at last to nothing. And though she had somewhat eased her self not long before, by attainting the Lord Wntworth and certain others, for their cowardly quitting of the place, which they could not hold; yet that served onely like a cup of Strong-waters for the present qualm, with∣out removing the just cause of the present distemper. And it encreased so plainly in her, that when some of her Visitants, not knowing the cause of her discomforts, applyed their several cordials to revive her spirits, she told them in plain tearms, that they were mistaken in the nature of her disease; and that if she were to be dissected after her death, they would find Calais next her heart. Thus between jealousie, shame, and sorrow, taking the growth of her infirmity amongst the rest, she became past the help of Physick. In which extre∣mity she began to entertain some thoughts of putting here sister Elizabeth be∣side the Crown, and setling the Succession of it on her cousen the Queen of Scots; and she had done it, (at the least as much as in her was) if some of the Council had not told her, That neither the Act of the Succession, nor the Last Will and Testament of King Henry the Eighth which was built upon it, could otherwise be repealed, than by the general consent of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. So that being altogether out of hope of having her will upon her sister, of recovering Calais, of enjoying the company of her husband, and reigning in the good affection of her injured subjects; she gave her self over to those sorrows which put an end to her life on the 17th. of November, some few hours before day, when she had reigned five years and four months wanting two days onely. Her death accompanied within few howers after by that of the Lord Cardinal-Legat, ushered in by the decease of Purefew, alias Wharton, Bishop of Hereford, and Holyman the new Bishop of Bristow, and Glyn of Bangor, and followed within two or three months after by Hopton Bishop of Norwich, and Brooks of Glocester: As if it had been necessary in point of State, that so great a Princess should not die without some of her Bishops going before, and some comming after. Her funeral solemnized at Westminster with a Mass of Reqiem, in the wonted form, on the 13th. of Decem∣ber then next following, and her body interred on the North side of the Cha∣pel of King Henry the seventh, her beloved Grandfather. I shall not trouble my self with giving any other character of this Queen, than what may be gathered from her story, much less in descanting on that which is made by others, who have heaped upon her many gracious praise∣worthy qualities of which, whether she were Mistress or not, I dispute not now. She was indeed a great Benefactresse to the Clergy, in releasing them of their Tenths and First-fruits; but she lost nothing by the bargain, the Clergy paid her back again in their Bills of Subsidies, which growing into an annual payment for seven years together, and every Subsidy amounting to a double
Tenth, conduced as visibly to the constant fillng of the Exchequer, as the payment of the Tenths and First-fruits had done before. That which went clearly out of her purse without retribution, was the re-edifying and endow∣ment of some few Religious Houses, mentioned in their proper place; she al∣so built the publick Schools in the University of Oxon, for which commemo∣rated in the list of their Benefactors; which being decayed in tract of time, and of no beautiful structure when they were at the best, were taken down about the year 1612. in place whereof, but on a larger extent of ground, was raised that goodly and magnificent Fabrick which we now behold. And though she had no followers in her first foundations, yet by the last she gave encourage∣ment to two worthy Gentlement to add two new Colleges in Oxon to the former number. Sir homas Pope, one of the Visitors of Abeys and other Re∣ligious Houses in the time of King Henry, had got into his hands a small College in Oxon, long before founded by the Bishop and Prior of Dur∣ham, to serve for a Nursery of Novices to that greater Monastery; with some of the Lands thereunto belonging, and some others of his own, he erected it into a new Foundation, consisting of a President, twelve Fellows, and as ma∣ny Scholars, and called it by the name of Trinity College; A College suffici∣ently famous for the education of the learned and renowned Selden, who needs no other Ttles of honor than what may be gathered from his Books, and the giving of eight thousand Volumes of all sorts to the Oxford Library. Grea∣ter, as to the number of Fellows and Scholars, was the Foundation of Sir Thomas White, Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1553. being the first year of the Queen; who in the place where formerly stood an old House or Hostel, com∣monly called Barnards Inne, erected a new College by the name of St. John Baptists College, consisting of a President, fifty Fellows and Scholars, besides some Officers and Servants which belonged to the Chapel, the vacant places to be filled for the most part out of the Merchant Taylors School in London, of which Company he had been free before his Mayoralty. A College founded as it seems in a lucky hour, affording to the Church in less than the space of eighty years no fewer than two Archbishops and four Bishops, that is to say, Doctor William Laud the most renowned Archbishop of Canterbury, of whom more else-where, Doctor Tobi Matthews the most reverend Archbishop of York, Doctor William Juxon Bishop of London and Lord Treasurer, Doctor John Bucheridge Bishop of Elie, Doctor Rowand Serchfield Bishop of Bristol, Doctor Boyl Bishop of Cork in the Realm of Ireland. Had it not been for these Foundations, there had been nothing in this Reign to have made it memorable, but onely the calamities and misfortunes of it.
ECCLESIA RESTAVRATA▪ OR, THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION of the CHURCH OF ENGLAND: CONTAINING The Beginning, Progress, and Successes of it; the Counsels, by which it was conducted; the Rules of Piety, and Prudence, upon which it was Founded; the several Steps, by which it was promoted, or retarded, in the Change of Times: FROM The first Preparations to it by King HENRY the Eight, untill the Legal Settling, and Establishment of it under Queen ELIZABETH: TOGETHER With the Intermixture of such Civil Actions, and Affairs of State, as either were Co-incident with it, or related to it. BY PETER HEYLYN. LONDON, Printed for H. Twyford, T. Dring, J. Place, W. Palmer; to be sold in Vine-Court, Middle-Temple, the George in Fleet-street, Furnival's Inne-Gate in Holborn, and the Palm-Tree in Fleet-street, MDCLXI.
To the Most Sacred MAJESTY OF KING CHARLES THE SECOND. Most Gracious Sovereign, IT was an usual Saying of King JAMES (Your Majestie's most Learned Grand-Fa∣ther) of Blessed Memory, that, Of all the Churches in the World, He knew not any which came nearer to the Primitive Pat∣tern, for Doctrine, Government, and Wor∣ship, then the Reformed Church of England. A Saying, which He built not upon Fancy, and Affection onely; but on such Just, and Solid Reasons, as might sufficiently endear it to all Knowing Men. The Truth, and Certainty whereof, will be made apparent by the following History, which here, in all Hu∣mility, is offered to Your Majestie's View. It is (Dread Sir) an History of the Reformation of the Church of ENGLAND, with all the Various Fortunes, and Successes of it, from the first Agitations in Religion under HENRY the Eight (which served for a Preamble thereunto) until the Legal Settling, and Establishment of it by the great Queen ELIZABETH, of Happy Memory. A Piece not to be Dedicated to any other, then Your Sacred Majesty; who, being rais'd by God, to be a Nursing-Father to this part of His Church, may possibly discharge that
Duty with the Greater Tenderness, when You shall finde upon what Rules of Piety, and Christian Prudence, the Work was carryed on by the first Reformers. Which being once found, it will be no hard matter to determine of such Means, and Coun∣sels, whereby the Church may be restored to her Peace, and Pu∣rity; from which She is most miserably fallen by our late Distra∣ctions. It cannot be denyed, but that some Tares grew up almost immediatly with the Wheat it self; and seem'd so specious to the Eye, in the Blade, or Stalk, that they were taken by some Credulous, and Confiding Men, for the better Grain. But still they were no more then Tares, distinguished easily in the Fruits (the Fruits of Errour, and False Doctrine; of Facti∣on, Schism, Disorder, and perhaps Sedition) from the LORD'S good Seed. And, being of an ater sowing (a Supersemina∣tion, as the Vulgar reads it) and sown on purpose by a Cunning, and Industrious Enemy, to raise an Harvest to himself, they neither can pretend to the same Antiquity, and much less to the Purity of that Sacred Seed, with which the Field was sown, at first, by the Heavenly Husband-man. I leave the Application of this Parable to the following History, and shall conclude with this Address to Almighty God; That, as He hath restored Your Majesty to the Throne of Your Father, and done it in so strange a manner, as makes it seem a Miracle in the Eyes of Christendom; so He would settle You in the same, on so sure a Bottom, that no Design of Mischievous, and Unquiet Men may disturb Your Peace, or detract any thing from those Felici∣ties, which You have acquired. So prayeth, Dread Sovereign, Your Majestie's most obedient Servant, and most Loyal Subject, PETER HEYLYN.
To the Reader. READER, I Here present thee with a Piece of as great variety, as can be easily comprehended in so narrow a compass; the History of an Affair of such Weight, and Conse∣quence, as had a powerful Influence on the rest of Christendome: It is an History of the Reformation of the Church of England, from the first Agitations in Religion under HENRY the Eight, untill the final settling, and establishing of it (in Doctrine, Government, and Worship) under the Fortunate, and most Glorious Reign of Queen ELIZABETH. Nor hast thou here a bare Relation onely of such Passages, as those Times afforded, but a discovery of those Counsels, by which the Action was conducted; the Rules of Piety and Prudence, upon which it was carryed; the several steps, by which it was promoted, or retarded in the Change of Times; together with the Intercurrence of such civil Concernments, both at home, and abroad, as either were co-incident with it, or related to it. So that We may affirm of this present History, as Florus doth of his Compendium of the Roman Sto∣ries, Ut non tam populi unius, quam totius generis humani; that is to say, That it contains not onely the Affairs of one State, or Nation, but, in a manner, of the greatest part of all Civil Governments. The Work first hinted by a Prince of an undanted Spirit, the Master of as great a Courage, as the World had any; and, to say truth, the Work required it: He durst not else have grapled with that mighty Adversary, who, claiming to be Successour to St. Peter in the See of Rome, and Vicar-General
to Christ over all the Church, had gained unto himself an ab∣solute Sovereignty over all Christian Kings and Princes in the We∣stern Empire: But this King being violently hurried with the tran∣sport of some private Affections, and finding that the Pope appeared the greatest Obstacle to his desires, he first divested him by degrees of that Supremacy, which had been challenged, and enjoyed by his Pre∣decessours for some Ages past; and finally, extinguished His Autho∣rity in the Realm of England, without noise, or trouble; to the great ad∣miration and astonishment of the rest of the Christian World This opened the first way to the Reformation, and gave encouragement to those, who enclined unto it: To which the King afforded no small Countenance, out of Politick Ends, by suffering them to have the Bible in the English ongue, and to enjoy the benefit of such Godly Tractates, as openly discovered the Corruptions of the Church of Rome. But, for his own part, he adhered to his old Religion, severely persecuted those, who dissented from it, and dyed (though Excommu∣nicated) in that Faith, and Doctrine▪ which he had sucked in, as it were, with his Mother's Milk; and of the wich he shewd himself so stout a Champion against Martin Luther, in his first Quarrels with the Pope. Next comes a Minor on the Stage, just, mild and gracious; whose Name was made a Property to serve turns withall, and his Authority abused (as commonly it happeneth on the like occsions) to his own undoing. In his first year, the Reformation was resolved on, but on different ends; endeavoured by some Godly Bshops, and other Lear∣ned and Religious Men of the lower Clergy, out of Judgment & Con∣science; who managed the Affair according to the Word of God, the Practice of the Primitive Times, the general current and consent of the old Catholick Doctours; but not without an Eye to such Foreign Churches, as seemed to have most consonancy to the antient Forms: Promoted with like Zeal, and Industry, but not with like Integrity, and Christian Candour, by some great men about the Court; who, under colour of removing such Corruptions, as remained in the Church, had cast their yes upon the spoil of Shrines, and Images (though still preserved in the greatest part of the Lutheran Churches) and the improving of their own Fortunes by the hantery-Lands: All which, most sacrilegiously they divided amongst themselves, without admitting the poor King to his share therein; though nothing but the filling of his Coffers, by the spoil of the one, and the encrease of his
Revenue, by the fall of the other, was openly pretended in the Con∣duct of it. But separating this bliquity from the main Intendment, the Work was vigorously carryed on by the King, and his Councel∣lours; as appears clearly by the Doctrinals in the Book of Homilies and by the Practical part of Christian Pety, in the first Publick Liturgie con∣firmed by Act of Parliament, in the second and third year of this King; and in that Act (and, which is more, by Fox himself) affirmed to have been done by the especial aid of the Holy Ghost. And here the business might have rested, if Catvin's Pragmatical Spirit had not interposed: He first began to quarrel at some passages in this Sacred Liturge▪ and afterwards never left solliciting the Lord Protectour, and practising by his Agents on the Court, the Countrey, and the Universities, till he had laid the first Foundation of the Zuinglian Faction, who laboured nothing more, then Innovation both in Doctrine, and Discipline. To which they were encouraged by nothing more, then some improvident Indul∣gence granted unto John A-Lasco; Who bringing with him a mixt mul∣titude of Poles, and Germans, obtained the Privilege of a Church for himself and his distinct in Government, and Forms of Worship, from the Church of England. This gave a powerful animation to the Zuinglian Gospellers (as they are called by Bishop Hooper, and some other Writers) to practise first upon the Church; who being countenanced, if not headed by the Earl of Warwick (who then began to undermine the Lord Protectour) first quarrelled the Episcopal Habit, and afterwards inveighed against Caps, and Surplices, against Gowns, and Tippets; but fell at last upon the Altars, which were left standing in all Churches by the Rules of the Liturgie. The touching on this String made excellent Musick to most of the Grandees of the Court, who had before cast many an en∣vious Eye on those costly Hangings tht Massie Plate, and other rich and preious Utensils, which adorned those Altars. And What need all this waste? said Judas; when one poor Chalice onely, and perhaps not that, might have served the turn. Besides, there was no small spoil to be made of Copes, in which the Priest officiated at the Holy Sacrament; some of them being made of Cloth of Tyssue, of Cloth of Gold and Silver, or embroidered Velvet; the meanest being made of Silk, or Sat∣tin, with some decent Trimming. And might not these be handsomly converted unto private uses, to serve as Carpets for their Tables, Co∣verlids
to their Beds, or Cushions to heir Chairs, or Windows. Here∣upon some rude People are encouraged under-hand to beat down some Altars, which makes way for an Order of the Counci-Table, to take down the rest, and set up Tables in their places; Followed by a Commission, to be executed in all parts of the Kingdom, for seising on the Premises to the use of the King. But as the Grandees of the Court intended to defraud the King of so great a Booty and the Commissio∣ners to put a Cheat upon the Court-Lords, who employed them in it: So they were both prevented in some places by the ods, and Gentry of the Countrey▪ who thought the Altar-Cloths, together with the Copes▪ and late of their several Churches, to be as necessary for them∣selves, as for any others. his Change drew on the Alteration of the former Liturg, reviewed by certain Godly Prelates, reduced almost into the same Form, in which now it stands, and confirmed by Parlia∣ment in the 5th and 6th years of this King; but almost as unpleasing to the Zuinglian Faction, as the former was. In which Conjuncture of Affairs dyed King Edward the Sixth. From the beginning of whose Reign, the Church accounts the poche of a Reformation. All, that was done in oder to it, under Henr the Eight▪ seemed to be accidental one∣ly▪ and by the by rather designed on private Ends, then out of any set∣led purpose to eform the Church, and therefore intermitted, and resu∣med again, as those Ends had variance. But now the Work was car∣ried on wih a constant Hand, the Prelates of the Church co-operating with the King and his Council, and each contriving with the other▪ for the Honour of it. Scarce had they brought it to this pass, when King Edwad dyed, whose Death I cannot reckon for an Infelicity to the Church of England: For being ill-principled in himself, and easily inclined to embrace such Counsels as were offered to Him; it is not to be thought, but that the rest of the Bishopricks (before sufficiently empoverished) mut have followed Durham, and the poor Church be left as destitute of Lands, and Ornaments, as when she came into the World in Her Natural Nakedness. Nor was it like to happen other∣wise in the following Reign, if it had lasted longer then a Nine Day's Wonder. For Dudley of Northumberland, who then ruled the Roast, and had before dissolved, and in hope devoured▪ the Wealthy Bishprick of Durham, might easily have possessed himself of the greatest part of the Revenues of York, and Carlisle. By means whereof, He would have made himself more absolute on the North-side of the Trent, then the
poor Titular Queen (a most virtuous Lady) could have been suffered to continue on the South side of it. To carry on whose Interess, and maintain Her Title, the poor re∣mainder of the Church's Patrimony was, in all probability, to have been shared amongst those of that Party, to make them sure unto the side. But the Wisdom of this great Achitophel▪ being turned to foolishness, He fell into the Hands of the Publick Hang-man, and thereby saved himself the labour of becoming his own Executioner. Now MARY comes to Act Her Part, and She drives on furiously: Her Personal Interess had strongly byassed Her to the Church of Rome; On which depended the Vali∣dity of Her Mother's Marriage, and consequently Her own Legitimation, and Succession, to the Crown of this Realm. And it was no hard matter for Her, in a time unsettled, to Repeal all the Acts of Her Brother's Reign, and after to re∣store the Pope unto that Supremacy, of which Her Father had deprived Him▪ A Reign Calamitous, and unfortunate to Her Self, and Her Subjects; Unfortunate to Her Self in the loss of Calais; Calamitous to Her Subjects, by ma∣ny Insurrections, and Executions; but more by the effu∣sion of the Bloud of so many Martys. For though she gave a Check to the Rapacity of the former Times; yet the Pro∣fessours of the Reformation paid dearly for it, whose Bloud she caused to be poured forth, like Water, in most parts of the Kingdom; but no where more abundantly, then in Bonner's Slaughter-House: Which being within the view of the Court, and under Her own Nose (as the Saying is) must needs entitle Her to a great part of those Horrid Cruelties, which almost every day were acted by that bloudy Butcher. The Schism at Frankot took beginning in the same time also, occasioned by some Zealots of the Zuinglian Faction; who needs must lay aside the use of the Publick Liturgie (retained by all the rest of the English Exiles) the better to make way for such Forms of Worship, as seemed more con∣sonant to Calvin's Platform, and the Rules of Geneva:
Which woful Schism, so wretchedly begun in a Foreign Na∣tion, they laboured to promote by all sinister Practises in the Church of England, when they returned from Exile in the following Reign. The miserable Effects whereof we feel too sensibly and smartly, to this very day. But the great Business of this Reign related to the restitu∣tion of the Abbey-Lands▪ end eavoured earnestly by the Queen, and no less strenuously opposed by the then present Own∣ers, who had all the reason in the World to maintain that Right, which by the known Laws of the Land, had been ve∣sted in them▪ For when the Monasteries, and Religious Houses, had been dissolved by several Acts of Parliament, in the time of King Henry; the Lands belonging to those Houses were by those Acts, conferr'd upon the King and His Successours, Kings, and Queens of England. Most of which Lands were either exchanged for others with the Lords, and Gentry, or sold, for valuable Consideration, to the rest of the Subjects. All which Exchanges, Grants, and Sales, were passed, and Confirmed by the King's Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England, in due Form of Law; Which gave unto the Patentees as good a Title, as the Law could make them. This was well known unto the Pope, and He knew well upon what ticklish Terms He stood with the Lords, and ommons, then Assembled in Parliament; whom i He did not gratifie with some Signal Favour, He could not hope to be restored by them to His former Power: for, being deprived of His Supemacy by Act of Parliament in the Time of King HENRY, He could not be restored unto it, but by Act of Parliamnt in the time of Queen MARY; and no such Ast could be obtained, or compassed for Him, without a Confirmation of Church-ands to the present Owners. To which Necessity Pope Julius being forced to submit Himself, He issueth a Decree, accompanied with some Reasons, which might seem to induce Him to it, for confirming all such Lands on the present Occupants, of which they stood possessed
(justo Titulo) by a Lawful Title. And this was onely reckon∣ed by him for a Lawful Title; First, that they were possessed of the said Lands (juxta Leges hujus Regni pro tempore existentes) according to the Laws of the Land which were thn in force; whether by Purchase, or by Gift, or in the way of Exchange: which are the words of the Decree. And secondly, If the said Lands were warranted, and confirmed unto them, by Letters Patents from the two last Kings; (qui per literas Patentes easdem Terras Warantizrunt) as is declared in the Second of the following Reasons. For which Consult the Book, En∣tituled, No Sacrilege, nor Sin, to purchase Cathedrl-Lands, &c. page 52. Where still observe, that nothing made a Lawful Title in the Pope's Opinion, but the King's Let∣ters Patents, grounded on the Laws of the Land, as is ex∣pressed more clearly in the former Passages. But this can no way serve the Turn of some present Purchasers, though much insisted on by one of that number, to justifie his de∣facing of an Episcopal Palace, and his pretensions to the Wealthy Borough, which depended on it; For, certainly, there must needs be a vast disproportion between such Contracts▪ as were founded upon Acts of Parliament, Legally passed by the King's Authority, with the Consent, and Ap∣probation of the Three Estates, and those, which have no other Ground, but the bare Votes, and Orders, of both Houses onely, and perhaps not that. And by this Logick, he may as well justifie the late horrid Murther committed on the most incomparable Majesty of King CHARLES the First, as stand upon the making good of such Grants, and Sates, as were Contracted for, with some of those very Men, who Voted to the setting up of the High Court of Ju∣stice, as most ridiculously, they were pleased to call it: When I shall see him do the one, I must bethink my self of some further Arguments to refute the other. And so Queen MARY makes Her Exit, and leaves the Stage to Queen ELIZABETH, Her younger Sister; A Princess, which had long been trained up in the
Schole of Experience, and knew the Temper of the People, whom She was to Govern; who, having generally em∣braced the Reformed Religion, in the Time of Her Brother, most passionately desired the Enjoyment of it under Her Protection; And She accordingly resolved to satisfie the Piety of their Desire, as soon as She had Power, and Opportunity, to go thorough with it. In Pro∣secution of which Work, She raised Her whole Fa∣brick on the same Foundation, which had been lay'd by the Reformers in the Reign of King EDWARD; that is to say, the Word of God, the Practise of the Primitive Times, the General Current of the Fathers▪ and the Example of such Churches, as seemed to retain most in them of the Antient Forms. But then She added thereunto such an equal mixture, both of Strengh, and Beauty, as gave great Lu∣stre to the Church, and drew along with it many rare Fe∣licities on the Civil State, both Extraordinary in them∣selves, and of long Continuance, as the most Excellent King IAMESIn His Proclama∣tion of March 5th 1603. hath right-well observed: So that We may affirm of the Reformation of the Church of England, as the HistorianQuibus ar∣tibus Imperii fundamenta locavit Pa∣ter▪ iisdem operis ttius gloriam con∣summavit Filius. Just. lib. 6. doth of the Power and Great∣ness of the Realm of Macedon; that is to say, that The same Arts, by which the first Foundations of it were laid by PHILIP, were practised in the Consummation, and Ac∣complishment of it, by the Care of ALEXANDER. For, in the first Year of Her Reign, the Liturgie, being first Reviewed, and qualified in some Particulars, was con∣firmed by PARLIAMENT; in Her first Year, the Articles of Religion were agreed upon the Convoca∣tion; and in the Eight, the Government of the Church, by Arch-Bishops, and Bishops, received as strong a Con∣firmation, as the Laws could give it. And, for this last, We are beholden unto BONNER, the late Bishop of LONDON, who being called upon, to take the OATH of Supremacie, by HORN of Winton, refused to take the OATH, upon this Account, because HORNs
Consecration was not good, and valid, by the Laws of the Land: Which he insisted on, because the Ordinal, Established in the Reign of King EDWARD, (by which both HORN, and all the rest of Queen ELIZA∣BETH's Bishops received Consecration) had been discharged by Queen MARY; and not restored by any Act of Parliament in the present Reign. Which being first declared by PARLIAMENT, in the Eighth of this Queen, to be Casus omissus, or rather, that the Ordinal was looked upon, as a part of the Liturgie, which had been solemnly confirmed in the first of this Queen's Reign, they next Enacted, and Ordained, That all such Bi∣shops, as were Consecrated by that Ordinal, in the Times precedent, or should be Consecrated by it, in the time to come▪ should be reputed, to be lawfully Ordained, and Consecrated, to all Intents, and Pur∣poses, in the Law, whatever. Which added as much Strength to the Episcopal Government, as the Authority of Man, and an Act of Parliament, could possibly Conferr upon it. This made the Queen more constant to Her former Principles, of keeping up the Church in its Power, and Purity, without subjecting it▪ to any, but Her Self alone: She looked upon Her Self, as the Sole Fountain of both Jurisdictions, which She resolved to keep in their proper Chanels; neither permitting them to mingle Wa∣ters upon any occasion, nor suffering either of them to invade, and destroy the other. And to this Rule She was so constant, that when one Morrice, being then Attorney of the Dutchy of Lancaster, had offered a Bill, ready drawn, to the House of Commons, in the Thirty Fifth of Her Reign, for the Retrenching of the Ecclesiastical Courts, in much Narrower Bounds; She first commanded Coke, then Spea∣ker, (and afterwards successively Chief Justice of either Bench) not to admit of any such Seditious Bills, for the time to come. And, that being done, She caused the per∣son of the said Attorney to be seized upon, deprived him
of his Place in the Dutchy-Court, disabled him from Pra∣ctising as a Common-Lawyer; and, finally, shut him up in Tutbury-Castle, where he continued till his Death. By which Severity, and keeping the like Constant Hand in the Course of Her Government, She held so great a Curb on the Puritan Faction, that neither Her Parliaments, nor Her Courts of Justice, were from thenceforth much troubled with them, in the rest of Her Reign. This is the Sum, and Method, of the following Hi∣story; in the Particulars whereof thou wilt finde more to satisfie thy Curiosity, and inform thy Judgment, then can be possibly drawn up in this General View. As for my Self, and my performance in this Work: in the first place, I am to tell thee, that, towards the raising of this Fabrick, I have not borrowed my Materials onely out of Vulgar Authors, but searched into the Registers of the Con∣vocation; consulted all such Acts of Parliament, as con∣cerned my Purpose, advised with many Foreign Writers, of great Name, and Credit, exemplified some Records, and Charters, of no common Quality, many rare Pieces in the famous Cottonian Library, and not a few Debates, and Orders, of the Council-able, which I have lai'd to∣gether in as good a Form, and beautified it with a Trim∣ming as agreeable, as my hands could give it. And, next, I am to let thee know, that, in the whole Carriage of this Work, I have assumed unto my Self the Freedom of a Just Historian; concealing nothing out of Fear, nor speak∣ing any thing for Favour: delivering nothing for a Truth without good Authority; but so delivering that Truth, as to witness for me, that I am neither byassed by Love, or Hatred,Nec di, nec amo∣re, dicturus aliquid, &c. Tacit. Hist. lib. 1. nor over-swayed by Partiality, and cor∣rupt Affections: If I seem art at any time, as sometimes I may, it is but in such Cases onely, and on such occasions, in which there is no good to be done by Lenitives, and where the Tumour is so putrified, as to need a Lancing. For, in this Case, a true Historian must have somewhat in him
of the good Samaritan, in using Wine, or Vineger, to cleanse the Wound, as well as Oyl to qualifie the Grief of the In∣flammation. I know it is impossible (even in a Work of this Nature) to please all Parties, though I have made it my Endeavour to dissatisfie none, but those, that hate to be reformed, in the Psalmist's Language; or otherwise are so te∣naciously wedded to their own Opinions, that neither Reason, nor Authority, can divorce them from it. And thus (good Reader) I commend thee to the Blessings of God, whom I beseech to guide thee in the way to Eternal Life, amongst those intricate Windings, and uncertain Turnings, those Crooked Lanes, and Dangerous Preci∣pices, which are round about thee. And so fare thee well. From Westminster, October the 20th. 1660.
An Advertisement to the Reader. THe Reader is to be informed of a mistake occuring in the first part of this Hi∣story, folio 126, where it is said that no care had been taken for translating the English Liturgy into the Irish tongue for the use of that Church from that day to this. Whereas it hath been since translated into that language, and recom∣mended to the people for Gods publique service, though not so generally made use of as it ought to be; Neither the Bible, nor the book of Homilies being yet transla∣ted, which makes the Liturgy imperfect, and the whole service of the Church defective in the maine parts of it. The Reader also is to know, that since these sheets were upon the Presse the Lord Marquesse of Hartford mentioned part 1 fo∣lio 5. was made Duke of Somerset, and Doctor William Juxon Bishop of London mentioned part 2 folio 84 is preferred to Canterbury. Such other things as stand in neede of any correction are summed up in the following Errataes. The Errata of the Preface. Folio 1 line 1 for variel, reade variety. p. 4. l. 13. f. reduced r. and reduced. p. 4. l. 24. f. contriving, r. contending. l. 20. f. by the by, r, on the By. p. 6. l. 2. f. first, r. fift. The Errata of the first part. P. 3. l. 29. f. Baron, r. Baronet. p. 10. l. 13. f. mary wife, r. maquise. p. 17. l. 13. f. imposed, r. debased. p. 54. l. 40. f. advancing, r. abandoning. p. 61. l. 14. f. Duke all, r. Dukes fall. p. 119. l. 24. Goodwine, r. Goodrith. p. 130. l. 30. f. Campden, r. Camden. p. 131. for keeping him both beforehand, &c. r. for keeping him from being both beforehand, &c. p. 134. l. 28. f. all∣waise, r. all or. p. 135. l. 48. f. Lorain, r. Lovain. p. 137. l. 21. f. Cabol. r. Cabot. ibidem l. 23. Darralaos. r. Daccalaos, and f. Caenada, r. Canada. p. 138. l. 39. f. Epy, r. Spie. p. 140. l. 39. for on the Church, r. in the Church. p. 141. l. 44. f. redemption, r. exception. p. 150. l. 34. f. venturer., r. ventes, p. 151. l. 6. for vertues, r. his vertues. p. 152. l. 31. for thus, r. these. p. 152 l. 43. for Gale, r. Gates. p. 154. l. 4. for pay, r. play. p. 155. l. 32. for hands, r. Bands. p. 158. l. 35. for rules, r. Rule. p. 160. l. 6. for letters, r. fetters. l. 28. for the heires, r. by the heires. l. 41. for Jenningham, r. Jerningham. p. 165. l. 23. dee possibly. p. 168. l. 46. for blowes in the second place, r. blood. Errata on the second part. P. 8. l. 15. for bayden, r. bugden. p. 20. l. 39. for lending, r, according. p. 20. l. 40. for poy∣ner, r. poynet. p. 25. l. 12. for Poyner, r. Poynet. p. 27. l. 4. for 300. r. 800. p. 36. l. 24. for alienis r. alternis. p. 38. l. 24. for impudence, r. imprudence. p. 49. l. 15. for there, r. thereof. p. 54. l. 23. for prejudiced, r. premised. p. 74. l. 32. for Artanasdes, r. Artavasdes. p. 79. l. 25. for Fanim, r. hames. p. 81. l. 1. de 1559. p. 82. l. 13. for presented, r. persecuted. p. 83. l. 40. for purefew, r. parfew. p. 103. l. 39. for petite, r. petie. p. 109. l. 7. for a pover, r. that is to say a pover. p. 121. l. 44. for Dale r. vale. p. 121. l. 30. for any of, r. any two of. p. 122. l. 2. for zeal r. weale. p. 124. l. 13. for. Oxon, r. Exon. p. 126. l. 15. for with Knox. p. 173. l. 16. for fail r. failer. 156. l. 46. for Bishop, r. Bishop of Bristow. p. 165. l. 13. d. as they all did. p. 179. col. 1. for one substance, r. of one substance. p. 181. col. 1. art 8. for fur from God. . fargon.
THE PARENTAGE,An. 1536 BIRTH, and FIRST FORTUNES of PRINCE EDWARD, The onely surviving Son of King HENRY the Eighth, before his coming to the CROWN. VVith the Condition of Affaires both in Church and State, at his first Coming to the same. PRINCE Edward, the onely surviving son of King Hen∣ry the Eighth, was born at the Royall Palace of Hamp∣ton Court▪ on the twelfth day of October, Anno 1537. Descended from his Father, by the united Families of York and Lancaster; by his Grandfather King Henry the seventh, from the old Royall Line of the Kings of Wales; by his Grand-Mother Queen Elizabeth, the el∣dest daughter of King Edward the fourth, from a long continued Race of Kings, descending from the Loynes of the Norman Conqueror; and finally by Maud, the wife of King Henry the first, from Edmond, sirnamed Iron-side, the last unquestionable King (as to the Right of his Succession) of the Saxon Race; so that all Titles seemed to be Concentred in the Person of this Infant Prince, which Might assure the Subjects of a Peaceable, and un-troubled Reigne, so much the more, because his Mothers Marriage was not subject unto any Dispute (as were those of the two former Queens) whereby the Legitimation of her Issue might be called in que∣stion:
An happinesse, which recompensed all defects that might be other∣wise pretended against her Birth, not answerable unto that of so Great a Mo∣narch, and short in some respects of that of her Predecessor, in the Kings af∣fections; though of a Family truely Noble, and of great Antiquity. Concerning which, it will be necessary to Premise somewhat in this place, not only for the set∣ting forth of this Queens Progenitours, but that we may the better understand the State of that Family, which was to Act so great a part on the Stage of England. Know then, that Queen Jane Seimour, was Daughter of S. John Seimour, of Wolf-Hall, in the County of Wilts. Descended from that William de S. Mauro (contractedly afterwards called Seimour) who by the Aide of Gilbert Lord Mareshall, Earle of Pembrooke, recovered Wendy, aud Penhow, (now parts of Monmouth shire) from the hands of the Welsh, Anno. 1240. being the two and twentieth yeare of King Henry the thirds Reign; which William, as he descended lineally from the  d' Sancto Mauro, whose name we find in the Roll of Battle Abbey, amongst those Noble Families which came in with the Conquerour; so was he one of the Progenitours of that S. Roger, S. Maur, or Seimour, Knight, who marryed one of the daughters, and Heires of John Beauchamp of Hach, a right Noble Baron, who brought his Pedigree from Sybill, one of the five daughters, and Heires of William Mareshall, the famous, and most puissant Earle of Pembrooke, married to William de Herrares, Earle of Herrars and Darby, as also from Hugh d' Vivon, and William Mallet, men in times past most Renowned, for Estate and Chivalry; which goodly Patrimony was afterwards very much augmented, by the mariage of one of this Noble Family, with the Daughter, and Heire of the Esturmies, Lords of Wolf-Hall, not far from Marleborough, in the County of Wilts, who bare for Armes, Ar∣gent, 3. Dmie Lions, Gules; And from the time of King Henry the second, were by right of inheritance, the Bayliffes and Guardians of the Forrest of Sarernak, lying hard by; which is of great note for plenty of Good Game, and for a kind of Ferne there, that yieldeth a most pleasant savour: In re∣membrance whereof, their Hunters Horne, of a mighty bigness, and tipt with silver, is kept by the Earles of Hartford unto this day, as a Monument of their Descent from such Noble Ancestors. Out of which house came Sir John Sei∣mour, of Wolfe-Hall, the Father of this Excellent Queen; as also of three sons, Edward, Henry, and Thomas; of which we shall speak somewhat severally in the way of Preamble, the first and last being Principal Actors on the Publique Thea∣tre of King Edwards Reigne. And first, Sir Edward Seymour, the Eldest son, received the Order of Knight∣hood at the hands of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, and brother in law to King Henry the Eighth. In the fifteenth yeare of whose Reign, he Command∣ed a Right puissant Army in a War with France, where he took the Town of Mont Dedier, and other pieces of Importance. On this foundation he began the rise of his following Fortunes, exceedingly improved by the Mariage of the King with his only sister, from whom, on Tuesday in Whitson week, Anno 1536. he received the Title of Viscount Beauchamp, with refe∣rence to his Descent, from the Lord John Beauchamp, above mentioned, and on the eighteenth of October, in the yeare next following he was created Earle of Hartford. A man obierved by Sir John Haywood, in his History of K. Edward the sixth, to be of little esteem for Wisdom, Personage, or Courage in Armes; but found withall, not onely to be very faithfull▪ but exceeding fortunate, as long as he served under the more Powerfull Plannet of King Henry the eighth. About five yeares before the end of whose Reign, (He being then Warden of the Mar∣ches against Scotland) the invasion of K. James, the fifth, was by his direction encountred, and broken at Solme Mosse, where divers of the Scottish Nobility were taken Prisoners. In the next yeare after, accompanied with Sir John Dudly, Viscount Lisle (Created afterwards Earle of Warwick, and Duke of Northum∣berland, by king Edward the sixth, with a handfull of men he fired Lieth, and
Edinborough, and returned by a leisurely March, 44. miles thorough the body of Scotlan. And in the year following he invaded the Scottish Borders. wasted Tive dale, and the Marches, defacing all those Parts with spoyle and ruine: As fortunate in his undertakings against the French, as against the Scos, for, being appointed by the King to view the Fortifications upon the Marches of Callice, he did not onely perform that service to the Kings contentment, but with the hardy ap∣proach of 7000. English men, raised an Army of 21000. French, Encamped o∣ver the River, before Bolloine, won their Ordinance, Carriage, Treasure, ad Tents, with the loss only of one man; winning in his return from thence, the Catle of Ouling, commonly called the Red Pile, within shot and rescue of the Town of Ardes. And finally, in the yeare ensuing, (being the last of that Kings Reign) he began the Fortresses of New Haven, Blackness, and Bul∣lingberg; in which he plyed his worke so well, that before his departure from those places, he had made them tenable. Such were hs Actings in the time of King Henry the Eighth, against whose Powerfull Genius, there was no withstand∣ing. In all whose time, he never rose to any haughtiness in himselfe, or con∣tempt of others, but still remained curteous, and affable towards all; choosing a course (least subject to envy) between stffe stubbornness, and servile flattery; without aspiring any further, then to hold a second place in the Kings good Grace. But, being left unto himself, and either overwhelmed by the Greatness of that Authority which was cast upon him, in the Minority of King Edward, or undermined by the practises of his cunning and malicious Enemies, he sud∣denly became (according to the usuall Disports of Fortune) a calamitous ruine; as being in himselfe of an easie nature, apt to be wrought upon by more subtle heads, and wholly Governed by his last wife, of which more hereafter. In the mean time we are to know, that having married one of the daughters, and Co-heires of William Hilol, of Woodlands, in the County of Dorset, he had by her, amongst other children, a son called Edward, from whom descends Sir Edward Seimure of Berrie Pomerie, in the County of Devon, Knight, and Barron. After whose death he married Ann, the daughter of Sir Edward Stan∣hop, by whom he had a so▪ called Edward also, on whom he was prevailed with, to entaile both his Lands and Honours; the children of the former bed being pretermitted. Concerning which there goes a stoy, that the Earle having been formerly mployed in France did there acquaint himselfe with a Learned man, supposed to have great skill in Magick: of whom he obtained, by great rewards▪ and importunities, to let him see, by the help of some Ma∣gicall perspective▪ in what Estate all his Relations stood at home. In which impertinent curiosity, he was so arr satisfied, as to behold a Gentleman of his acquaintance, in a more familiar posture with his wife, then was agreeable to the Honour of either Party. To which Diabollicall Illusion▪ he is said to have gi∣ven so much credit, that he did not only estrange himselfe from her society at his coming home, but furnished his next wife with an excellent opportunity for, pressing him to the disinheriting of his fomer children. But whether this were so or not, certain it is that his last wife, being a proud imperious woman, and one that was resolved to gain her own ends upon him, never let plying him, with one suspition after anoher, till in the end she had previled to have the greatest part of his lands, and all his Honourable Titles setled on her eldest son. And that she might make sure work of it, she caused him to obtaine a private Act of Parliament, in the 32. yeare of Henry the Eighth. Anno 1540. for en∣tailing the same on this last Edward, and the Heires male of his body. So easie was he to be wrought on, by those that knew on which side he did lie most open to assaults and batteries. Of a farr different temper was his brother Thomas, the youngest sonne of Sir John Seimour, of a daring and enterprising nature, arrogant in himselfe, a dispiser of others, and a Contemner of all Counsells, which were not first forged in his own brain. Following his sister to the Court,
he received the Order of Knighthood from the hands of the King, at such time as his brother was made Earle of Hartford, and on May day; in the thirtieth yeare of the Kings Reign; he was one of the Challengers at the Magnificent Justs, maintained by him, and others, against all comers in the Pallace of West∣minster; in which, together with the rest, he behaved himselfe so highly to the Kings contentment, and their own great Honor, that they were all severally rewarded with the Grant of 100. Marks of yearely rent, and a convenient house for habitation thereunto belonging, out of the late dissolved order of Saint John o Irusalem Which being the first foundation of his following greatness, proved not sufficient to support the building which was raised upon it; the Gen∣tleman, and almost all the rest of the challengers, coming within few yeares after to unfortunate ends. For, being made Lord Seimour of Sudley, and Lord High Admirall of England, by King Edward the sixth, he would not satisfie his ambition with a lower marriage then the widow of his deceased Soveraign, aspi∣ring after her death to the bed of the Princes of Elizabeth, the second daughter of the King. Which wrought such Jealousies, and distrusts in the Head of his bro∣ther, then being Lord Protector of the King, and Kingdom, that he was there∣upon, Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed (of which more anon) to the great joy of such as practised to ubvert them both. As for the Barrony of Sud∣ley, denominated from a goodly Mannor, in the County of Glcster, it was ancently the Patrimony of Harrold, the eldest Son of Ralph d' Mont. the son of . (Medantinu, or d' Mount, and of Goda his wife, one of the daugh∣ters of Ethilred, and sister of Edmond, sirnamed roside, Kings of England: whose Posterity taking to themselves the name of Sudley, continued in posses∣sion of it till the time of John, the last Baron of this name and Famiy. VVhose daugter Joane conveyed the whole estate in marriage to Sir William Botteler, of the Family of Wemm, in Shropshire. From whom decended Ralph, Lord Bot∣tele, of Sudley Castle, Chamberlain of the Houshold to King Henry the sixth, by whom he was created Knight of the Garter, and Lord High Treasurer of England. And though the greatest part of this Inheritance being devided be∣tween the sisters and co-heires, came to other Families, yet the Castle and Baro∣ny of Sudley remained unto a male of this house▪ untill the latter end of the Reign f King Henry the eighth, to whom it was escheated, by the Attainder of the last Lord Botteller, whose greatest Crime was thought to be this goodly Mannor, which some greedy Courtiers had an eye on. And being fallen unto the Crown, it was no hard matter for the Lord Protector to estate the same upon his brother; who was scarce warmed in his new Honour, when it fell into the Crown again. Where it continued all the rest of King Edwards Reign, and by Queen Mary was conferred on Sir John Bruges, (who derived his Pedigree from one of the said sisters, and co-heires of Ralph, Lord Botteler) whom she ennobled, by the Title of Lord Chaundos of Sudley. As for Sir Henry Seimour, the second son of Sir John Seimour, he was not found to be of so fine a metall as to make a Courtier, and was therefore left un∣to the life of a Country Gentleman; Advanced by the Power and favour of his elder Brother, to the oder of Knighthood; and afterwards Estated in the Mannours of Marvell, and Twyford, in the County of Southhampton, dismem∣bred in those broken times from the see of Winchester. To each of these belong∣ed a Park, that of the first containing no less then foure miles, that of the last but two in compass; the first being also Honoured with a goodly Mancion house, belonging anciently to those Bishops, and little inferiour to the best of the Wealthy Bishopricks. There goes a story, that the Priest Officiating at the Altar, in the Church of Ouslebury (of which Parish Marvell was a part) after the Mass had been abolished by the Kings Authority, was violently dragged thence by this Sir Henry, beaten, and most reproachfully handled by him, his servants universally refusing to serve him, as the instruments of his Rage and Fury; and that the poore Priest having after an opportunity to get into the
Church, did openly curse the said Sir Henry, and his posterity, with Bell, Book, and Candle, according to the use observed in the Church of Rome. Which, whether it were so or not, or that the maine foundation of this Estate being laid on Sacrilidge, could promise no long blessing to it; Certain it is, that his poste∣rity are brought beneath the degree of poverty. For, having three Nephewes, by Sir John Semour, his only Son; that is to say, Edward, the eldest, Henry and Thomas, younger sons, besides severall daughters, there remaines not to any of them one foot of Land, or so much as a penny of money to supply their ne∣cessities, but what they have from the Munificence of the Marquesse of Hart∣ford, or the charity of other well disposed people, which have affection, or Re∣lation to them. But, the great ornament of this house, was their sister Jane, the only daugh∣ter of her father, by whose care she was preferred to the Court, and service of Queen Ann Bollen, where she outshined all the other Ladies, and in short time had gained exceeding much on the King, a great admirer of Fresh Beauties, and such as could pretend unto no command on his own affections. Some La∣dies who had seen the pictures of both Queenes at White Hall Gallery, have entertained no small dispute▪ to which of the two they were to give Preheminence in point of beauty; each of them having such a plentifull measure of Perfections, as to Entitle either of them to a Superiority. If Queen Ann seemed to have the more lively countenance, Queen Jane was thought to carry it in the exact symi∣try, which showed it selfe in all her features; and what she carried on that side, by that advantage, was over-ballanced on the other by a pleasing sprightfulnesse, which gained as much upon the hearts of all beholders. It was conceived by those Great Critticks in the schooles of Beauty, that love which seemed to threaten in the eyes of Queen Jane, did only seem to sport it selfe in the eyes of Queen Ann, that there was more Majesty in the Gab of Queen Jane Seimour, and more lovelinesse in that of Queen Ann Bollen; yet so, that the Majesty of the one did excell in Lovelyness, and that the Lovelinesse of the other did exceed In majesty. Sir John Russell, afterwards Earle of Bedford, who had beheld both Queens in their greatest Glories, did use to say that the richer Queen Jane was in clothes, the fairer she appeared; but that the other, the richer she was apparrelled, the worse she looked:Lord Herb. Hist. fol. 387. which showes, that Queen Ann only trusted to the Beauties of Nature, and that Queen Jane did sometimes help her selfe by externall Ornaments. In a word, she had in her all the Graces of Queen Ann, but Governed (if my conjecture doth not faile me) with an evener, and more constant temper, or if you will, she may be said to be equally made up of the two last Queens,1536. as having in her all the Attractions of Queen Ann, but Regulated by the reservednesse of Queen Katharine also. It is not to be thought, that so many rare perections, should be long conceal∣ed from the eye of the King: or, that love should not worke in him it's accu∣stomed effects of desire and hope. In the prosecution whereof, he lay so open to discovery, that the Queen coud not chuse but take notice of it, and intimated her suspitios to him, as appeares by a letter of hers in the Scrinia Sacra. I which she signifies unto him, that by hastning her intended death, he would be left at liberty, both before God and man, to follow his affection, already setled on the Party, for whose sake she was reduced unto that condition; and whose name she could some while since have pointed to, his Grace not being ignorant of her sus∣picions. And it appeared by the event, that she was not much mistaken in the Mark she aimed at. For, scarce had her lementable death, which happened on the nineteenth of May, prepared the way for the Legitimating of this new af∣fection, but on the morrow after the King was secretly married to Mistress Sei∣mour, and openly showed her as his Queen in the Whitsontide following. A Marriage, which made some alteration in the face of the Court, in the advancing of her kindred, and discountenancing the Dependants of the former Queen; but otherwise produced no change in Affaires of State. The King proceeded as
before▪ in suppressing Monasteries, extinguishing the Popes Authority, and ltering divers things in the face of the Cuch which tended to that Reformation, which after followed. For, on the eighth of June began the Parliament, in which here past an Act for te finall extinguishing of the Power of the Popes of Rome, Cap. 10. And the next day a Convocation of the Bishops and Clergy, managed by Sir Thomas Cromwell, advanced about that time unto the Title of Lord Cromwell of Wimbledon; and made his Majesties Viccar Generall, of all Ecclesiast all Maters in the Realme of England. By whose Authority▪ a book was published, after Mature debate and Deliberation, under the name of Arti∣cles, Devised by the Kings Highness, in which mentioned ut three, Sacraments, that is to ay. Baptisme, Penance▪ and the Lords Supper. Besides which book, there were some Acts agreed upon in the Convocation, for diminishing the su∣perflous number of Holy dayes, especially of such as happened in the time of Harvest. Sgnified afterwards to the people in certain Injunctions, published in the Kings name, by the new Viccar Generall, as the first fruits of his Authority. In which it was ordained amongst other things, that the Curates in every Parish Church should teach the People to say the Lords Prayer, the Creed, the Ave-Mary, and the Ten Commandments in the English Tongue. But, that which seemed to make most for the Advantage of the new Queen, and her Posterity (if it please God to give her any) was the unexpected death of the Duke of Richmond, the Kings naturall Son, begotten on the body of the Lady Talboi: So dearly cherished by his Father (having then no lawful Issu-male) that in the sixth yeare of his Age, An. 1525. he created him Earl of Nottingham, and not long after Duke of Richmond and Sommerset, preferred him to the Honourable office of Earle Marshall, elected him into the Order of the Garter, made him Lord Admirall of the Royall Navy, in an expedition against France, and finally Affianced him to Mary, the daughter of Thomas Howard, Duke of Norolk, the most owerfull Subject in the Kingdom. Now were these all the favours intended to him, The Crown it selfe being designed him by the King▪ in default of Lawfull Issue▪ to be procreated, and begotten of his Royall Body. For, in the Act of the Succession, which past in the Parliament of this year, the Crown being first setled upon the Issue of this Queen, with the remainder to the Kings issue, lawfully begotten on any following wife whatso∣ever; there past this clause in favour of the Duke of Richmond (as it was then generally conceived) that is to say,An 28. Hen. 8. Cap. VII. That for lack of lawfull heires of the Kings body, to be procreated, or begotten, as is afore limitted by this Act, it should, and might be lawfull for him to confer the same on any such Person, or Persons, in Possession, and Remainder, as should please his Highnesse, and according to such Estate, and after such manner, orme, fashion, order, and condition, as should be expressed, declared, named, and lmitted, in his said Letters Patents or by his last Will: the Crown to be enjoyed by such person, or persons, so to be nominated and appointed, in as large and ample manner, as if such Person or Persons, had been his Highnesse Lawfull Heires to the Imperiall Crown of this Realm. And though it might please God, as it after did, to give the King some Law∣full Issue by this Queen, yet took he so much care for this naturall son, as to ena∣ble himselfe by another Clause in the said Act, to advance any person, or persons of his most Royall Blood, by Letters Patents, under the Great Seale, to any Title, Stile, or Name, of any Estate, Dignity, or Honour, whatsoever it be, and to give to them, or any of them, any Castles, Honours, Mannours, Lands, Tenements, Liberties, Franchiefes, or other Hereditaments in ee simple, or Fee tail, or for terme of their lives, or the life of any of them. But all these expectations and Provisions were to no effect, the Duke departing this life at the age of 17 yeares, or thereabouts, within few dayes after the end∣ing of this Session, that is to say, on the 22th. day of July, Anno 1536. to
the extreame griefe of the King,An. 1537. and the generall sorrow of the Court, who had him in a High degree of veneration, for his birth, and Galantry. It appeares also by a passage in this Act of Parliament, above mentioned, that the King was not only hurried to this Marriage by his own affections, but by the humble petition, and intercession of mst of the Nobles of his Realm; moved thereunto, as well by the conveieny of her yeares, as in respect that by her excel∣lent beauty, and purenesse of flesh and blood (I speak the very words of the Act it selfe) she was apt (God willing) to concieve issue. And so accordingly it pro∣ved. For,Anno. 15 on the 12th. of October▪ 1537. about two of the clock in the mor∣ning she was delivered of a young Prince (Christened not long after by the name of Edward) but it cost her deare, she dying within two dayes after, and lea∣ving this Character behind her, of being the Discreetest, Humblest, and Fairest of all the Kings Wives. It hath been commonly reported, and no lesse generally believed, that that childe being come unto the birth, and there wanting naturall strength to be delivered, his Mothers body was ripped open to give him a pas∣sage into the World, and that she died of the Incision in a short time after. The thing not only so related in our common Heralds, but taken up for a constant and undobted truth, by Sir John Haywood, in his History of the Life and Reign of King Edward the sixth, which, notwithstanding there are many reasons to evince the contrary. For, first it is observed by the said Sir John Haywood, that children, so brought forth, were by the ancient Romans esteemed fortunate, and commonly proved great enterprisers, with happy successe. And so it is affirm∣ed by Pliny,Plin. Lib. 7. Cap. 9. viz. Auspicatius Enecta Matre Nascuntur, &c. called first Cae∣sones, and afterwards more commonly Caesares▪ as learned Writers do averr, quia caeso matris utero in Lucem prodiissent, because their Mothers bodies had been o∣pened, to make passage for them. Amongst whom they reckon Caeso, and Fabius, who was three times Consull; Scipio, sirnamed Affricanus, Renown∣ed for his Victories in Spain, his vanquishing of Haniball, and humbling the proud Cities of Carthage. And besides others, Julius Caesar, who brought the whole Roman Empire under his Command, whereas the life of this Prince was short, his Reigne full of troubles, and his end generally supposed to be traiterously contrived, without performing any memorable Action, either at home, or abroad, which might make him pass in the account of a fortunate Prince, or any way successefull in the enterprising of Heroick Actions. Besides, it may appeare by two severall Letters, the one written by the appoint∣ment of the Queen her selfe, immediately after her delivery, the other by one of her Physitians, on the morrow after, that she was not under any such extream necessity (though questionlesse she had a hard labour of it) as report hath made her. For first, the Queen immediately upon the birth of the Prince, caused this ensuing Letter, signed with her own signet, to be sent unto the Lord of the Privy Counsell, that is to say. RIght trusty, and well Beloved, we greet you well. And forasmuch as by the inestimable goodnesse,Church. Hist. 7. Fol. 422. and Grace of Almighty God, we be delivered, and brought in Childeed of a PRINCE, concieved in most Lawfull Matrimony between my Lord the Kings Majesty, and us. Doubting not, but that for the Love and affection you beare unto us, and to the Common-Wealth of this Realme, this knowledge shall be joyous, and Glad Tidings unto you: We have thought good to certifie you of this same: To the intent ye might not only render unto God Condigne thanks, and praise for so great a benefit, but also continually pray for the long Continuance, and preservation of the same, here in this life
to the Honour of God, joy and pleasure of my Lord the KING, and us, and the Vniversall Weale, quiet, and tranquillity of this whole Realme. Given under our signet, at my Lords Mannor of HamptonCourt, the twelth day of October. But, having a hard labour of it, as before was said, it brought her first into a very high distemper, and after into a very great looseness, which so accelera∣ted the approach of death, that she prepared her selfe for God, according to the Rites of the Church then being. And this appares by a letter of the Queenes Physitians, directed in these words to the Lords of the Counsell, viz. THese shall be to advise your Lordships of the Queenes Estate:Id. Ibid. Yesterday afternoon she had a naturall lax, by reason whereof she began to lighten, and (as it appeared) to amend▪ and so continued till towards night. All this night she hath been very sick, and doth rather appare, then amend. her Confessor hath been with her Grace this morning, and hath done that to his office appertaineth, and is even now preparing to Administer to her Grace the Sacrament of Vnction. Subscribed at Hampton Court on Wednesday morning at eight of the clock, by Thomas Cutland, Robert Karhold, Edward Bayntam, John Cham∣bers Priest, William Butts, George Owen. So died this Noble, Beautifull, and Vertuous Queen, to the Generall lamen∣tation of all good Subjects, and on the twelfth of November following, with great Solemnity was conveyed to Windsor, and there Magnificently interred in the midst of the quire. In memory of whom, I find this Epitaph, not unworthy the greatest wits of the present times, to have then been made, viz. Phoenix Jana Jacet nto Phaenice Dolendum est, Saecula Phoenices nulla tulisse duas. That is to say, Here Jane, a Phenix lies, whose death, Gave to another Phenix breath. Sad case the while, that no age ever, Could show two Phaenixes together. But,Sow Chron p. 575. Godw. to return unto the Prince, It is affirmed with like confidence, and as little truth,Ann. Hen. 8. p. 117. that on the 13th. day of October, then next following (that being but the sixth day after his birth) he was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earle of Chester, &c.Lord Herb. Hist. fol. 430. In which, though I may easily excuse John Stow, and Bishop Goodwine, who report the same; yet I shall never pardon the late Lord Herbert for his incuriosity, as one that had fit opportunities to know the contra∣ry. For first, Prince Edward was never created Duke of Cornwall, and there was no reason why he should; he being actually Duke of Cornwall at the houre of his birth, according to the Entaile▪ which was made of that Dukedome to the Crown, by King Edward the third. And secondly, he was never created Prince of Wales, nor then, nor any time then after following, his Father dying in the midst of the preparations which were intended for the Pomp and Ceremony of
that Creation. This truth confessed by Sir John Haywood, in his History of the Life and Reig of this King; and generally avowed by all our Heralds, who reckon none of the children of King Henry the Eighth, amongst the Princes of Wales, although all of them successively by vulgar Appellation had been so en∣tituled. Which appeares more plainly by a particular of the Robes and Orna∣ments, which were preparing for the day of this Solemnity, as they are entred on Record in the book called The Catalogue of Honour, published by Thomas Mills of Canterbury, where it appeares also, that they were prepared only, but never used, by reason of the Kings death, which prevented the Sollemnities of it. The ground of this Error, I conceive first to be taken from John Stow, who finding a creation of some Noble men, and the making of many Knights, to relate to the 18 day of October, supposed it to have been done with reference to the Creation of a Prince of Wales, whereas, if I might take the liberty of putting in my own conjecture, I should conceive rather that it was done with Reference to the Prin∣ces Christning, as in like manner we find a creation of three Earles, and five to inferiour Titles, at the Christning of the Princesse Mary,Stow Chron. fol. 863. born to King James, after his coming into England, and Christened upon Sunday, the fifth of May. 1604. And I conceive withall, that Sir Edward Seimour, Vicount Beauchamp, the Queenes elder brother, was then created Earle of Hartford, to make him more capable of being one of the Godfathers; or a Deputy-Godfa∣ther at the least, to the Royall Infant, the Court not being then in a condition, by reason of the mournfull accident of the late Queenes death, to show it selfe in any extraordinary splendour, as the occasion had required at another time. A∣mong which persons so advanced to the Dignity and degree of Knighthood, I find Mr. Thomas Seimour, the Queenes youngest brother, to be one of the number, of whom we shall have frequent occasion to speak more fully and parti∣cularly in the course of this History. No other alteration made in the face of the Court, but that Sir William Pawlet was made Treasurer, and Sir John Rus∣sell Comptroller of his Majesties Houshold, on the said 18th. day of October (which I conceive to be the day of the Princes Christning (both of them be∣ing principall Actors in the Afaires, and troubles of the following times. But, in the face of the Church, there appeared some lines, which looked di∣rectly towards a Reformation. For, besides the surrendring of divers Monaste∣ries, and the executing of some Abbots, and other Religious Persons for their stiffenesse (if I may not call it a perversenesse) in opposing the Kings desires; there are two things of speciall note, which concurred this year, as the Prog∣nosticks, or ore-runners of those great events, which after followed in his Reign. For it appeares by a Memoriall of the Famous Library of Sir Robert Cot∣ton, Cot. M. S. p. 325. that Grafton now made known to Cromwell, the finishing of the English Bible, of which he had printed 1500. at his own proper charges, amounting in the totall to 500. p. desiring stoppage of a surreptitions Edition in a lesse Let∣ter, which else would tend to his undoing; the suit endeared by Cranmer, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, at whose request Cromwell presents one of the Bi∣bles to the King, and procures the same to be allowed by his Authority to be read publiquely, without comptrole, in all his Dominions, and for so doing, he re∣ceives a letter of thanks from the said Arch-Bishop, dated August the 13th. of this present year. Nor were the Bishops and Clergy wanting to advance the work, by publishing a certain book in the English Tongue, which they entituled The In∣stitution of a Christian Man; in which the Doctrine of the Sacraments, the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Commandments, were opened and expounded more perspicuously, and lesse abhorrent from the truth then in former times. By which clear light of Holy Scripture, and the principall duties of Religion so laid opn to them, the people were the better able to discerne the errors and corruption of the Church of Rome, From which by the piety of this Prince they were ful∣ly Freed. And for a preamble thereunto the Rood of Boxley, commonly called the Rood of Grace, so Artificially contrived (by reason of some secret wires in the
body, or concavities of it) that it could move the eyes the lips,An. 1538. &c. to the great wonder and astonishment of the common people; was openly discovered for a lewd imposture, and broke in pieces at St. Pauls Cross, on Sunday the 24. of Febru∣ary; the Rood of Bermondsey Abby in South-work following the same fortune also within six dayes. The next year brings an end to almost all the Monasteries,Anno 1538. and Religious houses in the Realme of England, surrendered into the Kings hands, by publque instruments, under the seales of all the severall and respective Convents, and those surrenderies, ratified and confirmed by Act of Parliament. And this occasional∣ly conduced to the future peace and quiet of this young Prince, by removing out of the way some Great Pretenders, who otherwise might have created to him no small disturbance. For so it happened, that Henry▪ Earle of Devnshire, and Mary, wife of Exceter, descended from a daughter of King Edward the furth, and Henry Pole, Lord Mountacute, descended from a daughter of George, Duke of Clarence, the second brother of that Edward, under colour of preventing, or revenging the Dissolution of so many famous Abbyes, and religious houses, associated themselves with Sir Edward Nvill, and Sir Nicholas Carew, in a dan∣gerous practise against the person of the King, and the Peace of the Kingdom. By whose endictment it appeares, that it was their purpose and designe to de∣stroy the King, and advance Reginald Pole, one of the younger brothers of the said Lord Mountacute (of whom we shall hear more in the course of this History) to the Regal Throne. Which, how it could consist with the Pretensions of the Marquisse of Exceter, or the Ambition of the Lord Mountacute, the elder bro∣ther of this Reginald, it is hard to say. But, having the Chronicle of John Speed to justifie me in the truth hereof in this particular, I shall not take upon me to dispute the point. The dangerous practise of which Persons, did not so much retard the worke of Reformation as their execution did advance it; to this year also appertaineth the suppressing of Pilgrimages, the defacing of the costly and magnficent shrines of our Lady of Walsingham, Ipswich, Worcester, &c, and more particularly of Thomas Becket, once Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. This last, so rich in Jewells of most inestimable value, that two great chests were filled with the spoyles thereo; so heavy and capacious, as is affirmed by Bishop oodwin, that each of them required no fewer then eight men to carry them out of the Church, nothing inferiour unto Gold, being charged within them. More modestly in this then Sanders, that malitious Sycophant, who will have no lesse then twenty six waine load of silver, Gold, and precious stones, to be seised into the Kings hands, by the spoyle of that Monument. Which proceedings so exasperated the Pope then being, that without more delay, by his Bull of January 1. he deprived the King of his Dominions, and caused the sentence of his Deprivati∣on to be posted up at the Townes of Bruges, Taurney, and Dunkike in Flanders, at Bolloigne, and Diepe in France, and St. Andrewes in Scotland; effcting nothing by the unadviedness of that desperate Counsell, but that the King be∣came more fixed in his Resolutions, and more averse from all the thoughts of Reconciliation with the See of Rome.Anno 1539. The surrenderies of the former year, cofirmed by Act of Parliament, in the beginning of this, drew after it the finall dissolution of all the rest; none daring to oppose that violent Torrent, which seemed to carry all before it; but the Abbots of Colchester, Reading, and Glastenbury quarrelled, for which they were seve∣rally condemned, and executed, under colour of denying the Kings Supremacy; and their rich Abbeys seized upon, as confiscations to the use of the King, which brought him into such a suspition of separating from the Communion of the Church of Rome,Anno 1540. that for the better vindicating of his integrity, as to the particulars, he passed in the same Parliament the terrible Statute of the six Articles, which drew so much good blood from his Protestant Subjects. And being further doubtfull in himselfe what course to steere, he marries at the same time with the Lady Ann, sister unto the Duke of Cleve, whom not long
after he divorseth; Advanceth his Great Minister▪An. 1542. Cromwell (by whom he had made so much havock of Religious houes, in all parts of the Realm) to the Earldome of Essex, and sends him headlesse to his Grave within three moneths after; takes to his bed the Lady Katharine Howard, a Neece of Thomas Duke of Nor∣folk, and in short time found cause enough to cut off her head; not being ei∣ther the richer in children, by so many wives,Anno 1541. nor much improved in his Reve∣nue by such horrible Rapines. In the middest of which confusions he sets the wheele of Reformation once more going, by moderating the extreme severi∣ty of the said Statute, touching the six Articles, abolishing the Superstitious u∣sages, accustomedly observed on St. Nicholas day; and causing the English Bible, of the Larger vollumne, to be set up, in all, and every Parish Church, within the Kingdome▪Anno 1542. for such as were Religiously minded to Resort unto it. The Prince had now but newly finished the first yeare of his age, when a fit wife was thought of for him upon this occasion. The Pope incensed against King Henry, had not long since sententially deprived him of his Kingdom, as before was said. And having so done, he made an offer of it to King James the fifth, then King of the Scots, the only Son of Margaret, his eldest sister, wife of James the fourth.Speed ex John Leshly. Fol. 1014. To whom he sent a Breve to this effect: viz. That he would assist him against King Henry, whom in his Consistory, he had pronounced to be an Heretick, a Scismatick, a manifest Adulterer, a pub∣lique Murtherer, a committer of Sacriledge, a Rebell, and convict of Le∣sae Majestatis, for that he had risen against his Lord, and therefore that he had justly deprived him of his Kingdom, and would dispose the same to him, and other Princes, so as they would assist him in the recovery of it. This could not be so closely carried, but that the King had notice of it, who from thenceforth began to have a watchfull eye upon the Actions of his Nephew; sometimes alluring him unto his party, by offering him great hopes and favours, and practising at other times to weaken, and distract him, by animating, and maintaining his owne Subjects against him. At last, to set all right between them, an enterview was appointed to be held at York, proposed by Henry, and condescended to by James. But, when the day appointed came, the Scots King failed, being deterred from making his appeareance there, by some Popish Pre∣lates, who put into his head, a fear of being detained a Prisoner, as James the first had been by King Henry the fourth. Upon this breach the King makes ready for a Warr, sets out a manifest of the Reasons which induced him to it, amongst which he insists especially on the neglect of performing that Homage, which anciently had been done (and still of Right ought to be done) to the Kings of Eng∣land. In prosecuting of which Warr▪ the Duke of Norfolk entred Scotland with an Army, October 21. Anno 1542. wats and spoyles all the Country; followed not long after by an Army of Scots, consisting of 15000. men, which in like manner entred England, but were discomfited by the valour and good fortune of Sir Thomas Wharton, and Sir William Msgrave, with the help of some few Borderers only, the Scots upon some discontent, making little resistance. In which fight, besides many of the Scottish Nobility, were taken eight hundred Prisoners of inferiour note: twenty foure peeces of Ordinance, some cart load of Armes, and other booty. On the 19 of December the Scottish Lords, and other of the Principall Pri∣soners, to the number of 20. or thereabouts, were brought into London; fol∣lowed on the third day after with the newes of the death of King James, and the birth of the young Queen his daughter. This put King Henry on some thoughts of uniting the two Crowns in a firme and everlasting League, by the Marriage of this infant Queen, with his Son Prince Edward: In pursuance whereof he sent for the inprisoned Lords, feasted them royally at White Hall, and dealt so effectually with them by himselfe and his Ministers, that they all severally and joyntly engaged themselves to promote this Match. Dismist into their own Country, upon these promises, and the leaving of Hostages, they followed
the Negotation with such care and diligence, that on the 29th. of June, in the yeare ensuing (notwithstanding the great opposition made against them by the Queen Dowager, Cardnall Beton, and divers others who adhered to the Faction of France) they brought the businesse at the last to this Conclusion, viz. 1. That the Lords of Scotland shall have the Education of the Princess for a time, yet so, as it might be Lawfull for our King to send thiter a Noble man, and his wife, with a Family under twenty Persons, to wate on her. 2. That at ten yeares of Age she should be brought into England, the contract being first finished by a Proxie in Scotland.Anno 1543 3. That within two moneths af∣ter the date heeof, six Noble Scts should be given as Hostages for the per∣formance of the Conditions on their Part: And that if any of them dyed, their num∣ber should be suplyed. 4. And furthermore it was agreed upon, that the Realme of Scotland (by that name) should preserve it's Lawes and Rights; and that Peace should be made for as long time as was desired, the French being ex∣cluded. But, though these Capitulations thus agreed on, were sent into ngland, signed, and ealed in the August following; yet the Cardinall and his Party grew so strong, that the whle Treaty cme to nothing; the Noble Men who had been Prsoners, falsifying their Faith, and chusing rather the Lord Kenneth Earle of Cassiles excepted) to leave their Hostages to King Henries mercy, then to put themselves into his Power. Provoked therewith, the King denounceth Warr against them, and knowing that they depended chiefly upon the strength of France, he peeceth with the Emperour Charles the fifth, and Proclaimeth Warr against the French, Following the Warr against both Kingdomes, he cau∣seth many in-roades to be made into Scotland wasting and harrasing that poor Country;Anno. 1544. and with a Royall Army passeth over into France▪ where he made him∣selfe Master of the strong Town of Bolloigne; with the Forts about it, into which he made his Royall entry, Sep. 25. 1544. The rest of the Kings life spent in continuall Action against both Nations, in which the Enemies had the worst, though not without some losse to the English also; the poore Scots pay∣ing so dearely for their breach of Faith, that no yeare passed, in which their Countrey was not wasted, and their ships destroyed. Toward the charges of which VVarres, the King obtained a Grant in Parliament of all Chanteries, Col∣ledges, Hospitalls, and free Chappells, with the Lands thereunto belonging, to be united to the Crown. But, dying before he had took the benefit of it, he lef that part of the spoyle to such of his Ministers, who had the Managing of Affaires in his Sons Minority. In the mean tme the Prince having attaied unto the Age of six yeares,Anno. 1545. was taken out of the hands o his women, and committed to the tuition of Mr. John Cheeke, whom he afterwards Knighted, and advanced him to the Provoship of Kings Colledge in Cambridge, and Doctor Richard Cox, whom afterwards he preferred to the Deanry of Westminster, and made chefe Almoner. These two being equall in Authority, employed them∣selves to his advantage in their severall kindes, Doctor Cox for knowledge of Divinity, Philosophy, and Gravity of Manners; Mr. Cheeke for eloquence in the Greek and Latine Tongues. Besides which two he had some others to instruct him in the Modern Languages, and thrived so well amongst them all, that in short time he perfectly spake the French tongue, and was able to express himselfe significantly enough in the Italian, Greek and Spa∣nish. And as for Latine, he was such an early proficient in it, that before he was eight yeares old, he is said to have written the ensu∣ing Letter to the King his Father; seconding the same with another to the Earle of Hartford, as he did that also with a third to the Queen Katharine Parre, whom his Father had taken to wife, July the 12th. 1543. And though these Letters may be used as good evidences of his great
proficiency, with reference to the times in which he lived;An. 1545. yet in our dayes in which either the wits of men are sooner ripe, or the method of teaching more exact, and facile, they would be found to contain nothing which is more then ordinary. Now his Letter to the King (referring the Reader for the other two, unto Fox, and Fuller) it beares date, on the 27th. day of September, when he wanted just a fortnight of eight yeares old, and is this that follow∣eth. PRINCE Edwards Epistle to the King, September 27. 1545. LIterae Meae semper habet unum Argumentum, Rex Nobilissime, atque pater ∣strissime, id est, in omnibus Epistolis ago tibi Gratias pro beneficentia tua Erga me Maxima; si enim spius multo, ad te literas Exararem, nullo tamen quidem modo potui pervenire officio Literarum ad magnitudinem benignitatis tuae erga me. Quis enim potuit compensare beneficia tua erga me? Nimirum nullus qui non est tam magnus Rex, ac Nobilis Princeps, ac tu es, cujusmodi ego non sum. Quamobrem Pietas tua in me, multo gratior est mihi, quod facis mihi, quae nullo modo compensare Possum; sed tamen Adnitar, & Faciam quod in me est, ut placeam Majestati, atque Precabor Deum, ut diu te servet in columem. Vale Rex Nobilissime, Majestati tu Observantissimus Filius Halfeldiae Vicesimo Septimo. Septemb. EDVARDUS PRINCEPS. For a companion at his book, or rather for a Proxie to bear the punishment of such errours as either through negligence, or inadvertency were committed by him, he had one Barnaby Fits Patrick, the son (if I conjecture aright) of that Patrick, whom I finde amongst the witnesses to King Henries last Will and Te∣stment, as also amongst those Legatees which are therein mentioned, the King bequeathing him the Legacy of one hundred markes. But, whether I hit right or not, most probable it is, that he had a very easie substitution of it; the harmlessenesse of the Princes nature, the ingenuity of his disposition, and his assiduity at his book, freeing him for the most part from such corrections, to which other children at the schoole are most commonly subject. Yet, if it some∣times happened, as it seldome did, that the servant suffered punishment for his Masters errors. It is not easie to affirm, whether Fits Patrick smarted more for the fault of the Prince, or the Prince conceived more griefe for the smart of Fits Patrick. Once I am certain that the Prince entertained such a reall Estimation of him, that when he came unto the Crown, he acquainted him by letter with the sufferings of the Duke of Sommerset, instructed and maintained him for his travels in France, endowed him with faire lands in Ireland (his native Country) and finally made him Baron of upper Ossery, which Honourable Title he enjoy∣ed till the time of his death, in the latter end of Queen Elizabeths Reign, at what time he dyed a zealous and Religious Protestant. One thing I must not
pretermit to shew the extraordinary piety of this hopefull Prince in the dayes of his childhood,An. 1546. when, being about to take down something, which seemed to be above his Reach, one of his fellowes proffeed him a Bossed-Plated Bible, to stand upon, and heighten him for taking that which he desired. Which, when he perceived to be a Bible, with Holy indignation he reued it, and sharply repre∣hended hm that made the offer. A stong assurance of that deare esteem and veneration, in which he held that Sacred Book in his riper yeares. Having attained the age of nine,Anno 1546. there were great prepaatins made for his sollemne investiture in the Principality of Wales, together with the Earle∣domes of Chester and Flint, as dependants on it. Toward which Pomp, I find a provision to be made of these Ornaments and Habiliments following▪ tha is to say, first an Honourable Habit, viz. A Robe of Purple Velvet, having in it about eigheen ells, more or lesse, Garied about with a ringe of Gold, and lined with Ermins, A Srcot, or inner Gown, having in it about fourteen ells of Velvet, of like colour, Fringe, and Furr, Laces, Buttons, and Tassells (as they call them, Onaments made of Purple, Silk, and Gold; A Grdle of sik, to grd his inne Gowne; A sword with a scabbard made  Purple, silke, and Gold, garnished with the like girdle he is girt withall, thereby showing him to be Duke of Cornwall by birth, and not by Creation. A cap of the same velvet tha is  is of, furred with mines, with Laces▪ and a button, and Tassells on the Crown thereof, made of Venice Gold▪ A Garland, or a little Coronet of Gold, to be put on his head, together with his Cap. A long golden verge, or Rod, beokening his Government. A ring of Gold also, to be put on the third finger of his left hand, whereby he was o declare his Mar∣riage, made with equity and Justice. But scarce were these provsions ready, but the Kings sicknesse brought a stop, and his death shortly afer put an end to those preparations; the expectation of a Principality, being therby changed to the posession o a Crown. For, the King having long lived a voluptuous life, and indulgent too much unto his Pallate, was gowne so corpulent, or rather so overgrown with in un∣weildly burhen of flesh, that he was not able to go up staires▪ from one roome to a∣nother, but as h was hoised up by an Engine: Whch, filling his body with oule and foggy humours, and those humours falling into his leg, in which  ancient and uncured ore, they there began to settle to an inflamation  both waste his Spirits, and increase his passions. In th mddest of , it was not his least care to provide for the safet of his Sn, and preserve the successi∣on of the Crown to his own Posterity. At such time as he had married Queen Ann Bollen, he procured hs daughter Mary to be declared  by Act of Parliament; the like he also did by his daughter Elizabeth, when he ha marri∣ed Queen Jane Simour, setling the Crown upon his issue by the said Queen Jane. But, having no other issue by her but Prince Edward only▪ and none at all by any of his following wives; he thought it a high point of Prdence (as in∣deed it was) to establish the Succession with more stayes then one, and not to let it rest on so weak a staffe, as a childe of little more then nine yeares of age, For which cause he procured an Act of Parliament, in the 35th. yeare of his Reign, in which it is declared, that in default of issue of the said Prince Ed∣ward, the Crowne should be entailed to the Kings daughter,Act of An. 35. Henry the 8th. Cap. . the Lady Mary, and the Heires of her body, and for default thereof to the Kings daughter, the Lady E∣lizabeth, and the heires of her body, and for lack of such issue, to such as the King by his Letters Patents, or his Last Will in Writing should Limit. So that he had three children by three severall wives, two of them borne of questionable Marriages, yet all made capable by this Act, of having their seve∣rall turnes in the succession, as it after proved. And though a threefold cord be not easily broken, yet he obtained further power for disposing the Crown, if their issue failed; whereof, being now sick, and fearing his approaching end, he resolved to make such use in laying down the State of the succession to the
Crown Imperiall, as was more agreeable to his private passions, then the Rules of Justice; which appeared plainly by his excluding of the whole Scottish Line, descended from the Lady Margaret, his eldest sister, from all hopes thereof; un∣lesse perhaps it may be said, that the Scottish Line might be sufficiently provided for, by the Marriage of the young Queen with the Prince his Son, and that it was the Scot own fault, if the match should faile. This care being over, and the Succession setled by his Last Will and Testament, bearing date, the 28th. of December, being a full moneth before his death, he began to entertaine some feares and Jealousies, touching the safety of the Prince, whom he should leave unto a factious and divided Court, who were more like to serve their own turns by him, then advance his interest His brother-in-Law, the Duke of Suffolk (in whom he most confided) died not long before; the kindred of Queen Jane were but new in Court, of no Authority in themselves, and such as had subsisted chiefly by the countenance, which she had from him. As they could contribute little to the defence of the Princes person, and the preservation of his Right; So there were some who had the Power, (and who could tell but that they also had the will?) to change the whole frame of his design, and take the Government to themselves. Amongst which there was none more feared then the Noble Lord Henry, Earle of Surrey, the eldest son of Thoas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, strong in Alliance and De∣pendance, of a Revenue not inferiour to some forreign Kings, and that did de∣rive his Pedigree from King Edward the first. The Earle himselfe, beheld in ge∣nerall by the English as the chiefe Ornament of the Nation; Highly esteemed for his Chivalry, his Affability, his learning, and whatsoever other Graces might either make him amiable in the eyes of the people, or formidable in the sight of a jealous, impotent, and way-ward Prince. Against him therefore, and his Father, there were Crimes devised, their persons put under an Arrest, their Arraignment prosecuted at the Guild Hall in London, where they both received the sentence of death; which the Earle suffered on the Tower Hill, on the 19. of January, the old Duke being reserved by the Kings death, (which followed within nine dayes after) for more happy times. Which brings into my minde a sharp, but shrewd Character of this King, occurring in the writings of some, but more common in the mouthes of many▪ that is to say, that be never spared woman in his lust, nor man in his anger. For proofe of which last, it is observed, that he brought unto the block two Queens, two Noble Ladies, one Cardinall declared,Sand. de Scis. Angl. p. 214. of Dukes, Marquisses, Earles, and the sons of Earles, no fewer then twelve: Lords and Knights▪ eighteen; of Abbots and Priors thirteen; Monks, and Religious Persons, about seventy seven; and many more of both Religions, to a very great number. So as it cannot be denied, that he had too much (as all great Monarchs must have somewhat) of the Tyrant in him. And yet I dare not say with Sir Walter Rawleigh, That if all the patterns of a mercilesse Prince had been lost in the World, they might have been found in this one King; some of his Executions being justifiable by the very nature of their Crimes, others to be imputed to the infelicity of the times in which he lived, and may be ascribed unto Reasons of State, the Exigences whereof are seldom squared by the Rule of Justice. His Infirmity, and the weaknesse which it brought upon him, having confined him to his bed, he had a great desire to receive the Sacrament; and being per∣swaded to receive it in the easiest posture, sitting, or raised up in his bed, he would by no meanes yield unto it; but caused himselfe to be taken up, placed in his chaire, in which he heard the greatest part of the Office, till the Consecration, and then Received the Blessed Sacrament on his knees,Ibid. p. 211. as at other times, saying withall, as Sanders doth Relate the story, That if he did not only cast himselfe upon the ground, but even under it also, he could not give unto the Sacrament the Honour which was due unto it. The instant of his death approaching, none of his Servants, though thereunto desired by his Physitians, durst acquaint him with
it. Till at last Sir Anthony Denny undertook that ungratefull office, which the King entertaining with lesse impatience then was looked for from him, gave or∣der that Arch-Bishop Cramner should be presently sent for. But, the Arch-Bishop being then at his house in Croyden, seven miles from Lambeth, it was so long before he came, that he found him speechlesse. Howsoever, applying himselfe to the Kings present condition, and discoursing to him on this Point, that Salvation was to be obtained only by Faith in Christ, he desired the King, that if he understood the effect of his words, and believed the same, he would signifie as much by some signe or other, which the King did by ringing him gent∣ly by the hand, and within short time after he gave up the Ghost, when he had lived fifty five yeares, seven moneths, and six dayes over, of which he had Reigned thirty seven yeares, nine moneths, and six dayes also. Having brought King Henry to his death, we must next see in what estate he left the Kingdome to his Son▪ with reference to the condition of Affares both at home and abroad. Abroad he left the Pope his most bitter enemy, intent on all advantages for the recovery of the Power and Jurisdiction, which had been exercised in England by his Predecessors; and all the Princes of his Party, in Germany, Italy, and elsewhere, either in Action, or Design, concurring with him. The Protestant Kings and Princes he had disobliged, by repudiating the Lady Ann of Cleve, and the precipitated death of Cromwell, upon whose Pow∣er and favour with him they did most rely: But, nothing did moe alienate their affections from him, then the persecution raised at home, upon the terrible Sta∣tute of the six Articles, before remembered; by which they saw themselves con∣demned, and executed in the persons of those, who suffered for the same Re∣ligion, which themselves professed. And, as for the two great Kings of France and Spaine, he had so carried himselfe between them, that he was rather feared of both, then beloved by either of them. The Realms and Signeuries of Spaine (excpt Portugall only) together with the Kingdomes of Naples, Scicilie, and Sardnia, and the Estates belonging to the House of Burgundy, in the Belgick Provinces, were all united in the Person of Chales the fifth, to which he aded by his own proper Power and Valour, the Dukedomes of Millain, and Gull∣dress, the Earldome of Ztphen, with the Estates of Grinigen, Vtrecht, and Over-yssll. And on the other side the French Kings were not only in the quiet possession of those goodly Territories, (Normandy, Guienne, and the rest) which ancintly belonged to the Kings of England; but lately had inparonised them∣selves of the Dukedomes of Burgoine, and Bretagne, and the Earledome of Provence, all meeting in the Person of King Francis the first. Of which two great and puissant Princes, the first being resolved to admit no equall, and the se∣cond to acknowledge no superiour, they endeavoured by all wayes and meanes immaginable to subdue each other, whereby the Conqueror might attaine in time to the Empire of Europe. It was therefore Kng Henries chiefest care, as it was his interess to keep the scales to even between them, that neither of them should preponderate, or weigh down the other, to the endangering of the rest of the Princes of Christendome: Which he performed with so great con∣stancy and courage, as made him in effect the Arbitrer at all times between them. So as it may be truely affirmed of him, that he sate at the Helmne, and Steered the great Affaires of Christendome, to what point he pleased. But then withall as his constant and continuall standing to ths Maxime of State, made him friend to neither, so he was suspected of them both; both having also their particular Animosities against his person and proceedings. The Emperour irreconciliably incenst against him for the injury done unto his Aunt, from whom he had caused himselfe to be divorced; the French King no less highly enraged by the taking of Biloigne, for which, though the King had shuffled up a peace with France, Prince Edward shall be called to a sober Reckoning, when he least lookes for it. To look to matters near at home, we finde the Scots exasperated by his
Annuall inrodes, but more by his demanding the long neglected duty of Ho∣mage to be performed from that Kingdom to the Crown of England: The Irish on the other side of the sea, being kept under by strong hand, but standing upon no good termes of affection with him; the executing of the young Earle of Kildare, and five of his Unckles at one time, being fresh in memory, and nei∣ther forgotten, nor forgiven by the rest of the Clanns. And, as for England it self, the People were generally divided into Schismes and Factions; some be∣ing two stiff in their old Mumpsimus, as others no lesse busie in their new Sumpsimus, as he used to phrase it. The Treasures of the Crown exhausted by prodigall gifts, and his late chargeable Expedition against the French; the Lands thereof charged with Rents, and Pensions granted to Abbots, Priors, and all sorts of Religious Persons; some of which remained payable, and were paid accordingly, till the time of King James; and, which was worst of all, the Mo∣ny of the Realm so imposed and mixed, that it could not pass for currant a∣mongst Forreign Nations, to the great dishonour of the Kingdome, and the losse of the Merchant. For, though an infinite Masse of Jewels, treasure in Plate, and ready Mony, and an incredible improvement of Revenue had acrued unto him by such an universell spoyle, and dissolution of Religious Houses, yet was he lit∣tle or nothing the richer for it. In so much, that in the yeare 1543. being within lesse then seven yeares after the Generall suppression of Religious Hou∣ses, he was faign to have recourse for moneyes to his Houses of Parliament, by which he was supplied after an extraordinary manner; the Clergy at the same time giving him a subsidy of 6. s. in the pound, to be paid out of all their Spiri∣tuall Promotions, poore stipendary Priests paying each 6. s. 8. d. to encrease the summe. Which also was so soon consumed, that the next yeare he prest his Subjects to a Benevolence, for carrying on his Warr with France and Scotland; and in the next obtained the Grant for all Chanteries, Hospitalls, Colledges, and Free-Chappells, within the Realm, though he lived not to enjoy the benefit of it, as before was said. Most true it is, that it was somewhat of the latest before he cast his eye on the Lands of Bishoppricks, though there were some who thought the time long till they fell upon them. Concerning which there goes a story, that after the Court-Harpies had devoured the greatest part of the spoyle, which came by the suppression of Abbyes, they began to seek some other way, to satiate that gree∣dy Appetite, which the division of the former booty had left unsatisfied; and for the satisfying whereof, they found not any thing so necessary as the Bishops Lands. This to effect, Sir Thomas Seimour is imployed as the fittest man, as being in favour with the King, as brother to Queen Jane, his most, and best beloved wife; and having the opportunity of accesse unto him, as being one of the Gentlemen of his Privy Chamber. And he not having any good affection to Arch-Bishop Cranmer, desired that the experiment should be tryed on him, and therefore took his time to informe the King, that my Lord of Canterbury did nothing but fell his woods, letting long leases for great fines, and making ha∣vock of the Royalties of his Arch-Bishopprick, to raise thereby a fortune to his wife and children; withall, he did acquaint the King, that the Arch-Bishop kept no hospitality, in respect of such a large Revenue; and that in the opinion of many wise men it was more meet for the Bishops to have a sufficient yearely Stipend out of the Exchequer, then to be so encumbred with temporall Royal∣ties, being so great a hindrance to their Studies, and Pastorall Charge, and that the said Lands and Royalists being taken to his Majesties use, would afford him (besides the said Annuall Stipends) a great yearly Revenue. The King soon smelt out the Device, and shortly after sent him on an Errand to Lambeth, a∣bout dinner time, where he found all the tables in the great Hall to be very boun∣tifully furnished, the Arch-Bishop himselfe accompanied at dinner, with di∣vers persons of Quality, his Table exceeding plentifully served, and all things answerable to the Port of so great a Prelate: Wherewith the King being made
acquainted at his coming back, he gave him such a Ratle for his false informati∣on, and the design which visibly depended on it, that neither he, nor any other of the Courtiers, durst stir any further in the suite, whilest King Henry lived. But the King, considering further of it, could not think fit that such a plausible Proposition, as taking to himselfe the Lands of the Bishops, should be made in vaine. Only he was resolved to prey further off: and not to fall upon the spoyle two neere the Court, for feare of having more partakers in the Booty, then might stand with his profit. And to this end the deales with Hlgate, pre∣ferred not long before from Landff to the See of Yorke; from whom he takes at one time no fewer then seventy Mannors, and Town-ships, of good old Rents, given him in exchange, to the like yearly value, certain Impropriations, Pensi∣ons, Tithes, and Portions of Tithes, (but all of an extended Rent,) which had accrued unto the Crown by the fall of Abbyes. Which Lands he aid by Act of Parliament, to the Dutchy of Lancaster. For which, see 37▪ Hen. 8. Cp 16. He dismembred also by these Acts certain Mannors from the See of Lodon, in favur of Sir William Petie; and others in the like manner from the See of Canterbury, but not without some reasonable compensation, or allowance for them. And though by reason of his death, which folowed within short time after; there was no further alienation made in his time, of the Churches Patri∣money; yet having opened such a Gap, and discovered this secret, that the sacred Patrimony might be alienated with so little trouble; the Courties of King Ed∣wards time, would not be kept from breaking violently into it, and making up their own fortune in the spoyle of the Bihopricks. Of which we may peak more hereafter in it's proper place. So impossible a thing it is for the il exam∣ple of Great Princes, not to finde followers in all ages, especially where profit, or preferment may be furthered by it. But then it cannot be deied, but that King Henry left the Church in many Respects, in a better condition then he found it; not only in order to the Re∣formation of Religion, which none but such a Masculine Prince durst have un∣dertaken, but also in the Polity and endowments of it. The Mnsteries and Religious Houses, might possibly be looked upon no otherwise, then as so many excrescences upon the body of the Church; exempt for the most part from the E∣piscopall Jurisdiction, wholly depending on the Pope▪ and such as might be taken away, without any derogation to the Church, in Power or Patrimony. But, Bi∣shopricks being more essentiall to the constitution of the same, he did not only preserve, as before he found them, but increased their number. Such of the old Cathedralls as were founded on a Prior and Covent, he changed into a Cor∣poration of secular Priests, consisting of a Deane, and Prebendarles, accor∣ding to the proportion of their yearely rents▪ of which sort were the Churches of Canterbury, Winton, Durham, Elie, Rochester, Norwich and Carlile. Six of the wealthier Monasteries he turned into Episcopall Sees, that is to say, the Ab∣byes of Westminster, Peter Borough, Bristoll▪ Glocester, and Chester, with that of Osney for the See of the Bishop of Oxon; assigning to every new Episcopall See its Deane and Chapter, and unto every such Cathedrall, a competent number of Quiremen, and other Officers, all of them liberally endowed and provided for. And that the Church might be continually furnished with sufficient Seminaries, he sounded a Grammer Schoole in every one of his Cathedralls, either old or new, with Annuall pensions to the Master▪ and some allowance to be made to the children yearely; and ordained also, that in each of the two Universities there should be publick Readers, in the faculties of Divinity, Law and Physick, and in the Greek and Hebrew Tongues; all which he pensioned, and endowed with lberall Saaries, as the times then were. Besides which publique benefact∣ions he confirmed Cardinall Wolsies Colledge in Oxon by the name of Kings Colledge first, and of Christ church afterwards; and erected that most beautifull pie of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge; those being the two farest, and most
magnificent foundations in the Christian World. As for the Polity of the Church, he setled it in such a manner, that Arch-bishops and Bishops might be chosen, confirmed, and consecrated, and all the Subjects be relieved in their suits and Grievances, without having such Recourse to the Court of Rome, as formerly had drained the Realm of so much Treasure. For▪ having by his Proclamation, of the 19th. of September, Anno 1530. prohibited all addresses and Appeales to the Popes of Rome, he prevailed so farr upon his Bishops and Clergy; intangled by the Cardinalls fall in a Premunire, that they acknowledged him in their Convocation, to be the Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England, and signified as much in a Publick Instrument, bearing date, the 22th day of March, next following. Upon this ground were bult the Statutes, prohibiting all Appeales to Rome, and for determi∣ning all Ecclesiasticall suites and controversies within the Kingdom. 24. Hen. 8. cap. 1. That for the manner of declaring, and consecrating of Arch-Bishops, and Bishops▪ 25. Hen. 8. Cap. 20. and the prohibiting the payment of all impositi∣ons to the Court of Rome; and for obtaining all such dispensations from the see of Canterbury, which formerly were procured from the Popes of Rome, 25. Hen. 8. Cap. 21. and finally, that for declaring the King to be the Supreme Head of the Church of England, and to have all Honours and Preheminences; and amongst o∣thers, the first-fruits and tenths of all Ecclesiasticall promotions within the Realm which were annexed unto that Title. In the forme of consecrating Arch-Bishops, and Bishops, and the rule by which they excercised their Jurisdiction, there was no change made, but what the transposition of the Supreme Power, from the Pope to the King, must of necessity infer. For, whereas the Bishops and Cler∣gy in the Convocation An. 1532. had bound themselves neither to make, nor execute any Canons, or Constitutions Ecclesiasticall, but as they were thereto en∣abled by the Kings Authority; it was by them desired, assented to by him, and confirmed in Parliament, that all such Canons, and Constitutions, Synodall and Provinciall, as were before in use, and neither Repugnant to the Word of God, the kings Prerogative Royall, or the known Lawes of the Land, should remaine in force, till a review thereof were made by thirty two Persons of the Kings appointment. Which review, not having been made from that time to this, all the said old Canons, and Constitutions so restrained and qualified, do still remaine in force, as before they did. For this Consult the Act of Parlia∣ment 25. Hen. 8. Cap. 1. And this, and all the rest being setled, then follow∣ed finally the Act for extinguishing the Power of the Pope of Rome. 28. Hen. 8 Cap. 10. which before we mentioned. In order to a Reformation in points of Doctrine, he first directed his Bishops and Clergy in their Convocation, Ano 1537. to compile a Book, containing The Exposition of the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the Avemary, and the Ten Com∣mandements, together with an Explication of the use and nature of the seven Sacraments. More cleerely in it self, and more agreeable to the Truth of Holy Scripture, then in former times; which book being called The Institution of a Christian Ma, was by them presented to the King, who liked thereof so well, that he sent it by Doctor Barlow, Bishop of St. Davids, to King James the fifth, hoping thereby, to induce him to make the like Reformation in the Realm of Scotland, as was made in England, though therein he was deceived of his expect∣ation. But, this Book having lien dormant for a certain time, that is to say, as long as the six Articles were in force, was afterwards corrected, and explained by the Kings own hand; and being by him so corrected, was sent to be reviewed by ArchBishop Cranmer, by him referred (with his own emendations on it) to the Bishop and Clergy, then Assembled in their Convocation, Anno 1543. and by them Approved. VVhich care that Godly Prelate took, as himselfe confes∣seth in a Letter to a friend of his,M. S. de Ec∣cles. in Bishop Cot. p. 5. bearing date, January 25. because the book being to come out by the Kings Censure and Judgement, he would have nothing in the same, which Momus himselfe could Reprehend. VVhich being done, it was pub∣lished shortly after, by the name of a Necessary Doctrine and Erudition, for any
Christian man, with an Epistle of the Kings Prefixt before it, in which it was commended to the Perusall of all his subjects, that were Religiously disposed. Now, as the first book was ushered in by an injunction, published in Sptember, An. 1536. by which all Curates were required to Teach the people to say the Lords Prayer, the Creed, the Aveary, and the Ten Commandements, in the English Tongue; o was the second countenanced by a Proclamation which made way unto it, bearing date, May the sixth. 1541, whereby it was commanded, that the English Bible, of the Larger Vollumne, should publiquely be placed in every Parish-Church of the Kings Dominions▪ And here we are to understand, that the Bible having been Translated into the English Tongue, by the great paines of William Tyndall (who after suffered for Reli∣gion, in the Reigne of this King) was by the Kings Command supprest, and the reading of it interdicted by Proclamation; the Bishops, and other Learned men, advising the retraint thereof, as the times then stood. But afterward, the times being changed, and the People better fitted for so great a benefit, the Bishops and Clergy Assembled in their Convocation, Anno 1536. humbly pe∣titioned to the King, that the Bible being faithfully Translated, and purged of such Prologues, and Marginall Notes, as formerly had given offence, might be permitted from thenceforth to the use of the people. According to which God∣ly motion, his Majesty did not only give Order for a new Translation, but in the Interim he permitted Cromwell, his Viccar Generall, to set out an Injuncti∣on, for providing the whole Bible, both in Latine and English, after the Transla∣tion then in use;) which was called commonly by the name of Matthews Bible, but was no other then that of Tyndall, somewhat altered) to be kept in every arish Church throughout the Kingdome. And so it stood (but not with such a Generall observation, as the case required, till the finishing of the new Transla∣tion, Printed by Grafton, countenanced by a learned Preface of Arch-Bishop Cranmer, and Authorised by the Kings Proclamation of the sixth of May, as be∣fore was said. Finally, that the people might be better made acquainted with the Prayers of the Church, it was appointed, a little before the Kings going to Bol∣loigne, Anno 1545. that the Ltany (being put into the same forme almost in which now it stands) should, from thenceforth be said in the English Tongue. So farr this King had gone, in order to a Reformation, that it was no hard mat∣ter for his Son (or for those rather, who had the Managing of Affaires, during his Minority) to go thorough with it. In Reference to the Regall State, he added to the Royal Stile, these three Glori∣ous Attributes, that is to say. Defender of the Faith, The Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England, and King of Ireland. In what manner he obtained the Title of Supreme Head, conferred upon him by the Convocation, in the year 1530. and confirmed by Act of Parliament, in the 26 yeare of his Reign, hath been showne before. That of Defender of the Faith, was first bestowed upon him by Pope Leo the tenth, upon the publishing of a Book against Martin Luther; which Book being presented unto the Pope, by the hands of Doctor Clark, afterwards Bishop of Bath and Wells, hath been preserved ever since amongst the choisest Rarities of the Vatican Library. Certain it is, that the Pope was so well pleased with the present, as to receive the same in a Sollemn Assembly of the Cardinalls, and Court of Rome, expressing the contentment which he took therein, by a fluent Oration, the Copy whereof we have in Speed, Fol. 991. And whereas, in former times, the French were Honoured with the Ti∣tle of Most Christian; and the Spaniard lately with the Title of The Catholick King, This Pope, in due acknowledgement of so great a Merit, bestowes on Henry the more Glorious Attribute of, The Defender of the Faith. Which Bull being dated on the tenth of Octob. Anno 1521. is to be found exem∣plified in The Titles of Honour, and thither I referr the Reader for his satisfacti∣on. Twenty three yeares the King enjoyed this Title, by no other Grant, then the Donation of Pope Leo. But, then considering with himselfe, that it was first
Granted by that Pope, as a Personall favour, and not intended to descend upon his Posterity, as also, that the Popes, by the reason of such differences as were between them, might possibly take a time to deprive him of it, he resolved to stand no longer on a ground of no greater certainty. And therefore, having summoned his High Court of Parliament, to Assemble on the 29th. of March, Anno 1544. he procured this Title to be assured unto his Person, and to be made perpetuall to his Heires and Successors, for all times succeeding. For which Consult, the Statute 35. Hen. 8. Cap. 3. And by the Act it was ordained, that whosoever should malitiously diminish any of his Majesties Royall Titles, or seek to deprive him of the same, should suffer death, as in case of Treason; and that from thenceforth the Stile Imperiall should no otherwise be exprest, then in this forme following, that is to say, N. N. by the Grace of God, King of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and on Earth of the Churches of England, and Ireland, the Supreme Head. By vertue of which Act Queen Mary still retained this Title, though she disclaimed the other of Supreme Head, by Act of Parliament, in the first yeare of her Reign, as being incompetible with her submission, and Relations to the See of Rome. As for the Title of King of Ireland, it was first given unto this King, by a Par∣liament, there holden in the Month of June, 1541. under Sir Anthony Saint-Leiger being then Lord Deputy. The Acts whereof being transmitted to the King, and by him confirmed, he caused himselfe to be first Proclaimed King of Ireland, on the 23th. of January, then next following. Which, though it added some∣what to him in point of Title, yet it afforded him no advantage in point of Pow∣er; but that the name of King was thought to carry more respect and awe with it amongst the Irish, then the Title of Lord, which only till that time had been assumed by the Kings of England. For, otherwise the Kings of England, from the first Conqest of the Country by King Henry the second, enjoyed and ex∣ercised all manner of Royalties, and Preheminences, which do, or can belong to the greatest Kings; Governing the same by their Vice-Gernts, to whom sometimes they gave the Title of Lord Lieutenants, sometimes Lord Deputies of Ireland, then whom no Vice-Roy in the VVorld comes nearer to the Pomp and splendor of a Soveraign Prince. And though they took no other Title to them∣selves, then Lords of Ireland, yet they gave higher Titles to their Subjects there, many of which they advanced to the Honour, and Degree of Earles. And at the same time, when King Richard the second contented himselfe with no Higher Stile then Lord of Ireland, he exalted his great Favourite Robert d' Vere, the tenth Earle of Oxon, of that Family, first, to the Dignity and Stile of Marquesse of Dublin, and after to the invidious Appellation of Duke of Ireland, which he enjoyed unto his death. The Countrey at the same time changed it's Title also, being formerly no otherwise called in our Records, then Terra Hiberniea, or the Land of Ireland, but, from henceforth to be called upon all occasions, in Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, and Letters Patents, by the name of Regnum Hiberniae, or the Realm of Ireland. At the assuming of which new Title, by this King, the Scots were somewhat troubled, but the Pope much more; The Scots had then some footing in the North parts of that Iland, and thought, the taking of that Title by the Kings of England, to tend to the endangering of their possession, or at least to bring them under a Subjection of a Foreign Prince. And on the other side, it was complained of in the Court of Rome, as a great and visible encroachment on the Ppall Power, to which it only appertained, to erect new Kingdomes; and that the injury was the greater in the present case, because the King holding that Iland by no other Title, (as it was then, and there pretended) then by the Donation of Pope Adrian to King Henry the se∣cond, was not withut the Popes consent to assume that Title. But, the King ca∣red as little for the Pope, as he did for the Scots, knowing how able he was to make good all his Actings against them both; and not only for enjoying this Title for the rest of his life, but for the leaving of it to his Heires and Successors▪
though afterward Queen Mary accepted a new Grant of it from the Pope then being. Having thus setled and confirmed the Regall Style, his next care was for set∣ling, and preventing all disputes and quarrells, which might be raised about the Succession of the Crown, if the Prince, his son, should chance to dye without lawfull issue, as he after did. In which, as he discharged the trust reposed in him, so he waved nothing of the Power which he had took unto himself by Act of Parlia∣ment, made in that behalfe, in the 35 year of his Reign, as before wasnoted. In pursuance whereof, finding himself sensibly to decay, but having his wits and un∣derstanding still about him, he framed his last Wil and Testament, which he caused to be signed and attested on the 30 of December, Anno 1546, being a full Month before his death. First published by Mr. Fuller, in his Church History of Brit∣tain, Lib. 5. Fol. 243, 244. And out of him I shall crave leave to transcribe so much thereof, as may suffice to show unto posterity the sence he had of his own condition, the vile esteem he had of his sinfull body, what pious, but unprofita∣ble care he took, for the Decent Interment of the same; in what it was wherein he placed the hopes of Eternall life; and finally, what course he was pleased to take in the intailing of the Crown after his decease, by passing over the line of Scotland, and setling the Reversion in the House of Suffolk, if his own children should depart without lawfull Issue, as in fine they did. In which, and in some other points, not here summed up, the Reader may best satisfie himselfe by the words and tenour of the VVill, which are these that follow. IN the name of God, and of the Glorious and blessed Virgin, our Lady St. Ma∣ry, and of all the Holy Company of Heaven: We Henry, by the Grace of God King of England, France, and Ireland; Defender of the Faith, and in Earth immediately under God, the Sùpreme Head of the Church of Eng∣land and Ireland, of that name the eighth; Calling to our remembrance the great gifts and benefits of Almighty God, given unto us in this Transitory life, give unto him our most lowly and humble thanks, acknowledging our selves insufficient in any part to deserve, or recompence the same. But feare that we have not worthily received the same; and considering further also, that we be, (as all mankinde are) mortall, and borne in sin, believing never∣thelesse, and hoping that every Christian creature living here in this Transito∣tory and Wretched World, under God, dying in stedfast and perfect Faith, endeavouring, and exercising himselfe to execute in this life time, if he have leisure, such good deeds, and charitable workes, as Scripture commandeth, and as may be to the Honour and pleasure of God, is Ordained by Christ's Pas∣sion to be sacred, and attain eternall Life; of which number we verily trust by his Grace to be one. And that every creature▪ the more high that he is in Estate, Honour, and Authority in this World, the more he is bound to love, serve, and thank God, and the more diligently to endeavour himselfe to do good and charitable works, to the Laud, Honour, and Praise of Almighty God, and the Profit of his soul; We also calling to remembrance the dignity, Estate. Honour, Rule and Governance that Almighty God hath called us to in this World; and that neither we, nor any other creature mortall knoweth, the place, time, when, nor where it shall please Almighty God to call him out of this Transitory World; Willing therefore, and minding with Gods grace, before our passage out of the same, to dispose and order our latter Mind, Will, and Tstament, in that sort, as we trust it shall be acceptable to Almighty God, our only Savi∣our Jesus Christ, and all the Holy Company of Heaven, and the due satis∣faction
of all Godly brethren in Earth, Have now, being of whole and perfect mind, adhering wholly to the right Faith of Christ, and his Doctrine, repen∣ting also our old and detestable life, and being in perfect will and mind, by his Grace, never to returne to the same, and such like. And minding, by Gods Grace, never to vary therefrom as long as any remembrance, truth, or inward knowledge doth, or may, remaine within this mortall body; most humbly and heartily do commend, and bequeath our soul to Almighty God, who in person of the Son redeemed the same, with his most pretious body and blood▪ in time of his Passion: And for our better remembrance thereof, hath left here with us in his Church Militant, the Consecration and Administration of his most pre∣tious Body and Blood, to our no little Consolation and Comfort, if we as thankfully accept the same, as he lovingly and undeservedly on mans behalfe, hath ordained it for our only benefit, and not his. Also, we do instantly require, and desire the blessed Virgin Mary, his Mo∣ther, with all the Holy Company of Heaven, continually to pray for us; whilest we live in this World, and in the time of passing out of the same, that we may the sooner attain everlasting life, after our departure out of this tran∣sitory life, which we do both hope and claime by Christs Passion; And for my body, when the soul is departed, shall then remaine but as a Cadaver, and so returne to the vile matter it was made of; were it not for the Crown and Dig∣nity which God hath called us unto, and that we would not be counted an infin∣ger of honest Woldly Policies, and Customes, when they be not contrary to Gods Lawes, we would be content to have it buried in any place, accustom∣ed for Christian olkes, were it never so vile, for it is but ashes, and to ashes it shall returne. Neverthelesse, because we would be loath, in the Reputation of the people, to do injury to the Dignity, which we are unworthily called unto, we are content, and also by these presents, Our Last Will and Testament is, to will and order, that our body be buried and interred in the Quire of our Col∣ledge of Windsor, middle way, between the stalls and the High Altar, and there to be made and set, as soon as conveniently may be done after our decease, by our Executors, at our costs and charges; if it be not done by us in our life∣time, an Honourable Tomb, for our bones to rest in, which is well onward, and almost made therefore already with a faire Grate about it; in which we will also, that the bones of our true and loving wife Queene Jane, be put also: And that there be provided, ordained and set, at the cost and charge of us, or of our Executors, if it be not done in our life time, a convenient Altar, Honourably prepared, and apparrelled with all manner of things requisite, and necessary for dayly Masse, there to be said perpetually, while the World shall endure: Also we Will, that the Tombs, and Altars of King Henry the sixt, and also of King Edward the fourth, our great Vncle and Grand∣father, be made more Princely, in the same place where they now be, at our charge. Which care being taken for his Tomb, he gives order that all Divine Offices, accustomed for the dead, should be duly Celebrated for him; that at the remo∣vall of his body to Windsor, 1000. Marks should be distributed amongst the poore, to the end that they might pray for the remission of his sins, and the Wealth of his soule; that a Revenue of 600 pound per Annum, be setled on the Deane and Chapter of Windsor, for performance of the uses in the Will. expressed, and more particularly for the maintainance of thirteen poore Gentle∣men, (to be called the Poore Knights of Windsor) at the rate of twelve pence by the day to each of them, with a see of 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. yearly to be superadded unto him; which should be chosen the Head and Goverour over all the rest. And that being done, he proceeds to the entailing of the Crown, in this manner following.
And as concerning the Order and disposition of the Imperiall Crown of this Realm of England, and Ireland, with our Title of France, and all Dig∣nities, Honours, and Preheminences, Prerogatives, Authorities and Juris∣dictions to the same annexed, or belonging, and for the sre Establishment of the Succession of the same. And also for a full and plaine gift, Disposition, Assignement, Declaration, Limitation, and appointment, with what Con∣ditions our Daughters, Mary and Elizabeth, shall severally have, hold, and enjoy the said imperiall Crowne, and other the like Premises after our De∣cease; and for default of issue, and Heires of the severall bodyes of us, and of our Son Prince Edward, lawfully begotten, And also for a full Gift, Disposition, Assignement, Declaration, Limitations, and appoint∣ment to whom, and of what Estate, and of what Manner, Fortune, and Condition, the said Imperiall Crowne, and other the Premises shall re∣maine, and come after our Decease; And for default of Issue, and Heires of the severall bodies of us, of our said Son Prince Edward, of our said Daughters, Mary and Elizabeth, lawfully begotten, We by these Presents do make, and declare our last Will and Testament, conveying the said Imperiall Crowne, and all other the Premises in manner and Forme fol∣lowing. That is to say, We will by these Presents, that Immediately after our de∣parture ut of this present life, our said Son Prince Edward shall have and enjoy the said Imperiall Crowne, and Realme of England, our Title of France, with all Dignities, Honours, Preheminences, Prerogatives, Autho∣rities, and Irisdictions, Lands and Possessions to the same annexed, or be∣longing unto him, or to the Heires of his body Lawfully begotten; And for default of such Issue of our said Son Prince Edward's Body, lawfully be∣gotten, We will the same Imperiall Crown, and other the Premises after our Deceases, shall wholly remaine, and come to the Heires of our Body, law∣fully begotten upon the body of our entirely beloved wife, Queene Katharine, that now is, or of any other our lawfull wife that we shall hereafter marry. And for lack of such issue and Heires, we will also that after our decease, and for default of Heires of the severall bodies of us, and of our said Son Prince Edward's, lawfully begotten, the said Imperiall Crowne, and all o∣ther the Premises shall wholly remaine, and come to our said Daughter Mary, and the Heires of her body, lawfully begotten, upon condition, that our said daughter Mary, after our decease, shall not marry, nor take any Person to her Husband, without the Assent, and Consent of the Privy Counsellours, and others, appointed by us to our dearest Son, Prince Edward aforesaid, to be of Counsell, or of the most part of them, or the most of such as shall then be alive thereunto, before the said Marriage, had in writing, sealed with their seales. All which conditions s Declare, Limit, Appoint, and Will by these Presents, shall be knit and invested to the said Estate of our daugh∣ter Mary, in the said Imperiall Crowne, and other the Premises. And if it fortune our said Daughter Mary to die, without Issue of her body lawfully begotten, We will, that after our decease, and for default of Issue of the se∣verall bodies of us, and of our said Son Prince Edward, lawfully begotten, and of our daughter Mary, the said imperiall Crown, and other the Premises shall wholly remain to come to our said daughter Elizabeth, and to the Heires of her body, lawfully begotten, upon condition, that our said daughter Eliza∣beth, after our decease, shall not marry, or take any Person to her Hus∣band, without the Assent, and Consent of the Privy Counsellors, and others appointed by us, to be of Counsell with our said dearest Son Prince Edward, or the most part of them, or the most part of such of them as shall be then alive, thereunto, before the Marriage, had in writing, sealed with their seales, which Condition we Declare, Limit, and appoint, and Will by these
presents, shall be to the said Estate of Our said Daughter Elizabeth knit, and invested. And, if it shall fortune Our said Daughter Elizabeth to die without Issue of Her Body lawfully begotten, We will, that after our Decease, and for default of Issue of the several Bodies of V, and of Our said Son Prince Edward, and of Our said Daughters Mary and Elizabeth, the said Imperial Crown, and other the Premisses, after Our Decease, shall wholly remain, and come to the Heirs of the Body of the Lady Frances our Neece, eldest Daughter to Our late Sister the French Queen, lawfully begotten. And, for default of such Issue of the Body of the said Lady Frances, We will, that the said Imperial Crown, and other the Premisses, after Our Decease, and for default of Issue of the se∣veral Bodies of V, and of Our Son Prince Edward, and of Our Daughters Mary and Elizabeth, and of the Lady Frances lawfully begotten, shall wholly remain, and come to the Heirs of the Body of the Lady Elanor Our Neece, second Daughter to Our said Sister the French Queen, lawfully begotten. And if it happen the said Lady Elanor to die without Issue of Her Body law∣fully begotten, We will, that after Our Decease, and for default of Issue of the several Bodies of Vs, and of Our said Son Prince Edward, and of Our said Daughters Mary and Elizabeth, and of the said Lady Frances, and of the said Lady Elanor, lawfully begotten, the said Imperial Crown, and other the Premisses, shall wholly remain, and come to the next Rightfull Heirs. And We will, that if Our said Daughter Mary do marry without the assent and consent of the Privy Councellours, and others appointed by Vs to be of Council to Our said Son Prince Edward, or the most part of them that shall then be alive, thereunto, before the said Marriage, had in wri∣ting, sealed with their Seals, as is afore-said; That then, and from thence∣forth, for lack of Heirs of the several Bodies of Vs, and of Our said Son Prince Edward, lawfully begotten, the said imperial Crown shall wholly re∣main be, and come, to Our said Daughter Elizabeth, and to the Heirs of Her Body lawfully begotten, in such manner and form, as though Our said Daugh∣ter Mary were then dead, without any Issue of the Body of Our said Daughter Mary lawfully begotten; Any thing contained in this Our Will, or any Act of Parliament, or Statute, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And in case Our said Daughter, the Lady Mary, do keep, and perform the said con∣dition, expressed, declared, and limited to her Estate in the said Imperial Crown, and other the Premisses in this Our last Will declared; And that Our said Daughter Elizabeth do not keep, and perform, for her part, the said con∣dition declared, and limited by this Our last ill to the Estate of the said La∣d Elzabeth in the said Imperial Crown in this Realm of England, and Ire∣land, and other the Premisses: We will, that then, and from thence-forth, after Our Decease, and for lack of Heirs of the several Bodies of Vs, and of Our said Son Prince Edward, and of Our Daughter Mary, lawfully begotten; the said Imperial Crown, and other the Premisses shall wholly remain, and come to the next Heirs lawfully begotten of the said Lady Frances, in such manner and form, as though the said Lady Elizabeth were dead with∣out any Heir of Her Body lawfully begotten, Any thing contained in this Will, or in any Act, or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding. The remain∣der over, for lack of Issue of the said Lady Frances lawfully begotten, to be, and continue, to such Persons, like Remainders, and states, as is before li∣mited, and declared. And We, being now at this time (thanks to Almighty God) of perfect Memory, do Constitute, and Ordain these Personages following Our Exe∣cutours, and Performers of Our last Will and Testament; Willing, Command∣ing, and Praying them to take upon them the occupation and performances of the same, as Executours: that is to say; The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; the Lord Wriothesly, Chancellour of England; the Lord St▪ John, Great
Master of Oar House; the Earl of Hartford, Great Chamberlain; the Lord Russel, Lord Privy Seal; the Viscount L'isle, Lord High Admiral of England; the Bishop Tonstal of Duresme; Sir Anthony Brown Knight, Master of Our Horses; Sir Edward Mountague Knight, chief Judge of the Common Pleas; Justice Bromly; Sir Edward North Knight, Chancellour of the Augmentations; Sir William Paget Kniht Our chief Secretary; Sir Anthony Denny, Sir William Herbert Knight, chief Gentlemen of Our Privy Chamber; Sir Edward Wotton, Knight, and Mr. Dr. Wotten, his Brother. And all these We will to be Our Executours, and Councellours of the Privy Council with Our said Son, Prince Edward, in all matters both concerning His Private affairs, and the Publick affairs of the Realm; Willing and charging them, and every of them, as they must, and shall, answer at the day of Judgement, wholly, and fully, to see this My last Will and Testament performed in all things, with as much speed and diligence as may be; and that none of them presume to medle with any of Our Treasure, or to do any thing appointed by Our said Will, alone, unless the most part of the whole number of the Co-Executours do consent, and by wri∣ting agree to the same; And wll that Our said Executours, or the most part of them, may lawfully do what they shall think most convenient for the execu∣tion of this Our Will, without being troubled by Our said Son, or any other for the same.—After which, having taken Order about the payment of His Debts, He proceeds as followeth. Further, according to the Laws of Almighty God, and for the Fatherly Love, which We bear to Our Son, Prince Edward, and this Our Realm, We declare Him; according to Justice, Equity, and Conscience, to be Our lawfull Heir; and do give, and bequeath unto Him the Succession of Our Realms of England and Ireland, with Our Title of France, and all Our Dominions, both on this side the Seas, and beyond: A convenient portion for Our will and Testament to be reserved. Also we give unto Him all Our Plate, Stuff of Houshold, Artillery, Ordnance, Ammunition, Ships, Cables, and all other things, and implements to them belonging, and Money also, and Jew∣els; saving such portions, as shall satisfie this Our Last Will and Testament: Charging, and commanding Him on pain of Our curse, (seeing He hath so Lo∣ving a Father of Vs, and that Our chief Labour, and Study in this world, is to establish him in the Crown Imperial of this Realm, after Our cease, in such sort as may be pleasing to God, and to the health of this Realm,) that He be Ordered and Ruled both in His Marriage, and also in ordering the Af∣fairs of the Realm, as well outward as inward; and also in all His own private Affairs, and in giving of Offices of Charge, by the Advice and Coun∣sel of Our Right-entirely beloved Councellours, the Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, the Lord Wriothesly Chancellour of England, the Lord St. John Master of Our Horse, the Lord Russel Lord Privy Seal, the Earl of Hart∣ford Great Chamberlain of England, the Viscount L'isle High Admiral of England, the Bishop Tonstal of Dureme, Sir Anthony Brown Knight Ma∣ster of Our Horses, Sir William Paget Our chief Secretary▪ Sir Anthony Denny, Sir William Herbert, Justice Mountague and Bromely, Sir Edward Wotton, Mr. octour Wotton, and Sir Edward North: Whom we Ordain, name and appoint, and by these Presents Signed with Our hand, do make, and constitute Our Privy Council, with Our said Son; and will that they have the Governance of Our most dear Son, Prince Edward, and of all Our Realms, Dominions, and Subjects, and of all the Affairs, publick and private, untill He shall have fully compleated the eighteenth year of His Age. And for because the variety, and number of things, affairs, and matters, are, and may be, such, as We, not knowing the certainty of them before, cannot conveniently prescribe a certain rder, or Rule, unto Our said Councellours, for their behaviours, and proceedings, in this charge which we have now, and do appoint unto them about Our said Son, during the time of His minority afore∣said:
We therefore, for the special Trust and Confidence, which We have in them, will, and by these Presents, do give, and grant full Power, and Authority, unto Our said Councelours; that they all, or the most part of them, being assembled together in Council, or, if any of them fortune to dye, the more part of them, which shall be for the time living, being assembled in Coun∣cil together, shall, and may make, devise, and ordain, whatsoever things they, or the more part of them, as afore-said, shall, during the Minority of Our said Son, think meet, necessary, and convenient, for the Benefit, Honour, and Surety of the Weal, Profit, and Commodity of Our said Son, His Realms, Dominions, or Subjects, or the Discharge of Our Conscience. And the same things made, ordained, and devised by them, or the more part of them, as afore-said, shall, and may, lawfully do, execute, and accomplish, or cause to be done, executed, or accomplished, by their Discretions, or the Di∣scretions of the more part of them, as afore-said, in as large and ample manner, as if We had, or did express unto them, by a more special Commission under Our Great Seal of England every particular cause, that may chance, or occurr, du∣ring the time of Our said Son's Minority, and the self-same manner of Pro∣ceeding, which they shall from time to time think meet to use, and follow: Will∣ing, and charging Our said Son, and all others, which shall hereafter be Councellours to Our said Son; that they never charge, molest, trouble, or dis∣quiet Our afore-said Councellours, nor any of them, for the devising, or doing, nor any other person, or persons, for doing that they shall devise, or the more part of them devise, or do, assembled as is afore-said. And We do charge expresly the same Our entirely-beloved Councellours, and Executours, that they shall take upon them the Rule and Charge of Our said Son and Heir, in all His Causes and Affairs, and of the whole Realm; doing nevertheless all things, as under Him, and in His name, untill Our said Son, and Heir, shall be bestowed, and married by their advice, and that the eigh∣teenth year be expired. Willing, & dsiring furthermore, Our said Trusty Coun∣cellours, and then all Our Trusty and Assured Servants; and Thirdly, all other Our Loving Subjects▪ to aid and assist Our fore-named Councellours in the Ex∣ecution of the Premisses, during the afore-said time; not doubting, but that they will in all things deal so truly and uprightly, as they shall have cause to think them well chosen for the Charge committed unto them: Streightly charging our said Councellours, and Executours, and in God's Name exhor∣ting them, for the singular Trust, and special Cofidence, which we have, and ever had in them, to have a due and diligent Eye, perfect Zeal, Love, and Affection, to the Honour, Surety, Estate, and Dignity, of Our said Son, and the Good State and Prosperity of this Our Realm; And, that all delays set apart, they well aid, and assist Our said Councellours and Executours, to the performance of this Our present Testament, and last Will in every part, as they will answer before God at the day of Judgement, Cum venerit judicate vivos & mortuos. And furthermore, for the special Trust and Confidence, which We have in the Earls of Arundel, and Essex, that now be; Sir Thomas Cheney Knight, Treasurer of Our Houshould; Sir John Gage Knight, Comptroller of Our Houshold; Sir Anthony Wingfield Knight, Our Vice-Chamberlain; Sir William Peter Knight, one of Our two principal Secretaries; Sir Richard Rich Knight, Sir John Baker Knight, Sir Ralph Sadler Knight, Sir Tho∣mas Seimour Knight, Sir Richard Souhwel, and Sir Edmond Peckham, Knights: they, and every of them, shall be of Council, for the aiding and assisting of the fore-named Councellours, and Our Executours, when they, or any of them, shall be called by Our said Executours, or the more part of the same.
Item, We bequeath to Our Daughters, Mary and Elizabeth's Marriage, they being married to any outward Potentate by the Advice of the aforesaid Councellours (if We bestow them not in Our Life-time) ten thousand pounds in Money, Plate, Jewels, and Houshold-stuff, for each of them; or a larger sum, as to the discretion of Our Executours, or the more part of them, shall be thought convenient; Willing them on My Blessing to be ordered, as well in Marriage, as in all other lawfull things, by the Advice of Our forenamed Councellours: And, in case they will not, then the sum to be minished at the Councellours Discretions. And Our further Will is, That from the first Hour of Our Death, untill such time, as the said Councellours can provide either of them, or both, some Honourable Marriages. They shall have, each of them, M. M. M. lb. ultra reprisas, to live upon; Willing, and charging the a∣fore-said Councellours to limit, and appoint to either of them▪ such said Officers, and Ministers, for Orderance thereof, as may be imployed both to Our Honour, and Theirs. And, for the great Love, Obedience, and Chast∣ness of Life, and Wisdom, being in Our fore-named Wife and Queen; We be∣queath unto Her, for Her proper Vse, and as it shall please Her to Order it, M. M. M. lb. in Plate, Jewels, and Stuff of Houshold, besides such Ap∣parell, as it shall please Her to take, as She hath already: And further We give unto Her M. lb. in Money, with the enjoying of Her Dowry and Joynture, according to Our Grant by Act of Parliament. Which said, He bequeathed, in other Legacies, amongst the Lords of His Council, and other of His Principal Officers, whom He had declared for His Executours, the sum of 6433. lb. 6. s. 8. d. And amongst other Knights, and Gentlemen, His Domestick Servants, and such as were in Ordinary Attendance about the Court, (under which stile I find that Pa∣trick before-remembred) the Sum of 583. lb. 6. s. 8. d. Both Sums amounting in the total to 11516. lb. 13. s. 4. d. And so concludeth with a Revocation of all other Wills, and Testaments, by Him formerly made; that onely this might stand in Force, and be effectual▪ to all Intents and Purposes in the Law whatsoever. Dated 30. December, Signed with His own hand, and Witnessed by eleven of such of His Physicians, and Attendants, as were then about Him. Such was the Last Will, and Testament, of this Puissant Prince. Of which how little was performed, and how much less should have been performed, if some Great Persons (whom He had nominated for His Executours) might have had their Wills; we shall hereafter show, in fit time, and place. In the mean season we will see Him laid into His Grave: which was done with as much conve∣nient speed, as the necessary Preparations for a Royal Funeral could of right admit. For, on the fourteenth day of February then next following, His Body, being removed in a Solemn and Magnificent manner to Shene, near Richmond, was the next day with like Solemnity attended to His Castle of Windsore (one of the Goodliet, and most Gallant Seats of the Christian World) and there Interred in a Vault, prepared for Himself, and His Dear Wife, Queen Jane; as in His Last Will He had desired. For, though a most Magnificent, and Costly Tomb, had been begun for Him, by Cardinal Wole, in a by-Chapel of that Church, (commonly called, The Chapel of King Henry the Eighth;) yet being an unfinished piece, and the King ha∣ving otherways disposed of His own Interment, a Vault was opened for Him in the middest of the Quire. Into which the Body of the King was no sooner laid, but all His Officers brake their Staves, and threw them in the Grave, (according to the usual Ceremonies on the like Occasions) re∣ceiving new ones the next day at the hands of His Son. Nor were the Funeral Rites performed by His own Subjects onely: but a Solemn Obsequie
was kept for Him, in the Church of Nostre-Dame in Paris, by King Fran∣cis the First; notwithstanding, that He had been Excommunicated by the Popes of Rome. So much that Generous Prince preferred His old affections to this King for former Favours: not onely above the late displeasures con∣ceived against Him, for the taking of Bulloign; but even above the Pope's Curse, and all the Fulminations of the Court of Rome, which might fol∣low on it. But long it will not be, before we shall discharg this debt, in pay∣ing the like Duty to the Honour of Francis; who, dying on the two and twentieth day of March next following, had here an Obsequie, as Solemn as the Times could give Him. Of which more hereafter.
THE LIFE and REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE SIXTH.An. 1546/7 Anno Reg. 1. Anno Dom. 1546, 1547. HENRY being dead, EDWARD, His onely surviving Son, at the age of nine years▪ three moneths, and sixteen days, by the name of King EDWARD the Sixth, succeeds His Father in the Throne: Charles the Fifth being then Emperour of Germany, and King of Spain; Francis of Anglesme (the last Branch of the Royal Line of Valoys) King of the French; and Paul the Third (of the Noble House of the Farnezi) presiding in the Church of Rome. No sooner was His Father dead; but Edward Earl of Hartford, and Sir Anthony Brown, Master of the Horse, were by the Rest of the Council dispatched in hast to Hartford-Castle; where, at that time, He kept His Court, accompanied with His Sister, the Princess Eli∣zabeth, about four years elder then Himself. Both whom they brought the next day as far as Enfield, where they imparted to Them the sad News of the
King's Decease; received by both with such a measure of true Sorrow, that it was very hard to say, whither Their Tears did more obscure, or set forth Their Beauties. The next day, advancing towards London, where he was Proclaimed King with all due Solemnities, He made his Royal Entry into the Tower, on the last of January. Into which He was conducted by Sir John Gage, as the Con∣stable of it, and there received by all the Lords of the Council; who, with great Duty and Affection, did attend His comings, and waiting on Him into the Chamber of Presence, did very chearfully swear Allegiance to him. The next day, by the general consent of all the Council, the Earl of Hartford, the King's Uncle, was chosen Governour of His Person; and Protectour of His Kingdomes, till He should come unto the Age of eighteen years and was Proclaimed for such in all parts of London: Esteemed most fit for this high Office, in regard, that he was the King's Uncle by the Mothers side; very near unto Him in Blood, but yet of no capacity to succeed in the Crown: by reason whereof, his Natural Affction, and Duty, was less easie to be over-carried by Ambition. Upon which Gound of civil Prudence, it was both piously, and prudently, Ordained by So∣lon, in the State of Athens, (Nè quis feree Curator, ad quem post Pupillorum obium specta∣ret . Diog. Laert. i Vua Solo∣nis, pag. 38.) That no man should be made the Guardian unto any Orphan, to whom the Inheritance might fall by the Death of his Ward. For the first Handselling of his Office, he Knighted the young King, on the sixth of February: Who, being now in a capacity of conferring that Order, bestowed it first on Henry Hoble-Thorn, Lord Mayor of London, and presently after on Mr. William Portman, one of the Justices of the Bench; being both dubbed with the same Sword, with which He had received the Order of Knighthood, at the hands of His Vncle. These first Solemnities being thus passed over, the next care was for the Inter∣ment of the Old King and the Coronation of the New. In order to which last, it was thought expedient, to advance some Confidents, and Principal Ministers of State, to higher Dignities and Titles, then before they had; the better to oblige them to a care of the State, the safety of the King's Person, and the preservation of the Power of the Lord Protectour, who chiefly moved in the Design. Yet so far did self-Interest prevail, above all other Obligations, and tyes of State▪ that some of these men thus advanced proved his greatest Enemies: the rest forsaking him, when he had most need to make use of their Friendship. In the first place, having resigned the Office of Lord High Chamber∣lain, he caused himself to be created Lord Seimour, and Duke of Somerset. Which last Title, (pprtaining to the King's Progenitours of the House of Lancaster; and, since the expiring of the Beauforts, conferred on none, but Henry, the Natu∣ral Son of the King decealed:) was afterwards charged upon him, as an Argu∣ment of his aspiring to the Crown; which past all doubt he never aimed at. His own turn being thus unhappily served, the Lord William Parr, Brother of Queen Katherin Parr, the Relict of the King deceased, (who formerly in the thirty fifth of the said King's Reign, had been created Earl of Essex, with refe∣rence to Ann his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Henry Burchier, the last Earl of Essex of that House;) was now made Marquess of Northampton, in refe∣rence to her Extraction from the Bohunes, once the Earls thereof. John Dudly Viscount L'isle, and Knight of the Garter, having resigned his Office of Lord Admiral, to gtifie the Lord Protectour, (who desired to confer that place of Power and Trust on his younger Brother,) was, in Exchange, created Lord High Chamberlain of England, and Earl of Warwick. Which Title he affected in regard of his Discent from the Beauchamps, who for long time had worn that Honour: from whom he also did derive the Title of Viscount L'isle, as being the Son of Edmond Sutton, alias Dudley, and of Elizabeth his Wife, Sister and Heir of John Gray Viscount L'isle, discended, by the Lord John Talbot Vis∣count L'isle, from Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, and Dame Elizabeth his Wife, the direct Heir of Waren Lord L'isle, the last of the Male Issue of that Noble Family. In the next place comes Sir Thomas Wriothsley, a man of a very
new Nobility; as being Son of William Wriothsley, and Grand-Child of John Wriothsley: both of them, in their Times, advanced no higher, then to the Office of an Herald; the Father by the Title of York, the Grand-father by that of Gar∣ter, King at Arms. But this man, being planted in a warmer Sun, grew up so fast in the esteem of King Henry the Eight, that he was first made Principal Se∣cretary, afterwards created Baron of Tichfield; advanced not long after to the Office of Lord Chancellour: And finally, by the said King, installed Knight of the Garter, An. 1545. For an addition to which Honours, he was now dignified with the Title of the Earl of South-hampton, enjoyed to this day by his Posterity. These men being thus advanced to the highest Titles; Sir Thomas Seimour, the new Lord Admiral, is Honoured with the Stile of Lord Seimour of Sudeley, and in the beginning of the next year made Knight of the Garter; prepared by this accumulation of Honours for his following Marriage, which he had now pro∣jected, and soon after compassed. With no less Ceremony, though not upon such lofty Aims, Sir Richard Rich (another of the twelve, which were appointed for Subsidiaries, to the great Council of Estate, by the King deceased, was prefer∣ed unto the Dignity of Lord Rich of Leez in Essex, the Grand-father of that Robert Lord Rich, who by King James was dignified with the Title of Earl of Warwick, Anno 1618. In the third place came Sir William Willoughby, discen∣ded from a younger Branch of the House of Eresby, created Lord Willoughby of Parham in the County of Sussex. And in the Rear, Sir Edmond Sheffield, ad∣vanced unto the Title of Lord Sheffield of Butterwick in the County of Lin∣coln; from whom the Earls of Moulgrave do derive themselves. All which Creations were performed with the accustomed Solemnities on the seventeenth of February: and all given out to be designed by King Henry before his death, the better to take off the Envy from the Lord Protectour; whom otherwise all understanding people must needs have thought to be too prodigal of those Ho∣nours, of which the greatest Kings of England had been so sparing. For when great Honours are conferred on persons of no great Estates, it raiseth common∣ly a suspicion amongst the people: That, either some proportionable Revenue must be given them also, to the impoverishing of the King; or else some way left open for them, to enrich themselves out of the purses of the Subject. These Preparations being dispatched, they next proceed unto the Coronation of the King, performed with the accustomed Rites on the twentieth of the same Moneth by Arch-Bishop Cranmer. The Form whereof we finde exemplified in a Book, called The Catalogue of Honour, published by Thomas Mills of Canterbury, in the year 1610. In which there is nothing more observable, then this following Passage. The King, (saith he) being brought unto the Church of Saint Peter in West∣minster, was placed in the Chair of Saint Edward the Confessour, in the middest of a Throne seven steps high. This Throne was erected near unto the Altar, upon a Stage arising with steps on both sides, covered with Carpets and Hangings of Arras. Where, after the King had rested a little, being by certain noble Cour∣tiers carried in another Chair, unto the four sides of the Stage; He was by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury declared unto the People (standing round about) both by God's and Man's Laws to be the Right and Lawfull King of England, France, and Ireland; and Proclaimed that day to be Crowned, Consecrated, and Anointed Unto whom He demanded whether they would obey and serve, or Not? By whom it was again, with a loud cry, answered; God save the King: and, Ever live his Majesty. Which Passage I the rather note; because it is observed, that, at the Coronation of some former Kings, The Arch-Bishop went to the four squares of the Scaffold, and with a loud voice asked the Consent of the People. But this was at such Times and in such Cases only, when the Kings came unto the Crown by Disputed Titles; for maintainance whereof the Favour and Consent of the people seemed a matter necessary: (as at the Coronations of King Henry the Fourth, or King Richard the Third) and not when it devolved upon them, as it did upon this King, by a Right unquestioned.
The Coronation was accompanied, as the Custome is, with a general Pardon. But as there never was a Feast so great, from which some men departed not with empty bellies; so, either out of Envy, or some former Grudge, or for some other cause unknown, six Persons were excluded from the taste of this gra∣cious Banquet: that is to say, the Lord Thomas Howard Duke of Nrfolk, a condemned Prisoner in the Tower; Edward Lord Courtney, eldest Son to the late Marquess of Exeter beheaded in the last times of King Henry the Eight; Car∣dinal Ple, one of the Sons of Margaret Countess of Salisbury, proscribed by the same King also; Doctour Richard Pate, declared Bishop of Worcester, in the place of Hierome de Nugaticis, in the year 1534. and by that Name sub∣scribing to some of the first Acts of the Councel of Trent: who, being sent to Rome on some Publick Imployment, chose rather to remain there in perpetu∣al Exile, then to take the Oath of Supremacy at his coming home; as by the Laws he must have done, or otherwise have fared no better▪ then the Bishop of Rochester, who lost his head on the refusal. Of the two others, Fort∣escue and Throgmorton, I have found nothing, but the Names: and therefore can but name them onely. But they all lived to better times: the Duke of Norfolk being restored by Queen Mary to his Lands, Liberty, and Honours; as the Lord Courtney was to the Earldom of Devonshire, enjoyed by many of his Noble Progenitours; Cardinal Pole admitted first into the Kingdom, in the capacity of a Legate from the Pope of Rome, and after Cranmer's death advanced to the See of Canterbury; and Doctour Pate preferred unto the actual Possession of the See of Worcester, of which he formerly had enjoyed no more but the empty Title. These Great Solemnities being thus passed over, the Grandees of the Court be∣gan to entertain some thoughts of a Reformation. In which they found Arch-Bishop Cranmer, and some other Bishops, to be as foreward as themselves; but on different ends: endeavoured by the Bishops, in a pious Zeal for rectifying such thing; as were amiss in God's publick Worship; but by the Courtiers, on an Hope to enrich themselves by the spoil of the Bishopricks. To the Advance∣ment of which work the Conjuncture seemed as proper, as they could desire. For First the King, being of such tender age, and wholly Governed by the Will of the Lord Protectour, who had declared himself a friend to the Lutheran Party in the time of King Henry, was easie to be moulded into any form, which the authority of Power and Reason could imprint upon Him. The Lord Tho∣mas Howard Duke of Norfolk, and Doctour Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Win∣chester, (who formerly) had been the greatest Sticklers at the Concil-Table in Maintainance of the Religion of the Church of Rome) were not long able to support it: the one of them being a condemned Prisoner in the Tower, as before was said; and the other, upon some just displeasure, not named by King Henry amongst the Councellours of State, who were to have the mana∣ging of Affairs in His Son's Minoty. Bonner, then Bishop of London, was absent at that time in the Court of the Emperour; to whom he had been sent Embassa∣dour by the former King. And no professed Champion for the Papacy remain∣ed amongst them, of whom they had cause to stand in doubt: but the new Earl of South-hampton▪ Whom when they were not able to remove from his old Opi∣nions, it was resolved to make him less both in Power and Credit; so, that he should not be able to hinder the pursuit of those Counsels, which he was not willing to promote. And therefore on the sixth of March, the Great Seal was taken from him by the King's Command, and for a while committed to the custody of Sir William Pawlet, Created Lord St▪ John of Basing, and made Great Master of the Houshold by King Henry the Eighth. And on the other side it was thought expedient, for the better carrying on of the Design, not onely to release all such as had been committed unto Prison; but also to recall all such as had been forced to abandon the Kingdom, for not submitting to the Superstitions and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Great were the Numbers of the first, who had their Fetters strucken off by this merci∣full
Prince, and were permitted to enjoy that Liberty of Conscience; for which they had suffered all Extremities in His Father's time. Onely it is observed of one Thomas Dobbs, once Fellow of Saint John's-College in Cambridg, condemned for speaking against the Mass, and thereupon committed to the Counter in Bread-street; that he alone did take a view of this Land of Canaan, into which he was not suffered to enter. It being so ordered by the Divine Providence, that he died in Prison, before his Pardon could be signed by the Lord Protectour. Amongst the rest, which were in number very many, those of chief note were, Doctour Miles Coverdale, after Bishop of Exeter; Mr. John Hooper after Bishop of Glocester; Mr. John Philpot, after Arch-Deacon of Winchester; Mr. John Rogers, after one of the Prebends of Saint Paul's; and many others, emi∣nent for their Zeal and Pety: which they declared by preferring a good Consci∣ence before their Lives, in the time of Queen Mary. But the busnss was of greater Moment, then to expect the coming back of the Learned men: who though they came not time enough to begin the work; yet did they prove exceeding serviceable in the furtherance of it. And there∣fore, neither to lose time, nor to press too much at once upon the People, it was thought sit to smooth the way to the intended Reformation, by setting out some Preparatory Injunctions; such as the King might publish by his own Authority, according to the example of His Royal Father in the year 1536. and at some times after. This to be done by sending out Commissioners into all parts of the Kingdom, armed with Instructions to enquire into all Ecclesiastical Concernments, in the manner of a Visitation; directed by the King, as Su∣preme Head on earth of the Church of England. Which Commissioners, being di∣stributed into several Circuits, were accompanied with certain Learned, and God∣ly Preachers, appointed to instruct the People, and to facilitate the work of the Commissioners, in all Towns, and Places, where they fate. And, that the People might not cool, or fall off again, in, and from that, which had been taught them by the Learned Preachers; they were to leave some Homilies to the same effect with the Parish-Priest: which the Arch-Bishop had composed; not one∣ly for the help of unpreaching Ministers, but for the regulating, and instructing even of Learned Preachers. Which Injunctions being agreed upon by such of the Great Council, as favoured the Design of the Reformation; and the Commissi∣ons drawn in due form of Law by the Counsel learned: they were all tendered to the Lord Chancellour Wriothsley; that the Authority of the Great Seal might be added to them. Which he, who was not to be told what these matters aimed at, refused to give consent unto: and so lost the Seal, committed (as before is said) to the Custody of the Lord Great Master, by whom the said Commissions were dispatched, and the Visitours thereby Authorised in due form of Law And here it is to be observed, that, besides the Points contained in the said Injunctions, the Preachers above-mentioned were more particularly instructed to perswade the People from Praying to the Saints, from making Prayers for the dead, from A∣doring of Images, from the use of Beads, Ashes, and Processions, from Mass, Diri∣ges, Praying in unknown Languages, and from some other such like things; where∣unto long Custome had brought a Religious Observation. All which was done to this intent; That the People in all places, being prepared by little and little, might with more ease, and less opposition, admit the total Alteration in the face of the Church, which was intended in due time to be introduced. Now, as for the Injuctions above-mentioned, although I might exemplifie them, as they stand at large in the First Edition of the Acts and Monuments, (fol. 684.) yet I shall choose rather to present them in a smoother Abstract; as it is done unto my hand by the Church-Historian: the Method of them onely altered in this manner following. That all Ecclesiastical Persons observe, and cause to be observed, the Laws for the abolishing the pretended and usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome, and Confirmation of the King's Authority and Supremacy: and four times in the
year, at the least, that they teach the People, That the one was now justly taken a∣way, (according to the word of God) and that the other was, of most Legal Du∣ty, onely to be obeyed by all the Subjects. That, once a Quarter, at the least, they sincerely declare the Word of God, disswading the People from Superstitious Fancies of Pilgrimages, Praying to I∣mages, &c. exhorting them to the Works of Faith, Mercy, and Charity: 3. And that Images, abused with Pilgrimages, and Offerings thereunto, be forthwith taken down, and destroyed, and that no more Wax-Candles, or Tapers, be burnt before any Image; but onely two lights upon the High Altar, before the Sacrament, shall remain still, to signifie, That Christ is the very Light of the World. That every Holy-Day, when they have no Sermon, the Pater-Noster, Credo, and Ten Commandments, shall be plainly recited in the Pulpit to the Pa∣rishioners. 5. And that Parents, and Masters, bestow their Children, and Ser∣vants, either to Learning, or some honest Occupation. That, within three Moneths after this Visitation, the Bible, of the Larger Volume, in English; and within twelve Moneths Erasmus his Paraphrases on the Gospels, be provided, and conveniently placed in the Church, for the People to read therein. 20. And that every Ecclesiastical Person, under the Degree of a Batchelour of Divinity, shall within three Moneths after this Visitation, pro∣vide of his own The New Testament in Latine and English, with Erasmus his Paraphrases thereon. And that Bishops, by themselves, and their Officers, shall Examine them, how much they have profited in the study of Holy Scripture. That such, who in Cases express'd in the Statute are absent from their Benefi∣ces, leave Learned, and expert Curates, to supply their places. 14. That all such Ecclesiastical Persons, not resident upon their Benefices, and able to dispend yearly xx. pounds, and above, shall in the presence of the Church-Wardens, or some other honest men, distribute the fourtieth part of their Revenues amongst the poor of the Parish. 15. And that every Ecclesiastical Person shal give compe∣tent Exhibition to so many Scholars in one of the Universities, as they have hun∣dred pounds a year in Church-Promotions. That a fifth part of their Benefices be bestowed on their Mansion-Houses, or Chancels, till they be fully repaired. 8. And that no Ecclesiastical Persons haunt Ale-houses, or Taverns, or any place of unlawfull Gaming. That they Examine such as come to Confession in Lent, whether they can recite their Credo, Pater-Noster, and Ten Commandments, in English, before they receive the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar; or else they ought not to presume to come to God's Board. That none be admitted to Preach, except sufficiently Licenced. 11. That, if they have heretofore extolled Pilgrimages, Reliques, Worshipping of Images, &c. they now openly recant, and reprove the same, as a Common Errour, groundless in Scri∣pture: 12. That they detect, and present such, who are Lettours of the Word of God in English, and Fautours of the Bishop of Rome his pretended Power. That no Person from henceforth, shal alter any Fasting-day, or manner of Com∣mon-Prayer, or Divine Service, (otherwise then is specified in these Injuctions) untill otherwise Ordered by the King's Authority. 21. And, that, in time of High Mass, he, that sayeth, or singeth a Psalm, shall read the Epistle and Gospel in En∣glish, and one Chapter in the New Testament at Mattens, & another at Even-song; And that, when nine Lessons are to be read in the Church, three of them shal be o∣mitted with Responds: And at the Even-song, the Responds, with all the Memories. By which last word I understand the Anniversary Commemoration of deceased Per∣sons on the day of their deaths, which frequently were expressed by the name Obits. That every Dean, Arch-Deacon, &c. being a Priest, Preach by him∣self, personally, every year at least. 27. That they Instruct their People not obstinately to violate the Ceremonies of the Church, by the King Commanded to be observed, and not as yet abrogated. And on the other side, that whoso∣ever doth Superstitiously abuse them, doth the same to the great Perill of his
Souls health: 25. And that no Curate admit to the Communion such, who are in Ranchor, and Malice with their Neighbours, till such controversies be re∣conciled. That, to avoid Contentions, and strife, which heretofore have risen a∣mongst the King's Subjects, by challenging of places in Procession; no Processi∣on hereafter be used about the Church, or Church-yard: but, immediately be∣fore High-Mass, the Letany shall be distinctly said, or sung in English; none de∣parting the Church without just cause, and all ringing of Bells (save one) ut∣terly forborn. That they take away, and destroy all Shrines, Covering of Shrines, Ta∣bles, Candlesticks, Trindils, and Rolls of Wax, Pictures, Paintings, and other Monuments of feigned Miracles; so that no Memory of them remain in Walls, or Windows: exhotting their Parishioners to do the like in their several hou∣ses. That the Holy-day, at the first beginning Godly-Instituted and ordained, be wholly given to God, in hearing the Word of God read and taught, in private and publique Prayers, in acknowledging their Offences to God, and a∣mendment, in reconciling themselves to their Neighbours, receiving the Com∣munion, Visiting the sick, &c. Onely it shall be lawfull for them, in time of Harvest, to labour upon Holy and Festival days, and save that thing which God hath sent; and that scrupulosity, to abstain from working upon those days, doth grievously offend God. That a Register Book be carefully kept in every Parish for Weddings, Christenings, and Burials: 29. That a strong Chest, with an hole in the upper part thereof (with three keys thereunto belonging) be provided to receive the Charity of the People to the Poor; and the same, at convenient times, be distri∣buted unto them in the presence of the Parish. And that a comely Palpit be provided, in a convenient place. That, because of the lack of Preachers, Curates shall read Homilies, which are, or shall be set forth by the King's Authority. 36. That, when any such Sermon, or Homily shall be had, the Primes and Hours shall be omitted. That none, bound to pay Tithes, detain them, by colour of Duty omit∣ted by their Curates, and so redoub one wrong with another. 33. And whereas many indiscrete persons do incharitably condemn, and abuse Priests having small Learning; His Majesty chargeth His Subjects, That from henceforth they be reverently used, for their Office and Ministration sake: 31. And, that, to avoid the detestable sin of Simonie, the Seller shall lose his right of Patronage for that time, and the Buyer to be deprived, and made unable to receive Spiritu∣al Promotion. That, to prevent sick persons in the damnable vice of Despair, They shall learn, and have always in readiness, such comfortable places, and Senten∣ces of Scripture; as do set forth the Mercies, Benefits, and Goodness of God Al∣mighty towards all penitent, and believing persons: 30. But that Priests be not bound to go visit women in Child-bed; except in times of dangerous sickness: and not to fetch any Coars, except it be brought to the Church yard. 34. That all persons, not understanding Latine, shall pray on no other Primer, but what lately was set forth in English by King Henry the Eighth; and that such, who have knowledge in the Latine, use no other also: that all Graces before, and after Meat, be said in English; and no Grammar taught in Scholes▪ but that which is set forth by Authority. 39. That Chantry-Priests teach Youth to read, and write. And finally, That these Injunctions be read once a Quarter. Besides these general Injunctions for the whole Estate of the Realm,Acts, & Mon. fol. 11. there were also certain others, particularly appointed for the Bishops onely; which, being delivered unto the Commissioners, were likewise by them in their Visita∣tions committed unto the said Bishops, with charge to be inviolably observed
and kept, upon pain of the King's Majesties displeasure: the effect whereof is, as in manner followeth. 1. That they should, to the utmost of their power, wit, and understanding, se, and cause all, and singular, the King's Injunctions heretofore given, or after to be given, from time to time, in, and through their Diocess, duly, faithfully, and truly to be kept▪ observed, and accomplished. And, that they should Personally Preach within their Diocess, every Quarter of a year, once at the least: that is to say, once in their Cathedral Churches, and thrice in other se∣veral places of their Diocesses, whereas they should see it most convenient and necessary; except they had a reasonable excuse to the contrary. Likewise, that they should not retain into their Service, or Houshold, any Chaplain, but such as were Learned, and able to Preach the Word of God, and those they should also cause to Exercise the same. 2. And Secondly, That they should not give Orders to any Person; but such as were Learned in Holy Scripture: neither should deny them to such, as were Learned in the same, being of honest conversation, or living. And Lastly, That they should not at any time, or place, Preach, or set forth unto the People, any Doctrine contrary, or repugnant to the effct, and intent, contained, or set forth in the King's Highnesse's Homilies: neither yet should admit, or give Licence to Preach to any, within their Diocess, but to such as they should know (or at least assuredly trust▪) would do the same: And, if at any time, by hearing, or by report proved, they should perceive the contrary; they should then incontinent not only inhibit that Person so offending, but also punish him, and revoke their Licence. There was also a Form of Bidding Prayer prescribed by the Visitours, to be used by all Preachers in the Realm; eiher before, or in their Sermons, as to them seemed best. Which Form of Bidding Prayer (or Bidding of the Beads, as it was then commonly called) was this, that followeth. You shall Pray for the whole Congregation of Christ's Church and specially for this Church of England and Ireland: wherein first I commend to your de∣vout Prayers the King's most Excellent Majesty, Supreme Head immedi∣ately under God of the Spirituality and Temporality of the same Church: And for Queen Katharine Dowager, and also for my Lady Mary, and my La∣dy Elizabeth, the King's Sisters. Secondly, You shall Pray for my Lord Protectour's Grace▪ with all the rest of the King's Majesty His Council; for all the Lords of His Realm, and for the Clergy, and the Commons of the same: beseeching God Almighty, to give very of them, in his degree, grace to use themselves in such wise, as may be to God's Glory, the King's Honour, and the VVeal of this Realm. Thirdly, You shall Pray for all them, that be departed out of this VVorld in the Faith of Christ; that they with us, and we with them, at the day of Judgement, may rest, both body and soul, with Abraham, Isaac, and Ja∣cob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Such were the Orders, and Injunctions, wherewith the King's Commissioners were furnished for their Visitation. Most of them such, as had been formerly given out by Cromwell, or otherwise published and pursued (but not without some intermissions) by the King deceased, and therefore to be put in Execution with the greater safety. For though the young King, by Reason of his tender Age, could not but want a great proportion of His Father's Spirit for carrying on a work of such weight and moment; yet he wanted nothing of that power in Church-concernment, which either Naturally was inherent in the Crown Im∣perial,
or had been Legally vested in it by Acts of Parliament. Neither could His Being in Minority, nor the Writings in His Name by the Lord Protectour, and the Rest of the Council, make any such difference in the Case; as to invali∣date the Proceedings, or any of the Rest which followed in the Reformation. For, if they did, the Objection would be altogether as strong against the Refor∣mation, made in the Minority of King Josias; as against this, in the Minority of the present King. That of Josias being made (as Josephus (Antiqu. Jud. lib. 10. cap. 4.) telleth us) by the Advice of the Elders: as this of King EDVVARD the Sixth by the Advice of the Council. And yet it cannot be denyed, but that the Reformation made under King Isias, by Advice of His Council, was no less pleasing unto God, nor less valid in the Eys of all His Subjects: then those of Jeboshaphat, and Hezekiah, in their Riper years; who perhaps acted singly on the strength of their Own Judgements onely, with∣out any Advice. Now of Josias we are told by the said Historian; That▪ When He grew to be twelve years old, He gave manifest Approbation of His Piety, and Justice. For He drew the People to a conformable Course of Life, and to the De∣testation and Abolishing of Idols, that were no Gods, and to the Service of the Onely True God of their Fore-Fathers. And, considering the Actions of His Predeces∣sours, He began to Rectifie them in that, wherein they were deficient, with no less Circumspection, then if He had been an Old Man; And that, which He found to be Correspondent, and Advisedly done by them, that did He both maintain and imitate. All which things He did, both by Reason of His Innated Wisdom, as also by the Amoshment and Council of His Elders: in following orderly the Laws▪ not onely in matters of Religion, but of Civil Politie. Which puts the Parallel betwixt the two young Kings, in the Case before us, above all Exception; and the Procee∣dings of King Edward, or His Council rather, beyond all Dispute. Now, whereas Question hath been made, whether the twenty fourth Injun∣ction, for Labouring on the Holy Day in time of Harvest, extend as well to the Lord's Day, as the Annual Festivals: The matter seems, to any well-discerning eye, to be out of Question. For in the third Chapter of the Statute made in the fifth and sixth years of King Edward the Sixth, (when the Reformation was much more advanced then it was at the present) the Names and Number of such Holy Days, as were to be observed in this Church, are thus layed down; That is to say, All Sundaies in the year, the Feasts of the Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ, of the Epiphany, &c. with all the Rest, still kept, and there named particularly. And then it followeth in the Act, That it shall, and may, be law∣full for every Husband-man, Labourer, Fisher-man, and to all, and every other person or persons, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition, he, or they, be, upon the Holy-Days afore-said, in Harvest, or at any other times in the year, when ne∣cessity shall so require, to Labour, Ride, Fish, or Work any kind of work, at their free-will and Pleasure; any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. The Law being such, there is no question to be made in point of practice, nor consequently of the meaning of the King's Injunction. For further opening of which Truth, we finde, that not the Country onely, but the Court were indulged the Liberty of attending business on that day; it being Ordered by the King, amongst other things, That the Lords of the Council should upon Sundays attend the publique Affairs of this Realm, dispatch Answers to Letters for good order of State, and make full dispatches of all things concluded the Week before: Provided alwaies, That they be present at Common Prayer, and that on every Sunday-Night the King's Secretary should deliver him a Memorial of such things, as are to be de∣bated by the Privy Council in the week ensuing. Which Order, being compa∣red with the words of the Statute, may serve sufficiently to satisfie all doubts, and scruples, touching the true intent and meaning of the said Injunction. But, as this Question was not startled till the Later Times, when the Lord's Day began to be advanced into the Reputation of the Jewish Sabbath; so was there nothing in the rest of the said Injunctions, which required a Commen∣tary. Some words, and Passages therein, which seem absurd to us of this
present Age,An. 1547. being then clearly understood by all, and every one, whom they did concern; Published, and given in charge, by the Commissioners in their se∣veral Circuits, with great Zeal and Chearfullness; and no less readily Obeyed in most parts of the Realms, both by Priests and People: who observed nothing in them, either new, or strange, to which they had not been prepared in the Reign of the King deceased. None forwarder in this Compliance, then some Learned men, in, and about the City of London; who not long since had shewed themselves of a contrary Judgement: Some of them running before Au∣thority, and others keeping even pase with it; but few so confident of themselves as to lagg behind. It was Ordered in the twenty first; That, at the time of High Mass, the Epistle, and Gospel should be read in the English Tongue: and, That both at the Mattens, and Even-Song, a Chapter out of the New Testament should be also read. And, for Example to the rest of the Land, the Complime, being a part of the Evening Service, was sung in the King's Chapel on Mnday in the Easter-week, (then falling on the eleventh of April) in the English Tongue. Do∣ctour Smith, Master of Whittington-College in London, and Reader in Divinity at the King's-College at Oxford, (afterwards better known by the name of Christ-Church) had before published two Books: One of them written, In De∣fence of the Mass; The other endeavouring to prove, That unwritten Veri∣ties ought to be believed, under pain of Damnation. But, finding that these Doctrines did not now beat according to the Pulse of the Times, he did volunta∣rily retract, the said Opinions; declaring in a Sermon at Saint Paul's Cross, on Sunday the fifteenth of May, that his said former Books, and Teachings, were not only erroneous, but Heretical. The like was done in the Moneth next follow∣ing by Doctour Pern, afterwards Master of Peter-House in Cambridge; who, having on Saint George's day delivered, in the Parish-Church of Saint Andrew Vndershaft, for sound Catholick Doctrine, That the Pictures of Christ, and of the Saints were to be adored; upon the seventeenth day of June, declared him∣self in the said Church to have been deceived in that, what he before had taught them, and to be sorry for delivering such Doctrine to them. But these men might pretend some Warrant from the King's Injunctions, which they might conceive it neither fit, nor safe to oppose: and therefore, that it was the wisest way, to strike Sail betimes, upon the shooting of the first Warning-Piece to bring them in. But no man was so much before hand with Authority, as one Doctour Glasier; who, as soon as the Fast of Lent was over, (and it was well he had the Patence to stay so long) affirmed publickly in a Sermon at Saint Paul's Cross; That, The Lent was not ordained of God to be Fasted, neither the Eat∣ing of Flesh to be forborn; but that the same was a Politick Ordinance of men, and might therefore be broken by men at their pleasures. For which Doctrine as the Preacher was never questioned, the Temper of the Times giving Incourage∣ment enough to such Extravagancies; so did it open such a Gap to Carnal Liberty, that the King found it necessary to shut it up again by a Proclamation on the sixteenth of January, commanding Abstinence from all Flesh, for the Lent then following. But there was something more, then the Authority of a Minour King, which drew on such a General Conformity to these Injunctions: and thereby smoothed the way to those Alterations, both in Doctrine and Worship; which the Gran∣dees of the Court, and Church, had began to fashion. The Lord Protectour, and his Party were more experienced in Affairs of State; then to be told, That, All great Counsels▪ tending to Innovation in the Publick Government, (especi∣ally where Religion is concerned therein) are either to be back'd by▪ Arms, or otherwise prove destructive to the Undertakers. For this cause, he resolves to put himself into the Head of an Army: as well for the security of His Person, and the Preservation of his Party; as for the carrying on of the Design against all Opponents. And, for the Raising of an Army, there could not be a fair∣er Colour, nor a more popular Pretence, then a War in Scotland: not to
be made on any new emergent Quarrel, which might be apt to breed suspicion in the Heads of the People; but in Pursuit of the great Project of the King de∣ceased, for Uniting that Realm (by the Marriage of their young Queen to His onely Son) to the Crown of England. On this pretense Levies are made in all parts of the Kingdom, great store of Arms and Ammunition drawn to∣gether to advance the service, considerable Numbers of Old Souldiers brought over from Bulloign, and the Peeces which depended on it, and good Provision made of Shipping, to attend the Motions of the Army upon all occasions. He entertained also certain Regiments of Walloons, and Germanes: not out of any great Opinion, which he had of their Valour; (though otherwise of good Experience in the Wars) but because they were conceived more likely to enforce Obedience, (if his Designs should meet with any Opposition) then the Natural English. But in the first place Care was taken, that none of the neighbouring Prin∣ces should either hinder his Proceedings, or assist the Enemy. To which end Doctour Wotton, the first Dean of Canterbury, then Resident with the Queen Dowager of Hungary, (who at that time was Regent of the Estates of Flanders for Charls the Fifth) was dispatched unto the Emperour's Court: there to succeed in the place of Doctour Bonner, Bishop of London; who, together with Sir Francis Bryan▪ had formerly been ent Embassadours thther from King Henry the Eighth. The Principal part of his Employment, besides such matters as are incident to all Ambassadours, was to divert the Emperour from concluding any League with France, contrary to the Capitulations made between the Empe∣rour and the King deceased; but to deal with him, above all things, for decla∣ring himself an Enemy to all of the Scotish Nation, but such as should be Friends to the King of England. And, because some Remainders of Hostility did still remain between the English and the French, (notwithstanding the late peace made between the Crowns) it was thought fit to sweeten, and oblige that People, by all the acts of Cor∣respondence, and friendly Neighbourhood. In Order whereunto it was com∣manded by the King's Proclamation, That Restitution should be made of such Ships and Goods, which had been taken from the French since the Death of King Henry. Which being done also by the French, though far short in the value of such Reprisals, as had been taken by the English: there was good hope of coming to a better understanding of one another: and that, by this Cessation of Arms, both Kings might come in short time to a further Agreement. But that which seemed to give most satisfaction to the Court of France▪ was the performance of a solemn Obsequie for King Francis the First; who left this Life on the twenty second day of March, and was Magnificently Interred amongst His Predecessours, in the Monastery of Saint Dennis, not far from Paris. Whose Funerals were no sooner Solemnized in France: but Order was given for a Dirige to be sung in all the Churches in London, on the nineteenth of June, as also in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul; in the Quire whereof, being hung with black, a sumptuous Herse had been set up for the present Ceremony. For the next day the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, assisted with Eight other of the Bishops, all in their Rich Mitres, and other their Pontificals, did sing a Mass of Requiem; the Funeral Sermon being preached by Doctour Ridley, Lord Elect of Rochester: who, if he did his part therein, as no doubt he did, could not but magnifie the Prince for His Love to Learning. Which was so great, and eminent in Him▪ that He was called by the French, L' pere des Arts & des Sciences, and The Father of the Muses by some Writers of other Nations. Which Attri∣butes as He well deserved, so did He Sympathize in that Affection, (as he did in many other things) with King Henry the Eighth: of whose Munificence for the Encouragements of Learning we have spoke before. This great Solemnity being thus Honourably performed, the Commissioners for the Visitation were dispatched to their several Circuits; and the Army drawn
from all parts to their Rendez-vous, for the War with Scotland. Of which two Actions, that of the Visitation, as the easiest, and meeting with a People, which had been long trained up in the Schole of Obedience, was carried on, without any shew of Opposition; submitted to upon a very small Dispute, even by some of those Bishops, who were conceived most likely to have disturbed the business. The first, who declared his aversness to the King's Proceedings, was Dr. Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester: who, stomaching his being left out of the Lift of the Council, appeared more cross to all their doings, then other of his Order. For which being brought before their Lordships, and not giving them such satisfaction, as they looked for from him, they sent him Pri∣soner to the Fleet; where he remained from the twenty fifth of September, till the seventh of January: the King's Commissioners proceeding in the mean time without any disturbance. With less aversness, but with success not much unlike, was the business en∣tertained by Dr. Edmond Bonner, then Bishop of London: whom the Commissi∣oners found far more tractable, then could have been expected from a man of so rough a Nature, and one so cordially affected to the Church of Rome. The Commissioners Authorised for this Imployment were, Sir Anthony Cook, and Sir John Godsal, Knights; John Godsal, & Christopher Nevinson, Doctours of the Laws; and John Madew, Doctour in Divinity: who, sitting in St. Paul's Church on the first day of September, called before them the said Bishop Bonner, John Royston, the renowned Polydore Virgil, and many other of the Dignitaries of the said Cathe∣dral: to whom, the Sermon being done, and their Commission openly read, they ministred the Oath of the King's Supremacy, according to the Statute of the thirty first of King Henry the Eighth; requiring them withall to present such things, as stood in need to be Reformed. Which done, they delivered to him a Copy of the said Injunctions, together with the Homilies set forth by the King's Authority; received by him with Protestation, that he would observe them, if they were not contrary to the Law of God, and the Statutes and Ordinances of the Church. Which Protestation he desired might be enrolled amongst the Acts of the Court. But afterwards, considering better with himself, as well of his own Danger, as of the Scandal and ill Consequents, which might thence arise, he addressed himself unto the King; revoking his said Protestation, and humbly submitting himself to His Majestie's Pleasure, in this manner following. Whereas I, Edmond Bishop of London, at such time, as I received the King's Majestie's Injunctions, and Homilies of my most Dread and Sove∣reign Lord, at the Hands of His Highness Visitours, did unadvisedly make such Protestation; as now, upon better consideration of my Duty of Obedi∣ence, and of the evil Example, that might ensue unto others thereof, appear∣eth to me neither Reasonable, nor such as might well stand with the Duty of a most humble Subject: for so much, as the same Protestation, at my Request, was then by the Register of the Visitation Enacted, and put in Record: I have thought it my Duty, not onely to declare before your Lordships, that I do now, upon better consideration of my Duty, renounce, and revoke my said Protestati∣on; but also most humbly beseech your Lordships, that this my Revocation of the same may be in like wise put in the same Records, for a perpetual Memory of the Truth: most humbly beseeching your Good Lordships, both to take or∣der, that it may take effect; and also, that my former unadvised doings may be by your good Mediations pardoned of the King's Majesty. Edmond London. This humble carriage of the Bishop so wrought upon the King, and the Lords of the Council, that the edg of their displeasure was taken off; though, for a terrour unto others, and for the preservation of their own Authority, he
was by them committed Prisoner to the Fleet. During the short time of whose Restraint, (that is to say, on the Eighteenth day of the same Moneth of Sep∣tember) the Letany was sung in the English Tongue, in Saint Paul's Church, between the Quire and the High Altar; the Singers kneeling, half on the one side, and half on the other. And the same day the Epistle and Gospel was also read at the High Mass in the English Tongue. And, about two Moneths after, (that is to say, on the seventeenth day of November, next following) Bishop Bonner, being then restored to his former Liberty, the Image of Christ, best known in those Times by the name of the Rood, together with the Images of Mary, and John, and all other Images in that Church, as also in all the other Churches of London were taken down; as was commanded by the said Injuncti∣ons. Concerning which we are to note, That, though the Parliament was then sitting, (whereof more anon) yet the Commissioners proceeded onely by the King's Authority, without relating any thing to that High Court in this weighty Business. And in the speeding of this Work, as Bishop Bonner, to∣gether with the Dean and Chapter▪ did perform their parts in the Cathedral of Saint Paul: so Bellassere, Arch-Deacon of Colchester, and Doctour Gilbert Bourn, (being at that time Arch-Deacon both of London and Essex; but after∣wards preferred by Queen Mary to the Bishoprick of Bath and Wells) were no less Diligent and Officious in doing the like in all the Churches of their Respe∣ctive Jurisdictions, according to the Charge imposed upon them by his Majestie's Visitours. In the mean time, whilst matters were thus calmly Acted on the Stage of England; all things went no less fortunately forward with the Lord Protectour in his War with Scotland: in which he carried himself with no less Courage, and Success, when it came to blows; then he had done with Christian Pru∣dence, before he put himself on the Expedition. For, having taken Order for his Forces to be drawn together, he thought it most expedient to his Affairs, to gain the start in point of Reputation with his very Enemies, by not ingaging in a War, untill they had refused all Terms of Peace. And to this end a Manifest is dispatched unto them, declaring the Motives, which induced him to put this Kingdom into a posture of Arms. In which he remembred them of the Promises, Seals, and Oaths, which by publick Authority had passed for concluding this Marriage; That, These, being Religious Bonds betwixt God and their Souls, could not by any Politick Act of State be dissolved, untill their Queen should attain unto years of Dissent: Adding that, The Providence of God did therein manifestly declare it self, in that, the Male-Princes of Scotland failing, the Kingdom was left unto a Daughter; and in that King Henry left onely one Son to succeed; That, These two Princes were agreeable, both for Years, and Princely Qualities, to be joyned in Marriage, and thereby to knit both Realms into One; That, This Vnion, as it was like to be both easily done, and of firm continuance: so would it be both profi∣table, and Honourable to both the Realms; That, Both the Easiness and Firmness might be conjectured: for that both People are of the same Language, of like Ha∣bit and Fashion, of like Quality and Condition of Life, of one Climate; not onely annexed entirely together but severed from all the World besides; That, as these are sure Arguments that both discended from one Original, so (by Reason, that Like∣ness is a great Cause of Liking and of Love) they would be most forcible Means, both to joyn and hold them in one Body again; That, Profit would rise by extingui∣shing Wars between the two Nations: by Reason whereof, in former times, Victories abroad have been impeached, Invasions and Seditions occasioned, the Confines of both Realms lay'd wast, or else made a Nursery of Rapines, Robberies, and Murthers; the Inner Parts often deeply pierced, and made a wretched Spectacle to all Eys of Humanity and Pity; That, The Honour of both Realms wuld Increase: as well in regard of the Countries, sufficient not onely to furnish the Necessities, but the moderate Pleasures of this Life; as also of the People, great in Multitude, in Body able, assured in Mind: not onely for the
Safety, but the Glory of the Common State: That, Hereby would follow Assurance of Defence, Strength to Enterprise, Ease in sustaining publick Burthens, and Char∣ges; That, Herein the English dsired no Pre-eminence, but offered Equality, both in Liberty and Privilege, and in capacity of Offices and Imployments; and, to that end, the Name of Britain should be assumed, indifferent to both Nations: That, This would be the Complishment of their common Felicity; in case, (by their Evil, either Destiny, or Advice) they suffered not the Occasion to be lst. It was no hard matter to fore-see, that, either the Scots would return no An∣swer to this Declaration, or such an Answer at the best, as should signifie no∣thing. So that the War began to open, and some Hostilities to be exercised on either side; before the English Forces could be drawn together. For so it happened, that a small Ship of the Kings, called The Pensie, hovering at Sea, was assailed by The Lyon, a principal Ship of Scotland. The fight began a far off, and slow; but when they approached, it grew very furious: wherein the Pensie so ap∣plyed her Shot, that therewith the Lyon's Ore-Loope was broken, her Sails, and Tacklings torn, and lastly she was boarded, and taken. But, as she was brought for England, she was cast away by Negligence, and Tempest, near Hare-wich-Haven, and most of her men perished with her. Which small Adven∣ture (as Sir John Hayward well observes) seemed to Prognosticate the Success of the War: in which the English, with a small Army, gained a glorious Victo∣ry; but were deprived of the Fruit, and Benefits of it, by the Storms at home. All thoughts of Peace being lay'd aside, the Army draws together at New-Castle, about the middle of August, consisting of twelve or thirteen thousand Foot, thirteen hundred Men at Arms, and two thousand Eight hundred light Horse: Both Men and Horse so well appointed that a like Army never shewed it self, before that time, on the Borders of Scotland. Over which Army, so ap∣pointed, the Lord Protectour held the Office of General; the Earl of Warwick that of Liev-tenant General; the Lord Gray, General of the Horse, and Marshal also of the Field; Sir Ralph Vane, Liev-tenant of all the Men at Arms▪ and Demi-lances; and Sir Ralph Sadlier, Treasurer General for the Wars: inferi∣riour Offices being distributed amongst other Gentlemen of Name and Quality, according to their well-deservings. At NewCastle they remained till the Fleet arrived, consisting of sixty five Bottoms: whereof one Gally and thirty four tall Ships were well-appointed for Fight; the Residue served for carriage of Munition, and Victuals. The Admiral of this Fleet being Edward Lord Clyn∣ton, created afterwards Earl of Lincoln, on the fourth of May 1572. in the fourteenth year of Queen Elizabeth. Making some little stay at Berwick, they entred not on Scotish Ground▪ till the third of September; keeping their March along the Shore within Sight of the Fleet, that they might be both Aid∣ed▪ and Releived by it, as Occasion served: and making all along the Shore, they fell, at the end of two days, into a Valley called The Peuthes▪ containing six Miles in length, in breadth about four hundred Pases toward the Sea, and but one hundred toward the Land, where it was shut up by a River. The Issues out of it made into several paths, which the Scots had caused to be cut in divers places with Traverse Trenches: and thereby so incumbred the Army in their marching forwards; (till the Pioneers had smoothed the way) that a small Power of the Enemy (if their Fortune had been anwerable to the Opportunity) might have given a very good Account of them to the rest of their Nation. Which Dffi∣culty being over-come, and a Passage thereby given them unto places of more Advantage, they made themselves Masters of the three next Castles, for making good of their Retreat, if the worst should happen. Upon the first News of these Approaches, enlarged (as the Custome is) by the Voice of Fame, the Earl of Arran, being then Lord Governour of Scotland, was not meanly startled; as being neither furnished with Foreign Aid▪ nor
much relying on the Forces, which He had at Home. Yet resuming his accusto∣med Courage, and well-acquainted with both Fortunes, He sent His Heralds through all parts of the Realm, commanded the Fire-Cross (that is to say, two Fire-brands, set in fashion of a Cross, and pitched upon the point of a Spear) to be advanced in the Field, (according to the Ancient Custome of that Country in Important Cases) and therewithall caused Proclamation to be made, That All Persons, from sixteen years of Age to sixty, should repair to Muscle-borough, and bring their Ordinary Provision of Victuals with them. Which Proclamation being made, and the Danger in which the Kingdom stoodrepresented to them, the People flocked in such Multitudes to their Rendezvus; that it was thought fit to make choice of such as were most serviceable, and dismiss the Rest. Out of which they compounded an Army (the Nobility, and Gentry, with their Followers being Reckoned in) consisting of thirty thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse: but poorly Armed, fitter to make Excursions, or to execute some suddain Inroad, then to entertain any strong Charge from so brave an Army. The Armies drawing near together, the General, and the Earl of Warwick, rode towards the place, where the Scotish Army lay, to view the manner of their in∣camping. As they were returning, an Herald, and a Trumpeter, from the Scots overtook them; and, having obtained Audience, thus the Herald began; That, He was sent from the Lord Governour of Scotland, partly; to enquire of Priso∣ners; but chiefly to make offer, that because he was desirous, not onely to avoid profusi∣on, but the least effusion of Christian blood; and for that the English had not done any unmanlike Outrage, or Spoyle, he was content they might return, and should have his Safe-conduct for their peaceable passage. Which said, the Trumpeter spake, as fol∣loweth; That, The Lord Huntly, His Master, sent Message by him; that, as well for brief Expedition, as to spare expence of Christian blood, He would fight upon the whole Quarrel, either with twenty against twenty, or with ten against ten; or, more particularly, by single Combate between the Lord General and himself. Which, in regard the Scots had advantage, both for Number, and Freshness of men; in regard also, that, for Supply, both for Provision, and Succours, they were at home, be esteemed an Honourable and charitable Offer. To the Herald the Lord General returned this Answer; That, As his com∣ing was not with purpose, or desire to endamage their Realm: as he was there, he would neither intreat, nor accept of him leave to depart; but would measure his Marches in Advancing or Retiring, as his own Judgment, guided by Advice of his Council, should deem expedient. To the Trumpeter he returned this Answer; That, The Lord Huntly, His Master, was a young Gentleman, full of Free Courage but more desirous of Glory, then Judi∣cious (as it seemed) how to win it; That, For number of Combatants, it was not in his power to conclude a bargain; but he was to employ all the Forces, put under his Charge, to the best advantage that he could; That, In case this were a particular Quarrel between the Governour and Him, he would not refuse a par∣ticular Combate; but, being a difference between the two Kingdoms, it was nei∣ther fit, nor in his Power, either to undertake the Adventure upon his own For∣tune, or bearing a Publique Charge, to hazard himself against a man of Private condition. Which said, and the Earl of Warwick offering to take upon himself the Answer to Huntly's Challenge: the Lord Protectour interposed, and turn∣ing again unto the Herald; Herald (saith he) tell the Lord Governour, and the Lord Huntly, that we have entred your Country with a sober Company: (which▪ in the Language of the Scots, is poor and mean) your Army is both Great and Fresh; but let them appear upon indifferent Ground, and assuredly they shall have fighting enough. And bring me word, that they will so do, and I will reward thee with a thousand Crowns. These Braveries thus passed over on either side, the Lord Protectour wisely considering with himself the uncertain Issue of pitched Fields, and minding to
preserve his Army for some other purposes, thought fit to tempt the Scots, by another Missive, to yield unto his just Demands. In which, he wished them to consider; That, This War was waged amongst Christians: And that, Our Ends were no other, then a just Peace, whereto the endeavours of all Good men should tend; That, An Occasion, not onely of a League, but of a Perpetual Peace was now happily offered, if they would suffer the two differing, and Emulous Nations, by uniting the Head, to grow together; That, As this had formerly been sought by us, so had it been generally Assented to by the Estates of Scotland; That, Therefore he could not but wonder, why they should rather Treacherously recurr to Arms (The events of War being usually, even to the Victour, sufficient∣ly unfortunate) then to maintain, inviolate, their Troth plighted to the Good of both Nations; That, They could not in reason expect, that their Queen should perpetually live a Virgin-life; That, If she Married, where could She bestow her self better, then on a Puissant Monarch, inhabiting the same Island, and speak∣ing the same Language? That, They could not choose, but see, what Inconve∣niences were the consequents of Foreign Matches. Whereof they should rather make Tryal by the Examples of Others, then at their Own Perill; That, Though he demanded nothing but Equity, yet be so far abhorred the Effusion of Christian blood, that, if he found the Scots not utterly averse from an accord, he would endeavour, that some of the Contentions should be remitted; That, He would also consent, that the Queen should abide, and be brought up amongst them, untill Her Age made Her Marriageable: at what time She should, by the Consent of the Estates, Her self make choice of an Husband; That, In the mean time, there should be a Cessation of Arms: neither should the Queen be transported out of Her Realm, nor entertain Treaty of Marriage with the French, or any other Fo∣reigner; That, if this they would Faithfully Promise, he would forthwith peaceably depart out of Scotland; And that, Whatsoever Dammages the Country had suffered by this Invasion, he would, according to the esteem of indifferent Arbi∣tratours, make Ample Satisfaction. What Effect this Letter might have produced, if the Contents thereof had been communicated to the Generality of the Scotish Army, it is hard to say. Cer∣tain it is, that those, who had the Conduct of the Scot's Affairs, (as if they had been totally carried on to their own Destruction,) resolved not to put it to the venture: but, on the contrary, caused it to be noised abroad; That, Nothing would content the English, but to have the young Queen at their disposal: and, under colour of a Marriage, to subdue the Kingdom; which was to be reduced for ever to the form of a Province. This false Report did so exasperate all sorts of people; that they were instant for the Fight. Which was as chearfully ac∣cepted by the Chief Commanders of the English Army; in regard of some In∣telligence, which was brought unto them, that the French were coming with twelve Galleys, and fifty Ships, to fall upon them in the Rear. So as both Parties being resolved to try their Fortune, they ranged their Armies in this manner. The English, having gained an Hill, which was near their Shipping, disposed their Army in this Order. The Avant-Guard, consisting of between three and four thousand Foot, one hundred Men at Arms, and six hundred light Horse-men, was Conducted by the Earl of Warwick. After which followed the Main-Battail, consisting of about six thousand Foot, six hundred Men at Arms, and about one thousand light Horse-men; Com∣manded by the Lord Protectour himself. And, finally, the Arrear, consist∣ing of between three and four thousand Foot, one hundred Men at Arms, and six hundred Light-Horse, was led by the Lord Dacres; an Active, though an Aged Gentleman. The rest of the Horses was either cast into the Wings, or kept for a Reserve against all Events. And so the Battil being dsposed, the Lord General, in few words, but with no small Gravity, (which to a Souldier serves in stead of Eloquence) puts them in mind of the Honour,
which their Ancestours had acquired in that Kingdom, of their own extream Dis∣grace, and Danger, if they fought not well: That, The Justness of their Quarrel should not so much encourage, as enrage them; being to revenge the Dishonour done to their King, and to chastise the deceitfull dealings of their nemies: That, The multitude of their Enemies should nothing dismay them; because they, who come to maintain their own Breach of Faith, (besides that the Check of their Consciences much breaketh their spirit) have the Omnipotent Arm of God mst furious against them. The Scots at the same time, having improvidently crossed the Esk, to find their Graves on this side of the water, disposed their Army in this manner. In the Avant-guard were placed about fifteen thousand, Commanded by the Earl of Angus; about ten thouand in the Main-battail, of whom the Lord Gover∣nour tok the Conduct; and so many more in the Arrear, Led by the Valiant Gourdon, Eal of Huntly. And being ready to fall on (on a false hope that the English were upon the flight) the Lord Governour put them in remembrance, how They could never yet be brought under by the English but were always able ei∣ther to beat them back, or to weary them out; bidng them look upon them∣selves, and upon their enemies▪ themselves dreadful; their enemies gorge∣ous, and brave: on their side men, on the other spoyle, in case either through flowness, or cowardise, they did not permit them to escape, who (o, now) already had began their flight. And to say truth, the English having chang∣ed their Ground, to gain the Hill which y near their Shipping and which also gave them the advantage both of Sun and Wind, wrought an opinion in the Scots; that they dislodged to no ther end then to recover their Ships that they might save themselves, though they lost their Carriages. In confidence where∣of, they quitted a place of great strength, where they were incamped, and from which the whole Army of England was not able to force them. But the old English Proverb telleth us, that, They that reckon without their Host, are to reckon twice; and so it fared with this infatuated People. For on the tenth of September, the Battails being ready to joyn, a Peece of Ordnance, discharged from the Galley of England, took off five and twenty of their men; amongst whom the eldest Son of the Lord Graham was one. Whereupon four thousand Archers, terrified with so unexpected a slaughter, made a stand, and could never after be brought on: so, that they stood like men amazd; as nei∣ther having Hearts to Fight, nor Opportunity to Fly. Which consternation notwithstanding, the Lord Gray, being sent with a strong Party of Horse to give the Onset, found the Main Body so well Embattailed, and such a Valiant Opposition made by a stand of Pikes; that they were almost as impenetrable as a Rock of Adamants: till being terrified by the English Ordnance, which came thundering on them from the top of the Hill, and galled by the Great-Shot from the Ships, they began to brangle. Which, being perceived by the English, they gave a loud Shout, crying; They Fly, They Fly▪ and thereby so astonish∣ed the affrighted Enemy; that they began to fly indeed, and presently throwing down their Arms, betook themselves unto their Heels. Many were slain upon the Place▪ more executed in the Chase, and not a few in the Esk; which so im∣providently they had passed the day before: so, that the number of the slain was thought to have amounted to fourteen thousand. About fifteen hundred of both sorts were taken Prisoners, amongst which the daring Earl of Huntly was one of the Chief; who, being after asked, How he liked the Marriage, is said to have returned this Answer, That, He could well enough brook the Wedding, but that he did not like that kind of Woing. Amongst the number of the slain were found good store of Monks and Friers: some thousands of which had put themselves into the Army; which had been raised especially by their Power and Practices. The Greatness of the Booty in Arms, and Baggage, was not the least cause, that the English reaped no better Fruit from so great a Victory, and did not
prosecute the War to an absolute Conquest. For, being intent in pillaging the dead, and gathering up the Spoils of the field, and solacing themselves in Leith, for five dayes together; they gave the Scots time to make Head again, to fortifie some Strong places on the other side of the Fryth, and to remove the Queen to Dun-britton-Castle: from whence they conveyed her into France in the year next following. And, though the loss, rather then neglect, of this opportuni∣ty is to be attributed in the first place to God's secret pleasure; who had re∣served the Union of the Kingdoms till an happier time: yet were there many Second Causes and subordinate Motives, which might prevail upon the Lord Protectour to return for England, without advancing any further. For either he might be taken off by the Earl of Warwick, who then began to cast an Envi∣ous eye on his Power and Greatness. Or, might be otherwise unwilling, of his own accord, to tempt his Fortune any further; by hazarding that Honour in a second Battail, which he had acquired in the first. Or, he might think it more conducible to his Affairs, to be present at the following Parliament; in which he had some work to do, which seemed more needfull to him, then the War with Scotland. The good Success whereof would be ascribed to his Officers and Commanders; but the Misfortunes wholly reckoned upon His account. Or fi∣nally, (which I rather think) he might conceive it necessary to preserve his Ar∣my, and Quarter it in the most convenient places near the English Borders: that it might be ready at Command upon all occasions; if his Designs should meet with any opposition, as before was said. And this may be believed the rather; because that, having fortified some Islands in the Mouth of the Fryth, he Garisoned the greatest part of his Army in Roxborough, Haddington, Hume-Castle, and other Peeces of importance; most of them lying near together, and the furthest not above a days March from Berwick. Now as concerning the Day, in which this Victory was obtained, I finde two notable Mistakes. The one committed by the Right Reverend Bishop Godwin: and the other by the no less Learned Sir John Hayward. By Bishop Godwin it is placed, exceeding rightly, on the tenth of September; but then he doth observe it, as a thing remarkable; That this memorable Victory was obtained on the very same day, in which the Images, which had been taken out of the several Churches, were burned in London. Whereas we are informed by John Stow▪ a dili∣gent Observer of Days, and Times; That the Images in the Churches of London were not taken down before the seventeenth of November. And we are told by Sir John Hayward, that the day of this Fight was the tenth of December, which must be either a mistake of the Press, or a slip of the Pen; it being noted in the words next following, That on the same day, thirty four years afore, the Scots had been defeated by the English at Flodden-field. Which though it pointeth us back to the Moneth of September; yet the mistake remaineth as unto the Day: that Battail being fought, not on the tenth, but the ninth of September; as all our Writers do agree. But, leaving these Mistakes behind us, let us attend the Lord Protectour to the Court of England. Towards which he hastened with such speed; that he stayed but twenty five days upon Scotish Ground from his first Entrance to his Exit. And being come unto the Court, he was not onely wel∣comed by the King for so great a Service, with a Present of 500l. per Ann. to him, and to his Heirs for ever; but highly Honoured by all sorts of people: the ra∣ther, in regard, that he had bought so great a Victory at so cheap a Rate; as the loss of sixty Horse onely, and but one of his Foot. And now 'tis high time to attend the Parliament, which took beginning on the fourth of November; and was Prorogued on the twenty fourth of December following. In which the Cards were so well packed by Sir Ralph Sadlier; that there was no need of any other shuffling till the end of the Game: this very Par∣liament, without any sensible alteration of the Members of it, being continued by Protogation, from Session to Session; untill at last it ended by the Death of the King. For a Preparatory whereunto, Richard Lord Rich was made Lord
Chancellour, on the twenty fourth of October; and Sir John Baker, Chancellour of the Court of First-Fruits and Tenths, was nominated Speaker for the House of Commons. And, that all things might be carried with as little opposi∣tion and noise as might be, it was thought fit, that Bishop Gardiner should be kept in Prison, till the end of the Session: and that Bishop Tonstal of Du∣ham (a man of a most even, and moderate Spirit) should be made less in Repu∣tation, by being deprived of his Place at the Council-Table. And though the Parliament consisted of such Members, as disagreed amongst themselves, in re∣spect of Religion: yet they agreed well enough together in one Common Prin∣ciple; which was, to serve the present Time, and preserve themselves. For, though a great part of the Nobility, and not a few of the Chief Gentry in the House of Commons, were cordially affected to the Church of Rome: yet were they willing to give way to all such Acts and Statutes, as were made against it, out of a fear of losing such Church-Lands, as they were possessed of, if that Religion should prevail, and get up again. And for the rest, who either were to make, or improve their Fortunes; there is no question to be made, but that they came resolved to further such a Reformation, as should most visibly conduce to the Advancement of their several Ends. Which appears plainly by the strange mixture of the Acts and Results thereof: some tending simply to God's Glo∣ry, and the Good of the Church; some to the present Benefit, and enriching of particular Persons; and some again being devised of purpose to prepare a way for exposing the Revenues of the Church unto Spoil and Rapine. Not to say a∣ny thing of those Acts, which were merely Civil, and tended to the Profit and Emolument of the Common-Wealth. Of the first Sort was The Act for repealing several Statutes concerning Trea∣son. Under which head, besides those many bloody Laws, which concerned the Life of the Subject in Civil Matters, and had been made in the distracted Times of the late King Henry, there was a Repeal also of all such Statutes, as seemed to touch the Subject in Life, or Liberty, for matter of Conscience: some whereof had been made, in the Times of King Richard the Second, and Henry the Fourth, against such, as, dissenting in Opinion from the Church of Rome, were then called Lollards. Of which Sort also was another, made in the twenty fifth of the King Deceased, together with that terrible Statute of the Six Arti∣cles (commonly called The whip with six strings,) made in the thirty first year of the said King Henry. Others were of a milder Nature, (but such as were thought inconsistent with that Freedom of Conscience, which most men coveted to en∣joy;) that is to say, The Act for Qualification of the said Six Articles; 35. H. 8. cap 9. The Act inhibiting the Reading of the Old and New Testament in the English Tongue, and the Printing, Selling, Giving, or Delivering of any such other Books or Writings, as are there in mentioned, and condemned; 34. H. 3. cap. 1. But these were also Abrogated as the others were, together with all, and every Act, or Acts of Parliament, concerning Doctrine and Matters of Religion; and all▪ and every Article, Branch, Sentence, and Matter, Pains, and Forfeitures in the same contained. By which Repeal all men may seem to have been put into a Li∣berty of Reading Scripture, and being in a manner their own Expositours; of en∣tertaining what Opinions in Religion best pleased their Fancies; and promulga∣ting those Opinions, which they entertained. So that the English for a time enjoy∣ed that Liberty, which the Romanes are affirmed by Tacitus (ubi & sen∣tire quae velis, & quae velis loqui liceat. Tacit. Hist. lib. 1.) to have enjoyed without comptrol in the Times of Nerva; that is to say, A liberty of Opining whatsoever they pleased, and speaking freely their Opinions wheresoever they listed. Which whether it were such a great Felicity, as that Authour makes it, may be more then questioned. Of this Sort alo was the Act. entituled An Act against such, as speak against the Sacrament of the Altar; and for the receipt thereof in both kinds: cap. 1. In the first part whereof it is Provided with great Care and Piety; That, (1. Edw. 6. cap. 1.) Whatsoever person, or persons, from, and after the first day of May next coming, shall deprave,
despise, or contemn the most Blessed Sacrament, by any contemptuous words, or by any words of depraving, despising, or reviling, &c. that then he, or they, shall suf∣fer Imprisonment, and make Fine and Ransome, at the King's pleasure. And, to say Truth, it was but time, that some provision should be made to sup∣press that Irreverence and Profaness, with which this Blessed Sacrament was at that time handled by too many of those, who seemed most ignorantly Zea∣lous of a Reformation. For, whereas the Sacrament was in those Times deliver∣ed unto each Communicant in a small round Wafer, called commonly by the name of Sacramentum Altaris, or The blessed Sacrament of the Altar; and that such parts thereof, as were reserved from time to time, were hanged up over the Altar in a Pix, or Box: those zealous ones, in hatred to the Church of Rome, reproached it by the odious Names of Jack-in-a-box, Round-Robin, Sacrament of the Halter, and other Names, so unbecoming the Mouths of Christians; that they were never taken up by the Turks, and Infidels. And though Bishop Ridley, a right Learned, and Religious Prelate, frequently in his Sermons had rebuked the irreverent behaviour of such light and ill-disposed Persons; yet neither he, nor any other of the Bishops were able to Reform the Abuse: (the Quality, and Temper of the Times considered) which therefore was thought fit to be committed to the power of the Civil Magistrate; the Bishop being called in, to assist at the Sentence. In the last branch of the Act, it is First declared, According to the Truth of Scripture, and the Tenour of approved Antiquity; That it is most agreeable both to the Institution of the said Sacrament, and more conformable to the common Vse, and Practice, both of the Apostles, and of the Primitive Church, by the space of five hundred years after Christ's Ascension; that the said Blessed Sacrament should rather be ministred unto all Christian people under both the Kinds of Bread and Wine; then under the form of Bread onely. And thereupon it was Enacted, That, The said most Blessed Sacrament should be hereafter commonly delivered, and ministred unto the People, within the Church of England, and Ireland, and other the King's Do∣minions, under both the Kinds; that is to say, of Bread and Wine. With these Provisoes notwithstanding, If necessity did not otherwise require: as in the Case of suddain Sickness; and other such like Extremities, in which it was not possi∣ble, that Wine could be provided for the Use of the Sacrament, nor the Sick∣man depart this life in peace without it. And Secondly, That the permitting of this Liberty to the People of England, and the Dominions of the same, should not be construed to the condemning of any other Church, or Churches, or the Vsa∣ges of them, in which the contrary was observed. So far the Parliament Enacted, in relation to the thing it self to the subject Matter; that the Communion should be delivered in both Kinds to all the good People of the Kingdoms. But for the Form, in which it was to be administred, that was left wholly to the King, and by the King committed to the Care of the Bishops: (of which more hereafter) the Parliament declaring onely, That a Godly xhortation should be made by the Ministers, therein expressing the great Benefit and Comfort promised to them. Which worthily receive the same; and the great Danger threatned by God to all such persons, as should unworthily receive it. Now, That there is not any thing, either in the Declaration of this Parlia∣ment, or the Words by which it was Enacted, which doth not every way a∣gree with Christ's Institution: appears most plainly by this Passage of Bishop Jewel. I would demand (saith he) of Master Harding, what things he would require to Christ's Institution, of Words, Christs Words be plain; If Example, Christ Himself Ministred in both Kinds; If Authority, Christ commanded His Disciples, and in them all other Ministers of His Church to do the like; If Cer∣tainty of His Meaning, the Apostles, endued with the Holy Ghost, so practised the same, and understood He meant so; If Continuance of Time. He ad the same to be continued, till His Coming again. Jewel against Hrding, Art. 2. Sect. 4. Which said, he thus proceedeth in the eight Sect. (that is to say) Some say, that the
Priests in Russia, for lack of Wine, used to Consecrate in Metheglin. Others, That Innocent the Eight, for the like want, dispensed with the Priests of Norway, to Consecrate without Wine. It were no Reason to binde the Church to the Necessity, or Imbecillity of a few. For, otherwise the same Want, and Imbecillity, which Master Harding hath here found for the one part of the Sacrament, may be found for the o∣ther. For Arrianus, De Rebus Indicis, and Strabo, in his Geography, have written, That, There be whole Nations and Countries, that have no Bread. There∣fore it should seem necessary by this Conclusion, that, in Consideration of them, the whole Church should abstain from the other Portion of the Sacrament also, and so have no Sacrament at all. But, because he may be suspected to be over-partial, in favour of the Church of England, let us see next what is confessed by Do∣ctour Harding, the first who took up Arms against it in Queen Elizabeth's Time: who doth acknowledge in plain Terms; That, The Communion was delive∣red in both kinds at Corinth, as appeareth by Saint Paul; and in many other places also, as may mot evidently be found in the Writings of many Antient Fathers: And finally, that it was so used for the space of six Hundred years, and after. Art. 2. Sect. 8▪ 28. But, because Harding leaves the point at 600, and after, I doubt not, but we may be able, on an easie search, to draw the Practice down to six hundred more, and possibly somewhat after also. For Haymo of Halbestadt, who flourished in the year 850. informs us, that, (Appellatur Calix   Haymo in 1. ad Cor. cap. 11.) The Cup is called the Cup of the Communion of the Blood of Christ because all Communicate thereof. And we are certified in the History of Atonius, Arch-Bishop of Florence; that William Duke of Nor∣mandy, immediately before the Battail near Hastings, Anno 966; caused His whole Army to communicate in both Kinds; as the use then was. And finally, It is observed by Thomas Aquinas, who lived in, and after the year 1260. That, In some Churches of his Time the Cup was not given unto the People. Which though he reckoneth fr a (In quibus∣dam Eccleiis provide objer∣vatr; u po∣ulo Sanguis non der Sect. 3. qu. 80. Art. 11.) Provident and Prudent Vsage: yet, by restraining it onely to some few Churches, he shews the General Usage of the Church to have been otherwise at that time, as indeed it was. So that the Parliament in this Case appointed nothing, but what was consonant to the Institution of our Lord and Saviour, and to the Practice of the Church for 1260 years, and upwards: which is sufficient to discharge it from the Scandal of an Innovation. Nor pro∣bably had the Parliament appointed this▪ but that it was advised by such Godly Bishops, as were desirous to Reduce the Ministration of that most Blessed Sa∣crament to the first Institution of it, and the Primitive Practice: the Convoca∣tion of that year not being enpowered to act in any Publick business; for ought appearing on Record. The next great Business was the Retriving of a Statute made in the 27th. year of King Henry the Eight: by which all Chanteries, Colleges, Free-Chapels, and Hospitals, were permitted to the Disposing of the King for Term of His Life. But the King dying, before He had taken many of the said Colleges, Hospi∣tals, Chantries, and Free-Chapels, into His Possession, and the Great Ones of the Court not being willing to lose so Rich a Booty; it was set on Foot again, and carried in this present Parliament. In, and by, which it was Enacted. That, All such Colleges, Free-Chapels, and Chanteries, as were in Being within five years of the present Session, which were not in the Actual Pos∣session of the said late King, &c. other then such, as by the King's Commissions should be altered, transported, and changed; together, with a ans, Laxds, Tenements, Rents, Tithes, Pensions, Portions, and other Hereditaments, to the sme belonging: after the Feast of Easter then next coming should be adjudged, and deemed, and also be, in the Actual and Real Possssion, an Sisin of the King, His Heirs, and Succssours for ever. And though the Hospitals, being at that time an hundred and ten were not included in this Grant, as they had been in that to the King decealed: yet the Revenue, which by this Act was designed to the King, His Heirs, and Successours, must needs have been a great Improvement to the
Crown; if it had been carefully kept together, as it was first pretended: there being accounted 90. Colleges within the Compass of that Grant, (those in the Universities not being reckoned in that Number) and no fewer then 2374. Free-Chapels and Chanteries: the Lands whereof were thus conferred upon the King by Name, but not intended to be kept together for His Benefit onely. In which Respect it was very stoutly insisted on by Arch-Bishop Cranmer, that the dissolving of these Colleges, Free-Chapels, and Chanteries, should be deferred untill the King should be of Age; to the intent that they might serve the better to furnish and maintain His Royal Estate, then that so great a Treasure should be consumed in His Nonage, as it after was. Of this we shall speak more in the following year, when the Grant of the said Chanteries, Free-Chapels, &c. came to take Effect. In the mean time, It will not be amiss to shew, that these Chanteries consisted of Salaries, allowed to one or more Priests to say daily Mass, for the Souls of their deceased Founders, and their Friends. Which, not subsisting on themselves, were generally Incorporated, and United to some Parochial, Collegiate, or Cathe∣dral Church. No fewer then 47. in Number, being found, and Founded, in Saint Paul's. Free-Chapels, though Ordained for the same Intent, were Indepen∣dent of themselves, of stronger Constitution, and Richer Endowment, then the Chanteries severally were; though therein they fell also short of the Col∣leges, which far exceeded them, both in the Beauty of their Building, the num∣ber of Priests▪ maintained in them and the Proportion of Revenue allotted to them. All which Foundations, having in them an Admixture of Superstition, (as Pre-supposing Purgatory, and Prayers to be made for Deliverance of the Soul from thence) were therefore now suppressed upon that Account, and had been granted to the late King upon other Pretences. At what time it was Preached at Mercers-Chapel, in London, by one Doctour Cromer, (a Man that wished exceeding well to the Reformation) That, If Trentals, and Chantery-Masses, could avail the Souls in Purgatory, then did the Parliament not well, in giving away Colleges, and Chanteries; which served principally for that purpose. But if the Parliament did well in dissolving and bestowing them upon the King: (which he thought that no man could deny) then was it a plain Case, that such Chanteries, and private Masses did con∣fer no Relief on the Souls in Purgatory. Which Dilemma, though it were unan∣swerable: yet was the matter so handled by the Bishops, seeing how much the Doctrine of the Church was concerned therein, that they brought him to a Re∣cantation at Saint Paul's Cross, in the June next following: (this Sermon be∣ing Preached in Lent) where he confessed himself to have been seduced by naugh∣ty books, contrary to the Doctrine then received in the Church. But the Cur∣rent of these Times went the other way, and Cromer might now have Preached that safely, for which before he had been brought into so much trouble. But that, which made the greatest Alteration, and threatened most danger to the State Ecclesiastical, was the Act, entituled An Act for Election of Bishops, and what Seals, and Styles, shall be used by Spiritual Persons. &c. In which it was Ordained, (for I shall onely repeat the Sum thereof) That, Bishops should be made by the King's Letters Patents, and not by the Election of the Deans and Chapters: That all their Processes, and Writings, should be made in the King's Name onely, with the Bishop's Teste added to it: and sealed with no other Seal, but the King's, or such, as should be Authorised and Appointed by Him. In the Compounding of which Act there was more Danger couched, then at first appeared. By the last Branch thereof it was plain and evident, that the Intent of the Contrivers was, by degrees to weaken the Authority of the Episcopal Order, by forcing them from their Strong-hold of Divine Institution, and ma∣king them no other, then the King's Ministers onely, His Ecclesiastical Sheriffs (as a man might say) to execute His Will, and disperse His Mandates. And of this Act such use was made, (though possibly beyond the true intention of it) that the Bishops of those Times were not in a Capacity of conferring Or∣ders:
but as they were thereunto enpowered by especial Licence. The Tenour whereof (if Sanders be to be believed) was in these words following: viz. The King to such a Bishop Greeting. Whereas all, and all manner of Jurisdiction, as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, flows from the King, as from the Supreme Head of all the Body, &c. We therefore give, and grant to thee full Power, and Licece, to continue during Our Good Pleasure, for holding Ordination within thy Diocess of N. and for promoting fit Persons unto Holy Orders, even to that of the Priest-hood. Which being looked on by Queen Mary, not onely as a dangerous Diminuti∣on of the Episcopal Power; but as an Odious Innovation in the Church of Christ  She caused this Act to be repealed in the first Year of Her Reign; lea∣ving the Bishops to depend on their former claim, and to act all things, which belonged to their Jurisdiction, in their own Names, and under their own Seals, as in former Times. In which Estate they have continued, without any Legal In∣terruption, from that time to this. But in the first Branch there was somewhat more, then what appeared at the first sigh. For, though it seemed to aim at nothing; but that the Bishops should depend wholly on the King, for their preferment to those great and eminent Places: yet the true Drift of the Design was to make Deans and Chapters useless, for the time to come, and thereby to prepare them for a Dissolution. For, had nothing else been intended in it, but that the King should have the sole Nomi∣nation of all the Bishops in His Kingdoms, it had been onely a Reviver of an An∣tient Power: which had been formerly Invested in His Predecessour's, and in all other Christian Princes. Consult the Stories, and Records, of the Eder Times▪ and it will readily appear, not onely that the Romane Emperours of the House of France, did nominate the Popes themselves: but that, after they had lost that Power, they retained the Nomination of the Bishops in their own Dominions. The like done also by the German Emperours, by the Kings of England, and by the Antient Kings of Spain: the Investiture being then performed Per An∣nulum & Baculum, as they used to Phrase it; that is to say, by delivering of a Ring, together with a Crosier, or Pastoral Staff, to the Party nominated. Ex∣amples of which Practice are exceeding obvious in all the Stories of those Times. But the Popes▪ finding at the last, how necessary it was in order to that absolute Power, which they ambitiously affected over all Christian Kings, and Princes, that the Bishops should depend on none but them, challenged this pow∣er unto themselves: declaring it in several Petit Councels for no less then Si∣mony, if any man should receive a Bishoprick from the Hands of his own Na∣tural Prince. From hence those long and deadly Quarrels begun between Pope Hildebrand and the Emperour Henry the Fourth, and continued by their Successours for many years after. From hence the like Disputes in England, between Pope Vrban the Second and King William Rufus; between Pope Inno∣cent and King Ihn: till in the end the Popes prevailed both here and elsewhere, and gained the point unto themselves. But so: that, to disguise the matter, the Election of the future Bishop was committed to the Prior and Convent, or to the Dean and Chapter of that Cathedral, wherein he was to be Installed. Which, passing by the Name of Free Elections, were wholly, in a manner, at the Pope's Disposing. The Point thus gained, it had been little to their Profit, if they had not put the same in Execution Which being done by Pope Innocent the Fourth, in Con∣secrating certain English Bishops at Lyons in France, without the King's Know∣ledge & Consent: it was observed by Matthew Paris (Matt. Paris. in Hn. 3. An 1245.) to be dishourable to the King and of great Dammage to the Kingdom▪ So much the more, by how much the Mischief grew more common, and the Design, concealed under that Disguise, became more apparent: which plainly was▪ () that being bound unto the Pope in the stricter Bonds, and growing into a Contempt of their Natural King, they might the more readily be inclined to worke any Mischief in the Kingdom. The Danger whereof being considered by King Edward the First, He came at last to
this Conclusion with the Popes then being; that is to say, That the said Priors and Convents, or the said Deans and Chapters, as the Case might vary, before they proceeded to any Election, should demand the King's Writ of Cong D'esliere: and, after the Election made, to crave his Royal Assent unto it, for Confirmation of the same. And so much was avowed by the Letters of King Edward the Third to Pope Clement the Fifth. In which it was declared; That all the Cathedral Churches in England were Found∣ed, and Endowed by His Progenitours; (Quas Ecclesias dicti Progenito∣res nostr du∣dum, singulis vacationibus earundem, per sonis doneis, jure suo Regio, libere confere∣bant. Apud Mason. De Mi∣nist. Anglic. lib. 4. cap. 13: pag. 497.) and that therefore, as often as those Churches became void of a Bishop, they were filled again with fit Persons by His said Progenitours, as in their own Natural and proper Right. The like done by the French Kings to this very day, partly by virtue of the Pragmatical San∣ction, established at the Councel of Basil, and partly by the Concordate between King Francis the First, and Pope Leo the Tenth. And the like also challenged by the State of Venice, within the Verge, and Territories of that Republick. For which consult the English History of that State, Decad. 5. lib. 9. fol. 229. So that, upon the whole matter, there was no Innovation made, as to this particular: but a Restoring to the Crown an antient Power, which had been Naturally and Originally in the Crown before. But howsoever, having the appearance of an Alteration from the received manner of Electings in the Church of Rome; and that, which was Established by the late King for the Realm of England: it was repealed by Queen Mary, and put into the former Chanel by Queen Eli∣zabeth. But from this Alteration, which was made in Parliament, in reference to the manner of Making Bishops, and the way of Exercising their Authority, when they were so made, let us proceed unto such Changes, as we finde made amongst the Bishops themselves. The first whereof was the Election of Doctor Nicholas Ridley to the See of Rochester: to which he had been nominated by King Henry the Eighth, when Holbeck, who preceded him, was designed for Lincoln. But, the King dying shortly after, the Translation of Holbeck was deferred till the Time of King Edward: which was no sooner done, but Ridley was chosen to suc∣ceed him; although not actually Consecrated till the fifth of September. A man of great Learning, as the Times then were, and for his excellent way of Preach∣ing highly esteemed by the late King; whose Chaplain he had been for many years before His death: and upon that onely designed to this Preferment, as the reward of his Service. Being well studyed in the Fathers, it was no hard matter for him to observe; That, as the Church of Rome had erred in the Point of the Sacrament: so, as well the Lutheran, as the Zuinglian Churches, had run themselves into some errour, by opposing the Papists: the one being forced upon the Figment of Consubstantiation; the other to fly to Signs and Figures, as if there had been nothing else in the blessed Eucharist. Which being obser∣ved, he thought it most agreeable to the Rules of Piety, to frame his Judgement to the Dictates of the Antient Fathers: and so to hold a Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Holy Sacrament; as to exclude that Corporal Eating of the same, which made the Christian Faith a scorn both to the Turks and Moors. Which Doctrine as he stoutly stood to in all his Examinations at Oxford, when he was preparing for the Stake, so he maintained it constantly in his Sermons also: in which it was affirmed; That, In the Sacrament were truly and verily the Body and Blood of Christ, made forth effectually by Grace, and Spirit. And, being so perswaded in his own Opinion he so prevailed by Discourse and Argument with Arch-Bishop Cranmer, as to bring him also to the same; (for which consult the Acts and Mn. fol.) a man of a most even and constant spirit, as he declared in all his Actions: but in none more, then in the opposition, which he made against Bi∣shop Hooper in Maintainance of the Rites, and Ceremonies, then by Law Establish∣ed: of which we shall have opportunity to speak more hereafter. In the next place, we are to look upon the Preferment of Doctor Bar∣low, to the Bishoprick of Bath and Wells; succeeding in the place of
Knight,An. 7/8 who dyed on the twenty ninth of the same September. He had been once Prior of the Monastery of Bisham, in the County of Berks: from whence preferred to the See of Asaph, in the end of February, An. 1535. And, in the April following, Translated to the Church of St. David's. During his sitting in which See, he fell up∣on an honest and convenient Project, for removing the Episcopal See from the decayed City of St. David's, most incommodiously Scituate in the remotest Angle of all the Diocess, to the rich Borough of Caer-marthen, in the midst there∣of; in the Chief Church whereof, being a Monastery of Grey-Friars, the body of Edmond Earl of Richmond, the Father of K. Henry the Seventh received Inter∣ment. Which Project he presented to Cromwel, being then Vicar General, endearing it by these Motives and Propositions; that is to say, That, being scitu∣ate in the midst of the Diocess, it was very opportune for the profiting of the King's Subjects, for the Preferment of God's Word, for abolishing all An∣tichristian Superstition, and settling in the Diocess the King's Supremacy; That it was furnished with all things necessary for the conveniency of the Canons, and might be done without any prejudice to the Friars: for every one of which he offered to provide a sufficient, Maintainance. And, to advance the work the more, he offered to remove his Consistory thither, to found therein a Gram∣mar-Schole, and settle a daily Lecture in Divinity there, for the reducing of the Welsh from their ancient Rudeness to the Civility of the Time. All which I finde in the Memorials of Sir Robert Cotton. And unto these he might have added, That he had a fair Episcopal House at Abberguilly, very near that Town: in which the Bishops of that Diocess have for the most part made their Dwelling. So that all Parties seemed to have been provided for in the Proposition: and therefore the more to be admired; That, in a Time so much addicted unto Alterations, it should speed no better. For, notwithstanding all these Motives, the See re∣mained where it was, and the Bishop continued in that See till this present year; in which he was made use of, amongst many others, by the Lord Protectour, for Preaching up the War against Scotland. For which and many other good Servi∣ces already passed, but more to be performed hereafter, he was Translated to this See on the death of Knight: but the precise Day, and Time thereof, I have no where found. But I have found, that, being Translated to this See, he gratified the Lord Protectour with a Present of eighteen or nineteen Manours, which antiently belonged unto it; and lying, all, or most part of them, in the County of Sommerset, seemed very conveniently disposed of, for the better Maintain∣ance of the Dukedom, or rather of the Title of the Duke of Sommerset; which he had took unto himself. More of which strange Donations we shall finde in others: the more to be excused, because there was no other means (as the Times then were) to preserve the whole; but by advancing some part thereof to the Spoil of others. Anno Regni Edw. Sexti 2o. An. Dom. 1547, 1548. THe Parliament ending on the twenty fourth day of December (as before was said,) seems to have put a stop to all Publique Businesses; as if it had been done of purpose to give the great Ministers of State a time of breathing. But no sooner was the year begun, (I mean the second year of the King) but that a Letter is sent from the Arch-Bishop to Doctour Bonnr, Bishop of London; requiring him in the name of his Majesty, and the Lords of his Council, to pro∣ceed unto the Reformation of such Abuses, as were therein mentioned, and to give Order for the like to the rest of the Suffragans. By antient Right, the Bishops of London are accounted Deans of the Episcopal College; and, being such, were by their place to signifie the pleasure of their Metropolitane to all the
Bishops of the Province, to execute his Mandates, and disperse his Missives, on all Emergency of Affairs: as also to preside in Convocations, or Provincial Synods; during the vacancy of the See, or in the necessary absence of the Metro∣politane. In which Capacity, and not out of any Zeal he had to the Reformati∣on, Bishop Bonner, having received the Arch-Bishop's Letters, communicateth the Contents thereof to the rest of the Suffragan-Bishops, and amongst others to Doctour Thomas Thirlby, then Bishop of Westminster, in these following words. My very Good Lord, AFter my most hearty Commendations, These are to Advertise your Good Lordship, that my Lord of Canterbury's Grace, this present 28th. of January, sent unto me his Letters Missive, containing this in Effect; That my Lord Protectour's Grace, with advice of other the King's Majestie's Honourable Privy Council (for certain Considerations them moving) are fully resolved, that no Candles shall be borne upon Candlemass day; nor also, from henceforth, Ashes, or Palms, used any longer; requiring Me thereupon by his said Letters, to cause Admonition, and Knowledg thereof, to be given unto your Lordship, and other Bishops, with celerity accordingly. In considera∣tion whereof, I do send at this present these said Letters to your Good Lord∣ship, that you thereupon may give Knowledge, and Advertisement thereof, within your Diocess, as appertaineth. Thus committing your Good Lordship to Almighty God, as well to fare, as your Good heart can best desire. Written in haste at my House in London, the said 28th. of January, 1547/8. Such was the Tenour of this Letter: the Date whereof doth very visibly declare, that the Counsel was as suddain, as the Warning short. For, being Dated on the 28th▪ of January, it was not possible, that any Reformation should be made in the first particular; but onely in the Cities of London, and Westminster, and the parts adjoyning: the Feast of Purification following within five days after. But yet the Lords drove on so fast; that, before this Order could be published, in the remote parts of the Kingdom, they followed it with another, (as little pleasing to the main body of the People) concerning Images; which in some places of the Realm were either not taken down at all, as was required the year before by the King's Injunctions, or had been re-advanced again assoon as the first Heats of the Visitation had began to cool. Which, because it cannot be expressed more clearly, then in the Letters of the Council to the Lord Arch-Bishop, and that the Reader be not troubled with any Repetitions; I shall commit the Nar∣rative thereof to the Letters themselves: which are these that follow. AFter Our Right Hearty Commendations to Your Good Lordship, where now of late, in the King's Majestie's Visitations, amongst other Godly In∣junctions, Commanded generally to be observed through all parts of this His Highness Realm, One was set forth for the taking down of such Images, as had at any time been abused with Pilgrimages, Offerings, or Censes; albe∣it that this said Injunction hath in many parts of the Realm been quietly obey∣ed, and executed; yet, in many other places, much strife and contention hath ri∣sen, and dayly riseth, and more and more increaseth, about the exe∣cution of the same. Some men being so Superstitious, or rather Willfull; as they would, by their good Wills, retain all such Images still, though they have
been most manifestly abused.An. Reg. 2o 1547/8. And almost in every place is Contention for Images, Whether they have been abused, or not. And whilst these men go on on bothsides con∣tentiously to obtain their minds, contending whether this Image, or that Iage hath been Offered unto, Kissed, Censed, and otherwise abused; Paris have in some places been taken in such sort, as further Inconveniences be like to ensue, if remedy be not found in time. Considering therefore, that almost in no place of this Realm is any sure quietness; but where all Image; be clean taken away, and pulled down already: to the intent, that all Contention, in every part of this Realm, for this matter, may be clearly taken away; and the lively Image of Christ should not contend for the dead Imaes, which be things not necessary; and without the which the Churches of Christ continued most Godly many years: We have thought good to signifie unto you, that his Highness Pleasure, with the Advice, and Consent of Vs, the Lord Protectour, and the rest of the Council, is, That immediately, upon sight hereof, with as convenient diligence as you may, you shall not onely give Order, that all the Images, remaining in any Church, or Chapel, within your Diocess, be removed, and taken away; but also, by your Letters, signifie unto the rest of the Bishops, within your Pro∣vince, this his Highness pleasure, for the like Order to be given by them, and every of them, within their several Diocesses. And in the Execution hereof We require both you, and the rest of the said Bishops, to use uch for-sight, as the same may be quietly done, with as Good satisfaction of the People, as may be. From Sommerset- Place, the 11th. of Febr. 1547. Your Lordship's assured Loving Friends, Edw. Sommerset, Hen. Arundel, Anth. Wingfield, John Russell, Thomas Seimour, William Paget. These quick Proceedings could not but startle those of the Romish Party, though none so much, as Bishop Bonner▪ who, by his place, was to disperse those unwelcome Mandates in the Province of Canterbury. And though he did per∣form the service with no small Reluctancy, yet he performed it at the last; his Letter to the Bishop of Westminster (his next neighbouring Bishop) not bear∣ing Date untill the twentieth of that Moneth. Nor was Bishop Gardiner better pleased, when he heard the News: who thereupon signified, in his Letter to one Mr. Vaughan, his great dislike of some Proceedings had at Portsmouth, in ta∣king down the Images of Christ, and his Saints; certifying him withall, not one∣ly, that with his own eyes he had seen the Images standing in all Churches, where Lu∣ther was had in Estimation; but that Luther himself had purposely written a Book against some men, which had defaced them. And therefore it may well be thought, that Covetousness spurred on this business, more then Zeal▪ there being none of the Images so poor and mean, the Spoyl whereof would not afford some Gold and Silver, (if not Jewels also) besides Censers, Candlesticks, and many other rich Utensils appertaining to them. In which Respect, the Commissioners hereto Authorised were entertained in many places with scorn, and railing: and the further they went from London, the worse they were handled. Insomuch, that one of them, called Body▪ as he was pulling down Images in Cornwal, was stabbed into the body by a Priest. And though the Principal Offender was ang∣ed in Smithfield▪ and many of his Chief Accomplices in other Parts of the Realm, which quieted all Matters for a time; yet, the next year the storm broke out
more violently then before it did:An. Reg. 2o 1548. not onely to the endangering of the Peace of those Western Counties, but in a manner of all the Kingdom. Which great Commotions the Council could not but fore-see, as the most probable Consequents of such Alterations: especially when they are suddain, and pressed too fast. There being nothing, of which People commonly are so tender, as they are of Religion: on which their Happiness dependeth, not one∣ly for this World, but the World to come. And therefore it concerned them, in point of Prudence, to let▪ the People see, that there was no intention to abo∣lish all their antient Ceremonies; which either might consist with Piety, or the Profit of the Common-Wealth. And, in particular, it was held expedient to give the generality of the Subject some contentment, in a Proclamation for the strict keeping of Lent, and the Example of the Court in pursuance of it. For Doctour Glaser having broke the Ice, (as before was said) there was no scarci∣ty of those, that cryed down all the Observations of Days, and Times; even to the Libelling against that antient and Religious Fast, in most scandalous Rhythms. Complaint whereof being made by Bishop Gardiner, in a Letter to the Lord Protectour; a Proclamation was set out, bearing Date in January, by which all People were Commanded to abstain from Flesh in the time of Lent; and the King's Lenten-Dyet was set out, and served, as in former Times. And now comes Bishop Latimer on the Stage again: being a man of Parts and Learning, and one that seemed inclinable enough to a Reformation. He grew into esteem with Cromwel: by whose Power and Favour with the King, he was made Bishop of Worcester▪ An. 1535. continuing in that See, till on the first of July, 1539. he chose rather willingly to Resign the same, then to have any hand in Passing the Six Articles, then Agitated in the Convocation, and Confirm∣ed by Parliament. After which time, either upon Command, or of his own accord, he forbore the Pulpit for the space of eight whole years, and upwards; betaking himself to the retiredness of a private life: but welcome at all times to Arch-Bishop Cranmer; to whom the Piety, and Plainness of the Man was exceeding acceptable. And possible enough it is, that being Sequestred from Preaching, and all other Publick Acts of the Ministration, he might be usefull to him in Composing the Homilies; having much in them of that plain and familiar Style, which doth so visibly shew it self in all his Writings. On New-Years▪ Day last past, being Sunday, he Preached his first Sermon at St. Paul'-Crss: (the first, I mean, after his re-Admission to his former Ministry) and, at the same place again, on that Day seven-night, and on the Sunday after also; and, final∣ly, on the day of St. Paul's Conversion, the twenty fifth of that Moneth. By means whereof he became so Famous, and drew such multitudes of People af∣ter him to hear his Sermons; that, being to Preach before the King on the first Friday in Lent, it was thought necessary, that the Pulpit should be placed in the King's Priv-Garden; where he might be heard of more, then four times as many Auditours, as could have thronged into the Chapel. Which, as it was the first Sermon, which was Preached in that place; so, afterward, a fixed, and standing Pulpit was erected for the like Occasions: especially for Lent-Sermons on Sundays in the after-noon; and hath so continued ever since, till these later Times. Now, whilst Affairs proceeded thus in the Court and City, some Godly Bshops, and other Learned and Religious Men, were no less busily imploy∣ed in the Castle of Windsor; appointed by the King's Command to Consult together about one Vniform Order for Administring the Holy Communion in the English Tongue, under both Kinds of Bread and Wine, according to the Act of Parliament made in that behalf. Which Persons so convened toge∣ther (if at the least they were the same, which made the first Liturgie of this King's time, as I think they were) were these, who follow: that is to say, Thomas Cranmer, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; Thomas Goodrick,
Bishop of Ely, and afterwards Lord Chancellour; Henry Holbeck, Bishop of Lincoln; George Day, Bishop of Chichester; John Skip, Bishop of Hereford; Thomas Thirlby, Bishop of Westminster; Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of Ro∣chester; Richard Cox, Almoner to the King, and Dean of Christ-Church; Doctour May, Dean of St. Paul's; Doctour Taylor, then Dean (after Bishop) of Lincoln; Doctour Heyns, Dean of Exeter; Doctour Robertson, afterwards Dean of Durham; Doctour Ridley, Master of Trinity-College in Cambridge. Who, being thus Convened together, and taking into Con∣sideration as well the right Rule of the Scripture, as the Usage of the Primitive Church, agreed on such a Form, and Order; as might comply with the Intention of the King, and the Act of Parliament, without gi∣ving any just Offence to the Romish Party. For they so Ordered it; that the whole Office of the Mass should proceed, as formerly, in the Latine Tongue; even to the very end of the Canon, and the receiving of the Sacrament by the Priest himself. Which being passed over, they began with an Exhortation in the English Tongue, directed to all those, which did intend to be partkers of the Holy Communion. Which Exhortation, beginning with these Words, Dearly-beloved in the Lord, ye coming to this Holy Communion, &c. is in ef∣fect the last of those, which afterwards remained in the Publick Liturgie. Then followed the Invitation thus; You, that do truly, and earnestly repent you of your sins, &c. proceeding to the General Confession, the Absolu∣tion, the Comfortable Sentences out of Holy Scripture; and so unto the Pray∣er of Humble Address; We do not presume to come to this Table, &c. the Di∣stribution of the Sacrament to the People present, continuing still upon their knees, and finally dismissing them, In the Peace of God. Which Godly Form, being presented to the King, and the Lords of the Council, and by them exceeding well approved; was Published on the eighth of March, together with his Majestie's Proclamation, Authorising the same, and Commanding all His Loving Subjects to conform unto it, in this Manner following. By the King. EDWARD, by the Grace of God, King of England▪ France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; and of the Church of England, and Ireland, in Earth the Supreme Head: To All, and Singular, Our Lo∣ving Subjects, Greeting. For so much, as in Our High Court of Parliament, lately holden at Westminster, it was by Vs, with the consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons there Assembled▪ most Godly, and a∣greeable to Christ's Holy Institution, Enacted; That the most Blessed Sacra∣ment of the Body and Blood of our Saviour Christ should from hence∣forth be commonly Delivered, and Ministred unto all Persons, within Our Realm of England, and Ireland, and other Our Dominions, un∣der both Kinds, that is to say, of Bread and Wine; (except necessity other∣wise require) lest, every man fantasying and devising a sundry way by himself in the Vse of this most Blessed Sacrament of Vnity, there might thereby arise any unseemly, or ungodly Diversity: Our pleasure is, by the Advice of Our most Dear Vncle the Duke of Sommerset, Governour of Our Person, and Pro∣tectour of Our Realms, Dominions, and Subjects, and other Our Privy Council; that the said Blessed Sacrament be Ministred unto Our People, nely after such Form, and Manner, as hereafter by Our Authority,
with the Advice before-mentioned, is set out, or declared; Willing eve∣ry man with due Reverence, and Christian Behaviour, to come to this Holy Sacrament, and most Blessed Communion; lest that, by the unworthy receiving of such high Mysteries, they become guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, and so eat and drink their own Damnation: but rather diligently try∣ing themselves, that they so come to this Holy Table of Christ, and so be par∣takers of this Holy Communion; that they may dwell in Christ, and have Christ dwelling in them: And also with such Obedience and Conformity, to receive this Our Ordinance, and most Godly Direction; that we may be incou∣raged from Time to Time further to travail for the Rformation, and setting forth of such Godly Orders, as may be most to God's Glory, the Edifying of Our Subjects, and for the Advancement of true Religion; which is thething We (by the help of God) most earnestly endeavoured to bring to effect: Willing all Our Loving Subjects in the mean time to stay, and quiet themselves, with this Our Direction; as men content to follow Authority (according to the bound∣en Duty of Subjects) and not enterprising to run before: and so by their Rash∣ness become the greatest Hinderers of such things, as they, more arrogantly then Godly, would seem (by their own Private Authority) most hotly to set forward. We would not have Our Subjects so much to mistake Our Judge∣ment, so much to mistrust Our Zeal; as though we either would not discern what were to be done, or would not do all things in due time: God be praised, We know both what by his Word is meet to be redressed, and have an earnest mind by the Advice of Our most Dear Vncle, and other of Our Privy Coun∣cil, with all diligence and convenient speed, so to set forth the same, as it may most stand with God's Glory, and edifying and quietness of Our People▪ Which We doubt not, but all Our Obedient and Loving Subjects will quietly and reverendly tarry for. The next Care was, to see the said Order put in execution: of which the Lords of the Council discharged the King, and took the whole Burthen on themselves. For, causing a sufficient Number of the Printed Copies to be sent to each Bishop in the Realm, they there withall directed Letters to them; Requiring, and in Hi Majestie's Name Commanding them, and every of them, to have an earnest Dili∣gence, and carefull Respect, both in their own Persons, and all their Officers, and Ministers, for causing the said Books to be so delivered to every Parson, Vicar, and Curate in their several Diocesses; that they may have sufficient time well to in∣struct and advise themselves for the Distribution of the most Holy Communion, ac∣cording to the Order of the said Book, before Easter following: and that▪ by the good Means of them, (the said Bishops) they may be well directed to use such Good, Gentle, and Charitable Instructions, to their simple and unlearned Parishioners; as may be to their good Satisfaction: Letting them further know, that, as the said Order was set forth, to the intent there should be in all parts of this Realm, and among all men, one Vniform manner quietly used; so that the Execution thereof did very much stand in the Diligence of them, and others of their Vocation, who there∣fore were again required to have a diligent respect unto it: as they tendred the King's pleasure, and would answer the contrary. Which Letter, bearing Dae on the thirteenth of March, was subscribed by the Arch-Bishop Cranmer, the Lord Chancellour Rich, the Earl of Arundel, the Lords St. John and Russel, Mr. Secretary Petre, Sir Anthony Wingfield, Sir Edward North, and Sir Ed∣ward otton. In Obedience unto whose Commands, as all the Bishops did not perform their parts alike: (Gardiner of Winchester, Bonner of London, Voysie of Exeter, and Sampson of Coventry and Lich-field, being more backward then the rest) so many Parish-Priests, not being willing to Advance so good a Work, laboured to disaffect the People to the present Government. And to that end it was endeavoured in their Sermons, to possess their Auditours with an ill opinion of the King; as if he did intend to lay strange Exactions on the Subject,
by forcing them to pay half a Crown a piece for every one, who should be Mar∣ried, Christened, or Buried. For Remedy whereof it was Ordered by Procla∣mation, bearing Date the twenty fourth of April; That none should be permitted to Preach: but such as were Licenced under the Seals of the Lord Protectour, or the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. In the next place we must attend the King's Commissioners, dispatched in the beginning of March, into every Shire throughout the Realm, to take a Survey of all Colleges, Free-Chapels, Chanteries, and Brother-Hoods, within the com∣pass of the Statute, or Act of Parliament. According to the Return of whose Commissions, it would be found no difficult matter to put a just estimate and va∣lue on so great a Gift, or to know how to parcell out, proportion, and divide the Spoil betwixt all such, who had before in hope devoured it. In the first place, as lying nearest, came in the Free-Chapel of Saint Stephen, Originally Founded in the Palace at Westminster, and reckoned for the Chapel-Royal of the Court of England. The whole Foundation consisted of no fewer▪ then thirty eight Persons: viz. one Dean, twelve Canons, thirteen Vicars, four Clerks, six Choristers; besides a Verger, and one that had the Charge of the Chapel. In place of whom a certain Number were appointed for Officiating the daily Service in the Royal-Chapels: (Gentlemen of the Chapel they are commonly called) whose Saaries, together with that of the Choristers, and other Servants of the same, amounts to a round yearly Sum: and yet the King, if the Lands belonging to that Chapel had been kept together, and honestly aid unto the Crown, had been a very rich Gainer by it▪ the yearly Rents thereof being valued at 1085 l. 10 s. 5 d. As for the Chapel it self, together with a Clolyster of curious Workmanship, built by John Chambers, one of the King's Physicians, and the last Master of the same; they are still standing as they were: the Chapel having been since fitted, and imployed for an House of Commons, in all times of Par∣liament. At the same time also fell the College of St. Martin's, commonly called St. Martin's le Grand, scituate in the City of London, not far from Aldersgate: first founded for a Dean, and Secular Canons, in the time of the Conquerour, and afterwards, privileged for a Sanctuary; the Rights whereof it constantly en∣joyed without interruption, till all privilege of Sanctuary was suppressed in this Realm by King Henry the Eighth. But the Foundation it self being now found to be Superstitious, it was surrrendred into the hands of King Edward the Sixth: who after gave the same, together with the remaining Liberties, and Precincts thereof, to the Church of Westminster: and they, to make the best of the King's Donation, appointed, by a Chapter held the seventh of July, that the Body of the Church, with the Quire and Iles, should be Leased out for fifty years, at the Rent of five Marks per Annum to one H. Keeble of London; excepting out of the said Grant, the Bells▪ Lead, Stone, Timber, Glass and Iron, to be sold and disposed of, for the sole Use and Benefit of the said Dean and Chapter. Which foul Transaction being made, the Church was totally pulled down; a Tavern built in the East part of it: the rest of the site of the said Church and College, together with the whole Precinct thereof, being built upon with se∣veral Tenements, and let out to Strangers; who very industriously affe∣cted to dwell therein (as the natural English since have done) in regard of the Privileges of the place, exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Lord Mayor, and Sheriffs of London; and governed by such Officers amongst themselves, as are appointed thereunto by the Chapter of Westminster. But for this Sacrilege the Church of Westminster was called immediately in a manner to a ober Reckoning. For the Lord Potectour, thinking it alto∣gether unnecessary, that two Cathedrals should be Founded so near one another, and thinking, that the Church of Westminster, (as being of a late Foundation) might best be spared, had cast a longing eye upon the goodly Patrimony, which remained unto it. And being then unfurnished of an House, or Palace, propor∣tionable
unto his Greatness, he doubted not to finde room enough; upon the Dissolution and Destruction of so large a Fabrick, to raise a Palace, equal to his vast Designs. Which coming to the ears of Benson, the last Abbot, and first Dean of the Church, he could behink himself of no other means to preserve the whole▪ but by parting for the present with more then half the Estate, which belonged un∣to it. And thereupon a Lease is made of seventeen Manours, and good Farms, lying almost together in the County of Glocester, for the Term of ninety nine years; which they presented to the Lord Thomas Seimour, to serve as an Addition to his Manour of Sudeley: humbly beseeching him to stand their Good Lord and Pa∣tron, and to preserv them in a fair Esteem, with the Lord Protectour. Another Present of almost as many Manours, and Farms, lying in the Counties of Glocster, Worcester, and Hereford, was made for the like Term to Sir John Mason, a special Confident of the Duke's: not for his own, but for the use of his Great Master; which, after the Duke, all came to Sir John Bourn, principal Secretary of Estate in the time of Queen Mary. And yet this would not serve the Turn, till they had put into the Scale their Manour of Islip, conferred upon that Church by King Edward the Confessour; to which no fewer then two hundred Customary Tenants owed their Soil and Service: and, being one of the best wooded things in those parts of the Realm, was to be granted also without Im∣peachment of Wast, as it was accordingly. By means whereof the Deantry was preserved for the later Times; how it succeeded with the Bishoprick, we shall see hereafter. Thus Benson saved the Deanery; but he lost himself: or, calling to remembrance, that formerly he had been a means to surrender the Ab∣by, and was now forced on the . Dilapidating the Estate of the Deanery, he fell into a great disquiet o nd, which brought him to his death within few Moneths after. To whom succeeded Doctour Cox, being then Almo∣ner to the King, Chancellour of the University of Oxford, and Dean of Christ-Church: and afterwards preferred by Queen Elizabeth to the See of Ely. I had not singled these two (I mean St. Martin's, and St. Stephen's) out of all the rest: but that they were the best, and richest in their several kinds; and that there was more depending on the Story of them, then on any others. But Bad Examples seldome end where they first began. For the Nobility, and inferi∣our Gentry, possessed of Patronages, considering how much the Lords, and Great men of the Court had improved their Fortunes, by the suppression of those Chanteries, and other Foundations, which had been granted to the King; conceived themselves in a capacity of doing the like, by taking into their hands the yearly Profits of those Benefices, of which by Law they onely were entrusted with the Presentations. Of which abuse Complaint is made by Bishop Latimer, in his Printed Sermons. In which we finde, That the Gentry of that Time in∣vaded the Profits of the Church; leaving the Title onely to the Incumbent: and That Chantery-Priests were put by them into several Cures▪ to save their Pnsions; pg. 38. that many Benefices were let out in Fee-Farms, (pag. 71) or given unto Ser∣vants for keeping of Hounds, Hawks, and Horses, and for making of Gardens; pag. 91, 114. And finally, That the Poor Clergy, being kept to some sorry Pittances, were forced to put themselves into Gentlemens Houses, and there to serve as Clerk of the Kitching, Surveyour, Receivers, &c. pag. 241. All which Enormities (though tending so apparently to the Dshonour of God, the Disservice of the Church, and the Disgrace of Religion) were generally connived at by the Lords, and others; who onely had the power to Reform the same: because they could not question those, who had so miserably invaded the Churches Patrimony, without con∣demning of themselves. Thus leaving England for a while, we are to take a short Survey of Affairs in Scotland, into which the French had put ten thousand Souldiers; three thou∣sand of them being Almains, under the Command of Mounsieur D' Essie; who, joyning with the Scots▪ laid Siege before the Town of Haddington, on St. Peter's-Eve. For the Relief whereof a strength of one thousand three hun∣dred
Horse was sent from Berwick,An. Reg. 2.o 1548. under the Conduct of Sir Robert Bowes, and Sir Thomas Palmer; who, falling very unfortunately into the Hands of the Ene∣my, were for the most part slain or taken. The English notwithstanding made good the Town▪ and held it out so long; that in the end the Earl of Shrewsbu∣ry, with a Power of sixteen thousand men, (of which there were four thousand Lansquenets, or Germane Souldiers) appeared in fight. On whose approach, the Enemy withdrew themselves, and raised their Siege on or about the twenti∣eth day of August; giving great commendation to the English Garison, for the notable service they had done in defence of the Town. The Siege being raised, the Earl of Shrewbury with his Forces returned for England; leaving the Town well stored with Victuals, and plentifully furnished with all manner of Ammuni∣tion▪ which put the Souldiers of the Garison into so good heart; that they made many Sallies out, and frequently Skirmished with the French, and Scots, whom they found Quartered in the Villages and Towns adjoyning. But, the matter being taken into Debate by the Council of England, it was Resolved, especially by those, who secretly envied at the Power and Greatness of the Lord Protectour; That the keeping of the Town would not quit the Cost; as being farthest from the Borders, and not to be Relieved, if it were distressed, without the raising and imploying of a Royal Army. And thereupon the Earl of Rutland was sent thither with three thousand of the Lansquenets, and as many Borderers: who, coming to the Town on the twentieth of September, sleighted the Works; and, having de∣stroyed the Houses, caused all the Ordnance, and Carriages, to be sent to Ber∣wick, and returned without Battail. The voluntary quitting of which Town drew after it the loss of all the Peeces, which we held in Scotland. The English Forces being removed from the Town of Haddington, the French immediately prepared for their going home-wards: carrying a richer Lading with them; then all the Arms, and Ammunition, which they brought at their coming. For, while the Army lay at the Siege at Haddington, the Ministers of the French King were busied in Treaty with the Scots, for putting the Young Queen into their Power, transporting her into France, and Marrying her un∣to the Daulphin. But in this point they found the Council much divided. Some thought, That the Conditions, offered by the Lord Protectour, (not till then gene∣rally known) were to be embraced; in regard it gave them an assurance of ten years Peace at the least; and that, if either of the Princes died within that time, they should be left at Liberty, to Order the Affairs of that Kingdom to the most Ad∣vantage. But against this it was alledged by those of the opposite Party; (whom the French King had bought with ready Money, and Anual Pensions.) That, as long as the Queen remained amongst them, they should never be Free from the Pretensions of the English. From which, there was no question, but they would desist; when they saw the Ground thereof to be taken away by the Queens Re∣moval. Of which Party, (besides those, which were corrupted by the Gold of France) were the Bishops and Clergy; who, being Zealous for the preserva∣tion of their Old Religion, abominated nothing more, then the Alliance with En∣gland. And so the matter being carried in behalf of the French, and there being now no further need of them for defence of the Countrey, they gave Order to make ready their Shipping, and nominated a set day for their Departure. Which day being come, they Coasted about Scotland, by the Isles of Orkney, took in the young Queen at Dunbritton-Castle, and passing through St. George's Chanel arrived in Bretaigne; whilest a strong Squadron of the English attended for their coming in the Narrow-Seas. But this Departure of the French, though it much weakened, did not disani∣mate the Scots, for making trial of their Fortune against the English. Hume-Castle, and Fast-Castle, remained (amongst some others) as Thorns in their Sides: but they regained them both this year. Hume-Castle they surprised by means of some of their own Nation; who, being reputed Friends, and suffered to have free and frequent Access unto it, had Opportunity, both to discover the
Weaknesses of it, and by what Ways it might most easily be taken. And, being more cordially affected to their Old Country-men, then their New Acquaintance, they directed a select number of Souldiers to some secret Pasages; by which, having fist climbed up a very steep Rock, they found an Entrance into the Castle, put the secure Garison to the Sword, and possessed the Place, leaving a fair warning unto all others; Never to trust the Courtesies, or Services of those, whom they have provoked to be their Enemies. Fast-Castle they surprised by a War∣like Stratageme. For the Governour having Commanded the neighbouring Villages, at a prefixed day, to bring in their Contribution of Corn, and other necessary Provision; the Enemy makes Use of this Opportunity. Souldiers, habited like Peasants, came at the day, fraught with their Burthens; whereof having eased their Horses, they carry them on their shoulders over the Bridg, (which joyned two Rocks together) and so gained Entrance: the Watch-word being given, they cast down their Burthens, till the Sentinels open the Gates to their Fellows; and become Masters of the Place. The News of which Surpri∣sals, together with that of the Queens Removal, being brought into the Court of England, which then began to be divided into Sides and Factions; there was no further Care taken for the Prosecution of the Scotish War: which for the pesent much refreshed that impoveished Kngdom. Now while these Traverses of War were made in Scotland, there was no solid Peace, though no open Discord in the Church of England. It hath been shew∣ed; that Bishop Gardiner, having long lain Prisoner in the Fleet, was, on the Morrow after Twelth-Day last, restored to Liberty; and permitted to return un∣to his Diocess. Where, contrary to the Promise made at his Enlargment, he began to shew himself displeased with the King's Proceedings in the case of Ima∣ges. Concerning which he wrote a long Letter to the Lord Protectour, on the twenty first of May, and backed it with another of the sixth of June: and o∣therwise appeared so cross to the King's Designs; that he was sent for to the Cort, and after some Reproofs dismissed unto his house in South-Wark, where he was commanded to remain untill further Order. But there also he behaved himself with much unquietness, medling in many matters, which concerned the King; for which he had neither Warrant, nor Commission: whereof being once again admonished by their Lordships, he did not onely promise to conform him∣self like a good Subject; but to declare his Conformity to the World, in an o∣pen Sermon, in sundry Articles agreed upon; that such, as were offended, might be satisfied in him. St. Peter's-Day, then near at hand, was given him for the Day, whereon he was to Preach this Sermon. In which though he allowed the Sacrament to be Administred in both Kinds, and shewed his Approbation of the King's Proceedings in some other Points: yet in the rest he gave such little sa∣tisfaction to the King and Council; that the next day he was sent Prisoner to the Tower, where he remained till his Enlargment by Queen Mary. The Punishment of this great Prelat did not so much discourage those of the Romish Party: as his Example animated, and emboldened them to such Iconfor∣mity; as gave no small Disturbance to the King's Proceedings. For notwith∣standing His great Care to set forth one Vniform Order of Administring the Holy Communion in both Kinds; yet so it happened, that, (through the perverse Ob∣stinacy, and froward Dissembling of many of the inferiour Priests, and Mini∣sters, of Cathedral, and other Churches of this Realm) there did arise a marvai∣lous Schisme, and Variety of Factions, in celebrating the Communion-Service, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church. For some, zealously allowing the King's Proceedings, did gladly fol∣low the Order thereof; and others▪ though not so willingly admitting them, did yet dissemblingly and patchingly use some part of them: but many, causlesly contemning them all, would still continue in their former Popery. Besides, it is Observed in the Register-Book of the Parish of Petworth; That many at this time affirmed the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar to be of little re∣gard;
that in many places it was irreverently used, and cast out of the Church, and many other great Enormities committed: which they second∣ed by oppugning the established Ceremonies; as Holy Water, Holy Bread, and divers other Usages of the seven Sacraments. And yet these were not all the Mischiefs, which the Time produced. For, in Pursuance of this Schism, and to confirm the People in their former ways, ma∣ny of those, which had been Licenced in Form, and Manner prescribed by the Proclamation of the twenty fourth of April▪ appeared as Active in Preaching against the King's Proceedings; as any of the Unlicenced Preachers had been found to be. Which being made known unto the King, and the Lords of the Council, it was advised; That a Publick Liturgie should be drawn, and confirm∣ed by Parliament▪ with several Penalties to be inflicted on all those, who should not readily conorm to the Rules, and Appointments of it For though some ill-affected men mght look upon the late Order for Administring the Holy Sacra∣mnt in the English Tongue, as the Act of some few Persons about the King; and not proceeding reall from the King Himself: yet, when the King's Pleasure came to be decared by Act of Paliment, it was to be presumed; that (all such, Sub∣terfuges and Evsios being tken away) the Subjects would conform unto it without futher trouble. Which being thus resolved upon, He caused those Godly Bishops, and other Learned Divies, whom He had formerly imployed in drawing up the Order for the Holy Communion, to attend His pleasure on the first day of September then next following. Attending at the day appointed, it pleased His Majesty to commend unto them the framing of a Publick Liturgie, which should contain the Order of Morning and Evening Prayer, together with a Form of Ministring the Sacraments and Sacramentals, and for the Cele∣brating of all other Publick Offices; which were required by the Church, of good Christian People. Which as His Majesty commanded out of a most Religious Zeal to the Honour of God, the Edification of His Subjects, and to the Peace and Happiness of His Dominions; so they (who knew no better Sacrifice, then Obedience) did chearfully apply themselves to the Underta∣king. And, that they might proceed therein, not onely with the less Disquiets, but with the greater Hope of gaining their desired End; it pleased His Majesty to declare by His Proclamation, bearing Date the twenty third day of the said Mo∣neth of September, into what course he had put this Business: letting them know; That, for the settling of an Vniformity and Order thoughout his Realm, and for putting an End to all Controversies in Religion, He had caused certain Godly Bi∣shops, and other notable Learned men to be Congregated, or called together. And thereupon doth inferr, That, notwithstanding many of the Preachers, formerly Licenced, had behaved themselves very discreetly, and wisely; to the Honour of God, and the Contentation of His Highness: yet till such time, as the said Order should be generally set forth throughout the Realm, His Majesty did thereby inhi∣bit all manner of Persons, whatsoever they be, to Preach in open Audience, in the Pulpit, or otherwise, by any sought colour, or fraud, to the disobeying of His Com∣mandment. And this he did to this intent; That the whole Clergy in the mean space mght apply themselves, to Prayer to Almighty God, for the better atchieving of this same Godly Intent and Purpse; not doubting, but that all His Loving Sub∣jects in the mean time would occupie themselves to God's Honour, with due Prayer in the Church, and patient Hearing of the Godly Homilis, heretofore set forth by His Highness Injunctions: and so endeavour themselves, that they may be te more reay, with thankfull Obedience to receive a most quiet, Godly and Vniform Order, through all His said Realms, and Dominions. And to the end, that His Majestie's Pleasure in the Premisses should be the more punctually obeyed, He wil∣th and rquireth all His Loving Officers and Ministers, as well Justices of the Peace; as Maors Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, or any other His Officers, of what State, Degree, and Condition soever they be, to be attendant upon this Procla∣mation,
and Commandment: and to see the Infringers, and Breakers thereof, to be Im∣prisoned, and His Highness, or the Lord Protectour's Grace, or His Majestie's Coun∣cil, to be certified thereof immediately, as they tendered His Majestie's Pleasure, and would answer to the contrary at their Perils. And here it is to be Observed; That those, who had the chief directing of this weighty Business, were before-hand resolved, that none but English Heads, or Hands, should be used therein: left otherwise it might be thought, and per∣haps Objected; that they rather followed the Example of some other Churches, or were swayed by the Authority of those Foreign Assistants; then by the Word of God, and the most uncorrupted Practice of the Primitive Times. Certain it is, that, upon the very first Reports of a Reformation here intended, Calvin had offered his Assistance to Arch-Bishop Craenmer; as himself confesseth. But the Arch-Bishop knew the Man, and refused the Offer. And it appears in one of Bishop Latimer's Sermons, that there was report, about this time, of Melan∣cthon's coming; but it proved onely a Report. And, though it was thought ne∣cessary, for the better seasoning of the Vniversities in the Protestant Refor∣med Religion; that Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr, two eminent Divines of the Foreign Churches, should be invited to come over: yet the Arch-Bishop's Letter of Invitation, sent to Martin Bucer, was not written till the twelfth day of October. At what time the Liturgie then in hand, being the chief Key to the whole Work of Reformation, was in very good forwardness: and must needs be compleatly finished, before he could so settle, and dispose his Affairs in Germa∣ny; as to come for England. And though Peter Martyr, being either more at Leasure, or less engaged, or otherwise more willing to accept of the Invitation, came many Moneths before the other: yet neither do we finde him here, till the end of November▪ when the Liturgie had been approved of by the King and Coun∣cil, if it had not also passed the Approbation of both Houses of Parliament. Nor was it likely, that they should make use of such a Man in composing a Liturgie; wherein they were resolved to retain a great part of the Antient Ceremonies: who, being made Canon of Christ-Church in Oxford, and frequently present at Divine Service in that Church, could never be prevailed with, to put on the Surplice. Being left therefore to themselves, they were at the more liberty for follow∣ing the King's most Godly, and most Wise Directions: having in the first place an eye, and respect, to the most sincere, and Pure Religion, taught by the Scri∣pture; and, in the second, to the Vsages of the Primitive Church: and making, out of both, one convenient and meet Order, Rite, and Fashion of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments▪ to be had, and used in the Realm of Englnd, and the Principality of Wales. Which being finished, they all sub∣scribed their Names unto it; but (Sed Ri∣chardus Cis∣cestriensis (ut ipse mihi dixit) non subcripsit. Lib. Pew.) Day of Chichester: who would by no means have his Hand in the Subscription; as is related in the Register-Book of the Parish of Petwoth. But▪ being subscribed by all the rest, it was by them, with all due Reverence, humbly presented to the King: by whom it was received to His great Comfort, and Quietness of mind; as the Statute (Act. 2. Edw. 6. 1.) telleth us. And be∣ing by him commended to the Lords, and Commons, then Assembled in Parlia∣ment; (which Parliament took beginning on the fourth day of November) they, did not only give His Highness most hearty and lowly thanks, for his Care therein: but, on perua of the Book, declared it to be done by the aid of the Holy Ghost. And therupo, considering the Godly Prayers, Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies, in the said Book mentioned; and also the reasons of Altering of those things, which be altered, and the retaining those things, which be retained; together with the Ho∣our of God, and the great Quietess, which by the Grace of God, was likely to en∣se on suh an Uiform Order, in Common Prayer, Rites, and External Cere∣monies to be used in all England, and Wales, in Calice, and the Marches of the ame: it was Eaced; That all, and singular, Ministers, in any Cathedral, or -Church, or other Place, within this Realm of England, Wales, Calce▪
and the Marches of the same, or other the King's Dominions, should from, and after the Feast of Pentecost, next coming, (that Interval being given for the Print∣ing of it) be bounden to say, and use the Mattens, Even-song, Celebration of the Lord's Supper, mmonly caed The Mass, and Administration of each of the Sacraments, and all their Common and Open Prayer▪ in such Order, and Form, as is mentioned in the same Book, and no otherwise: with several Penalties therein mentioned, to be imposed on all such in their several places, as either should willfully refuse to Officiate by it; or hinder the Lawfull Excution o it; or speak any thing in Derogation of the said Book, or any thing therein con∣tained. The passing of this Act gave great Offence to those of the Romish Paty: not, that they could except against it, in regard either of the Manner, or Matter of it; (which they acknowledged to be Consonant to the Antient Forms) but bcause it was communicated to the People in the Vulgar Tongue. And this they charged, as a geat Erour in those Men; who had the chief Hand in the Conduct of that Affi: becase that, by the Rules thereof, the Scriptures were to be read publckly in the  Tongue. Which, what else was it, (as they said) but the committing so much Heavenly Treasure unto Rtten Vessels? the trusting so much Excellent  to such Musty Bttles? And, being that there are many things in he Divine Offices of the Church, quae secreta esse debent, as the Cardinal telleth us, which ought to have been kept as Secrets from all Vulgar knowledg▪ it must needs be of very ill Conequence, to communicate them to all sors of People. But certainly the Holy Ghost was able to direct the Church in  beter way; then such, as should be subject unto Man's Exceptions. And he directs the Service of the Church to be Officiated in such a Language, to which the ignorant, and unlearned may say Amen; 1 Cor. xiv. 9, 16. Upon which Words it is observed by Lyra, and Aquinas; two as great Clerks as any in the Church of Rome: That, The Publick Service of the Church, in the Primitive Times, was in the Common Vulgar Language. The like affirmed by Doctour Haaing, as great a Stickler for that Church, and the Doctrines of it, as any o∣ther of his Time: adding withall; That it was necessary in the Primitive Times, that it should be so: and granting also▪ That it were still better, that the Peo∣ple had their Service in their own Vulgar Tongue, for their better understanding of it. So he, in Answer to the Challenge made by Bishop Jewel, Art. 3. Sect. 28, and 33. And theefore having the confession, and acknowledgment of the very Advesay; not onely as to the Antiquity, but the Fitness also of Celebra∣ting Divine Offices in the Vulgar Language: it may be thought a loss both of Time and Travail▪ to press the Argument any further. Which ntwithstanding, for the more perfect clearing of the Point in questi∣on, it wll be found upon a very easie seach; that the Jews did Celebrate their Divine Offies, Tractatus, and Oblationes (as the Father hath it) most com∣monly in the Syriack, and sometimes in the Hebrew Tongue, the natural Lan∣guages of that People; as is affirmed by St. Ambrose, upon 1 Cor. cap. 14. and out of him by Durand, in his Rationale. Eckius, a great Servant of the Popes, affirmeth in his Common Places; That the Indians have their Service in the Indian Tongue; and that St. Hierom▪ having Translated the whole Bible into the Dalmatick, procu∣red that the Service should be celebrated in that Language also. The like St. Hierom himself, in his Epistle to Heliodorus, hath told us of the Bessi, a Sarma∣tian People. The like St. Basil, in his Epistle to the Neo-Caesarians, assures us for the Egyptians, Libans, Palestinians, Phoenicians, Arabians, Syrians, and such as dwell about the Bank of the River Euphrates. The Aethiopians had their Mssal, the Chaldeans theirs, each in the Lanuage of their Countries; which they still retain: so had the Moscovites of old, and all the scattered Chuches of te Eastern Parts; which they contie to this day. Nay, rather then the People shuld be kept in Ignorance of the Word of God, and the Divine Of∣fices of the Church, a signal Miracle should be wrought to command the con∣trary.
For we are told of the Sclavonians, by Aeneas Sylvius, (who being afterwards Pope, was called Pius the Second,) that being converted unto the Faith, they made suit unto the Pope, then being, to have their Publick Service in their Natural Tongue: but some delay being made therein by the Pope and Cardinals, a voice was heard, seeming to have come from Heaven, saying in the Latine Tongue; Omnis Spiritus laudet Dominum, & omnis lingua confiteatur Ei: that is to ay, Let every Soul praise the Name of God, and every Tongue or Language make Pro∣fession of it; whereupon their Desires were granted without more delay. Which probably might be a chief Inducement to Innocent the Third, to set out a Decree in the Lateran Councel, importing. That in all such Cities, in which there was a Concourse of divers Nations, and consequently of Different Languages (as in most Towns of Trade there doth use to be) the Service should be said, and Sacraments administred, Secundum diversitates Nationum, & Linguarum; that is, According to the Difference of their Tongues and Nations. So that, if we consider the Direction of the Holy Ghost▪ the Practice of the Primitive Times, the General Vsage of all Nations not inthralled to the Popes of Rome, the Confession of the very Adversary, the Act and Approbation of the Pope himself, and finally, the Declaration of God's Peasure by so great a Miracle: The Church did nothing in this Case, but what was justifiable in the sight, both of God, and Man. But then again it is Objected on the other side, That neither the underta∣king was advised, nor the Book it self approved, in a Synodical Way, by the Bi∣shops and Clergy: but that it was the Act onely of some few of the Prelates, im∣ployed therein by the King, or the Lord Protectour, without the Privity, and Approbation of the rest. The Consideration whereof shall be referred to a∣nother place: when we shall come to speake of the King's Authority for the composing, and imposing of theSee the Book called Cyprianus An∣glicus: lib. 4. An. 1637. Scotish Liturgy. In the mean time, we must take notice of another Act, of as great importance for the Peace, and Honour of the Church, and the Advancing of the Work of Reformation: which took away those positive Laws▪ by which all men in Holy Orders were restrained from Marriage. In which  it is first declared, That; It were much to be desired, that Priests, and all others in Holy Orders, might ab∣stain from Marriage, that, thereby being freed from the Cares of Wed-lock, and abstracted from the Troubles of Domestical Business, they might more diligently attend the Ministery, and apply themselves unto their Studie. But, then withall it is considered, That as all men have not the Gift of Continence, so many great Scandals, and other notable Inconveniencies, have been occasioned in the Church by the enforced Necessity of a single Life, in those admitted unto Orders. Which seeing it was no more imposed on them, then on any other, by the Word of God, but onely such positive Laws and Constitutions, as had been made to that Effect by the Church of Rome: It was therefore Enacted by the Authority of the present Parliament; That, All such Positive Laws, and Ordinances, as prohibited the Marriages of Priests, or any other in Holy Orders, and Pains and Forfeitures therein contained, should be utterly void. Which Act, permitting them to mar∣ry, but looked on as a matter of Permission onely, made no small Pastime a∣mongst those of the Romish Party: reproaching both the Priests, and much more their Wives, as not lawfully married; but onely suffered to enjoy the Company of one another, without Fear of Punishment. And thereupon it was Enacted in the Parliament of the fifth and sixth of Edw. 6. cap. 12. that, The Marriages of the Priests should be reputed lawfull, thmselves being made Capa∣ble of being Tenants by Courtesie, their Wives to be endowed, as others, at the Com∣mon Law, ad their Childen Heritable to the Lands of their Fathers, or M∣thers. Which Privileges, or Capacities rather, (notwithstanding the Repeal of this Statute in the Time of Queen Mary) they, and their Wives, and Children, still enjoyed without Dsturbance, or Dispute. And to say truth, it was an Act, not onely of much Chistian Piety; but more Civil Prudence: the Clergy by this means being taken off from all Dependance
on the Popes of Rome, and rivited in their Dependance on their Natural Princes, to whom their Wives and Children serve for so many Hostages. The Consequents whereof was so well known to those of Rome: that when it was desired by the Ambassadours of the Emperour, and the Duke of Bavaria, in the Councel of Trent, That Marriage might be permitted to the Priests in their several Territo∣ries, it would by no means be admitted. The Reason was; Because that having Houses, Wives and Children, they would depend no longer upon the Pope, but onely on their several Princes: that the Love to their Children would make them yield to many things, which were prejudicial to the Church, and in short time confine the Pope's Authority to the City of Rome▪ For otherwise if the Pope were not rather governed in this business by Reason of State, then either by the Word of God, or the Rules of Piety, they had not stood so stiffly on an Inhibition, ac∣companied with so much Scandal, and known to be the onely Cause of too much Lewdness and Impuity in the Rmane Clergy. If they had looked upon the Scriptures, they would have found, that Marriage was a Remedy ordained by God, for the preventing of Incontinencies, and wandring Lusts, extending generally to all, as much to those in Holy Orders, as to any others; as being subject all alke to Humane Infirmities. If they had ruled the Case by the Procee∣dings o the Councel of Nice, or the Examples of many Good, and Godly men in the Primitive Times; they would have found, that, when the single Life of Prists was moved at that great Councel, it was rejected by the general Consent of all the Fathers there assembled, as a Yoke intolerable: that Eupsychius, a Cappadcian Prelate, was married after he had taken the Degree of a Bishop: the like observed of one Phileus, an Egyptian Prelate: and that it is affirmed by Hierom, That many Priests in hs Time had their proper Wives. Had they con∣sulted with the Stories of the middle Times, when Priests were forced to put a∣way their Wives, by the Pope's Commandment, or else to lose the Benefices, which they were possessed of; they would have found what horrible Confusions did ensue upon it in all the Kingdoms of the West, what Tragical Exclamations were made against the Popes, for so great a Tyranny. Or finally, If they had looked upon the scandalous Effects, which this forced Coelibate produced, they could not but have heard some News of Pope Gregory's Fish Pond: and must have been in∣formed in their own Panormitan, that the greatest part of the Clergy were given over to prohibited Lusts; and by others of their Canonists, that Clerks were not to be deprived for their Incontinency: considering, how few there were to be found without it; so universal was the Mischief, that it was thought uncapable of any Remedy. If we desire to be further informed in it, as a matter Doctrinal, we shall finde many eminent men in the Church of Rome, to state the point in favour of a married Clergy. By Gratian it is said, That the Marriage of Priests is neither prohibited by the Law, or any precept in the Gospel, or any Canon of the Apo∣stles. By Cardinal Cajetan, That it can neither be proved by Reason, nor good Athority, that a Priest committeth any sin by being married. By the same Caje∣tan, That Orders neither in themselves, nor as they are accompanied by the Title of Holy, are any Hinderances, or Obstructions in the Way of Marriage. By Panormitan, The Coelibate, or the single Life of Priests, is neither of the Essence of Holy Orders, nor required by the Law of God. By Antoninus, That there is nothing in the Episcopal Function, which can disable the Bishop from the married life. By the Authour of the Gloss upon the Decrees, That the Greek Priests neither explicitely, nor implicitely, do bind themselves to Chastity or a single life. By Pope Pius himself in the Councel of Basil, That many might be saved in a married Priesthood, which are in danger to be damned by living un∣married. By Durand, That it would be profitable to the Church, if Marriage were allowed to Priests, from whom it hath been found a very vain thing to look for chastity. And finally by Martinus,Multis piis vium est, ut le∣ges de Coelibatu llerentur pro∣pter Scanda∣lum. That it seemed fi to many good, and Godly men, that all Laws for compellng a single life should be wholly ab∣rogated
for the avoiding of those Scandals, which ensued upon it. For  which Passages▪ together with the words of the several Authours in the Latine Tongue, I shall refer the Reader to the Learned and Laborious Works of Bishop Jewel, in the Defence of his Challenge against Doctour Harding, cap. 8. 1. 3. And so I shut up this Discourse, and therewith the Defence of this Act of Parliament, with the most memorable Apophthegm of the said Pope Pius, viz. That the Law had taken away Priests Wives, and the Devil had given them Concubines to supply their places. Two other Acts were passed in this present Parliament, exceeding necessary for the Preservation of the Churches Patrimony, and the Retaining of good Order. The fist was made for the Encouragement and Support of the Parochial Clergy, in the true Payment of their Tithes, lately invaded by their Patrons, and otherwise in danger to be lost for ever, by the avaritiousness of the Parishioners, as before was said. For Remedy whereof, it was Enacted, That no Person, or Persons, should from thenceforth take, or carry away, any Tithe, or Tithes, which had been received, or paid, within the space of fourty years next before the Date thereof, or of Right ought to have been paid, in the place, or places, tithable in the same, before he hath justly divided, or set forth for the Tithe thereof, the tenth part of the same, or otherwise agree, for the same Tithes, with the Parson, Vicar, or other Owner, Proprietary, or Farmer of the same, under the Pain or Forfeiture of the treble Value of the Tithes, so taken, or carried away. To which a Clause was also added, enabling the said Parsons, Vicars, &c. to enter upon any man's Land, for the due setting out of his Tithes, and carrying away the same with∣out Molestation; with other Clauses no less beneficial to the injured Clergy. And because the Revenue of the Clergy had been much diminished by the Loss of such Offerings, and Oblations, as had been accustomably made at the Shrines of Certain Images, now either defaced, or removed; it was thought meet, to make them some amends in another way. And thereupon it was Enacted, That every Person exercising Merchandises, Bargaining, and Selling, Cloathing, Han∣dy-Craft, and other Art, and Faculty, being such kind of Persons, and in such Places, as heretofore, within the space of fourty years then before passed, have accu∣stomably used to pay such Personal Tithes, or of right ought to pay, (other then such as the Common Day-Labourers shall yearly, at, or before the Feast of Easter,) shall pay for his Personal Tithes, the tenth part of his clear Gains; his Charges, and Expences, according to his Estate, and Condition, or Degree, to be there aowed, aba∣ted and deducted; with a Proviso for some Remedy to be had therein before the Ordinary, in the case of Tergiversation, or Refusal. But the Power of the Bi∣shops, and other Ordinaries, growing less and less; and little, or no execution, following in that behalf, this last Clause proved of little Benefit to those, whom it most concerned: who, living for the most part in Market-Towns, and having no Predial Tithes to trust to, are thereby in a far worse Condition, then the Rural Clergy. There also passed another Act, for Abstinence from Flesh upon all such Days, as had been formerly taken, and reputed for Fastingdays. By which it was enjoyned; That for the better subduing of the Body to the Soul, and the Flesh to the Spirit, as also for the Preservation of the breed of Cattle, the Encouragement of Mari∣ners, and increase of Shipping; all manner of Persons should abstain from eating Flesh, upon the days there named; that is to say, all Frydays and Saturdays in the year, the Time of Lent, the Ember-Days, the Eves, or Vigils, of such Saints, as had been antiently used for Fasts by the Rules of the Church. An Act, or Ordinance, very seasonable, as the case then stood, the better to beat down the Neglect of all Days and Times of publick Fastings: which Doctour Glasier had cryed up, and his Followers had pursued in contempt of Law. And here I should have closed this year, but that I am to remove some Errours about the Time of Doctour Farra'rs Consecration to the See of Saint David's; put off by ishop Godwin to the following year 1549. and ante-Dated by the Acts and
Monuments to the fifth day of December, in the year fore-going, An. 1547. But by neither rightly. For first, I finde on good Record, that Knight depart∣ed not this life till Michaelmass-Day, An. 1547. At what time, and for some time after, Doctour Barlow, who succeeded Knight, was actually Bishop of St. Davia's; and therefore Farrars could not be Consecrated to that See some weeks before. I finde again in a very good Authour, that Doctour Farrar was the first Bishop made by Letters Patents, without Capitular Election: which could not be till after the end of the last years Parliament; because till then the King pretended not to any such Power of making Bishops. And Thirdly, if Bishop Barlow had not been Translated to the See of Wells, till the year 1549. as Bishop Godwin saith he was not; it must be Barlow, and not Farrars, who first enjoy∣ed the benefit of such Letters Patents: because Barlow must first be removed to Wells, before the Church of St. Davia's was made void for Farrars. So that the Consecration of Farrars, to the See of St. David's, being placed by the Canons of that Church, (in an Information made against him) on the fifth of September; it must be on the fifth day of September, in this present year: and neither in the year 1547. as the Acts and Monuments make it; nor in the year 1549. as in Bishop Godwin. Anno Regni Edw. Sexti 3o. An. Dom. 1548, 1549. THere remains yet one Act of this Parliament,An. Reg. 3o 1548/9. which we have not spoke of; but of a different nature from all the rest: I mean the Act for the At∣tainder of the Lord Thomas Seimour; whose Tragedy came on but now, though the Ground thereof was laid in the former year. The occasion, much like that of the two great Ladies in the Roman Story. Concerning whom it is related by Herodian: that, when the Emperour Commodus was unmarried, he permitted his Sister Lucilla, whom he had bestowed on Pompeianus, a Right Noble Senatour, to have a Throne erected for Her on the Publick Theatre; Fire to be borne be∣fore Hr when she walked abroad; and to enjoy all other Privileges of a Prin∣c's Wife. But, when Commodus had Married Crispina, a Lady of as great a Spirit, though of lower Birth; Lucilla was to lose her place, and to grow less in Reputation, then before she was. This so tormented her proud heart, when she perceived that nothing could be gained by disputing the Point: that she ne∣ver lest practicing one mischief on the neck of another, till she had endangered the young Emperour's life; but utterly destroyed her self, and all those friends, whom she had raised to advance her Interess. VVhich Tragedy (the Names of the Actours being onely changed) was now again played over in the Court of England. Thomas Lord Seimour, being a man of lofty Aims, and aspiring Thoughts, had Married Queen Katharine Parr, the Relict of the King deceased; who look∣ing on him as the Brother of the Lord Protectour, and being looked on as Queen Dowager in the eye of the Court, did not conceive, that any Lady could be so forgetfull of her former Dignity, as to contend about the place. But therein she found her self deceived: for the Protectour's Wife, a Woman of most infinite Pride, and of a Nature so imperious, as to know no rule but her own Will; would needs conceive her self to be the better Woman of the two. For, if the one were widow to the King deceased; the other thought her self to stnd on the Higher ground, in having all advantages of Power above her. For what said She within Her self; Am not I wife to the Protectour, who is King in Power▪ though not in Title; a Duke in Order and Degree; Lord Treasu∣rer, and Earl Marshal, and what else he pleaseth; and one, who hath Enobled
His highest Honours by his late great Victory?An. Reg. 2. 1548/9 And did not Henry Marry Katharine Parr in His doting Days: when he had brought himself to such a Condition by His Lusts, and Cruelty; that no Lady, who stood upon Her Honour, would adventure on Him? Do not all Knees bow before Me, and all Tongues celebrate My Praises, and all Hands pay the Tribute of Obedience to Me, and all Eys look upon Me, as the first in State; through whose Hands the Principal Offices in the Court, and chief Preferments in the Church, are obser∣ved to pass? Have I so long Commanded him, who Commands two Kingdoms? And shall I now give place to Her; who, in her former best Estate, was but Latimer's Widow, and is now fain to cast Her self, for Support and Countenance, into the despised Bed of a younger Brother? If Mr. Admiral teach his Wife no better Manners; I am She, that will: and will choose rather to remove them both, (whether out of the Court, or out of the World; shall be no great mtter) then be out-shined in My own Sphere, and trampled on within the Verge of my Jurisdi∣ction. In this Impatiency of Spirit, she rubs into the Head of the Duke her Husband (over whom she had obtained an absolute Mastery) How much he was despised by the Lord Admiral for his Mildness and Lenity: What secret Practices were on foot, in the Court, and Kingdom, to bring him out of Credit with all sorts of People. What tore of Emissaries were imployed to cry up the Lord Admiral, as the Abler man: And finally, that, if he did not look betimes about him, he would he forthwith dispossessed of his Place and Power; and see the same confer∣red on one of his own preferring. This first begat a Diffidence in the Duke of his Brother's Purposes; which afterwards improved it self to an estranging of Affe∣ction, and at last into an open Breach. But before Matters could proceed to the last Extremity, the Queen died in Child-birth, (which happened September last, 1648) being delivered of a Daughter; who afterwards was Christened by the name of Mary. A Lady of a mild and obliging Nature, honoured by all the Court for her even Behaviour, and one, who in this Quarrel had been meerly passive; rather maintaining what she had, then seeking to invade the place, which belonged not to her. And here the Breach might have been closed, if the Admiral had not ran him∣self into further Dangers, by practicing to gain the good Affections of the Princess Elizabeth. He was (it seems) a man of a strange Ambition in the choice of his Wives, and could not level his Affections lower, then the Bed of a Princess. For an Essay whereof he first addressed himself to the Lady Mary, Duchess of ichmond and Sommerset, Daughter of Thomas Duke of Nor∣folk, and Widow of Duke Henry before mentioned, the King's Natural Bro∣ther. But, she being of too high a Spirit to descend so low, he next applied himself to the Wdow-Queen: whom he beheld, as double Jointured, one, who ha filled her Coffers in the late King's Time; and had been gratified with a Le∣gacy of four thousand pounds in Plate, Jewels, and Mony: which he had Means enough to compass; though all other Debts and Legacies should remain unpaid. And on the other side She looked on him, as one of the Peers of the Realm, Lord Admiral by Office, Uncle to the King, and Brother to the Lord Protectour, with whom she might enjoy all Content and Happiness, which a vertuous Lady could desire. And that they might appear in the greater Splen∣dour, he took into his hands the Episcopal House, belonging to the Bishop of Bath and Wells: which, being by him much Enlarged, and Beautified, came af∣terwards to the Possession of the Earls of Arundel, best known of late Times, by the name of Arundel-House. And so far all things went on smoothly betwixt him and his Bother; though afterwards there were some distrust between them: but this last Practice gave such an hot Alarum to the Duchess of Sommerset; that nothng could content her, but his absolute Ru∣in. For what hope could she have of Disputing the Precedence with any of King Hene's Daughters: who, if they were not married out of the Realm, might
Create many Troubles, and Disturbances in it? Nor was the Lord Prtectur so insensible of his own Condition, as not to fear the utmost Danger; which the Effecting of so great an Enterprise might bring upon him: so that the Rupture, which before had began to close, became more open then before, made widr by the Artifices of the Earl of Warwick; who, secretly playing with both hands, exasperated each of them against the other, that so he might be able to destroy them both. The Plot being so far carried on, the Admiral was committed to the Tower, on the sixteenth of January, but never called unto his Answer, it being thought safer to Attaint him by Act of Parliament, where Power and Faction might pre∣vail, then put him over to his Peers in a Legal way. And, if he were guilty of the Crimes, which I finde charged upon him in the Bill of Attainder, he could not, but deserve as great a Punishment, as was laid upon him. For, in that Act, he stands condemned, for Attempting to get into his Custody the Person of the King, and the Government of the Realm: for obtaining many Offices, retaining many Men into his Service, for making great Provision for Money, and Victuals: for endeavouring to marry the Lady Elizabeth the King's Sister, and for perswading the King, in His Tender Age, to take upon Him the Rule, and Order, of Himself. But Parliaments being Governed by a allible Spirit, the Business still remaineth under such a Cloud: that he may seem rather to have fallen a Sacrifice to the Private Malice of a Woman; then the Publick Justice of the State. For, the Bill of Attain∣der passing at the End of the Parliament, which was on the fourteenth day of March, he was beheaded at Tower-Hill, on the sixth day after, (the War∣rant for his Execution coming under the hand o his own Brother,) at what time he took it on his Death: That, he had never committed, or meant any Trea∣son against King, or Kingdom. Thus, as it is affmed of the Emperour Valenti∣nian; that, by causing the right Noble Aetius to be put to Death, he had cut off his Right Hand with his Left: so might it be affirmed of the Lord Prote∣ctour; that, when he signed that unhappy Warrant, he had with his Right Hand robbed himself of his greatest Strength. For as long as the two Brothers stood together, they were good support unto one another: but now, the one being taken away, the other proved not Subtantive enough to stand by himself, but fell into his Enemies hands within few Moneths after. Comparing them to∣gether, we may finde the Admiral to be Fierce in Courage, Courtly in Fashi∣on, in Personage Stately, in Voice Magnificent; the Duke to be Mild, Affa∣ble, Free, and Open, more easie to be wrought upon, and no way Malicious: the Admiral generally more esteemed amongst the Nobles; the Duke Honoured by the Common People: the Lord Protectour, to be more desired for a Friend; the Lord Admiral, to be more feared for an Enemy. Betwixt them both, they might have made one excellent man; if, the Defects of each being taken a∣way, the Virtues onely had remained. The Protectour, having thus thrown away the chief Prop of his House, hopes to repair that Ruin, by erecting a Magnificent Palace. He had been bought out of his purpose for building on the Deanery and Close of Westminster, and casts his Eye upon a piece of Ground in the Strand; on which stood three Episcopal Hou∣ses, and one Parish-Church: the Parish-Church Dedicated to the Virgin Mary; the Houses belonging to the Bishops of Worcester, Lichfield, and Landaff. All these he takes into his Hands; the Owners not daring to oppose, and therefore wil∣lingly consenting to it. Having cleared the place, and projected the intended Fabrick, the Workmen found, that more Materials would be wanting to go thorough with it, then the Demolished Church and Houses could afford unto them. He thereupon resolves for taking down the Parish-Church of Saint Mararets in Westminster, and turning the Parishioners, for the celebrating of all Divine Offices, into some part of the Nave, or main Body, of the Abby-Church, which should be marked out for that purpose. But the Workmen had no sooner advanced their Scafolds; when the Parishioners gathered together in great Multitudes, with Bows, and Arrows, Staes, and Clubs, and other
such offensive Weapons;An. Reg. 3o 1549. which so terrified the Workmen, that they ran a∣way in great Amazement, and never could be brought again upon that Imploy∣ment. In the next place, he is informed of some superfluous, or rather Superstitious Buildings on the North-side of Saint Paul's, that is to say, a goodly Cloyster, environing a goodly piece of Ground, called Pardon-Church-Yard, with a Cha∣pel in the midst thereof, and beautified with a piece of most curious Workman∣ship, called the Dance of Death, together with a fair Charnel-House, on the South-side of the Church, and a Chapel thereunto belonging. This was conceiv∣ed to be the safer undertaking, the Bishop then standing on his good Behaviour, and the Dean and Chapter of that Church, (as of all the rest) being no better in a manner by reason of the late Act of Parliament) then Tenant at Will of their great Landlords. And upon this he sets his Workmen, on the tenth of April: takes it all down, converts the Stone, Timber, Lead, and Iron, to the use of his inten∣ded Palace, and leaves the Bones of the dead Bodies to be buried in the Fields in unhallowed Ground. But, all this not sufficing to compleat the Work, the Stee∣ple, and most parts of the Church of Saint John's of Jerusalem, not far from Smith∣field, most beautifully built not long before by Dockwray, a late Priour thereof, was blown up with Gunpowder; and all the Stone thereof imployed, to that pur∣pose also. Such was the Ground, and such were the Materials of the Duke's New Palace, called Sommerset-House: which either he lived not to finish, or else it must be very strange; that having pulled down two Churches, two Chapels, and three Episcopal Houses, (each of which may be probably supposed, to have had their Oratories) to finde Materials for this Fabrick, there should be no room purposely erected for Religious Offices. According unto this Beginning, all the year proceeds; in which there was no∣thing to be found; but Troubles, and Commotions, and Disquiets, both in Church and State. For about this Time there started up a sort of men, who ei∣ther gave themselves, or had given by others, the Name of Gospellers: of whom Bishop Hooper tells us, in the Preface to his Exposition on the Ten Command∣ments; That, They be better Learned then the Holy Ghost: for they wickedly attri∣bute the Cause of Punishment, and Adversity to God's Providence, which is the Cause of no Ill, as he himself can do no ill; and of every Mischief that is done, they say it is God's Will. And at the same time, the Anabaptists, who had kept them∣selves unto themselves in the late King's Time, began to look abroad, and dis∣perse their Dotages. For the preventing of which Mischief, before it grew unto a Head, some of the Chiefs of them were convented, on the second of April, in the Church of Saint Paul, before the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Westminster, Doctour Cox, Almoner to the King, Doctour May, Dean of that Church, Doctour Cole, Dean of the Arches, and one Doctour Smith, af∣terwards better known by the Name of Sir Thomas Smith. And, being convicted of their Errours, some of them were dismissed onely with an Admonition, some sentenced to a Recantation, and others condemned to bear their Faggots at Saint Paul's Cross. Amongst which last, I finde one Campneys: who, being suspected to incline too much to their Opinions, was condemned to the bearing of a Fag∣got, on the Sunday following, (being the next Sunday after Easter,) Doctour Miles Coverdale, who afterwards was made Bishop of Exter, then preaching the Rehearsal Sermon; which Punishment so wrought upon him, that he relinqui∣shed all his former Errours, and entred into Holy Orders, flying the Kingdom for the better keeping of a good Conscience in the Time of Queen Mary, and com∣ing back again with the other Exiles, after Her Decease. At what time he published a Discourse, in the way of a Letter, against the Gospellers above-men∣tioned. In which he proves them to have laid the blame of all sins, and wicked∣ness, upon God's Divine Decree of Predestination, by which men were compelled unto it. His Discourse answered not long after by John Veron, one of the Pre∣ends of Saint Paul's, and Robert Crowley, Parsons of Saint Giles's near Cripple∣gate;
but answered with Scurrility and Reproach enough, according to the Hu∣mour of the Predestinarians. And now the Time draws on for putting the New Liturgie in Execution, fra∣med with such Judgment out of the Common Principles of Religion, wherin all Parties do agree, that even the Catholicks might have resorted to the same with∣out Scruple, or Scandal; if Faction more then Reason did not sway amongst them. At Easter, some began to officiate by it, followed by others as soon as Books cld be provided. But on Whitsunday, being the day appointed by Act of Parliament, it was solemnly Executed in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, by the Command of Doctour May, for an example unto all the rest of the Churches in London: and consequently of all the Kingdom. In most parts whereof, there was at the first a greater forwardness then could be rationally ex∣pected, the  men amongst the Papists conforming to it, because they in the maine (no not so much as in the Canon of the Latine Sevice. And the unlearned had good reason to be plea∣sed , in regard that all Divine Offices were Celebrated in a Tongue whic  understood, whereby they had means and opportunity to be∣come acqaint with the che Mysteries of their Religion, which had been before  scret frm hem. But then withall, many of those, both Priests and Bshops, who pey had Officiated by it, to avoid the Penalty of the Law, did Celebrate their private Masses in such secret places, wherein it was not easie to discover their doings. More confidently caried in the Church of St. Paul: in many Chapels whereof, by the Bishop's sufferance, the former Masses were kept up; that is to say Our Ladies Mass, the Apostles Mass, &c. performed in Latine, but Disguised by the English names of the Apostles Communion, and Our Ladies Communion. Which coming to the knowledg of the Lords of the Council, they addssed their Letters unto Bonner: Dated the tweny fourth of June; and Subscribed by the Lord Protectour, the Lord Chancellour Rich, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lord St. John, Chief Justice Mountague, and Mr. Cecil, made not long after one of the Secretaries of State. Now the Te∣nour of the said Letters was as followeth. AFter Hearty Commendations; having very credible notice, that within that your Cathedral Church, there be as yet the Apostles Mass, and Our Ladies Mass, and other Masses of such peculiar name, under the defence and nomination of Our Ladies Communion, and the Apostles Communion, u∣sed in private Chapels, and other remote places of the same, and not in the Chancel, contrary to the King's Majesties Proceedings: the same being for that misuse displeasing unto God; for the place, Pauls, in example not to∣lerable; for the fondness of the name, a scorn to the Reverence of the Com∣munion of Christ's Body and Blood: We, for the Augmentation of God's Glo∣ry, and Honour, and the Consonance of His Majestie's Lawes, and the avoid∣ing of Murmur, have thought good, to will and Command you, that from henceforth no such Masses in this manner be in your Church any longer used; but that the Holy Blessed Communion, according to the Act of Parliament, be Administred at the High Altar of the Church, and in no other places of the same; and onel at such time as your High Masses were wont to be used: ex∣cept some number of People desire (for their necessary business) to have a Com∣munion in the Morning, and yet the same to be executed at the Chan∣cel on the High Altar; as it is appointed in the Book of the Publick Ser∣vic; without Cautele, or Digression from the Common Order. And here∣in you shall not onely satisfie Our Expectation of your Conformity in all Lawfull things; but also avoid the murmur of sundry, that be therewith just∣ly offended. And so We bid your Lordship farewell, &c. These Commands being brought to Boner, he commits the Execution of them to the Dean and Chapter; not willing to engage himself too far upon ei∣ther
side,An. Reg. 3o 1546. till he had seen the Issue of such Commotions, as were then raised in many Parts of the Kingdom on another occasion. Some Lords and Gentlemen, who were possessed of Abbey-Lands, had caused many inclosures to be made of the waste Grounds in their several Mannours; which they conceived to be (as indeed it was) a great advantage to themselves, and no less profitable to the Kingdom. Onely some poor and indigent people were offended at it, in being thereby abridged of some liberty, which before they had in raising to them∣selves some inconsiderable profit from the Grounds enclosed. The Lord Pro∣tectour had then lost himself in the love of the Vulgar, by his severe, if not un∣natural proceedings against his Brother; and somewhat must be done for his re∣storing to their good opinions, though to the prejudice of the Publick. Upon this ground he caused a Proclamation to be Published in the beginning of May; Commanding, that they who had inclosed any Lands, accustomed to be common, should upon a certain pain, before a day signed, lay them open again. Which so encouraged the rude Commons, in many Parts of the Realm, that without Ex∣pecting the time limitted by the Proclamation, they gathered together in a rio∣tous, and tumultuous manner; pulled up the Pales, flung down the Banks, and filled the Ditches, laying all open as before. For which, some of them had been set upon, and slin in Wiltshire, by Sir William Herbert; others suppressed by force of Armes, conducted by the Lord Gray of Wilton, as were those in Oxfordshire; and some again reduced to more moderate, and sober courses, by the perswasion of the Lords and Gentlemen; as in Kent, and Sussex. But the most dangerous commotions, which held so long, as to Entitle them to the name of Rebellions, were those of Devonshire, and Norfolk; places remote from one another, but such as seemed to have communicated Counsels, for carrying on of the design. The first of these in Course of time, was that of Devonshire, began (as those in other places) under pretence of throwing open the enclosures, but shortly found to have been chiefly raised, in maintainance of their old Religion. On Whitson-Munday, June the tenth, being next day after the first exercising of the Publick Liturgi. Some few of the Parishioners of Samford Courtney, compelled their Parish-Priest, who is supposed to have invited them to that compassion, to let them have the Latine Mass, as in former times. These being seconded by some others, and finding that many of the better sort were more like to engage in this quarrel, then in the other; prevailed with those which before had Declared onely against Inclosures, to pretend Religion for the cause of their coming toge∣ther. And that being done, they were first Headed by Humphry Arundel Esquire, Commander of St. Michaels Mount, and some other Gentlemen, which so in∣creased the Reputation of the Cause, that in short time they had made up a Body of ten thousand men. Of this Commotion, there was but little notice taken at the first beginning, when it might easily have been crushed; the Lord Protectour not being very forward to suppress those Risings, which seemed to have been made by some incouragement from his Proclamations. In which Respect, and that his good fortune now began to fail him, when the mischief did appear with a face danger, and could not otherwise be redressed but by force of Arms; in stead of putting himself into the Head of an Army, the Lord Russel is sent down with some slender Forces, to give a stop to their Proceedings. But whe∣ther it were, that he had any secret instructions to drill on the time, or that he had more of the States-Man, then the Souldier in him; or that he had not strength enough to encounter the Enemy, he kept himself aloofe, as if he had been sent to look on, at a distance, without approaching near the dan∣ger. The Rebels in the mean time increasing as much in confidence, as they did in numbers; sent their Demands unto the King. Amongst which, one more spe∣cially concerned the Liturgie, which therefore I have singled out of all the rest, with the King's Answer thereunto, in the words that follow. It was demanded
by the Rebels;An. Reg. 3o 1549. That, for as much as we constantly believe, that after the Priest hath spoken the words of Consecration, being at Mass there Celebrating, and Con∣secrating the same; there is very really the Body and Blood of our Saviour Jesus Christ, God and Man; and that no substance of Bread and Wine remaineth after, but the very self-same Body, that was born of the Virgin Mary, and was given up∣on the Cross for our Redemption: therefore we will have Mass Celebrated as it was in Times past, without any man communicating with the Priests; for as much as ma∣ny, presuming unworthily to receive the same, put no difference between the Lord's Body, and other kind of meat; some saying, that it is Bread both before and after; some saying, that it is profitable to no man, except he receive it, with many other abu∣sed Terms. To which Demand of theirs the King thus Answered; viz. That for the Mass, I assure you, no small study, nor travail hath been spent, by all the Learn∣ed Clergy therein, and, to avoid all contention, it is brought even to the very use as Christ left it, as the Apostles used it, as the holy Fathers delivered it; indeed somewhat altered from that, to which the Popes of Rome, for their Lucre, had brought it. And, although (saith He) ye may hear the contrary from some Popish evil men, yet. Our Majesty, which for Our Honour may not be blemished and stained, assureth you, that they deceive, abuse you, and blow these Opinions into your heads, to finish their own purposes. But this Answer giving no content, they Marched with all their Forces to the Siege of Exeter; carrying before them in their March (as the Jews did the Ark of God, in the Times of old) the Pix, or Consecrated Host, borne under a Canopie, with Crosses, Banners, Candlesticks, Holy-Bread, and Holy-Water, &c. But the Walls of Exeter fell not down before this False Ark; as Dagon did before the True. For the Citizens were no less gallantly resolved to make good the Town; then the Rebels were desperately bent to force it. To which Resolution of the Ci∣tizens, the natural Defences of the City, (being round in Form, scituate on a rising Hill, and environed with a good Old Wall,) gave not more Encouragement: then some insolent speeches of the Rebels; boasting, that they would shortly measure the Silks, and Sattens therein, by the length of their Bows. For fourty days the Siege continued, and was then seasonably raised; the Rebels not being able to take it sooner, for want of Ordnance: and the Citizens not able to have held it longer, for want of Victuals; if they had not been Succoured, when they were. One fortunate Skirmish the Lord Russel had with the daring Rebels about the passing of a Bridg, at which he slew six hundred of them: which gave the Citizens the more Courage to hold it out. But the coming of the Lord Gray, with some Companies of Almain-Horse, seconded by three hun∣dred Italian-Shot under the Command of Baptista Spinoli, put an end to the Business. For, joyning with the Lord Russel's Forces, they gave such a strong Charge upon the Enemy: that they first beat them out of their Works; and then compelled them, with great Slaughter, to raise their Siege. Blessed with the like Success in some following Fights, the Lord Russel entereth the City on the sixth of August; where he was joyfully received by the half-starved Citizens: whose Loyalty the King rewarded with an encrease of their Privileges; and giving to their Corporation the Manour of Eviland. The sixth of August, since that Time, is observed amongst them for an Annual Feast, in perpetual Gratitude to Al∣mighty God, for their Deliverance from the Rebels; with far more Reason, then many such Annual Feasts have been lately Instituted in some Towns, and Cities, for not being gained unto their King. But, though the Sword of War was Sheathed, there remained work enough for the Sword of Justice; in Execu∣ting many of the Rebels, for a Terrour to others. Arundel, and the rest of the Chiefs, were sent to London, there to receive the recompense of their Deserts; most of the Raskal Rabble Executed by Martial Law; and the Vicar of St. Tho∣mas, one of the Principal Incendiaries, hanged on the Top of his own Tower, apparailed in his Popish Weeds, with his Bads at his Girdle.
The Norfolk Rebels brake not out, till the twentieth of June; beginning first at a place called Ail-borough: but not considerable, either for Strength, or Number, till the sixth of July; when mightily encreased by Ket, a Tanner of Windham: who took unto himself the conducting of them. These men pre∣tended onely against Enclosures: and, if Religion was at all regarded by them, it was rather kept for a Reserve; then suffered to appear in the Front of the Bat∣tail. But, when their Numbers were so vastly multiplyed, as to amount to twen∣ty thousand; nothing would serve them, but the suppression of the Gentry, the placing of New Councellours about the King, and somewhat also to be done in fa∣vour of the Old Religion. Concerning which they thus Remonstrate to the King, or the People rather; viz: First, That the Free-born Commonalty was oppressed by a small Number of Gentry: who glutted themselves with Pleasure; whilest the poor Commons, wasted with dayly Labour, did, like Pack-Horses, live in extreme Slavery. Secondly, That Holy Rites, Established by Antiquity, were abolished, New ones Authorised, and a New Form of Religion obtruded; to the subjecting of their Souls to those Horrid Pains, which no Death could terminate. And therefore, Thirdly, That it was necessary for them, to go, in person, to the King, to place New Councellours about him, during his Minority; removing those, who, ruling as they list, confounded things Sacred and Profane, and regarded no∣thing but the enriching of themselves with the Publick Treasure, that they might Riot it amidst these Publick Calamities. Finding no satisfactory Answer to these proud Demands, they March direct∣ly towards Norwich; and possess themselves of Moushold-Hill: which gave them not onely a large Prospect over; but a full Command upon that City: which they entered, and re-entered as they pleased. For what could a Weak City do in Opposition to so Great a Multitude: being neither strong by Art, nor Nature; and therefore not in a capacity to make any Resistance. Under a large Oak, on the top of this Hill, (since called The Oak of Reformation) Ket keeps his Courts, of Chancery, King's Bench, &c. forcing the neighbouring Gentry to submit to his lawless Ordinances; and committing many huge Enormities, under pretense of rectifying some Abuses. The King sends out his Gracious Pardon; which the proud Rebels entertain with Contempt, and Scorn. Whereupon it was resolved; that the Marquess of North-hampton should be sent against them, accompanied with the Lords Sheffield, and Wentworth, and divers Gen∣tlemen of Note, assisted by a Band of Italians (under the Command of Ma∣la-testa, an Experienced Souldier.) The Marquess was an excellent Courtier; but one more skilled in Leading a Measure, then a March: so that being beaten out of Norwich, (into which he had peaceably been admitted) with loss of some Persons of Principal Quality, and the firing of a great part of the City, he re∣turns ingloriously to London. Yet all this while, the Lord Protectour was so far from putting himself upon the Action, that he suffered his most dangerous Enemy, the Earl of Warwick, to go against them, with such Forces, as had been purposely provided for the War of Scotland. Who, finding the City open for him, entertained the Rebels with divers Skirmishes; in most of which he had the better: which put them to a Resolution of forsaking the Hill, and trying their Fortune in a Battail, in a place called Dussing-dale, where they maintained a bloody Fight. But, at the last, were broken by the Earl's good Conduct, and the valiant Loyalty of his For∣ces. Two thousand of the Rebels are reported to have been slain in the Fight and Chase, the residue of them scattered over all the Country, the Principals of them taken, and deservedly Executed: Robert Ket hanged on Norwich-Castle; Willi∣am, his Brother, on the top of Windham-Steeple; nine of his chief Followers on as many Boughs of the Oak, where Ket held his Courts. Which great Deliverance was celebrated in that City by a Publick Thanks giving on the twenty seventh of August: and hath been since perpetuated Annually on that day, to these present Times. The like Rising happened about this time in York-shire, began by Dale,
and Ombler two seditious persons, and with them it ended, for being taken in a Skirmish, before their number had amounted to three thousand men, they were brought to York, where they were executed, with some others, on the twenty first of September▪ then next following. The breaking out of these Rebellions, but most especially that of Devonshire, quickned the Lords of the Council to a sharper course, against all those whom they suspected not to favour the King's Proceedings, nor to advance the Exe∣cution of the Publick Liturgie, amongst whom, none was more distrusted then Bonner of London, concerning whom it was informed, that by his negligence, not onely many People within his Diocess, were very forgetfull of their Duty to God, in frequenting the Divine Service, then by Law established, but divers others utterly despising the same, did in secret places often frequent the Popish Mass. For this he is Commanded to attend the Lords of the Council on the eleventh of August, by whom he was informed of such Complaints as were made against him, and so dismissed with certain private Injunctions to be obser∣ved by him for the time to come. And for a further Trial to be made of his Zeal and Loyalty (if it were not rather for a Snare to entrap him in) he was Com∣manded to Preach against the Rebels, at Saint Paul's Cross, on the first of September, and there to shew the unlawfullness of taking Arms on Pretence of Religion. But on the contrary, he not onely touched not upon any thing which was enjoyned him by the Council, but spent the most part of his Sermon in maintenance of the Gross, Carnal, and Papistical presence of Christs Body and Blood, in the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar. Complaints whereof, being made by William Latimer, Parson of St. Laurence Poultey, and John Hooper, sometimes a Cister'ian Monk; a Commission is issued out to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Rochester and Peterborough, Sir Thomas Smith, and Doctour May, before whom he was convented at Lam∣beth, on the tenth of the Moneth, where after many Shifts on his part, and much patience on theirs, he is taken pro confesso, on the twenty third, and in the beginning of October deprived of his Bishoprick. To whom succeded Do∣ctour Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of Rochester, a Learned, Stout, and Resolute Prelate, as by the Sequel will appear: not actually translated till the twelth of April, in the year next following, and added not long after to the Lords of the Council. The necessary Execution of so many Rebels, and this seasonable Se∣verity against Bishop Bonner, did much facilitate the King's Proceedings in the Reformation. As certainly the Opposition to Athority when it is sup∣pressed, both makes the Subject, and the Prince more absolute. Howso∣ever to make sure Work of it, there passed an act of Parliament in the follow∣ing Session, (which also took beginning on the fourth of November) for ta∣king down such Images, as were still remaining in the Churches; as also for the bringing in of all Antiphonaries, Missalls, Breviaries, Offices, Horaries, Pri∣mers, and Processionals, with other Books of False and Superstitious Worship. The Tenour of which Act was signified to the Subject by the King's Procla∣mations, and seconded by the Missives of Arch-Bishop Cranmer, to the Suffra∣gan Bishops, requiring them to see it put in execution with all Care and Dili∣gence. Which so secured the Church on that side, that there was no further Opposition against the Liturgie by the Romish Party, during the rest of this King's Reign. For what can any workman do when he wants his Tools, or how could they Advance the Service of the Church of Rome, when the Books by which they should officiate it, were thus taken from them. But then there started up another Faction, as dangerous to the Church, as opposite to the Publick Liturgie, and as destructive of the Rules of the Refor∣mation, then by Law established, as were those of Rome. The Arch-Bishop and the rest of the Prelates, which co-operated with him in the Work, having so far proceeded in abolishing many Superstitions, which before were used, re∣solved
in the next place to go forwards with a Reformation in a Point of Do∣ctrine. In Order whereunto Melancthon's coming was expected the year before, but he came not then. And therefore Letters were directed by the ArchBishop of Canterbury to Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr, two Great and Eminent Divines, but more addicted to the Zuinglian, then the Lutheran Doctrines, in the point of the Sacrament. Martyr accordingly came over in the end of No∣vember, and, having spent some timewith the Arch-Bishop in his House at Lam∣beth, was dispatched to Oxford, where he was made the King's Professour for Divinity, and about two years after made Canon of Christ-Church. In his first Lectures he is said by Sanders (if he may be credited) to have declared himself so much a Zuinglian in that point, as to give great offence to Cranmer, and the rest of the Bishops; but afterwards, upon notice of it, to have been more moderate, and to conform his Judgment to the Sense of those Learned Pre∣lates: Which whether it be true or not, certain it is, that his Readings were so much disliked by some of that University; that a publick Disputation was shortly had, betwixt him, and some of those who disliked his Doings: in which he publick∣ly maintained these two Propositions: 1. That the Substance of the Bread and Wine was not changed; and 2. That the Body and Blood of Christ was not Carnal∣ly and Bodily in the Bread and Wine; but united to the same Sacramentally. And for the better Governing of the Disputation, it was appointed by the King, that Doctour Cox, Chancellour of that University, assisted by one Mr. Morrison, a right Learned man, should preside as Judges, or Moderatours, as we call them; by whom it was declred in the open Scholes, that Martyr had the upper hand, and had sufficiently answered all Arguments, which were brought against him. But Chadsey the chief of the Opponents, and the rest of those who disputed with him, acknowledged no such Satisfaction to be gi∣ven unto them; their party noising it abroad (according to the Fate of such Dispuations) that they had the Victory. But Bucer not coming over at the same time also, he was more earnestly in∣vited by Pet. Alexander, the Arch-Bishop's Secretary. whose Letters bear Date March 24. which so prevailed with him at the last, that in June we finde him here at Canterbury, from whence he writes to Peter Martyr, who was then at Oxford. And being here, he receives Letters from Calvin, by which he was advised to take heed of his old fault (for a fault he thought it) which was to run aMediis consiliis vel Authorem esse, vel approbato∣rem. Calv. Epist. ad Bucer. moderate course in his Reformations. The first thing that he did at his coming hither (as he saith himself) was to make himself acquainted with the English Liturgie; translated for him into Latine, by Alexander Alesius, a Learned Scot, and generally well approved of by him, as to the main Frame, and Body of it, though not well satisfied perhaps in some of the particular Branches. Of this he gives account to Calvin, and desires some Letters from him to the Lord Protectour (with whom Clvin had already began to tamper) that he might finde the greater favour, when he came before him, which was not till the Tumults of the time were composed and quieted. Having received a courteous enter∣tainment from the Lord Protectour, and being right heartily welcomed by Arch-Bishop Cranmer, he is sent to take the Chair at Cambridg. Where his first Rea∣dings gave no such distast to the Learned Academicks, as to put him to the necessity of challenging the Dissentients to a Disputation: though in the Ordi∣nary Form, a Disputation was there held at his firstcoming thither, concerning the Sufficiency of Holy Scripture, the Fallibility of the Church, and the true Nature of Justification. But long he had not held the place, when he left this life, deceasing on the nineteenth of January, 1550. according to the computation of the Church of England, to the great loss and grief of that University. By the chiefest Heads whereof, and most of the Members of that Body, he was attended to his Grave with all due Solemnity: of which more hereafter. But so it was, that the Account which he had given to Calvin of the English Liturgie, and his desiring of a Letter from him to the Lord Protectour,
proved the occasions of much trouble to the Church, and the Orders of it. For Calvin, not forgetting the Repulse he found at the hands of Cranmer, when he first offered his Assistance, had screwed himself into the Favour of the Lord Protectour. And thinking nothing to be well done, which either was not done by him, or by his Direction (as appears by his Letters to all Princes, which did but cast an eye towards a Reformation) must needs be meddling in such Matters, as belonged not to him. He therefore writes a very long Letter to the Lord Protectour; in which, approving well enough of set Forms of Prayer, he descends▪ more particularly to the English Liturgy, in canvasing whereof, he there except∣eth against Commemoration of the Dead (which he acknowledgeth however to be very Antient,) as also against Chrism, and Extreme Vnction; the last of which being rather allowed of, then required by the Rules of that Book: which said, he maketh it his Advice, that all these Ceremonies should be abrogated, and that withall he should go forwards to Reform the Church without fear or wit, without regard of Peace at home, or Correspondency abroad: such Considera∣tions being onely to be had in Civil Matters: but not in Matters of the Church; In quo ni∣hil non ad Dei Verbum exigi fas est. Epist. ad Prot. wherein not any thing is to be Exacted, which is not warranted by the Word, and in the managing whereof, there is not any thing more distastfull in the ey of God, then Worldly Wisdom,Ut vel mo∣deremur▪ vel rescindamus, &c. ibid. either in moderating, cutting off, or going backwards, but meerly as we are directed by his Will revealed. In the next place, he gives a touch on the Book of Homilies, which Bucer, (as it appears by his Epistle to the Church of England) had right-well approved of. These very faintly he permits for a season onely; but by no means allows of them for a long continuance, or to be looked on as a Rule of the Church, or constant∣ly to serve for the instruction of the People: and thereby gave the hint to the Zuinglian Gospellers, who ever since almost have declaimed against them. And whereas some Disputes had grown by his setting on, or the Pragmatick Humour of some Agents, which he had amongst us, about the Ceremonies of the Church, then by Law established, he must needs trouble the Protectour in that business also. (Nisi maturè compositum esset Dissidium de Ceremoniis. p. 98.) To whom he writes to this effect, That the Papists would grow insolenter every day then other, unless the differences were composed about the Ceremonies. But how? not by reducing the Opponents to Conformity, but by encouraging them rather in their Opposition: which cannot but appear most plainly to be all he aimed at, by soliciting the Duke of Sommerset, in behalf of Hooper, who was then fallen into some troubles upon that; of which more hereafter. Now in the Heat of these Imployments, both in Church and State, the French and Scots lay hold on the Opportunity, for the Recovering of some Forts, and Peeces of Consequence, which had been taken from them by the English in the former War. The last year Bulloign-Siege was attempted by some of the French, in hope to take it by Surprize, and were couragiously repulsed by the English Garison. But now they are resolved to go more openly to work, and there∣fore send an Herald to defy the King, according to the Noble manner of those Times, in proclaiming War, before they entred into Action against one ano∣ther. The Herald did his Office on the eighth of August, and preently the French, with a considerable Army, invade the Territory of Bulloign. In less then three weeks, they possess themselves of Blackness, Hamiltue, and New-Haven, with all the Ordnance, Ammunition, and Victuals in them. Few of the Souldiers escaped with Life: but onely the Governour of New-Haven, (a Bastard Son of the Lord Sturton's,) who was believed to have betrayed that Fort unto them, because he did put himself immediatly into the Service of the French. But they sped worse in their Designs by Sea, then they did by Land: for giving themselves no small Hopes in those broken Times, for taking in the Islands of Guersey and Jersey, they made toward them with a great number of Gallies: but they were so manfully encountred with the King's Navy, which lay then hovering on those Coasts; that, with the loss of a Thousand men, and great
spoil of their Gallies, they were forced to retire into France, and desist from their purpose. Nor were the Scot, in the mean time, negligent in preparing for their own Defence; against whom some considerable Forces had been prepared in the Beginning of this Summer, but most unhappily diverted: though very fortunately imployed for the Relief of Exeter, and the taking of Norwich. So that, no Succours being sent for the Relief of those Garisons, which then re∣mained unto the English; the Scots, about the middle of November following▪ couragiously assault the strong Fort of Bouticrage, take it by Storm, put all the Souldiers to the Sword; except the Captain: and him they spared, not out of any Pity, or Humane Compassion, but because they would not lose the Hope of so great a Benefit, as they expected for his Ransom. Nothing now left unto the English, of all their late Purchases, and Acquists in Scotland: but the strong Fort of Aymouth, and the Town of Rox-borough. The loss of so many Peeces in France, one after another, was very sad News to all the Court; but the Earl of Warwick. Who purposely had delayed the sending of such Forces, as were prepared against the French, that the Forts above-menti∣oned might be lost: that, upon the loss thereof, he might project the Ruin of the Lord Protectour. He had long cast an envious Eye at his Power and Greatness, and looked upon himself, as a man of other parts, both for Camp and Counsel; fitter in all Respects to Protect the Kingdom, then he that did enjoy the Ti∣tle. He looked upon him also, as a man exposed to the Blows of Fortune, in being so fatally deprived of his greatest strength, by the Death of his Brother: after which he had little left unto him, but the worst half of himself; feared by the Lords, and not so well beloved by the Common People, as he had been for∣merly. There goes a Story, that Earl Godwine, having treacherously slain Prince Alfred, the Brother of Edward the Confessour, was afterwards present with the King, when his Cup-bearer, stumbling with one foot, recovered himself by the Help of the other. One Brother helps another, said Earl Godwine merrily: And so, replyed the King as tartly, My Brother might have been useful unto me; if you had pleased to spare his Life, for my present Comfort. The like might have been said to Earl Dudly of Warwick: That, if he had not lent an helping hand to the Death of the Admiral, he could not so easily have tripp'd up the Heels of the Lord Prote∣ctour. Having before so luckily taken in the Out-Works, he now resolves to plant his Battery for the Fort it self. To which end he begins to muster up his Strengths, and make ready his Forces, knowing which way to work upon the Lords of the Court: many of which began to stagger in their good Affections, and some openly to declare themselves the Protectour's Enemies. And he so well applyed himself to their several Humours, that in short time his Return from Nor∣folk▪ with Success and Honour, he had drawn unto his side the Lord Chancel∣lour Rich; the Lord Saint-John, Lord Great Master: the Marquess of North-hampton; the Earl of Arundel, Lord Chamberlain; the Earl of South-hampton; Sir Thomas Cheny, Treasurer of the Houshould; Sir John Gage, Constable of the Tower; Sir William Peter, Secretary; Sir Edward Mountague, Chief Ju∣stice of the Common Pleas; Sir Edward North, Sir Ralph Sadlier, Sir John Ba∣ker, Sir Edward Wotton, Doctour Wotton, and Sir Richard Southwell. Of which some shewed themselves against him upon former Grudges, as the Earl of South-hampton; some out of hope to share those Offices amongst them, which he had ingrossed unto himself; many, because they loved to follow the strongest side; few in regard of any Benefit, which was like to Redound by it to the Com∣mon-Wealth; the greatest part complaining▪ that they had not their equal Di∣vidend, when the Lands of Chanteries, Free-Chapels, &c. were given up for a Prey to the greater Courtiers; but all of them disguising their private Ends, un∣der pretense of doing service to the Publick. The Combination being thus made, and the Lords of the Defection convent∣ed together, at Ely-House in Holborn, where the Earl then dwelt: they sent for the Lord Mayour, and Aldermen, to come before them. To whom it is declared by
the Lord Chancellour Rich (a man of Sommerset's own preferring) in a long Ora∣tion, in what dangers the Kingdom was involved by the mis-Government, and Pra∣ctices of the Lord Protectour: against whom he objected also many Misdemean∣ours: some frivolous, some false, and many of them of such a Nature, as either were to be condemned in themselves, or forgiven in him. For in that Speech he charged him, amongst other things, with the loss of the King's Peeces in France, and Scotland, the sowing of Dissension betwixt the Nobility and the Com∣mons, Embezelling the Treasures of the King, and inverting the Publick stock of the Kingdom to his private use. It was Objected also; That he was wholly acted by the Will of his Wife, and therefore no fit man to command a King∣dom: That he had interrupted the ordinary Course of Justice, by keeping a Court of Requests in his own House, in which he many times determined of mens Free-holds: That he had demolished many Consecrated Places, and E∣piscopal Houses, to Erect a Palace for himself, spending one hundred pounds per diem, in superflous Buildings: That by taking to himself the Title of Duke of Som∣merset, he declared plainly his aspiring to the Crown of this Realm: and finally, having so unnaturally laboured the Death of his Brother, he was no longer to be trusted with the Life of the King. And thereupon he desires, or conjures them rather, to joyn themselves unto the Lords, who aimed at nothing in their Counsels; but the Safety of the King, the Honour of the Kingdom, and the Pre∣servation of the People in Peace and Happiness. But these Designs could not so closely be contrived, as not to come unto the Knowledg of the Lord Protectour, who then remained at Hampton-Court, with the rest of the Lords, who seemed to continue firm unto him. And, on the same day, on which this meeting was at London, (being the sixth day of October) he causeth Proclamation to be made at the Court-Gates, and afterwards in other places near adjoyning; requiring all sorts of persons to come in, for the defence of the King's Person: whom he conveyed the same night unto Windsore-Castle, with a strength of five hundred men, or thereabouts; too many for a Guard, and too few for an Army. From thence he writes his Letters to the Earl of Warwick, to the rest of the Lords, as al∣so to the Lord Mayour, and City of London, of whom he demanded a supply of a thousand men for the present service of the King. But that Proud City, seldom true to the Royal Interess, and secretly obsequious to every popular Pretender, seem∣ed more inclinable to gratifie the Lords in the like Demands, then to comply with his Desires. The News hereof being brought unto him, and finding that Master Secretary Peter, whom he had sent with a secret Message to the Lords in Lon∣don, returned not back unto the Court, be presently flung up the Cards: ei∣ther for want of Courage to play out the Game; or rather choosing willingly to lose the Set, then venture the whole Stock of the Kingdom on it. So that, up∣on the first coming of some of the opposite Lords to Windsore, he puts himself into their hands: by whom, on the fourteenth day of the same Moneth, he is brought to London, and committed Prisoner to the Tower; pitied the less, even by those that loved him, because he had so tamely betrayed himself. The Duke of Sommerset▪ no longer to be called Protectour, being thus laid up; a Parliament beginneth (as the other two had done before) on the fourth of November. In which there passed two Acts of especial consequence, (besides the Act for removing all Images out of the Church, and calling in all Books of false and superstitious Worship, before-remembred,) to the concernments of Religion. The first declared to this Effect; That Such form, and manner of making, and Consecrating Arch-Bishops, and Bishopt, Priests, Deacons, and other Ministers of the Church, as by six Prelates, and six other Learned Men of this Realm, learned in God's Law, by the King to be appointed and assigned, or by the most number of thm, shall be devised for that purpose, and set forth under the Great Seal, before the First of A∣pril next coming, shall be lawfully exercised, and used, and no other. The number of the Bishops, and the Learned Men, which are appointed by this Act, assure me, that the King made choice of the very same; whom he had formerly im∣ployed
in composing the Liturgie; the Bishop of Chichester being left out, by reason of his Refractoriness in not subscribing to the same. And they accord∣ingly applyed themselves unto the Work, following therein the Rules of the Primitive Church, as they are rather recapitulated▪ then ordained, in the fourth Councel of Carthage, Anno 401. Which, though but National in it self, was generally both approved, and received (as to the Form of Consecrating Bishops, and inferiour Ministers) in all the Churches of the West. Which Book, being fi∣nished, was made use of, without further Authority, till the year 1552. At what time, being added to the second Liturgie, it was approved of, and confirmed, as a part thereof, by Act of Parliament, An. 5. Edw. 6. cap. 1. And of this Book it is, we finde mention in the 36th. Article of Queen Elizabeth's Time. In which it is Declared; That, Whosoever wre Consecrated, and Ordered, according to the Rites thereof, should be reputed, and adjudged to be lawfully Consecrated, and right∣ly Ordered. Which Declaration of the Church was afterwards made good by Act of Parliament, in the eighth year of that Queen: in which the said Ordinal, of the third of King EDVVARD the Sixth, is confirmed, and ratified. The other of the said two Acts was, For enabling the King to nominate Eight (Bishops, as many Temporal Lords, and sixteen Members of the Lower House of Parliament: for reviewing all such Canons, and Constitutions, as remained in force, by Virtue of the Statute made in the 25th. year of the late King HENRY; and fitting them for the Vse of the Church, in all Times succeeding. According to which Act, the King directed a Commission to Arch-Bishop Cranmer, and the rest of the Per∣sons, whom he thought fit to nominate to that imployment. And afterwards ap∣pointed a Sub-Committee of eight Persons, to prepare the Work, & make it ready for the rest; that it might be dispatched with the more expedition: which said eight persons were, the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury▪ Doctour Thomas Goodrick, Bishop of El; Doctour Richard Cox, the King's Almoner; and Peter Martyr, Doctour in Divinity; William May, and Rowland Taylour, Doctours of the Laws; John Lu∣cas, and Richard Goodrick, Esquires. By whom the Work was undertaken, and di∣gested, fashioned according to the Method of the Romane Decretals; and called by the Name of Reformati Legum Ecclesiasticarum, &c. But not being Commissiona∣ted hereunto, till the eleventh of November in the year 1551, they either wanted time to communicate it to the chief Commissioners, by whom it was to be presen∣ted to the Kng: or found the King encumbred with more weighty matters; then to attend the pesal of it. And so the King dying (as he did) before he had given life unto it by his Royal Signature, the Design miscarried: never thought fit to be resumed in the following Times, by any of those; who had the Government of the Chuch, or were concerned in the Honour, and Safety of it. There also passed another Act, in Order to the Peace of the Common-Wealth, but especially procued by the Agents of the Duke of Sommerset; the better to secure him from all Attempts, and Practices, for the Times ensuing; by which his Life might be illegally endangered. The purport of which Act was, to make it High Treason, for any twelve Persons, or above, assembled together, to kill, or imprison any of the King's Council; or alter any Laws; or continue together the space of an hour, being Commanded to return by any Justice of the Peace, Mayour, Sheriff, &c. Which Act, intended by his Friends for his Preservation, was afterwards made use of by his Enemies, for the onely means of his Destructi∣on; deferred a while, but still resolved upon, when occasion served. It ws not long before Earl Dudly might perceive; that he had served other mens Turs against the Duke, as well as his own: and that, having served their Turns therein, he ound no such forwardness in them, for raising him unto the Place. They were all willing enough to unhorse the Duke; but had no mind, that such a rank Rider▪ as the Earl, should get into the Saddle. Besides, he was not o be told; that there was nothing to be charged against the Duke, which could touch his life; that so many men, of dfferent Humours, were not like to hold ong in a Plot together, now their Turns were served; that the Duk's Friends
could not be so dull, as not to see the emptiness of the Practice▪ which was forged against him; nor the King so forgetfull of his Uncle, when the Truth was known, as not to raise him up again to his former height: it therefore would be fittest for his ends, and purposes, to close up the Breach, to set the Due at Liberty, from his Imprisonment; but so to order the Affair, that the Benefit should be acknowledged to proceed from himself alone. But first, the Duke must so acknowlege his Offences; that his Adversaries might come off with Honour. In Order whereunto, he is first Articled against, for many Crimes and Misdemea∣nours, rather imputed to him, then proved against him. And unto all these he must be laboured to subscribe, acknowledging the Offences contained in them; to beg the Favour of the Lords, and cast himself upon his Knees, for his Maje∣stie's Mercy. All which he very poorly did, subscribing his Confession on the twenty third of December. Which he subjoyned unto the Articles, and so re∣turned it to the Lords. Anno Regni Edw. Sexti 4o. An. Dom. 1549, 1550. THe Lords,An. Reg. 4o 1549/50. thus furnished with sufficient matter for a Legal Proceeding▪ condemned him, by a Sentence passed in the House of Peers, unto the Loss of all his Offices; of Earl Marshal, Lord Treasurer, and Lord Protectour: as also to he Forfeiture of all his Goods, and near two thousand pounds of good yearly Rents. Which being signified unto him, he acknowledged himself, in his Letter of the second of February, to be highly avoured by their Lordships; in that they brought his Cause to be Finable. Which Fine, though it was to him al∣most unsupportable, yet he did never purpose to contend with them, nor once to justi∣fie himself in any Action. He confess'd, That, being none of the wisest, he might easily err: that it was hardly possible for any man, in Eminent place, so to car∣ry himself; that all his Actings should be blameless in the eye of Justice. He therefore submitted himself wholly to the King's Mercy; and to their Discreti∣ons, for some Moderation: desiring them, to conceive of what he did amiss; as ra∣ther done through Rudeness, and want of Judgment▪ then through any malicious Meaning: and, that he was ready both to do, and suffer, what they should appoint. And finally, he did again, most humbly, upon his Knees, intreat Pardon, and Favour; and they should ever finde him so lowly to their Honours, and Obedient to their Or∣ders, as he would thereby make Amends for his former Follies. By which Submission (it may be called an Abjectedness rather) as he gave much secret Pleasure to the most of his Adversaries: so he gained so far upon the King; that he was released of his Imprisonment on the fourth day after. And by his Majestie's Grace, and Favour, he was discharged of his Fine: his Goods, and Lands, being again restored unto him; except such, as had been given away: either the malice of his Enemies being somewhat appeased, or wanting power, and credit, to make Resistance. This great Oak being thus shrewdly shaken, there is no doubt, but there will be some gathering up of the Sticks, which were broken from him, and somewhat must be done, as well to gratifie those men, which had served the Turn, as to inclin others to the like Propensions. And therefore upon Can∣dlemas-Day, being the dy, on which he had made his humble Submission be∣fore-mentioned, William Lord St. John, Lord Great Master, and President of the Council, is made Lord Treasurer; John Dudley, Earl of Warwick, Lord High Chamberlain, is preferred to the Office of Lord Great Master; the Marquess of North-hampton created Lord High Chamberlain; Sir Anthony Wingfield, Ca∣ptain
of the Guard, is made Comptroller of the King's House, in the place of Sir William Paget▪ (of whom more anon) and Sir Thomas Darcie advanced to the Office of Vice-Chamberlain, and Captain of his Majestie's Guard. And, though the Earls of Arundel, and Sou-hampton, had been as forward as any of the rest, in the Duke's destruction; yet now, upon some Court-displeasures, they were commanded to their Houses, and dismissed from their Attendance at the Council-Table: the Office of Lord Chamberlain of his Majestie's Houshold being taken from the Earl of Arundel, and bestowed on Wentworth, ennobled by the Title of Lord Wentworth, in the first year of the King. Some Honours had been given before, between the time of the Duke's Acknowledgment, and the Sentence passed on him by the Lords; and so disposed▪ that none of the Factions might have any ground for a Complaint. One of each side being taken out for these Advancements. For, on the nineteenth day of Janu∣ary, William Lord St. John, a most affectionate Servant to the Earl of War∣wick, was preferred unto the Title of Earl of Wiltshire; the Lord Russell, who had made himself the Head of those; which were engaged on neither side, was made Earl of Bedford; and Sir William Paget, Comptroller of his Majestie's Houshold, who had persisted faithfull to the Lord Protectour, advanced to the Dignity of a Baron, and not long after to the Chancellour-ship of the Dutchy of Lancaster. Furnished with Offices, and Honours, it is to be presumed, that they would finde some way to provide themselves of sufficient Means, to maintain their Dignities. The Lord Wentworth, being a younger Branch of the Wentworths of Yorkshire, had brought some Estate with him to the Court; though not e∣nough, to keep him up in Equipage, with so great a Title. The want where∣of was supplied in part, by the Office of Lord Chamberlain, now conferred upon him; but more by the goodly Manours of Stebunth (commonly called Stepney) and Hackney, bestowed upon him by the King, in consideration of the Good and Faithfull Services before performed. For so it happened, that the Dan and Chapter of St. Paul's, lying at the Mercy of the Times, as before was said, conveyed over to the King the said two Manours, on the twelfth day after Christmss, now last past, with all the Members and Appertenances there∣unto belonging. Of which, the last named was valued at the yearly rent of 41. pounds, 9. ▪ 4▪ d. The other at 140. pounds, 8▪ . 11. . ob. And, being thus vested in the King they were by Letters Patents, bearing Date the sixteenth of April, then next following, transferred upon the said Lord VVntworth. By means whereof, he was possessed of a goodly Territory, extending on the Thames, from St. Katharine's near the Tower of London, to the Borders of Es∣sex, near Black-wall; from thence along the River Le to Stratford le Bow: and, fetching a great compass on that side of the City, contains in all no fewer, then six and twenty Town-ships, Streets, and Hamlets; besides such Rows of Building, as have since been added in these later Times. The like provision was made by the new Lord Pget, a Londoner by Birth, but by good Fortune, mix∣ed with Merit▪ preferred by degrees, to be one of the Principal Secretaries to the late King Henry: by whom he was employed in many Embassies, and Negoti∣ations. Being thus raised, and able to set up for himself, he had his share in the division of the Lands of Chantery, Free-Chapels, &c. and got into his hands the Episcopal House, belonging to the Bishop of Exeter, by him enlarged, and beautified, and called Paget-House▪ sold afterwards to Robert, Earl of Lei∣cester: from whom it came to the late Earls of Essex, and from them took the name of Essex-House, by which it is now best known. But being a great House is no able to keep it self▪ he played his Game so well; that he got into his pos∣session the Manour of Beau-desart (of which he was created Baron) and ma∣ny other fair Estates▪ in the County of Stafford; belonging partly to the Bishop, and partly to the Dean and Chater of Lichfield: neither of which was able to contend with so great a Courtier, who held the See, and had the Ear of the
Protectour,An. Reg. 4o 1550. and the King's to boot. What other Course he tok to improve his Fortunes, we shall see hereafter; when we come to the last part of the Tragedy of the Duke of Sommerset. For Sommerset, having gained his Liberty, and thereby being put into a Ca∣pacity of making use of his Friends, found Means to be admitted to the King's Presence: by whom he was not onely welcomed with all the kind Expressions of a Gracious Prince, and made to sit down at his own Table; but the same day (the eighth of April) he was again sworn one of the Lords of the Privy Council. This was enough to make Earl Dudly look about him, and to pre∣tend a Reconciliation with him for the present; whom he meant first to make se∣cure, and afterwards strike the last blow at him, when he least look'd for it. And, that the knot of Amity might be tyed the faster, and last the longer, (a True-Loves-Knot it must be thought or else nothing worth) a Marriage was ngotiated between John Lord Viscount L'isle, the Earl's Eldest Son, and the Lady Ann Seimour, one of the Daughters of the Duke; which Marriage was joyfully solemnized on the third of June, at the King's Mannour-House of She; the King himself gracing the Nuptials with his Presence. And now, who could imagine, but that, upon the giving of such Hostages unto one ano∣ther, a most inviolable League of Friendship had been made between them; and that, all Animosities and Displeasures being quite forgotten, they would more powerfully Co-operate to the publick Good? But, leaving them, and their Aderents, to the dark Contrivances of the Court, we must leave England for a time, and see how our Affairs succeeded on the other side of the Sea. Where, in the middle of the former Dissensions, the French had put us to the Worst in the way of Arms, and after got the Better in a Treaty of Peace. They had, the last year, taken in all the Out-works, which seemed the strong∣est Rampars, of the Town of Bulloign; but had not strength enough to venture on the Town it self; provided plentifully of all necessaries to endure a Siege, and bravely Garisoned by men of too much Courage, and Resolution, to give it up upon a Summons. Besides, they came to understand, that the English were then Practicing with Charles the Emperour, to associate with them in the War, ac∣cording to some former Capitulations made between those Crowns. And, if they found such Dffiulties, in maintaining the War against either of them, when they fought singly by themselves, there was no hope of any good Success against them, should they unite, and poure their Forces into France. Most true it is; that, after such time, as the French had bid Defiance to the King; and that the King, by reason of the Troubles and Embroilments at home, was not in a Condition to attend the Affairs of France, Sir William Paget was sent Ambas∣sadour to Charles the Fifth to desire Succour of Him, and to lay before Him the Infancy, and several Necessities of the young King, being then in the twelfth year of His Age. This desire when the Emperour had refused to hearken to, they besought Him; that he would, at the least, be pleased to take into His Hands, the keeping of the Town of Bulloign: and that, for no longer time, then untill King EDVVARD could make an End of the Troubles of His Subjects at home▪ and compose the Discords of the Court, which threatned more Danger then the other. To which Request He did not onely refuse to hearken; except the King would promise to restore the Catholick Religion as He called it, in all His Dominions; but expresly commanded, that, neither His Men, no Ammu∣nition, should go to the Assistance of the English. An Ingratitude not easie to be marked with a fitting Epithete: considering what fast Friends the Kings of England had alwaies been to the House of Burgundy, the Rights whereof re∣mained in the person of Charles; with what sums of Money they had helped them; and what sundry Way they had made for them, both in the Nether-Lands to maintain their Authority, and in the Realm of France it self, to in∣crease their Power. For, from the Marriage of Maximilian, of the Family of Austri, with the Lady Mary of Burgundy, (which happened in the year
1478.) unto the Death of Henry the Eight, (which fell in the year 1546) are just threescore and eight years. In which time onely, it was found, on a just ac∣count, that it had cost the Kings of England, at the least, six Millions of Pounds, in the meer Quarrels of that House. But the French, being more assured, that the English held some secret Pra∣ctice with the Emperour, then certain what the Issue thereof might be, resolv∣ed upon a Peace with EDVVARD: in hope of getting more by Treaty, then he could by Force. To this end one Guidolti, a Florentine, is sent for En∣gland: by whom many Overtures were made to the Lords of the Coun∣cil; not as from the King, but from the Constable of France. And spying with a nimble Eye, that all Affairs were governed by the Earl of Warwick, he resolved to buy him to the French, at what price soever: and so well did he ply the Business; that, at the last, it was agreed, that four Ambassadours should be sent to France from the King of England; to treat with so many others of that King∣dom, about a Peace between the Crowns: but that the Treaty it self should be held in Guisnes, a Town belonging to the English, in the Marches of Calice. In pursuance whereof, the Earl of Bedford, the new Lord Paget, Sir William Pe∣ter, Principal Secretary of Estate, and Sir John Mason, Clerk of the Coun∣cil, were, on the twenty first of January, dispatched for France. But no sooner were they come to Calice, when Guidoli brings a Letter to them from Moun∣sieur d' Rochpot, one of the four, which were appointed for that Treaty, in behalf of the French. In which, it was desired, that the English Ambassadours would repair to the Town of Bulloign, without putting the French to the Charge, and Trouble, of so long a Journey, as to come to Guisnes. Which being demurred on by the English, and a Post sent unto the Court, to know the pleasure of the Council in that particular: they received word, (for so the Oracle had dire∣cted) that they should not stand upon Punctilioes, so they gained the point; nor hazard the Substance of the Work, to preserve the Circumstances. Accord∣ing whereunto, the Ambassadours removed to Bulloign, and pitch'd their Tents without the Town, as had been desired, for the Reception of the French: that so they might enter on the Treaty, for which they came. But then a new Dfficulty appeared: for the French would not cross the Water, and put them∣selves under the Command of Bulloign; but desired rather, that the English would come over to them, and fall upon the Treaty in an House, which they were then preparing for their Entertainment. Which being also yielded to, af∣ter some Disputes: the French grew confident, that, after so many Condescensi∣ons on the part of the English, they might obtain from them what they lited, in the main of the Business. For, though it cannot otherwise be, but that in all Treaties of this Nature, there must be some Condescendings made by the one, or the other: yet he, that yields the first inch of Ground, gives the other Party a strong Hope of obtaining the rest. These Preparations being made, the Commissioners, on both sides, begin the Treaty: where, after some Expostulations, touching the Justice, or Injustice of the War, on either side, they came to particular Demands. The English requi∣red the payment of all Debts, and Pensions, concluded on between the two Kings deceased: and, that the Queen of Scots should either be delivered to their Hands, or sent back to Her Kingdom. But unto this the French replyed; That the Queen of Scots was designed in Marriage to the Daulphin of France: and, that She looked upon it, as an high Dishonour, that their King should be esteem∣ed a Pensioner, or Tributary to the Crown of England. The French, on the o∣ther side, propounded: That, all Arrears of Debts, and Pensions, being thrown aside, as not likely to be ever paid, they should either put the higher Price on the Town of Bulloign; or else prepare themselves to keep it, as well as they could. From which Proposals when the French could not be removed, the Oracle was again consulted: by whose Direction, it was ordered in the Council of England▪ That the Commissioners should conclude the Peace, upon such Ar∣ticles,
and Instructions, as were sent unto them: Most of them ordinary, and accustomed, at the winding up of all such Treaties. But that of most Concern∣ment was; That, all Titles, and Claims on the one side, and Defences on the other, remaining to either Party, as they were before, the Town of Bulloign, with all the Ordnance found there at the taking of it, should be delivered to the French, for the Sum of four hundred thousand Crowns of the Sun. Of which four hundred thousand Crowns, (each Crown being valued at the Price of six Shillings, and six Pence,) one Moity was to be paid, within three days after the Town should be delivered, and the other at the end of six Moneths after; Hostages to be given in the mean time for the payment of it. It was agreed also, in relation to the Realm of Scot∣land; That, if the Scots razed Lowder, and Dowglass, the English should raze Rox-borough, and Aymouth; and no Fortification in any of those places to be afterwards made. Which Agreement being signed by the Commissioners of each side, and Hosta∣ges mutually delivered for performance of Covenants, Peace was Proclaimed between the Kings on the last of March: and the Town of Bulloign, with all the Forts depending on it, delivered into the power of the French, on the twen∣ty fifth day of April, then next following. But they must thank the Earl of Warwick, for letting them go away with that commodity at so cheap a Rate: for which the two last Kings had bargained for no less, then two Millions of the same Crowns, to be paid unto the King of England, at the end of eight years; the Towns, and Territory, in the mean time to remain with the English. Nor was young Edward backward in rewarding his Care, and Diligence, in expenditing the Affair. Which was so represented to him, and the extraordinary Merit of the Service so highly magnified; that he was made General Warden of the North, gratified with a thousand Marks of good Rent in Land, and the Com∣mand of an hundred Hors-men at the King's Charge. Such is the Fortune of some Princes, to be most Bountifull to those, who are falsest to them. Gui∣dolti also was rewarded with Knighthood, a Present of a thousand Crowns, and an Annual Pension of as much, to maintain his Honour; besides a Pension of two hundred and fifty Crowns per annum, which was given to his Son. What Rcompense he had of the Crown of France I have no where found; but have good Reason to believe, that he did not serve their Turn for nothing. Great Care was also taken, for the preventing of such Disorders, as the dissolv∣ing of great Garisons, and the disbanding of Armies, do for the most part carry with them. And to this end the Lord Clinton, Governour of the Town, and Territoy of Bulloign, was created Lord Admiral; the Officers, and Ca∣ptains, rewarded with Lands, Leases, Offices, and Annual Pensions; all foreign Forces satisfied, and sent out of the Kingdom; the Common Souldiers, having all their Pay, and a Moneths-Pay over, dismissed into their several Countries, and great Charge given, that they should be very well observed, till they were quietly settled at home▪ the Light-Hors-men, and Men-at-Arms, put under the Command of the Marquess of North hampton, then being Captain of the Band of Pensioners; and finally some of the Chief Captains, with six hundred Ordinaries, disposed of on the Frontiers of Scotland. All Things thus quieted at Home, and composed Abroad, in reference to the Civil State; we must next see how Matters went, which concerned Religion: all Parties making use of the Publick Peace for the advancing of their Private, and particular Ends. And the first Matter of Remark, which occurs this year, is the Burning of John Butcher, (by others called John Knell, but generally best known by the Name of Joan of Kent) condemned for Heresie in the year last past, about the time, that so many Anabaptists were convented in the Church of Saint Paul, before Arch-Bishop Cranmer, and his Assistants: whereof men∣tion hath been made already. Her Crime was, That she denied Christ to have takn Flsh from the Virgin Mary; affirming (as the Valentinians did of old) that he onely passed through her Body, as Water through the Pipe of a Con∣duit,
without participating any thing of that Body, through which He passed. Great Care was taken, and much Time spent, by the Arch-Bishop to per∣swade her to a better sence: but, when all failed, and that he was upon the Point of passing Sentence upon her, for persisting obstinate in so gross an Heresie, she most maliciously reproached him, for passing the like Sen∣tence of Condemnation on another Woman, called Ann Akew, for denying the Carnal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament▪ telling him, That he had con∣demned the said Ann Akew not long before for a piece of Bread, and was then ready to condemn her for a piece of Flesh. But being convicted, and delivered over to the Secular Judges, she was by them condemned to be burnt; but no Execution done upon it, till this present year. The Interval was spent in using all Means for her Conversion, and a∣mendment; which as it onely seemed to confirm her in her former Obstinacy: so it was found to have given no small encouragement to others, for entertaining the like dangerous, and un-Christian Errours. His Majesty was therefore moved to sign the Warrant for her Death. To which when the Lords of the Council could by no means win Him: the Arch-Bishop is desired to perwade Him to it. The King continued both in Reason, and Resolution, as before He did, notwith∣standing all the Arch-Bishop's Arguments to perswade the contrary: the King affirming, that He would not drive her headlong to the Devil, and thinking it better to chatise her with some corporal Punishment. But, when the Gravity, and Importunity of the Man had prevailed at last, the King told him, as He signed the Warrant, that upon him He would lay all the Charge thereof, be∣fore God. Which Words of His declare sufficiently His Aversness from having any hand in shedding of that Womans Blood, how justly soever she deserved it. But that the Arch-Bishop's Earnestness, in bringing her to exemplary Punish∣ment, should contract any such guilt in the sight of God, as to subject him to the like cruel Death, within few years after (as some would bear the World in hand) is a Surmise, not to be warranted by any Principle of Piety, or Rule of Charity. The Warrant being signed, and the Writ for Execution Sealed; she was kept a whole Week before her Death, at the Lord Chancellour's House, dai∣ly resorted to, both by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Lon∣don; who spared no pains to bring her to a ight belief in that Particular. But the same Spirit of Obstinacy still continued with her, and held her to the very last. For, being brought to the Stake in Smithfield, on the second of May, Dr. Scoy (not long after made Bishop of Rechester) was desired to Preach unto the People; who insisting on the proof of that Point, for denyal whereof the obstinate Wretch had been condemned, she interrupted him, and told him with a very loud Voice; that, He lied like &c. And so, the Sermon being ended, the Executioner was commanded to do his Office, which he did ac∣cordingly. And yet this terrible Execution did not so prevail, as to extirpate, and exterminate the like impiou Doages; though it suppressed them for a time. For, on the twenty ourth of April, in the year next follwing▪ I finde one George Paris, a Dutch man, to have been burnt for Arianism in the very same place. Better Success had John à Lasco, a Polonian born, with his Congregation of Germans, and other Strangers, who took Sanctuary this year in England; ho∣ping, that here they might enjoy that Liberty of Conscience, and Safety for their Goods, and Persons, which their own Countrey had denyed them. Nor did they fall short in any thing, which their Hopes had promised them. For the Lords of the Council looking on them, as afflcted Strangers, and persecu∣ted for the same Religion, which was here professed, interceded for them with the King. And He as Graciosly vouchsafed to give them, both Entertainment, and Protection; assigned them the West-part of the Church, belonging to the late dissolved House of Augustine Friers, for the Exercise of Religious Duties: made thm a Corporation, consisting of a Super-intendent, and four other Mi∣nisters; with power, to fill the vacant Places by a new Succession, whensoever
any of them should be void by Death, or otherwise the Parties by them chosen to be approved by the King, and Council. And this he did, with a Command to the Lord Myour of London, the Alderme, and Sheriffs thereof; as also to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and all other Bishops of this Realm not to disturb them, either in the Free Exercise of their Religion, and Ecclesistical Government; notwithstanding, that they differed from the Government, and Forms of Worship, Established in the Church of England. All which, and more, He grants by His Letters Patents, bearing Date at Lez (the Lord Chancellour's House) on the twenty fourth of July, and the fourth year of His Regn. Which Grant, though in it self an Act of most  Compassion, in respect of those Strangers, yet proved the occasion of no small disturbance to the Proceedings of the Church, and the quiet ordering o the State; for, by suffering these men, to live under another kind of Government, and to Wor∣ship God after other Forms, then those allowed of by the Laws, proved in effect the  up of one Altar against another in the midst of the Church, and the erecting f a Common-Wealth in the midst of the Kingdom. So much the more unfortunately peitted in this present Conjuncture, when such a Repure began to appear amongst our selves, as was made wider by the coming in of these Dutch Reformer, and the Indulgence granted to them: as will appear by the follwing Story of John Hooper, designed to the Bishoprick of Glocester; which in bref was this. John Hooper▪ the designed Bishop of Glocester, being bred in Oxford, stu∣dious in the Holy Scriptures, and well-affected unto those Beginnings of the Reformation, whih had been countenanced by King Henry, about the time of the Six Articles, found himself so much in danger, as put upon him the ne∣cessity of forsaking the Kingdom. Settling himself at Zurich, a Town of Swit∣zerland, he acquaints himself with Bulliger, a Scholar, in those Times, of great Name▪ and Note: and, having staid there, till the Death of King Henry, he returned into England; bringing with him some very strong Affecti∣ons to the Nakendness of the Zuinglian, or Helvetian Churches: though differ∣ing in Opinion from them in some Points of Doctrine; and more especially in that of Predestination. In England, by his constant Preaching, and learned Writings, he grew into great Favour, and Esteem, with the Earl of Warwick; by whose procurement, the King most Graciously bestowed upon him, without any seeking of his own, the Bishoprick of Glocester; which was then newly void, by the Death of Wakeman, the last Abbot of , and the first Bishop of that See. Having received the King's Letters Patents for his Preferment to that Place, he applies himself to the Arch-Bishop for his Consecration: concerning which there grew a difference between them. For the Arch-Bishop would not Conse∣crate him▪ but in such an Habit, which Bishops were required to wear by the Rules of the Church: and Hooper would not take it, upon such Conditions. Repairing to his Patron, the Earl of Warwick, he obtains from him a Letter to the Arch-Bishop; desiring a forbearance of those things, in which the Lord Elect of Glo∣cester did crave to be forborne at his hands; implying also, that it was the King's desire, as well as his, that such forbearance should be used. It was desired also, that he would not charge him with any Oath, which seemed to be burthenous to his Conscience. For the Elct Bishop, as it seems, had boggled also at the Oath of paying Cannical Obedience to his Metropolitan; which by the Laws, then, and still in force, he was bound to take. But the Arch-Bishop still persisting in the Denyal, and being well seconded by Bishop Ridley of London, (who would by no meanes yield unto it) the King himself was put upon the business by the Earl of VVarwick; who thereupon wrote to the Arch-Bishop this ensuing Letter.
RIght-Reverend Father, and Right-Trusty, and VVell-Beloved, VVe Greet you well. VVhereas VVe, by the Advice of Our Council, have Calaen, and Chosen Our Right-VVell-Beloved, and VVell-VVorthy, Mr. John Hooper, Professour of Divinity, to be Our Bishop of Glocester: as well for his Great Learning, Deep Judgment, and Long Study, both in the Scriptures, and other Profound Learning; as also for his Good Discreti∣on, Ready Vtterance, and Honest Life for that kind of Vocation; &c. From Consecrating of whom VVe understand you do stay, because he would have you omit, and let pass certain Rights, and Ceremonies, offensive to his Consci∣ence▪ whereby you think you should fall in Praemunire of Our Laws: VVe have thought Good, by Advice afore-said, to dispence, and discharge you of all manner of Dangers, Penalties, and Forfeitures, you should run into, and be in, in any manner of way, by omitting any of the same. And this Our Let∣ters shall be your sufficient Warrant, and Discharge therefore. Given under Our Signet, at Our Castle of Windsore, the fifth day of August, in the fourth year of Our Reign. This Gracious Letter notwithstanding, the two Bishops, wisely taking into con∣sideration, of what Danger, and Ill Consequence, the Example was, humbly craved leave, not to obey the King against his Laws: and the Earl, finding little hope of prevailing in that suit, which would not be granted to the King, leaves the new Bishop to himself; who, still persisting in his Obstinacy, and wilfull Humour, was finally for his Disobedience, and Contempt, committed Pri∣soner; and, from the Prison, writes his Letters to Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr, for their Opinion in the Case. From the last of which, who had declared himself no friend to the English Ceremonies, he might presume of some Encouragement; but, that he had any from the first, I have no where found. The contrary whereunto will appear by his Answer unto John à Lasco▪ in the pre∣sent Case; whereof more anon. In which condition of Affairs, Calvin addresseth his Letters to the Lord Protectur, whom he desireth to lend the man anHomi∣nem hortatus sum; ut Hop∣pero Manum helping hand, and extri∣cate him out of those Perplexities, into which he was cast. So that, at last, the Differences were thus compromised; that is to say, That Hooper should receive his Consecration, attired in his Episcopal Robes; that he should be dispensed with∣all▪ from wearing it at ordinary times,Porrigeret. as his dayly Habit: but that he should be bound to use it, when soever he Preached before the King, in his own Cathedral, or any other place of like Publick Nature. According to which Agreement, be∣ing appointed to Preach before the King, he shewed himself apparelled in his Bi∣shop's Robes: namely, a long Scarlet Chimere, reaching down to the ground, for his upper Garment, (changed in Queen Elizabeth's Time, to one of Black Satten) and under that a white Linen Rochet, with a Square Cap upon his head; which Fox reproacheth by the name of a Popish Attire, and makes to be a great cause of Shame, and Contumeli, to that Godly man. And possibly it might be thought so, at that time, by Hooper himself; who from thenceforth carried a strong Grudg against Bishop Ridley, the principal man, as he conceiv∣ed, (and that not untruly) who had held him up so closely to such hard Con∣ditions: not fully reconciled unto him, till they were both ready for the Stake; and then it was high time to lay aside those Animosities, which they had here∣upon conceived on against another. But these thing happened not, (I mean
his Consecration, and his Preaching before the King) till March next follow∣ing; and then we may hear further of him. And thus we have the first beginning of that Opposition, which hath conti∣nued ever since against the Liturgie it self, the Cap, and Surplice, and other Rites, and Vsages of the Anglican Church. Which Differences, being thus begun, were both fomented, and increased, by the Pragmaticalness of John à Lasco, Opposite, both in Government, and Forms of Worship, (if not perhaps in Doctrine also) to the Church of En∣gland. For John à Lasco not content to enjoy those Privileges, which were intended for the use of those Strangers onely, so far abused His Majestie's good∣ness, as to appear in favour of the Zuinglian, or Calvinian Faction, which then began more openly to shew it self, against the Orders of the Church. For, first▪ he publisheth a Book, entituled, Forma, & ratio totius Ecclesiastici Mi∣nisterii: Wherein he maintains the Use of Sitting at the Holy Communion; con∣trary to the Laudable Custome of the Church of England, but much to the En∣couragement of all those, who impugned her Orders. A Controversie, unhappi∣ly moved by Bishop Hooper, concerning the Episcopal Habit, was presently pro∣pagated amongst the rest of the Clergy, touching Caps, and Surplices. And in this John à Laco must needs be one: not onely countenancing those, who re∣fused to wear them; but writing unto Martin Bucer, to declare against them For which severely reprehended by that Moderate and Learned Man▪ and all his Ca∣vils, and Objections very solidly Answered; which being sent to him, in the way of Letter, was afterwards Printed, and dispersed, for keeping down that Oppo∣site Humour, which began then to overswell the Banks, and threatned to bear all before it. And by this Passage we may rectifie a Mistake, or a Calumny ra∣ther, in the Altare Damascenum. The Authour whereof makes Martin Bu∣cer Peremptory, in refusing to wear the Square Cap, when he lived in Cambridg; and to give this simple Reason for it; That he could not wear a Square Cap, since his Head was Round. But I note this onely by the way, to shew the Honesty of those men, which erected that Altar: and return again to John à Lasco; who, being born in Poland▪ where Sitting at the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper had been used by the Arians; (who looking no otherwise on Christ, then their Elder Brother, might think it was no Robbery at all to be equal with Him, and sit down with Him at His Table) what he learned there, he desired might be Practiced here, the better to conform this Church to the Polish Conventi∣cles. As for the other Controversie about Caps, and Surplices; though it found no Encouragement from Martin Bucer; yet it received no small countenance from Peter Martyr. For in a Letter of his, of the first of July, inscribed Vnto a nameless Friend, who had desired his Judgement in it, he first declares, according to the very Truth; That, being indifferent in themselves, they could make no man, of themselves, to be either Godly▪ or Vngodly, by the use, or forbear∣ance of them: but then he addeth, That, (Magis ex∣pedre judico; ut evestis, & alia, id genus, plura, cum fi∣eri commode posuit, auferan¦tur, &c.) He thinks it most Expedient to the Good of the Church; that they, and all others of that kind, should be taken away, when the next convenient Opportunity should present it self. And then he gives this Reason for it: That, Where such Ceremonies were so stifly contended for, which were not warranted, and supported, by the Word of God; there commonly men were less sollicitous of the Substance of Religion, then they were of the Circumstances of it. But he might well have spared his Judgement, which had so visibly appeared in his dayly Practice. For he hath told us of himself, (in one of his Epistles, bearing Date at Zurick, the fourth of November, 1559. being more then five years, after he had left this Kingdom;) That, (Ego, com es∣sem Oxonii, vestibus illis al∣bis, in Choro, nunanam nil volti;quam∣ esem Cano∣nicus.) He had never used the Surplice, when he lived in Oxford, though he were then a Canon of Christ-Church, and frequently present in the Quire. So that, between the Authority of Peter Mar∣tyr on the one side, and the Pragmaticalness of John à Lasco on the other, ma∣ny were drawn from their Obedience to the Rules of the Church, for the time
then present, and a ground laid for more Confusions, and Disturbances in the time to come. The Regular Clergy, in those days, appeared not, commonly, out of their own Houses; but in their Priests Coats, with the Square Cap upon their Heads; and, if they were of Note, and Eminency, in their Gowns, and Tippets. This Habit also is decryed for Superstitious; affirmed to be a Popish Attire, and alto∣gether as unfit for Ministers of the Holy Gospel, as the Chimere, and Rochet▪ were for those; who claimed to be the Successours of the Lord's Apostles, So Tyms re∣plyed unto Bishop Gardiner, when, being asked, Whether a Coat, with Stockings of divers Colours, the upper part White, and the nether-stock Russet, (in which Habit he appeared before him) were a fit Apparel for a Deacon: (which Office he had exercised in this Church) he sawcily made Answer, That his Vesture did not so much vary from a Deacon's, as his Lordships did from that of an Apostle. The less to be admired in Tyms, in that I finde the like aversness from that Grave, and Decent Habit, in some other men: who were in Parts and Place above him▪ For, while this Controversie was on Foot, between the Bishops and Clergy, about wearing Priests-Caps, and other Attire, belonging to their Holy Order, Mr. John Rogers, one of the Prebends of Saint Paul's, and Divinity-Reader of that Church, then newly returned from beyond the Seas, could never be perswaded to wear any other, then the Round Cap, when he went abroad. And, being fur∣ther pressed unto it, he declared himself thus, That he would never agree to the point of Conformity: but on this Condition, that, if the Bishops did require the Cap, and Tipper, &c. then it should also be decreed, that all Popish Priests (for a Distinction between them▪ and others) should be constrained to wear upon their Sleeves a Chalice, with an Host upon it. The like aversness is by some ascribed also to Mr. John Philpot, Arch-Deacon of Winchester, not long before returned from beyond the Seas▪ as the other was, and sffering for Religion in Queen Ma∣rie's Days, as the other did. Who, being by his place a Member of the Convo∣cation, in the first of Queen Mary, and required by the Prolcutour to come apparelled, like the rest, in his Gown and Tippet, or otherwise to forbear the House, chose rather to accept of the last Condition, then to submit unto the former. But there was some thing else in the first Condition, which made him unwilling to accept it, and that was, That He must not speak, but when he was commanded by the Prolocutour. Which being so directly against the Customes of the House, and the Privileges of each Member of it▪ he had good reason, rather to forbear his Presence; then to submit himself, and consequently all the rest of the Members, to so great a Servitude. Such were the Effects of Calvin's Interposings in behalf of Hooper; and such the Effects of his Exceptions against some Antient Usages in the Publick Li∣turgie; and such the Consequents of the Indulgence granted to John a Lasco, and his Church of Strangers, opposite, both in Practice, and point of Judgment, to the established Rules, and Orders of the Church of England. For what did follow hereupon, but a continual multiplying of Disorders in all Parts of this Church? What from the Sitting at the Sacrament, used, and maintained by John a Lasco: but first Irreverence in receiving, and afterwards a Contempt and de∣paving of it? What from the crying down of the Sacred Vestments, and the Grave Habit of the Clergy: but first a Disesteem of the men themselves, and by Degrees a Vilifying and Contempt of their Holy Ministery? Nay, such a pc∣cancy of Humour began then manifestly to break out; that it was Preached at Paul's Cross by one Sir Steven, (for so they commonly called such of the Cler∣gy, as were under the Degree of Doctour) the Curate of Saint Katharine-Christ Church, That, it was fit the Names of Churches should be altered, and the Names of the Days in the Week changed; That Fsh-days should be kept on any other days, then on Fridays, and Saturdays, and the Lent at any other time, except onely between Shrovetide, and Easter. We are told also by John Stow, that he had seen the said Sir Steven to leave the Pulpit, and Preach to the Peo∣ple
out of an high Elm, which stood in the middest of the Church-Yard; and, that being done, to return into the Church again; and leaving the High Altar, to sing the Cmmunion-Service upon a Tomb of the Dead, with is Face to∣ward the North. Which is to be Observed the rather; because Sir Stephn hath found so many Followers in these later Times. For, as some of the  sort have left the Church, to Preach in Woods, and Barns, &c. and, instead of the Names of the Old Days, and Moneths, can finde no other sitle for them, then the First, Second, or Third Moneth of the Year, and the First, Second, or Third Day of the Week, &c. so was it propounded, not long since, by some State-Reformrs: That the LentenFast should be kept no longer, between Shrove∣tide and Ealster; but rather (by some Act or Ordinance, to be made for that purpose) bwixt Easter and▪ Whitsuntide. To such wild Fancies do men grow, when once they break those Bonds, and neglect those Rules, which wise Antiquity or∣daind, for the preservation of Peace, and Order. If it be asked, What, in the mean time, was become of the Bishops, and, Why no Care ws tken for the purging of these Peccant Humours: It may be Answered; That the Wings of their Authority had ben so clipped that it was scarce able to fly aboad: the Setnce of Excommunication▪ wherewith they formerly kept in Aw both Priest, and People no having been in Use, and Practice, since the first of this King. Whether it were, that any Command was lay'd upon the Bishops; by which they were restrained from the Exercise of it: Or, that some other Course was in Agitation for drawing the Cognizance of all Ecclesiastical Cau∣ses to the Courts at Westminster: Or, that it was thought inconsistent with that Dreadful Sntence, to be issued in the King's Name: (as it had lately been ap∣pointed by Act of Parliament,) it is not easie to determine. Certain it is, that, at this Time, it was in an Abeyace, (as our Lawyers Phrase it) either Aboli∣shd for the present, or of none Effect: not onely to the cherishing of these Disorders, amongst the Ministers of the Church; but to the great encrease of Vicousness in all sorts of Men. So that it was not without cause▪ that it was called for so earnestly by Bishop Latimer, in a Sermon Preached before the King, where he thus presseth for the Restitution of the Antient Discipline; Lechery (saith he) is used in England, and such Lechery, as is used in no other Part of the World. And yet it is made a matter of Sport, a matter of Nothing, a Laughing matter, a Trifle, not to be Passed-on▪ nor Reformed. Well, I trust it will be amended one day, and I hope to see it mended, as old as I am. Ana here I will make a Suit to your Highness, to restore unto the Church the Dscipline of Christ, in Excommunicating such, as be notable Offenders. Nor, never devise any other Way: for no man is able to devise any better, then that God hath done, with Ex∣communication to put them from the Congregation, till they be conounded. There∣fore Restore Christ's Discipline, for Excommunication: and that shall be a mean, both to pacifie Go's Wrath, and Indignation; and also, that less Abomination shall be used, then in Times past hath been, or is at this day. I speak this of a Con∣science, and I mean to move it, of a Will, to Your Grace, and Your Realm. Bring into the Church of England, the Open Discipline of Excommunication; that open Sinners may be striken with all. No were these all the Mischiefs, which the Church suffered at this Time. Many of  Nobility, and Gentry, whch held Abbey-Lands, and were charged with Pensions to the Monks, out of a covetous Design to be freed of those Pensions, o to discharge their Lands from those Incumbrances, which by that means were la'd upon them, had placed them in such Benefices, as were in their Gifts. This filed the Church with ignorant and illiterate Priest: few of the Monks being Learned beyond their Mass-Book, utterly unacquainted with the Art of Preaching, and otherwise not well-affected to the Reformation. Of which Abuse, Complaint is made by Calvin to Arch-Bishop Cranmer: and Pter Martyr () much bemoaneth the miserable Condition of the Church, for want of Preachers; though he touch not at the Reasons, and Causes of it.
For the remdy whereof (as Time, and Leasure would permit) it was Ordained, by the Advice of the Lods of the Council; That, of the King's , Chalains, which attended in Ordinary, two of them shuld be always abot the Court, and the other four should Travail in Preaching abroad. The first year, two in Wales, and two in Lincolnshire; the second year, two in the Marches of Scot∣land, and two in Yorkshire; the third year, two in Devonshire, and two in Hamp∣shire; the fourth year, two in Norfolk, and two in Essex; the fith year, two in Kent and two in Sussex: and so throughout all the Shires in England. By which means it was hoped, that the People might, in time, be well instructed in their Duty to God, and their Obedience to the Laws: in which they had not shewed themselves so forward; as, of right, they ought. But this Course be∣ing like to be long in running, and subject to more Heats and Cods, then the nature of the Business could well comport with; the next cae was, to fil the Church with Abler, and more Orthodox Clarks, as the Cures fell void. And, for an Example to the rest, it was Ordered; That none should be presented unto any Benefice in the King's Donation; either as in the Right of His Crown or by Promotion. Wardship, Lapse, &c. till he had Preached before the King; and thereby passed Hs Judgment, and Approbation. And it was much about this time, that Ser∣mons at the Court were increased also. For whereas formerly there were no Ser∣mons at the Court, but in time of Lent; and possibly on some ew of the greater Fe∣stivals; in which repect six Chaplains were sufficient to attend in Ordinary: it was now Ordered; That, from thenceforth, there should be Sermons every Sun∣day, for all such as were so disposed, to resort unto. But the Great business of this Year was the taking down of Altars, in many places, by the Publick Authorty; which in some few had formerly been pulled down, by the irregular forwardness of the Common People. The Principal Motive whereunto was, in the first place, the Opinion of some dslikes, which had been taken by Calvin, against the Liturgie; and the desire of those of the Zuinglian Faction, to reduce this Church unto the Nakedness and Simplicity, of those Transmarine Chuches, which followed the Hlveian, or Calvinian Forms. For the Advancement of which Work, it had been Preached by Hooper, above-mentioned, before the King, about the bginning of this year; That, It would be very well, that it might please the Magistrate, to tun the Altars into Tables: according to the first Institution of Christ; and thereby to take away the fale per∣swsion of the People, which they have of Sacrifices to be done upon the Altars. Because (said he) as long as Altars remain, both the ignorant People, and the igno∣rant, and evill-perswaded Prist, will dream always of Sacrifice. This was ∣nough▪ to put the thoughts of the Alteration into the Head of some Great Men about the Court, who thereby promised themselves no small Hopes of Profit, by the disfurnishing of the Altars of the Hangings, Palls, Plate, and other Rich Vtensils; which every Parish, more, or less, had provided for them. And that this Consideration might prevail upon thm, as much, as a∣ny other, (if perhaps not more) may be collected from an Equiry▪ made a∣bout two years after. In which, it was to be interrogated; What Jewels of Gold, and Silver, or Silver Crosses, Candlsticks, Censers, Chalices, Cpes, and other Vstments, were then remaining, in any of the Cathedral, or Parochial Churches; or otherwise had been embezelled, or taken away: the leaving f one Chalice to every Church, with a Cloath, or Covering, for the Cmmunion-Table, being thought sufficient. The matter being thus resolved on, a Letter comes to Bishop Ridley, in the name of the King, Signed with His Royal Signet, but Subscribed by Sommer∣set, and other of the Lords of the Council, concerning the taking down of Al∣tars, and setting up Tables in the stead thereof. Which Letter, because it re∣lates to somewhat, which was done before, in some of the Churches, and seems only to pretend to an Vniformity in all the rest, I shall here subjoyn; that bing the Chief Ground, on which so great an Alteration must be suppo∣sed
to have been raised. Now the Tenour of the said Letter is, as follow∣eth. RIght-Reverend Father in God, Right-Trusty, and Well-Beloved; We Greet You well: Whereas it is cme to ur Knwldge; that being the Altars within the more part of the Churches of the Realm, upon Good and Godly Considerations, are takn down, there doth yet remain Altars, stand∣ing in divers other Churches; by occasion wheeof uch Varince, and Con∣tention, ariseth amongst sundry of Our Subjects; which, if good Foe-sight were not had, might perhaps engener great Hurt, and Inconvenience: We let you wit; that, minding to have all ccasions of  taken away, which many times groweth by thse, and sch lke Diversities and consi∣dering, that, amongst other thigs, belongig to Our , an Care, We do account the greatest to be, to mintain the cmmon Quiet of Our Relm; We have thought Good, by the Advice of Ou Curcil, to reqire You, and nevertheless especially to Charge, ad Cmmnd You, for the avoidig of all mtters of further  about the standing, or taing away of the said , to give  Order thughout all Your Diocess; that, with al Dilgence, all the Altars, in e∣very Church, or Chapel: as well in places Exempted▪ as not Exempted, within Your said Dioces, be taken own; and in stead of them, a Table to be set up, in some convenent part of the Chancel▪ within every such Church, or Chpl, to serve for the Ministration f the Blsted Communion. And, to the intent, the same may be done, without the Offence of such Our Loving Subjects, as be not, yet, so well perswaded in that behalf, as We ould wish, We send unto You herewith certain Considerations, Gathered, and Collected, that mak for the purpose. The which, and such others, as You shall think meet, to be set forth to perswade the weak, to embrace Our Procedings in this pat, We pray You cause to be declared to the People by some discreet Preachers, in such places, as You shall thik eet, before the taking down of the said Altars: so, as both the weak Consciences of others my be in∣structed, and satisfied, as much as my be▪ and this Our Pleasure the more quietly Executed. For the better doing whereof, We require You to open the foresaid Considerations, in that Our Cathedral Church in Your own Per∣son if You conveniently may; or, otherwe by Your Chancellour or other Grave Preacher, both there, and in such other Markt-Towns, and most Notable Places, of Your Diocess, as You may think most requisite. Which Letter, bearing Date on the twenty fourth of November, in the fourth year of the King, was Subscribed by te Duke of Sommerset, the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Lord Admiral Clinton, the Earls of Warwick, Bedford, and Wiltshire; the Bishop of Ely, the Lords Wentworth, and North. Now te Effect of the said Reasons, mentioned in the last part of this Letter, were; First, o move the People, from the Superstitios Opinions of the Popish Mass, unto the right Use of the Lora's Supper. The Use of an Altar being, to Sacrifice upn; and the Use of a Table, to Eat upon: and therefore a Table to be fr more  for Our feeding on Him▪ who was once onely Crucified, and Offered for us. Secondly, That, in the Book of Common-Prayer, the name of Alta, the Lord's Board, and Table, are used indifferently, without prescibing any thing in the Form thereof. For as it is called a Table, and the Lord's Board, in reference to the Lord's Supper, which is there Administred, so it is called an Altar also, in reference to the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanks-giving, which is there fferd unto God. And so the changing the Altars into Tables nt to be any way repugnant to the Rules of the Liturgie. The third Reason seems to be
no other then an Illustration of the First, for taking away the superstitious Opinion out of the Minds of the People, touching the Sacrifice of the Mass, which was not to be Celebrated, but upon an Altar. The Fourth, That the Altars were Erected for the Sacrifices of the Law; which being now ceased, the Form of the Altar was to cease together with them. The Fifth, That, as Christ did Institute the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, at a Table, and not at an Altar, (as appear∣eth by the three Evangelists) so it is not to be found, that any of the Apostles did ever use an Altar in the Ministration. And finally, That, it is declared in the Preface to the Book of Common-Prayer, That, If any Doubt arise in the Use, and Practising, of the said Book, that then, to appease all such Diversity, the Matter shall be referred unto the Bishop of the Diocess; who, by his Discre∣tion, shall take Order for the quieting of it. The Letter with these Reasons being brought to Ridley, there was no time for him to dispute the Commands of the one, or to examine the Validity, and Strength of the other. And thereupon, proceeding shortly after to his first Visi∣tation, he gave out one Injunction, amongst others, to this Effect, That Those Churches in his Diocess, where the Altars do remain, should conform themselves unto those other Churches, which had taken them down; and that, instead of the multi∣tude of their Altars, they should set up one decent Table in every Church. But this be∣ing done, a question afterwards did arise, about the Form of the Lords Board; some using it in the Form of a Table, and others in the Form of an Altar. Which be∣ing referred unto the Determination of the Bishop, he declared himself in fa∣vour of that Posture, or Position of it; which he conceived most likely to procure an Vniformity in all his Diocess, and to be more agreeable to the King's Godly Proceedings, in abolishing divers vain, and superstitious Opinions, about the Mass, out of the Hearts of the People. Upon which Declaration, or Determi∣nation, he appointed the Form of a Right Table, to be used in his Diocess; and caused the Wall standing on the back side of the Altar, in the Church of Saint Paul's, to be broken down, for an Example to the rest. And being thus a leading Case to all the rest of the Kingdom, it was followed, either with a swifter, or a slower Pase; according as the Bishops in their several Diocesses, or the Clergie in their several Parishes, stood affected to it. No Universal Change of Altars into Tables, in all parts of the Realm, till the Repealing of the First Liturgie, in which the Priest is appointed, To stand before the middest of the Altar, in the Celebration; and the establishing of the Second, in which it is required, That The Priest shall stand on the North-side of the Table, had put an end to the Dispute. Nor, indeed, can it be supposed, that all, which is before affirmed of Bishop Ridley, could be done at once, or acted in so short a Space, as the rest of this year: which could not give him time enough, to Warn, Commence, and carry on a Visitation; admitting, that the Inconveniency of the Season might have been dispensed with. And therefore I should rather think, that the Bishop, having received His Majestie's Order in the end of November, might cause it to be put in Execution in the Churches of London, and Issue out his Mandates to the rest of the Bishops, and the Arch-Deacons of his own Diocess, for doing the like i other Places within the compass of their several and Respective Jurisdictions. Which being done, as in the way of Preparation, his Visitation might proceed in the Spring next following; and the whole Business be transacted, in Form, and Mnner, as before laid down. And this may be beleived the rather; be∣cause the changing of Altars into Tables is made by Holinshead, (Fol. 1062.) (a Dili∣gent and Painfull Writer) to be the Work of the next year: as, questionless it needs must be, in all Parts of the Realm; except London, and Westminster, and some of the Towns, and Villages, adjoyning to them. But, much less can I think, that the Altar-wall, in Saint Paul's Church, was taken down by the Command of Bishop Ridley, in the Evening of Saint Barnaby's-Day this present year; as is affirmed by (Fol.  604.) John Stow. For then it must be done five Moneths, before
the coming out of the Order from the Lords of the Council.An. Reg. 5o. 1551. Assuredly, Bishop Ridley was the Master of too great a Judgment, to run before Authority, in a Business of such Weight, and Moment. And he had also a more high Esteem of the Blessed Sacrament; then, by any such unadvised, and precipitate Action, to render it less Venerable in the Eyes of the Common People. Besides, whereas the taking down of the said Altar Wall is said to have been done n the first Saint Barny's-Day▪ which was kept Holy with the Church: that Circumstance is alone sufficient, to give some Light to the Mistake. The Liturgie, whch appoint∣ed Saint Barnaby's-Day to be kept for an Holy-Day, was to be put in Executi∣on in all parts of the Realm, at the Feast of Whitsun-tide, 1549▪ and had actually been Officiated in some Churches, for some Weeks before. So, that the first Saint Barnaby's Day, which was to be kept Holy by the Rules of that Liturgie, must have been kept in that year also; and consequently the taking down o the said Altar-Wall, being done n the Evening of that day, must be supposed to have been done above ten Moneths, before Bishop Ridley was Translted to the See of London. Let therefore the keeping Holy of the first Saint Barnaby's-Day be placed in the year 1549, the Issuing of the Order from the Lords of the Council in the year 1550, and the taking down of the Altar-Wall, on the Evening of Saint Barnaby's-Day, in the year 1551. And then all Inconveni∣ences, and Contradictions, will be taken away, which otherwise cannot be avoided. No change this year amongst the Peers of the Realm, or Principal Officers of the Court: but in the Death of Thomas Lord Wriothesly, the first Earl of South∣hampton▪ of that Name▪ ad Family; who died at Lincoln-Place, in Holborn, on the thirtieth day of July: leaving his Son Henry, to succeed him in his Lands, and Honours. A Man Unfortunate in his Relations to the two Great Persons of that Time; deprived of the Great Seal by the Duke of Sommerset; and re∣movd from his Place at the Council-Table by the Earl of Warwick: having first served the Turns of the one, in lifting him into the Saddle; and of the o∣ther, in dismounting him from that High Estate. Nor finde I any great Change thi year amongst the Bishops: but that Doctour Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of Rechester, was Transloted to the See of London, on the twelfth of April; and Doctor John Pynet, Conscrated Bishop of Rochester, on the twenty sixth of June. By which Account he must needs be the first Bishop▪ which received Epi∣scopal Consecration according to the Fom of the English Ordinal: as Farrars was the fist, who was advanced, unto that Honour, by the King's Letters Pa∣tens. As for Ridley, we have spoke before; and as for Poynet, he is affirmed to have been a Man of ver good Learning, with Reference to his Age, and the Time he lived in: well studied in the Greek Tongue, and of no small Emi∣nence in the Arts, and Mathematical Sciences. A Change was also made in Cambridg by the Death of Bucer: which I finde placed, by Fx, on the twenty third of December; by others, with more Truth, on the nineteenth of January (both in the Compass of this year) and by some others, with less Rean, on the tenth of March. But, at wht time sover he died, certain it is, that he was most Solemnly Interred in Saint Marie's-Church attended to Fu- his rave by all the Heads, and most of the Graduates in that Vniversity: his neal Sermon Preached by Dctur Parer, he first Arch-Bishop of Canterbu∣ry in Queen Elizbeth' Time: the Panegyrick made by one of the Haddons▪ a Man of a mo Fluen, and Rhetorical Syle: all that pretended to the Muses, in both Vniverities, setting forth his great Worth, and their own Loss in him, with the best of their Poetry.
Anno Regni Edw. Sexti 5o.An. Reg. 5.o 1550/51 An. Dom. 1550, 1551. WE must begin this year with the Deprivation of Bishop Gardiner, whom we left committed to the Tower the last of June in the year 1548. There he remained almost two years, without being pressed to any particular Point: the yielding unto which might procure his Liberty: or the Refusal justifie such a long Imprisonment. On the tenth of June, this year the Publick Liturgie, now being generally executed in all Parts of the Kingdom, was offered to his Considerati∣on; that some Experiment might be made, whether he would put his Hand unto it, and promise to advance the Service. Upon the fourth day after, the Duke of Sommerset, with five other of the Lords of the Council, was sent unto the Tower to receive his Answer. Which he returned to this effect; That he had deli∣berately considered of all the Offices contained in the Common-Prayer-Book, and all the several Branches of it: That, Though he could not have made it, in that Man∣ner, had the Matter been referred unto him; yet, that he found such things there∣in, as did very well satisfie his Conscience: and therefore that he would, not onely execute it in his own Person; but cause the same to be Officiated by all those of his Diocess. But this was not the Answer which the Courtiers looked for. It was their Hope, they should have found him more averse from the King's Proceed∣ings; that, making a Report of his Perversness, he might be lifted out of that Wealthy Bishoprick: which, if it either were kept Vacant, or filled with a more Tractable Person, might give them opportunity to enrich themselves by the Spoil thereof. Therefore to put him further to it, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Warwick; Sir William Herbert, Master of the Horse; and Mr. Secreta∣ry Petre, are sent upon the ninth of July, with certain Articles: which, for that end, were Signed by the King, and the Lords of the Council. According to the Tenour hereof, he was not onely to testifie his Consent to the Establishing of the Holy-Days, and Fasting-Days, by the King's Authority, the Allow∣ance of the Publick Liturgie, and the Abrogating of the Statute for the Six Articles, &c. but to Subscribe to the Confession of his Fault in his former Obsti∣nacy, after such Form and Manner, as was there required. To which Articles he Subscribed without any great Hesitancy: but refused to put his Hand to the said Confession; There being no reason, (as he thought; and so he answered those, which came unto him from the Court on the Morrow after) that he should yield to the Confssion of a Guilt, when he knew himself Innocent. He is now faln into the Toil, out of which he finds but Little Hope of being set free. For presently, on the neck of this, a Book of Articles is drawn up, containing all the Alteration made by the King, and His Father, as well by Acts of Parliament, as their own Injunctions, from the first Suppression of the Monasteries, to the coming out of the late Form for the Consecration of Arch-Bishops, Bishops▪ &c. Of all which Doings he is required to signifie his Approba∣tion, to make Confession of his Fault, with an Acknowledgment, that he had deserved the Punishment, which was aid upon him. Which Articles (being tendered to him by the Bishop of London, the Master of the Horse, Mr. Secretary Petre, and Goodrick▪ a Counsellour at Law) appeared to him, to be of such an hard Digestion: that he desir'd first to be set at Liberty, before he should be pressed to make a particular Answer. This being taken for a Refusal, and that Refusal taken for a Contempt: the Profits of his Bishoprick are Sequestered from him, for three Moneths, by an Order of the Council-Table, bearing date the nineteenth of the Moneth, the said Profits, in the mean time, to be collect∣ed, or received, by such Person, or Persons, as the King should thereunto ap∣point: with this Intimation in the Close; that if he did not tender his Submissi∣on, at the end of that Term, he should be taken for an Incorrigible Person, and unmeet Minister of this Church, and, Finally to be procceeded against to a Deprivati∣on.
The Term expired, and no such humble Submission, or Acknowledgment, made, as had been required at his Hands; a Commission is directed to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Ely, and Lincoln, Sir William Peter, &c. authorised thereby to proceed against him, upon certain Articles in the same contained. Convented before whom at Lambeth, on the fifteenth of December, he received his Charge. Which being received, he used so many Shifts, and found so many Evasions to elude the Business; that, having appear∣ed six Days before them, without coming to a plain and Positive Answer, he was, upon the fourteenth of February, Sentenced to a Deprivation, and so re∣mitted to the Tower. But Gardiner did not mean to die so tamely, and therefore had no sooner heard the Definitive Sentence; but presently he Protesteth against the same, makes his Appeal unto the King; and causeth both his said Appeal, and Protestation, to be Registred in the Acts of that Court. Of all which he will finde a time to serve himself, in the Aleration of Affairs. It was presumed, that the Report of this Severity against a Man, so eminent for his Parts and Place, would either bring such other Bishops, as had yet stood out, to a fit Conformity; or otherwise expose both them, and their Estates, to the like Condemnation. But some there were, so stiff in their old Opinions: that neither Terrour, nor Perswasion, could prevail upon them; either to give their Approbation of the King's Proceedings; or otherwise to advance the Service. And some there were; who, though they outwardly complyed with the King's Commands, yet was it done so coldly, and with such Reluctancy, as la'd them open to the Spoil, though not to the Loss, of their Bishopricks. Of which last Sort were; Kitching Bishop of Landaff, Salcot (otherwise called Capon) Bishop of Salisbury, and Sampson of Coventry and Lichfield. Of which, the last, to keep his ground, was willing to fling up a great part of his Lands; and, out of those, which either belonged unto his See, or the Dean and Chapter, to raise a Baron's Estate (and the Title of the Baronie too) for Sir William Paget, not born to any such fair Fortunes, as he thus acquired. Salcot of Salisbury, knowing himself obnoxious to some Court-Displeasures, redeems his Peace, and keeps himself out of such Danger, by making long Leases of the best of his Farms and Manours; known afterwards most commonly by the Name of Capons-Feathers. But none of them more miserably Dilapidated the Patrmony of his See, then Bishop Kitching of Landaff. A Church so liberally endowed by the Munificence, and Piety, of some Great Persons in those Times; that if it were possessed but of a tenth Part of what once it had, it might be reckoned (as is affirmed by Bishop Godwine, one of Kitching's Successours) amongst the Rich∣est Churches in these Parts of Christendom. But whatsoever Kitching found it, it was made poor enough, before he left it: so poor, that it is hardly able to keep the Pot boiling for a Parson's Dinner. Of the first Rank, I reckon Voysie of Exeter, Heath of Worcester, and Day of Chichester; for the Province of Canterbury: together with Bishop Tonstal Durham, in the Province of York. The first, once Governour to the Prin∣cess Mary, Preferred afterwards, by King Henry, to the Lord-President-ship of Wales, and the See of Exeter. Which See he found possessed, at his coming to it, of twenty two goodly Manours, and fourteen Mansion-Houses, Richly furnished. But the Man neither could approve the Proceedings of the King in the Reformation; nor cared, in that respect, to Preserve the Patrimony of the Church, for those, who might differ in Opinion from him. And being set upon the Pin, he made such Havock of his Lands, before he was brought under a Deprivation: that he left, but seven or eight of the worst Manours, and those let out into long Leases, and charged with Pensions; and not above two Houses, both bare and naked. Having lost so much Footing within his Di∣ocess, it is no marvail, if he could no longer keep his Standing. For, being found an open Hinderer of the Work in hand, and secretly to have fo∣mented the Rebellion of the Devonshire-Men, in the year 1549▪ he either was
deprived of, or (as some say) resigned his Bishoprick, within few Moneths after the Sentence passed on Gardiner: but lived to be restored again, (as Gardiner also was) in the Time of Queen Mary. Of Day, and Heath, I have nothing to remember more particularly; but, that they were both Deprived on the tenth of October, and lived both to a Restitution in Queen Marie's Reign: Heath, in the mean time, being Liberally, and Lovingly entertained by the Bishop of London, and afterwards Preferred to the Arch-Bishoprick of York, and made Lord Chancellour of England. Nor shall I now say more of Tonstal; but, that, being cast into the Tower on the twentieth day of December, he was there kept, untill the Dissolution of his Bishoprick by Act of Parliament: of which we shall speak more at large, in its proper place. We must not leave these Churches vacant; considering, that it was not long, before they were supplyed with new Incumbents. To Gardiner, in the See of Winton succeeded Doctour John Poynet, Bishop of Rochester: a better Scholar then a Bishop; and purposely Preferred to that Wealthy Bishoprick, to serve other Mens Turns. For, before he was well warm in his See, he dismem∣bred from it the Goodly Palace of Marwel, with the Manours and Parks, of Marwel and Twiford, which had before been seised upon by the Lord Prote∣ctour, to make a Knight's Estate for Sir Henry Seimour, as before was signified. The Palace of Waltham, with the Park and Manour belonging to it, and some good Farms depending on it, were seised into the hands of the Lord Treasurer Pawlet, Earl of Wiltshire: who, having got into possession so much Lands of the Bishoprick▪ conceived himself in a fit Capacity to affect (as shortly after he obtained) the Title of Lord Marquess of Winchester. But this, with many of the rest of Poynet's Grants, Leases, and Alienations, were again recovered to the Church, by the Power of Gardiner; when, being restored unto his See, he was by Queen Mary made Lord Chancellour. To Voysie, in the See of Exeter, suc∣ceeded Doctour Miles Coverdale: one, who had formerly assisted Tyndal, in Translating the Bible into English, and for the most part, lived at Tubing, an Vniversity belonging to the Duke of Saxonie; where he received the Degree of Doctour. Returning into England, in the first year of King Edward, and grow∣ing into great Esteem, for Piety, and Diligent Preaching, he was Consecrated Bishop of this Church, the thirtieth of August: the Bones whereof were so clean picked, that he could not easily leave them with less Flesh, then he found upon them. Nor have we more to say of Scory, who succeeded Day: but, that being Consecrated Bishop of Rochester, in the place of Poynet, on the thirtieth of August also, he succeeded Day, at Chichester, in the year next following. Of which Bishoprick he was deprived of, in the Time of Queen Mary; and after∣wards preferred by Queen Elizabeth to the See of Hreford, in which place he dy∣ed. To Heath, at Worcester, no Successour was at all appointed: that Bishoprick being given in Commendam to Bishop Hooper; who, having been Consecrated Bi∣shop o Glocester on the eighth of March, was made the Commendatory of this See: to which he could not legally be Translatd (as the Case then stood) both Latimer, and Heath being stll alive, and both reputed Bishops of it, by their se∣veral Parties. And here we have a strange Conversion of Affairs: for whereas heretofore, the County of Glocester was a part of the Diocess of Worcester, out of which it was taken by King Henry, when first made a Bishoprick; the Dio∣cess of Worcester was now lay'd to the See of Glocester Not, that I think, that Hoo∣per was suffered to enjoy the Temporal Patrimony of that Wealthy Bishop∣rick: but that he was to exercise the Jurisdiction, and Episcopality, with some short Allowance for his Pains. The Pyrates of the Court were too intent on all Advantages, to let such a Vessel pass untouched; in which they might both finde enough to enrich themselves, and yet leave that, which was sufficient to content the Merchant. An this perhaps may be one Reason, why Latimer was not restored unto his Bishoprick, upon this Avoydance: not in regard of any sensible Dislike, which was taken at him by the Court, for his down-right
Preaching, or that the Bishops feared from him the like Disturbances, which they had met withall in Hooper. But, I conceive, the Principal Reason of it might proceed from his own Unwillingness, to cumber his old Age with the Trouble of Business, and to take that Burthen on his Shoulders; which he had, long be∣fore, thrown off, with such great Alacrity And possible enough it is: that, find∣ing his Abilities more proper for the Pulpit, then they were for the Consistory; he might desire to exercise himself in that Imployment, in which he might appear most serviceable, both to God, and his Church. For, both before, and after this, we finde him frequent in the Pulpit before the King, and have been told of his Diligent and Constant Preaching in other places. His Sermons, for the most part (as the use then was) upon the Gospels of the Day: by which he had the Opportunity of Opening, and Expounding a greater Portion of the Word of God; then if he had confined his Meditations to a single Text. His Enter∣tainment generally with Arch-Bishop Cranmer; where he found all necessary Accommodation: and so extreamly honoured by all sorts of People, that he never lost the Name of Lord; and was still looked on, as a Bishop, though with∣out a Bishoptick. But, notwithstanding the Remove of so many Bishops, there still remained one Rub in the Way; which did as much retard the Progress of the Reformation, as any of the rest, if not altogether. The Princess Mary, having been bred up, from Her Infancy, in the Romish Religion▪ could not be won, by any Argu∣ments, and perswasions, to change Her Minde, or permit that any Altera∣tion should be made in those Publick Offices; to which She had so long been u∣sed. The King had writ many Letters to Her, in hope to take Her off from those Affections, which She carried to the Church of Rome. The like done also by the Lords of the Council, and with like Success. For, besides that She conceived Her Judgment built on so good a Foundation, as could not easily be subverted; there were some Politick Considerations: which possibly might prevail more with Her▪ then all other Arguments. She was not to be told, That, by the Religion of the Protestants, Her Mother's Marriage was Condemned; That by the same She was declared to be Illigitimate; and Consequently, made uncapable to succeed in the Crown, in Case She should survive Her Brother. All which She must acknowledge, to be legally and justly determined. Upon these Grounds, She holds Her self to Her first Resolution, keeps up the Mass, with all the Rites, and Ceremonies belonging to it, and suffers divers Persons, besides her own Domestick Servants, to be present at it. The Emperour had so far mediated in Her behalf, that Her Chaplains were permitted to Celebrate the Mass in Her Presence: but with this Cautio and Restriction; That, they should Celebrate the same in Her Presence onely. For the transgressing of which Bounds, Mallet, and Barkley, Her two Chaplains were Committed Prisoners in December last: of which She makes Complaint to the Lords of the Council; but finds as cold Return from Them, as they did from Her. A Plot is thereupon contrived: for conveying Her out of the Realm by Stealth, to transport Her from Essex, where She then lay, to the Court of the Queen Re∣gent in Flanders; some of Her Servants sent before, Flemish Ships ready to receive Her, and a Commotion to be raised in that County; that in the Heat, and Tu∣mult of it She might make Her Escape. The King is secretly advertised of this Design, and presently dispatcheth certain Forces under Sir John Gates, then newly made Lievtenant of the Band of Pensioners, to prevent the Practice, se∣cures His Coasts, orders His Ships to be in Readiness, and speeds away the Lord Chancellour Rich, with Sir William Peter▪ to bring the Princess to the Court. Which being effected at the last, though not without extream Unwil∣lingness on Her part to begin the Journey; Inglesfield, Walgrave, and Rochester, being all of Principall place about Her, on the thirtieth of October▪ were com∣mited to Custody; which adds a new Affliction to Her, but there was no Re∣medy. The Lords of the Council being commanded by the King to attend upon
Her, declared in the name of His Highness, how long He had permitted Her the Mass; that, finding how unmoveable She was from Her former Courses, He re∣solved not to endure it longer, unless He might perceive some hope of Her Con∣formity, within short time after. To which the Princess Answered; That Her Soul was Goa's; and for Her Faith, that as She could not change, so She would not dssemble it. The Council thereunto rejoyn; That the King intended not to Constrain Her Faith▪ but to restrain Her in the outward Profession of it: in re∣gard of those many dangers, and inconveniences, which might ensue on the Ex∣ample. Which enterchange of words being passed, She is appointed, for the present, to remain with the King: but neither Mallt, nor any other of Her Chaplains, permitted to have speech with Her, or access unto Her. The Emperour, being certified how all things passed, sends an Ambassadour to the King, with a Threatning Message: even to the Denouncing of a Wr; in case his Cousin, the Princess Mary, were not permitted to enjoy the exercise of Her own Religion. To Gratifie whom in His desires, the Lords of the Council generally seemed to be very inclinable; they well considered of the Prejudice, whch must fall upon the English Merchants, if they should lose their Trade in Fl∣ders; where they had a whole year's cloth, beside other Goods. And they knew well, what inconvenience must befall the King, who had there 500. Quintals of Powder, and good store of Armour; which would be seised into the Emperour's hands, and imployed against Him, if any Breach should grow between them. The King is therefore moved, with the joynt Consent of he whole Board, to grant the Emperour's Request: and to dispence with the utmost Rigour of the Law, in that particular; for fear of drawing upon Himself a greater mischief. But they found Him so well Studied in the Grounds and Principles of His Reli∣gion; that no Consideration, drawn from any Reason of State, could induce Him to it. It was thereupon thought fit, to send the Arch-Bishop of Canterbu∣ry, and the Bishop of London, being both Members of that Body, to try what they could do upon Him, in the way of Argument. By them, the Point being brought unto such an Issue▪ as might give them some hopes of being admit∣ed, it was Propounded to Him, as their Opinion, (after some Progress made in the Disputation,) that, Though it were a sin, to give Licence to sin; yet a connivance of it might be allowed: in case it neither were too long, nor with∣out some probable hope of a Reformation. With which Nicety the young King was so unsatisfied, that he declared a Resolution, rather to venture Life, and all things else, which were dear unto Him: then to give way to any thing; which He knew to be against the Truth. Upon which words, the King expressed His inward Trouble by a flood of Tears; and the Bishops, on the sight thereof, wept as fast as He: the King conceiving Himself wronged, in being so unreasonably pres'd; and the Bishops thinking themselves neglected, because unseasonably denied. Thus stood they sient for a time: each Party looking sadly on the apprehension of those Extremities, which this Dispute had brought upon them: as certainly, the Picture of Unkindness is never represented in more lively Co∣lours; then when it breaks out betwixt those, who are most tenderly affected unto one another. The Bishops thereupon withdrew, admiring at such great Abilities in so young a King; and magnified the Name of God, for giving them a Prince of such Eminent Piety. This being made known unto the Council, it was thought necessary to dismiss the Emperour's Embassadour with such an Answer; as should both give the English time to fetch off their Goods, and let his Master have the st of the Winter to al∣lay his Heats. It was therefore signified unto him; That, The King would short∣ly send an Aget to reside with the Emperour, Authourised, and strcted in all particulars, which might beget a right Vnderstanding between both Princes. Thus answered, he returns to the Emperour's Court: whom Wotton shortly after fol∣loweth, ufficiently Instructed; To desire the Emperour to be less violent in his requests; and to Advertise him, That, The Lady Mary, as She was His Cou∣sin,
so She was the King's Sister, and, which is more, His Subject  That seeing the King was a Sovereign Prince, without dependency upon any but God, it was not rea∣son, that the Emperour should intermeddle, either with Ordering His Subjects, or directing the Affairs of His Realm. But so far he was Authourised to offer; That whatsoever favour the King's Subjects had in the Emperour's Dominions, for their Religion, the same should the Emperour's Subjects receive in England. Fur∣ther then this, as the King, his Master, would not go, so it would be a lst labour to desire it of him. This was enough to let the Emperour see, how little his Threats were feared, which made him the less forward in sending more. Which Passa∣ges, relating to the Princess Mary, I have lai'd together, for the better under∣standing, how all matters stood about this time, betwixt Her, and the King; though possibly the sending of Wotton to the Emperour might be the Work of the next year, when the King's Affairs were better setled, then they were at the present. For the King, finding the extraordinary Coldness of the Emperour, when his assistance was required, for Defence of Bulloign, and the hot Pursuit of his Demands of a Toleration, for the Family of the Lady Mary, conceived it most expedient, for His Affairs, to unite Himself more strongly, and entirely, in a League with France. For entrance whereunto, an Hint was taken from some Words, which fell from Guidolti at the Treaty of Bulloign: when he propound∣ed; That, in stead of the Queen of Scots, whom the English Commissioners demanded for a Wife to their King, a Daughter of the French King might be joyned in Mariage with Him: affirming merrily. That, If it were a dry Peace, it would hardly be durable. These Words, which then were taken onely for a Slight, or Diversion, are now more seriously considered: as Many times the smallest Overtures produce Conclusions of the greatest Consequence. A Solemn Em∣bassie is thereupon directed to the Court of France: the Marquess of North∣hampton nominated for the Chief Embassadour, associated with the Bishop of Ely; Sir Philip Hobby, Gentleman-Usher of the Order; Sir William Pickering; Sir Thomas Smith, Principal Secretary of State, and Sir John Mason, Clerk of the Council; as Commissioners with him. And, that they might appear in the Court of France with the greater Splendour, they were accompanied with the Earls of Arundel, Rutland, and Ormond; and the Lords, L'isle, Fitz-water, Abergaven∣ny, Bray▪ and Evers, with Knights, and Gentlemen of Note, to the number of six and twenty, or thereabouts. Their Train so limited▪ for avoiding of con∣tention amongst themselves, that no Earl should have above four Attendants, no Baron above three; nor any Knight, or Gentleman, above two a piece; the Commissioners not being limited to any number, as the others were. Setting forwards in the Moneth of June, they were met by the Lord Constable Chastition, and by him Conducted to the Court, lying at Chasteau Bryan: the nearer to which as they approached, thē greater was the concourse of the French Nobi∣lity, to attend upon them. Being brought unto the King, then being in his Bed-chamber, the Marquess first presented him, in the name of his King, with the Order of Saint George, called The Garter: wherewith he was presently Invested by Sir Philip Hobby; who, being an Officer of the Order, was made Commissioner (as it seemed) for that purpose chiefly; rewarded for it by that King with a Chain of Gold, valued at two hundred pounds▪ and a Gown, richly trim∣med with Ayglets, which he had then upon his back. This Ceremony being thus performed; the Bishop of Ely, in a short Speech Declared, How desirous his Master was, not onely to continue, but to encrease Amity with the French King; that for this end He had sent the Order of The Garter, to be both a Testimony, and Tye of Love between them; to which purpose principally, those Societies of Honour were first devised: Declaring, that they had Commission to make Overtures of some other matters, which was like to make the Concord betwixt the Kings, and their Realms, not onely more durable, but in all expectation perpetual; and thereupon desired the King to ap∣point
some persons, enabled with Authourity, to Treat with them. To which it was Answered, by the Cardinal of Lorrain, in the name of that King; That his Master was ready to apprehend and embrace all Offers, tending to encrease of Amity; and the rather, for that long Hostility had made their new Friend∣ship both more weak in it self▪ and more obnoxious unto Jealousies, and Distrusts: and therefore promised on the King's behalf, that Commissioners should be ap∣pointed to Treat with them about any matters, which they had in Charge. In pursuance whereof, the said Cardinal, the Constable Chastilion, the Duke of Guise, and others of like Eminent note, being appointed for the Treaty; the English Commissioners first prosecute their Old Demand for the Queen of Scots. To which it was Answered by the French, That they had parted with too much Treasure, and spent too many Lives, upon any Conditions, to let Her go: and that Conclusion had been made, long before, for her Marriage with the Daul∣phin of France. The English, upon this, proposed a Marriage between their King, and the Lady Elizabeth, the Eldest Daughter of France (who after was Mar∣ried to Philip the Second) to which the French Commissioners seemed very in∣clinable; with this Proviso notwithstanding, That neither Party should be bound, either in Conscience, or Honour, untill the Lady should accomplish twelve years of Age. And so far Matters went on smoothly: but, when they came to talk of Portion, there appeared a vast difference between them. The English Commissioners ask no more, then fifteen hundred thousand Crowns; but fell, by one hundred thou∣sand after another, till they sunk to eight. The French on the other side began as low, at one hundred thousand; but would be drawn no higher, then to Pro∣mise two: that being (as they affirmed) the greatest Portion, which ever any of the French Kings had given with a Daughter. But, at the last, it was accorded, that the Lady should be sent into England at the French King's Charges, when She was come within three Moneths of the Age of Marriage; sufficiently appoint∣ed with Jewels, Apparel, and convenient Furniture for Her House; That, at the same time, Bonds should be delivered for Performance of Covenants, at Paris by the French, and at London by the King of England; and That, in case the Lady should not consent, after She should be of Age for Marriage, the Penalty should be one hundred and fifty thousand Crowns. The perfecting of the Negotiation, and the settling of the Ladie's Joynture referred to such Ambassadours, as the French King should send to the Court of England. Appointed whereunto were the Lord Marshal of France, the Duke of Guise, the President Mortuillier, the Prin∣cipal Secretary of that King, and the Bishop of Perigeux; who, being attended by a Train of 400. men, were conducted from Graves-end by the Lord Admiral Clinton, welcomed with Great Shot from all the Ships, which lay on the Thames, and a Vollie of Ordnance from the Tower, and lodged in Suffolk-Place in South-wark. From whence attended the next day to the King's House at Richmond: His Majesty then remaining at Hampton-Court, by reason of the Sweating Sickness (of which more anon) which at that time was at the Highest. Having refreshed themselves that night, they were brought the next day be∣fore the King, to whom the Marshal presented, in the name of his Master, the Collar, and Habit of St. Michael, being at that time the Principal Order of that Realm: in testimony of that dear Affection, which he did bear unto him; greater then which (as he desired him to believe) a Father could not bear unto his Natural son. And then, Addressing himself in a short Speech unto His Highness, he desired him, amongst other things, not to give entertain∣ment to Vulgar Rumours, which might breed Jealousies, and Distrusts, between the Crowns; and, that if any difference did arise between the Subjects of both Kingdoms, they might be ended by Commissioners, without engaging either Nation in the Acts of Hostility. To which the King returned a very favourable Answer, and so dismissed them for the present. Two, or three days being spent in Feasting, the Commissioners on both sides settled themselves upon the matter
of the Treaty; confirming what had passed before, and adding thereunto the Proportioning of the Ladie's Jointure. Which was accorded at the last, to the yearly value of ten thousand Marks English; with this Condition interposed, that, if the King died before the Marriage, all her Pretensions to that Jointure should be buried with him. All Matters being thus brought unto an happy Conclusion, the French prepared for their Departure: at which Time the Mar∣shal presented Monsieur Boys, to remain as Legier with the King, and the Ma∣quess presented Mr. Pickering, to be his Majestie's Resident in the Court of France. And so the French take leave of England, rewarded by the King in such a Royal and Munificent Manner, as shewed, he very well understood what belong∣ed to a Royal Suitour: those, which the French King had designed or the English Ambassadours, (not actually bestowed, till all things had been fully settled, and dispatched in England) hardly amounting to a fourth part of that Munificence, which the King had shewed unto the French. Grown confident of his own Security, by this new Alliance, the King not onely made less Reckoning of the Emperour's Interposings in the Case of Reli∣gion; but proceeded more vigorously, then before, in the Reformation: the Building up of which upon a surer, and more durable Bottom, was contrived this year, though not established till the next. Nothing as yet had been conclu∣ded positively, and Dogmatically, in Points of Doctrine, but as they were to be collected from the Homilies, and the Publick Liturgie; and those but few, in Refe∣rence to the many Controversies, which were to be maintained against the Papists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries of that Age. Many Disorders had grown up in this little time; in the Officiating the Liturgie, the Vestures of the Church, and the Habit of Church-Men, began by Calvin, prosecuted by Hooper, and countenanced by the large Immunities, which had been given to John a Lasco, and his Church of Strangers. And unto these, the change of Al∣tars into Tables gave no small Encrease: as well by reason of some Differen∣ces, which grew amongst the Ministers themselves upon that Occasion; as in re∣gard of of that Irreverence, which it bred in the People, to whom it made the Sacrament to appear less Venerable, then before it did. The People had been so long accustomed to receive that Sacrament upon their Knees; that no Rule, or Canon, was thought necessary to keep them to it: which thereupon was not im∣prudently omitted in the Publick Rubricks. The Change of Altars into Tables, the Practise of the Church of Strangers, and John a Lasco's Book in Maintain∣ance of sitting at the Holy Table, made may think that Posture best, which was so much countenanced. And, what was like to follow upon such a Liberty, the Proneness of those Times to Heterodoxies, and Prophaness, gave just cause to fear. Somewhat was therefore to be done to prevent the Mischief: and nothing could prevent it better, then to reduce the People to their Antient Custome by some Rule, or Rubrick, by which they should be bound to receive it kneeling. So for the Ministers themselves, they seemed to be as much at a Loss in their Offi∣ciating at the Table, as the People were in their Irreverences to the Blessed Sacra∣ment. Which cannot better be expressed, then in the words of some Popish Prelats, by whom it was objected unto some of our chief Reformers. Thus White of Lincoln chargeth it upon Bishop Ridley (to omit his prophane calling of the Lord's Table, in what Posture soever scituated, by the Name of an Oyster-Board) Acts and Mon. That, when their Table was Constituted, they could never be content iplacing the same; now East, now North, now one way, now another: untill it pleased God, of his Goodness, to place it quite out of the Church. The like did Weston (the Pro∣locutour of the Convocation, in the first of Queen Mary) in a Disputation held with Latimer; telling him with Reproach, and Contempt enough, that the Prote∣stants, having tured their Table, were like a Company of Apes, that knew not which way to turn their Tails▪ looking one day East, and another West; one this way, and another that way, as their Fancies lead them. Thus finally, one Miles Hubbard, in a Book, called The Display of ProtestantsPrinted 1556. pag. 81. doth report the Business,
How long (say they) were they learning to set their Tables to minister the Com∣munion upon? First they placed it aloft, where the High Altar stood, then must it be removed from the Wall, that one might go between: the Ministers being in Con∣tention on whether part to turn their faces, either toward the West, the North, or South; some would stand Westward, some Northward, some Southward. It was not to be thought, but that the Papists would much please themselves in these Disorders; and that this Difference, and Diversity, though in Circumstance onely, might draw contempt upon the Sacrament it self, and give great Scandal unto many Moderate, and well meaning Men. A Rubrick therefore is resolv∣ed on, by which the Minister, which officiates, should be pointed to a certain Place; and, by the Rubrick then devised, the North-side was thought fitter, then any other. But the main Matters, which were now brought under Consideration, were the reviewing of the Liturgie, and the Composing of a Book of Articles: this last for the avoiding diversities of Opinions, and for the stablishing of Consent touch∣ing true Religion; the other for removing of such Offences, as had been taken by Calvin, and his Followers, at some parts thereof. For Calvin, having broke the Ice, resolved to make his way through it to the Mark he aimed at, which was to have this Church depend upon his Direction, and not to be less estimable here, then in other places. To which end, as he formerly had applyed himself to the Lord Protectour, as appears by his Letter of the year An. 1549. So now he sets upon the King, the Council, and the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, in hope to bring them to his Bent. In his Letters to the King, and Council, (as himself signified to Bullinger, on the 29th. of August) he exciteth them to proceed to a Reformation; that is to say, to such a ReformationVt eos inci∣taremus ad per∣gendum. &c. pag. 98. as he had projected, and without which his Followers would not be contented. In his Letters to the King alone, he lets him knowIn statu Re∣gni multa adhuc desiderantur. pag. 384. that many things were still amiss in the State of the Kingdom, which stood in need of Reformation. And finally in those to Cranmer, he certifies him, that in the Service of this Church, as then it stood, there remained a whole Mass of Popery, which did not onelyQuae non ob∣seuret modo, &c. darken, but de∣story God's Holy Worshp. But fearing he might not edifie with so wise a Prince, assisted by such a Prudent Council, and such Learned Prelats, he hath his Agents in the Court, the Country, and the Universities, by whom he drives on his Design, in all parts at once. And so far he prevailed in the first two years, that in the Convocation, which began in the former year, An. 1550, the first Debate amongst the Prelats was of such Doubts, as had arisen about some things contained in the Common-Prayer-Book and more particularly touch∣ing such Feasts, as were retained, and such, as had been abrogated by the Rules thereof; the Form of Words used at the giving of the Bread, and the different Manner of Administring the Holy Sacrament. Which being signified unto the Prolocutour, and the rest of the Clergy, who had received somewhat in Charge about it the day before; Answer was made, that they had not yet sufficiently con∣sidered of the Points proposed, but that they would give their Lordships some account thereof in the following Session. But what account was given, appears not in the Acts of that Convocation; of which there is nothing left upon Re∣cord, but this very Passage. For the avoiding of these Doubts, the satisfying of the Importunities of some, and rectifying the Disorders of Others, rather then in regard of any Impiety, or Impertinency in the Book it self, it was brought under a Review; and being so reviewed was ratified, and confirmed by Act of Parliament, in the following year. By the Tenour of which Act it may appear, First, That there was nothing contained in the said First Book, but what was agreeable to the Word of God, and the Primitive Church, very comfortable to all good People, desiring to live in Christi∣an Conversation, and most profitable to the Estate of this Realm. Secondly, That such Doubts, as had been raised in the use and exercise thereof, proceeded rather from the Curiosity of the Minister, and Mistakers, then of any other Worthy
Cause. And therefore Thirdly, That it was found expedient, that the said Bok should be faithfully perused, explained, and made fully perfect in all such pla∣ces, in which it was necessary to be made more earnest, and fit for the stirring up of all Christian people, to the true honouring of Almighty God. So far we are directed by the Light of this Act of Parliament, 5. 6. Edw. 6. cap. 1. But, if we would desire to know the Names of those good and Godly Men, by whom it was so explained, and altered, in that it leaves us in the dark: none of them being named, nor any way lad open for the finding of them. So that the most, that can be done▪ is to go by Conjecture, and to ascribe it to those Men; who had first composed it, and who were afterwards Authorised, for drawing up the Form of Consecration, &c. annexed to this new Book, as a part thereof, and so adjudged to be by two Acts of Parliament. For the avoyding of Diversities of Opinions, and for stablishing Consent, touch∣ing true Religion, it was thought necessary to compose a Book of Articles: in which should be contained the Common Principles of the Christian Faith, in which all Parties did agree; together with the most material Points, in which they differed. For the better performing of which Work, Melancthon's Company, and Assistance, had been long desired. That he held Correspondence once with the King, and Arch-Bishop Cranmer, appears by his Epistles of the year 1549, 1550, and 1551. but that he came not over, as had been expected, must be imputed, either to our home-bred Troubles, or the great Sickness of this year, or the deplorable Death of the Duke of Sommerset, on whose Integrity, and Candour, he did most rely. Yet the best was, that, though Erasmus was dead, and Me∣lancthon absent, yet were they to be found both alive, and present in their learn∣ed Writing. By which, together with the Augustan Confession, the Compo∣sers of those Articles were much directed; not, that they looked upon them as the Rule, or Canon, but onely as subservient helps to promote the Service. But, who they were, that laboured in this weighty Work, and made it ready for De∣bate, and Conference, in the next Convocation; as I have no where found, so I cannot conjecture: unless perhaps, we may attribute the Honour of it to those Bishops, and the other Learned Men; before remembred, whose Hands and Heads had before been exercised in the publick Formulas. That Cranmer had a great hand in them, is a hing past question; who therefore takes upon himself, as the Authour of them: for which Consult the Acts and Mon. fol. 1704. In which, we are to understand him, as the principal Architect, who contrived the Build∣ing, and gave the inferiour Workmen their several parts, and Offices, in that great Imployment; and not, that it was the sole work of his Hands, or had been agitated and debated in no Head, but his. So did the Emperour Justinian, in the Book of Institutes, and Theodosins in the Code, Boiface in the Decretals, and John the 22th. in that part of the Canon Law, which they call the Extravagants: the honour of which Works was severally arrogated by them; because per∣formed by their Encouragement, and at their Appointment. But whosoever laboured in the Preparation of these Articles, certain it is, that they were onely a Rude Draught, and of no signification▪ till they had passed the Vte of the Convocation; and there we shall hear further of them. In Reference to the Polity, and good Order of the Common-Wealth, there were two things done of great Importance: the one redounding to the Present, the o∣ther to the Future Benefit of the English Nation. Of which last sort, was the sup∣pressig of the Corporation of Merchant-Strangers, the Merchants of the Steel-Yard, as they commonly called them. Concerning which we are to know, that the English, in the Times foregoing, being neither strong in Shipping, nor much accustomed to the Seas, received all such Commodities, as were not of the growth of their own Country, from the hands of Strangers, resorting hither, from all Parts, to upbraid our Laziness. Amongst which, the Merchants of the East-Land arts of Almain, or High Germany, (well known in former Stories by the Name of Easterlings,) used to bring hither, yearly, great quantities of
Wheat, Rye, and other Grain, as also Cables, Ropes, Masts, Pitch, Tar, Flax, Hemp, Linen Cloth, Waincoats, Wax, Steel, and other profitable Merchandises, for the use of this Kingdom. For their Encouragement wherein they were amply Privileged, exempt from many Impositions, which Mer∣chant-Strangers use to pay in all other Countries, erected into a Corporation by King Henry the Third, commonly called Guilda Aula Theutonicorum; per∣mitted first to carry out Wools unwrought, and afterwards a certain number of Cloaths, when the English were grown skilfull in that Manufacture. Their Court kept in a fair large House built near the Thames, which from an open place, wherein Steel had formerly been sold, took the Name of the Steel-Yard. Grown Rich, and driving a great Trade, they drew upon themselves the Envy (as all other Merchant-Strangers did) of the Londoners chiefly, but generally of all the Port Towns of England, who began now to think the Seas as open to them, as to any others. It was considered also, by the Lords of the Council, that by suffering all Commodities of a Foreign growth, and a great part of the Com∣modities of the growth of England, to be imported, and exported in Out-lan∣dish Bottoms, the English Merchants were discouraged from Navigation, where∣by the Shipping of the Realm was kept low, and despicable. It was therefore thought expedient, in Reason of State, to make void their Privileges, and put the Trade into the hands of the English Merchant. For the doing whereof, the Easterlings, or Merchants of the Steel-Yard, had given cause enough. For, whereas they had antiently been permitted to ship away but eighty Cloaths, af∣terwards one hundred, and at last one thousand; it was found, that, at this time, they had transported, in their own Bottoms, 44000 English Cloat, there being but 1100 ship'd away, by all Strangers else. It was also found, that, besides the Native Commodities of their own growth, they had brought in much Stran∣gers goods, of other Counties, contrary to their agreement, made with King Edward the Furt; and that, upon a further search, their Corporation was found imperfect, their Numbers, Names, and Nations not sufficiently known. This gave the Council ground enough for seising all their Liberties into the hands of the King, and never after to restore them; notwithstanding the great Embassies and Solicitations of the Cities of Hamborough, and Lubeck, and many other of the Hans-Towns in Germany, who had seen their Factories, and Factours. And hereunto the seasonable coming of Sebastian Cabot (of which more anon) gave no small Advantage: by whose Encouragement, and Example, the English Nation began to fall in Love with the Seas, to try their Fortunes in the Discovery of unknown Regions, and consequently to encrease their Shipping; till by de∣grees, they came to drive a wealthy Trade in most parts of the World, and to be more considerable for their Naval Power, then all their Neighbours. But because all things could not be so well settled at the first, as not to need the Help, and Correspondencies of some foreign Nations, it was thought fit to earken to an Entercourse with the Crown of Sweden; which was then Oppor∣tunely offered by Gustavus Ericus, the first of the Family now reigning. By which it was agreed, First, That, if the King of Sweden sent Bullion into England, He might carry away English Commodities without Custom. Secondly, That He should carry Bullion to no other Prince. Thirdly, That, if He sent Ozimus, Steel, Copper, &c. He should pay Cu∣stom for English Commodities, as an English-man. Fourthly▪ That, if He sent other Merchandise, He should have free Intercourse; paying Custom, as a Stranger. Whreupon the Mint was set on work, which brought the King, for the first year, the sum of twenty four thousand Pounds; of which the sum of fourteen thouand pounds was designed for Ireland, and the rest lay'd up in the Exche∣quer: some other waies were devised also, that the Mint might be kept going, and some agreement made with the Mint-Masters, in the Point of Coynage:
which proved more to the Advantage of the King, then the present profit of the Subject. For, hereupon, on the ninth of July, the base Money, Coyned in the time of the King deceased, was publickly decryed by Proclamation▪ the Shilling to go for Nine Pence onely, and the Groat for Three Pence. And, on the seventeenth of August then next following, the Nine-Peny-piece was de∣cryed to Six Pence, the Groat to Two Pence, the Half-Groat to a Peny. By means whereof, he, that was worth one thousand pound on the eighth of July, without any ill-husbandry in himself, or diminution of his stock, was found, be∣fore the eighteenth day of August, to be worth no more then half that Sum; and so proportionably in all other Sums, both above, and under▪ Which, though it caused many an heavy heart, and much repining at the present, amongst all those, whose Wealth lay most especially in Trade, and Money; yet proved it by degrees a chief Expedient, for reducing the Coyn of England to it's anti∣ent Valew. For, on the thirtieth of October, the Subjects had the taft of the future benefit, which was to be expected from it; there being then some Coyns Proclaimed, both in Gold, and Silver: Pieces of thirty shillings, ten shillings, and five shillings, of the finest Gold; pieces of five shillings, two shillings six pence, one shilling six pence, &c. of the puret Silver. Which put the Mer∣chant in good hope, that he should drive as rich a Trade under this young King, as in the happiest dayes of his Predecessours, before the Mony was deba∣sed. And now we come to the great Troubles in the Court, began in the Destruction of the Duke of Sommerset: but ending in the untimely death of this Hopeful King; so signified (as it was thought, upon the Post-Fact) by two strange Presages within the compass of this year, and one, which followed in the next. The first, of this year, was a great and terrible Earthquake, which happened on the twenty fifth of May, at Croydon, and some other Villages thereabouts, in the County of Surrey. This was conceived to have Prognosticated those Concussions, which af∣terwards happened n the Court, to the fall of the Great Duke of Sommerset, and divers Gentlemen of Note, and Quality, who perished in the same ruin with him. The last was of six Dolphins, taken up in the Thames, three of them at Queen Borough, and three near Grenwich; the least as big as any Horse. The Rarity whereof occasioned some Grave men to dispence with their Pru∣dence, and some Great Persons also to put off their State, that they might be∣hold a Spectacle, so unusual to them. Their coming up so far, beheld by Mariners, as a Presage of foul weather at Sea; but afterwards by States-Men, of those Storms, and Tempests, which afterwards befell this Nation, in the Death of King Edward, and the Tempestuous Times of Queen Marie's Reign. But the most sad Presage of all was the Breaking out of a Disease, called the Sweating Sickness; appearing first at Shrewsbury, on the fifteenth of April, and after spreading by degrees over all the Kingdom; ending its Progress in the North, about the beginning of October. Described by a very Learned Man, to be a new, strange, and violent Disease: wherewith if any man were attached, he dy∣ed, or escaped within nine hours, of ten at most; if he slept, (as most men de∣sired to do) he dyed within six hours, if he took cold, he dyed in three. It was observed to Rage chiefly amongst men of strongest Constitution, and years: few aged Men, or Women, or young Children, being either subject to it, or dy∣ing of it. Of which last sort, those of most Eminent Rank, were two of the Sons of Chals Brandon: both dying at Cambridg, both Dukes of Suffolk (as their Father had been before;) but the youngest following his dead Brother so close at the Heels, that he onely out-lived him long enough to enjoy that Title. And, that, which was yet most strange of all, no Foreigner, which was then in England (four hundred French attending here, in the Hottest of it, on that King's Ambassadours) did perish by it. The English being singled out, taint∣ed, and dying of it in all other Countries, without any danger to the Natives; called therefore, in most Latine Writers, by the name of Sudor Anglicus, or
The English Sweat. First known amongst us, in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh; and then beheld, as a Presage of that troublesom, and Laborious Reign, which after followed: the King being for the most part in continual Action; and the Subjects, either sweating out their Blood, or Trea∣sure. Not then so violent, and extreme, as it was at the present; such infinite Multitudes being at this time swept away by it, that there died eight hundred in one week in London onely. These being looked on as Presages, we will next take a view of those sad Events, which were supposed to be prognosticated by them; beginning first with the Concussions of the Court by open Factions, and ending in a Sweating Sickness; which drew out some of the best Blood, and most Vital Spirits of the Kingdom. The Factions Headed by the Duke of Sommerset, and the Earl of Warwick: whose reconciliation, on the Earl's part, was but feigned, and counterfeit; though he had both given, and taken Pledges for a faster Friendship. The good suc∣cess he found in his first attempt against the Duke, when he degraded him from the Office of Lord Protectour, emboldened him to make some further trial of his Fortune; to which there could not be a stronger Temptation, then the Ser∣vility of some Great Men about the Court, in prostituting their affection to his Pride, and Tyranny. Grown absolute in the Court (but more by the weakness of others, then any virtue of his own he thought it no impossible matter, to make that Weakness an improvement of his strength, and Power. And, passing from one Imagination to another, he fixed at last upon a Fancy of transferring the Imperial Crown of this Realm, from the Royal Family of the Tudors, unto that of the Dudlies. This to be done, by Marrying one of his Sons to the Lady Jane, the eldest Daughter of Henry, Lord Marquess Dorset, and of the Lady Francis his Wife, one of the Daughters, and co-Heirs of Charls Brandon, the late Duke of Suffolk, by Mary, Dowager of France, and the bet-beloved Sister of King Henry the Eighth. In order whereunto, he must first oblige the Mar∣quess by some signal favour; advance himself to such a Greatness, as might render any of his Sons an agreeable match for either of the Marquess's Daugh∣ters; and finally devise some means, by which the Duke of Sommerset might be took out of the way: whose life he looked on, as the principal Obstacle to his great Aspirings. By this Design, he should not onely satisfie his Ambition, but al∣so sacrifice to Revenge. The Execution of his Father, in the first year of the Reign of the late King Henry, would not out of his mind; and by this means he might have opportunity to execute his just vengeance on the King's Posterity, for the unjust Murther (as he esteem'd it) of his innocent Father. Confirm∣ed in these Resolves by Sir John Gates, Lieutenant of the Band of Pensioners; who was reported afterwards to have put this Plot into his Head at the first, as he stood to him in the prosecution of it to the very last. The Privy Council of his own thoughts having thus advised, the Privy Coun∣cil of the King was in the next place to be made sure to him; either obliged by Favours, or gained by Flatteries: those of most Power to be most Courted, through a smooth Countenance, fair Language, and other thriving Acts of in∣sinuation, to be made to all. Of the Lord Treasurer Paulet he was sure enough: whom he had found to have so much of the Willow in him, that he could bend him how he pleased. And being sure of him, he thought himself as sure of the Publick Treasure, as if it were in his own Pockets. The Marquess of North-hampton was Captain of the Band of Pensioners, encreased in Power, though not in Place; by ranging under his Command, as well the Light-Horse, as the Men at Arms, which had served at Bulloign. With him the Earl had peeced before, drew him into his first Design, for bringing down the Lord Pro∣tectour to a lower Level: but made him faster then before, by doing so many good Offices to Sir William Herbert, who had Married his Sister. Which Her∣bert, being son of Richard Herbert of Ewias, one of the Bastards of William Lord Herbert of Ragland, the first Earl of Pembroke of that House, was, of
himself, a Man of a daring Nature, Boisterously bold, and, upon that account, much favoured by King enry the Eighth growing into ore Credit with the King, in regard of the Lady Ann his Wife, the Sister of Queen Katin Par, and having mightily raised hmslf in the fall of Abbies, he was made chief Gen∣tleman of the Privy-Chamber, and by that Title raked amongst the Execu∣tours of the King's last Will, and then appointed to be one of the Council to the King now Reigning. Being found by Dudly, a fit man to advance his ends, he is by his Procurement gratfid (for I know not what Service, unless it were for furthering the Sale of Bulloign) with some of the King's Lands, amounting to five hundred pounds in yearly Rents, and made Lord Prsident of Wales, pro∣moted afterwards to the place of Master of the Horse, that he might be as con∣siderabe in the Court, as he was in the Country. It was to be presumed, that he would not be wanting unto him, who had so preferred him. By these three all Affairs of Court were carried: ploted by Dudley, smoothed by the Court∣ship of the Marquess, and executed by the bold hand of the new Lord Pre∣sident. Being thus fortified, he revives his former Quarrel with the Duke of Som∣merset; not that he had any just ground for it, but that he looked upon him as the onely Block, which lay in the way of his Aspirings, and herefore was to be removed by what means soever. Plots are lai'd therefore to entrap him, Snares to catch him, Reports raised him, as a Proud, and Ambitious Person, of whose Aspirings there would be no other end, then the Crown it self, and com∣mon Rumours spread abroad, that some of his Followers had Proclaimed him King in several places, onely to finde how well the People stood affected to it. His Doors are watched, and Notice took of all, that went in and out, his Words ob∣served, made much worse by telling, and aggravated with all odious Circum∣stances to his Disadvantage. No way untravailed in the Arts of Treachery, and Fraud, whch might bring him into Suspicion with the King, and Obloquie with the common People. The Duke's Friends were not ignorant of all these Practises, and could not but perceive, but that his Ruin, and their own, was pro∣jected by them. The Law of Nature bound them to preserve themselves: but their Adversaries, were too cunning for them at the Weapon of Wit, and had too much Strength in their own Hands, to be easily overmastered in the way of Power. Some dangerous Counsels were thereupon infused into him, (more likely by his Wife, then by any other) to invite these Lords unto a Banquet, and either to kill them as they sate, or violently to drag them from the Table, and cut of their Heads; the Banquet to be made at the Lord Page's Hose, near Saint Clement's Church, and one hundred stout Men to be lodged in Sommerset-Place, not far off, for the Execution of that Mrther. This Plot confessed (if any Credit may be given to such Confessions) by one Crane, and his Wife, both great in the Favour of the Duchess, and with her committed. And after justfied by Sir Thomas Palmer, who was committed with the Duke, in his Examination ta∣ken by the Lords of the Council. There were said to be some Consultations al∣so, for raising the Forces in the North, for setting upon the Gens'd arms, which served in the Nature of a Life-Guard (as before was said) upon some day of General-Muster: two thousand Foot, and one hundred Horse of the Duke's being designed unto that Service; and that, being done, to raise the City, by Proclaiming Liberty. To which it was added by Hammond, one of the Duke's false Servants, That his Chamber at Greenwich had been strongly guarded by Night, to prevent the Surprisal of his Person. How much of this is true, or whether any of it be true or not, it is not easie to determne, though possibly enough it is, that all this Smoak could not be without some Fire: which whosoever kindled first, there is no doubt, but that Earl Dudly blew the Coals, and made it seem greater then it was. Of all these Practises, and Designs (if such they were) the Earl is contantly advertised by his Espials, whom he had among them; and gave them as much Lin, and Lei∣sure,
as they could desire, till he had made all things ready for the Executing of his own Projectments. But first there must be a great day of bestowing Ho∣nours: as well for gaining the more Credit unto him, and his Followers; as, by the jollity of the Time, to take away all Fear of Danger from the Opposite Party. In Pursuit whereof, Henry Lord Gray, Marquess of Dorset, descended from Elizabeth, Wife of King Edward the Fourth, by Her former Husband, is made Duke of Suffolk: to which he might pretend some Claim▪ in Right of the Lady Frances, his Wife▪ the eldest Daughter of Charls Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, and Sister of Henry an Charls, the two late Dukes thereof, who dyed a few Moneths since, at Cambridg, of the Sweating Sickness. The Earl himself, for some Rea∣sons very well known to himself, and not unknown to many others, is made Duke of Northumberland: which Title had lain Dormant, ever since the Death of Henry Lord Percy, the sixth Earl of that Family, who dyed in the year 1537. or thereabouts: of whom more anon. The Lord Treasurer Pawlet, being then Earl of Wiltshire, is made Marquess of Winchester: Sir William Herbert created at the same time Lord Herbert of Cardiff, and Erl of Pembroke. Some make Sir Thomas Darcie, Captain of the Guard, to be advanced unto the Title of Lord Darcy of Chich on the same day also: which others place, perhaps more right∣ly, on the fifth of April. The Solemnity of which Creations being passed over, the Order of Knighthood is conferred on William Cecil Esquire, one of the Se∣cretaries of Estate; John Cheek, Tutour, or Schole-Master to the King; Henry Dudley, and Henry Nevil, Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber. At, or about which time, Sir Robert Dudley, the third Son of the new Duke of Nrthumber∣land, (but one, which had more of the Father in hm, then all the rest) is sworn of the BedChamber to the King; which was a place of greatest Trust, and Near∣ness to His Majestie's Person. The Triumphs of this Day, being the eleventh day of October, were but a Por∣logue to the Tragedy, which began on the fifth day after. At what time the Duke of Sommerset, the Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Palmer, Sir Ralph Vane, Sir Thomas Arundel, together with Hammond, Newdigate, and two of the Sei∣mours, were seised on, and committed to Custody; all of them, except Palmer, Vane, and Arundel, being sent to the Tower. And these three kept in several Chambers, to attend the pleasure of the Council, for their Examinations. The Duchess of Sommerset, Crane, and his Wife, above-mentioned, and one of the Gentlewomen of her Chamber, were sent unto the Tower on the morrow next; followed not long after by Sir Thomas Holdcroft, Sir Miles Partridg, Sir Mi∣chael Stanhop, Wingfield, Banister, and Vaughan, with certain others: for whose Commitment there was neither cause known, nor afterwards discovered. Onely the greater Number raised the greater Noise, increas'd the Apprehension of the present Danger, and served to make the Duke more Criminal in the Eyes of the People, for drawing so many of all sorts into the Conspiracy. Much time was spent in the Examination of such of the Prisoners, as either had before disco∣vered the Practice (if any such Practice were intended) or were now fitted, and in∣structed, to betray the Duke into the Power, and Malice of his Enemies. The Con∣fessions which seemed of most importance, were those of Palmer, Crane, and Ham∣mond; though the Truth, and Reality, of the Depositions may be justly question∣ed. For, neither were they brought, face to face, before the Duke, at the time of his Trial; as in ordinary course they should have been: nor suffered loss of Life, or Goods, as some others did, who were no more guilty then themselves. And yet the Business stai▪d not here; the Earl of Arundel, and the Lord Paget, and two of the Earl of Arundel's Servants, being sent Prisoners after the rest, upon Crane's detection. It was further added by Palmer, that, on the last St. George's-Day, the Duke of Sommerset, being upon a journey into the North, would have raised the People; if he had not been assured by Sir William Her∣bert, that no Danger was intended to him. Six Weeks there passed between the Commitment of the Prisoners, and the
Duke's Arraignment: which might have given the King more, then leisure enough to finde the depth of the Design; if either he had not been directed by such, as the new Duke of Northumberland had placed about him, or taken by a Sole∣mnity, which served fily for it. For so it happened, that the Queen Regent of Scotland, having been in France to see Her Daughter, and being unwilling to re∣turn by Sea, in that cold time of the year, obtained leave of the King (by the mediation of the French Ambassadour) to take Her journey through En∣gland. Which leave being granted, She put Her self into the Bay of Ports∣mouth, where She was Honourably received, and conveyed towards London. From Hampton-Court She passed by Water, on the second day of November, to St. Paul's-Wharf. From whence She rode, accompanied with divers Noble Men, and Ladies of England, besides Her own Train of Scotland, to the Bishop's-Pa∣lace. Presented at Her first coming thither, in the name of the City, with Mut∣tons, Beefs, Veals, Poultry, Wine, and all other sorts of Provisions, necessa∣ry for Her Entertainment, even to Bread, and Fewel. Having reposed Her self two days, She was conveyed in a Chariot to the Court at White-Hall, accompa∣nied with the Lady Margaret Douglass, Daughter of Margaret, Queen of Scots, by Her second Husband; together with the Duchesses of Richmond, Suffolk, and Northumberland; besides many other Ladies of both Kingdoms, which followed after in the Train. At the Court-Gate She was received by the Dukes of Suffolk, and Northumberland, and the Lord High-Treasurer, the Guard standing on both sides, as She went along; and being brought unto the King, whom She found standing at the end of the Great Hall, She cast Her self upon Her knees, but was presently taken up, and Saluted by Him, accord∣ing to the Free Custom of the English Nation. Leading Her by the Hand to the Queen's Chamber of Presence: He Saluted in like manner all the Ladies of Scotland, and so departed for a while. Dinner being ready, the King conducted Her to the Table prepared for them, where they dined together, but had their Services apart. The Ladies of both Kingdomes were feated in the Queen's Great Chamber, where they were most Sumptuously Served. Dinner being done, that Her Attendants might have time to partake of the Entertainment, the King shewed Her His Gardens, Galleries, &c. and, about four of the clock, He brought Her down by the Hand into the Hall, where He Saluted Her, and so She departed to the Bishop's-Paace, as before. Departing towards Scotland, on the sixth of that Moneth, She rode through all the Principal Streets of London; betwixt the Bishop's House, and the Church in Shore-ditch, attended by divers Noble Men, and Women, all the way She went. But more particularly the Duke of Northumberland shew∣ed himself with one hundred Horse, each having his Javelin in his hand; and fourty of them apparelled in Black Velvet, Guarded with White and Velvet Caps, and White Feathers, and Chains of Gold about their Necks. Next to these stood one hundred and twenty Horsemen, of the Earl of Pembroke's, with black Javelins, Hats, and Feathers. Next to them one hundred of the Lord Treasurer's Gentlemen, and Yeomen, with Javelins. These ranks of Horsemen reaching, from the Cross in Cheap-side, to the end of Birching-Lane in Cornhill. Brought as far as Shoreditch-Church, She was committed to the care of the Sheriffs of London, by whom She was attended as far as Walham. Conducted in like manner by the Sheriffs of all the Counties, through which She passed, till She came unto the Borders of Scotland: Her Entertainment being provided by the King's appointment, at the Charge of the Counties. Which Passages, not be∣ing otherwise Material in the Course of this History, I have adventured to lay down; the better to express the Gallantry, and Glory of the English Nation, before Puritanism, and the Humour of Parity, occasioned the neglect of all the laudable Solemnities, which antiently had been observed, both in Church, and State. The Discourse, raised on this Magnificent Reception of the Scotish Queen, so
filled all Mouths, and entertained so many Pens, that the Danger of the Duke of Sommerset seemed for a time to be forgotten; but it was onely for a time. For, on the first of December, the Duke being brought by water to Westminster-Hall, found all things there prepared for his Arraignment. The Lord High-Steward, for the time, was the Marquess of Winchester, who took his place under a Cloath of Estate, raised three steps higher, then the rest of the Scaffold. The Peers, to the number of twenty seven, sitting one step lower. Amongst these were the Duke of Northumberland, the Marquess of North-hampton, and the Earl of Pembroke: who, being Parties to the Charge, ought, in all Honesty, and Honour, to have excused themselves, from sitting in Judgment on him, at the time of his Trial. But no Challenge, or Objection, being made, or al∣lowed against them, they took place with the rest. The Court being sate, and the Prisoner brought unto the Bar, the Charge against him was divided into five Particulars: viz. Fir, His design of Raising men in the North- Parts of the Realm, and of assembling men at his House, to kill the Duke of Northumber∣land. 2. A resolution to assist his Attachment. 3. The Plot for killing the Gens d' Arms. 4. His intent for raising London. 5. His purpose of assaulting the Lords, and devising their Deaths. The whole Impeachment managed in the name of Treason, and Felony: because in all Treasons the intent, and pur∣pose is as Capital, as the Act it self, if once discovered, either by word, or deed, or any other material Circumstance, though it go no further. But, though Treason made the loudest noise, it was the Felony, which was especially relied up∣on, for his Condemnation. Two Statutes were pretended for the Ground of the whole Proceedings. The first made in the time of King Henry the Seventh, by which it was Enacted, to be Felony, for any inferiour Person, to contrive the death of a Lord of the Council. The second, that of the last Session of Parlia∣ment, By which it was Declared, to be Treason, for any Twelve Persons, or more, to Assemble together, with an intent to murther any of the Lords of the Council: if, after Proclamation made, they dissolved not themselves, with∣in the space of an hour. The Indictment being Read, and the Confessions of Palmer, and the rest, being produced, and urged by the King's Council, (who spared not to press them, as is accustomed in such Cases) to the best advantage. The Duke, though much dismayed, returned this Answer to the Branches of his Accusation: viz. That He never intended to raise the North-Parts of this Realm; but that, upon some bruits, he apprehended a Fear, which made him send to Sir William Herbert, to remain his Friend; That He determined not to kill the Duke of Northumber∣land, nor any other Lord: but spake of it onely, and determined the contrary; That It had been a mad enterprise, with his hundred men, to assail the Gens d' Arms, consisting of nine hundred: which, in case he had prevailed, would nothing have advanced the pretended purpose; That Therefore this bing senseless, and absurd, must needs discredit other matters: which otherwise might have been be∣lieved; That At London he never projected any stir: but ever held it a good place for his security; That, For having men in his Chamber at Green∣wich, it was manifest, that he meant no harm: because, when he might have done it, he did not. And further, against the persons of them, whose Examinations had been read, he objected many things; desiring, that They might be brought to his face: which, in regard of his Dignity, and Estate, he conceived to be reasona∣ble. And so it happened unto him, as with many others; that, hoping to make his fault seem less, by a fair Confession, he made it great enough to serve for his Condemnation. For, presently upon these words, the Council, thinking they had matter e∣nough, from his own Confession, to convict him of Felony, insisted chiefly on that Point, and flourished out their Proofs upon it, to their best Advantage. But so, that they neglected not to aggravate his Offence in the Treason also: that his Peers might be under some necessity of finding him guilty in the one; if
they should finde themselves unsatisfied, for passing their Verdict in the other. And though neither the one, nor the other, were so clear in Law, as to make him liable to a Sentence of Condemnation: if either the Statute in the Contents had been rightly opened, or the Opinion of the Judges demanded in them; yet what cannot the Great Wit of some Advocates do, when they have a mind to serve their Turn upon a Statte, contrary to the Mind and Meaning of them that made it. The Duke of Northumberland, thereupon, with a Counterfeit Modesty (conceiving that he had him fast enough, in Re∣spect of the Felony) desired their Lordships, that no Act against his life might be brought within the Compass of Treason; and they who understood his meaning at half a Word, after a full hearing of the Evidence, withdrew them∣selves into a Room appointed for them: and after some Conference amongst themselves, acquitting him of Treson, they pronounced him guilty of the Felony onely; which being returned for their Verdict, by all the Lords one af∣ter another, in their Rank and Order, and nothing objected by the Duke, that Judgement should not pass upon him, the Lord High Steward, with a seeming Sorrow, gave Sentence, That he should be had to the Place from whence he came, from thence to the Place of Execution, and there to hang while he was dead; which is the Ordinary Form of condemning Felons. A Matter not sufficiently to be admired, that the Duke should either be so ignorant, or ill advised, so de∣stitute of present Courage, or so defective in the Use of his Wit, and Judgment, as not to crave the common Benefit of his Clergy; which had he done, it must have been allowed him by the Rules of the Court: whether it were, that of his own Misfortunes might render him uncapable of laying hold on such Advanta∣ges, as the Laws admitted; or that he thought it better to die once for all, then living in a perpetual Fear of dying daily by the malicious Practises and Devises of his powerfull Adversaries; or that he might presume of a Pardon of Course, in regard of the nature of the Offence, in which neither the King, nor the Safety of the Kingdom was concerned, and that the Law, by which it was found guilty of Felony, had never been put in Execution upon a man of his Quality, if perhaps at all; or finally, whether it were some secret Judgment on him from above (as some men conceived) that he who had destroyed so many Churches, invaded the Estate of so many Cathedrals, deprived so many Learned Men of their Means, and Livelyhood, should want, (or rather not desire) the Benefit of the Clergy, in his greatest extremity. In stead whereof he suffered Judgment of death to pass upon him, gave thanks unto the Lords for his gentle Tryall▪ craved Pardon of the Duke of Northumberland, the Marquess of North-hampton, and the Earl of Pembroke, for his ill Meaning towards them; conclu∣ding with an humble Suit for his Life, and Pity to be shewed to his Wife and Children. It is an antient Custome in the Triall of all great Persons accused of Treason, that the Ax of the Tower is carried before them to the Bar, ad afterwards at their Return from thence, on the Pronouncing of the Sentence of Condemna∣tion. Which Ceremony not being performed at his going thence, in regard he was condemned of the Felony onely, gave an occasion unto such as had throng∣ed into the Hall, and knew not otherwise how things passed, to conceive that he had been acquitted absolutely of the whole Indictment. And thereupon so loud a Shout was made in the lower end of the Hall, that the noise thereof was heard be∣yond Charing-Cross, to the great Terrour and Amazement of his guilty Adver∣saries. But little pleasure found the Prisoner in these Acclamations, and less, the People, when they understood of his Condemnation: so that departing thence with grief, they left the way open for the Prisoner to be carried by water, to the Cranes in the Vietry, and from thence peaceably conveyed to the Tower a∣gain. Not long after followed the Arraignment of Sir Michael Stanhop, Sir Thomas Arundel, Sir Ralph Vane, and Sir Miles Partridge, on whom also pas∣sed the Sentence of Death; but the certain Day and Time of their Triall. I
have no where found. Most probable it is, that they were not brought to their Triall, till after the Ax had done its part on the Duke of Sommerset, which was on the twenty third of January, because I finde they were not brought to their Execution till the twenty sixth of February then next following, the two first being then beheaded, and the two last hanged, at what time they severally Pro∣tested, (taking God to witness) that they never practised Treason against the King, or against the Lives of any of the Lords of his Council; Vane adding after all the rest, that his Blood would make Northumberland's Pillow uneasie to him. None of them less lamented by the Common People, then Sir Miles Partridge, against whom they had an old Grudge, for depriving them of the best Ring of Bells, which they had at that time, called Jesus-Bells; which winning of King Henry at a Cast of Dice, he caused to be taken down, and sold, or melted for his own Advantage. If any Bell tolled for him when he went to his Death, or that the sight of an Halter made him think of a Bell-Rope, it could not but remember him of his Fault in that Particular, and mind him of calling upon Christ Jesus, for his Grace and Mercy. But in the mean time, Care is taken, that the King should not be too appre∣hensive of these Misfortunes into which his Uncle had been cast; or enter into any Enquiries, whether he had been cast into them by his own Fault, or the Pra∣ctises of others. It was therefore thought fit to Entertain him frequently with Masks, and Dancings, brave Challenges at Tilts, and Barriers, and whatsoever Sports and Exercises, which they conceived most pleasing to him. But nothing seemed more delightfull to him, then the appearing of His Lords, and others in a General Muster, performed on the twenty third of December, in Saint James his Fields. At what time sitting on Horse-back with the Lords of His Council, the Band of Pensioners in compleat Arms, with four Trumpeters, and the King's Standard going before them, first appeared in sight: each Pensio∣ner having two Servants waiting on him with their several Spears. Next fol∣lowed, in distinct Companies of one hundred apiece, the Troops of the Lord Treasurer Paulet, the Duke of Northumberland, the Lord Privy Seal, the Marquess of North-hampton, the Earl of Pembroke, and the Lord Warden of the Cinque-Ports: a Trumpet and a Standard carried before each Troop; four∣ty of the Duke of Northumbeland's Men, and as many of the Earl of Pem∣broke's, having Velvet Goats upon their Harness; with these were mingled in like Equipage, (as to the Trumpets, and the Standards) the distinct Troops of the Earls of Rutland, and Hntington, and the new Lord Darcy, consisting each of fifty Horse, and Rancked according to the Order, and Precedency of their several Lords. All which rode twice before the King, by five in a Ranck, all excellently well Armed, and bravely Mounted, to the great Contentment of the King, the Delight of the People, and as much to the Honour of the Nati∣on, in the Eye of all such Strangers, as were present at it. But then the Lords of England, were Lords indeed, and thought it not consistent with a Title of Honour, to walk the Streets, attended by a Lacquie onely, and perhaps not that, The Particulars of which Glorious Muster had not been specified, but for sup∣plying the Place of Musick, (as the Solemn Reception of the Queen Regent did before) betwixt the two last Acts of this Tragedy, to the last whereof we shall now come, and so end this year. Two Moneths had passed since the Pronouncing of the Fatal Sentence of Condemnation, before the Prisoner was brought out to his Execution. In all which time it may be thought, that he might easily have obtained his Pardon of the King, who had passed the first years of His Reign under his Protection, and could not but behold him with the Eye of Respect, as hisnearest Kinsman by the Mother, But first his Adversaries, had so possessed the King with an Opi∣nion of his Crimes, and Misdemeanours, that he believed him to be guilty of them: as appears by his Letter to Fitz-Patrick, (for which Consult the Church Historian. Lib. 7. fol. 409, 410.) wherein he Summarily repeateth the Substance
of the Charge, the Proofs against him, the Proceedings of the Lords in the Ar∣raignment, and his Submiss Carriage, both before, and after the Sentence. They also filled his Ears with the Continual Noise of the Unnatural Prosecuting of the late Lord Admiral; inculcating, how unsafe it was to trust to the Fidelity of such a Man, who had so lately washed his Hands in the Blood of his Brother. And, that the King might rest himself upon these Perswasions, all ways were stopped, and all the Avenues blocked up, by which it might be possible for any of the Duke's Friends to finde access, either for rectifying the King's Opinion, or ob∣taining his Pardon. So that at last, upon the twenty second of January before-remembred (the King not being sufficiently possessed before of his Crimes, and Cruelties) he was brought to the Scaffold on Tower-Hill. Where he avouch∣ed to the People: That, His Intentions had been not onely harmless, in regard of particular Persons, but driving to the Common Benefit, both of the King, and of the Realm. Interrupted in the rest of his Speech, upon the suddain ear of a Rescue, by the coming in of the Hamlets on the one side, ad the Hopes of a Pardon, which the People conceived to have been brought him by Sir Anthony Brown, who came speedily galloping on the other, he composed himself at last to make a Confession of his Faith, heartily praying for the King, exhorting the People to Obedience, and humbly craving Pardon both of God, and Man. Which said, he chearfully submitted his Head to the stroke of the Ax, by which it was taken off at a Blow; putting an end thereby to his Cares and Sorrows. Such was the End of this Great Person, whose Power and Greatness may be best discerned by this following Style, used by him in the Height of his former Glories: that is to say, Edward, by the Grace of God, Duke of Sommerset, Earl of Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp, Baron Seimour, Uncle to the King's Highness of England, Governour to the King's Highness Person, Protectour of all his Realms, Dominions, and Subjects, Lieutenant General of His Maje∣stie's Armies, both by Sea, and Land, Lord High Treasurer, and Earl Marshal of England, Captain of Isles the of Garnsey, and Jarsey, and Knight of the most Honourable Order of the Garter. As to his Parts, Person, and Abilitie, there needs no other Character of him, then what was given in the beginning, and may be gathered from the Course of this present History. More Moderate in carrying on the Work of Reformation, then those, who after had the Manage∣ing, and Conduct of it, as one, that, in himself, was more inclinable to the Lutheran (but where his profit was concerned in the spoil of Images) then th Zuin∣glian Doctrines: so well beloved in general by the Common People, that divers dipt their Handkerchiefs in his Blood, to keep them in perpetual Remembrance of him. One of which, being a sprightly Dame, about two years after, when the Duke of Northumberland was led through the City, for his opposing the Title of Queen Mary, ran to him in the Streets, and, shaking out her bloody Hand∣kerchief before him, Behold (said she) the Blood of that worthy man, that good Vncle of that Excellent King, which shed by thy malicious Practice, doth now begin apparently to revenge it self on thee. The like Opinion also was conceived of the business by the most understanding men in the Court, and Kingdom; though the King seemed for the present to be satisfied in it. In which opinion they were ex∣ceedingly confirmed by the Enlargment of the Earl of Arundel, and restoring of Crane, and his Wife, to their former Liberty; but most especially by the great Endearments, which afterwards appeared between the Duke of Northumberland and Sir Thomas Palmer, and the great confidence, which the Duke placed in him for the Advancement of his Projects, in behalf of the Duke of Suffolk: of which more hereafter. But the Malice of his Enemies stayed not here, extending also to his Friends, and Children, after his Decease: but chiefly to the eldest Son by the second Wife; in favour of whom, an Act of Parliament had been passed in the thirty second year of the late King Henry, for the entailing on his Person all such Lands, Estates, and Honours, as had been, or should be purchasd by his Fa∣ther,
from the twenty fifth day of May, then next foregoing. Which Act they caused to be repealed, at the end of the next Session of Parliament (which began on the morrow after the Death of the Duke) whereby they strip'd the young Gentleman, being then about thirteen years of Age, of his Lands, and Titles; to which he was in part restored by Queen Elizabeth: who, in pity of his Father's Suffrings, and his own Misfortunes, created him arl of Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp, &c. Nor did the Duke's Fall end it self in no other ruin, then that of his own house, and the Death of the four Knights, which suffer∣ed on the same account; but drew along with it the emoval of the Lord Rich, from the Place, and Office, of Lord Chancellour. For so it happened, that the Lord Chancellour, commiserating the Condition of the Duke of Sommerset, though formerly he had shewed himself against him, dispatched a Letter to him, concerning some Proceedings of the Lords of the Council, which he thought fit for him to know. Which Letter being hastily superscribed, To the Duke, with no other Title, he gave to one of his Servants, to be carried to him. By whom, for want of a more particular direction, it was delivered to the hands of the Duke of Norfolk. But, the Mistake being presently found, the Lord Chancellour knowing into what hands he was like to fall, makes his Address un∣to the King, the next morning betimes; and humbly prays, that, in regard of his great Age, he might be discharged of the Great Seal, and Office of Chan∣cellour. Which being granted by the King, though with no small difficulty; the Duke of Northumberland, and the Earl of Pembroke, (forward enough to go upon such an Errand) are sent, on the twenty first of December, to receive the Seal; committed on the morrow after to Doctour Thomas Goodwin, Bishop of Ely, and one of the Lords of the Privy Council. Who afterwards, that is to say, on the two and twentieth of January, was sworn Lord Chan∣cellour; the Lord Treasurer Paulet giving him the Oath, in the Court of Chancery. Next followed the Losses, and Disgraces, suffered by the Lord Paget, on the Duke's account. To whom he had continued faithfull in all his Troubles; when Sir William Cecil, who had received greater Benefits from him, and most of the Dependants on him, had either deserted, or betrayed him. His House designed to be the place, in which the Duke of Northumberland, and the rest of the Lords were to be murthered at a Banquet: if any credit may be given to the Informa∣tions; for which Committed to the Tower, as before is said. But having no sufficient Proof, to warrant any further Proceeding to his Condemnation, an Enquiry is made not long after into all his Actions. In the return whereof, it was suggested; That he had sold the King's Lands, and Woods, without Commission; That he had taken great Fines for the King's Lands, and applyed them to his pro∣per use; and That he had made Leases in Reversion, for more then one and twen∣ty years. Which Spoyl is to be understood of the Lands and Woods of the Dutchy of Lancaster, of the which he was Chancellour; and for committing whereof, he was not onely forced to resign that Office, but condemned in a fine of six thousand pounds; not otherwise to be excused, but by pay∣ing of four thousand pounds within the year. This Punishment, was accompani∣ed with a Disgrace, no less grievous to him, then the loss both of his Place, and Money. He had been chosen into the Society of the Garter, An. 1548. when the Duke of Sommerset was in Power, and so continued, till the fifteenth of April, in the year next following, Anno 1552. At what time Garter, King of Ams, was sent to his Lodging in the Tower, to take from him the Garter, and the George, belonging to him, as a Knight of that most Noble Order. Which he suffered willingly to be done, because it was His Majestie's Pleasure, that it should so be. More sensible of the Affront, without all question, then otherwise he would have been, because the said George, and Garter, were presently afer sent, by the King to John, Earl of Warwick, the Duke of Northumberland's eldest Son, Admitted thereupon into that Society. So prevalent are the Passions of some
Great Persons; that they can neither put a measure upon their Hatred, nor an end to their Malice. Which two last Passages, though more properly belong∣ing to the following year, I have thought fit to place in this; because of that dependance, which they have on the Fall of Sommerset. The like Ill-Fortune happened, at the same time also▪ to Doctour Robert Farrar, Bishop of St. David's; who, as he had his Preferments by him, so he suffered also in his Fall: not because Guilty of the Practice, or Conspiracy with him, as the Lord Paget, and the rest, were given out to be; but because he wanted his Support, and Countenance, against his Adversaries. A Man he was of an un∣sociable disposition, rigidly self-willed: and one, who looked for more Obser∣vance, then his place required; which drew him into a great dislke with most of his Clergy, with none more, then the Canons of his own Cathedral. The Faction headed, amongst others, by Doctour Thomas Young, then being the Chantour of that Church, and afterwards advanced by Queen Elizabeth to the See of York; as also Doctour Rowland Merick, preferred by the same Queen to the See of Bangor: though they appeared not visibly in the Information, which was made against him. In which I finde him charged amongst other things, for Celebrating a Marriage, without requiring the Married Persons to receive the Communion, contrary to the Rubrick in the Common-Prayer-Book; for going ordinarily abroad in a Gown, and Hat, and not in a Square Cap, as did the rest of the Clergy; for causing a Communion-Table, which had been placed, by the Official of Caer-marthen, in the middle of the Church, (the High Alltar being then demolished) to be carried back into the Chancel, and there to be disposed of, in, or near the place, where the Altar stood; for suffering ma∣ny Superstitious Uages to be retained amongst the people, contrary to the Laws in that behalf: But chiefly for exercising some Acts of Episcopal Jurisdicti∣on, in his own name, in derogation of the King's Supremacy; and grounding his Commissions, for the exercise thereof, upon foreign, and usurped Authority. The Articles, fifty six in number; but this last, as the first in Rank, so of more Danger to him, then all the ret, preferred against him, but not prosecu∣ted, as long as his great Patron, the Duke of Sommerset, was in place, and Power. But, he being on the sinking hand, and the Bishop too stiff to come to a Com∣pliance with those, whom he esteemed beneath him; the Suit is followed with more noise, and violence, then was consistent with the credit of either Party. The Duke being dead, the four Knights Executed, and all his Party in Disgrace, a Commission is Issued, bearing Date the ninth of March, to enquire into the Merit of the Articles, which were charged against him. On the return where∣of, he is Indicted of a Prmunire, at the Assizes held in Caer-marthen, in the Ju∣ly following; committed thereupon to Prison, where he remained all the rest of King Edward's time; never restored to Liberty, till he came to the Stake▪ when all his Sufferings, and Sorrows, had an end together. But this Business hath car∣ried us too far into the next year of this King: to the beginning whereof we must now return. Anno Regni Edw. Sexti 6o. An. Dom. 1551, 1552.An. Reg. 6o. 1552. WE must begin the sixth year of the King with the fourth Session of Par∣liament, though the beginning of the fourth Session was some days be∣fore; that is to say, on the twenty third day of January, being the next day after the Death of that Great Person. His Adversaries possibly could not do it sooner, and found it very unsafe to defer it longer, for fear of being over∣ruled in a Parliamentary way, by the Lords, and Commons. There was Sum∣moned
also a Convocation of the Bishops, and Clergy of the Province of Canter∣bury, to begin upon the next day after the Parliament. Much business done in each, as may appear by the Table of the Statutes made in the one, and the passing of the Book of Articles as the Work of the other. But the Acts of this Convoca∣tion were so ill kept, that there remains nothing on Record, touching their Pro∣ceedings, except it be the names of such of the Bishops, as came thither to Ad∣journ the House. Onely I finde a Memorandum, that, on the twenty ninth of this present January, the Bishoprick of Westminster was dissolved, by the King's Letters Patents; by which the County of Middlesex, which had before been laid unto it, was restored unto the See of London: made greater then in former times, by the Addition of the Arch-Deaconry of St. Alban's; which, at the dissoluti∣on of that Monastery, had been laid to Lincoln. The Lands of Westminster so dilapidated by Bishop Thirlby, that there was almost nothing left to support the Dignity; for which good service, he had been preferred to the See of Norich, in the year foregoing. Most of the Lands invaded by the Great men of the Court, the rest laid out for Reparation to the Church of St. Paul; pared al∣most to the very quick, in those days of Rapine. From hence first came that significant By-word (as is said by some) of Robbing Peter, to pay Paul. But this was no Business of that Convocation, though remembred in it. That which most specially doth concern us in this Convocation, is the settling, and confirming of the Book of Articles, prepared by Arch-Bishop Cranmer, with the assistance of such Learned men, as he thought fit to call unto him, in the year last past; and now presented to the consideration of the rest of the Clergy. For, that they were debated, and agreed upon in that Convocation, appears by the Title of the Book, where they are called, Aticuli, de quibus in Synodo Londinensi, An. Dom. 1552, &c. that is to say, Articles, Agreed upon in the Synod of London, An. 1552. And it may be concluded from that Title al∣so, that the Convocation had devolved their Power on some Grand Committee, sufficiently Authourised to Debate, Conclude, and Publish what they had Con∣cluded in the name of the rest. For there it is not said, as in the Articles Pu∣blished in Queen Elizabeth's time, An. 1562. That they were agreed upon by the Arch-Bishops, and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole-Clergy, in the Convoca∣tion holden at London; but that they were agreed upon, in the Synod of London▪ by the Bishops, and certain other Learned Men; inter Episcopos, & lios Eruditos vi∣ros, as the Latin hath it. Which seems to make it plain enough, that the de∣bating, and concluding of the Articles, contained in the said Book, was the Work onely of some Bshops, and certain other Learned men: sufficiently em∣powered for that end, and purpose. And being so empowered to that end and purpose, the Articles, by them concluded, and agreed upon, may warranta∣bly be affirmed, to be the Acts, and Products of that Convocation; Confirm∣ed, and Published for such by the King's Authority (as appears further by the TitleRegia Au∣thoritate in lu∣cem Edti. in due form of Law. And so it is resolved by Philpot, Arch-Deacon of Winchester, in behalf of the Catechism, which came ut An. 1553. with the Approbation of the said Bishops, and Learned men. Against which, when it was objected by Doctour Weston, Prolocutour of the Convocation, in the first of Queen Mary; that the said Catechism was not set forth by the Agreement of that House; it was Answered by that Reverend, and Learned man; That The said House had graned the Authority, to make Ecclesiastical Laws, unto certain Persons, to be appointed by the King's Majesty; and therefore, whatsoever Eccle∣siastical Laws▪ they, or the most part of them did set forth, (according to the Sta∣tute in that behalf provided) might be well said to be done in the Synod of London. And this may also be the Case of the Book of Articles, which may be truly, and justly said to be the Work of that Convocation: though many Members of it never saw the same, till the Book was published; in regard (I still use Philpot's words in the Acts and Mon. Fol. 1282.) that they had a Synodal Authority unto them committed, to make such Spiritual Laws, as to them seemed to be ncssa∣ry,
or convenient for the use of the Church. Had it been otherwise, King Edward, a most Pious, and Religious Prince must needs be looked on, as a Wicked and most Lewd Impostour, in putting such an horrible Cheat upon all His Subjects, by Fathering these Articles on the Convocation, which begat them not, nor ever gave consent unto them. And yet it is not altogether improbable, but that these Articles being debated, and agreed upon, by the said Commitee, might also pass the Vote of the whole Convocation, though we finde nothing to that purpose in the Acts thereof, which either have been lost, or were never Regi∣stred. Besides, it is to be observed that the Church of England, for the first five years of Queen Elizabeth, retained these Articles, and no other, as the publick Te∣nents of the Church in point of Doctrine; which certainly She had not done, had they been commended to Her by a less Authority, then a Convocation. Such hand the Convocation had in canvasing the Articles, prepared for them, and in concluding, and agreeing to so much, or so many of them, as afterwards were published by the King's Authority in the name thereof. But whether they had any such hand in Reviewing the Liturgie, and passing their Consent to such Alte∣rations, as were made therein, is another Question. That some necessity appeared both for the Reveiwing of the whole, and the altering of some Parts thereof hath been shew'd before: And it was shewed before by whose Procurement, and Sollici∣tation, the Church was brought to that necessity of doing somewhat to that Pur∣pose. But being not sufficiently Authorised to proceed upon it, because the King's sole Authority did not seem sufficient, they were to stay the Leasure, and Consent of the present Parliament. For being the Liturgie then in force had been confirmed and imposed by the King in Parliament, with the Consent, and Assent of the Lords and Commons, it stood with Reason, that they should not venture actu∣ally on the Alteration, but by their permission first declared. And therefore it is said expresly in the Act of Parliament made this present year, That The said Order of Common Service, Entituled The Book of Common-Prayer, had been Perused, Explained, and made fully perfect: not single by the King's Authority, but by the King, with the Assent of the Lords and Commons. More then the giving of their Assent, was neither required by the King, nor desired by the Prelats; and less then this could not be fought, as the Case then stood. The signifying of which Assent enabled the Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy, whom they had taken for their Assistants, to proceed to the Digesting of such Alterations, as were before considered, and resolved on, amongst themselves; and possibly might re∣ceive the like Authority from the Convocation, as the Articles had, though no such thing remaining upon Record in the Registers of it. But whether it were so, or not, certain it is, that it received as much Authority, and Countenance▪ as could be given unto it by an Act of Parliament; by which imposed upon the Subject under certain Penalties (Imprisonments, Pecuniarie Mulcts, &c.) which could not be inflicted on them by Synodical Acts. The Liturgie being thus Settled, and Confirmed in Parliament, was by the King's Command translated into French, for the Use of the Isles of Guernsey, and Jersey, and such as lived within the Marches, and Command of Calais. But no such Care was taken for Wales, till the fifth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: nor of the Realm of Ireland, from that time to this. King Henry had so far prepared the Way to a Reformation, as His own Power, and Profit was concerned in it; to which Ends he excluded the Pope's Authority, and cau∣sed Himself to be declared Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of Ireland, by Act of Parliament. And by like Acts he had annexed to the Crown the Lands of all Monasteries, and Religious Orders: together with thetwentieth Part of all the Ecclesiastical Promotions within that Kingdom; and caused the like Course to be settled for the Electing, and Consecrating of Arch-Bishops, and Bishops, as had been done before in England. Beyond which, as he did not go; so, as it seems, King Edward's Council thought not fit to adventure fur∣ther. They held it not agreeable to the Rules of Prudence, to have too many
Irons in the Fire at once: nor safe, in Point of Policy, to try Conclusions on a People in the King's Minority, which were so far tenacionsly addicted to the Superstitions of the Church of Rome, and of a Nature not so tractable, as the English were. And yet that Realm was quiet, even to Admiration, notwithstanding the frequent Embroilments, and Commotions, which so miserably disturbed the Peace of England: which may be reckoned for one of the greatest Felicities of this King's Reign, and a strong Argument of the Care, and Vigilancy of such of His Ministers, as had the chief Direction of the Irish Affairs. At the first Payment of the Money for the Sale (rather then the Surrendry) of Bulloign: eight thousand pounds was set apart for the Service of Ireland; and shortly af∣ter out of the Profits, which were raised from the Mint, four hundred men were Levied, and sent over thither also; with a Charge given to the Gover∣nours, that the Laws of England should be Carefully, and Duly administred, and all such as did oppose, suppressed: by Means whereof great Countenance was given to those, who embraced the Reformed Religion there: especially within those Counties, which are called commonly by the name of the English Pale. The Common-Prayer-Book of England, being brought over thither, and used in most of the Churches of the English Plantation, without a∣ny Law in their own Parliaments to impose it on them. But nothing more conduced to the Peace of that Kingdom, then that the Governours for the most part were men of such Choice; that neither the Nobility disdained to endure their Commands, nor the inferiour sort were oppressed, to supply their Wants. Besides which, as the King drew many men from thence to serve him in his Wars against France, and Scotland, which otherwise might have disturbed the com∣mon Peace; so, upon notice of some great Preparations, which were made in France for the Assistance of the Scots, he sent over to guard the Coast of Ireland, four Ships, four Barks, four Pinnaces, and twelve Victuallers. By the Advantage of which Strength, He made good three Havens, two on the South-side toward France, and one toward Scotland; which afterwards made themselves good Booties out of such of the French, as were either cast away on the Coast of Ireland, or forced to save themselves in the Havens of it. For the French making choice rather of their Passage by Saint George's Chanel, then by the ordinary Course of Navigation, from France, to Edenborough, fell from one Danger to another; and, for fear of being intercepted, or mole∣sted by the Ships of England, were Shipwracked, as before was said, on the Coast of Ireland. Nothing else Memorable in this King's Reign, which con∣cerned that Kingdom; and therefore I have lai'd it altogether in this Place, and on this Occasion. But we return again to England, where we have seen a Reformation made in Point of Doctrine, and settled in the Forms of Worship; the Superstitions and cor∣ruptions of the Church of Rome entirely abrogated, and all things rectified, accor∣ding to the Word of God, and the Primitive Practice: nothing defective in the Managing of so great a Work, which could have been required by equal, and im∣partial Men, but that it was not done, as they conceived it ought to have been done, in a General Council. But first we finde not any such Necessity of a Gene∣ral Council, but that many Heresies had been suppressed, and many Corrupti∣ons removed out of the Church, without any such Trouble. Saint Augustine Paucas fu∣isse Haereses, ad qus superan∣das neces∣sarium fuerit Consilinm ple∣narium Occiden∣tis, & Orientis, lib. 4 cap. 12. in his fourth Book against the two Epistles of the Pelagians, cap. 12. speaks very plainly to this Purpose, and yet the Learned Cardinal, though a great Stickler in behalf of General Councils, speaks more plain then he. By whom it is affirrmed, that for seven Heresies condemned in seven General Councils (though by his leave the seventh did not so much suppress, as advance an Heresie) an huu∣dred had been quashed in National and Provincial Councils. The Practice of the Church in the several Councils of Aquilia, Carthage, Gangra, Milevis, &c. make this plain enough; all of them being Provincial, or at least but Na∣tional, and doing their own Work without Help from others. The Church had
been in an ill Condition, had it been otherwise; especially under the Power of the Heathen Emperours; when such a Confluence of the Prelats, from all Parts of the World, would have been construed a Conspiracy against the State, and drawn Destruction on the Church, and the Persons both. Or granting, that they might assemble without any such Danger, yet being great Bodies, moving slowly, and not without long time, and many Difficulties, and Disputes to be rightly Constituted: the Church would suffer more under such Delay, by the spreading of Heresie, then receive Benefit by this Care to suppress the same. So that there neither is, or can be, any such Necessity, either in Order to the Reformation of a National Church, or the Suppressing of particular Heresies, as by the Objectours is supposed. Howsoever taking it for granted, that a General Council is the best and safest Physick, that the Church can take, on all Occasions of Epidemical Distempers; yet must it be granted at such times, and in such Cases onely, when it may conveniently be had. For where it is not to be had, or not had conveniently, it will either prove to be no Physick, or not worth the taking. But so it was, at the time of the Reformation, that a General Council could not conveniently be assembled, and more then so, it was impossible, that any such Council should assemble: I mean, a General Council rightly called, and constituted, accord∣ing to the Rules lai'd down by our Controversers. For first they say, It must be called by such as have Power to do it. Secondly, That it must be intimated to all Christian Churches, that so no Church, nor People may plead Ignorance of it. Thirdly, That the Pope, and the four chief Patriarchs, must be present at it, ei∣ther in person, or by Proxie. And lastly, That no Bishop be excluded, if he be known to be a Bishop, and not Excommunicated. According to which Rules, it was impossible, I say, that any General Council should be assembled at the time of the Reformation o the Church of England. It was not then, as when the chief four Patriarchs, together with their Metropolitan and Suffragan Bishops, were under the Protection of the Christian Emperours, and might without Danger to themselves, or to their Churches, obey the Intimation, and attend the Service, the Patriarchs, with their Metropolitans and Suffragans, both then and now languishing under the Power and Tyranny of the Turk: to whom so general a Confluence of Christian Bishops must needs give matter of Suspicion of just Fears and Jealousies, and therefore not to be permitted (as far as he can possibly hinder it) on good Reason of State. And then besides, it would be known by whom such a General Council was to be assembled: if by the Pope, as generally the Papists say, He, and his Court were looked on, as the greatest Grievance of the Christian Church, and it was not probable, that he should call a Council against himself, unless he might have leave to pack it, to govern it by His own Legats, fill it with Titular Bishops of His own creating, or send the Holy Ghost to them in Cloak-Bag, as he did to Trent. If joyntly, by all Christian Princes which is the Common Tenent of the Protestant; Scholes: what Hopes could any man conceive (as the Times then were) that they should lay aside their particular Interesses, to enter all together upon one design? Or, if they had agreed about it, what Power had they to call the Prelats of the East, to attend the Business, and to protect them for so doing at their going home? So that I look upon the hopes of a General Council. I mean a General Council rightly called, and constituted, as an empty Dream. The most, that was to be expected, was but a meeting of some Bishops of the West of Europe, and those but of one Party onely: as such were excommunicated, (and that might be as many as the Pope should please) being to be excluded by the Cardinal's Rule. Which how it may be called an Oecumenical, or General Council, unless it be a Topical-Oecmenical, a Particular-General (as great an Absurdity in Gram∣mar, as a Romaeu-Catholick) I can hardly see: Which being so, and so no que∣stion,
but it was, either the Church must have contined without Reformation, or else it must be lawfull for National particular Churches to Reform themselves. And in that case the Church may be Reformed per partes, part after part; Province after Province, as is said by Gerson. Further then which, I shall not enter into this Dispute, this being enough to Justifie the Church of England from doing any thing Unadvisedly, Unwarrantably, or without Example. That which remains, in Reference to the Progress of the Reformation, con∣cerns as well the Nature as the Number of such Feasts and Fast, as were thought fit to be retained, Determined and Concluded on, by an Act of Parliament; to which the Bishops gave their Vote: but whether Predetermined in the Convo∣cation, must be left as doubtfull. In the Preamble to which Act, it is Declared; That, At all times men are not so mindfull of performing those Publick Christian Duties, which the true Religion doth require, as they ought to be; and therefore it hath been wholesomly provided, that, for calling them to their Duties and for helping their Infirmities, that some certain Times, and Days should be appointed, wherein Chri∣stians should cease from all other kinde of Labours, and apply themselves onely, and wholely unto such Holy Works, as properly pertain to True Religion; that the said Holy Works, to be performed upon those Days, are more particularly to hear, to learn, and to remember Almighty God's great Benefits, his manifold Mer∣cies, his inestimable Gracious Goodness, so plentifully poured upon all his Creatures; rendring unto him for the same our most hearty thanks; That the said Days, and Times, are neither to be called, or accounted Holy: nei∣ther in the Nature of the time, or day, nor for any of the Saints sakes, whose Memories are preserved by them; but for the Nature, and Condition, of those God∣ly, and Holy Works, with which onely God is to be Honoured, and the Congrega∣tion to be Edified; That the Sanctifying of the said Days consisteth in separating them apart from all prophane uses, and Dedicated not to any Saint, or Creature, but onely to the Worship of God; That there is no certain time, nor definite number of days appointed by Holy Scripture: but, that the appointment of the time, as also of the days, is left to the Liberty of Christ His Church by the Word of God; That the days, which from thenceforth were to be kept as Holy days in the Church of England, should be all Sundays in the Year; the Feast of the Circumcision, the Epiphany, the Purification of the Blessed Virgin, &c. with all the rest, recited at the end of the Calender, in the publick Liturgy; That the Arch-Bishops, Bi∣shops, &c. shall have Authority to punish the Offenders, in all, or any of the Pre∣misses, by the usual censures of the Church, and to impose such penance on them, as to them, or any of them shall seem expedient; and finally, that, notwithstanding any thing before declared, it shall, and may be lawfull, for any Husbandman, La∣bourer, Fisherman, &c. to labour, ride, fish, or work any kind of work, on the foresaid Holy days, not onely in the time of Harvest, but at any other time of the year, when need shall require; with a Proviso for the Celebrating of St. Georg's Feast, on the two and twenty, three and twenty, and four and twentieth Days of April yearly, by the Knights of the Right Honourable Order of the Garter, or by any of them. Which Declaration, as it is agreeable in all points to the Tenour of approved Antiquity; so can there nothing be more contrary to the Doctrine of the Sabba∣tarians, Which of late time hath been Obtruded on the Church. Then for the number of the Fasts, It is Declared, that from that time for∣wards, every Even, or Day, going before any of the aforesaid Days of the Feasts of the Nativity of Our Lord, of Easter, of the Ascension of our Lord, Pentecost. of the Purification, and the Annunciation of the aforesaid Blessed Virgin; of All-Saints, of all the said Feasts of the Apostles, (other then of St. John the Evan∣gelist, and of St. Philip and Jacob) shall be fasted, and Commanded to be kept, and observed, and that none other Even, or Day, shall be Commanded to be Fasted. For Explication of which last Clause, it is after added, that the said Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to abrogate, or take away the Abstinence from Flesh in Lent, or on Fridays, and Saturdays: or any other ap∣pointed
pointed to be kept for a Fasting-Day, but onely on the Evens of such other Days, as formerly had been kept, and observed for Holy, and were now abrogated by this Act. And for the better suppressing, or preventing of any such Fasts, as might be kept upon the Sunday, it was Enacted in the same (according to the Practice of the Elder Times) that, when it shall chance any the said Feasts, (the Eves whereof are by this Statute to be kept for Fasting-Days) to fall upon the Munday; that then the Saturday next before shall be Fasted, as the Eve thereof, and not the Sunday. Which Statute, though repealed in the first of Queen Ma∣ry, and not revived till the first year of the Reign of King James: yet in Effect it stood in Force, and was more punctually observed in the whole time of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, then after the Reviver of it. Such course being taken for the due observing of Days, and Times; the next care was, that Consecrated Places should not be Prophaned by Fighting, and Quarrelling, as they had been lately, since the Episcopal Jurisdiction, and the Ancient Censures of the Church were lessened in Authority, and Reputation. And to that end it was Enacted in this present Parliament, that if any Persons whatsoever, after the first day of May then next following, should quarrel, chide, or brawl, in any Church, or Church-yard, he should be suspended ab ingressu Ecclesiae, if he were a Lay-man; and from his Ministration, if he were a Priest; that if any Person after the said time should smite, or lay violent hands upon an∣other, he should be deemed to be Excommunicate, ipso facto, and be excluded from the Fellowship, and Company of Christ's Congregation; and finally, that if any Person should strike another with any weapon, in the Church, or Church-yard, or draw his sword, with an intent to strike another with the same, and thereof be law∣full convicted, he should be punished with the loss of one of his Ears, &c. A sea∣sonable severity, and much conducing to the Honour both of Church, and State. There were some Statutes also made for taking away the benefit of Clergy in some certain Cases; for making such, as formerly had been of any Religious Or∣der, to be Heritable to the Lands of their Ancestours, or next of Kindred, to whom they were to have been Heirs by the Common Law; for Confirming the Marriages of Priests, and giving them, their ives, and Children, the like Capa∣cities, as other Subjects did enjoy, whereof we have already spoke in another place. There also passed another Act, that no Person, by any means, should lend, or forbear any Sum of Mony, for any manner of Vsury, or encrease to be received, or hoped for, above the sum lent, upon pain to foreit the sum so lent, and the encrease, and to suffer imprisonment, and make fine at the King's plea∣sure. But this Act being found to be prejudicial to the rade of the Kingdom, first discontinued of it self, and was afterwards repealed in the thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth. This Parliament ending on the fifteenth of April gave time enough for Prin∣ting, and Publishing the Book of Common-Prayer, which had been therein Au∣thorised; the time for the Officiating of it, being fixed on the Feast of All-Saints, then next ensuing. Which time being come, there appeared no small Altera∣tion in the outward Solemnities of Divine Service, to which the people had been formerly so long accustomed. For, by the Rbrick of that Book, no Copes, or other Vestures were required, but the Surplice onely; whereby the Bishops were necessitated to forbear their Crosses, and the Prebends of St. Paul's, and other Churches, occasioned to leave off their Hoods. To give a beginning here∣unto, Bishop Ridley, then Bishop of London (obediently conforming unto that, which he could not hinder) did the same day Officiate the Divine Service of the Morning in his Rochet onely, without Cope, or Vestment; he Preached also at St. Paul's Cross in the afternoon, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Compa∣nies, in their best Liveries, being present at it; the Sermon tending for the most part to the setting forth of the said Book of Common-Prayer, and to acquaint them with the Reason of such Alterations, as were made therein. On the same day the New Liturgie was executed also in all the Churches of London. And
not long after (I know not by what strange forwardness in them that did it) the Upper Quire in St. Paul's Church, where the High-Altar stood, was broken down, and all the Quie thereabout; and the Communion-Table was placed in the Lower Part of the Quie, where the Priest sang the Dayly Service. What hereupon ensued of the Rich Ornaments, and Plate, wherewith every Church was furnished after its proportion; we shall see shortly, when the King's Com∣missioners shall be sent abroad to seise upon them in His Name, for their own Commodity. About this time the Psalms of David did first begin to be Composed in En∣glish Meeter, by one Thomas Sternhold, one of the Grooms of the Privy-Cham∣ber; who, Translating no more then thirty seven, left both Example, and En∣couragement to John Hopkins, and others, to dispatch the rest. A Device first taken up in France, by one Clement Marot, one of the Grooms of the Bed-Chamber to King Francis the First: who, being much addicted to Poetry, and having some acquaintance with those, which were thought to have enclined to the Reformation, was perswaded by the Learned Vatablus (Professour of the He∣brew Tongue in the University of Paris) to exercise his Poetical Fancies, in Translating some of David's Psalms. For whose satisfaction, and his own, he Translated the first fifty of them: and after, flying to Geneva, grew acquainted with Beza who, in some tract of time, Translated the other hundred also; and caused them to be fitted unto several Tunes; which  hereupon began to be Sung in private houses, and by degrees to be taken up in all the Churches of the French, and other Nations, which followed the Genevian Plat-form. Marot's Translation said by Strada, to have been ignorantly, and perversely done: as being but the Work of a man, altogether unlearned; but not to be compared with that Barbarity, and Botching, which every where occurreth in the Transla∣tion of Sternhold, and Hopkins. Which notwithstanding being first allowed for private Devotion, they were by little, and little, brought into the use of the Church: Permitted rather, then Allowed to be Sung before, and after Sermons; afterwards Printed, and bound up with the Common-Prayer-Book, and at last ad∣ded by the Stationers at the end of the Bible. For, though it be expressed in the Title of those Singing Psalms, that they were set forth, and allowed to be Sung in all Churches; before, and after Morning, and Evening Prayer: and also before, and after Sermons; yet, this Allowance seems rather to have been a Connivance, then an Approbation: No such Allowance being any where found, by such as have been most Industrious, and concerned in the search thereof. At first it was, pretended onely that the said Psalms should be Sung before, and after Morn∣ing, and Evening Prayer, and also before, and after Sermons: which shews, they were not to be intermingled in the Publick Liturgie. But, in some tract of time, as the Puritan Faction grew in strength, and confidence, they prevailed so far in most places, to thrust the Te Deum, the Benedictus, the Magnificat, and the Nunc Dimittis, quite out of the Church. But of this more perhaps here∣after, when we shall come to the Discovery of the Puritan Practices, in the Times succeeding. Next to the business of Religion, that which took up a great part of the Pu∣blick Care, was the Founding, and Establishing of the new Hospital in the late dis∣solved House of Grey-Friers, near New-gate, in the City of London; and that of St. Thomas in the Borough of Sothwark. Concerning which we are to know, that the Church, belonging to the said House, together with the Cloysters, and almost all the Publick Building, which stood within the Liberties, and Precincts thereof, had the good Fortune to escape that Ruin, which Generally befell all other Houses of that Nature. And standing undemolished, till the last Times of King Henry, it was given by him, not many days before His Death, to the City of London: together with the late dissolved Priory, called Little St. Bar∣tholomew's; which, at the Suppression thereof, was valued at 305. pounds, 6. s. 7. d. In which Donation, there was Reference had to a Double End. The
one for the Relieving of the Poor, out of the Rents of such Messuages, and Tene∣ments, as in the Grant thereof are contained, and specified. The other for Con∣stituting a Parish-Church, in the Church of the said dissolved Grey-Friers: not onely for the use of such, as lived within the Precincts of the said two Houses; but for the Inhabitants of the Parishes of Saint Nicholas in the Shambles, and of Saint Ewines, scituate in Warwick-Lane-end, near New-gate Market. Which Chur∣ches, with all the Rents, and Profits, belonging to them, were given to the City at the same time also, and for advancing the same ends, together with five hun∣dred Marks by the year for ever; the Church of the Grey-Friers to be from thenceforth called Christ-Church, Founded by King Henry the Eighth. All which was signified to the City in a Sermon Preached at Saint Paul's-Cross, by the Bishop of Rochester, on the thirteenth of January; being no more then a Fortnight before the death of the King: so that He wanted not the Prayers of the Poor, at the Time of His Death, to serve as a Counter-Ballance for those many Curses, which the poor Monks, and Friers had bestowed upon Him in the Time of His Life. In pursuance of this double Design, the Church of the said Friers (which had before served as a Magazine, or Store-house for such French-Wines, as had been taken by Reprise) was cleansed, and made fit for Holy uses, and Mass again sang in it on the thirteenth day of January before remembred, resorted to by such Parishioners as were appointed to it by the King's Donation. After which fol∣lowed (in the first years of King Edward the Sixth) the taking down of the said two Churches, and building several Tenements, on the Ground of the Churches, and Church-Yards, the Rents thereof to be imployed for the further maintenance, and Relief of the poor, living and loytering in, and about the City, to the great Dishonour of the same. But neither the first Grant of the King, nor these new Additions, being able to carry on the work to the end desired, it happened, that Bishop Ridley, preaching before the King, did much insist upon the settling of of some constant course for Relief of the Poor. Which Sermon wrought so far upon Him, that He caused the Bishop to be sent for, gave him great Thanks for his good Exhortation; and thereupon entred into Communication with him, about the devising of some Corse, by which so great, and good a Work should be brought to pass. His Advice was, That Letters should be written to the Lord Mayour, and Aldermen, for taking the Business into Consideration, in Reference to such Poor, as swarmed in great numbers about the City. To which the King so readily hearkened, that the Letters were dispatched, and Signed, be∣fore He would permit the Bishop to go out of His Presence. Furnished with these Letters, and Instructions, the Bishop calls before him Sir Richard Dobbs, then Lord Mayour of London, with so many Aldermen, as were thought fit to be advised with in the present Business. By whom it was agreed upon, That a Ge∣neral Contribution should be made by all wealthy, and well-affected Citizens, to∣wards the Advancement of a work so necessary for the publick good. For the effe∣cting whereof, they were all called to their Parish-Churches, where by the said Lord Mayour, their several Aldermen, and other grave Citizens, they were by Eloquent Orations, perswaded, how great▪ and how many Commodities, would ensue unto them, and their City; if the Poor of divers sorts were taken from out their Streets, Lanes, and Allyes, and were bestowed, and provided for in several Hospitals. It was therefore moved, that every man would signifie what they would grant, towards the preparing, and furnishing of such Hospitals, as also, what they would contribute weekly towards their Maintenance untill they were furnished with a more Liberal Endowment. Which Course prevailed so far upon them, that every man subscribed, according to his Ability, and Books were drawn in every Ward of the City, containing the Sum of that Relief: which they had contributed. Which being delivered unto the Mayour, were by Him humbly tendred to the King's Commissioners on the seventeenth of Februa∣ry.
This good Foundation being lai'd, a Beginning was put to the Reparation of the decayed Buildings, in the Gray-Friers, on the twenty sixth of July, for the Reception of such poor, fatherless Children, as were then to be provided for at the publick Charge. The like Reparation also made of the Ruinous Buildings belonging to the late dissolved Priory of Saint Thomas in the Burough of South∣wark; which the Citizens had then newly bought of the King, to serve for an Hospital of such Wounded, Sick, and Impotent Persons, as were not fit to be intermingled with the Sound. The Work so diligently followed in both places at once, that on the twenty third of November, the sick and maimed People were taken into the Hospital of Saint Thomas, and into Christ-Hospital to the number of four hundred Children; all of them to have Meat, Drink, Lodging, and Cloths, at the Charge of the City, till other means could be provided for their future Maintainance. And long it was not, before such further Means was provided for them, by the Bounty, and Piety of the King; then drawing as near unto his End, as his Fa∣ther was, when he lai'd the first Foundation of that Pious Work. For earing with what chearfulness the Lord Major, and Aldermen, had conformed themselves to the effect of His former Letters, and what a great advance they had made in the Work, commanded them to attend Him on the tenth of April, gave them great thanks for their Zeal, and forwardness, and gave for ever to the City his Palace of Bridewel (erected by King Henry the Eight) to be employed as a relieving house for such Vagabounds, and thriftless Poor, as should be sent thither to receive Cha∣stisement, and be forced to labour. For the better maintainance whereof, and the more liberal Endowment of the other Hospitals before remembred, it was sug∣gested to him; that the Hospital founded in the Savoy by King Henry the seventh, for the Relief of Pilgrims, and Travellers, was lately made the Harbour, or re∣lieving Place for Loyteres, Vagabonds, and Strumpets, who sunned themselves in the Fields all Day, and at Night found entertainment there. The Master and Brethren of the House are thereupon sent for to the King, who dealt so power∣fully and effectually with them, that they resigned the same into His Hands, with all the Lands, and Goods thereunto belonging. Out of which He presently be∣stowed the Yearly Rent of Seven Hundred Marks, with all the Beds, Bedding, and other Furniture, which he found therein, towards the maintainance of the said Work-House, and the Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark. The Grant where∣of He confirmed by His Letters Patents, bearing Date the 26th of June; adding thereunto a Mort-Main for enabling the City to purchase Lands, to the value of four thousand Marks per annum, for the better maintainance of those, and the other Hospitals. So that by the Donation of Bridewel, which He never built, and the suppression of the Hospital in the Savoy, which He never endowed, He was entituled to the Foundation of Bridewel, St. Bartholomew's, and St. Tho∣mas, without any charge unto himself. But these last Passages concerning the Donation of Bridewel, the suppression of the Hospital in the Savoy, and the Endowment of the said three Houses with the Lands thereof, hapned not till the year ensuing, Anno 1553. though lai'd unto the rest in the present Narrative, in regard of the Dependence, which it hath on the former Story. Nothing else memorable in the course of this present Year, but the coming of Cardanus, the death of Leland, and the preferment of Doctor John Taylor to the See of Lincoln. The See made void by the death of Doctor Henry Holbeach, about the beginning of August, in the former year, and kept void, by some powerful men about the King, till the 26th of June, in the year now present. At what time, the said Doctour Taylor, who before had been Dean of that Church, was Consecrated Bishop of it. During which interval, the Patri∣mony of that great and wealthy Bishoprick (one of the richest in the King∣dom) was so dismembred in it self, so parcelled, and marked out for a Prey to others, that when the New Bishop was to be restored unto his Temporals, under the Great Seal of England, (as the Custom is) there was none of all his Ma∣ours
reserved for him,An. Reg 7. 1553. but his Manour of Bugden, together with some Farms and Impropriations, toward the support of his Estate: The rest was to be raised out of the profits, perquisits, and emoluments of his Jurisdict  on; yet so, that nothing was to be abated in his Tenths, and first-fruits, which were kept up according to the former value. As for John Leland; for whose death I finde this year assigned: he had his Education in Christ's Colledg in Cambridg. Being a man of great parts, and indefatigable industry, he was imployed by King Henry the Eight to search into the Libraries, and Collect the Antiquities of Religious Houses, at such time, as they lay under the fear of suppression. Which work as he performed with more then Ordinary Diligence, so was he encourged thereunto by a very Liberal Exhibition, which he received annually from the late King Henry. But the King being dead, his Exhibition, and encouragments, dyed also with him. So that the Lamp of his life being destitute of the Oyl, which fed it, after it had been in a langishing condition all the rest of hs King's Reign was this year un∣fortunately Extingushed: unfortunately, in regard that he dyed distrcted to the great Greif of all that knew him, and the no small sorrow of may, who never saw him, but onely in his painful, and laboious Writings. Wich Writngs, be∣ing by him Presented to the hands of King Henry, came aterwards into he pow∣er of Sr. John Chek, Schole-master, and Secretary for the Ltine tongue to the King now Reigning. And though collcted Principally for the ue of the Crown, yet, on the death of the young King, his Tuour kept thm to him∣self as long as he lived, and left them at his death to Henry his Eldest Son, Secre∣tary to the Councel Established at Yok for the Nrhern parts. From Chek, but not without some intermediate conveyances, four of them came in∣to the possession of William  of Leicse shie; who having served his turn of them as well as he could, in his dscription of that County, bestowed them, as a most choise Rarity upon Oxford Library, where the Oginals tll emain. Out of this Treasury, whilest it remained entire in the hands of Cheek, the lear∣ned Campden was supplyed with much Excellent matter toward the making up of his description of the sles of Britain; but not without all due acknowledg∣ment to his Benefactour, whom he both frequent citeh, and very highly com∣mendeth for his pains▪ and industry. In the last place comes in Cardanus, an eminent Philosopher, born in Italy, and one not easily over matched by the then supposed Matchless Scliger, having composed a Book, Entituled  De varietate Rerum▪ with an Epistl Dedicatory to King Edward the Sixth he came over this year into England to present it to him; which gave him the Occasion of much conference with m. In which he found uch dexterity in Him for Encountring many of his Paradoxes in natu∣ral Philosophy▪ that he seemed to be astonished between Admiration, and De∣light, and divulged his Abilities to be miraculu. Some Passages of which di∣scourse Cardanus hath left upon Record in these words ensung. Decimm quintum, adhuc agbat Annum, cum interrogobat Latine &c. Being yet (saith he) but of the age of fifteen years he asked me in Latine (in which tongue he utter∣red his mind no less eloquently, and readily, then I could do my self) what my Book which I had dedicated unto him. De varietate Rerum, did contain? I an∣swered▪ that in the first Chapter was shewed the cause of Comts, or blazing∣stars▪ which hath been long sought for▪ and hitherto scarce fully found. What cause (sayd he) is that? The concoure or meeting of the light of the wandring Planets, or stars. To this th King thus replyed again. For as much (said he) as the motion of the stars keepeth not one course, but is diverse and variable by continual Alteration, how is it then that the cause of these Comets doth not quickly vde▪ or vanish, or that the Comet doth not keep one certain and uniform course, and motion, with the said stars, and Planets? Whereunto I anwered, that it oved indeed, but with a far swifter motion then the Planets, by reaon of the di∣versity
of Aspects, as we see in Christal, and the Sun, when a Rainbow re∣bounds on a Wall, for a little change makes a great difference of the place. The King rejoyned, How can that be done without a subject? as the Wall is the Subject to the Rainbow. To which I answered, That as in the Galaxia, or Via lactea, and in the Reflection of Lights, when many are set near one another, they do produce a certain Lucid and bright Mean. Which Conference is thus shut up by that Learn∣ed Men, That he began to favour Learning, before he could know it; and knew it, before he could tell what use he had of it: And then bemoans his short life, in these words of the Poet, Immodics brevis est Aetas, & rara Senectus. Anno Reg. Edw. Sexti 7o Anno Dom. 1552, 1553. SUch being the excellent Abilities of this hopeful Prince in Matters of Ab∣struser Learning, there is no question to be made, but that he was the Master of so much Perspicacity in his own Affairs, (as indeed he was, which might pro∣duce both Love, and Admiration in the Neighbouring Princes: Yet such was the Rapacity of the Times and the Unfortunateness of his Condition, that his Mi∣nority was abused to many Acts of Spoil, and Rapine (even to an high degree of Sacrilege) to the raising of some, and the enriching of others, without any manner of improvement to his own Estate. For, notwithstanding the great and most inestimable, Treasures which must needs come in, by the spoil of so ma∣ny Shrines, and Images, the sale of all the Lands belonging to Chanteries, Colleges, Free Chapels, &c. And the Dilapidating of the Patrimony of so many Bishop∣ricks, and Cathedral Churches; he was not onely plunged in Debt, but the Crown-Lands were much diminished, and impaired, since his coming to it. Be∣sides which spoils, there were many other helps, and some great ones too, of keeping him both beforehand, and full of Money, had they been used to his Ad∣vantage. The Lands of divers of the Halls, and Companies in London, were char∣ged with Annual Pensions, for the finding of such Lights, Obits, and Chantry-Priests, as were founded by the Donours of them. For the redeeming whereof, they were constrained to pay the sum of Twenty Thousand Pounds to the use of the King, by an Order from the Council-Table; not long before the payment of the first Money for the sale of Boloign Anno 1550. And somewhat was also paid by the City, to the King, for the Purchase of the Borough of Southwark, which they bought of him the next year. But the main glut of Treasure was that of the four hundred thousand Crowns, amounting in our Money to 133333 l. 13 s. 4 d. paid by the French King, on the srrendry of the Town, and Territory of , before remembred Of which vast sum, (but small, in reference to the loss of so great a strength) no less then fourscore thousand pounds was laid up in the Tower; the rest assigned, to publick uses, for the peace and safety of the King∣dom. Not to say any thing of that great Yearly Profit, which came in from the Mint, after the entercourse settled betwixt Him and the King of Sweden, and the decrying so much Base Money, had begun to set the same on work. Which great Advantages notwithstanding, He is now found to be in Debt to the Bankers of Anwep & elsewhere, no less then 251000 l, of English money. Towards which, the sending of his own Ambassadours into France, and the entertainment of the French, when they were in England, (the onely two great Charges, which we finde Him at in the whole course of His Reign) must be inconsiderable. It was to no purpose for Him to look too much backward, or to trouble Him∣self with enquiring after the ways, and means, by which He came to be involved in so great a Debt. It must be now his own care, and the endeavours of those, who plunged Him in it, to finde the speediest way for His getting out.
And first they fall upon a course to lssen the Expenses of His Court ad Family, by suppressing the Tables formerly appointed for young Lords, the Ma∣sters of the Requests, Serjeant at Arms, &c. which thought it saved some money, yet it brought in none. In the next place, it was resolved, to call such Officers to a present and publick Reckoning, who either had embezelled any of the Crown Lands, or inverted any of the King's Money to their private use. On which course they were the more intent, because they did both serve the King▪ and con∣tent the People: but might be used by them as a Scourge, for the whipping of those, against whom they had any cause of quarrel. Amongst which I finde the new Lord Paget to have been fined six thousand pound (as before was said) for divers Offences of that nature, which were charged upon him Baumont, then Master of the Rolls, had purchased Lands with the King's Money, made longer Leases of some other Crown Lands, then he was authorized to do by his Com∣mission, and was otherwise gulty of much corrupt and fraudulent dealing. For expiating of which Crimes, he surrendred all his Lands and Goods to the King, and seems to have been well befriended, that he sped no worse. The like Of∣fences proved against one Whaley, one of the King's Receivers for the County of York; for which he was punished with the loss of his Offices, and adjudged to tand to any such Fine, as by his Majesty▪ and the Lords of hs Council shoud be set upon him. Which manner of proceeding, though it be for the most part pleasing to the Common People, and profitable to the Common-Wealth; yet were it more unto the honour of a Pince, to make choice of such Officers, whom He thinks not likely to offend, then to sacrifice them to the People, and His own Displeasures having thus offended. But the main Engine at this time for advancing Money, was the speeding of a Commission into all parts of the Realm under pretence of selling such of the Lands & Goods of Chanterys, &c as remained unsold; but, in plain truth, to seize upon all Hangings▪ Altar-Cloths, Fronts, Parafronts, Copes of all sorts, with all manner of Plate, which was to be found in any Cathedral, or Parochial Church. To which Rapacity the demolishing of the fomer Altars, and placing the Com∣munion Table in the middle of the Quires, or Chancels of every Church, (as was then most used) gave a very good ht, by rendring all such Furnitures, rich Plate, and other costly Utensils, in a manner useless. And that the business might be carryed with as much advantage to the King as might be, He gave out certain Instuctons under his Hand, by which the Commissioners were to regu∣late themselves in their Proceedings, to the advancement of the service. Amongst which pretermitting those, which seem to be Preparatoris onely unto all the rest, I shall put down as many▪ as I think material: And that being done, it shall be left to the Reader's Judgment, whether the King, being now in the sixteenth year of his Age, were either better studied in his own Concernments or seemed to be worse principled in Maters, which concerned the Church. Now the most Ma∣terial of the said Instructions were these, that follow. 1. The said Commissioners shall, upon their view and survey taken, cause due In∣ventories to be made by Bills or Book indented, of all manner of Goods, Plates, Jewels, Bells, and Ornaments, as yet remaining, or any wise forthcoming, and be∣longing to any Churches, Chapels, Fraternities, or Gilds; and one part of the said Inventories to send and return to  Privy Council, and the other to deliver to them, in whose hands the said Goods, Plate, Jewels, Bells, and Ornaments, shall re∣main, to be kept▪ and preserved. And thy shall also give good Charge and Order, that the same Goods, and every part thereof, be at all times forthcoming to be answe∣red; leaving nevertheless in every Parish-Church or Chapel, of common resort, one, two, or more Chalices, or Cups, according to the multitude of People, in every such Church, or Chapel; and also such other Ornamets as by their discretion shall seem requisite for the Divine Service▪ in every such place for the time.
2. That because Information hath been made, that in many Places great quan∣tities of the said Plate, Bells, Jewels, Ornaments, hath been embezelled by certain private men, contrary to his Majestie's express Commandment in that behalf, the said Commissioners shall substantially, and justly enquire, and attain the knowledge thereof: by whose default the same is, or hath been, or in whose hands any part of the same is come. And in that point, the said Commissioners shall have good regard that they attain to certain Names, and dwelling Places of every person, or persons, that hath sold, alienated, embezelled, taken, or carryed away; or of such also, as have coun∣selled, advised, and commanded any part of the said Goods, Plate, Jewels, Bells, Vest∣ments, and Ornaments, to be taken, or carryed away▪ or otherwise embezelled. And these things they shall as certainly, and duly, as they can, cause to be searched, and un∣derstood. 3. That upn full search and enquiry thereof, the said Commissioners, four, or three of them, shall cause to be called before them all such persons, by whom any of the said Goods, Plate Jewels, Bells, Ornaments, or any other the Premises, have been alienated, embezelled, and taken away; or by whose means, and procurement, the same, or any part thereof hath been attempted, or to whose hands, or use, any of the same, or any profit for the same hath grown. And by such means, as to their discre∣tions shall seem best, cause them to bring into these the said Commissioners hands, to Our use, the said Plate, Jewels, Bells, and other the Premises so alienated, for the true and full value thereof: certifying unto Our Privy Council the Names of all such as refuse to stand to, or obey their Order touching their delivery, or restitution of the same, or the just value thereof. To the intent, that, as cause and reason shall require, every man may answer to his doings in this behalf. 4. To these another Clause was added, touching the moderation, which they were to use in their Proceedings; to the end, that the effect of their Commission might go forward with as much quiet, and as little occasion of trouble, or disquiet to the Mul∣titude, as might be; using therein such wise perswasions, as in respect of the place, and disposition of the People, may seem to their Wisdoms most expedient: yet so, that they take care for giving good and substantial Order to stay the inordinate and gree∣dy Covetousness of such disordered People, as should go about to alienate any of the Premises; or otherwise to let them know, that according to Reason, and Order, such as have, or should contemptuously offend in that behalf, should receive such punish∣ment, as to the quality of their doing should be thought most requisite. Such were the Faculties, and Instructions, wherewith the Kings Commissioners were impowered and furnished. And doubt we not, but that they were as pun∣ctual and exact in the execution: which cannot better be discerned, then by that, which is reported of their doings generally in all parts of the Realm, and more particularly in the Church of St. Peter in Westminster, more richly furnished, by reason of the Pomps of Coronations, Funerals, and such like Solemnities, then any other in the Kingdome. Concerning which I find, in an old Chapter-Book belonging to it, that on May the 9. 1553. Sir Roger Cholmley Knight, Lord Chief Justice, and Sir Robert Bowes Knight, Master of the Rolls, the King's Com∣missioners, for gathering Ecclesiastical Goods, held their Session at Westmin∣ster, and called before them the Dean of that Cathedral, and certain others of the same House, and commanded them, by virtue of their Commission, to bring to them a true Inventory of all the Plate, Cups, Vestiments, and other Ecclesiasti∣cal Good, which belonged to their Church. Which done, the Twelfth Day of the same Moneth, they sent John Hodges, Robert Smalwood, and Edmund Best, of the City of Westminster, (whom the said Commissioners had made their Colle∣ctours) with a Commandment to the Dean and Chapter, for the delivery of the said Goods; which were by Robert Crome Clerk, Sexton of the said Church, de∣livered to the said Collectors, who left no more unto the Church, then two Cups,
with the Covers all gilt; One white Silver Pot, Three Herse-Cloths, Twelve Cushions, One Carpet for the Table, Eight Stall-Cloths for the Quite, Three Pulpit-Cloths, Nine little Carpets for the Dean's Stall, Two Table-Cloths: the rest of all the rich Furniture, massie Plate, and whatsoever else was of any value, (which questionless must needs amount to a very great Sum) was seized on by the said Collecturs, and clearly carryed away by Order, from the said Commis∣sioners. The lke done generally in all the other parts of the Realm, into which the Commissioners began their Circuits in the Moneth of April, as soon as the ways were open, and fit for Travail. Their business was to seize upon all the Goods remaining in any Cathedral, or Parish-Churches, all Jewels of Gold, and Silver, Crosses, Candlesticks, Censers, Chalices, and such like; with their ready Money: As also, all Copes▪ and Vestments of Cloth of Gold, Tyssue, and Sil∣ver; together with all other Copes, Vestments, and Ornaments, to the same be∣longing. Which general seizure being made, they were to leave one Chalice, with certain Table-Cloths, for the use of the Communion-Board, as the said Commissioners should think fi: the Jewels Piate, and ready Money, to be deli∣vered to the Master of the King's Jewels in the Tower of London; the Cope of Cloth of Gold, and Tyssue, to be brought into the King's Wardrobe; the rest to be turned into ready Money, and tha Money to be paid to Sir Edmond Peckam, the King's Cofferer, for the defraying of the Charges of Hs Majestie's Hou∣shold. But notwithstanding this great Care of the King on the one side, and the dou∣ble-diligence of his Commissioners on the other, the Booty did not prove so great, as the Expectation. In all great Fairs, and Markets, there are some Fore∣stallers, who get the bst Peny-worths to themselves, and suffer not the Richest and most gainful Commodities to be openly sold. And so it fared also in the present Business, there being some, who were as much before-hand with the King's Commissioners in embezelling the said Plate▪ Jewels, and other Furnitures, as the Commissioners did intend to be with the King, in keeping always most part unto themselves. For when the Commissioners came to execute their Powers in their several Circuits, they neither could discover all, or recover much of that, which had been puroined; some things being utterly embezelled by Persons not responsible; in which Case, the King, as well as the Commis∣soners, was to lose his Right: but more concealed by Persons not detectable; who had so cunningly carryed the stealth, that there was no tracing of their oot-step. And some there were, who, being known to have such Goods in ther possession, conceived themselves too Great to be called in question; conni∣ved at willngly by these, who were but their Equals, and either were, or meant to b Offendurs in the very same kind. So that although some Profit was here∣by raised to the King's Exchequer; yet the far greatest part of the Prey came to other hands: Insomuch, that many private men's Parlours were hung with Al∣tar-Cloths, their Tables, and Beds covered with Copes, instead of Carpets, and Covelids; and many made Carousing Cups of the Sacred Chalices, as once elshzzar celebrated his Drunken Feast in the Sanctified Vessels of the Temple. It was a sorry House, and not worth the naming, which had not somewhat of this Furniture in it, though it were onely a fair large Cushion made of a Cope, or Altar-Cloth, to adorn their Windows, or make their Chairs appear to have somewhat in them of a Chair of State. Yet how contemptible were these Trap∣pings, in comparison of those vast sus of Money, which were made of Jewels, Pate, and Cloth of Tyssue, either conveyed beyond the Seas, or sold at home, and good Lands purchased with the Money; nothing the more blessed to the Poste∣rty o them, that bught them, for being purchased with the Consecrated Trea∣sures of so many Temples.
But as the King was plunged in Debt, without being put to any extraordina∣ry Charges in it, so was He decayed in his Revenue, without selling any part of His Crown Lands towards the payment of His Debts. By the suppressing of some, and the surrendring of other Religious Houses, the Royal Intrado was so much increased in the late King's time; that, for the better managing of it, the King erected first the Court of Augmentation, and afterwards the Court of Surveyours. But in short time, by His own Profuseness, and the Avaritious∣ness of this King's Ministers, it was so retrenched, that it was scarce able to finde Work enough for the Court of Exchequer. Hereupon followed the dis∣solving of the said two Courts in the last Parliament of this King, beginning on the first, and ending on the last day of March. Which, as it made a loud noise in the Ears of the People, so did it put this Jealousie into their Minds. That, if the King's Lands should be thus daily wasted without any recruit, He must at last prove burthensom to the common Subject. Some course is therefore to be thought on, which might pretend to an increase of the King's Revenue, and none more easie to be compassed, then to begin with the suppression of such Bi∣shopricks, and Collegiate Churches, as either lay urthest off, or might best be spared. In reference whereunto, it was concluded, in a Chapter held at West∣minster, by the Knights of the Garter, That from thenceforth the said most noble Order of the Garter should be no longer enttuled by the Name of St. George, but that it should be called the Oder of the Garter onely; and that the Feast of the said Order should be celebrated upon Whitson-Eve, Whitson-day, and Whit∣son-Monday, and not on St. George's day, as before it was. And to what end was this concluded; and what else was to follow upon this Conclusion, but the dissolving of the Free-Chapel of St. George in the Castle of Windsor, and the transferring of the Order to the Chapel of King HENRY the Seventh, in the Abbey of Westminster? Which had undoubtedly been done, and all the Lands thereof converted to some powerful Courtiers, under pretence of laying them to the Crown, if the King's Death, which happened within four Moneths after, had not prevented the Design, and thereby respited that Ruin, which was then intended. The like preservation happened, at the same time also, in the Church of Dur∣ham, as liberally endowed as the most, and more amply priviledged, then the best in the King's Dominions. The Bishops hereof by Charter, and long Pre∣scription, enjoyed and exercised all the Rights of a County Palatine in that large Tract of Ground, which lyes between the Tees, and the Tine, best known in those Parts by the Name of the Bishoprick; the Diocess containing also all Northumberland, of which the Bishops, and the Percies, had the greatest shares. No sooner was Bishop Tonstal committed to the Tower, which was on the Twentieth of December, 1551. but presently an Eye was cast upon his Possessions. Which, questionless, had followed the same fortune with the rest of the Bishopricks, if one, more powerful then the rest, had not preserved it from be∣ing parcelled out as the others were, on a rong Confidence of getting it all unto himself. The Family of the Percies was then reduced to such a point, that it seem∣ed to have been quite expired; a Family which first came in with the Nor∣man Conquerour, by whom enriched with most of the forfeited Estates of Morchar, Gospatrick, and Waltheof, the three last Earls of Northumber∣land, of the Saxon Race. But, this Line ending in the latter times of King HENRY the First, Josseline of Lorain, descended from the Emperour CHARLES the Great, and one of the younger Brothers of Adeliza, the last Wife of the King, enrich'd himself by Marriage with the Heir-General of this House, upon condition, that keeping to himself the Arms of his own Family, he should assume the Name of Percy, to remain always afterward unto his Posteri∣ty. Advanced in that respect, by the Power and Favour of John of Gaunt, to
the Rank and Title of the Earls of Northumberland, at the Coronation of King Richard the Second. They held the same with great Power, and Honour, (the short interposing of the Marquess Mountacute excepted onely) till toward the latter end of King Henry the Eighth. At what time it happened▪ that Hen∣ry Lord Peircy, the sixth Earl of this House, had incurred the heavy displeasure of that King: First, for an old affection to the Lady Ann Bollein▪ when the King began first to be enamoured of her excellent Beauties; and afterwards for denying to confess a Precontract to have been formerly made between them; when the King (now as weary of her, as before he was fond) was seeking some fair Pretences to divorce himself from her, before she was to lose her Head. He had no Children of his own; and Thmas his Brother, and next Heir, was, to his greater grief, attainted of Treason, for being thought to have a chief hand i the Northern Rebellion, Anno 1536. In both respects, he found himself at such a loss, and the whole Family without hope of a Restitution to its antient splendour; that, to preserve himself from running into further danger, he gave unto the King the greatest part of that fair Inheritance; and, dying not long after, left his Titles also to the King's disposing. The Lands, and Titles, being thus fallen into the Crown, continued undisposed of, till the falling of the Duke of Somerset; when Dudley, Earl of Warwick, ha∣ving some projections in his Head beyond the greatness of a Subject▪ advanced himself unto the Title of Duke of Northumberland; not doubting, but he should be able to possess himself in short time also of all the Land of that Family, which were then remaining in the Crown. To which Estate, the Bishoprick of Duham, and all the Lands belonging to it, could not but be beheld as a fair Addition, if at the least it might be called an addition, which was of more value, then the Patrimony, to which it was to have been added. He had long Reigned without a Crown, suffering the King for some years to enjoy that Title, which was to be transferred (if all Contrivances had held good) upon one of his Sons, whom He designed in Marriage to the eldest Daugh∣ter of the House of Suffolk. And then how easie was it for him, having a King of his own begetting, a Queen of his own making, the Lords of the Council at his beck, and a Parliament to serve his turn for all occasions, to incorporate both the Lands of the Peircies, and the Patrimony of that Church, into one Estate, with all the Rights, and Privileges of a County Palatine. Count Palatine of Durham, Prince Palatine of Northumberland, or what else he pleased, must be the least he could have aimed at, in that happy Conjuncture; happy to him, had the Even been answerable unto his Projections; but miserable enough to all the rest of the Kingdom, who should not servilely submit to this Glorious Up∣start. Upon which Grounds, as the Bishoprick of Durham was dissolved by Act of Parliament, under pretence of patching up the King's Revenue; so the greatest part of the Lands thereof had been kept together, that they might serve for a Revenue to the future Palatine. But all these Projects failing in the death of the King, and his own Attaindure, not long after the Peircies were restored by Queen Mary to their Lands, and Honours, as the Bishop was unto his Liberty, and to most of his Lands; it being almost impossible, that such a fair Estate should fall into the hands of the Courtiers, and no part of it be left sticking in those Glutinous Fingers. For to begin the Year withall, the King was taken with a very strong Cough in the Moneth of January, which at last ended in a Consumption of the Lungs; the Seeds of which Malignity were generally supposed to have been sown in the last Summer's Progress, by some over-heatings of himself in his Sports, and Exer∣cises. But they, that looked more narrowly into the matter, observed some kind of decayings in him from the time that Sir Robert Dudley▪ the third Son of Nor∣thumberland, was admitted into a place of ordinary attendance about his Per∣son, which was on the same Day, when his Father was created Duke▪ For where∣as
most men gave themselves no improbable hopes, that betwixt the Spring time of his life, the Growing season of the year, and such Medicinal applications as were made unto him, the disease would wear it self away, by little and little, yet they found the contrary. It rather grew so fast upon him, that when the Parliament was to begin on the first of March, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, were Commanded to attend him at White-Hall, instead of waiting on him from thence to Westminster, in the usual manner. Where being come, they found a Sermon ready for them (the Preacher being the Bishop of London) which otherwise was to have been Preached in the Abby-Church; and the Great Chamber of the Court accomodated for an House of Peers to begin the Session. For the opening whereof, the King then sitting under the Cloth of State, and all the Lords, according to their Ranks, and Orders, he declared by the Lord Chancellor Goodrick▪ the causes of his calling them to the present Par∣liament, and so dismist them for that time. A Parliament which began, and ended in the Month of March, that the Commissions might the sooner be dispatched to their several Circuits, for the speedier gathering up of such of the Plate, Copes, Vestments, and other Furnitures, of which the Church was to be spoyled, in the time of his sickness, Yet in the midst of these disorders there was some care taken for advancing both the honour and the interest of the English-Nation, by furnishing Sebastian Cabol for some new discoveries. Which Sebastian, the Son of John Cabol a Vene∣tian born, attended on his first imployment under Henry the seventh, Anno 1497. At what time they discovered the Barralaos, and the Coasts of Caena∣da: now called New-France, even to the 67½. degree of Northern Lati∣tude. Bending his Course more toward the South, and discovering a great part of the shoars of Florida, he returned for England; bringing with him three of the Natives of that Country, to which the name of New-Found-Land hath been since appropriated. But finding the KING unhappily Embroyled in a War with Scotland, and no present Encouragements to be given for a fur∣ther Voiage, he betook himself into the service of the KING of SPAIN, and after fourty years and more, upon some distast, abandoned SPAIN, and offered his service to this KING. By whom, being made Grand Pilot of Eng∣land, in the year 1549. he animated the English-Merchants, to the finding out of a passage by the North-East Seas to Cathay, and China; first enterprised under the Conduct of Sr. Hugh Willoughby, who unfortunately Perished in the Action; himself, and all his Company, being Frozen to Death (all the parti∣culars of his Voiage being since committed to Writing) as was certified by the Adventures in the year next following. It was upon the twentith of May in this present year that this Voiage was first undertaken, three great Ships being well manned, and fitted for the Expedition; which afterwards was followed by Chan∣celour, Burrought, Jackman, Jenkinson, and other noble Adventurers, in the times Succeding. Who though they failed of their Attempt in finding out a shorter way to Cathay, and China; yet did they open a fair Passage to the Bay of S. Nicholas, and thereby layd the first foundation of a Wealthy Trade betwixt us, and the Muscovites. But the KING'S Sickness still encreasing, who was to live no longer then might well stand with the designs of the DVKE of Northumber-land; some Marriages are resolved on, for the Daughters of the DVKE of Suffolk, in which the KING appeared as forward, as if he had been one of the Princi∣palls in the Plot against him. And so the matter was Contrived, that the La∣dy IANE the eldest Daughter to that DVKE, should be Married to the Lord Guilford Dudly, the fourth Son (then living) of Northumberland, all the three Elder Sons having Wives before, that Katherine the second Daughter of
Suffolk, should be Married to the Lord Henry Herbert, the Eldest Son of the Earl of Pembrock, whom Dudly had made privy to all his Counsels; and the third Daughter, named Mary, being Crook-Backed, and otherwise not very taking, affianced to Martin Keys, the KING'S Gentleman-Porter. Which Marriages together with that of the Lady Katherine, one of the Daughters of Duke Dudly, to Henry Lord Hastings, Eldest Son of the Earl of Hunting∣ton, were celebrated in the end of May, or the beginning of June (for I finde our Writers differing in the time thereof) with as much Splendour and solem∣nity, as the KING'S weak Estate, and the sad Condition of the Court could be thought to bear. These Marriages all solemnized at Drham. House in the Strand, of which Northumberland had then took possession in the name of the Rest, upon a Confidence of being Master very shortly of the whole Estate. The noise of these Marriages bred such Amazement in the Hearts of the common People, apt enough in themselves to speak the worst of Northumberland's A∣ctions; That there was nothing left unsaid, which might serve to shew their hatred against him, or express their Pity toward the KING. But the DVKE was so little troubled at it, that on the contrary he resolved to Dissemble no longer, but openly to play his Game, according to the Plot and Project; which he had been Hammering ever ince the Fall of the DVKE of Somerset, whose Death he had Contrived on no other Ground, but for laying the way more plain, and open to these vast ambitions. The KING was now grown weak in Body, and his Spirits much decaied by a languishing Sickness; which Rendred him more apprehensive of such fears and Dangers, as were to be presented to him, then otherwise he could have been in a time of strength. In which Estate, Duke Dudly so prevailed upon him, that he conented at the last to a transposition of the Crown from his natural sisters, to the Children of the Dutchess of Suffolk; Confirming it by Letters Patents, to the Heirs Males of the Body of the said Dutchess. And for want of such Heirs Males to be Born in the lifetime of the KING, the Crown immediately to descend on the Lady IANE (the eldest Daughter of that House) and the Heirs of her Body, and so with several Remainders, to the rest of that Family. The carriage of which Business, and the Rubs it met with in the way, shall be reserved to the particular story of the Lady IANE when she is brought unwilling upon the Stage, there on to Act the part of a Queen of England. It sufficeth in this place to note, that the KING had no sooner caused these Leters Pa∣tents to passe the Seal, but his Weakeness more visibly encreased, then it did before. And as the KING'S Weakeness did encrease, so did the DVKE of Northumberland's Diligence about him; for he was little absent from him, and had alwaies some well-assured, to Epy how the State of his Health changed every Hour; And the more joyful he was at the Heart, the more Sorrowful appearance did he outwardly Make. Whither any tokens of Poyson did Appear, reports are various. Certainly his Physicians discerned an invincible Malignity, in his disease; and the Suspicion did the more encrease, for that the Complaint proceded chiefly from the Lights; a part, as of no quickness, so no seat for any sharp Disease. The Bruit whereof being got amongst the People, they break out into immoderate Passions; Com∣plaining that, for this cause, his two Uncles had been taken away; that for this cause the most Faithful of his Nobility, and of his Council were disgraced, and removed from Court; that this was the reason why such were placed next his Person, who were most assuredly disposed, either to commit,. or permit, any Mischeif; that now it did appear, that it was not vainly conjectured some years before, by Men of Judgment and Fore∣sight,
that after Sommerset's Death the King should not long Enjoy his Life. But the DVKE regarded not much the muttering Multitude, knowing full well, that Rumours grow Stale, and Vanish with Time; and yet, somewhat to abate, or Delay them for the present, He caused speeches o be spread abroad that the KING began to be in a Recovery of his Health, which was the more readily Beleived, because most desired it to be true. To which Report the General Jugdment of his Physicians gave no little Countenance, by whom it was affirmed, that they saw some hopes of his Recovery, if he might be re∣moved to a Better, and more Healthful Air. But this, DVKE Dudly did not like of, and therefore he so dealt with the LORDS of the Council, that they would by no means yield unto it, upon pretense of his Inability to endure any such Remove. And now, the time being near at hand, for the last Act of this Tragedy, a certain Gentlewoman, accounted a fit Instrument for the purpose, offer∣ed her Service for the Cure; giving no small assurance of it, if He might be com∣mitted wholy to her disposing. But from this Proposition the KING'S Phy∣sicians shewed themselves to be very averse, in regard, that as she could give no reason, either of the nature of the Disease, or of the part afflicted; so she would not declare the means, whereby she intended to work the Cure. Whose Opposition notwithstanding, it was in time resolved by the Lords of the Council, that the Physicians should be discharged, and the Ordering of the King's Person committed unto her alone. But she had not kept Him long in hand, when He was found to have fallen into such Desperate Extremity, as manifestly might Declare, that His Death was hastened, under pretense of finding out a more quick way for restoring of His Health. For now it vi∣sibly appeared, that His Vital Parts were mortally stuffed. Which brought Him to a difficulty of speech, and breathing; that His Legs▪ swelled, his Pulse failed, and his Skin changed colour; with many other horrid Symptoms of appro∣ching Death. Which being observed, the Physicians were again sent for, when it was too late; and sent for (as they gave it out) but for Fashion onely; because it was not thought fit in Reason of State, that a King should by, without having some Physicians in attendance of him, by some of which it was secretly whispered. That neither their Advice nor Applicati∣ons, had been at all regarded in the course of his Sickness, That the King had been ill dealt with, more then once, or twice; and that, when by the Bene∣fit, both of his Youth, and of careful Means, there were some fair hopes of his Recovery, He was again more strongly Over-laied then ever. And for a farther proof, that some undue Practises had been used upon him, it is Affirmed by a Writer of the Popish Party, who could have no great cause to pity such a Calamitous End, not onely that the Apothecary, who poysoned him, as well for the Horrour of the Offence, as the Disquietness of his Con∣science, did not long after drown himself; but that the Landress, who washed his Shirts, lot the Skin of her fingers. Againt which general appre∣hensions of some ill Dealing toward this unfortunate Prince, it can be no suffi∣cient Argument (if any Argument at all) that Queen Mary caused no En∣quiry to be made about it, as some supposed She would have done, if the suspicion had been raised upon any good Grounds, For it may easily be Believed, that She who afterwards admitted of a Consultation for Burning the Body of Her Father, and cutting off the Head of Her Siter, would not be over-Careful in the search, and punshment of those, who had precipitated the Death of her Brother. The differences which were between them in the point of Religion, and the King's forwardness in the Cause of the Lady Jane; His rendring Her uncapa∣able,
as much as in Him was, to succeed in the Crown; and leaving Her in the Estate of Illegitimation, were thought to have enough in them of a Supersedeas unto all Good Nature. So that the King might dye by such sinister Practises, without putting Queen MARY to the trouble of enquiring after them; who thought Her Self to have no Reason of being too sollicitous in searching out the secret Causes of His Death, who had been so injurious to Her in the time of His Life. A Life, which lasted little, and was full of trouble; so that Death could not be unwelcome to Him, when the hopes of His Recovery began to fail Him. Of which if He desired a Restitution, it was rather for▪ the Church's sake, then for His own. His dying Prayers not so much aiming at the prolonging of His Life, as the Continuance of Religion: Not so much at the freeing of Himself from His Disease, as the preserving of the Church from the danger of Popery. Which dying Prayer, as it was taken from His Mouth, was in these words fol∣lowing: Lord God, deliver me out of this miserable, and wretched life, and take me among thy Chosen. Howbeit, not my Will, but Thine be done. Lord, I commit my Spirit to Thee. O Lord, Thou knowest, how happy it were for Me, to be with Thee: Yet, for thy Chosen's sake, send me Life, and Health, that I may truly se ve Thee. Oh my Lord God! bless my People, and save Thine Inheritance. O Lord God, save thy Chosen People of England. Oh Lord God! defend this Realm from Papistry, and maintain thy true Religion, that I, and my People, may praise thy Holy Name, for Jesus Christ his sake. With this Prayer, and other Holy Meditations, He prepared that Pious Soul for God; which He surrendred into the Hands of His Creatout, on the sixth of July, toward Night, when He had lived fifteen Years, eight Moneths, and four and twenty Days: Of which, He had Reigned six Years, five Moneths, and eight Days over. His Body, kept a while at Greenwich, was, on the eight of August, removed to Westminster, and, on the morrow after, solemnly Interred amogst His Ancestours, in the Abbey Church. In the performance whereof, the Lord Treasure Paulet, with the Earls of Shrewsbury and Pembroke, served as prin∣cipal Mourners; the Funeral Sermo Preached by Doctour Day▪ then shortly to be re-established in the See of Chichester. And, if the Dead e capable of any Feli∣city in this present Woald, He might be said, to have had a special part there∣of, in this particular. viz. That, as He had caused all Divine Offices to be Cele∣brated in the English Tongue, according to the Reformation, which was made in the time of His Life; so the whole Service of the Day, together with the Form of Burial, and the Communion following on it. were Officiated in the English Tongue, (according to the same Model) on the Day of his Obsequies. But whilest these things were Acting on the Curch of Westminster, Queen Mary held a more beneficial Obsequie for Him, (as She then imagined) in the Tower of Lon∣don, where She caused a Solemn Dirige, in the Latine Tongue, to be Chanted in the Afternoon; and, the next Day, a Mass of Requiem, to be sung for the good of His Sonl: At which, both She, and many of Her Ladies, made their accu∣stomed Offerings, according to the Form, and Manner of the Church of Kome. Such was the Life, and such the Death of this Excellent Prince, whose Character I shall not borrow from any of our own English Writers, who may be thought to have been byassed by their own Affections, in speaking more, or less, of Him, then He had deserved. But I shall speak Him in the words of that Great Phi∣losopher Hierome Cardanus, an Italian born; and, who professing the Religion of the Church of Rome, cannot be rationally accused of Partiality in his Cha∣racter of Him.
There was in Him (saith he) a towardly Disposition, and pregnancie, apt to all Humane Literature: as who, being yet a Childe, had the knowledg of divers Tongues: First, of the English, His own Natural Tongue; of the Latine also, and of the French: Neither was He ignorant (as I hear) of the Greek, Italian, and Spanish Tongues, and of other Languages, peradventure, more. In His own, in the French, and in the Latine Tongue, singularly perfect; and, with the like fa∣cility, apt to receive all other. Neither was He ignorant in Logick, in the Prin∣ciples of Natural Philosophie, or in Musick. There was in Him, lacking neither Humanity, a Princely Gravity, and Majesty, for any kind of towardliness, beseem∣ing a Noble King. Briefly, it might seem A Miracle of Nature, to behold the Excellent Wit, and Forwardness, that appeared in Him, being yet but a Childe. And this (saith he) I speak not Rhetorically, to amplifie things, or to make them more, then Truth is; nay, the Truth is more, then I do utter. So He, in reference to His Peronal Ablities and Qualifications: And for the rest, that is to say, His Piety to Almighty God, His Zeal to the Reformation of Religion, His Care for the well-ordering of the Common-Wealth, and other Qualities belonging to a Chri∣stian King, (so far as they could be found in such tender years,) I leave them to be gathered from the Passages of His Life, as before lai'd down: Remem∣bring well, that I am to play the Part of an Historian, and not of a Panegyrist, or Rhetorician. As for the manner of His Death, the same Philosopher leaves it under a suspicion, of being like to fall upon Him, by some dangerous Practise. For, whe∣ther He divined it by his ART in Astrologie (having Calculated the Scheme of His Nativity) or apprehended it by the Course, and Carriage of Business, he made a dangerous Prediction; when he fore-saw, that the KING should shortly dye a violent Death; and (as he reporteth) fled out of the Kingdom, for fear of further danger, which might follow on it. Of any Publick Works of Piety, in the Reign of this KING, more then the Founding and Endowing of the Hospitals before-remembred, I finde no mention in our Authours; which cannot be affirmed of the Reign of any of His Predecessours, since their first receiving of the Gospel. But their Times were for building up, and His unfortunate Reign was for pulling down. Howsoever, I finde His Name remembred amongst the Benefactours to the University of Oxford, and, by that Name, required to be commemorated in all the Prayers before such Sermons; as were Preached ordinarily by any of that Body, in Saint Marie's Church, or at Saint Paul's Cross, or finally in the Spittle without Bishops-Gate, on some solemn Festivals. But, possibly it is, that his Beneficence did extend no further, then either to the Confirmation of such Endowments, as had been made unto that Uni∣versity by King Henry the Eight, or, to the excepting of all Colleges in that, and the other University, out of the Statute, or Act of Parlia∣ment, by which all Chantries, Colleges, and Free-Chapels, were confer∣red upon Him. The want of which Redemption, in the Grant of the said Chantries, Colleges, Free-Chapels to King Henry the Eight, strook such a Terrour unto the Students of both Universities, that they could ne∣ver think themselves secure, till the Expiring of that Statute by the Death of the King; notwithstanding a very Pious and Judicious Letter, which had been written to the King in that behalf, by Doctour Richard Cox, then Dean of Christ-Church, and Tour to His Son, Prince Ed∣ward. But, not to leave this Reign, without the Testimony of some Work of Piety, I cannot but remember the Foundation of the Hospital of Christ in Abindon, as a Work, not onely of this Time, but the King's own Act. A Guild, or Brother-hood, had been there founded in the Pa∣rish-Church
of Saint Hellens, during the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, by the procurement of one Sir John Gollafrie (a near Neighbouring Gen∣tleman) for Building, and Repairing certain Bridges, and High-waies, a∣bout the Town; as also, for the Sustenance, and Relief of thirteen poor People, with two, or more Priests, for performing all Divine Offices, unto those of the Brother-hood. Which being brought within the Com∣pass of the Act of Parliament, by which all Chantries, Colleges, and Free-Chappels, were conferred on the Crown: the Lands hereof were seized on, to the use of the King; the Repairing of the Waies, and Bridges, turned upon the Town, and the Poor left Destitute▪ in a man∣ner, of all Relief. In which Condition it remained, till the last Year of the King, when it was moved by Sir John Mason, one of the Masters of Re∣quests (a Town-born Childe, and one of the poorest mens Children in it) to erect an Hospital in the same, and to Endow it with such of the Lands, belonging to the former Brother-hood, as remained in the Crown, and to charge it with the Services, and Pious Uses, which were before in∣cumbent on the old Fraternity. The Suitour was too powerfull to be de∣nyed, and the Work too Charitable in it self to be long demurr'd on, so that he was easily made Master also of this Request. Having obtained the King's Consent, he caused a handsome Pile of Building to be Erected near the Church, distributed into several Lodgings, for the Use of the Poor, and one convenient Common-Hall, for dispatch of Business: to which he lai'd such Farms, and Tenements in the Town, and elsewhere, as had been vested in the Brother-hood of the Holy-Cross, before remembred; and committed the Care, and Governance of the whole Revenue, to a Corporation of twelve Persons, by the Name of the Master, and Gover∣nours of the Hospital of Christ in Abindon. All which he fortified, and assured to the Town for ever, by Virtue of this His Majestie's Letters Patents, earing Date the nineteenth of May, in the seventh and last Year of His Reigne, Anno 1553. And so I conclude the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, sufficiently remarkable for the Progress of the Reformation; but otherwise tumultuous in it self, and defamed by Sa∣crilege, and so distracted into Sides, and Factions; that, in the end, the King Himself became a Prey to the strongest Party: which could not other∣wise be safe, but in His Destruction, contrived on Purpose, as it was ge∣nerally supposed) to smooth the Way to the Advancement of the Lady Jane Grey to the Royal Throne. Of whose short Reign, Religious Disposition, and Calamitous Death, We are next to speak.
AN APPENDIX TO THE FORMER BOOK, Touching the Interposings made in Behalf of the Lady JANE GRAY, Publickly Proclaimed QUEEN of ENGLAND. Together with the History of Her Admirable Life, Short Reign, and most Deplorable Death. Prov. xxxi. 29. Many Daughters have done vertuously; but thou excellest them all. Vell. Paterc. lib. 2. Genere, Probitate, Formâ, Romanorum Eminentissima, &, per omnia, Deis, quám hominibus, similior Foemina. Cambd. in Reliquiis. Miraris Janam Graio Sermone loquutam? Quo primùm nata est tempore, Graia fuit. LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1660.
THE LIFE and REIGN OF QUEEN JANE. Anno Domini 1553.An. 1553. THE Lady IANE GRAY, whom King EDWARD had Declared for His next Successour, was Eldest Daughter of HENRY Lord GRAY, Duke of Suffolk, and Mar∣quess Dorset, descended from THOMAS Lord GRAY, Marquess Dorset, the Eldest Son of Queen ELIZA∣BETH, the onely Wife of EDWARD the Fourth, by Sir IOHN GRAY, Her former Husband. Her Mother was the Lady Frances's Daughter; and in fine, one of the Co-Heirs of Charls Brandon, the late Duke of Suffolk, by Mary▪ His Wife, Queen Dowager to Lewis the Twelfth of France, and youngest Daughter of King HENRY the Seventh, Grandfather to King ED∣WARD now Deceased. Her High Descent, and the great Care of King HEN∣RY the Eighth, to see Her happily, and well bestowed in Marriage, Commend∣ed Her unto the Bed of Henry, Lord Marquess Dorset, before-remembred; A man of known Nobility, and of Large Revenues; possess'd not onely of the Patrimony of the Grays of Groby, but of the whole Estate of the Lord Har∣rington,
and Bonvile: which descended on him in the Right of his Grand-Mother, the Wife of the first Marquess of Dorset, of this Name, and Family. And it is lit∣tle to be doubted, but that the Fortunes of the House had been much increased, by the especial Providence, and Bounty of the said Queen Elizabeth; who can∣not be supposed to have neglected any Advantage, in the Times of Her Glory, and Prosperity, for the Advancement of Her Children by Her former Husband. In these Respects, more then for any Personal Abilities, which he had in himself, he held a very fair Esteem amongst the Peers of the Realm: rather Beloved, then Reverenced by the Common People. For, as he had few Commendable Quali∣ties, which might produce any High Opinion of his Parts, and Merit: so was he guilty of no Vices, which might blunt the Edg of that Affection in the Vulgar sort; which commonly is born to Persons of that Eminent Rank. His Wfe, as of an Higher Birth, was of greater Spirit: but one, that could accom∣modate it to the will of Her Husband. Pretermitted in the Succession to the Crown, by the last Will, and Testament of King Henry the Eighth: not out of any Disrespect, which that King had of Her; but, because he was not willing to think it probable, that either She, or the Lady Ellanor, Her younger Sister, (whom he had pretermitted also in that Designation) could live so long▪ as to Survive His own three Children, and such, as, in the course of Nature, should be issued from them. Of this Marriage there were born three Daughters, that is to say, Jane, Katha∣rine, and Mary. Of which, the Eldest, being but some Moneths older then the late King Edward, may be presumed to have took the name of Jane, from the Queen Jane Seimour; as Katharine, from Queen Katharine Howard, or Queen Katharine Parr; and Mary, from the Princess Mary, the eldest Daughter of King Henry, or in Relation to Her Grand-Mother, His youngest Sister. But the great Glory of this Family was the Lady Jane, who seemed to have been born with those At∣tractions, which seat a Sovereignty in the face of most beautifull Persons; yet was Her mind endued with more Excellent Charms, then the Attractions of Her face: Modest, and Mild of Disposition, Courteous of Carriage, and of such Affable Deportment, as might Entitle Her to the Name of Queen of Hearts, before She was Designed for Queen over any Subjects. Which Native, and Obliging Graces, were accompanied with some more profitable ones, of Her own Acquiring; which set an higher Valew on them, and much encreased the same, both in Worth, and Lustre. Having attained unto that Age, in which other young Ladies used to apply themselves, to the Sports, and Exercises of their Sex: She wholly gave Her mind to good Arts, and Sciences; much further∣ed in that pursuit, by the care, and diligence of one Mr. Elmer, who was ap∣pointed for Her Tutour; the same (if my Conjecture deceive me not) who afterwards was deservedly Advanced, by Queen Elizabeth, to the See of London. Under his charge She came to such a large Proficiency, that She spake the Latine, and Greek Tongues, with as sweet a fluency, as if they had been Natural, and Na∣tive to Her; Exactly skilled in the Liberal Sciences, and perfectly well Studi∣ed in both kinds of Philosophy. For Proof whereof, there goes a Story, that Mr. Rger Ascham (being then Tutour to the Princess Elizabeth) came to attend  once at Broadgates, a House of Her Father's, neighbouring to the Town of Leicester: where he found Her in Her Chamber, reading Phaedon Platonis in Greek, with as much delight, as some Gentlemen would have read a Merry Tale in Geoffery Chacer. The Duke, Her Father, the Duchess, and all the rest of the Houshould, were at that time hunting in the Park: which moved him to put this Question to Her, How She could find in Her Heart to loose such Excellent Pastimes? To which She very chearfully returned this Answer, That all the Pastimes in the Park were a Shadow onely of the Pleasure, and Contentment, which She found in that Book; adding moreover, That one of the greatest blessings God ever gave Her, was in sending Her sharp Parents, and a gentle Schole-Master, which made Her take
delight in nothing so much, as in Her Study. By which agreeableness of Di∣sposition, and eminent Proficiency in all parts of Learning, she became very dear to the young King Edward; to whom Fox not onely makes Her equal, but doth acknowledge her also to be His Superiour in those Noble Studies. And for an Ornament superadded to Her other Perfections, she was most zealously af∣fected to the true Protestant Religion, then by Law established; which She embra∣ced, not out of any outward compliance with the present current of the Times; but because Her own most Excellent Judgment had been fully satisfied in the Truth, and Purity thereof. All which together did so endear her to the King, that he took great Delight in Her Conversation, and made it the first step to that Royal Throne, to which He afterwards designed Her in the Time of His Sickness. Thus lived she in these sweet Contentments, till she came unto the years of Marriage, when she, that never found in Her self the least Spark of Ambition, was made the most unhappy Instrument of another man's. Dudly of Warwick, a Person of a proud, deceitfull, and aspiring Nature, began to entertain some Ambitious thoughts, when Edward first began to Reign: but kept them down, as long as his two Uncles lived together, in Peace, and Concord. But, having found a means to dissolve that knot, occasioned by the Pride, and Insolency of the Duchess of Sommerset, one as ill-Natured as himself, he first made use of the Protectour to destroy the Admiral, and after served himself by some Lords of the Court, for humbling the Lord Protectour to an equal Level with the rest of the Council. Finding by this Experiment, how easie a thing it was to serve his Turn by them on all other Occasions, he drew unto himself the managing of all Affairs; none being so hardy, as to question any of his Actions, and much less to cross them. But not content with being looked on as the Chief in Power, he is resolved to make himself the first in Place; thinking no private Greatness to be answerable to so great a Merit, as he had fancied in himself. Thus busy∣ing his unquiet thoughts upon new Designs, and passing from one imagination to another, he fixed at last upon a purpose of Husbanding the Opportunities to his best Advantage; in transferring the Crown into his own Family, which he thought Capable enough of the highest Honours. For why (said he) within himself, should not the Son of a Dudly, being the more Noble House of the two, be thought as Capable of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, as the Son, or Grand-Childe of a Seimour. Though I pretend not to be born of the Race of Kings; yet I may give a King to England of my Race and Progeny, on as good ground, as any, which derive themselves from Owen Tudor, the Ancestour of the Boy now reigning. That Family pretend∣ed onely from a Daughter to the House of Sommerset, and there are now some Daughters of the House of Suffolk, which may pretend as much as she. If by a Match into that House, I can finde a way to bring the Crown into mine own; I shall want no Presidents at home, and finde many abroad. Some Dangers may present themselves in the Pursuit of this Enterprise: but Dangers are to be de∣spised, as in all great Actions; so chiefly, when a Crown is aimed at. It is re∣solved, that I will try my Fortune in it: which if it prosper to my wish, I shall live Triumphantly; if I sink under the Attempt, I shall perish Nobly. Which being concluded▪ and resolved on, he first insinuates himself into the good affe∣ctions of the Marquess of Dorset; whom he assisteth in his Suit for the Title of Sufflk, which without him was not to be gained: exalts himself to the like Glorious Title of Duke of Northumberland, that he might stand on equal round with the proudest of them: and in a word so cunningly prepareth his Toils for the Duke of Sommerset, that at the last he fell into them, never to be set free again, untill Death released him; all which Particulars have been at large laid down in the former History. And this being done, he suffered the young King to wear out all the following year, the better to avoid all Popular suspiti∣on, that His Uncle's Death was onely hastened to make way for His. And possi∣ble it is, that he might have tired it out a little longer; but for a smart Jest, which
He put upon this Ambiious Minister. The King took great delight in his Bow, and, Arrows: and shooting one day at the Butt (as He used to do) hit the very White. Well aimed, my Liege, said Merrily the Mighty Duke: But you aimed better, said the King, when you shot off the head of My Vncle Sommerset: which words so stang the Conscience of the guilty man, that he could not think himself secure, but by accelerating his Design, for settling the Crown upon the Head of one of his Children, according to the Plot, which he had hammer∣ed in the Forge of his Wretched Brain. For now, the King beginning sensibly to decay, he takes his time▪ to enter into Communication with the Duke of Suffolk, about a Marriage to be made betwixt the Lord Guilford Dudly, his fourth Son, and the Lady Jane Gray, the Duke's eldest Daughter: which, with the rest of the Marriages before-mentioned, being pro∣pounded and concluded, (for he was grown too great, and known to be too dan∣gerous to be denied in any reasonable Suit) a day was set, in which this Excellent Lady was to be transplanted into the Family of the Dudlies. A day, which she ex∣pected with a Virgin Modesty, and, after the Solemnity of the Nuptial Rites, deli∣vers Her pure Body to the chast Embraces of a Vertuous Conort; who, of all Dudlie's Brood, had nothing of the Father in him. All which succeeding to his wish, he sets himself to the accomplishing of that Project, which he had long before designed. The King was now grown weak in Body, and decayed in Spirits, and in that weak Estate he takes his Opportunities to inculcate to Him, what infinite Blessings had been derived from Him on this Church, and Nati∣on, by the Blessed Reformation of Religion, so happily began, and brought to such Perfection by Him: That it must therefore be His Care so to provide for the Continuance of those infinite Blessings, that Posterity might enjoy the Benefit, and Comfort of it, which would gain Him a more pretious Memory amongst His Subjects, then all His other Princely Virtues; That nothing was more fear∣ed by all Sorts of People, then that the Crown Imperial (if it should please Almighty God to call Him to a Crown of Glry) would fall upon the Head of the Lady Mary, a Princess passionately affected to the Interess of the Church of Rome, and one, who by Her Marriage with some Potent Prince of that Re∣ligion, might Captivate the Free-Born English Nation to a Foreign Servitude; That both His Sisters, being born of disputed Marriages, and howsoever being but his half Sisters onely, and by several Ventures▪ could neither be Heirs to Him, nor to one another, by the known Laws of the Land: which neither Acts of Parliament, nor the last Will, and Testament of the King Deceased, were of power to alter; That the young Queen of Scots was an Alien born, by Conse∣quence uncapable of any Inheritance in the Realm of England, and had besides preferred the Alliance of the French before that of His Majesty, which render∣ed Her as unworthy, as she was uncapable; That, for the better carrying on of that Blessed Work of Reformation, the Peace, and Happiness of His People, the preventing of all Emergent Mischiefs, and His own everlasting Fame, it was not possible to make a more happy Provision, then by transferring the Crown to the Lady Jane, a Lady of such Excellent Virtues, as were sufficient to adorn the Richest Diadem; That there was no Question to be made, but that His Ma∣jesty knew, as well as any, the admirable qualities of that Matchless Lady, Her Zeal to the Religion, here by Him established, the agreeableness of Her Con∣versation with His own Affections, and could not but conceive that Nation to be infinitely happier then all others, which might fall under the Command of so mild a Government; And finally, That he was bound by His Duty to God, the Light of His own Conscience, and the Love He had to all His Subjects, to lay aside all Natural Affections to His Father's House, in respect of that great Obligation, which He had to God's Glory and the true Religion; following therein the Ex∣ample of our Lord, and Saviour, who looked both for his Brothers, and Sisters, amongst his Disciples, without relating to his nearest Kindred by Joseph, or Mary.
By these Suggestions, and Inducements, he much enclined the King to hearken to his Propositions. For furtherance whereof he caused such, as were about Him, to entertain Him with continual Discourses of the Divine Perfections, and most Heavenly Graces of the Lady Jane; the high Esteem, in which She was with all the Subjects, for Her Zeal, and Piety; the everlasting Fame, which would wait upon Him, by providing such a Successour to enjoy the Crown, in whom Virtues would survive to succeeding Ages. Then which, no Musick could sound sweeter in the Ears of the King, whom he knew to have an affectionate Sympathy with that Excellent Lady; as being much of the same Age, brought up in the same Studies; as near to Him in the sweetness of Her Disposition, as She was in Blood; and of a Conversation so agreeable to Him, as if They had been but the same Person in di∣vers Habits. And they all plied their Game so cunningly, that the weak King, not being able to withstand so many Assaults, did at last condescend to that, which he found not onely most conformable to their Importunities, but to His own Affections also. Order was taken thereupon, that an Instrument should be drawn in due Form of Law, for the transposing of the Crown to the Children of the Lady Frances, Duchess of Suffolk, and Daughter to Mary, the French Queen, one of the Sisters of King Henry, His Majetie's ∣ther. In which Instrument, nothing was to be defective, which either could be drawn from the Grounds of Law, or the Rules of Polity, to justifie, and en∣dear the Action. In drawing up whereof, there was none thought fitter to be used, then Sir William Cecil, one of the Chief Secretaries of Estate, who having before served Dudlie's Turn against his old Master, the Duke of Sommerset, was looked on, as the Readiest Man for the present Service. The Pretensions, taken from the Law, for excluding the King's two Sisters from the Right of Succession, were grounded; First, Upon the Invalidity of their Mother's Marriage: both being made void by Legal Sentences of Divorce, and those Divorces ratified by Acts of Parliament. In which the said two Sisters were declared to be illegitimate, and consequently uncapable of any of those Favours, which were intended to them by the Act of Succession, made in the thirty fifth year of the late King Henry, or by the last Will, and Testament, of that King, which was built upon it. In the next Place it was pretended, that the said two Sisters, Mary, and Elizabeth, being but of half Blood to the King now Reigning (admitting them to have been born in lawfull Wedlock) were not in any Capacity by the Common-Law, (the old good Law of England) to be Heirs unto Him, or to Succeed in any Part of that Inheritance, which came unto Him by His Father. It was considered also, that by the known Rules, and Principles of the Common-Law, no manner of Person was Inheritable to any Estate of Lands, or Tenements, in the Realm of England, who was not born under the King's Allegiance, as King of England, but in the case of Natura∣lization by Act of Parliament. Which seemed to be a sufficient Bar against all Titles, and Demands, for the Line of Scotland, although derived from Mar∣garet, the Eldest Daughter of King Henry the Seventh. And whereas the Lady Frances, Duchess of Suffolk, might seem both by the Law of Nature, and the Right of Succession, to have precedency in Title before her Daughter; yet was no Injury offered to her: in regard, that she was willing to pass by all her Per∣sonal Claims, for the Preferment of her Children. Which Pretermissions of the Mother were neither new, nor strange in the Succession to the Crown of this Kingdom. Not new; because the like was done by Maud the Emperess, for the Advancement of her Son King Henry the Second: nor strange; because it hd been lately practised in the Person of the Lady Margaret, Countess of Rich∣mond, in giving Way to the Preferment of King Henry the Seventh, the first King of the House now Regnant. The Reasons, or Pretexts, which seemed to be built on Polity, and Point of State, were: first, the unavoydable Danger of Reducing this Free, and Noble Realm, under the Vassalage, and Servitude, of the Bishop of Rome; if either of the King's
two Sisters, in their several Turns, should marry with a Foreign Prince of that Religion; or otherwise, by the Transport of their own Affections, submit their Scepters to the Pope. It was considered also, That, by such Marriages, not onely many Foreign Customs, and Laws, would be introduced: but that there might follow an Abo∣lishment of those Antient Laws, upon which the Native Rights, of all the Sub∣jects, seemed to have dependance. Besides, that possibly the Realm might here∣by be annexed to some greater Kingdom: of which, in time, it would be reckoned for a Member, and consequently be reduced unto the Form of a Province, to the utter Subversion of the Antient Dignity, and Estate thereof. Which whenso∣ever it should happen▪ it was neither impossible, nor improbable, that the People, upon a just Sence of the Indignities, & Pressures might elect some popular and se∣ditious man to be their King, who, to countenance his own unworthiness, & obscu∣rity, would little regard, what Contumelie he cast upon the falling Family of the Kings before him. To which, perchance some further Countenance might be added from the Holy Scripture: where Solomon is found to be preferred unto the Throne by David, before Adonijah; the youngest Son, before the eldest; a Childe, before a Man experienced, and well grown in years. And some Examples also might be had of the like Transpositions, in the Realm of Scotland, in Hungary, Naples, and else where: enough to shew, that nothing had been done in this great Transaction, which was not to be presidented in other Places. Upon all which Considerations, it was thought most agreeable to the Rules of Polity, that the King by Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England, should so dis∣pose of the Possession of the Crown, (with such Remainders, and Reversions, as to him seemed best) as might prevent such Inconveniencies, and Emergent Mis∣chiefs, as might otherwise happen: which could not better be effected, then by setting the Crown on the Head of the Lady Jane; a Lady of a Royal Blood, born in the Realm, brought up in the Religion now by Law established; Married al∣ready to a Person of Desert, and Honour; and such an one, in whom all those Gra∣ces were concentred, which were sufficient to adorn all the rest of Her Sex. Thus Reason being thus prepared, the next Care was, to have the Instru∣ment so contrived in due form of Law, that nothing might be wanting in the Stile and Legalities of it, which might make it any way obnoxious to Disputes, and Questions. For the doing whereof, it was thought necessary to call in the Assistance of some of the Judges, and others of His Majesties Council learned in the Laws of this Realm; by whose Authority it might be thought more passa∣ble amongst the People. Of all which Rank, none was thought fitter to be ta∣ken into the Consultation, then Sir Edward Montague; not onely as Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and very well experienced in His own Profession: But because, he being one of the Executours of the King deceased, his concur∣rence with the rest of the Council, seemed the more considerable. A Letter is therefore sent unto him on the eleventh of June, subscribed by the Lord Trea∣surer, the Duke of Northumberland, the Earls of Shrewsbury, Bedford, and Pembroke, the Lord Admiral Clinton, the Lord Darcie, Sir John Gale, Sir William Peter, Sir William Cecil, and Sir John Cheek. By the Tenour where∣of, he was commanded to attend upon their Lordships the next day, in the After∣noon, and to bring with him, Sir John Baker, Chancellour of the first-Fruits and Tenths, Master Justice Bromeley, together with the Attorney, and Sollicitour General. Being brought into the King's Presence, at the time appointed▪ whom they found attended by the Lord Treasurer, and some others of those, who had subscribed the former Letter: the King declared Himself with a weak Voice to this Effect; viz. That He had considered, in His Sickness, of the Estate of His Realm; which, if it should descend on the Lady Mary, who was then unmarried, it might so happen, that She might marry a Stranger born, whereby not onely the Laws of the Realm might be changed and altered; but all His own Proceedings in Religion, might be also reversed; That it was His Pleasure there∣fore,
that the Crown should Descend, after His Decease, unto such Persons, ad in such Form, as was contained in certain Articles, then ready to be shewed unto them, to be by them digested, and disposed of, in due Form of Law. These Articles, when they had Perused, and Considered of, they signified unto the King, that they conceved them to be contrary to the Act of Succes∣sion; which, being made in Parliament, could not be Frustrated, or made Ineffectu∣al but by Parliaments onely. Which Answer notwithstanding, the King▪ without al∣lowing further time, or deliberation, commanded them to take the Articles a∣long with them, and give the Business a Dispatch, with all speed as might be. But finding greater Difficulties in it, then had appeared unto their Lordships, they made a Report unto them at their next Attendance, that they had Considered of the King's Articles, and the Act of Succession; whereby it appeared manfestly, that, if they should make any Book concerning the King's Commandment they should not onely be in danger of Treason, but their Lordships also. The sum of which Report being cerifid to the Duke of Northumberland, (who, though absent, was not out of Call) he came in great Rage, and Fury, to the Council-Chamber, called the Chief Justice Traitour; affirmed, that he would fight in his Shirt, in that Quarrel, against any man living; and behaved himself in such an outragious manner, as put both Mountague, and Justice Bromely, in a very great fear, that he would have struck them. Caled to the Court again by a Letter of the fourteenth of the same Moneth, they found the King more ear∣nest in it, then He was before; requiring them, with a sharp Voice, and a dis∣pleased Countenance, to dispatch the Book, according to the Articles delivered to them; and telling them, that He would have a Parliament shortly to Con∣firm the same. When nothing else would serve the turn, Answer was made, That His Cmmandment should be obeyed; upon Condition, that they might be Commissionated so to do by His Majestie's Warrant, under the Great Seal of England, and have a General Pardon for it, when the Deed was done. Not daring longer to resist, and having made as good Provision, as they could, for their own Indemnty, they betook themselves unto the Work, digested it in form o Law, caused t to be Engrossed in Parchment, and so dispatched it for the Seal, to the Lord Chancellour Goodrick, sufficiently prepared before-hand not to stick upon it. Bt then appeared another Difficulty amongst the Lords of the Council: some of whch not well satisfied with these Proceedings, appeared as backward in Subscribing to the Instrument, before it went unto the Seal; as the Great Lawyers had done at the first, in being brought to the Employ∣ment. But such was the Authority, which Dudley, and his Party, had gained a∣mongst them, that some for fear, and some for favour, did Subscribe at last: a Zeal to the Reformed Religion prevailing in it upon some; a doubt of loosing their Church-Lands more powerfully over-swaying others; and all in fear of getting the displeasure of that Mighty Tyrant, who, by his Power, and Practi∣ces, carried all before him. The last, that stood it out, was Arch-Bishop Cranmer. Who, being sent for to the Court, when all the Lords of the Council, and most of the Judges of the Realm had subscribed the Instrument, refused to put his hand unto it, or to consent to the Disherison of the late King's Daughters. Af∣ter much Reasoning of the Case, he requires a longer time of deliberation; con∣sults about it with some of the most Learned Lawyers, and is finally sent for by the King: who, having fully set his heart upon the Business, did use so many Reasons to him, in behalf of Religion, and plyed him with such strong Perswasi∣ons in pursuance of them; that at the last he suffered himself to be overcome by His Importunities, and so Subscribed it with the rest. Onely Sir James Hales, one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas, carried the Honour of a Resolute, and Constant Man: not onely from those of his own Rank, but even from all the Lords of the Council, and almost all the Peers of the Realm to boot; who, be∣ing a man observed to be both Religious, and upright, did very worthily refuse to Subscribe, and was afterwards as unworthily requited by Queen Mary for it.
Yet, notwithstanding all these Rubs, the Project was driven on so fst by the haty Duke, that, by the one and twentieth of June, the Letters Patents were made ready to pass the Seal: which was about a fortnight before the Death of the King. During which Interval, he had another Game to Pay: which was the getting into his Power the Princess Mary, whom, of all others, he most feared, as the most likely Person to destroy his whole Contrivance. For well he knew, that, if She stood upon Her Right, as no doubt She would, She was not onely sure of a strong Party in the Realm, who still remained in good Affections to the Church of Rome; but, that Her Party hee would be Backed, and Countenanced by Her Alliances abad wo cld ot but Prefer, and Sup∣port Her Interess against all Pretenders.  ust make sure of Her, or else account all Void, and Frstiate, which was done already. Ad▪ that he might make sure of Her, he so prevailed, that Letters were directed to er, in the King's Name, from the Lords of the Coucil: Willing Her fol wh to resort to the Kng; as well to be a comfort to Him in His , as to see all Matters well Ordered about Him. The Lady, suspecting to  Mischief, addressed Her Self with all sped to the  gea Joy, that either Her Company, or Her Service▪ shuld be esteem'd Needfull to the King. But, as She was upon the way; and  half a Da's Journey of the Court, She received Advice, both of the King's desperate Estate, and of the Duke's Designs against Her: whereupon She  in hat to Her House at Hove∣den; where, in a very short time, She hard the Sad Nws of Her Brother's Death: who dyed upon the sixth of July▪ as before was sad. Which being the same day of the Moneth, on which King Henry ad taken off the Head of Sir Thomas More, for his Adhesion to the Pope, the Interess of Queen Katharine Dowager, and the Princess Mary, gave an occasion unto hose of the Rmish Par∣ty, to look upon it, as a Piece of Divine Retrbution, in taking away the  of His onely Son, on the same day also. Two days the Death of the King was by Special Order kept so secret, that it was known to very fw about the Court. And it concerned them so to do; partly in expectation of the coming of the Princess Mary whm thy knw to be upon the way: and partly to make sure of the City of London; the Favour, and Fidelity whereof, was of great Importance for the carrying on of the Design. But, under∣standing by their Espils, that the Princess Mary was retired; a Message was sent on Saturday, the eighth of July, to Sir George Barns, the Lord Mayour of London; requiring him, in the Name of the Lords of the Council, to give his At∣tendance at the Court, and bring with him six of the Principal Aldermen, six Mer∣chants of the Staple, and as many of the Company of Merchant-Adventurers. No haste was wanting on their parts. And coming at the time appointed, they were privily informed by some of the Council (but in the Name of all the rest) that the King was dead, and that He had Declared by His Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England, subscribed by all the Lords of the Council, and almost all the Peers of the Realm, that His Cousin, the Lady Jane Gray, was to Suc∣ceed Him in the Crowns of England, and Ireland; as the most True, Certain, and Undoubted Heir of all His Dominions. Which being signified unto them, it was no hard matter to obtain their Consent to that, which they were not a∣ble to deny. And so, upon a Promise of their best Assistance to Promote the Cause, and to keep secret the King's Death, untill further Order, they were dismissed unto their Houses. It is an Antient Custom of the Kings of England, immediately on the Death of their Predecessours, to provide their Lodgings in the Tower. Taking pos∣session, as it were, by that Royal Fortress, of the rest of the Kingdom; and from thence passing, in a Solemn, and Magnificent manner, through the Princi∣pal Streets of London, to their Coronation. According to which Antient Cu∣stom, the Lodgings in the Tower being fitted, and prepared, for the Queen's Reception: the Lords of the Council passed over from Greenwich on Munday,
the tenth of the same Moneth. A Letter had been brought the night before from the Princess Mary, who had received Advertisement of Her Brother's Death: notwithstanding all their Care, and Diligence, in labouring to conceal it from His nearest Servants; which made them meet the earlier, and in greater numbers, to return an Answer thereunto. The Princess knew Her own Right, and the Wrong, which was intended to Her: both which She signified unto Them, in these following words. My LORDS, WE Greet You well; and have received sure Advertisement, that Our Dearest Brother, the King, Our late Sovereign Lord, is departed to God's Mercy. Which News how wofull they be unto Our Heart, He onely knoweth, to whose Will, and Pleasure, We must, and do humbly sub∣mit Vs, and Our Wills. But, in this so lamentable a Case, that is, to wit, after His Majestie's Departure, and Death, concerning the Crown, and Governance of this Realm of England, with the Title of France, and all things thereto belonging; what hath been provided by Act of Parliament, and the Testament, and Last Will of Our Dearest Father; besides other Cir∣cumstances Advancing Our Right; You know, the Realm, and the whole World knoweth: the Rolls, and Records appear, by the Authority of the King, Our said Father, and the King, Our said Brother, and the Sub∣jects of this Realm. So that We verily trust, that there is no good true Sub∣ject, that is, can, or would pretend to be ignorant thereof: And of Our part, We have of Our Selves caused, and as God shall aid, and strengthen Vs, shall cause, Our Right, and Title in this behalf, to be Published, and Proclaim∣ed accordingly. And albeit this so Weighty a Matter seemeth strange, that the Dying of Our said Brother, upon Thursday at night, last past, We hither∣to had no knowledge from You thereof; yet We consider Your Wisdom, and Prudence to be such, that having eftsoons amongst You Debated, Pondred, and well Weighed this present Case, with Our Estate, Your Own Estate, the Common-Wealth, and all Our Honours; We shall, and may conceive Great Hope, and Trust, with much assurance in Your Loyalty, and Service; and therefore for the time interpret, and take things, not to the worst, that Ye yet will, like Noble Men, Work the best. Nevertheless We are not igno∣rant of Your Consultations, to Vndo the Provisions made for Our Prefer∣ment; nor of the Great Hands, and Provisions forcible, wherewith You be Assembled, and Prepared: by whom, and to what end, God, and You know; and Nature cannot, but fear some Evil. But be it, that some Considerati∣on Politick, or whatsoever thing else, hath moved You thereto; yet, doubt ye not, My Lords, but We can take all these Your doings, in Gratious Part; be∣ing also Right-Ready to remit, and fully Pardon the same; and that to E∣schew Bloodshed, and Vengeance, against all those, that can, or will intend the same; trusting also assuredly, that Ye will take, and accept this Grace, and Vertue, in Good Part, as appertaineth; and that We shall not be Enforced to use the Service of other Our True Subjects, and Friends: which, in this Our Just, and Right Cause, Go, in whom all Our affiance is shall send Vs. Wherefore, My Lords, We require You, and charge you, and every of You, of Your Allegi∣ance, which You ow to God, and Vs, and to none other: for Our Honour, and the Surety of Our Person, onely imploy Your Selves; and forthwith, upon receipt hereof, cause Our Right, and Title to the Crown, and Governance of this Realm, to be Proclaimed in Our City of London, and other places, as to your Wisdoms shall seem Good, and as to this Case appertaineth; not fail∣ing hereof, as Our very Trust is in You. And this Our Letter, Signed with Our Hand, shall be your sufficient Warrant in that behalf. Given under Our Signet, at Our Mannour of Ken∣ning-Hall, the ninth of July, 1553.
This Letter seemed to give their Lordships no other trouble, then the returning of an Answer. For well they knew, that She could do no less, then put up Her Claim; and they conceived that She was not in a condition for doing more. Onely it was thought fit to let Her know, what She was to trust to: the better to prevent such Inconveniencies, as might otherwise happen. And to that end an Answer was presently dispatched, under the Hands of the ArchBishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellour Goodrich, Bishop of Ely, the Dukes of North∣humberland, and Sufflk; the Marquesses of Winchester, and North-hampton; the Earls of Arundel, Shrewsbury, Huntington, Bedford, and Pembroke; the Lords Cobham, and Darcie; Sir Thomas Cheny, Sir Robert Cotton, Sir William Peter, Sir William Cecil, Sir John Cheek, Sir John Mason, Sir Edward North, Sir Robert Bows. The Tenour whereof was as followeth. MADAM, WE have received Your Letters the ninth of this Instant, Declaring Your Supposed Title, which You Judg Your Self to have to the Im∣perial Crown of this Realm, and all the Dminions thereunto belonging. For Answer whereof this is to Advertise You, that for as much as Our Sovereign Lady Queen Jane is, after the Death of Our Sovereign Lord King Edward the Sixth (a Prince of most Noble Memory) Invested, and Possessed with the just, and Right Title, in the Imperial Crown of this Realm; not onely by Good Order of Old Antient Laws of this Realm; but al∣so by Our late Sovereign Lord's Letters Patents, Signed with His Own Hand, and Sealed with the Great Seal of England, in presence of most part of the Nobles, Counsellours, Judges, with divers others Grave, and Sage Person∣ages, Assenting, and Subscribing the same: We must therefore, as of most Bound Duty, and Allegiance, and Assent unto Her said Grace, and to none o∣ther: except we should (which Faithfull Subjects cannot) fall into grievous, and unspeakable Enormities. Wherefore We can no less do, both for the quiet of the Realm, and You also; to advertise you, that for as much as the Di∣vorce, made between the King of Famous Memory, King Henry the Eighth, and the Lady Katharine Your Mother, was necessary to be had, both by the E∣verlasting Laws of God, and also by the Ecclesiastical Laws, and the most part of the Noble, and Learned Vniversities in Christenam, and Confirmed also by the sundry Acts of Parliaments, remaining yet in Force, and thereby You justly made Illegitimate, and Vn-heritable to the Crown Imperial of this Realm, and the Rules, and Dominions, and Possessions of the same; You will upon just consideration hereof, and of divers other Causes, Lawfull to be Alledged for the same, and for the just Inheritance of the Right Line, and Godly Order, taken by the late King, Our Sovereign Lord King Edward the Sixth, and agreed upon by the Nobles, and Greatest Personages aforesaid; Surcease by any pretents, to vex, or molest, any of Our Sovereign Lady Queen Jane Her Subjects, from their True Faith, and Allegiance, due unto Her Grace; assuring You, that if you will, for Respect, shew Your Self Quiet, and Obedient (as You ought) You shall find Vs all, and several, ready to do You any Service, that We with Duty may; and be glad with Your quietness to preserve the Common State of this Realm, wherein You may be otherwise grievous Vs, to Your Self, and to them. And thus We bid You most Heartily well to fare, &c. These Letters being thus dispatched, and no further danger seeming to be feared on that side, all things are put in Readiness against the coming of the Queen; who the same day, about three of the Clock in the Afternoon, was
brought by water to the Tower; attended by a Noble Train, of both Sexes, from Durham House in the Strand, where She had been entertained, as a part of Dudley's Family, ever since Her Marriage. She could not be i∣gnorant of that, which had been done in Order unto Her Advancement to the Royal Throne; and could not but conceive, that Her being Conducted to the Tower, in that Solemn manner, did portend somewhat, which looked toward a Coronation. But still She hoped, that either She should hear some Good News of the King's Recovery, or of the Altering of His Purpose; and that She might be suffered to enjoy those Divine Contentments, which she had found in the Repose of a Studious Life. But when She came into the presence of the two Dukes, Her Father, and Her Father-in-Law: She observed their Behaviour to∣wards Her, to be very different from that, which they had used before. To put Her out of which Amazement, it was signified to Her by the Duke of Northumberland; That The King was Dead, and that He had Declared Her for His next Successour in the Crown Imperial; That This Declaration was Approved by all the Lords of the Council, most of the Peers, and all the Judges of the Land, which they had Testified by the Subscription of their Names, and all this Ratified, and Confirmed by Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England; That The Lord Mayour, the Aldermen, and some of the Principal Citizens had been spoke with∣all, by whom they were assured of the Fidelity of the rest of the City; That There was nothing wanting, but Her Gratefull Acceptance of the High Estate, which God Almighty, the Sovereign Disposer of all Crowns, and Scepters, (never suf∣ficiently to be thanked by Her, for so great a Mercy) had advanced Her to; That Therefore She should chearfully take upon Her, the Name, Title, and Estate of Queen of England, France, and Ireland, with all the Royalties, and Preheminen∣cies to the same belonging; Receiving at their hands the First-Fruits of the Humble Duty (now tendred by them on their Knees) which shortly was to be payed to Her, by the rest of the Kingdom. This Speech being ended, the poor Lady found Her Self in a great Perplexity, not knowing whether she Should more lament the Death of the King, or Her Adoption to the Kingdom: the first Loss not to be repaired, the next Care pos∣sible to be avoided. She looked upon the Crown, as a great Temptation; to re∣sist which, She stood in need of all the Helps, which both Philosophy, and Di∣vinity, could suggest unto Her. And She knew also, that such Fortunes, sel∣dom knocked twice for entrance at the same Man's Gate: but that, if once re∣fused, they are gone for ever. Taking some time therefore of Deliberation, She summoned a Council of Her purest Thoughts; by whose Advice, half drown∣ned in Tears, (either as sorrowing for the King's Death, or fore-seeing Her own) She returned an Answer in these Words, or to this Effect; That The Laws of the Kingdom, and Natural Right, standing for the King's Sister, She would be∣ware of burthening Her weak Conscience with a Yoke, which did belong to them; That She understood the Infamy of those, who had permitted the violation of Right to gain a Scepter; That it were to mock God, and deride Justice, to scruple at the stealing of a Shilling, and not at the Vsurpation of a Crown. Besides (said She) I am not so young, nor so little read in the Guils of For∣tune, to suffer my self to be taken by them. If she inrich any, it is but to make them the Subject of her Spoil; If she raise others, it is but to pleasure her Self with their Ruins. What sh adored but yesterday, is to day her Pastime. And, if I now permit her to adorn, and Crown me, I must to Morrow suffer her to crush, and tear me in pieces. Nay with what Crown doth she Present me. A Crown, which hath been Violently and Shamefully wrested from Katharine of Arragon; made more unfortunate by the Punishment of Ann Bulloign, and others, that wore it after Her. And why then would you have me add my Blood to theirs, and to be the third Vi∣ctime, from whom this Fatal Crown may be ravished with the Head that wears it? But in Case it should not prove Fatal unto me, and that all its Venom were consu∣med; if Fortune should give me Warranties of her Constancy; Should I be well ad∣vised
to take upon me these Thorns, which would dilacerate, though not kill me outright; to burthen my self with a Yoke, which would not fail to torment me, though I were assured not to be strangled with it? My Liberty is better, then the Chain you proffer me, with what pretious stones soever it be adorned, or of what Gold soe∣ver framed. I will not exchange my Peace for Honourable and pretious Jealousies, for Magnificent, and Glorious Letters. And, if you love me sincerely, and in good earnest, you will rather wish me a secure, and quiet Fortune, though mean, then an exalted Condition exposed to the Wind, and followed by some dismal Fall. It had been happy for Her self, Her Fathers, and their several Families, if they had suffered themselves to be overcome by such powerfull Arguments: which were not onely persuasive, but might seem convincing; had they not all been fatally hurried unto their own Destruction. But the Ambition of the two Dukes was too Strong, and Violent, to be kept down by any such prudent Con∣siderations. So that being wearied at the last with their Importunities, and o∣vercome by the entreaties of Her Husband, whom She dearly loved, She submit∣ted unto that necessity, which She could not vanquish; yielding her Head with more unwillingness to the Ravishing Glories of a Crown, then afterwards She did to the Stroak of the Ax. The Point being thus concluded on, the two Dukes, with all the rest of the Lords of the Council, swore Allegeance to her. And on the same day, about five of the Clock in the afternoon, they caused Her Solemnly to be Proclaimed Queen of England, France, and Ireland, &c. in many of the principal Streets in London; and after by Degrees, in most of the Chief Cities, Towns, and Places of greatest Concourse, and Resort of People. In which Proclamation it was signified, That, by the Letters Patents of the late King Edward, bearing Date the twenty first of June last past, the Lady Jane Gray, Eldest Daughter to the Duchess of Suffolk, had been declared His true and lawfull Successour to the Crown of England, the same to be enjoyed after Her Decease, the Heirs of Her Body, &c. as in the said Letters Patents, more espe∣cially did at large appear. Which Proclamation, though it was published in the City with all due Solemnities, and that the Concourse of People was exceeding great, yet their Acclamations were but few; which served as a sufficient Argu∣ment to the Friends and Followers of the Princess Mary, that they were rather drawn together out of Curiosity to behold some unusual Spectacle; then out of any purpose to congratulate at the Queen's Advancement. And so far some of of them declared their dislike thereof; that, the next Day, one Gilbert Pot was set on the Pllory in Chepside, his Ears first nailed, and afterwards cut off, for certain words, which he had spoken at the Publishing of the Proclamation; a Trumpet sounding at the Time of the Execution, and an Herald in his Coat of Arms publickly noting his Offence in a Form prescribed. A Severity neither safe, nor necessary (the party being of no better Condition, then a Vintner's Boy) as the Case then stood. For the next day the Lords received Advertisement from divers hands, that many persons of Quality were drawn together at Kenning-HallCastle in Norfolk to offer their Service and assistance, to the Princess Mary; who finding, by the Answer which She had received from the Lords of the Council, that no good was otherwise to be be done, resolved not to be wanting to Her own Pre∣tensions, and to that end gave chearfull Entertainment to all comers, which either favoured Her Title, or embraced Her Religion. Amongst such Gentle∣men, as were certified to the Lords of the Council; I finde the names of the Earl of Bath Sir Thomas Wharton, son to the Lord Wharton, Sir John Mordant, Son to the Lord Mordant, Sir William Drury, Sir John Shelton, Sir Henry Be∣dingfield, Mr. Henry Jenningham, Mr. John Sulierd, Mr. Richard Higham of Lincoln's-Inn. It was advertised also, that the Earl of Sussex, and Mr. Henry Ratcliff his Son, were coming towards Her with their Forces: which last Advertisement gave the Business some appearance of Danger; for what else was to be expected, but that the Countenance and Encouragement of so
great a Person might draw many more unto the side; who otherwise would have been content to be lookers on, in case they had not moved against Her. Preven∣tion, in such Cases, was the wholesomest Physick: which therefore was to be admi∣nistred, with all speed that might be, before those Companies encreased, and were united under some Commander, which might gain them the Reputation of a little Army little at first, but like enough to become so midable to their Ene∣mies, if not broken in time. Some Forces therefore to be sent under the Con∣duct, and Command, of some Person who was well affected to the Cause, to scat∣ter those small Companies, before they grew unto an Head, to seise upon the Lady Mary, and bring Her with him to the Court, where they knew well e∣nough how to make sure of her. For which Employment none more fit, then the Duke of Suffolk, who had the greatest Stock going in the present Adventure, and whose affection to the Queen, being raised out of the Bowels of Nature, would prompt him to dispatch the Service, with his utmost Diligence. And be∣cause possibly the Lady Mary, hearing of these Preparations, might fly for safe∣ty into Flanders, and create more Trouble to them there, then She could at home; it was thought necessary, that such Ships, as lay upon the Downs, should be Commanded to attend on the Coast of Norfolk, to intercept Her on the Way; if peradventure she should think of flying to the Emperour's Court. So was it Counselled, and Concluded. But the matter could not be carried so close, as not to come to the Queen's Knowledg; to whom the least Drop of Her Father's Blood was far more pretious, then all the Kingdoms in the World: so that, with Tears in Her Eys, and Voice as mournfull as Her Face, She besought such of the Lords, as She conceived to be most tenderly affected towards Her, to be Her Mediatours to the rest of the Council, that Her Father might be suffered to remain with Her; and that some other Man, more exercised in Deeds of Arms, might be sent out on that Employment. Nor was the Motion made in vain. For some there were, who secretly had as great a Mind to put Northumber∣land upon the Service; as She could be to have Her Father excused from it. They saw how things were like to go, and how generally the People were enclined to King Henrie's Children, and could not promise to themselves any long Securi∣y under that Power, which they had put into the hands of a weak young Lady, who must be altogether Governed by Duke Dudlie's Counels. Of whom they stood in so great Fear, that none of them durst oppose his Doings, or stear their Course unto that Point, which most they aimed at, and which they doubt∣ed not to gain, if they could finde a Way to send him from the Council-Table. No way more probable, then this, and this they meant to husband to the best ad∣vantage, using their best Endeavours to perswade him to the Understanding of the present Service; For who, said they, can be so proper, as Tour Grace, to undertake this Expedition into Norfolk, where Your late Victories hath made Your Name so Terri∣ble to all Sorts of People, is may disperse them without Battail. For should the Mat∣ter come to Blows, (which God prohibit) what man so able as Your Self in the Art of War, the Order of Encamping, the putting of Your Men into such a Figure, as may best suit with the Advantages, which are offered to You; and animating the mst Cowardly Soldiers, not onely by Your own Exemplary Valour, but by strong Perswasions? Whom have we in the Realm so dexterous in Point of Treaty, so able to perswade the nemy to lay down Arms (which is the Noblest Way of conquering the tue-born English) if once it came unto Parle, as they hoped it would. Besides the Queen had made it Her most earnest Suit, that Her Father might be spared to stay wth Her, till those Terours, and Affrights, were over; and had moreover pointed out His Grace, as the abler Man, and more fit for Action; then which what can be further said, to prompt Your Grace to lay fa hold upon all op∣portunities, for obliging Her, who may hereafter finde so many Ways for ob∣liging You. Swelled with vain Glory, and tickled with the frequent mention of his dear Abilities, he suffered Himself to be entreated to an Action of such Fame, and Me∣rit,
as that, which they presented to im. And signifying his Assent, with a feigned Unwillingness, he told them; That He woul make Ready his own Pow∣er on the morrow after, not doubting, but They would send Theirs with him, or speed them after him; That He must recommend the Queen unto Their Fidelity: of whose Sacred Person he desired Them to be very tender. All which they Pro∣mised him to do. And, having thus settled the Affairs, they made the Queen acquainted, in Northumberland's Presence, with how great readiness he had took the danger of that Action upon himself, to give Her the Contentment of e∣joying Her Father's company, till the present storm was over-blown; who hum∣bly thanked the Duke for so great a favour, and chearfully desired him not to be wanting to the Publick and his personal safety. That evening, and the greatest part of the next day, being spent in Raising men, and making other necesary prepara∣tions for the Expedition; he repairs again to the Court, and once more putting them in mind of hasting their Forces; and, appointing New-Market for the place of their Rendez-vous, he took his Leave of them, in these Words, or to this Effect. My Lords (said he) I, and these other Noble Personages, with the whole Army, that now goes forth▪ as well for the behalf of You, and Yours, as for the E∣stablishing of the Queen's Highness, shall not onely aventure our Bodies, and Lives, amongst the Bloody Strokes, and Cruel Assaults, of our Adversaries in the open Fields: but also we do leave the Conservation o our Selves▪ Children, and Families, at home here with You, as altogether committed to your Trust, and Fi∣delity. Whm, if we thought You would, through Maice, Conspiracy, or Dissen∣sion, leave us, Your Frinds, in the Briars, and betray us; we could as well sun∣dry ways fore see, and provide for our own safe-guards▪ as any of You, by betray∣ing us, can do for Yours. But now, upon the onely Trust, and Faithfulness of Your Honours, whereof we think our selves most assured▪ we do hazard our ives: which Trust, and Promise, if You shall Violate, hoping thereby of Life, and Pro∣motion; yet shall not God count You inncent of our Bloods, neither acquit You of the Sacred Holy Oath of Allegiance, made freely by You to this Virtuos Lady, the Queen's Highness:☞ Who, by Your, and Our Enticement, is rather of force placed therein, then by Her own seeking, and Request. Consider also, that God's Cause, which is the Prefement of His Word, and the fear of the return of Po∣pery, hath been (as Ye have heretofore always said) the Original cause, where∣upon Ye (even at the first motion) granted Your good Wills, and Consents thereun∣to, as by Your Hand-Writing appeareth. And think not otherwise, but that, if You mean deceit, though not forthwith, yet hereafter▪ God will revenge the same. I can say no more, but in this troublesom time with You to use constant hearts; a∣bandoning all Malice, Envy, and private Affections. Which said, and having paused a little, he shut up his Address in these fol∣lowing Words. I have not spoken to You, my Lords, in this sort, upon any mistrust I have of Your Fidelities; of which, always, I have ever hitherto, con∣ceived a trusty Confidence: but I have onely put You in Remembrance thereof, what chance of Variance soever might grow amongst You in my absence. And this I pray You, that You would not wish me less good speed in this Journey, then You would have to Your selves. To which last words, one of them is reported to have thus replyed. My Lord, If You mistrust any of Vs in this matter, Your Grace is much mistaken in us. For which of Vs can wash his hands clean of the present Business; for, if we should shrink from You, as one that is culpable, which of Vs can excuse himself, as being guiltless? Little the more assured by this quick return, he went to take his Leave of the Queen, where he found his Commission ready Sealed, together with certain Instructions, subscribed by all the Lords of the Council, in which his Marches were lai'd out, and Limited from one day to another. Conditions not to be imposed on any, who Com∣mands in Chief; nor to have been accepted by him: but that it was a matter of his own desiring. And he desired it for these Reasons, (so strongly was he caught in a Snare of his own devising) partly because he would be thought to
have Acted nothing, but by Authority of the Council, which he supposed might serve for his Indemnity, if the Tide should turn; and partly▪ that the blame of all Mscariages might be laid on them, if he were foiled in the Adven∣ture. But so instructed, he takes Leave, embraced by all the Lords, with great demonstrations of Affection, according to the wonted dissimulation in Princes Courts; by none more passionately▪ then by those, who most abhorred his pride, and falshood. Amongst which it is said of the Earl of Arundel, (upon whom he had put more Disgraces, and Affronts, then on all the rest) that he eemed to ex∣press much sorrow at the Duke's departure; in regard he was not Ordered to be one of his Company, in whose presence he could finde in his heart to spend his blood, and to lay his life down at his feet. Accompanied with the Marquess of North-hampton, the Lord Gray, and others, he passeth by water in his Barge to Dur∣ham-Place, and from thence to White-Hall, where they Mustered their men. And the next morning being Friday, the fourteenth of the Moneth, he sets fward with a Body of six hundred Horse, their Arms, and Ammunition being sent befo; and Sir John Gates (of whose Fidelity, and Adhesion, he was well assured) follow∣ing not far behind with the rest of his Company. Passing through Shore-ditch, he found the Streets to be thronged with People, but could hear nothing of their Prayers for his Prosperous Journey. Insomuch, that, turning to the Lord Gray, he could not choose, but say unto him; The People press to see us: but not one bids, God speed us. On Saturday-night he comes to Cambridg, where he assured him∣self of all Obedience, and Conformity, which ether the University, or that Town could give him: as being Chancellour of the one, and Sene∣schal, or High-Steward of the other; two Offices incompatible in themselves, and never United in one person before, or since. At night he sends for Doctour Edwin Sandys, Master of Katharine-Hall, and Vice-Chancellour of the Uni∣versity, to Supper with him: whom he enjoyns to Preach before him the next day. A service not to be performed, and much less declined, without mani∣fest danger. But the Good Man, submitting to the present necessity, betakes himself unto his Study, and his Prayers, falls on a Text exceeding proper to the present Exigent (being tht of Joshua, chap. 1. v. 16.) but handled it so Warily▪ and with such Discretion, that he much satisfied the one, without giving any just advantage against him to the other Party. On Munday Mor∣ing, the Duke, with his whole Power, goes forward to St. Edmond's-Bury, where he ldged that night, But, in stead of hearing News of those Supplies, which were to attend him at New-Market, he receives Letters from some Lords of the Council, so full of Trouble, and Dscomfort, that he Marched back again to Cambridg, on the morrow after. And there we will leave him for a time, betwixt Hope, and Fear, less Confident, and worse Attended, then he was, at his first coming thither; as being not onely deserted by a great part of his company, but in a manner by himself. In the mean time the Princes Mary was not idle▪ but served Her Self of all Advantages, which were offered to Her. Comforted, and encouraged by so ma∣ny persons of Quality, as She had about Her. She sends unto the Mayour of Nor∣wih on the Twefth of July, requiring him, and the rest of the Magistrates of that City, to Proclaim Her Queen. Which though they at that time refused to do, because they had no certain knowledg of the Death of the King; yet, on the nex dy, hving received good assurance of it, they did not onely Pro∣claim Her Queen, (as She had desired) but sent Her Men, and Ammunition to avnce the Service. Not fiding Norfolk Men so foward as She had expected▪ Se remo ith Her small Party into Suffolk, and puts Her Self into Fraling∣ham-Cstle, a Castle Scituate ear the Sea, from whence She might convenient∣ly espe into Flanders, if Her Affairs succeeded not to Her Hopes, and Pray∣ers. Hee She fist takes upon Her the Name of Queen, and by that Name dis∣patcheth Letters to the Peers of the Realm; requiring Them, and all other Her faithful Subjects, to repair unto Her Succour. And, for the first handel of good For∣tune, it happened, that the six ships, which were appointed to hover on the Coast
of Norfolk, were driven by oul weather into the Haven of Yarmouth, where Jerningham, above-mentioned, was busie in Raising men, to Maintain Her Quar∣rel. By whom the Captains, and the Mariners, were so cunningly dealt with, that they put themselves under his Command, drew all their Ordnance on shore, and left their Ships to be disposed of at his pleasure. About which time Sir Ed∣ward Hastings, the brother of Francis Earl of Huntington, being Commissi∣onated by the Duke of Northumberland to Raise four thousand men for the pre∣sent Service, pass'd over with his men to the other side, and joyned himself to Her Party also. The News whereof being brought unto the Lords, which remained in London, hatened the Execution of that Design, which had been formerly contrived by some amongst them. For no sooner had the Great Duke put himself on his March toward Ca∣bridg▪ but some began to shew themselves in favour of the Princess Mary, and to dese how they might extricate themselves out of those perplexities, into which they had been brought by his Ambition. Amongst which none more forward, then the Earl of Pembroke, in whom he had placed more Confidence, then in all the others. Who, together with Sir Thomas Cheyny▪ Lord Warden of the inque-Ports; with divers others, endeavoured to get out of the Tow∣er, that they might hold some secret Consultation with their Friends in London: but were so narrowly watched, that they could not do it. On Sunday, the six∣teenth of the Moneth, Doctour Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of London, is order∣ed by the Lords of the Council, to Preach at St. Paul's-Cross, and in his Ser∣mon to Advance the Title of Queen Jane, and shew the invalidity of the Claim of the Lady Mary. Which he performed according to such Grounds of Law, and Polity, as had been lai'd together in the Letters Patents of King Edward, by the Authority▪ and Consent of all the Lords of the Council, the greatest Judges in the Land, and almost all the Peers of the Kingdom. But then, with∣all, he press'd the Incommodities, and Inconveniencies, which might arise, by re∣ceiving Mary for their Queen; prophecying that, which after came to pass: Name∣ly, that She would bring in a Foreign Power to Reign over this Nation; and that She would subvert the True Religion, then Established by the Laws of this Ream▪ He also shewed, that, at such time as She lived in his Diocess, he had Travailed much with Her, to reduce Her to the True Religion; but that (though otherwise She used him with great Civility) She shewed Her self so stiff, and ob∣stinate, that there was no hope to be conceived, but that She would disturb, and destroy all that, which with such great Labour had been settled in the Reign of Her Brother. For which Sermon he incurred so much displeasure, that it could never be forgiven him, when the rest were Pardoned: by whose Encouragement, and Command, he had undertook it. But this Sermon did not work so much on the People, as the ill News, which came continually to the Tower, had prevailed on many of the Lords. For presently, upon that of the six Ships, which were Revolted from the Queen, Advertisement is given, that the Princess Mary was Proclaimed Queen in Oxford Shir by Sir John Willi∣ams, and others; in Buckingham-Shire by the Lord Windsore, Sir Edward Ha∣stings, &c. and in North-hampton-Shire by Sir Thomas Tresham. And, which was worse then all the other, that the Noble-Mens Tenants refused to serve their Lords against Her. Upon the first bruit of which Disasters, the Lord Treasurer Pawlet gets out of the Tower, and goes unto his House in Brod-street; which made sch a pow∣erfull apprehension of sme dangerous practises to be suddenly put in Execution, that the Gates of the Tower were locked about seven of the Clock, and the Keys carried to the Queen. And though the Lord Treasurer was brought back about twelve at night, yet now the knot of the Confederacy began apparently to break. For, finding by intelligence from so many Parts of the Realm, but chiefly by the Lord Treasurer's return, that generally the People were af∣fected to the Title of the Princess Mary, they thought it most expedient for
them, to Declare themselves in Her Favour also, and not to run themselves, their Friends, and Families, on a certain Ruin. But all the Difficulty was, in finding out a way, to get out of the Tower: the Gates whereof were so narrowly watch∣ed: that no man could be suffered to go in, and out; but by the Knowledg, and Permission of the Duke of Suffolk. But that, which their own Wisdom could not, the Duke of Northumberland's Importunity effected for them; who, fail∣ing of the Supplies, which the Lords had promised to send after him, as before is said, had pressed them earnestly, by his Letters, not to be wanting to their own Honour, and the Publick Service. This gave them a fair Colour to pro∣cure their Liberty from that Restraint, by representing to the Queen, and the Duke Her Father, that the Supplies expected, and all things necessary to the same, could not be raised, unless they were permitted personally to attend the Business; both for the Pressing of the Men, providing them of all things needfull, and choosing fit Commanders, to Conduct them in good Order to the Duke of North∣humberland. Which seemed so reasonable to the Duke of Suffolk, a Man of no great Depth himself, and so not like to penetrate into the bottom of a deep Design; that he gave way to their Departure for the present: little conceiving, that they never meant to come back again, till the State was altered. Being thus at their desired Liberty, the Earls of Shrewsbury, and Pembroke, toge∣ther with Sir Thomas Cheyny, and Sir John Mason, betake themselves immediately to Baynard's-Castle: an House belonging then (as now) to the Earls of Pembroke▪ To which Place they were followed, not long after, by almost all the rest of the Lords of the Council; bringing with them as many of the Nobility, then about the Town, as they conceived to tand fair for the Princess Mary. And, that the Meeting might be held with the less Suspicion, it was given out to be up∣on a Conference with Laval, the French Ambassadour, about Affairs of great Importance for the Weal of both Kingdoms. No sooner had they took their Places: but the Earl of Arundel, who had held Intelligence with the Princess, ever since the first Extremities of Her Brother's Sickness, inveighed most bitter∣ly against the Duke of Northumberland. And, after he had ripped up the Acts of his former Life, and burthened him with all, that had been done un∣justly, cruelly, or amiss, in King Edward's Time; he at last descends to the Treacherous Act of the Disherison of the Children of the late King Henry; professing, that he wondred, how he had so enthralled such persons, as the Lords there present, as to make them Instruments of his Wickedness. For was it not, saith he, by Our Consent, and Suffrages; that the Duke of Suffolk's Daughter, the same Northumberland's Daughter-in-Law, hath took upon Her the Name, and Title, of Queen of England: though it be nothing, but the Title; the Sovereign Power remaining wholly in the Hands of Dudly, who contrived the Plot▪ that e might freely exercise his Tyranny on our Lives, and Fortunes. Religion is indeed the thing pre∣tended. But suppose we have no regard to these Apostolical Rules; Evil must not be done, that Good may come thereof; and, We must obey even evil Princes; not for Fear, but for Conscience-sake: Yet, how doth it appear, that the Princess Mary intends any Alteration in Religion? Certainly, having been late∣ly Petitioned to in this Point by the Suffolk-men, She gave them a very hopefull Answer. And what a mad Blindness is it, for the avoidance of an uncertain Danger, to precipitate Our selves into a most certain Destruction? I would we had not erred in this kind. But Errours past cannot be recalled: some may peradven∣ture be amended; wherein speedy Execution ft-times happily supplyeth former De∣fects. Recllect Your selves then, and so make use of Your Authority, that the Princess Mary, the undoubtedly Lawfully Heir, may publickly be Proclaimed Queen of England, &c. No other way, but this, as the Case now stands, to recover our lost Honours, and preserve the State. The Earl of Pembroke was a man altogether unlettered, but so well skilled in humouring King Henry the Eighth, that he had raised Himself to a great Estate; for whch he could not but express some sense of Gratitude, in doing
good Offices for his Children. And having formerly been suspected to have had too great a part in Northumberland's Counsels, he conceved himself obliged to wipe off that Stain, by declaring his Zeal, and Resolution in the Cause of the Princess. And, therefore, assoon as the Earl of Arundel had concluded his Speech, he very chearfully professed, that he approved, and would subscribe the Proposition, and therewithall laying his Hand upon his Sword, he signifid his Readiness▪ and Resolution to defend the Lady Marie's Cause against all Oppo∣nents. The rest of the Lords, encouraged by these good Examples, and seeing nothing, but apparent Danger on all sides, if they did the contrary, came to a speedy Conclusion with them, and bound themselves to stand together, in De∣fence of the late King's Sisters, against all their Enemies. Which being thus so ge∣nerously and unanimously agreed upon, a Messenger is presently dispatched to the Lord Mayour, requiring him to repair to Baynara'-Castle within an hour: and to bring with him the Recorder, and such of the Aldermen of the City, as to him seemed best. Who being come accordingly at the time appointed; their Lordships told them, in few words, as well their Resolution, as their Reason of it: and so desired their Company to Cheap-side-Cross to Proclaim Queen Ma∣ry. Which said, without any further Dispute about the Title, they rode all together in good order▪ through Saint Paul's-Church-Yard; till they came to the Gate, which openeth into the Street: where they found such Multi∣tudes, and Throngs of People; whom the Noise of such a Confluence at Bay∣nard's-Castle, and the going down of the Lord Mayour, and Aldermen, had drawn together; that they could hardly force a Way through them to come to the Cross. But being come thither at the last, though with much ado, Sir Chri∣stopher Barker, Knight of the Bath, and Principal King at Arms, Proclaimed, by the Sound of Trumpet, the Princess Mary, Daughter of King Henry the Eighth, and Queen Kaharine, His Wife, to be the Lawfull, and Undoubted Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, adding there∣to that Sacred Title of Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England: which She retained till the beginning of the following Parliament, and then rescinded all those Acts, by which it had been formerly united to the Crown of this Realm. The Proclamation being ended, they went together in a Solemn Pr∣cession, to Saint Pau's Church, where they caused the Te Deum to be sung, with the Rights accustomed, and so dismissed the Assembly to their several dwellings. Being returned to Baynard's-Castle, the Earl of Arundel, and the Lord Paget, are presently dispatched to Framlingham, with thirty Horse, to give the Queen a Narrative of their whole Proceedings. Some Companies are also sent to assure the Tower, and to Command the Duke of Suffolk, to discharge the Family, and Attendants, of the Lady Jane; to signifie unto Her, that She must lay a∣side the Name, and Title of Queen, and suffer Her Self to be reduced to the Rank of a private Person. All which, he readily obeyed (as easily subject to Despair, as before he had been swelled with Ambitious Hopes) and the next day adjoyns himself to the rest of the Counil, subscribing amongst others to such In∣structions, as were to be dispatched to the Duke of Northumberland, for the disbanding of his Forces; and carying himself like an obedient, and dutifull Subject, as he ought to do. But there was little need of this last Message, and none at all of the other. Fo the noise of these loud Acclamions, which were made at the Proclaiming of the new Queen, passing from one Street to another, came at last to the Tower, efore the Message had been sent to the Duke of Suffolk, where they were heard by the ady Jane (now no longer Queen) with such Tranquility of Mnd, and Composedness of Countenance; as if she had not been concerned in the Alteration. She had before received the offer of the Crown, with as even a Temper, as if it had been nothing, but a arland of Flowers: and now She lays aside the thought thereof with as much contentedness, as She could have thrown away that Garland, when the sent was gone. The time of her Glo∣ries
was so short, but a nine Days wonder; that it seemd nothing but a Dream, out of which She was not sorry to be awakened. The Tower had been to Her a Prison, rather then a Court, and interrupted the Delights of Her former Life by so many Terrours; that no day passed without some new Alarms to disturb Her Quiet. She doth now know the worst, that Fortune can do unto Her. And having always feared, that there stood a Scaffold secretly behind the Throne, She was as readily prepared to act her Part upon the one, as upon the other. If Sorrow, and Affliction did at any time invade Her Thoughts, it was rather in re∣ference to Her Friends, but most of all unto Her Husband, who were to be in∣volved in the Calamity of Her Misfortunes; then upon any Apprehensions, which She had for Her Self. And hereunto the bringing in of so many Prisoners, one day after another, gave no small Encrease: brought hither for no other Reason, but because they had seemed forward in contributing towards Her Advancement. In the middest of which Disconsolations, the restoring of the Duke, Her Fa∣ther, to his former Liberty gave some Repose unto Her Mind; whose Sufferings were more grievous to Her, then Her own Imprisonment. And then to what a mi∣serable Extremity must his Death have brought Her? And though the Attainder, and Death, of the Duke of Northumberland, hich followed very shortly after, might tell Her in Effect, what She was to trust to; yet She was willing to distinguish betwixt his Case, and Her own; betwixt the Principal, and the Ac∣cessaries, in the Late Design. In which Respect She gave Her self no improba∣ble Hope; th possibly the like Mercies, which was shewed to Her Father, might possibly be extended unto others, and amongst others to Her Husband, as innocent as Her self, from any open Practice against the Queen. And who could tell, but that it might descend on Her self at last? whom no Ambition of Her own had tempted to the acceptation of that Dangerous Offer, which She beheld as the greatest Errour of Her Life, and the onely Stain of all er Actions. But neither the Queen's Fears, nor the publick Justice of the Land, could so be satisfied. It was held Treason to accept of a Kingdom offered: to which She could pretend no Right; whilest the Queen was living. And, if Examples of that Nature should pass unpunished, no Prince could possibly be safe, nor Tiles valid, as long, as any Popular Spirit could pretend a Colour to advance some other to the Throne. Upon which Reason of State She was brought to Her Tri∣al at the Guild-Hall in London, on the third of November, accompanied with Her Husband, the Lord Guilford Dudly (his Company never, till that Hour, unwelcome to Her) together with Arch-Bishop Cranmer, the Lord Ambrose Dudly, the second Son, then living, to the Duke of Northumberland. Sentence of Death passed upon them all: though at that time not executed upon any of them. The Lord Ambrose was reserved unto better Fortunes: as the Arch-Bishop was to a more miserable, but more Glorious Death. And for Her self, and Her dear Husband, it was conceived; that, now the Law had done its part in their Condemnation, the Queen in pitty of their Youth, and Innocence, would have gone no further. But, as they were first brought under this Affliction, by the inordinate Ambition of the Duke of Northumberland; so shall they shortly finde an end of all their Troubles, by the rash and unadvised Attempts of the Duke of Suffolk. For upon Wya's breaking out in Kent, and the Earl of Devon-Shire in the West, the Duke had been prevailed with, amongst many others, to apear in the Action. To which he unadvisedly yielded, caused Proclamation to be made in some Towns of Leicester-Shire, against the Queen's intended Marriage with the Prince of Spain, and drew together many of his Friends, and followers, to oppose that Match. And though he was discomfited, within few days after: yet the Queen saw, that she could promise Her self neither Peace, nor Safety; as long as the Lady Jane was preserved alive. Whose Restitution to the Throne must be the matter chieflly aimed at, in these Insurrections; though other Co∣lours were devised, to disguise the Business. Her Death is now resolved upon; but first She must be practised with to
change Her Religion; as the Great Duke of Northumberland had done before. To which end Fecknam is employed: not long before made Dean of Saint Paul's, and not long after Abbot of Westminster; a Man, whose great Parts promised him an easie Victory over a poor Lady of a broken, and dejected Spirit: but it proved the contrary. For so well had She studied the Concernments of Her own Religion, and managed the Conference with him, with such a readiness of Wit, such constancy of Resolution, and a Judgment so well-grounded in all helps of Learning: that She was able to make Answer to his strongest Arguments; as well to Her great Honour, as his Admiration. (The Substance of which Con∣ference he, that sts to see, may finde it in the Acts, and Monuments, fol. 1290.) So that, not able to prevail with Her in the Change of Religion, he made offer of his Service to prepare Her for Death: which though She thankfully accept∣ed of, as finding it to proceed from a good Affection; yet soon he found, that She was also before hand with him in those Preparations, which are fit, and neces∣sary for a dying Christian. Friday, the ninth of February was first designed for the Day of Her Execution; but the Desire of gaining Her to the Church of Rome procured Her the short Respite of three Days more. On Sundaynight, being the Eve unto the  of Her Translation, She wrote a Letter in the Greek Tongue, at the end of the Testament, which She bequeathed as a Le∣gacy to Her Sister the Lady Katharine; which being such a lively Picture of the Excellent Lady, may well deserve to be continually kept in Remembrance of Her, and is this, that followeth. I have here sent you (Good Sister Katharine) a Book, which although it be not outwardly trimmed with Gold, yet inwardly it is more worth, then pretious Stones. It is the Book (Dear Sister) of the Law of the Lord. It is his Testament, and last Will, which he bequeathed unto us, Wretches; which shall lead you to the path of eternal Joy, and, if you with a good mind read it, and with an earnest mind do purpose to follow it, it shall bring you to an immortal, and everlasting Life. It shall teach you to live, and learn you to die. It shall win you more, then you should have gained by the possession of your wofull Father's Lands. For as, if God had prospered him, you should have inherited his Lands: so, if you apply dili∣gently this Book, seeking to direct your Life after it, you shall be an inheritour of such Riches; as neither the Covetous shall withdraw frm you, neither Thief shall steal, neither yet the Moths corrupt. Desire with David (Good Sister) to understand the Law of the Lord God. Live still to die, that you (by Death) may purchase eternal Life; and trust not, that the tenderness of your Age shall lengthen your Life: for as soon, if God calls, goeth the young, as the old, and la∣bour always to learn to die. Defie the World: Deny the Divel: and Despise the Flesh; and Delight your self onely in the Lord. Be penitent for your Sins, and yet Despair not. Be strong in Faith, and yet presume not, and desire, with Saint Paul, to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, with whom, ∣ven in Death, there is Life. Be like the good Servant, and even at Midnight be waking; lest, when Death cometh, and stealeth upon you, like a Thief in the night, you be with the evil Servant ound sleeping; and lest for lack of Oyl, you be found like the five foolish Women, and like him, that had not on the Wedding-Garment; and then ye be cast out from the Marriage Rejoyce in Christ, as I do. Follow the Steps of your Master Christ, and take upon you your Cross. Lay your Sins on his Back▪ and always embrace him. And, as touching my Death, re∣joyce, as I do (good Sister) that I shall be delivered of this Corruption, and put on Incorruption. For I am assured, that I shall, for losing of a mortal Life, win an immortal one. The which I pray God to grant you, and send you of his Grace, to live in his Fear▪ and to die in the true Christian Faith: from the which in God's Name, I exhort you, that you never swerve, neither for Hope of Life, nor for Fear of Death. For, if you will deny his Truth, to lengthen your Life, God will deny you, and yet shorten your Days: and if you will leave unto him, he will prolong your Days to your Comfort, and to his Glory. To the which Glory
God bring me now, and you hereafter, when it pleaseth him to call you. Fare you well (Good Sister) and put your onely trust in God, who onely must help you. The Fatal Morning being come, the Lord Guilford earnestly desired the Offi∣cers, that He might take His Farewell of Her. Which though they willingly per∣mitted; yet, upon notice of it, She Advised the contrary; assuring Him, That such a meeting would rather add to His Afflictions, then encrease that Quiet, wherewith they had possessed their souls for the stroke of Death, that He de∣manded a Lenitive, which would put fire into the Wound; and that it was to be feared Her Presence would rather weaken, then strengthen Him that He ought to take courage from his Reason, and derive constancy from his own heart; that if his soul were not firm, and setled, She could not settle it by Her eyes, nor confirm it by Her words; that He should do well to remit this Interview to the other World, that there indeed Friendships were happy, and Unions undesolvable; and that theirs would be Eternal, if their souls carried nothing with them of Terrestrial, which might hinder them from rejoycing. All She could do was to give Him a Farewell out of a Window, as He passed toward the place of His disso∣lution: which He suffered on the Scaffold on Tower-Hill with much Christian meekness. His Dead body being lai'd in a Car, and His Head wrapped up in a Linen-cloth, were carried to the Chapel within the Tower; in the way to which, they were to pass under the Window of the Lady Jane, where She had given Him His Fare-well. A Spectacle sufficient to disanimate a couragious Heart, not arm∣ed with the Constancy, and Resolution of so brave a Vertue. The Spectacle endured by Her with the less Astonishment, because She knew, She was upon the point of meeting with Him in a better Conjuncture; where they should ne∣ver finde the like Intermission of their Joys, and Happinesses. It was once resolved on by the Court, that She should dy on the same Scaffold with Her Husband: but it was feared, that, being both pittied, and beloved by the common People, some suddain Commotion might be raised; if She were publickly brought forth to Her Execution. It was therefore held the safer course, that a Scaffold should be erected for Her within the Verge of the Tower: on which She might satisfie the greatest severity of the Law without any danger to the State. Towards which being to be led by Sir John Gage (who was then Con∣stable of the Tower) he desired Her to bestow some small Gift upon him, to be kept as a Memorial of Her. To gratifie which desire She gave him Her Table-Book: in which She had written three Sentences in Greek, Latine, and English, as She saw Her Husband's Body brought unto the Chapel; which She besought him to accept as Her last Bequest. The Greek to this effect: That, If His Exe∣cuted Body should give Testimony against Her before men; His most blessed Soul should give an eternal Proof of Her Innocence in the presence of God: the Latine added; that Humane Justice was against His Body; but the Divine Mercy would be for His Soul: and then concluded thus in English, that, If Her fault deserved Punishment, Her Youth, at least, and Her Imprudence, were worthy of Excuse; and that God, and Posterity, would shew Her Favour. Conducted by Feckman to the Scaffold, She gave not much heed unto his Dis∣courses; but kept Her Eyes upon a Prayer-Book of Her own. And, being mount∣ed on the Throne, from which She was to receive a more excellent Crown, then any, which this vile Earth could give Her, She addressed Her self in some few words to the standers by; letting them know, that Her Offence was not for ha∣ving lay'd Her Hand upon the Crown; but for not rejecting it with sufficient Con∣stancy; That She had less erred through Ambition, then out of Respect, and Reve∣rence to Her Parents; acknowledging nevertheless, that Her Respect was to be ac∣counted as a Crime, and such Reverence, to deserve a Punishment; That She would willingly admit of Death; so to give satisfaction to the injured State; that, by Obe∣dience to the Laws, She might voluntarily take off the Scandal, which She had
given by Her constrained Obedience to Her Friends▪ and Kindred; concluding fi∣nally, that She had justly deserved this Punishment, for being made the instru∣ment (thugh the unwllig Instrument) of another's Ambition; and should leave behind Her an Exampl that Innence excuseth not great Msdeeds; if they any way ten to the Destruction of the CommonWealth. Which said, and desi∣ring the people to recommend Her, in their Prayers, to the mercies of God, She caused Her self to be disrobed by some of Her Women, who with w Eyes, and heavy Hearts, performed that Office, which was to Her no more unwelcome, then if it had been nothing, but the preparation to the Death of Sleep, and not unto the Sleep of Death. And being now eady for the Blck, with the same clear, and untroubled Countenance, wherewith She had acted all the rest of Her Tra∣gedy, She said aloud the Psalm of Miseere mei, eus, in the English Tongue: and so submitted Her pure Neck to the Excutioner. Touching the Bonds, Recognscances, Grants, Conveyances, and other Lgal Instruments, which ad been made in the short Reign of this Queen, a doubt was rased among our Lawyers, whither they were good, and valid in the Law, or not. The Reason of which Scruple was, because that Interval of time, which passed between the Death of King Edward, on the sixth of July, and the Proclaiming of Queen Mary in all Parts of th Realm, was in the Law to be e∣steemed▪ as a part of Her Reign, without any notice to be taken of the interpo∣sing of the Lady Jane: in the fist year of whose Reign, the said Bonds, Reco∣gniscances▪ Grants, &c. had their several Dates. And thereupon it was Enacted in the following Parliament▪ That all Statutes, Recogniscances▪ and other Wri∣tings whatsoever, knoledged, or made, by, or to any Person, or Persons, Bodies Po∣litick, or Corporate, being the Queen's Subjects, since the sixth day of July last past, untill the fist day of August then next following, under the Name of the Reign of any other Person, then under the Nam of the said ueen's Majesty▪ with the Stile appropriated, or united to Her Majestie's Imperial Crown, shall be as good, and ffectual in the Law▪ to all intents, purposes▪ costructions, and mean∣ings; as, if upon the mking thereof▪ the Name of the said Queen Mary, with Her Stileappropated, had been fully, and plainly expressed in the same▪ Wh a Proviso notwithstanding, that all Grants, Letters Patents, and Commis∣sions, made by the said Lady Jane to any Person, or Persons whatsoever, should be reputed void, and of none ffct. Whch Proviso seems to have been added, not only for the making void of all such Grants of the Crown-Lands, as had passed in the Name of the said Queen Jane (if any such Grants were ever made) but for invalidating the Commion granted to the Duke of Northumberland for raising Arms in Her behalf. The pleading whereof, though it could not be allowed for his Indmnity, when he stood at the Bar, might possibly have raised some Re∣proach, or Trouble, to his Peers, and Judges, if the Integrity of their Proceed∣ings had been called in Question. Such was the end of the short Life, but far shorter Reign, of the Lady Jane. Her Reign but of nine Days, and no more: Her Life not twice so many years, as She Reigned days. Such was the end of all the Projects of the two great Dukes, for Her Advancement to the Crown, and their own in Hers. To which as She was raised without any Blows; so She might have been deposed without any Blows: if the Ax had not been more cruel on the Scaffold, then the Sword in the Field. The Sword had never been unsheathed: but when the Scaffold was once Erect∣ed, and the Ax once sharpened, there followed so many Executions after one an∣other, till the Death of that Queen; that, as Her Reign began in the Blood of those, who took upon them the Pusuit of this Lady's Title; so was it stained more fouly in the Blood of ▪ as were Matyred in all parts for Her Religion. To the Relation of which , Deaths, and Martyrdoms, and other the Calamities of that Tragical, and unpperous Reign, we must next proceed.
The Parentage, Birth, and first Fortunes of the Princesse ELIZABETH, The second Daughter of King Henry the Eighth, before her coming to the CROWN. With a true Narrative of the first Loves of King Henry the Eighth, to Queen Anne Bollen. The Reasons of his alienating of his first affections, and the true causes of her woful and calamitous death. ELIZABETH the youngest daughter of King Henry the 8th. was born at Greenwich on the 7th. of September (being the Eve of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary) 1533. be∣gotten on the body of Queen Anne Bollen, the eldest daughter of Thomas Bollen Earl of Wiltshire, and of El∣zabeth his wife, one of the daughters of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, and Earl Marshal of England. The Fa∣mily of the Bollens before this time neither great nor an∣tient, but highly raised in reputation by the marriage of the Lady Anne, and the subsequent birth of Queen Elizabeth; the first rise thereof comming out of the City in the person of Sir Geofrey Bollen Lord Mayor of London, Anno 1457. which Geofrey being son of one Geofrey Bollen of Sulle in Norfolk, was fa∣ther of Sir William Bollen of Blickling in the said County, who took to wife the Lady Margaret, daughter and one of the heirs of Thomas Butler Earl of Ormond, brother and heir of James Butler Earl of Wiltshire. Of this marriage came Sir Thomas Bollen above mentioned, imployed in several Embassies by King Henry the Eighth, to whom he was Treasurer of the Houshold, and by that name en∣rolled amongst the Knights of the Garter, Anno 1523. advanced about two years after (being the seventeenth of that King) to the style and title of Vis∣count Rochfort, and finally in reference to his mothers extraction created Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond, 1529. But dying without issue male surviving, the title of Ormond was restored to the next heir male of the Butlers in Ireland, and that of Wiltshire given by King Edward the 6th. to Sir William Paules, be∣ing then great Master of the Houshold. And as for that of Viscount Rochfort
it lay dormant after his decease, till the 6th. of July, Anno 1621. when confer∣red by King James on Henry Cary, Lord Hunson, the son of John, and Grand∣child of Henry Cary, whom Queen Elizabeth in the first year of her Reign, made Lord Cary of Hunsdon, he being the son and heir of Sir William Cary, one of the Esquires of the body to King Henry the 8th. by the Lady Mary Bllen his wife, the youngest daughter, and one of the Coheirs of the said Thomas Bollen, Viscount Rochfort, and Earl of Wiltshire. Such being the estate of that Family, which became afterwards so fortunate in the production of this Princess to the Realm of England, we must in the next place enquire more particularly into the life and story of Queen Anne her Mother. Who in her tender years attending on Mary the French Queen to the Court of France, was by her Father, after the return of the said Queen, pla∣ced in the retinue of the Dutchess of Alanzone, the beloved sister of King Fran∣cis, where she not only learnt the language, but made her self an exact Mistriss both of the Gaities and Garb of the great French Ladies. She carried such a stock of natural graces, as render'd her superlatively the most admired beauty in the Court of France; and returned thence with all those advantages which the civilities of France could add to an English beauty. For so it hapned, that her Father being sent with Sir Anthony Brown, Anno 1527. to take the oath of the French King to a solemn league not long before concluded betwixt the Crowns, resolved to bring back his daughter with him, to see what fortunes God would send her in the Court of England. Where being Treasurer of the hou∣shold, it was no hard matter for him to prefer her to Queen Katherines service, on whom she waited in the nature of a Maid of Honour; which gave the King the opportunity of taking more than ordinary notice of her parts and person. Nor was it long before the excellency of her beauty, adorned with such a grace∣fulness of behaviour, appeared before his eyes with so many charms, that not able to resist the assaults of Love, he gave himself over to be governed by those affections which he found himself unable to Master. But he found no such easie task of it as he had done before in bringing Mrs Elizabeth Blunt, and o∣thers, to be the subjects of his lusts; all his temptations being repelled by this vertuous Lady, like arrows shot in vain at a rock of Adamants. She was not to be told of the Kings loose love to several Ladies, and knew that nothing could be gained by yielding unto such desires but contempt and infamy, though for a while disguised and palliated by the plausible name and Courtly Title of a Princes Mistriss. The humble and modest opposition of the Lady Gray, to the inordinate affections of King Edward the 4th. advanced her to his bed as a law∣ful wife, which otherwise she had been possessed of by no better title than that of Jane Shore, and his other Concubines. By whose example Mistriss Bolln is resolved to steer her courses, and not to yield him any further favours, than what the honour of a Lady, and the modesty of a virgin, might inoffensively permit to so great a King. But so it chanced, that before her coming back from the Court of France, the King began to be touched in conscience about his marriage with the Queen, upon occasion of some doubts which had been cast in the way both by the Ministers of the Emperour, and the French King, as touching the legitima∣tion of his daughter Mary. Which doubts being started at a time when he stood on no good terms with the Emperour, and was upon the point of break∣ing with him, was secretly fomented by such of the Court as had advanced the party of Francis, and sought alwaies to alienate him from the friendship of Charles. Amongst which none more forward than Cardinal Wolsie, who for almost twenty years together, had governed his affairs with such power and prudence. The Emperor had disgusted the ambitious Prelate, not only by cros∣sing him in his sute for the Popedome▪ but by denying him the Archbishoprick of Toledo, of which he had once given him no small hopes. And now the Cardi∣nal is resolved to cry quits for both, thinking himself as much affronted in the sailer of his expectations, as if he had been disgracefully deprived of some pre∣sent
possession. No way more open to his ends, than by working on that scruple of Conscience which had been raised unto his hand; to the advance whereof, the reservedness of the Queens behaviour, and the inequality of her years, which render'd her the less agreeable to his conversation, gave no small advantage. In which conjuncture it was no hard matter to perswade him unto any way which might give satisfaction to his conscience, or content to his fancy, especially i it came accompanied with such a change as promised him the hopes of a son and heir, or at the least of a more lawful and unquestioned issue. And then what fitter wife could be found out for him than Madam Rheene, one of the daughters of King Lewis the 12th. and sister to the wife of the King then Reigning. By which alliance he might be able to justifie his se∣paration from the bed of Katherine, not only against Charls her Nephew, but against all Kings and Emperors in the Christian world, taking the Pope into the reckoning. A proposition so agreeable to the Kings own thoughts (who be∣gan to grow weary of his Queen) that he resolved to buy the amity of Francis at any rate; to which end he not only made a league with him against the Em∣perour, when the condition of the French was almost desperate, but remitted unto Francis a very vast debt, to the value of 500000 Crowns, partly accruing unto him by some former contracts, and parly for the payment of forfeiture incurred by Charles, with which the French had charged himself by the ca∣pitulations. And so far matters went on smoothly to the Cardinals wish, and possibly might have succeeded in all particulars, had not the plot miscaried by the re∣turn of Viscount Rochfort, and the planting of Anne Bollen in the Court. The admirable attractions of which young Lady, had drawn the King so fast unto her, that in short time he gave her an absolute soverainty over all his thoughts. But so long he concealed his affections from her▪ that a great league and en∣tercourse was contracted betwixt her and the young Lord Percy, the eldest son of Henry Lord Percy, the 5th. Earl of Northumberland of that Name and Family; who being brought up in the Cardinals service, had many opportu∣nities of confirming an acquaintance with her▪ when either his own pleasure or his Lords affairs, occasioned his waiting at the Court. But these complian∣ces on both sides, neither were, nor probably could be so closely caried as not to come unto the knowledge of the jealous King, impatient of a Rival in his new affections, and yet resolved to carry the business in such a manner, as to give no distaste to her whom he so much loved. The Cardinal is therefore dealt with to remove that obstacle, to which he readily condescended, not look∣ing further at the present into the design, but that the King intended to ap∣propriate the young Lady to his private pleasures, as he had done many others in the times foregoing. A messenger is thereupon dispatched to the Earl of Northumberland, who at his coming to the Court, is informed by the Cardinal, how unadvisedly the Lord Percy had entred himself into the affections of Mrs Bollen, one of the daughters of Viscount Rochfort, not only without his fa∣thers privity, but against the express will of the King, who was resolved to dispose otherwise of her. And this he urged upon the strength of an old pre∣rogative, both then and after exercised by the Kings of England, in not permit∣ting any of the Nobility to contract mariages, and make alliances with one ano∣ther, but by their consents. The old Earl startled at the newes, and fearing nothing more than the Kings displeasure, calls for his son, and presenly schools him in this manner. Son, (quoth he) even as thou art, and ever haste been, a proud, disdainful, and ve∣ry unthtifty Master, so haste thou now declared thy self: Wherefore what joy, what pleasure, what comfort, or what solace can I conceive in thee? that thus without discretion hast abused thy self, having neither regard to me thy natural father, nor to thy natural Soverain Lord the King, to whom all honest and loyal subjects bear faithful obedience, nor yet to the prosperi∣ty of thy own estate, but hast so unadvisedly ensared thy self to her, for
whom thou hast purchased the Kings high displeasure, intolerable for any subject to sustain. And but that the King doth consider the lightness of thy head, and wilful quality of thy person, his displeasure and indignation were sufficient to cast me and all my posterity into utter ruine and destru∣ction. But he being my singular good Lord, and favourable Prince, and my Lord Cardinal my very good friend, hath and doth clearly excuse me in thy lewdness, and doth rather lament thy folly than malign thee, and hath advi∣sed an order to be taken for thee, to whom both I and you are more bound than we conceive of. I pray to God that this may be sufficient admonition to thee, to use thy self more wisely hereafter. For assure thy self, if thou dost not amend thy prodigality, thou wilt be the last Earl of our house. For thy natural inclination, thou art masterful and prodigal to consume all that thy progenitors have with so great travail gathered and kept together with honour. But having the Kings Majesty my singular good Lord, I trust (I assure thee) so to order my succession, that thou shalt consume thereof but a little. For I do not intend (I tell thee truly) to make thee heir, for (thanks be to God) I have more boys that I trust will use themselves much better, and prove more like to be wise and honest men, of whom I will chuse the most likely to succeed me. So said the much offended father, and yet not thinking he had done enough for his own security, a marriage is presently concluded for him to the Kings good liking, with the Lady Mary, one of the daughters of George Lord , Earl of Shrewsbury. Mrs Anne Bollen in the mean time is removed by her fa∣ther from the Court, to her no small trouble; who knowing nothing of the Kings, had willingly admitted the Lord Percy into her affections. And under∣standing by him what had past betwixt him and his father, she conceived such a mortal grudge against the Cardinal, (whom she looked on as the only cause of this separation) that she contributed her best assistance to his final ruine. It was about the time when the Kings cause was to be agitated in the Leganine Court, that he caused her to be sent for out of the Country, to give her at∣tendance on the Queen as in former times▪ impatient of a longer absence, and fearful of a second Rival, if he should any longer conceal his purpose. Which having taken some fit time to disclose unto her, he found in her a ver∣tue of such strength against all temptations, that he resolves upon the senten∣cing of the divorce, which he little doubted, to take her to him as the last sole object of his wandring loves. A matter not to be concealed from so many espials as Wolsie had about the King. Who thereupon slackneth his former pace in the Kings affairs, and secretly practiseth with the Pope to recall the Commission, whereby he was impowred together with Campegius, to deter∣mine in it▪ Anne Bollen formerly offended at his two great haste in breaking the compliance betwixt her and Percy, is now as much displeased with him for his being too slow in sentencing the Kings Divorse. On which as she had built the hopes of her future greatness, so she wanted neither will nor oppor∣tunity to do him ill offices with the King, whom she exasperates against him upon all occasions. The King growes every day more open in his cariage to∣wards her, takes her along with him in his progress, dies with her privately in her chamber, and causeth almost all adresses to be made by her in matters of the greatest moment. Resolved to break through all impediments which stood betwixt him and the accomplishment of his desires, he first sends back Campegius an alien born, presently caused Wolsie to be indicted and attainted in a premunire, and not long after by the counsel of Thomas Cromwel (who formerly had been the Cardinals Solicitor in his Legantine Court) involves the whole body of the Clergy in the same crime with him. By the perswasions of this man, he re∣quires the Clergy to acknowledge him for supreme head on earth of the Church of England, to make no new Canons and Constitutions, nor to execute any such when made, but by his consent. And having thus brought his own Clergy
under his command, he was the less solicitous how his matters went in the Court of Rome; to which the Pope recalled his cause, which he either quick∣ned or retarded, as rather stood with his own interess,1532. than the Kings concern∣ments. The King being grown more confident in the equity and justice of his cause, by the determinations of many of the Universities in France and Italy, better assured than formerly of his own Clergy at home, and wanting no en∣couragement from the French King to speed the business, advanced the Lady Anne Bollen (for by this time her father for her sake was made Earl of Wltshire) to the Title, Stile, and Dignity of Marchoness of Pmbrook, on the first of September, 1532. assigning her a pension of a thousand pounds per annum out of the Bishopick of Durham. And now the time of the intended interview be∣twixt him and the French King drawing on a pace, he takes her along with him unto Calais, where she entertained both Kings at a curious Mask. At what time having some communication about the Kings intended mariage, the French encouraged him to proceed, assuring him that if the matter should be questioned by the Pope or Emperour, (against whom this must make him sure to the party of France) to assist him with his utmost power, what fortune soever should beide him in it. On which assurance from the French, the mariage is privately made up on the 14th. of November then next following, the sacred Rites performed by Dr Rowland Lee, whom afterwards he preferred to the See of Lichfield, and made Lord President of Wales. None present at the Nuptials but Archbishop Cranmer, the Duke of Norfolk, the Father, Mother, and Bro∣ther of the new Queen, and possibly some other of the Confidents of either side, whom it concerned to keep it secret at their utmost peril. But long it could not be concealed. For finding her self to be with child, she acquaints the King with it, who presently dispatcheth George Lord Roch∣fort her only brother, to the Court of France, as well to give the King adver∣tisement of his secret mariage, as to desire him not to fail of performing his promises if occasion were, and therewithall to crave his counsel and advice how it was to be published, since it could not long be kept unknown. It is not to be doubted, but that the French King was well pleased with the news of a mariage, which must needs fasten England to the party of France, and that he would be forward enough to perform those promises which seemed so visible to conduce to his own preservation. And as for matter of advice, it appeared unnecessary, because the mariage would discover it self by the Queens being with child, which could no longer be concealed. And being to be concealed no longer, on Easter Eve the twelfth of April, she shewed her self openly as Queen, all necessary officers and attendants are appointed for her; an Order issueth from the Parliament at that time sitting, that Katherine should no lon∣ger be called Queen, but Princesse Dowager. Cranmer the new Archbishop re∣pairs to Dunstable, erects his Consistory in the Priory there, cites Katherine fif∣teen dayes together to appear before him, and in default of her appearance proceedeth judicially to the sentence, which he reduceth into writing in due form of Law, and caused it to be openly publish'd (with the consent of his Col∣leagues) on Friday the 23d. of May. And on the Sunday sevennight being then Whitsunday, the new Queen was solemnly crowned by the said Archbi∣shop; conducted by water from Greenwich to the Tower of London, May 29. from thence through the chief streets of the City unto Westminster Hall, May 31. and the next day from Westminster Hall to the Abby Church to receive the Crown, a solemn tilting before the Court gate on the morrow after. All which was done with more magnificence and pomp, than ever had been seen before on the like occasion; the particulars whereof, he that lists to see, may find them punctually set down in the Annals of John Stow, fol. 563, 564, &c. And he may find there also the solemnities used at the Christning of the Princess Elizabeth, born upon Sunday the 7th. day of September, and Christned on the Wednesday following, with a pomp not much inferiour to the Corona∣tion;
her Godfather being the Archbishop of Canterbury, her Godmothers the old Dutchess of Norfolk, and the old Marchioness of Dorset, by whom sh was named Elizabeth, acording to the name of the Grandmothers on eithe side. Not long after Christmass then next following began the Parliament in which the Kings mariage with the Lady Katherine was declared unlawful her daughter the Lady Mry to be illegitimate, the Crown to be entailed on the Kings heirs males, to be begotten on the body of the present Queen, and for default of such issue on the Princess Elizabeth; an oath devised in maintenance of the said succession, and not long after, Moor and Fisher executed (as before was said) for the refusal of that oath. The Kings cause all this while depended in the Court of Rome, not like to be determined for him, and yet the Pope not willing to declare against him, till by the solicitation of the Emperour, and for the vindication of the honour of the See Apostolick, he seemed to be ne∣cessitated to some acts of rigour, which at last proved the total ruine of his power and party in the Realm of England. For the new Queen considering that the Pope and she had such different in∣teresses, that they could not both subsist together, resolved upon that course which Nature and self-preservation seem'd to dictate to her. But finding that the Popes was too well intrenched to be dislodged upon a sudden, it was advi∣sed by Cromwel (made Mr of the Rols on her commendation) to begin with ta∣king in the out-works first; which being gained, it would be no hard matter to beat him out of his trenches. In order whereunto a visitation is begun in the month of October,1555. 1535. in which a diligent enquiry was to be made into all Abbies, Priories, and Nunneries within the Kingdome; Cromwel himself, Dr Lee, and others, being named for Visitors. Who governing themselves accor∣ding to certain instructions of their own devising, dismist all such religious persons as were under the age of 4. or otherwise were willing to relinquish their several houses, shutting up such from going out, as were not willing to accept the benefit of that permission; all such religious persons as departed thence, to be gratified by the Abbot or Prior with a Priests Gown, and forty shillings in mony; and all Nuns to be put into a secular habit, and suffered to go where they would. They took order also, that no men should go into the houses of women, nor women into the houses of men, but only for the hear∣ing of Divine Service; making thereby that course of life less pleasing unto either Sex, than it had been formerly. They also inventaried, or else directly ook away the Relicts and chief Jewels out of most of the said Monasteries or Religious houses, pretending that they took them for the Kings use, but possi∣bly keeping them for their own. And having made a strict and odious inqui∣sition into the lives of all the Votaries of both Sexes, they return'd many of them guilty of exorbitant luts, and much carnal uncleanness; representing their offences in such multiplying glasses, as made them seem both greater in number, and more horrid in nature, than indeed they were. And in the Febru∣ary following was held a Parliament, in which all Monasteries, Priories, and other Religious houses under the yearly value of 200l. were granted unto the King and his heirs for ever. The number of the Houses then suppressed were said to be 376, their yearly Rents then valued at the sum of thirty two thousand pounds and upwards, their movable goods, as they were sold at Robin Hood's penny-worths, amoun∣ting to one hundred thousand pounds and more. The Religious persons thus despoiled of their Estates, either betook themselves to some of the greater Houses of their several Orders, or went again into the world, and followed such secular businesses as were offered to them towards the getting of their livings. Much lamentation made in all parts of the Country, for want of that relief and sustenance which the poor of all sorts received daily from their hospitality, and for the want of that employment which they found continu∣ally in and about those Houses, in their several Trades; insomuch that it was commonly thought, that more than ten thousand persons, as well Masters as
Servants, had lost their livelyhoods by that act of suppression. To the passing whereof, the Bishops and the Mitred Abots, which made the prevalent part of the House of Peers, contributed their Votes and Suffrages as the other did; whether it were out of pusillanimity, as not daring to appear in behalf of their brethren, or out of a weak hope, that the Rapacity of the Queen and her Mi∣nisters would proceed no farther, it is hard to say. Certain it is, that by their improvident assenting to the present Grant, they made a rod for their own backs, (as the saying is) with which they were sufficiently scourged within few years after, till they were all finally whipt out of the Kingdom, though the new Queen, for whose sake Cromwel had contrived the plot, did not live to see it. For such is the uncertainty of human affairs, that when she thought her self most safe and free from danger, she became most obnoxious to the ruine pre∣pared for her. It had pleased God on the eighth of January to put an end unto the calamities of the vertuous but unfortunate Queen, into whose Bed she had succeeded; the news whereof she entertained with such contentment, that she caused her self to be apparalled in lighter colours than was agreeable to the season, or the sad occasion; Whereas if she had rightly understood her own condition, she could not but have known, that the long life of Katherine was to be her best preservative against all changes, which the Kings loose af∣fections, or any other alterations in affairs of State, were otherwise like to draw upon her. But this contentment held not long, for within three weeks after she fell in travail, in which she miscarried of a Son, to the extream grief of the Mother, and discontent of the Father, who looked upon it as an argu∣ment of Gods displeasure, as being as much offended at this second Marriage as he was at the first. He then began to think of his ill forune with both his Wives, both Mariages subject to dispute▪ and the Legitimation of his daugh∣ter Elizabeth as likely to be called in question in the time succeeding, as that of Mary in the former. He much therefore cast about for another wife, of whose marriage and his issue by her there could arise no conroversie, or else must die without an heir of his own body, or leave the Crown to be contended for by those, who though they were of his own body, could not be his heirs. His eye had carried him to a Gentlewoman in the Queens attendance, of ex∣traordinary beauty, and superlative modesty; on the enjoying of whom he so fixed his thoughts, that he had quite obliterated all remembrance of his for∣mer loves. As resolute, but more private in this pursute than he was in the for∣mer; yet not so private, but that the Queen (so piercing are the eyes of Love and Jealousie) had took notice of it, and signified her suspitions to him, of which, more anon. In the mean time she was not wanting in all those honest arts of Love, Ob∣sequiousness, and Entertainment, which might endear her to the King, who now began to be as weary of her gaities and jocular humor, as formerly of the gravity and reservedness of Katherine. And causing many eyes to observe her actions, they brought him a return of some particulars, which he conceived might give him a sufficient ground to proceed upon. The Lord Rochfort, her own brother, having some sute to obtain by her of the King, was found whis∣pering to her on her bed when she was in it; which was interpreted for an act of some great dishonor done or intended to the King, as if she had permitted him some farther liberties than were consistent with the innocent familiarity between brothers and sisters: In the aggravating whereof with all odious cir∣cumstances, none was more forward than the Lady Rochfort her self, whether out of any jealousie which she had of her husband, or whether out of some in∣veterate hatred which she had to the Queen, (according to the peccant humor of most sisters in law) is not clearly known. It was observed also, that Sir Hen∣ry Norris, Groom of the Stool unto the King, had entertained a very dear af∣fection for her, not without giving himself some hopes of succeeding in the King's bed, (as Sir Thomas Seimer after did) if she chanced to survive him. And
it appears that she had given him opportunity to make known his affe∣ction, and to acquaint her with his hopes, which she expressed, by twitting him in a frolick humor with ooking after dead mens shoos. Weston and Beerton, both Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, were observed also to be very diligent in their services and addresses to her, which were construed rather to proceed from love than duty, though no reciprocation could be found to proceed from her, but what was agreeable to that affability and general debonairness which she shewed to all men. Out of these premises, weak and imperfect though they were, the King resolves to come to a conclusion of his aims and wishes. A solemn Tilting was maintained at Greenwich on the first of May, at which the King and Queen were present, the Lord Rochfort and Sir Henry Norris being principal Chal∣lengers. The Queen by chance let fall her handkerchief, which was taken up by one of her supposed favourits who stood under the window, whom the King perceived to wipe his face with it. This taken by the King to be done of purpose, and thereupon he leaves the Queen and all the rest to behold the Sports, and goeh immediately in great haste to Westmster, to the no small amazement of all the company,1536. but the Queen especially. Rochfort and Nor∣ris are committed to the Tower on the morrow after, to which unfortunate place the Queen her self, on the same day, was conducted by Sir Thomas Aude∣ley Lord Chancellor, the Duke of Norfolk, Cromwel then Master of the Rolls and principal Secretary, and Kingston Lieutenant of the Tower. Informed by them upon the way of the Kings suspitions, she is said to have fallen upon her knees, and with dire imprecations to have disavowed the crime (whatsoever it were) wherewith she was charged; beseeching God so to regard her as the justness of her cause required. After which, William Breerton Esquire, and Sir Francis Westn of the King's Privy Chamber, together with Mark Smeton one of the King's Musicians, were committed on the same occasion. These persons being thus committed, and the cause made known, the next care was to find sufficient Evidence for their condemnation. It was objected, that th Queen growing out of hope of having any issue male by the King, had used the company of the Lord Rchfort, Norris, Beerton, and Weston, and pos∣sibly of Smeton also; involving her at one in no smaller crimes than those of Adultery and Incest. For proof whereof, there was no wat of any artifices, in sifting, canvasing, and intangling, not onely the Prisoners themselves, but all such Winesses of either sex, as were thought fit to be examined by the King Commissioners; from none of which they were able to get any thing by all their Arts, which might give any ground for her conviction; but that Mak Smeton had been wrought on to make some confession of himself to her dishonor, out of a vain hope to save his own life by the loss of hers. Concern∣ing which, Cromwel thus writes unto the King, after the Prisoners had been throughly examined in the Tower by the Lords of the Council, Many things (saith h) have been objected, but nothing confessed; onely some circumstances have been a knowledged by Mark. To which effect, and other the particulars before remembred, take here a Letter written by Sir Eward Baynon to Sir William Fitswiliams, being then Treasurer of the Household, and not long after raised unto the style and Title of Earl of Southampon. Mr. Treasurer, THis shall be to advertise you, that here is much communication, that no man will confess any thing against her at all, but onely Mark, of any actual thing. Wherefore in my foolish conceit it should much touch the Kings honor if it should no further appear. And I cannot believe, but that the other two be as far culpable as ever was he; and I think assuredly the one keepeth the others counsel, as many con∣ectures in my mind causeth me to think, and especially of the communication that was last between the Queen, Mr. Norres, Mr. Amner, and me; as I would, if I might speak with Mr. Secretary and you together, more plainly expresse my mind.
If the case be, that they have confessed (like witnesses) al things as they ould do, then the matter is at a point. I have mused much at the manner of Mistresse Mar∣gery, which hath used her self so strangely towards me of late, being her friend so much as I have been. But no doubt it cannot be chosen but she must be of counsell therewith; for there hath been great friendship between the Queen and her of ae. I hear further, that the Queen standeth stifly in her opinion, that she will die in it, which I think is in the trust that she hath of the other two. But if your businesse be such as you cannot come, I would gladly come and wait on you, if you think it re∣quisite. In appears also by a Letter of Sir William Kingstons, that he had much com∣munication with her when she was his prisoner, in which her language seem∣ed to be broken and distressed betwixt tears and laughter, out of which no∣thing could be gathered, but that she exclaimed against Norris, as if he had ac∣cused her. It was further signified in that Letter, that she named some others, who had obsequiously applied themselves to her love and service, acknow∣ledging such passages, though not sufficient to condemn her, as shewed, she had made use of the utmost liberty which could be honestly allowed her. Most true it is, (as far as any truth can be collected from common and credi∣ble reports) that Norris being much favoured by the King, was offered pardon for his life, if he would confess the crimes which he was accused of. To which he made this generous answer, That in his conscience he thought her guiltlesse of the crimes objected, but whether she were or no, he could not accuse her of any thing; and that he had rather undergo a thousand deaths than betray the innocent. So that upon the point there was no evidence against her, but the confession of Sme∣ton, and the calumnies of the Lady Rochfort, of which, the one was fooled into that confession by the hope of life, which notwithstanding was not pardoned; and the other most deservedly lost her head within few years after, for being accessary to the Adulteries of Queen Katherine Howard. And yet upon this Evidence she was arraigned in the great Hall of the Tower of London on the 15th. of May, and pronounced guilty by her Peers, of which her own father (which I cannot but behold as an act of the highest tyranny) was compelled to be one. The Lord Rochfort and the rest of the prisoners were found guilty also, and suffered death on the 17th. day of the same month, all of them stand∣ing stoutly to the Queens and their own integrity; as it was thought that Smeton also would have done, but that he still flattered himself with the hopes of life, till the loss of his head disabled him from making the retractation. The like death suffered by the Queen on the second day after, some few permitted to be present, rather as witnesses than spectators of her final end. And it was so ordered by the advice of Sir William Kingston, who signified in his Letters to one of the Council, that he conceived it best, that a reasonable number onely should be present at the Execution, because he found by some discourse which he had had with her, that she would declare her self to be a good wo∣man, for all men, but for the King, at the hour of death. Which declaration she made good, going with great cheerfulness to the Scaffold, praying most heartily for the King, and standing constantly on her innocence to the ve∣ry last. So dyed this great and gallant Lady, one of the most remarkable mockeries and disports of fortune which these last ages have produced, raised from the quality of a privat Lady to the bed of a King, crowned on the Throne, and executed on the Scaffold; the fabrick of her power and glories being six years at the least in building, but cast down in an instant; the splendor and magni∣ficence of her Coronation seeming to have no other end, but to make her the more glorious Sacrifice at the next alteration of the Kings affections. But her death was not the onely mark which the King did aim at; If she had onely lost her head, though with the loss of her honor, it would have been no bar to her daughter Elizabeth from succeeding her father in the Throne, and he must
have his bed left free from all such pretensions, the better to draw on the fol∣lowing mariage. It was thought necessary therefore, that she should be sepa∣rated from his bed by some other means than the Axe or Sword, and to be le∣gally divorced from her in a Court of Judicature, when the sentence of death might seem to have deprived her of all means, as well as of all manner of de∣sire to dispute the point. Upon which ground Norris is practised with to confess the Adultery, and the Lord Percy (now Earl of Northumberland) who was known to have made love unto her in her former times, to acknowledge a Contract. But as Norris gallantly denyed the one, so the Lord Percy could not be induced (though much laboured to it) to confess the other. For proof whereof we have this Letter of his own hand writing, directed to Secretary Cromwel in these following words. Mr Secretary, THis shall be to signifie unto you, that I perceive by Sir Raynald Carnaby, that there is supposed to be a pre-contract between the Queen and me. Whereupon I was not only examined upon my oath before the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, but also received the blessed Sacrament upon the same before the Duke of Norfolk, and others of the Kings Highnesse Council, learned in the spiritual Law; assuring You Mr Secretary by the said oath and blessed body which afore I received, and hereaf∣ter mean to receive, that the same may be to my damnation, if ever there were any contract or promise of mariage betwixt her and me. At Newington Green the 13th. of May, in the 28th year of the reign of Our Soverain Lord King Henry the 8th. Yours assured, H. Northumberland. But notwithstanding these denyals, and that neither the Adultery was con∣fessed, not the Contract proved, some other ground was found out to dissolve the mariage; though what it was doth not appear upon Record. All which occurs in reference to it is a solemn instrument under the seal of Archbishop Cranmer, by which the mariage is declared (on good and valuable reasons) to be null and void, no reason being exprest particularly for the ground thereof. Which sentence was pronounced at Lambeth on the 17th. of May, in the pre∣sence of Sir Thomas Hadly, Lord Chancellor, Charles Duke of Suffolk, John Earl of Oxon, Robert Earl of Sussex, William Lord Sandys▪ Lord Chancellor of his Majesties houshold, Thomas Cromwel, Master of the Rolls and principal Se∣cretary, then newly put into the office of Vicar General, Sir William Fitzwilli∣ams, Treasurer, and Sir William Paulet Controller of the Kings houshold, Thomas Bedil, Arch-Deacon of Cornwal, and John Trigunwel, Dr of the Lawes, all being of the Privy Council. Besides which, there were present also John Oliver, Dean of Kings College in Oxon, Richard Guent, Arch-Deacon of Lon∣don, and Dean of the Aches, Edmund Bonner, Arch-Deacon of Leicester, Rich∣ard Leighton, Arch Deacon of Buckingham, and Thomas Lee, Doctor of the Lawes; as also Dr Richard Sampson, Dean of the Chapel Royal, who appeared as Proctor for the King, together with Doctor Nicholas Wotton, and Doctor John Barbour, appointed Proctors for the Queen. By the authority of which great appearance, more than for any thing contain'd particularly in the act or in∣strument, the said sentence of Divorce was approved by the Prelates and Clergy assembled in their Convocation on the ninth of June, and being so confirmed by them, it received the like approbation by Act of Parliament with∣in few dayes after; in which Act there also passed a clause, which declared the Lady Elizabeth (the only issue of this mariage) to be illegitimate. What else concerns this unfortunate Lady, together with some proof of divers things before delivered, cannot be more pathetically expressed, than by her self, bemoaning her misfortunes to the King, in this following Letter.
Sir, YOur Graces displeasure, and my imprisonment, are things so strange unto me, as what to write, or what to excuse, I am altogether ignorant. Whereas you send unto me (willing me to confesse a truth, and so obtain your favour) by such a one whom you know to be my antent professed enemy, I no sooner received this message, than I rightly conceived your meaning: And if (as you say) confessing a truth in∣deed may procure my safety, I shall with all willingness and duty perform your com∣mands; but let not your Grace ever imagine that your poor wife will ever be brought to acknowledge a faut, where not so much as a thought ever proceeded: And to speak a truth, never Prince had never wife more loyal in all duty, or in all true affe∣ction, than you have ever found in Anne Bollen. With which name and place I could willingly have contented my self, if God, and your Graces pleasure had so been plea∣sed. Neither did I at any time forget my self in my exaltation or received Queen∣ship, but that I oked alwaies for such an alteration as now I find; the ground of my preferment being on no surer foundation than your Graces fancy, the least al∣teration whereof, I knew was fit and sufficient to draw that fancy to some other subject. You have chosen me from a low estate to be your Queen and companion, far beyond my desert or desire. If then you find me worthy of such honour, Good your Grace let not any light fancy or bad counsel of my enemies, withdraw your Princely favour from me; neither let that stain, that unworthy stain of a disloyal heart towards your Good Grace, ever cast so foul a blot on your most dutiful wife, and the infant Princesse, your daughter. Try me good King, but let me have a lawful trial, and let not my swrn enemies sit as my accusers and judges; Yea let me receive an open tryal, for my tuths shall fear no open shames; then shall you see either my innocence clea∣red, your suspicion and conscience satisfied, the ignominy and slander of the world stopped, or my guilt openly declared. So that whatsoever God or you may determine of , your Grace may be freed from an open censure; and my offence being so law∣fuly proved, your Grace is at liberty both before God and man, not only to execute worthy punishment on me as an unfaithful wife, but to follow your affection already setled on that party, for whose sake I am now as I am; whose name I could some∣while since have pointed to, your Grace being not ignorant of my suspicion therein. But if you have already determined of me, and that not only my death, but an infa∣mous slander might bring you the enjoying of a desired happinesse, then I desire of Go that he wil pardon your great sin herein, and likewise my enemies, the instru∣ments thereof; and that he will not call you to a strict account for your unprincely and cruel usage of me, at his general judgement seat, where both you and my self must shortly appear, and in whose judgement I doubt not, whatsoever the world may think of me, my innocency shall be openly known, and sufficiently cleared. My last and only request shall be, that my self may bear the burthen of your Graces displeasure, and that it may not touch the innocent souls of those poor Gentlemen, who as I understand are in streight imprisonment for my sake. If ever I have found favour in your sight, if ever the name of Anne Bollen hath been pleasing in your ears, let me obtain this last request, and I will so leave to trouble your Grace any fur∣ther, with my earnest prayers to the Trinity, to have you in his good keeping, and to direct you in all your actions. Your most loyal and faithful Wife, Anne Bollen. From my dolefull prison in the Tower, May the 6th. 1536. I had not dwelt so long upon the story of this Queen, but that there is so much which depends upon it in reference to the Honour, Birth and Title of the Princess Elizabeth; whose Reign of 44 years, accompanied with so many signal blessings both at home and abroad, is used by some for a strong Argument of her mothers innocence. For further proof whereof, they behold the Kings precipitate and hasty mariage, casting himself into the bed of a third, before the
sword was dried from the blood of his second wife. But of these miseries and calamites which befel her mother, the Princess was too young (as not being fully three years old) to take any notice. And when she came unto the years of understanding, she had been much sweetned and repaired by her fathers goodness, By whose last will she was assured of her turn in the succession to the Crown, if her brother and sister died without lawful issue; allowed the same yearly maintenance, and allotted the same portion in mariage, with the Princess Mary. But nothing more declares his good affection to her, than the great care he took of her education; committed to the government and tuition of Roger Ascam, a right learned man, she attained unto the knowledge of the Greek and Latine; and by the help of other School-masters, of the Mo∣dern Languages. Insomuch that she very well understood the Greek, and was able readily to express her self in the Latine tongue; as appears by an Oration which she made at her entertainment in Cambridge, and the smart answer which she gave ex tempore to a Polish Ambassador, of which we may hear more in their proper place. And as for the Italian and the French, she spake them with as much facility and elegance, as if they had been natural to her. And if some times she made use of Interpreters when she conversed with the Ambassadors of forein Princes, it rather was to keep her State, than that she could not en∣tertain discourse with them in their proper languages. Her person may be best known by her pictures, and the perfections of her mind by her following government. Suffice it in this place to know, that she seemed to be made up of Modesty and Majesty in an equal mixture; and was so moderate in the course and caiage of her desires, that King Edward (who took much delight in her conversation) used commonly to call her his Sister Temperance. Yet notwithstanding all these personal Graces, I do not find that she was sought in mariage in the time of King Henry; the blots of infamy which had been laid upon her Mother,1550. serving as a bar to her preferment amongst forein Princes. In the beginning of King Edward's, she was aimed at by Sr Thomas Seymour, a brother of the Lord Protector Sommersets, for the advancing of his lofty and ambitious projects.1552. And in the latter end thereof, propounded to the eldest son of the King of Denmark. But it was propounded only and not persued, whether neglected by that King for the former reason, or inter∣mitted by her own aversness from mariage, we are yet to seek. But in the first year of Queen Mary, she was desired by Edward Courtney Earl of Devonshire, the eldest son of Henry Marquiss of Exeter, descended from a daughter of King Edward the 4th. which proved so much to the displeasure of the Queen, that it became dangerous to both of them, as was shewed before. For notice of the Queens displeasure having been took by some of great place about her, they were both dawn into suspicion of being privy at the least unto Wiat's rebellion, (raised on the noise of the Queens mariage with the Prince of Spain) both of them clapt in prison upon that account, and so detained for a long time, though both acquitted publickly by Wiat at the time of his death. But nothing so much alienated the Queens affection from her, as the diffe∣rence which was between them in the cause of Religion, occasioned and con∣tinued by their several interests. For it concerned Queen Mary to maintain the Pope and his Religion, her mothers marriage not being otherwise to be defended as good and lawful but by his authority, which marriage, if by his authority made good and lawfull, then must the marriage of Anne Bollen be made unlawful, and consequently the Princess Elizabeth must actually be made illegitimate by the same authority. Upon which point, as the Queen laboured nothing more than the restoring of the Pope to that Supremacy of which he had been deprived by the two last Kings; so kept she a hard hand upon her sister, as of a different Religion from her, the visible Head of the Protestant party in the Kingdom, and one whom she suspected to have more hearts amongst the Subjects than she had her self. Upon the first surmise of her being privy to Wyat's conspiracy, Sir Edward Hastings and some others were sent to bring her
to the Court from her house at Ashrsdge, where though they found her ex∣tream sick, and unfit for travel, yet they compelled her to go with them on the morrow after. Being come unto the Court, she was first kept prisoner in her chamber for the space of a fortnight, neither permitted to come to the Queens presence, nor suffered without much difficulty to write unto her. Charged by the Bishop of Winchester and some other Lords with Wyat's pra∣ctices, she stoutly stood on the denyall, professing her fidelity and loyalty to the Queen her sister. Which notwithstanding she was conveied by water, on the Sunday commonly called Palm-Sunday,March 18. 1553. to the Tower of London, the people being commanded to keep their Churches, for fear she might be rescued and took from them who were to have the conduct of her; by whom compelled to land at the private Stairs, generally called The Traitors Stairs, she openly affir∣med, That there landed as true a Subject, being a Prisoner, as ever landed in that place; and so was brought unto the Lodgings appointed for her, all doors be∣ing locked and bolted on her, to her great amazement. Gage Constable of the Tower, and at that time Lord Chamberlain also, was her bitter enemy, but more for love to the Pope than for hate to her person, and did not only place a strong Guard about her, but suffered none but those of that ragged Regiment to carry up her dyet to her. Of which, complaint being made to him by some of her servants, he threatned to lay them in such a place where they should nei∣ther see the Sun nor Moon, if they troubled him any more about it; though afterwards it was otherwise ordered by the Lords of the Council. Wearied with the closeness of her imprisonment, she moved the Lord Chadois and the Lord Chamberlain, the one of which was Constable, and the other Lieutenant of the Tower, that she might have the liberty of walking in the private Garden, or at the least in the Queens Lodgings, for her better health. In which, not able to gratifie her by their own authority, the Lord Chandois obtained leave of the Lords of the Council that she might walk in the Queens Lodgings, himself, the Lord Chamberlain, and three of the Queens Gentle∣women being still in her company; permitted afterwards to enjoy the benefit of the private Garden, the doors were always shut upon her, and order given, that no Prisoners should be suffered by their Keepers to look out of the win∣dows so long as she was walking in it. Such care there was to hinder all access unto her, and opportunity of conference with her, that a little Boy of four years old was threatned to be whipt for presenting her with flowers and nose∣gays, and a command given by Gage that the Boy's father should keep him at home, and not suffer him to come thither any more. But the Tower being thought to be no safe prison for a person of such eminent quality, by reason of its nearness to the capital City, and the great number of prisoners which were kept therein, she was committed to the custody of Sir Henry Bedingfield, a man of an untractable and rugged nature,1554. by whom she was conducted with a guard of soldiers to the Mannor of Woodstock, which journey she began on the 19th. of May being Trinity Sunday, and ended by short and easie stages on the Thursday after; her own servants sometimes sequestred from her by command of her Jaylor, (as she commonly called him) the people sometimes rated and reviled by him for flocking to see her as she passed, and the Lord Williams, though associated in Commission with him, openly quarrelled and reproached for giving her a noble Entertainment at his house of Ricolt. Being brought to Woodstock, she was kept under many locks and bolts, a guard of Russians con∣tinually attending before her dores, and the keys every night brought up to Reding field, who suffered no access unto her upon any occasion; Which being made known to the Lord Williams, he sollicited the Queen that she might be prisoner in his house, and offered to be surety for her, and was in such a fair way of obtaining his sute, that he caused preparations to be made for her re∣ception; but either by the interposition of the Bishop of Winchester, her most
mortal enemy, or the sollicitation of Bedingfield, who possibly might have some other end to work upon her, no effect followed answerably to that expecta∣tion. About this time she was advised by some of her friends to submit her self unto the Queen, which they conceived would be very well taken, and re∣dound muh boh to her benefit and contentment. To which she answered, That she would never make any submission to them against whom she never had offended in word or deed; adding withall, that if she were guilty of any such offence, she would crave no mercy but the Law, which she was sure she should have had before that time, if any thing could have been proved against he by her greatest enemies; onely she was perswaded to make a sute to the Lords of the Council that she might be suffered to write a Letter to the Queen▪ not gatified without muh difficulty in that easie sure, nor otherwise graified at all, but that Bedngfiel was to stand by her all the time she , and have the keeping of her papers till she came to an end, and to be made privy to the conveyane of those Letters when they once were written. At her first comming to the Tower, she had a Priest appointed to say Mass in her chamber; but whether the same Priest or any other was appointed for the like office at her being at Woodstoc, I find not in the story of her life and troubles. Certain it is, that she resorted to the Mass both before and after, and seemed not a little discontented that she could not gain so much upon the Queen by her outward conformity, as to believe that she was catholickly affected. But the Queen was not the onely one who believed so of her, though she behaved her self so warily as not to come within the danger of the Laws, for acting any thing in opposition unto that Religion which was then established. Con∣cerning which there goes a story, that when a Popish Priest had urged her very earnestly to declare her judgment touching the Presence of Christ in the bles∣sed Sacrament; she very cautelously resolved the point in these following Verses: 'Twas God the word that spake it, He took the bread and bake it, And what the Word did make it, That I believe and take it. But all this caution notwithstanding, her aversness from the Church of Rome was known sufficiently, not to be altered while she lived, and therefore she to live no longer to be the occasion of continual fears and jealousies to the Catholick party. The times were then both sharp and bloody, and a great per∣secution was designed against the Protestants in all parts of the Kingdom; At what time Bishop Gardiner was heard to say, That it was to no purpose to cut off the boughs and branches, if they did not also lay the Ax to the root of the Tree. More plainly the Lord Paget in the hearing of some of the Spa∣niads, That the King should never have a quiet Government in England, if her ad were not stricken off from her shoulders. With which the King being made acquainted, he resolved to use his best endeavour, not onely to preserve her life, but obtain her liberty; For he considered with himself, that if the Prin∣cess should be taken away, the right of the Succession would remain in the Queen of Scots, who being married to the Daulphin of Frce, would be a means of joyning this Kingdom unto that, and thereby gain unto the French the Soveraignty or supream command above all other Kings in Europe. He considered also with himself, that the Queen was no very healthy, supposed at that ime to be with child, but thought by others of more judgment not to be like to bring him any children to succeed in the Crown, and hoped by such a signall favour to oblige the Princess to accept him for her husband, on the
Queens decease, by means whereof, he might still continue Master of the trea∣sures and strength of England, in all his wars against the French, or any other Nation which maligned the greatness of the Austrian Family. Upon which grounds he dealt so effectually with the Queen, that order was given about a fortnight after Easter to the Lord Williams and Sir Henry Bedingfield to bring their prisoner to the Court; which command was not more cheerfully exe∣cuted by the one,1555. than stomach'd and repin'd at by the other. Being brought to Hampton Court, where the Queen then lay, she was conducted by a back way to the Prince's Lodgings, where she continued a fortnight and more without being seen or sent to by any body, Bedingfield and his guards being still about her; so that she seemed to have changed the place, but not the Pri∣son, and to be so much nearer danger, by how much she was nearer unto those who had power to work it. At last, a visit was bestowed upon her, but not without her earnest sute in that behalf, by the Bishop of Winchester Lord Chancellor, the Earls of Arundel and Shrewsbery, and Sir William Peter, whom she right joyfully received, desiring them to be a means unto the Queen that she might be freed from that restraint, under which she had been kept so long together. Which being said, the Bishop of Winchester kneeling down, besought her to submit her self to the Queen, that being, as he said, the onely probable expe∣dient to effect her liberty. To whom she answered as before, that rather than she would betray her innocence by such submission, she would be content to lie in prison all the days of her life. For by so doing, (said she) I must confess my self to be an offender, which I never was against her Majesty, in thought, word, or deed; and where no just offence is given, there needs no submission. Some other Overtures being made to the same effect, but all unto as little purpose, she is at last brought before the Queen (whom she had not seen in more than one year before) about ten of the clock at night; before whom falling on her knees, she desired God to preserve her Malesty, not doubting, as she said, but that she should prove her self to be as good a Subject to her Majesty, as any other whosoever. Being first dealt with by the Queen to con∣fess some offence against her self, and afterwards to acknowledge her im∣prisonment not to be unjust, she absolutely refused the one, and very hand∣somely declined the other. So that no good being to be gotten on her on either hand, she was dismissed with some uncomfortable words from the pre∣sent Enterview, and about a week after was discharged of Bedingfield and his guard of soldiers. It was reported, that King Philip stood behind the Hang∣ings, and hearkned unto every word which passed between them, to the end, that if the Queen should grow into any extremity, he might come in to pa∣cifie her displeasures, and calm her passions. He knew full well, how passio∣nately this Princess was beloved by the English Nation, and that he could not at the present more endear himself to the whole body of the people, than by effecting her enlargment; which shortly after being obtained, she was permitted to retire to her own houses in the Country, remaining sometimes in one, and sometimes in another, but never without fear of being remand∣ed unto prison, till the death of Gardiner, which hapned on the 12th. of November then next following. Some speech there was, and it was earnestly endeavoured by the Popish Party, of marrying her to Emanuel Philebert Duke of Savoy, as being a Prince that lived far off, and where she could give no en∣couragement to any male-contented party in the Realm of England; Against which, none so much opposed as the King, who had a designe on her for him∣self, as before is said; and rather for himself than for Charls his son (though it be so affirmed by Cambden) the Princess being then in the twenty second year of her age, whereas the young Prince was not above seven or eight. So that a resolution being finally fixed of keeping her within the Kingdom, she lived
afterwards for the most part with less vexations, but not without many watch∣full eyes upon all her actions, till it pleased God to call her to the Crown of England. She had much profited by the Pedagogie of Ascham, and the rest of her Schoolmasters, but never improved her self so much as in the School of Affliction, by which she learned the miseries incident to Subjects, when they groan under the displeasure of offended Princes; that the displeasures of some Princes are both made and cherished by the art of their Ministers, to the undoing of too many innocent persons who do less deserve it; that it is there∣fore necessary, that the ears of Princes should be open unto all complaints, and their hands ready to receive Petitions from all sorts of people, to the end that knowing their grievances and distresses, they may commiserate them in the one, and afford them remedy in the other; that a good Prince must have somewhat in him of the Priest, who if he be not sensible of the infirmities of his brethren, cannot be thought to intercede so powerfully in their behalf, as when he hath been touched with the true sense and feeling of their extre∣mities; and finally, that the School is never better governed, than by one who hath past through all the forms and degrees thereof, and having been perfectly trained up in the ways of obedience, must know the better how to use both the Rod and Ferula when he comes to be Master of the rest.
The first eight years of the Reign of QUEEN ELIZABETH. An. Reg. Eliz. 1. An. Dom. 1558, 1559.An. Reg. Eliz. 1. 1558. ELizabeth the only child then living of King Henry the 8th. succeeded her Sister in the Throne, on the 17th. of Novem∣ber, Anno 1558. Ferdinand of Austria being then Empe∣rour, Henry the 2d. King of the French, Philip the second King of Spain, and Paul the 4th. commanding in the Church of Rome. Queen Mary not long before her death had called a Parliament, which was then sitting when the news there∣of was brought unto the Lords in the House of Peers. The newes by reason of the Queens long sickness, not so strange unto them, as to take them either unresolved or unprovided for the declaring of their duty to the next successor; though some of them perhaps had some se∣cret wishes that the Crown might have fallen rather upon any oher, than upon her to whom it did of right belong; so that upon a short debate amongst them∣selves, a message is sent to the Speaker of the House of Commons, desiring him, and all the Members of that House, to come presently to them, upon a business of no small importance, to the good of the Kingdom. Who being come, the Lord Chancellor Heath, with a composed and setled countenance, not without sorrow enough for the death of the one, or any discontent for the succession of the other, declared unto them in the name of the rest of the Lords, that God had taken to his mercy the late Queen Mary, and that the succession to the Crown did belong of right to the Princess Elizabeth, whose Title they conceived to be free from all legal questions; that in such cases no∣thing was more necessary than expedition, for the preventing of all such plots and practices of any discontented or ambitious persons, as might be set on foot to the disturbance of the common quiet; and therefore that there concurrence was desired in proclaiming the new Queen with all speed that might be, they being then so opportunely convened together as the Represen∣tees of the whole body of the Commons of the Realm of England; Which be∣ing said, the Knights and Burgestes gave a ready consent to that which they had no reason to deny; and they which gave themselves some thoughts of incli∣ning otherwise, conceived their opposition to the general Vote, neither safe nor seasonable. So that immediately the Princess Elizabeth was proclaimed
by the King at Arms, first before Westminster Hall door in the Palace Yard, in the presence of the Lords and Commons, and not long after at the Cross in Cheapside, and other places in the City, in the presence of the Lord Mayor, Al∣dermen, and principal Citizens, to the great joy of all peaceable and well-affe∣cted people. It was not long before the Princess had advertisement of the death of her sister, together with the general acknowledgement of her just and lawful. Title to the Crown Imperial. The newes whereof being brought unto her by some of the Lords, she prepared for her removal from Hatfield on the Saturday af∣ter, (being the 19th. of that month) and with a great and Royal train set for∣wards to London. At Higate four miles from the City, she was met by all the Bishops then living, who presented themselves before her upon their knees, in testimony of their loyalty and affection to her. In which address as she see∣med to express no small contentment, so she gave to each of them particular∣ly her hand to kiss, except only unto Bonner of London, whose bloody butcheries had render'd him uncapable in her opinion of so great a fa∣vour. At her first coming to the City she took her lodging in the Charter∣house, where she staid some days, till all things in the Tower might be fitted and prepared for her reception. Attended by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, with a stately strain of Lords and Ladies, and their several followers, She entreth by Cripple gate into the City, passeth along the wall till she came to Bishops gate, where all the Companies of the City in their several Liveries waited her coming in their proper and distinct rancks, reaching from thence until the fur∣ther end of Mark Lane, where she was entertained with a peal of great Ord∣nance from the Tower. At her entrance into which place, she render'd her most humble thanks to Almighty God for the great and wondrous change of her condition, in bringing her from being a prisoner in that place, to be the Prince of her people, and now to take possession of it as a Royal Palace, in which before she had received so much discomfort. Here she remained till the 5th. day of December then next following, and from thence removed by water unto Sommerset House. In each remove she found such infinite throngs of people, who flocked from all parts to behold her, both by land and water, and testified their publick joy by such loud acclamations, as much rejoyced her heart to hear, and could not but express it in her words and countenance, by which she doubled their affections, and made her self the absolute Mistriss at all times of their hands and purses. She had been forged upon the anvil of adversity, which made her of so fine a temper, that none knew better than her self how to keep her State, and yet descend unto the meanest of her subjects in a popular Courtship. In the mean time the Lords of the Council had given Order for the stopping of all Ports and Havens, that no intelligence of the Queens death might be ca∣ried out of the Realm, by which any disturbance might be plotted or contrived against it, till all things were setled here at home. But finding such a gene∣ral concurrence in all sorts of people, in acknowledging her just and lawful Ti∣tle, testified by so many outward signs of a publick joy, that there was no fear of any danger from abroad, that bar was speedily removed, and the Ports open∣ed as before to all sorts of passengers. And in the next place care was ta∣ken for sending new Commissions unto such Embassadors as resided in the Courts of several Princes, both to acquaint them with the change, and to assure those Princes of the Queens desire to maintain all former leagues between them and the Crown of England; but more particular instructions were dire∣cted to her Agent in the Court of Spain; to whom it was given in charge to represent unto the King, the dear remembrance which she kept of those many humanities received from him in the time of her troubles. Instructions are sent also to Sir Edward Karn, the late Queens Agent with the Pope, and now confirmed by her in the same imployment, to make his Holiness acquainted with the death of Queen Mary, and her succession to the Crown, not with∣out
out some desire that all good offices might be reciprocally exchanged between them. But the Pope answered hereunto (according to his accustomed ri∣gour) That the Kingdom of England was held in Fee of the Apostolick See; that she could not succeed being illegitimate; that he could not contradict the declarations of Clement the 7th and Paul the 3d. that it was a great boldness to assume the name and government of it without him; yet being desirous to shew a fatherly affection, if she will renounce her pretensions, and refer her self wholly to his free disposition, he will do whatsoever may be done with the honour of the Apostolick See. To the making of which sudden answer, though there needed no other instigation of his own rough nature, yet many thought that he was put upon it by some Ministers of the Court of France, who fearing nothing more than that Philip will endeavour by a second mariage, to assure himself of the possession of the Realm of Eng∣land, and to that end sollicit for a dispensation to make way unto it, thought it expedient to prevent those practices in the first beginning, by putting the Pope upon such counsels, as would be sure to dash all his hopes that way. But the new Queen having perform'd this office of civility to him, as she did to others, expected not the coming back of any answer, not took much thought of it when she heard it. She knew full well, that her legitimation and the Popes supremacy could not stand together, and that she could not possibly maintain the one, without a discarding of the other. But in this case it concerned her to walk very warily, and not to unmask her self too much at once, for fear of giving an alarum to the Papal party, before she had put her self into a posture of ability to make good her actions. Many who were imprison∣ed for the cause of Religion, she restored to liberty at her first coming to the Crown. Which occasioned Rainsford, a Buffonly Gentleman of the Court, to make a sute to her in the behalf of Mathew, Mark, Luke, and John, who had been long imprisoned in a Latine Translation, that they also might be restored to liberty, and walk abroad as formerly in the English Toung. To whom she presently made answer▪ That he should first endeavour to know the minds of the Prisoners, who perhaps desired no such liberty as was demanded. Which notwithstanding, upon a serious debate of all particulars, she was resolved to proceed to a reformation, as the times should serve. In order whereunto, she constitutes her Privy Council, which she compounds of such ingredients, as might neither give encouragement to any of those who wish'd well to the Church of Rome, or alienate their affections from her, whose hearts were more inclined to the Reformation. Of such as had been of the Concil to the Quen her sister, she retained the Lord Archbishop of York, the Lord Marquess of Winchester, the Earls of Arundel, Shrewsbury, Darby, and Pembrock, the Lords Clynton and Effingham, Sir Thomas Cheiney, Sir William Petice, Sir John Mason, Sir Richard Sackvile, and Doctor Wotton; To whom she added of her own, the Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of Bedford, Sir Thomas Parre, Sir Edward Roers, Sir Ambrose Care, Sir William Cecil, and Sir Nicholas Bcn. To which last, being then Attorney of the Dutchy of Lancaster, and one that had been much employed by her in some former services which had relation to the Law, she committed the custody of the Great Seal on the 22 of De∣cember, the Title of Lord Chancellor remaining to Archbishop Heath as be∣fore it did, and that of the Lord keeper being given to Bacon: Which being a new Title, and consequently subject unto some disputes, an Act was passed in the second Parliament of her Reign for investing the said new Lord Keeper, and all that should from thenceforth enjoy that Office, with all the Powers, Privileges, and Preheminences which antiently had been exercised and en∣joyed by the Lord Chancellor of England, and for confirming of all sentences and decrees in Chancery, which had or should be made by the said Lord Kee∣pers in all times to come. The like mixture she also caused to be made a∣mongst other her subordinate Ministers, in adding such new Commissioners for the Peace in every County, as either were known to be of the Reformed Religion, or to wish well to it.
The preferring of so many of the Protestant party, as well to places of em∣ployment in their several Countries, as to the ranck and dignity of Privy Counsellors, and the refusal of her hand to Bishop Bonner at her very first comming to the Crown, were taken to be strong presumptions (as indeed they were) that she intended to restore the Reformed Religion. And as the Papists, in the first beginning of the Reign of Queen Mary, hoping thereby the better to obtain her favour, began to build new Altars, and set up the Mass, before they were required so to do by any publick Authority; so fared it now with many unadvised Zelots amongst the Protestants, who measuring the Queens affections by their own, or else presuming that their errors would be taken for an honest zeal, employed themselves as busily in the demolishing of Altars, and defacing of Images, as if they had been licenced and commanded to it by some legal warrant. It hapned also, that some of the Ministers which remained at home, and others which returned in great numbers from beyond the Seas, had put themselves into the Pulpits, and bitterly inveighed against the superstitions and corruptions of the Church of Rome. The Popish Prea∣chers did the like, and were not sparing of invectives against the others, whom they accused of Heresies, Schisms, and Innovation in the Worship of God. For the suppressing of which disorders on the one side, and those common disturbances on the other, the Queen set out two Proclamations much about one time, by one of which it was commanded, that no man, of what per∣swasion soever he was in the points of Religion, should be suffered from thenceforth to preach in publick, but onely such as should be licensed by her authority; and that all such as were so licensed or appointed, should forbear preaching upon any point which was matter of Controversie, and might con∣duce rather to exasperate than to calm mens passions. Which Proclamation was observed with such care and strictness, that no Sermon was preached at St. Paul's Cross or any publick place in London, till the Easter following: At what time the Sermons which were to be preached in the Spittle (according to the antient custom) were performed by Doctor Bill the Almoner to the Queen, and afterwards the first Dean of Westminster of the Queens foundati∣on; Doctor Richard Cox formerly Dean of Westminster, preferred in short time after to the See of Ely, and Mr. Robert Horn (of whom mention hath been made before at the troubles of Franckfort) advanced not long after to the See of Winchester. The Rehearsal Sermon, accustomably preached at St. Pauls Crosse on the Sunday following, was undertook by Doctor Thomas Sampson then newly returned from beyond the Seas, and after most unhappily made Dean of Christ-church. But so it chanced, that when he was to go into the Pulpit, the dore was locked, and the key thereof not to be found, so that a Smith was sent for to break open the dore; and that being done, the like ne∣cessity was found of cleansing and making sweet the place, which by a long disuse had contracted so much filth and nastiness, as rendred it unfit for ano∣ther Preacher. By the other Proclamation which was published on the 30th. of December, t was enjoyned, That no man of what quality or degree soever, should pre∣sume to alter any thing in the state of Religion, or innovate in any of the rites and ceremonies thereunto belonging, but that all such rites and cere∣monies should be observed in all Parish Churches of the Kingdom, as were then used and retained in her Majesties Chapel, until some further order should be taken in it. Onely it was permitted, and withall required, that the Letany, the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Commandments, should be said in the English tongue, and that the Epistle and the Gospel, at the time of the High Mass, should be read in English, which was accordingly done in all the Churches of London on the next Sunday after, being New-years day, and by degrees in all the other Churches of the Kingdom also. Further than this, she thought it not convenient to proceed at the present, but that she had commanded the Priest or Bishop (for some
say it was the one,An. Reg. Eliz. 1. 1558/9. and some the other) who officiated at the Altar in the Cha∣pel-Royal, not to make any Elevation of the Sacrament, the better to prevent that adoration which was given unto it, and which she could not suffer to be done in her sight without a most apparent wrong to her judgment and con∣science; Which being made known in other places, and all other Churches be∣ing commanded to conform themselves to the example of the Cha∣pel, the elevation was forborn also in most other places, to the great dis∣content and trouble of the Popish party. And though there was no further progress toward a Reformation by any publick Act or Edict, yet secretly a Reformation in the form of Worship, and consequently in point of Doctrine, was both intended and projected. For making none acquainted with her se∣cret purposes but the Lord Marquis of Northampton, Francis Earl of Bedford, Sir John Gray of Pergo, (one of the late Duke of Suffolk's brothers) and Sir William Cecil; she committed the reviewing of the former Litutgy to the care of Doctor Parker, Doctor Gryndal, Doctor Cox, Doctor Pilkington, Doctor Bill, Doctor May, and Mr. Whitehead, together with Sir Thomas Smith Do∣ctor of the Laws, a very learned, moderate, and judicious Gentleman. But what they did, and what preferments they attained to on the doing of it, we shall see anon, wheu we shall find the Book reviewed, confirmed by Act of Parliament, and executed in all parts of the Kingdom, as that Act re∣quired. But first, some publick Acts of State, and great Solemnities of Court are to be performed. The Funeral of the Queen deceased solemnised on the 13th. of December at the Abbey of Westminster, and the Sermon preached by Doctor White then Bishop of Winchester, seemed onely as a preamble to the like So∣lemnity performed at the said place about ten days after, in the Obsequies of Charls the 5th. which mighty Emperor having first left the world by resigning his Kingdoms, and retiring himself into a Monastery, as before was said, did after leave his life also in September last; and now upon the 24th. of this pre∣sent December a solemn Obsequie was kept for him in the wonted form, a rich Hearse being set up for him in the Church of Westminster, magnificently co∣vered with a Pall of gold, his own Embassador serving as the principal Mour∣ner, and all the great Lords and Officers about the Court attending on the same in their rancks and orders. And yet both these, though stately and ma∣jestical in their several kinds, came infinitely short of those Pomps and Tri∣umphs which were prepared and reserved for the Coronation. As a Prepara∣tion whereunto, she passed from Westminster to the Tower on the 12th. of Ja∣nuary, attended by the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, and other Citizens, in their Barges, with the Banners and Escutcheons of their several Companies, loud Musick sounding all the way; and the next day she restored some unto their old, and advanced others to new honors, according to her own fancy and their deservings. The Marquis of Northampton, who had lain under an Attaindure ever since the first beginning of the Reign of Queen Mary, she re∣stored in blood, with all his Titles and Estates. The Lord Edward Seimer, eldest son to the late Duke of Somerset, was by her reconfirmed in the Titles of Viscount Beachmp and Earl of Hertford, which had been formerly entayled upon him by Act of Parliament. The Lord Thomas Howard, second son of Tho∣mas the late Duke of Norfolk, and brother to Henry Earl of Surrey, (beheaded in the last days of King Henry the Eighth) she advanced to the Title of Vis∣count Howard of Bindn. She also preferred Sir Oliver St. Johns, who derived himself from the Lady Magaret daughter of John Duke of Somerset, from whom the Queen her self descended, to the dignity of Lord St. John of Bletso; and Sir Henry Carte, son of Sir William Carie Knight, and of Mary Bollen his wife, the onely sister of Queen Anne Bollen, she promoted to the honor and degree of Lord Carie of Hansdon. The ordinary acts of grace and favour being thus dispatched, she prepares the next morning for a triumphant passage through London to her Palace at
Westminster. But first before she takes her Chariot, she is said to have lifted up her eyes to heaven, and to have used some words to this or the like effect. O Lord Almigy and everiving , I give thee most hearty thanks that thou hast been so mercifu. unto me, as to spare me to see this joyful day. And I acknowledge that thou hast dealt as wonderfully and a mercifully with me, as thou didst with thy true and faithful servant Daniel thy Prophet, whom thou deliveredst out of the den, from the cruelty of the raging greedy Lyons; even so was I overwhelmed, and only by thee de∣livere; to thee only be thanks, honour, and prase for ever. Amen. Which said, she mounted into her Chariot with so cleer a spirit, as if she had been made for that dayes solemnity. Entertained all the way she went with the joyful shouts and acclamations of God save the Queen, which she repaid with such a modest affability, and so good a grace, that it drew tears of joy from the eyes of some, with infinite prayers and thanksgiving from the hearts of all; but nothing more indeared her to them, than the accepting of an English Bible richly gilt, which was let down unto her from one of the Pageants, by a child repre∣senting Truth. At the sight whereof she first kissed both her hands, with both her hands she received the book, which first she kiss'd and after laid unto her bosome, (as the nearest place unto her heart) giving the City greater thanks for that excellent Gift, than for all the rest, which plentifully had been that day bestowed upon her, and promised to be diligent in the reading of it. By which, and many other acts of a popular piety, with which she passed away that day, she did not only gain the hearts of all them that saw her, but they that saw her did so magnifie her most eminent Graces, that they procured the like affecti∣ons in the hearts of all others also. On the next morning with like magnificence and splendor, she is attended to the Church of St Peter in Westminster, where she was crowned according to the Order of the Roman Pontifical, by Dr Owen Oglethorp, Bishop of Carlisle, the only man among all the Bishops, who could be wrought on by her to per∣form that office. Whether it were that they saw some alteration coming, to which they were resolved not to yield conformity, so that they could not be in a worse case upon this refusal, than they should be otherwise; or that they feared the Popes displeasure, if they should do an act so contrary unto his pre∣tensions, without leave first granted; or that they had their own particular animosities and spleens against her, (as the Archbishop of York particularly for his being deprived of the seal) is not certainly known. None more condem∣ned for the refusal, than the Bishop of Ely, as one that had received his first preferments from the King her father, and who complyed so far in the time of King Edward, as to assist in the composing of the publick Liturgy, and otherwise appeared as forward in the reformation, as any other of that Order. So that no reason can be given either for his denial now to perform that service, or afterwards for his not complying with the Queens proceedings, but that he had been one of those which were sent to Rome to tender the submission of the Kingdom to the Pope still living, and could not now appear with ho∣nour in any such action, as seemed to carry with it a repugnancy (if not a ma∣nifest inconsistency) with the said ingagement. It cannot be denyed but that there were three Bishops living of King Edward's making, all of them zealously affected to the reformation. And possibly it may seem strange that the Queen received not the Crown rather from one of their hands, than to put her self un∣to the hazard of so many denyals as had been given her by the others. But un∣to this it may be answered, that the said Bishops at that time were deprived of their Sees, (but whether justly or unjustly, could not then be questioned) and therefore not in a capacity to perform that service. Besides, there being at that time no other form established for a Coronation, than that which had much in it of the Ceremonies and superstitions of the Church of Rome, she was not sure that any of the said three Bishops would have acted in it, without such alterations and omissions in the whole course of that Order, as might have render'd the whole action questionable amongst captious men, and therefore
finally she thought it more conducible to her reputation amongst forein Prin∣ces, to be Crowned by the hands of a Catholick Bishop (or one at least which was accounted to be such) than if it had been done by any of the other Religion. And now the Parliament draws on, summoned to begin on the 25th. of that month, being the Anniversary day of St Paul's conversion; a day which seemed to carry some good Omen in it, in reference to that great work of the Reformation which was therein to be established. The Parliament opened with an eloquent and learned Sermon preached by Dr Cox, a man of good cre∣dit with the Queen, and of no less esteem with the Lords and Commons, who caried any good affection to the memory of King Edward the 6th. The chusing of which man to perform that service, was able of it self to give some intima∣tion of the Queens design to most of the Auditors; though to say truth, the Bishops refusing to perform the Ceremony of the Coronation, had made them∣selves uncapable of a further trust. Nor could the Queens design be so closely caried, but that such Lords and Gentlemen as had the managing of elections in their several Countries, retained such men for Members of the House of Commons, as they conceived most likely to comply with their intentions for a Reformation. Amongst which none appeared more active than Thomas How∣ard Duke of Norfolk, whom the Queen had taken into her Council; Henry Fitz-allen Earl of Arundel, whom she continued in the Office of Lord Steward, and Sir William Coecil, whom she had restored to the place of Secretary, to which he had been raised by King Edward the 6th. Besides, the Queen was young, unmaried, and like enough to entertain some thoughts of an husband; so that it can be no great marvel, not only if many of the Nobility, but some even of the Gentry also, flattered themselves with possibilities of being the man whom she might chuse to be her partner in the Regal Diadem. Which hopes much smoothed the way to the accomplishment of her desires, which otherwise might have proved more rugged and unpassable than it did at the present. Yet notwithstanding all their care, there wanted not some rough and furious spirits in the House of Commons, who eagerly opposed all propositi∣ons which seemed to tend unto the prejudice of the Church of Rome. Of which number none so violent as Story Dr. of the Lawes, and a great instrument of Bonner's butcheries in the former Reign. Who being questioned for the cruelty of his executions, appeared so far from being sensible of any errour which he then committed, as to declare himself to be sorry for nothing more, than that instead of lopping off some few boughs and branches, he did not lay his axe to the root of the tree; and though it was not hard to guess at how high a mark the wretches malice seemed to aim, and what he meant by laying his axe to the root of the tree; yet passed he unpunished for the present, though divine vengeance brought him in conclusion to his just reward. Others there were, and doubt less many others also in the House of Commons, who had as great zeal as he to the Papal interess, but either had more modesty in the conduct of it, or preferred their duty and allegiance to their natural Prince, before their zeal to the concernments of the Church of Rome. In this Parliament there passed an act for recognizing the Queens just Title to the Crown; but without any Act for the validity of her mothers mariage, on which her Title most depended. For which neglect most men condemned the new Lord Keeper, on whose judgement she relied especially in point of Law; in whom it could not but be looked on as a great incogitancy, to be less careful of her own and her mothes honour, than the Ministers of the late Queen Mary had been of hers. But Bacon was not to be told of an old Law∣Maxim, That the Crown takes away all defects and stops in blood, and that from the time that the Queen did assume the Crown, the fountain was cleared, and all at∣tainders and corruption of blood discharged. Which Maxim how unsafe soever it may seem to others, yet since it goes for a known rule amongst our Law∣yers, could not be questioned at that present. And possible it is that he con∣ceived
it better for the mariage of the Queens mother to pass unquestioned, as a matter justly subject unto no dispute, than to build the validity of it on no better ground than an Act of Parliament, which might be as easily reversed as it was agreed to. There pat an Act also for restoring to the Crown the tenths and first fruits, first serled thereon in the time of King Henry the 8th. and afterwards given back by Queen Mary as before was said. For the better drawing on of which concession, it was pretended, that the Patrimony of the Crown had been much dilapidated, and that it could not be supported with such honour as it ought to be, if restitution were not made of such rents and profits, as were of late dismembred from it. Upon which ground they also passed an act for the dissolution of all such Monasteries, Convents, and Religious Orders, as hd been founded and established by the Queen deceased. By vertue of which Act the Queen was repossessed again of all those lands which had been granted by her sister to the Monks of Westminster and Sheene, the Knights Hospitalers, the Nuns of Son, together with the Mansion Houses re-edified for the Observants at Greenwich, and the Black Friers in Smithfield. Which last being planted in a house neer the dissolved Priory of Great St Bartholomews, had again fitted and prepared the Church belonging thereunto for religious offices; but had scarce fitted and prepared it, when dissolved again, and the Church afterwards made a Parochial Church, for the use of the Close, and such as lived within the verge and precincts thereof. How she disposed of Sion House, hath been shewn already; and what she did with the rich Abby of Westminster, we shall see hereafter. In the passing of these Acts there was little trouble, in the next there was. For when the Act of the Supremacy came to be debated, it seemed to be a thing ab∣horrent even in Nature and Polity, that a woman should be declared to be the supream Head on Earth of the Church of England. But those of the reformed party meant nothing less than to contend about words and phrases, so they might gain the point they aimed at, which was the stripping of the Pope of all authority within these Dominions, and fixing the supream power over all per∣sons and estates of what ranck soever in the Crown Imperial, not by the name of Supream Head, which they perceived might be made lyable to some just exceptions; but which comes all to one, of the Supream Governesse. Which when it gave occasion of discourse and descant amongst many of the captious Papists, Queen Mary helped her sister unto one good Argument for her justi∣fication, and the Queen helped her self to another, which took off the cavil. In the third Session of Parliament in Queen Mary's time, there pass'd an Act, declaring, That the Regal power was in the Queens Majesty, as fully as it had been in any of her predecessors. In the body whereof it is expressed and decla∣red, That the Law of the Realm is, and ever hath been, and ought to be un∣derstood, that the Kingly or Regal Office of the Realm, and all Dignities, Prerogatives Royal, Power, Preheminences, Privileges, Authorities and Ju∣risdictions thereunto annexed, united, or belonging, being invested either in Male or Female, are, be, and ought to be, as fully, wholly, absolutely and intirely, deemed, adjudged, accepted, invested, and taken, in the one or in the other. So that whatsoever Statute or Law doth limit or appoint that the King of this Realm may, or shall have, execute and do, any thing as King, &c. the same the Queen, (being Supream Governesse, possessor and inhe∣ritor to he Imperial Crown of this Realm) may by the same power have and execute, to all intents, constructions and purposes, without doubt, ambi∣guity, scruple or question, any custome, use, or any other thing to the con| trary notwithstanding. By the very tenor of which Act, Queen Mary grants unto her sister as much authority in all Church concernments, as had been exercised and enjoyed by her Father and Brother, according to any Act or Acts of Parliament in their several times. Which Acts of Parliament as our learned Lawyers have declared upon these occasions, were not to be con∣sider'd as Introductory of a new power which was not in the Crown before,
but only Declaratory of an old, which naturally belonged to all Christi∣an Princes, and amongst others to the Kings and Queens of the Realm of England. And to this purpose it is pleaded by the Queen in her own behalf. Some busie and sedtious persons had dispersed a rumour, that by the Act for recog∣nizing of the Queens Supremacy, there was something further ascribed unto the Queen, her heirs and successors, a power of administring Divine Service in the Church, which neither by any equity or true sence of the words, could from thence be gathered; And thereupon she makes this Declaration unto all her subjects, That nothing was or could be meant or intended by the said Act, than was acknowledged to be due to the most Noble King of fa∣mous memory, King Henry the 8th. her Majesties Father, or King Edward the 6th. her Majesties Brother. And further she declareth, That she neither doth, not will challenge any other authority by the same, than was challen∣ged and lately used by the said two Kings, and was of ancient time due un∣to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, that is, under God to have the Sove∣rainty and Rule over all persons born within her Realms or Dominions, of what estate (either Ecclesiastical or Temporal) soever they be, so as no other forein power shall or ought to have any superiority over them. Which explication published in the Queens Injunctions, Anno 1559. Not giving such a general satisfaction to that groundless cavil as was expected and inten∣ded, the Bishops and Clergy in their Convocation of the year 1562. by the Queens authority and consent, declared more plainly, that is to say, That they gave not to their Princess by vertue of the said Act or otherwise, either the ministring of Gods word or Sacraments, but that only Prerogtive which they saw to have been given alwaies to all godly Princes in holy Scripture by God himself, that is to say, that they should  all estates and de∣grees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword, the stubborne and evil doers. By all which, if the cavils of the Adversary be not fully answered, it would be known upon what reason they should question that in a soverain Queen, which they allow in many cases to a Lady Abbess. For that an Abbess may be capable of all and all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, even to the d∣nouncing of that dreadful sentence of Excommunication; and that thy may lawfully exercise the same upon all such as live within the verge of their au∣thority, is commonly acknowledged by their greatest Canonists. First for suspension, it is affirmed by their Glosse, that an Abbess may suspend such Clerks as are subject to her, both from their Benefice and Office. And que∣stionless either to suspend a Clerk, or to bring his Church under the sentence of an Interdict, is one of the chief parts of Ecclesiastical or spiritual Censures. Nor have they this authority only by way of delegation from the Pope in some certain cases, as is affirmed by Aquinas, Durandus', Sylvster, Dominicus Soto, and many other of their Schoolmen, but in an ordinary way, as properly and personally invested them, which is the general opinion of their greatest Cano∣nists. Next for the Sacraments, it is sufficiently known that the ministrati∣on of Baptism is performed by Midwives, and many other women as of com∣mon course; not only as a thing connived at in extreme necessity, but as a necessary duty, in which they are to be instructed against all emergencies by their Parish Priests; for which we have the testimony of the late Lord Legate, in the Articles published by him for his visitation. And finally for excom∣munication, it is affirmed by Palladanus and Navarre (none of the meanest in the Pack) that the Pope may grant that power to a woman also; higher than which there can be none exercised in the Church by the sons of men. And if a Pope may grant these powers unto a woman, as to a Prioress or Abbess, or to any other; there can be then no incapacity in the Sex, for exersing any part of that jurisdiction which was restored unto the Crown by this Act of Parliament.
And if perhaps it be objected, that a Lady Abbess is an Ecclesiastical or spi∣ritual person in regard of her office, which cannot be affirmed of Queens, Pope Gregory himself will come in to help us, by whom it was not thought unfit to commit the cognisance of a cause concerning the purgation of a Bishop, who stood charged with some grievous crime, to Brunichildis or Brunholi Queen of France; of which, although the Gloss upon the Decretals be pleased to say,Fuit hic ni∣mium populari∣tr dispeasatum That the Pope stretched his power too far in this particular, yet Gregory did no more therein but what the Popes may do, and have done of late times by their own confession; so little ground there is for so great a clamour as hath been made by Bellarmine and other of the Popish Jesuites upon this occasion. Now for the better exercising and enjoying of the jurisdiction thus re∣cognised unto the Crown, there are two Clauses in the Act of great impor∣tance; the first whereof contains an Oath for the acknowledgment and de∣fence of this Supremacy, not onely in the Queen, but her heirs and successors; the said Oath to be taken by all Archbishops, Bishops, and all other Ecclesi∣astical persons, and also by all temporal Judges, Justiciaries, Mayors, or any other temporal Officers, &c. For the refusal whereof when lawfully tendred to them by such as were thereto commissionated under the great Seal of Eng∣land, every such person so refusing, was actually to stand deprived of his or their Eclesiastical Preferments, or other temporal office of what sort soever; onely it was provided, that the Oath should not be imposed on any of the temporal Peers, of whose fidelity the Queen seemed willing to assure her self without any such tye; though this exemption was esteemed by others but a piece of cunning, the better to facilitate the passing of that Act amongst them, which otherwise they might have hindred. But this provision was not made till the following Parliament, though for the reason before mentioned it was pro∣mised now. By the last Clause it was enacted, That it should and might be lawful to the Queen, her heirs and Successors, by Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, to assigne, name, and authorise, when and as often as her Highness, her Heirs or Successors, should think convenient, such per∣sons being natural born Subjects to them, to exercise, use, and occupie under her Highness, her Heirs and Successors, all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges, and Preheminences, in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, within the Realms of England and Ireland, or any other her Highness Dominions or Countries, and to visit, reform, repress, order, correct, and amend all such errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offences, contempts and enormities whatsoever, which by any manner of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction, or can or may lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained or amended, to the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of vertue, and con∣servation of the peace and unity of this Realm. With a Proviso notwith∣standing, that nothing should from thenceforth be accounted for Heresie, but what was so adjudged in the holy Scripture, or in one of the four first General Councils, or in any other National or Provincial Council, determining ac∣cording to the word of God; or finally which should be so adjudged in the time to come by the Court of Parliament, first having the assent of the Bi∣shops and Clergy in their Convocation. This was the first foundation of that famous Court of High Commission, the principal Bulwark and Preservative of the Church of England, against the practices and assaults of all her Adversa∣ries, whether Popish or Puritan. And from hence issued that Commission, by which the Queens Ministers proceeded in their Visitation in the first year of her Reign, for rectifying all such things as they found amiss, and could not be redressed by any ordinary Episcopal power, without the spending of more time than the exigencies of the Church could then admit of. There also past another Act for recommending and imposing the Book of Common-Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, according to such alterations and corrections as were made therein by those who were appoint∣ed
to revise it, as before is said. In the performance of which service, there was great care taken for expunging all such passages in it, as might give any scandal or offence to the Popish party, or be urged by them in excuse for their not comming to Church, and joyning with the rest of the Congregati∣on in Gods publick Worship. In the Letany first made and published by King Henry the 8th. and afterwards continued in the two Litugies of King Edward the 6th. there was a Prayer to be delivered from the tyranny and all the detestable enormities of the Bshop of Rome; which was thought fit to be expunged, as giving matter of scandal and dis-affection to all that party, or otherwise wisht well to that Religion. In the first Liturgie of King Edward, the Sacrament of the Lords Body was delivered with this Benediction, that is to say, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for the preservation of thy body and sul to life everlasting; The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, &c. Which being thought by Calvin and his Disciples to give some countenance to the grosse and carnal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which passeth by the name of Transbstantiation in the Schools of Rome, was altered into this form in the second Liturgy, that is to say, Take and eat this in remembrance that Christ died for thee, and eed on him in thy heart by faith with thanksgiving. Take and drink this, &c. But the Revisors of the Book joyned both Forms together, lest under colour of rejecting a Carnal, they might be thought also to deny such a Real Presence as was defended in the Writings of the Antient Fa∣thers. Upon which ground they expunged also a whole Rubrick at the end of the Communion-service, by which it was declared, that kneeling at the participation of the Sacrament was required for no other reason, than for a signification of the humble and grateful acknowledging of the benefits of Christ, given therein unto the worthy Receiver, and to avoid that prophanati∣on and disorder which otherwise might have ensued, and not for giving any adoration to the Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily received, or in re∣gard of any real and essential presence of Christs body and blood. And to come up the closer to those of the Church of Rome, it was ordered by the Queens In∣junctions, that the Sacramental Bread (which the Book required onely to be made of the finest flower) should be made round in fashion of the Wafers used in the time of Queen Mary. She also ordered, that the Lords Table should be placed where the Altar stood, that the accustomed reverence should be made at the name of Jesus, Musick retained in the Church, and all the old Festivals observed with their several Eves. By which compliances, and the expunging of the passages before remembred, the Book was made so passable amongst the Papits, that for ten years they generally repaired to their Parish Churches, without doubt or scruple, as is affirmed not onely by Sir Edward Coke, in his speech againt Gnet, and his Charge given at the Assizes held at Norwich, but also by the Queen her self in a Letter to Sir Francis Walsingham, then be∣ing her Resident or Leiger-Ambassador in the Court of France; the same con∣fessed by Sanders also in his Book de Schismate. And that the Book might passe the better in both Houses when it came to the Vote, it was thought requisite that a Disputation should be held about some points, which were most likely to be checked at; the Disputants to be five Bishops and four other learned men of the one side, and nine of the most leared men, graduated in the Schools, on the other side; the Disputation to begin on the 30th. of March, and to be holden in the Church of West∣minster, in the presence of as many of the Lords of the Council, and of the Members of both Houses, as were desirous to inform themselves in the state of the Questions. The Disputation for that reason to be held in the English Tongue, and to be managed (for the better avoiding of confusion) by a mu∣tual interchange of writings upon every point, those writings which were mu∣tually given in upon one day, to be reciprocally answer'd on another, & so from day to day till the whole were ended. To all which points the Bishops gave consent for themselves, and the rest of their party, though they refused to
stand unto them when it came to the tryal.An. Reg. Eliz 1. 1559. The points to be disputed on were three in number, that is to say, That it is against the word of God, and the custom of the antient Church, to use a Tongue unknown to the people in Common-Praier, and in the administration of the Sacaments. 2. That every Church hath authority to appoint, take away, and change Ceremonies and Ecclesiastical Rites, so the same be to edification. 3. That it cannot be proved by the word of God, that there is in the Masse offered up a sacrifice propitiatory for the living and the dead. And for the Disputants of each side, they were these that follow, that is to say, first, for the Popish party, Dr. White Bishop of Winchester, Dr. Bayn Bishop of Lichfield, Dr. Scot Bishop of Chester, and Dr. Watson Bishop of Lincln, Dr. Fecknam Abbot of Westminster, Dr. Henry Cole Dean of St. Pauls, Dr. Harpfield Arch∣deacon of Canterbury, Dr. Chadsey Prebend of St. Pals, and Dr. Langdale Archdeacon of Lewis in Sussex. For those of the Protestant perswasion appear∣ed Dr. Scory the late Bishop of Chichester, Dr. Cox the late Dean of Westmin∣ster, Dr. Sandys late Master of Katherine Hal., Mr. Horn the late Dean of Dur∣ham, Mr. Elmar late Archdeacon of Stow, Mr. Whtehead, Mr. Gryndal, Mr. Gest, and Mr. Jewel; all of which, except onely Whiehead, attained after∣wards to some eminent place in the sacred Hierachy. The day being come, and the place fitted and accommodated for so great an audience, the Lord Keeper Bacon takes the Chair as Moderator, not for determining any thing in the points disputed, but for seeing good order to be kept, and that the Disputation might be managed in the form agreed on. When contrary to expectation, the Bishops and their party brought nothing in writing to be read publickly in the hearing of all the Auditors, but came resolved to try it out by word of mouth, and to that end appointed Cole to be their Spokesman. For which neglect, being reproved by the Lord Keeper, they promised a conformity on the Monday following, being the second day of April; but would not stand unto it them, because they would not give their Adversaries so much leisure as a whole nights deliberation to return an an∣swer. Desired and pressed by the Lord Keeper to proceed according to the form agreed on, for the better satisfaction and contentment of so great an Au∣dience, it was most obstinately denyed. Wtson and White behaving themselves with so little reverence (or so much insolency rather) as to threaten the Queen with Excommunication in that publick Audience, for which they were committed to the Tower on the fifth of April. The rest of the Bishops were commanded to abide in London, and to give bond for their appearance at the Council-Table whensoever they should be rquired. And so the whole Assembly was dismist, and the conference ended before it had been well be∣gun, the Lord Keeper giving to the Bishops this sharp remembrance, Sinc (said he) you are not wlling that we should hear you, you shall very shortly hear from us. Which notwithstanding produced this good effect in the Lords and Commons, that they conceived the Bishops were not able to defend their Doctrin in the points disputed; which made the way more easie for the passing of the publick Liturgy, when it was brought unto the Vote. Two Speeches there were made against it in the House of Peers, by Scot and Fecknam, and one against the Queens Supremacy by the Archbishop of York; but they prevailed as little in both points by the power of their Eloquence, as they had done in the first by their want of Arguments. It gave much matter of discourse to most knowing men, that the Bishops should so wilfully fall from an appointment to which they had before agreed, and thereby forfeit their whole Cause to a Condemnation. But they pretended for themselves, that they were so straightned in point of time, that they could not possibly digest their Arguments into form and order; that they looked upon it as a thing too much below them to humble themselves to such a Con∣ference or Disputation, in which Bacon, a meer lay-man, and of no great lear∣ning, was to sit as Judge; and finally, that the points had been determined al∣ready by the Catholick Church, and therefore were not to be called in que∣stion
without leave from the Pope. Which last pretence, if it were of any weight and moment, it must be utterly impossible to proceed to any Refor∣mation in the state of the Church, by which the power and pride of the Popes of Rome may be any thing lessened, or that the corruptions of the Church should be redressed, i it consist not with their profit. For want of time they were no more straightned than the opposite party, none of them knowing with what arguments the other side would fortifie and confirm their cause, nor in what forms they would propose them, before they had perused heir recipro∣cal Papers. But nothing was more weakly urged, than their exception against the Presidency of Sir Nicholas Bacon, which could not be considered as a mat∣ter either new or strange; not strange, because the like Presidency had been given frequently to Cromwel, in the late Reign of King Henry the 8th. and that not only in such general Conferences, but in several Convocations and Synodi∣cal meetings. Not new, because the like had been frequently practised by the most godly Kings and Emperors of the Priitive times; for in the Council of Chalceon the Emperor appointed certain Noblemen to sit as Judges, whose names occur in the first Action of that Counil. The like we find exem∣plified in the Ephesine Council, in which, by the appointment of Theodosius and Vulentinian, then Roman Emperors, Candidianus, a Count Imperial, sate as Judge or President, who in the managing of that trust over-acted any thing which was done by Cromwel as Vicar-General to that King, or Bacon was im∣powered to do as the Queens Commissioner. No such unreasonable conde∣scention to be found in this, as was pretended by the Bishops and the rest of that party, to save themselves from the guilt and censure of a Tergiversation; for which, and other their contempts, we shall find them called to a reckoning within few months after. In the Convocation which accompanied the present Parliament, there was little done, and that little which they did was to little purpose. Held under Bonner, in regard of the Vacancy of the See of Canterbry, it began without the ordinary preamble of a Latine Sermon, all preaching being then prohibited by the Queens command. The Clergy for their Prolocutor made choice of Doctor Nicholas Harsield Archdeacon of Canterbry, a man of more ability (as his works delare) than he had any opportunity to make use of in the pre∣sent service. The At of the submission of the Clergy to King Henry the 8th. and his Successors Kings of England, had been repealed in the first year of Queen Mary, so that the Clergy might have acted of their own authority, without any license from the Queen; and it is much to be admired that Bon∣ner, White, or Watson did not put them to it; but such was either their fea, or modesty, or a despair of doing any good to themselves and the cause, that there was nothing done by the Bishops at all, and not much more by the lower Clergy, than a declaration of their judgment in some certain points, which at that time were conceived fit to be commended to the sight of the Parlia∣ment, that is to say, 1. That in the Sacrament of the Altar, by vertue of Christs assisting, after the word is duly pronounced by the Priest, the natural body of Christ conceived of the Virgin Mary is really present under the species of Bread and Wine, as also his natural Blood, 2. That after the Cn∣secration there remains not the substance of Bread and Wine, not any sub∣stance, save the substance of God and Man. 3. That the true body of Christ and his Blood is offered for a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead. 4. That the supream power of feeding and governing the militant Church of Christ, and of confirming their brethren, is given to Peter the Apostle, and to his lawful Successors in the See Apostolick, as unto the Vi∣cars of Christ. 5. That the authority to handle and define such things which belong to Faith, the Sacraments, and Discipline Ecclesiastical, hath hither∣to ever belonged, and onely ought to belong unto the Pastors of the Church, whom the holy Spirit hath placed in the Church, and not unto Lay-men. These Articles, they caused to be engrossed, & so commended them to the care
and consideration of the Higher House. By Bonner afterwards, that is to say on the 3d. of March, presented to the hands of the Lord Keeper Bacon, by whom they were candidly received. But they prevailed no further with the Queen or the House of Peers, when imparted to them, but that possibly they might help forwards the disputation, which not long after was appointed to be held at Westminster, as before was said. It was upon the 8th. of May that the Parliament ended, and on the 24th. of June, that the publick Liturgy was to be officiated in all the Churches of the Kingdom. In the performane of which service, the Bishops giving no encouragement, and many of the Clergy being backward in it, it was thought fit to put them to the final test, and either to bring them to conformity, or to bestow their places and preferments on more tractable persons. The Bishops at that time had been reduced into a narrower number than at any other time before. The Sees of Salisbry and Oxon had been made vacant in the year 1557. by the death of Capn in the one, and of King in the other, neither of which Churches had since been filled, and that of Oxon not in ten years after. Pacefew of Hereford, Holyman of Bistow, and Glyn of Bangor, died some few weeks before the Queen, Cardinal Poe of Canterbury on the same day with her. Hopton of Norwich, and Broks of Glcester, within few weeks after. Gryssin of Rochester departed this life about the beginning of the Parliament, about which time also Paes of Worcester forsook the Kingdom, and was followed by Goldwel of St Asaph in the end of May; so that there were no more than fifteen li∣ving of that sacred Order. And they being called in the beginning of July by certain of the Lords of the Council, commissionated thereunto in due form of Law, were then and there required to take the oath of Supremacy, accor∣ding to the law made in that behalf. Kitchin of Landaff only takes it, who ha∣ving formerly submitted unto every change, resolved to shew himself no Changling in not conforming to the pleasure of the Higher Powers. By all the rest it was refused, that is to say, by Dr Heath Archbishop of York, Bonner of London, Tonstall of Duham, White of Winchester, Thirlby of Ely, Watson of Lin∣coln, Pool of Peteborough, Christopherson of Chichester, Bourn of Wels, Turbervile of Exeter, Morgan of St Davids, Bain of Lichfield, Scot of Chester, and Oglethorp Bishop of Carlisle. And yet these men (which makes it seem the greater won∣der) had either taken the like oath as Priests or Bishops in some part or other of the Reign of the two last Kings. But now they had hardened one another to a resolution of standing out unto the last, and were thereupon deprived of their several Bishopricks, as the Law required. A punishment whih came not on them all at once, some of them being borne withall (in hope of their conformity and submission) till the end of September. And when it came, it came accompanied with so much mercy, that they had no reason to complain of the like extremity as they had put upon their brethren in the late Queens time. So well were they disposed of and accom∣modated with all things necessary, that they lived more at ease, and in as pro∣sperous a condition, as when they were possessed of their former dignities. Archbishop Heth was suffered to abide in one of his own purchased houses, never restrained to any place, and died in great favour with the Queen, who be∣stowed many gratious visits on him during this retirement. Tonstall of Dur∣ham spent the remainder of his te with Archbishop Parker, by whom he was kindly entertained, and honourably buried. The like civility afforded also in the same house to hirlby of Ely, and unto Bourn of Wlls by the Dean of Exon, in which two houses they both dyed about ten years after. White though at first imprisoned for his hauts and insolencies, after some cooling of himself in the Tower of London, was suffered to enjoy his liberty, and to re∣tire himself to what friend he pleased. Which favour was vouchsafed unto Tubervile also, who being by birth a Gentleman of an ancient Family, could not want friends to give him honest entertainment. Wtson of Lincoln having endured a short restraint, spent the remainder of his time with the Bishops of
Rochester and Ely, till being found practising against the State, he was finally shut up in Wisbich Castle, where at last he died. Oglethorp died soon after his deprivation, of an Apoplexy, Bayne of the Stone, and Morgan of some other disease in December following; but all of them in their beds, and in perfect li∣berty. Poole by the clemency of the Queen, injoyed the like freedom, cour∣teously treated by all persons amongst whom he lived, and at last died upon one of his own Farms in a good old age. And as for Christopherson, he had been in his time so good a Benefactor to Trinity College in Cambridge, whereof he had been sometimes Master, that he could not want some honest and ingenuous retribution, if the necessity of his estate had required the same. Bonner alone was doomed to a constant imprisonment, which was done rather out of care for his preservation, than as a punishment of his crimes; the pri∣son proving to that wretch his safest sanctuary, whose horrid tyrannies had o∣therwise exposed him to the popular fury. So loud a lie is that of Genebrard, (though a good Chronologer) that the Bishops were not only punished with imprisonment and the loss of their livelihoods, but that many of them were de∣stroyed by poyson, famine, and many other kinds of death. The Bishops being thus put to it, the Oath is tendered next to the Deans and Dignitaries, and by degrees also to the Rural Clergy; refused by some, and took by others, as it seemed most agreeable to their consciences, or parti∣cular ends. For the refusal whereof, or otherwise for not conforming to the publick Liturgy, I find no more to have been deprived of their preferments, than fourteen Bishops, six Abbots Priors, and Governours of Religious Or∣ders, twelve Deans, and as many Arch-Deacons, fifteen Presidents or Masters of Colleges, fifty Prebendaries of Cathedral Churches, and about eighty Par∣sons of Vicars. The whole number not amounting to 200 men, which in a Realm consisting of nine thousand Parishes, and 26 Cathedral Churches, could be no great matter. But then we are to know withall, that many who were cordially affected to the interess of the Church of Rome, dispensed with themselves in these outward conformities, which some of them are said to do upon a hope of seeing the like revolution by the death of the Queen, as had before hapned by the death of King Edward; and otherwise that they might be able to relieve their brethren, who could not so readily frame themselves to a present compliance. Which notwithstanding so it was, that partly by the deprivation of these few persons, but principally by the death of so many in the last years sickness, there was not a sufficient number of learned men to supply the cures, which filled the Church with an ignorant and illiterate Clergy, whose learning went no further than the Liturgy▪ or the Book of Homilies, but otherwise conformable (which was no small felicity) to the Rules of the Church. And on the other side, many were raised to great preferments, who, having spent there time of exile in such forein Churches as followed the platform of Geneva, returned so disaffected to Episcopal Government, unto the Rites and Ceremonies here by law established, as not long after filled the Church with most sad disorders; not only to the breaking of the bond of peace, but to the grieving and extinguishing of the spirit of Unity. Private o∣pinions not regarded, nothing was more considered in them, than their zeal against Popery, and their abilities in learning to confirm that zeal. On which account we find the Queens Professor in Oxford to pass amongst the Non-Con∣formists, though somewhat more moderate than the rest; and Cartwright the Lady Margarets in Cambridge, to prove an unextinguished firebrand to the Church of England; Whittington the chief Ringleader of the Franckfort Schis∣maticks, preferred unto the Deanry of Durham, from thence encouraging Knox and Goodman, in setting up Presbytery and Sedition in the Kirk of Scotland; Sampson advanced unto the Deanry of Christ-Church, and within few years after, turned out again for an incorrigible Non-Conformist; Hardiman one of the first twelve Prebends of the Church of Westminster, deprived soon af∣ter for throwing down the Altar, and defacing the vestments of the Church.
Which things I only touch at now, leaving the further prosecution of them to another place. Of all these traverses, the Pope received advertisement from the first to the last. But being of a rugged humou, he fell most infinitely short of that dexte∣rity which the case required, for finding out a fit expedient to prevent the rupture. When his first sullen fits had left him, he began to treat more seri∣ously with the English Agent; not that the Queen should sue unto him for the Crown, which she was possessed of, but that no alteration of Religion might be driven at by her. To whih Karn answered according to such instru∣ctions as he had received, That he could give him no assurance in that point, unless the Pope would first declare, that the mariage of King Henry with Queen Anne Bollen, had been good and lawful. Which cross request so stumbled both the Pope and the Conclave, that they made choise rather of doing nothing, than to do that, of which they could not promise to themselves any fortunate issue. Roused at the last by the continual alarums which came from England, he entertains some secret practices with the French, and on the sudden signifies his commands to Karn, that he should not depart out of Rme without his leave, and that in the mean time he should take upon him the government of the English Hospital in the City. In which command each of them is affir∣med to have had his own proper ends: For Karn affected that restraint, which he was thought to have procured under hand, because he had no mind to re∣turn into England, where he ws like to find a different Religion from that which he embraced in his own particular. And the Pope had his own ends al∣so, in hindering as he thought he discovering of that secret intelligence which he maintained with the French King, to the Queens destruction, if his designs had took effect. But his design was carried with so little cunning, that pre∣sently it discovered it self, without the help of a revelation from the English Agent. For whether it were by his instigation, or by the solicitation of the French King, or the ambition of the Daulphin, who had then maried the Queen of Scots, (as before was said) the Queen of Scots assumes unto her self the stile and title of Queen of England, quartereth the Arms thereof upon all her Plate, and in all Armories and Escoutcheons, as she had occasion. And this she did as Cosen and next heir to the Queen deceased; which could not be without imputing bastardy to the Queen then living. A folly which oc∣casioned such displeasure in the heart of Elizabeth, that it could neither be for∣gotten, nor so much as forgiven, till that unfortunate Lady was driven out of her Kingdom, hunted into a close imprisonment, and finally brought out to the fatal block. This as it somewhat startled the new Queen of England, so it engaged her the more resolutely in that Reformation which was so happily begun. And to that end she sets out by Advice of her Council, a certain Body of Injuncti∣ons, the same in purpose and effect, with those which had been publish∣ed in the first of King Edward, but more accommodated to the temper of the present time. Nothing more singular in the same, than the severe course taken about Ministers Mariages, the use of singing, and the Reverences in Divine Worship to be kept in Church, the posture of the Communion Table, and the form of bidding Prayers in the Congregation. This last almost the same verbaim with that which is prescribed Can. 55. Anno 1603. and therefore not so necessary to be here repeated. The first worne long since out f use, and not much observed neither when it first came out, as if it had been published in the way of caution, to make the Clergy men more wary in the choice of their wives, than with a purpose of persuing it to an execution. But as for that concerning the use of singing, and the accustomed Reverences to be kept in Churches, they are these that follow. Touching the last it is enjoyed, That whensoever the name of Jesus should be in any Lesson, Sermon, or otherwise in the Church pronounced, that due reverence be made of all persons, young and old, with lowliness of courtesie, and uncovering of the heads of the men
kind, as thereunto did necessarily belong, and heretofore hath been accusto∣med. For the encouragement of the Art, and the continuance of the use of Singing in the Church of Engand, it was thus enjoyned, that is to say, That because in divers Collegiat, as also in some Parish Curches, heretofore, there hath been Livings appointed for the maintenance of men and children for singing in the Church, by means whereof, the laudable exercise of Musick hath been had in estimation, and preserved in knowledge; The Queens Ma∣jesty neither meaning in any wie the decay of any thing, that might conve∣niently tend to the use and continuance of the said Science, neither to have the same so abused in any part of the Church, that thereby the Common-Prayer should be the worse understood by the Hearers, willeth and command∣eth, that first no alterations be made of such assignments of Living as hereto∣fore hath been appointed to the use of Singing or Musick in the Church, but that the same so remain. And that there be a modest and distinct Song so used in all parts of the Common-Prayers in the Church, that the same may be as plainly understood as if it were read without singing; And yet neverthe∣less, for the comforting of such as delight in Musick, it may be permitted, that in the beginning or in the end of common-Prayer, either at morning or even∣ing, there may be sung an Hymn or such like Song to the praise of Almighty God, in the best Melody and Musick that may be conveniently devised, having respect that the sentence of the Hymn may be understood and perceived. Ac∣cording to which order, as Plain-song was retained in most Parish-Churches for the daily Psalms, so in her own Chapels, and in the Quire of all Cathe∣drals, and some Colleges, the Hymns were sung after a more melodious man∣ner, with Organs commonly, and sometimes with other musical Instruments, as the solemnity required. No mention here of singing David's Psalms in Meeter, though afterwards they first thrust out the Hymns which are herein mentioned, and by degrees also did they the Te Deum, the Magnificat, and the Nunc dimittis. Concerning the Position of the holy Table it was ordered thus, viz. That no Altar should be taken down, but by oversight of the Curat of the Church, or the Church-wardens, or one of them at the least, wherein no riotous or disodered manner was to be used; and that the holy Table in every Church be decently made, and set in the place where the Altar stood, and there commonly covered as thereto belongeth, and as should be ap∣pointed by the Visitors, and so to stand, saving when the ommunion of the Sacrament is to be administred; at which time the same shall be so pla∣ced in good sort within the Quire or Chancel, as whereby the Minister may be more conveniently heard of the Communicants in his Prayer and Mini∣stration, and the Communicants also more conveniently and in more num∣ber communicate with the said Minister. And after the Communion done, from time to time the said holy Table to be placed where it stood before. Which permission of removing the Table at Communion-times is not so to be understood, (as the most excellent King Charls declared in the case of St. Gre∣gories) as if it were ever left to the discretion of the Parish, much less to the particular fancy of any humorous person; but to the judgment of the Ordi∣nary, to whose place and function it doth properly belong to give direction in that point, both for the thing it self, or for the time, when, and how long, as he may find cause. By these Injunctions she made way to her Visitation, executed by Com∣missioners in their several Circuits, and regulated by a Book of Articles prin∣ted and published for that purpose. Proceeding by which Articles, the Com∣missioners removed all carved Images out of the Church▪ which had been for∣merly abused to superstition, defacing also all such Pictures, Paintings, and other monuments, as served for the setting forth of feigned Miracles; and this they did without any tumult and disorder, and without laying any sacrilegious and ravenous hands on any of the Churches Plate, or other Utensils which
had been repaired and re-provided in the late Queens time. They enquired also into the life and doctrine of Ministers, their diligence in attending their se∣veral Cures, the decency of their apparel, the respect of the Parishioners to∣wards them, the reverent behaviour of all manner of persons in Gods publik worship. Inquiry was also made into all sorts of crimes, haunting of Taverns by the Clergy; Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness, amongst those of the Laity, with many other things since practised in the Visitations of particular Bshops; by means whereof, the Church was setled and confirmed in so good an order, that the work was made more easie to the Bishops when they came to govern, than otherwise it could have been. But more particularly in Lon∣d (which for the most part gives example to the rest of the Kingdom) the Visitors were Sir Richard Sackvile, (father to homas Earl of Dorset) Mr. Ro∣bert Hern after Bishop of Winchester, Dr. Hick a Civilian, and one Salvage possibly a Common Lawyer; who calling before them divers persons of every Parish, gave them an Oath to enquire and present upon such Articles and as were given unto them. In persuance whereof, both the Commissio∣nrs and the People shewed so much forwardness, that on St. Bartholomews day and the morrow after, they burned in St. Paul's Church-yard, Cheap-side, and other places of the City, all the Roods and other Images which had been ta∣ken out of the Churches. And as it is many times supposed that a thing is ne∣ver well done if not over-done, so hapned it in this case also, zeal against su∣perstition had prevailed so far with some ignorant men, that in some places the Coaps, Vestments, Altar-cloaths, Books, Banners, Sepulchres, and Rood∣lofts, were burned altogether. All matters of the Church being thus disposed of, it will be time to cast our eyes on the concernments of the civil State which occurred this year, in which I find nothing more considerable than the overtures of some Marriages which had been made unto the Queen. Philip of Spain had made an offer of himself by the Count of Feria his Ambassadour; but the Queen had heard so much of the disturbances which befell King Henry, by marrying with his bro∣thers wife, that she had no desire to run into the like perplexities by marry∣ing with her sisters husband; and how he was discouraged from proceeding in it, hath been shewed already. Towards the end of the Parliament the Lords and Commons made an humble Addresse unto her, in which they most earnestly besought her, That for securing the peace of the Kingdom, and the contenta∣tion of all her good and loving subjects, she would think of marrying; not pointing her particularly unto any one man, but leaving her to please her self in the choice of the person. To which she answered, That she thanked them for their good affections, and took their application to her to be well intended, the rather, because it contained no limitation of place or person; which had they done, she must have disliked it very much, and thought it to have been a great presumption. But for the matter of their sure, she lets them know, That she had long since made choice of that state of life in which now she lived, and hoped that God would give her strength and constancy to go throw with it; that if she had been minded to have changed that course, she neither want∣ed many invitations to it in the reign of her brother, not many strong im∣pulsions in the time of her sister. That as she had hitherto remained, so she intended to continue by the grace of God, though her Words, compared with her Youth, might be thought by some to be far different from her meaning. And so having thanked them over again, she licensed them to depart to their several businesses. And it appeared soon after that she was in earnest, by her re∣jecting of a motion made by Gustavus King of Sweden for the Prince Ericus; for the solliciting whereof, his second son John Duke of Finland (who suc∣ceeded his Brother in that Kingdom) is sent Ambassador into England about the end of September; Received at Harwich in Essex by the Earl of Oxford and the Lord Robert Dudley, with a goodly train of Gentlemen and Yeoman, he was by them conducted honourably towards London, where he was met by the
Lords and Gentlemen of the Court, attended through the City on the 5th. of Octobr to the Bishop of Winchesters house in Souhwark; there he remained with his Train, consisting of about fifty persons, till the Easter following; magnificently feasted by the Queen, but otherwise no farther gratified in the buness which he came about than all the rest, who both before and after tried their fortunes in it. The next great business of this year was a renewing of the Peace with the crown of France, agreed on at the Treaty near the City of Cambray; in which all differences were concluded also between France and Spain, all other Ar∣ticles being accorded, the restitution of Calais to the Queen of England seemed the onely obstacle, by which the general peace of Christendom was at the point to have been hindred. But the Queen, either preferring the pub∣lick good before private interest, or fearing to be left alone if she should stand too obstinately upon that particular, came at the last to this agreement, viz. That Calais should remain for the tearm of eight years then next following in the hands of the French, that at the end of the said tearm it should be deliveed unto the English, or otherwise the French King should pay unto the Queen the sum of 500000 Crowns. According unto which Agreement, Peace was pro∣claimed in London on the 7th. of April between the Queens Majesty on the one part, and the French King on the other; as also between her and the King Dolphin, with his wife the Queen of Scots, and all the Subjects and Do∣minions of the said four Princes; The Proclamation published by Garter and Norrey Kings at Arms, accompanied with three other Heralds and five Trum∣peters, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in their Scarlet Gowns being present on horseback. But long the French King lived not to enjoy the benefit of this general Peace, unfortunately wounded in Paris at a Tilt or Tournament by Count Mongomery, of which wound he shortly after died on the 10th. of July, leaving be hind him four sons, Francis, Charls, Henry, and another Francis, of which, the three first, according to their seniority, enjoyed that Kingdom. And though she had just cause to be offended with the young King Francis, for causing the Queen of Scots his wife to take upon her self the Title and Arms of England, yet she resolved to bestow a royal Obsequy on the King deceased, which was performed in St. Paul's Church on the 8th. and 9th. of September in most solemn manner, with a rich Hearse made like an Im∣perial Crown, sustained with eight pillars, and covered with black Velvet, with a Valence fringed with gold, and richly hanged with Sctcheous, Pen∣nons, and Banners of the French Kings Arms; the principal mourner for the first day was the Lord Treasurer Paulet, Marquis of Winchester, assisted with ten other Lords Mourners, with all the Heralds in black, and their Coat-Ar∣mours uppermost. The divine Offices performed by Doctor Matthew Parker Lord elect of Canterbury, Doctor William Barlow Lord elect of Chichester, and Doctor Ihn Scory Lord elect of Hereford, all sitting in the Throne of the Bi∣shop of London, no otherwise at that time than in hoods and Surplices; by whom the Derige was executed at that time in the English toung: The Fune∣ral Sermon preached the next morning by the Lord of Hereford, and a Com∣munion celebrated by the Bishops then attired in Copes upon their Surplices. At which time six of the chief mourners received the Sacrament, and so de∣parted with the rest to the Bishops Palace, where a very liberal Entertain∣ment was provided for them. By which magnificency and the like, this pru∣dent Queen not onely kept er own reputation at the highest amongst forein Princes, but caused the greater estimation to be had by the Catholick party of the Religion here established.
Anno Reg. Eliz. 2. A. D. 1559, 1560.An. Reg. Eliz. 2. 1559. WE must begin this year with the Consecration of such new Bishops, as were elected to succeed in the place of those which had been deprived, the first of which was that of the most reverend Doctor Matthew Parker elect∣ed to the See of Canterbury on the first of August, but not consecrated till the 17th. of December following. That Dignity had first been offered, as is said by some, to Doctor Nicholas Wotton Dean of Canterbury and York, who grown in years, and still a well-willer to the Pope, desired to be excused from underta∣king of a charge so weighty. And some say it was offered unto Whitehead also, who had been Chaplain to Anne Bollen the Queen's mother; but he returned the like refusal, though on other grounds, as more inclined (by reason of his long abode in Calvin's Churches) to the Presbyterians than the Episcopal form of Government; and it was happy, for the Church might have been be∣trayed by his dissaffection, that he did refuse it. The Chair being better filled by Parker another of Queen Anne Bollen's Chaplains, but better principled, and of a far more solid judgment in affairs of moment. The Conged' sleiur, which opened him the way to this eminent Dignity, bears date on the 18th. day of July, within few days after the deprivation of the former Bishops, to satisfie the world in the Queens intention of preserving the Episcopal Go∣vernment. And therefore why the consecration was deferred so long maybe made a question; some think it was, that she might satisfie her self, by putting the Church into a posture by her Visitation, before she passed it over to the care of the Bishops; others conceive, that she was so enamoured with the power and title of Supream Governess, that she could not deny her self that contentment in the exercise of it which the present Interval afforded; For what are Titles without Power? and what pleasure can be took in Power if no use be made of it? And it is possible enough that both or either of these considerations might have some influence upon her. But the main cause for keeping the Episcopal Sees in so long a vacancy must be found else-where. An Act had passed in the late Parliament, which never had the confidence to appear in print, in the Preamble whereof it was declared, That by dissolution of Religious Houses in the time of the late King her Majesties father, many Impropriations, Tithes, and portions of Tithes had been invested in the Crown, which the Queen, be∣ing a Lady of a tender conscience, thought not fit to hold, nor could conve∣niently dismember from it without compensation, in regard of the present low condition in which she found the Crown at her comming to it; And thereupon it was enacted, that in the vacancy of any Archbishoprick or Bi∣shoprick, it should be lawful for the Queen to issue out a Commission under the Great Seal, for taking a survey of all Castles, Mannors, Lands, Tenements, and all other Hereditaments to the said Episcopal Sees belonging or apper∣taining▪ and on the return of such surveys, to take into her hands any of the said Castles, Mannors, Lands, Tenements, &c. as to her seemed good; giving to the said Archbishops or Bishops as much annual Rents, to be raised upon Impropriations, Tithes, and portions of Tithes, as the said Castles, Mannors, Lands, &c. did amount unto. The Church Lands certified according to the antient Rents, without consideration of the Casualties and other Perqisites of Court which belonged unto them; the Retribution made in Pensions, Tithes, and portions of Tithes, extended at the utmost value, from which no other profit was to be expected than the Rent it self. Which Act not being to take effect till the end of that Parliament, the interval between the end of the Parliament, the deprivation of the old Bishops, and the consecration of the new, was to be taken up in the executing of such surveys, and making such advantages of them, as most redonded to the profit of the Queen and her
Courtiers. Upon whih ground, as all the Bishops Sees were so long kept vacant before any one of them was filled, so in the following times they were kept void one after another as occasion served, till the best Flowers in the whole Garden of the Church had been clled out of it. There was another Clause in the said Statutes, by which the patrimony of the Church was as much dilapidaed, sede plena, as it was pulled by this in the times of vacancy; for by that Clause, all Bishops were restrained from making any Grants of their Farms and Mannors for more than twenty one years, or three lives at the most, except it were unto the Queen, her Heirs and Successors. But either to the Queen, or to any of her Heirs and Successors (and under that pretence to any her hun∣gry Courtiers) they might be granted in Fee farm, or for a Lease of fourscore and nineteen years, as it pleased the Parties. By which means, Credinton was dismembered from the See of Exon, the goodly mannor of Sherborn from that of Salsbury, many fair mannors alienated for ever from the rich Sees of Win∣chester, Elie, and indeed what not? But to proceed unto the Consecration of the new Archbishop, the first thing to be done after the passing of the Royal Assent for ratifying of the election of the Dean and Chapter, (was the confirming of it) in the Court of the Arches, according to the usual form in that behalf; Which being accor∣dingly performed, the Vicar General, the Dean of the Arches, the Proctors and Officers of the Court, whose presence was required at this Solemnity, were entetained at a dinner provided for them at the Nags head Tavern in Cheapside; for which, though Parker paid the shot, yet shall the Church be called to an after rekoning. Nothing remains to expedite the Consecration but the Royal Mandat, which I find dated on the sixth of December, directed to Anthony Ktching Bishop of Landaff, William Barlow late Bishop of Bath and Wells, Lord Elect of Chichester; John Scory late Bishop of Chichester, Lord Elect of Hereford; Miles Coverdale late Bishop of Exeter, John Hodgskins Suf∣fragan of Bedford, John Suffragan of Thetford, and John Bale Bishop of Osser in the Realm of Ireland; requiring them, or any of them at the least, to pro∣ceed unto the consecration of the right reverend Matthew Parker lately elect∣ed to the Metropolitical See of Canterbury. The first, and the two last, either hindred by sickness, or by some other lawfull impediment, were not in a con∣dition to attend the service; whih notwithstanding was performed by the other four on Sunday the seventeenth of that Month, according to the Or∣dinal of King Edward the sixth, then newly printed for that purpose; the Ce∣remony performed in the Chapel at Lambeth house, the East end whereof was hanged with rich Tapestry, and the floor covered with red cloth; the Morn∣ing Service read by Pearson the Archbishops Chaplain, the Sermon preached by Doctor Scy Lord Elect of Hereford, on those words of St. Peter, The Elders which are among you  exhort, &c. 1 Pet. 5. 1. The Letters Parents for proceeding to the Consecration publickly read by Doctor Dale, the Act of Consecration legally performed by the imposition of the hands of the said four Bishops, ac∣cording to the antient Canons and King Edward's Ordinal; and after all, a plentiful dinner for the entertainment of the company which resorted thither, amongst whom, Charls Howard, eldest son of William Lord Effingham, created afterwards Lord Admiral and Earl of Notingham, hapned to be one, and after testified to the truth of all these particulars, when the reality and form of this Consecration was called in question by some captious sticklers for the Church of Rome. For so it was, that some sticklers for the Church of Rome having been told of the dinner which was made at the Nags head Tavern at such time as the ele∣ction of the new Archbishop was confirmed in the Arches, raised a report, that the Nags head Tavern was the place of the Consecration. And this report was countenanced by another slander, causing it to be noised abroad, and pub∣lished in some seditious Pamphlets, that the persons designed by the Queen for the several Bishopricks, being met at a Tavern, did then and there lay
hands upon one another, without Form or Order. The first calumny fathered on one Keale, once Hebrew Reader in the University of Oxford, and Chaplain unto Bishop Bonner; which last relation were sufficient to discredit the whole tale, if there were no other evidence to disprove the same. And yet the si∣lence of all Popish Writers concerning this Nags head-Consecration, during the whole Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when it had been most material for them to insist upon it, as much discrediteth the whole figment, as the Author of it. The other published by Dr. Nicholas Sanders, (never more truly Dr. Sanders than in that particular) in his pestilent and seditious Book, Entituled De Schis∣mate Anglicano; whose frequent falshoods make him no fit Author to be built upon in any matter of importance. Yet on the credit of these two, but on the first especially, th Tale of the Nags-head-Consecration being once ta∣ken up, was generally exposed to sale, as one of the most vendible commodities in the writings of some Romish Piests and Jesuits; as Champney's▪ Fitzsimons, Parson, Kellison, &c. They knew right well, that nothing did more justifie the Church of England in the eye of the world, than that it did preserve a successi∣on of Bishops, and consequently of all other sacred Orders, in the ministration. Without which, as they would not grant it to be a Church, so could they prove it to be none by no stronger Argument than that the Bishops (or the preten∣ded Bishops rather in their opinion) were either not consecrate at all, or not canonically consecrated as they ought to be. And for the gaining of this point, they stood most pertinaiously on the fiction of the Nags-head Tavern, which if it could be proved, or at least believed, there was an end of the Episco∣pal succession in the Church of England, and consequently also of the Church it self. For the decrying of this clamour, and satisfying all opponents in the truth of the matter, it was thought fit by Dr. George Abbot then Archbishop of Can∣terbury, to call before him some of the Priests and Jesuits, that is to say, Faire∣cloth, Leake, Laithwaite and Collins, being then prisoners in the Clinck. Who being brought to Lambeth on the 12th▪ of May 1613. were suffered in the pre∣sence of divers Bishops, to peruse the publick Registers, and thereby to satis∣fie themselves in all particulars concerning the Confirmation and Consecrati∣on of Archbishop Parker, according to the circumstances and Punctillioes be∣fore laid down. This stilled the clamour for the present, though it brake out again forty years after, and was again stilled by the care and industry of the right Reverend Dr. Bamhall, Lord Bishop of Derry, in a Book Entituled, The Church of England defended against some scandalous and fabulous ptations cast upon her, &c. Which cavil (for it is no better) being thus refelled, the other objections of the Adversaries will be easily answered; though Barlow and Scory were de∣prived of their Episcopal Sees, yet first the justice and legality of their depri∣vation was not clear in Law; and secondly they neither were nor could be deprived of their Episcopal character which remained in them undefaced, as before it was. And whilst the character remained, they were in a capacity of performing all Episcopal Offices to which they should be called by their Me∣tropolitan, or any higher Power directing and commanding in all such matters as concerned the Church. And as for Suffragans, by which title Hodgskins is Commissionated for the Consecration, they were no other than the Chore-Epscopi of the Primitive times, Subsidiary Bishops, ordained for easing the Diocesan of some part of his burthen. By means whereof, they were enabled to perform such offices belonging to that sacred function, not limited to time and place by the ancient Canons, by which a Bishop, was restrained in some certain acts of Jurisdiction to his proper Diocess. Of this sort there were twenty six in the Realm of England, distinguished by the names of such prin∣cipal Towns as were appointed for their title and denomination. The names and number whereof, together with the jurisdiction and preheminences pro∣portioned to them, the Reader may peruse in the Act of Parliament made in the 6th. year of King Henry the 8th.
No sooner was this solemnity ended, but a new mandate comes for the Confirmation of Dr. Barlow in the See of Chichester, and Dr Scory to the See of Hereford, to which they had been severally elected in August last. And though the not restoring of them to their former Sees, might seem to juifie the late Queen Mary in their deprivation, yet the Queen wanted not good reasons for their present removal; not that she did consult therein her own power and profit, (as is thought by some) but studied rather their content and satisfaction, than her own concernments. For Balow having wasted the revenue of the Church of Wells, could not with any comfort behold a place which he had so spoiled; and Scory having been deprived of the See of Chiche∣ster, under pretence of wanting a just title to it, desired not to be put upon the hazard of a second ejction. But as for Coverdale, he did not only wave the acceptation of Oxon, but of any other Church then vacant. He was now 72 years old, and desired rather to enjoy the pleasure of a private life, than be disquieted in his old age with the cares of Government. And somewhat might be also in it of a disaffection, not to the Calling but the Habit, which is to be believed the rather, because he attended not at the Consecration in his Cope and Rocher, as the others did, but in a plain black Coat reaching down to his Ankles. And now the rest of the Episcopal Sees begin to fill; for on the 21 of the same December, D. Edmond Gindall was consecrated to the See of London, Dr. Rchard Cox to that of Ely, Dr. Edwin Sandys to the Church of Worcester, Dr. Rowland Merick unto that of Bangor. On the 21 of January then next following,1559/60. Dr. Nicholas Bullingham was by the like consecration made Bishop of Lincoln, the right learned Mr. John Jewel (who afterwards ac∣cepted the degree of Doctor) Bishop of Sarisbury, Dr. Thomas Young Bishop of St. Davids, and Mr. Rchard Davis Bishop of St. Asaph. The 24th. of March was honoured with the Consecration of three other Bishops, that is to say, of Mr. Thomas Bentham to the See of Coventry and Lichfield, of Mr. Gilbert Bar∣clay to the See of Wlls, and of Dr. Edmund Guest to that of Rochester. On the 14th. of July comes the consecration of Dr. William Alley to the Church of Exon, and that of Mr John Parkhurst to the Church of Norwich, on the first of September. By which account we find no ewer than sixteen Sees to be filled with new Bishops, within the compass of the year, men of ability in matter of learning, and suh as had a good report for the integrity of their lives and con∣versations. Nor was it long before the rest of the Episcopal Sees were supplied with new Pastors, as shall be shewn hereafter in due time and place. The Queens commission of sarvey had not crossed the Trent, which possibly may be the reason why we find no new Bishops in the Province of York, and Wnchster must afford one Michaelmas rent more to the Queens Exchequer, before the Lord Treasurer could give way to a new incumbent. And now we may behold the face of the Church of England, as it was first setled and established under Queen Elizabeth.1560. The Government of the Church by Archbishops and Bishops, according to the practice of the best and hap∣piest times of Christianity. These Bishops nominated and elected according to the Statute in the 26th. of King Henry the 8th. and consecrated by the Or∣dinal, confirmed by Parliament, in the 5th. and 6th. years of King Edward the 6th. never appearing publickly but in their Rochets, nor officiating otherwise than in Copes at the Holy Altar. The Priests not stirring out of doors but in their square Caps, Gowns, or Canonical Coats, nor executing any divine Office but in their Surplice, avestment set apart for Religious services in the Primitive times, as may be gathered from St Chrysostome for the Eastern Churches, and from St Hierom for the Western. The Doctrine of the Church reduced unto its ancient purity, according to the Articles agreed upon in Convocation Anno 1552. The Liturgy conform to the Primitive patterns, and all the Rites and Ceremonies therein prescribed, accommodated to the ho∣nour of God and increase of piety. The Festivals preserved in their former dignity, observed with their distinct Offices peculiar to them, and celebrated
with a Religious coucu of all sorts of people;An. Reg. Eliz. 2. 1560. the weekly Fasts, the holy time of Lent, the Embr  together with the Fast of the Rogation, se∣verely kept by a forbearance of all ind of flesh, not now by vertue of the Statute, as in the time o King Edward, but as appointed by the Church in her publick Calender before the Book of Common Prayer. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper celebrated in most reverend manner, the Holy Table seated in the place of the Altar, the people making their due reverence at their first entrance into the Church, kneeling at the Communion, the Confession, and the publick Prayers, standing up at the Creed, the Gospels, and the Gloria Patri, and using the accustomed reverence at the name of Jesus. Musick retai∣ned in all such Churches in which provision had been made for the mainte∣nance of it, or where the people could be trained up at the least to plain-song: All which particulars were either established by the Lawes, or commanded by the Queens Injunctions, or otherwise retained by vertue of some anient usa∣ges not by Law prohibited. Nor is it much to be admired, that such a general conformity to those antient usages was constantly observed in all Cathedral, and the most part of the Parish Churhes, considering how well they were presidented by the Court it self, in which the Liturgy was officiated every day both morning and evening, not only in the publick Chapel, but the pri∣vate Closet▪ celebrated in the Chapel with Organs, and other musical instu∣ments, and the most excellent voices both of men and children, that could be got in all the Kingdom. The Gentlemen and children in their Surplices, and the Priests in Copes as ot as they attended the Divine Service at the Holy Altar. The Altar furnished with rich Plate, two fair gilt Candlesticks with Tapers in them, and a massie Crucifix of silver in the midst thereof. Which last remained there for some years, till it was broke in pieces by Pach the Fool (no wiser man daring to undertake such a desperate service) at the solicitation of Sir Francis Knolles, the Queens neer Kinsman by the Caries, and one who openly appeared in favour of the Schism at Franckfort. The antient Ceremo∣nies accustomably observed by the Knights of the Garter in their adoration to∣ward the Altar, abolished by King Edward the 6th. and revived by Queen Ma∣ry, were by this Queen retained as formerly in her Fathers time, which made that Order, so esteemed amongst forein Princes, that the Emperors, Maximi∣lian and Rodolphus, the French Kings, Charls the 9th. and Henry the 3d. to∣gether with Francis Duke of Mont Morency, though of a contrary Religion to her, (not to say any any thing of divers Lutheran Kings and Pinces) did thankfully accept of their elections into that society. The solemn Sermons upon each Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday in the time of Lent, preached by the choicest of the Clergy, she devoutly heard, attired in black, according to the commendable custome of her Predecessors, in which if any thing escaped them contrary to the Doctrine and approved Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England. they were sure to hear of it; for which she received both thanks and honour from her very enemies, as appears by Dr. Harding's Epistle Dedi∣catory before his Answer to the Apology writ by Bishop Jewel. Particularly when one of her Chaplains (Mr. Alexander Nowel Dean of St. Pauls) had spoke less reverently in a Sermon preached before her of the sign of the Cross, she called aloud to him from her closet window, commanding him to retire from that ungodly digression, and to return unto his Text. And on the other side, when one of her Divines had preached a Sermon in defence of the Real Pre∣sence, on the day commonly called Good Friday, Anno 1565. she openly gave him thanks for his pains and piety. The Bishops and the Clergy had been but ill proficients in the school of conformity under so excellent a Mistriss, if they had not kept the Church in the highest splendor, to which they were invited by that great example. And in this glorious posture still had lasted longer▪ had not her Order been confounded, and her Peace disturbed by some factious spi∣rits; who having had their wils at Franckfort, or otherwise ruling the Preby∣ery when they were at Geneva, thought to have carried all before them with the like facility when they were in England.
But leaving them and their designes to some other time, we must next look upon the aid which the Queen sent to those of the reformed Religion in the Realm of Scotland, but carried under the pretence of dislodging such French Forces as were Garrisoned there, and might have proved bad neigh∣bours to the Kingdom of England. Such of the Scots as desired a Reformation of Religion, taking advantage by the Queens absence, the easiness of the Earl of Arran, and want of power in the Queen Regent to suppress their practices, had put themselves into a Body; Headed by some of the Nobility, they take unto themselves the name of the Congregation, managing their own affairs apart from the rest of the Kingdom, and in assurance of their own strength, petition to the Queen Regent and the Lords of the Council, that the Sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper might be administred in both kinds, that Divine Offices might be celebrated in the Vulgar tongue, and that they might have the choice of their own Ministers according to the practice (as it was pretended) of the Primitive times. The Answer hereunto was fair and gratious, but rather for the gaining of time, than with a purpose to grant any of the points de∣manded. The principal Leaders of the party, well followed by the common people, put themselves into Perth, and there begin to stand on higher terms than before they did. The news whereof occasioneth Knox to leave his Sanctu∣ary in Geneva, and joyn himself unto the Lords of the Congregation; At Perth he goes into the Pulpit, and falls so bitterly on Images, Idolatry, and other superstitions of the Church of Rome, that the people in a popular fury deface all the Images in that Church, and presently demolish all Religious Houses within that City; This hapned about the end of May, Anno 1559. and gave a dangerous example to them of Couper, who forthwith on the hearing of it de∣stroyed all the Images, and pulled down the Altars in that Church also. Preaching at Craile he inveighed sharply against the Queen Regent, and ve∣hemently stirred up the people to joyn together for the expulsion of the French, which drew after it the like destruction of all Altars and Images as was made before at Perth and Couper. The like followed on his preaching at St. Andrews also, the Religious Houses being pulled down as well as the Ima∣ges, and laid so flat, that there was nothing left in the form of a building. In∣flamed by the same firebrand, they burned down the rich Monastery of Scone, and ruined that of Cambskenneth, demolished all the Altars, Images, and Covents of Religious persons in Sterling, Lithgo, Glascough, Edenburgh, make themselves Masters of the last, and put up their own Preachers into all the Pulpits of that City, not suffering the Queen Regent to have the use of one Church onely for her own devotions. Nor staid they there, but being carried on by the same ill spirit, they pass an Act among themselves for depriving the Queen Regent of all place and power in the publick Government; concerning which, the Oracle being first consulted, returned this Answer, sufficiently ambiguous, as all Oracles are, that is to say, That the iniquity of the Queen Regent ought not to withdraw their hearts from the obedience due to their Soveraigns, nor did he wish any such sentence to be pronounced against her, but when she should change her course, and submit her self to good counsel, there should be place left unto her of regresse to the same honors, from which, for good causes, she ought to be deprived. This Act is intima∣ted to the Queen Regent, who now begins as seriously to provide for her own preservation, as she had done before in maintenance of the Queens Authority. Some Forces had been sent from France, together with many Arms and Am∣munition in proportion to them; but these not being great enough to sup∣press those insolencies, she is supplied at times with 3000 Foot, beside Octa∣vian's Regiment sent over to make way for the rest. Some Horse were also shipt from France, but so scattered and dispersed by tempest, that few of them came safely thither. Yet by the terrour of their comming, and the noise of more, she recovereth Edenborough, compelleth the confederate Scots to go further North, fortifies Lieth the Port-Town to Edenborough, and the chief Key of all
that Kingdom, Garrisoned forthwith by the French, not onely to make good their Entrance, but second their Exit. On these discouragements, many of the Scots soldiers drop away, and the rest refuse to stand unto their Arms, without present pay. Had the French gone to work like soldiers, and poured such for∣ces into that Kingdom as the condition of affairs did require at their hands, they might easily have suppressed that scattered Faction, before they were united under the protection of a forein Power; but this doing of their work by halves proved the undoing of the whole, and onely served to give the Scots sufficient time to renew their forces, and call the English to their aid. They had all along maintained a correspondence with some in England, but more parti∣cularly with Crofts Governor of the Town of Barwick; To him they send for a supply in this great necessity, by whom their Agents are dispatched with four thousand Crowns; but the Queen Regent was so seasonably advertised of it, that she intercepted on the way both the men and the mony. In this extremity they take counsel of despair, with Knox, by whom they are advised to cast themselves into the arms of the Queen of England, the one∣ly visible means then left to support the cause; to whom the neighbourhood of the French, upon just jealousies and reasons of State, was not very accep∣table. No better counsel being offered (as indeed none could) Maitland and Melvin are dispatched o the Court of England, by whom the Queen is made acquainted with the state of that Kingdom, the difficulty under which it strug∣led, the danger like to fall on her own Dominions if the French should grow too strong in Scotland; and thereupon entreat her succours and assistance for the expulsion of that People, who otherwise might to both Realms prove alike destructive. The business being taken into consideration, it was conceived by some of the Council, that the Queen ought not to give ear unto their de∣sires; that it was a matter of dangerous consequence, and of ill example, to assist the Subjects of that or any other Kingdom against their own natural and lawful Princes, and that she did not know how soon it might be her own case, to have the like troubles and commotions raised against her by those who liked not her proceedings in the change of Religion. By others it was thought a matter of no small impiety not to assist their brethren of the same profession▪ imploring their assistance in the present exigency; that it was a work of charity to defend their neighbours from the oppression of strangers; that the French were always enemies to the Crown of England, and therefore that it could not be consistent with the rules of prudence to suffer them to grow too strong upon their borders; that the French King had already assumed the Ti∣tle of England, and it concerned them to take care that they gave him not by their improvidence the possession also. These reasons carried it for the Scots, And so they are dismist with promise of such present aid, and on such condi∣tions as should be agreed on by Commissioners on both sides in the Town of Barwick. About the middle of February the Commissioners meet, the Duke of Nor∣folk for the Queen, the Lord James Stewart (one of the bastard brothers of the Queen of Scots) the Lord Ruthwen, and some other principal men of the Congregation in the name of the rest: By whom it was concluded on the 27th. of that month, That the Queen should send sufficient forces into Scot∣land both by Sea and Land, furnished with Mony, Arms, and Ammunition; that she should not recall her forces till that Kingdom was cleared of all the French; that provision of Victuals for the Army should be made by the Scots, & that the Scots should shew themselves enemies to all such as were enemies to the Crown of England, whether Scots or French; But by all means, that nothing should be done by vertue of this Agreement, which might import the least withdrawing of the Scots from that loyalty, duty, and obedience which was due unto their natural Queen, or the King her husband. By which Agreement with the Scots the Queen abundantly provided for her own security from all Invasions on that side; and by affording them such succours as their wants re∣quired,
but chiefly by conferring some small annual pensions on the Chiefs amongst them, she made her self more absoute on that side of the Tweed, than either the Queen of Scos her self, or King James her son, or any of their Predecessors in all times before. According to these Capitulations, an Army gallantly appointed is sent into Scotland, consisting of 6000 Foot and 2000 Horse, and commanded by the Lord Gray a right expert Soldier, accompanied by some Lords and Gentlemen of eminent quality; some ships were also sent to block up the Haven, and hinder all relief which might come by Sea to the Town of Lieth, on the defence whereof depended the whole hopes of the French, together with the interest of that Crown in the Realm of Scotland. It was about the beginning of April that the English Army came before it▪ recruited afterwards by the comming of 2000 more; which fresh supply, to∣gether with some ill success which they found in the action, did so disanimate the besieged, that they conceived no possibility of a long resistance; Ambas∣sadors are therefore sent from France to Edenborough, there to confer with such of the same quality as should also come thither, authorised by the Queen of England, by whom it was in fine concluded, That all the French Forces should forthwith depart out of Scotland, except 60 onely to be left in Dunbar, and as many in the Fort of Nachkeeth; that they should be transported for their greater safety in English Bottoms; that all matters of Religion should be referred to the following Parliament; that an act of Oblivion should be passed for the indemnity of all who had born Arms on either side; that a general Bond of Love and Amity should be made betwixt the Lords and their Adherents of both Religions; and finally, amongst many other particu∣lars, that neither the Queen of Scots nor the French King should from thence∣forth assume the Titles and Arms of England. Which Articles being signed and confirmed for both Kingdoms, the French about the middle of July take their leave of Scotland, and the English Army at the same time set forward for Bar∣wick, being there disbanded and dismissed to their several dwellings. Followed not long after by the Earls of Morton and Glencarn, in the name of the rest of the Congregation, sent purposely to render to the Queen their most humble thanks for her speedy & prosperous assistance, and to desire the continuance of her Majesties favours, if the French should any more attempt to invade their Country. Assured whereof, and being liberally rewarded with gifts and pre∣sents, they returned with joy and glad tydings to the Congregation, whom as the Queen had put upon a present confidence of going vigorously on in their Reformation, so it concerned them to proceed so carefully in pursuance of it, as might comply with the dependence which they had upon her. First therefore, that she might more cordially espose their quarrel, they bound themselves by their subscription to embrace the Liturgy, with all the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, which for a time remained the onely form of Worship for the Kirk of Scotland; when, and by whose means they receded from it, may be shown hereafter. In the next place they cause a Parliament to be called in the month of August, according to the Articles of the Pacification, from which no person was excluded, who either had the right of Suffrage in his own capacity, or in relation to their Churches, or as returned from their Shrevalties or particular Burroughs; of which last, there appeared the accustomed number, but of the Lords Spiritual, no more than six Bishops of thirteen, with thirteen Abbots and Priors or thereabouts; and of the Temporal Lords to the number of ten Earls and as many Barons: By whose Authority and consent they passed three Acts, conducing wholly to the advantage of the Reformation; the first whereof was for abolishing the Popes Jurisdiction and Authority within the Realm; the second, for annul∣ling all Statutes made in former times for maintenance of Idolatry and Super∣stition; and the third, for the punishment of the Sayers and Hearers of the Masse. To this Parliament also some of the Ministers presented A Confession of the Faith and Doctrine to be believed and professed by the Protestants of the
Kirk of Scotland; modelled in many places by the Principles of Cal∣vin's Doctrine, which Knox had brought with him from Geneva; but being put unto the Vote, it was opposed by no more than three of the Temporal Lords, that is to say, the Earl of Atholl, and the Lords Somervil and Borth∣wick, who gave no other reason for it, but that they would believe as their fathers did. The Popish Prelates were silent in it, neither assenting nor opposing: Which being observed by the Earl-Marshal, he is said to have broke out into these words following; Seeing (saith he) that my Lords the Bishops (who by their learning can, and for the zeal they should have to the truth, ought as I suppose to gainsay any thing repugnant to it) say nothing against the Confession we have heard; I cannot think but that it is the very truth of God, and that the contrary of it false and deceivable Doctrine. Let us now cross over into Ireland, where we shall find the Queen as active in advancing the reformed Religion, as she had been in either of the other Kingdoms. King Henry had first broke the ice, by taking to himself the Title of Supream Head on earth of the Church of Ireland, exterminating the Popes authority, and suppressing all the Monasteries and Religious Houses. In mat∣ters doctrinal, and forms of Worship, as there was nothing done by him, so neither was there much endeavoured in the time of King Edward, it being thought perhaps unsafe to provoke that people in the Kings minority, consi∣dering with how many troubles he was elsewhere exercised. If any thing were done therein, it was rather done by tolleration than command. And what∣soever was so done, was presently undone again in the Reign of Queen Mary. But Queen Elizabeth having setled her affairs in England, and undertaken the protection of the Scots, conceived her self obliged in point of piety, that Ireland also should be made partaker of so great a benefit. A Parliament is therefore held on the 12th. of January, where past an Act, restoring to the Crown the antient jurisdiction over all Ecclesiastical and Spiritual persons. By which Statute were established both the Oath of Supremacy and the High Commission, as before in England. There also past an Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, &c. with a permission for saying the same in Latine, in such Church or place, where the Minister had not the knowledge of the Eng∣lish Tongue. But for translating it into Irish (as afterwards into Welsh in the 5th. year of this Queen) there was no care taken, either in this Parliament, or in any following. For want whereof, as also by not having the Scriptures in their native language, most of the natural Irish have retained hitherto there old barbarous customes, or pertinaciously adhere to the corruptions of the Church of Rome. The people by that Statute are required under several penalties, to frequent their Churches, and to be frequent at the reading of the English Li∣turgy, which they understand no more than they do the Mass. By which means the Iish was not only kept in continual ignorance as to the Doctrines and Devotions of the Church of England, but we have furnished the Papists with an excellent Argument against our selves, for having the Divine Service celebrated in such a language as the people do not understand. There also past another Statute for restoring to the Crown the first fruits, and twenty parts of all Ecclesiastical promotions within that Kingdom; as al∣so of all impropriat Parsonages, which there are more in number than those Rectories which have cure of souls. King Henry had before united the first fruits, &c. to the Crown Imperial, but Queen Mary out of her affection to the Church of Rome, had given them back unto the Clergy, as before was said. The like Act passed for the restitution of all such lands belonging to the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, as by that Queen had been regranted to the Order; with the avoidance of all Leases and other grants, which had been made by Sir Oswald Massingberd, the lte Lord Prior of the same. Who fear∣ing what was like to follow, had voluntarily forsook the Kingdome in the Au∣gust foregoing, and thereby saved the Queen the charge of an yearly pension, which otherwise he might have had as his Predecessors had before him in the
time of King Henry. During the Reign of which King, a Statute had been made in Ireland (as in England also) for the electing and consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops, repealed in the year first of Queen Mary, and now revived by her sister, in which there is nothing more memorable, than that amongst many other Ceremonies therein directed, there is mention of giving the Pall to a new Archbishop, that being an Ornament or Habit peculiar only unto those of the highest ranck in the holy Hierarchy. And that she might not only take care for the good of the Church, without consulting her own safety, she caused an Act to pass for the recognition of her own just title to the Crown, as before in England. All which being done, she left the prosecution of the work to her Bishops and Clergy, not so well countenanced by power as they were by Law; and yet more countenanced by Law than they made good use of. For many of them finding how things went in England▪ and knowing that the like alterations would ensue amongst themselves, resolved to make such use of the present times, as to inrich their friends and kindred by the spoil of their Churches. To which end they so dissipated the revenues of their several Bishop∣ricks, by long Leases, see Farms, and plain alienations, that to some of their Sees they left no more than a Rent of five Marks per annum, to others a bare yearly Rent of 40 shillings, to the high displeasure of Almighty God, the re∣proach of Religion, the great disservice of the Church, and the perpetual igno∣miny of themselves for that horrible sacrilege. It is now time that we hoise sail again for England, where we shall find an en∣tertainment made ready for us in a Sermon preached by Reverend Jewel, then newly Consecrated Bishop of the Church of Sarisbury. The Sermon preached at St. Paul's Cross on the 30th. of March, being Passion-Sunday, or the Sunday fortnight before Easter, the Text or Theam of his discourse being taken out of St Paul's 1 Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 11. Ver 23. That which I deli∣vered to you  received of the Lord, &c. Which Text being opened, and accom∣modated to the present times, he published that memorable Challenge, which so much exercised the pens and studies of the Romish Clergy. By whom the Church had been injuriously upbraided with the imputation of novelty, and charged with teaching such opinions as were not to be found in any of the an∣cient Fathers, or approved Councils, or any other Monument of true Antiqui∣ty, before Luther's time. For the stopping of whose moths for ever, this learned Prelate made this stout and gallant challenge in these following words. Bishop Jewel's Challenge. If any Learned man of our Adversaries, or all the Learned men that be alive be able to bring any one sufficient sentence out of any old Catholick Doctor or Father, or General Council, or Holy Scripture, or any one example in the Primitive Church, whereby it may clearly and plainly be proved, during the first six hundred years. 1. That there was at that time any private Masse in the world. 2. Or that there was then any communion ministred unto the people un∣der one kind. 3. Or that the people had their Common Prayer in a strange tongue that the people understood not. 4. Or that the Bishop of Rome was then called an universal Bishop, or the head of the universal Church. 5. Or that the people were then taught to beleeve that Christs body is really, substantially, corporally, carnally, or naturally in the Sacrament. 6. Or that his body is or may be in a thousand places or more at one time. 7. Or that the Priest did then hold up the Sacrament over his head. 8. Or that the people did then fall down and worship it with godly honour. 9. Or that the Sacrament was then or now ought to be hanged up under a Canopy. 10. Or that in the Sacrament after the words of Consecration, there remain only the accidents and shewes, without the substance of Bread and Wine. 11. Or that then the Prists divided the Sacrament into three parts, and afterwards received himself all alone. 12. Or that whosoever had said the Sacrament is a figure, a pledge, a
token or a remembrance of Christs body, had therefore been iudg'd for an Heretick. 13. Or that it was lawful then to have thirty, twenty, fifteen, ten, or five Masses said in one day. 14. Or that images were then set up in the Churches, to the intent the people might worship them. 15. Or that the lay people were then forbidden to read the word of God in their own tongue. 16. Or that it was then lawful for the Priest to pronounce the words of Consecration closely, or in private to himself. 17. Or that the Priest had then authority to offer up Christ unto his Father. 18. Or to communicate and receive the Sacrament for another, as they do. 19. Or to apply the vertue of Christs death and passion to any man by the means of the Masse. 20. Or that it was then thought a sound doctrine to teach the people, that Mass ex opere operato, that is, even for that it is said and done, is able to remove any part of our sin. 21. Or that any Christian man called the Sacrament the Lord his God. 22. Or that the people were then taught to believe that the body of Christ remaineth in the Sacrament, as long as the accidents of Bread and Wine remain there without corrup∣tion. 23. Or that a mouse, or any other worm or beast, may eat the body of Christ, (for so some of our Adversaries have said and taught.) 24. Or that when Christ said hoc est corpus meum, the word hoc pointed not the Bread, but individuum vagum, as some of them say. 25. Or that the Accidents, or Forms, or Shews of Bread and Wine, be the Sacraments of Christs body and blood, and not rather the ve∣ry Bread and Wine it self. 26. Or that the Sacrament is a sign or token of the body of Christ that lyeth hidden underneath it. 27. Or that ignorance is the mother and cause of true Devotion; the conclusion is, that I shall be then content to yield and subscribe. This Challenge being thus published in so great an auditory, startled the English Papists both at home and abroad, none more than such of the fugitives, as had retired to Lovain, Doway, or St Odomars in the Low Country Provinces belonging to the King of Spain. The business first agitated by the exchange of friendly Letters, betwixt the said Reverend Prelate, and Dr Henry Cole the late Dean of St Pauls; more violently followed in a book of Rastal's who first ap∣peared in the lists against the Challenger. Followed therein by Dorman and Marshal, who severally took up the cudgels to as little purpose; the first be∣ing well beaten by Nowel, and the last by Calfhil, in their discourses writ against them. But they were only velilations, or preparatory skirmishes in reference to the main encounter, which was reserved for the Reverend Challenger him∣self, and Dr. John Harding, one of the Divines of Lovain, and the most learned of the College. The Combatants were born in the same County, bred up in the same Grammar School, and studied in the same University also: So that it may be said of them, as the Historian hath of Jugurth and Sylla un∣der Caius Marius, that is to say, that they both learned those feats of Arms in the same Camp, and under the same Commander, which afterwards they were to exercise against one another. Both zealous Protestants also in the time of King Edward, and both relapsed to Popery in the time of Queen Mary; Jewel for fear, and Harding upon hope of favour and preferment by it. But Jewel's fall may be compared to that of St Peter, which was short and sud∣den, rising again by his repentance, and fortified more strongly in his faith than before he was: But Harding's like to that of the other Simon, premeditated and resolved on, never to be restored again (so much was there within him of the gaul of bitternesse) to his former standing. But some former differences had been between them in the Church of Sarisbury, whereof the one was Prebenda∣ry, and the other Bishop, occasioned by the Bishops visitation of that Cathe∣dral, in which as Harding had the worst, so was it a presage of a second foil which he was to have in this encounter. Who had the better of the day, will easily appear to any that consults the writings. By which it will appear how much the Bishop was too hard for him at all manner of weapons. Whose lear∣ned answers as well in maintainance of his Challenge, as in defence of his A∣pology, (whereof more hereafter) contain in them such a magazin of all sorts
of learning, that all our controversors since that time, have furnished themselves with Arguments and Authority from it. But these discourses came not out until some years after, though the occa∣sion was given now by this famous Challenge; the interval being spent in pre∣parations by the Romish party, before they shewed themselves in publick. In the mean time, the Papists mad enough before, seemed to grow more outra∣gious upon this occasion, though they were willing to impute it to some o∣ther cause. Philip of Spain shewed himself much incensed against her, as well for altering the Religion here by him established, as for refusing him in mariage when the offer had been made unto her by the Count of Feria; Nor was the Count less troubled at it than the King. And in this melancholy humour he imploys all his interess with the Pope then being, for subjecting her unto a sentence of Excommunication. Which motion if it had been press'd on Pope Paul the 4th. who seemed very much displeased at her for accepting the Crown without his consent, there is no question to be made but that it had been hearkned to with a listning ear, and executed with a rash and ungoverned hand. But Paul the 4th. deceased about the middle of August, in the year last past, and John Angelo Cardinal of Medices, succeeded him by the name of Pope Pius the 4th. in December following. Who being a more moderate man, did not think fit to proceed to such extremities. For seeing that his power was a thing rather consisting in the conceits of men, than in truth and substance, if it should once appear that this thunderbolt of Excommunication (whereby the world is so much terrified) should prove ineffectual and without all power, then might this great authority fall into contempt, and become ridiculous. Upon which ground he goes another way to work, and is resolved to try all fair and plausible means, for gaining her to the obedience of the See Aposto∣lick. To which end he directs unto her an affectionate Letter, in which he calls her his dearest daughter, and seems exceeding careful of her salvation, and the prosperity of her people; not to be found by wandring out of the Commu∣nion of the Catholick Church, to which she is again invited with much Chri∣stian meekness. Which Letter he dispatcheth by the hands of Vincentius Parpa∣lia, a right trusty Minister, and one (by reason of some former imployments hither in the time of Queen Mary) not unknown to her. Whom he had fur∣nished also with some secret instructions to be communicated to her at his being in England. Concerning which (for with that intimation he concludes his Letter) the same Vincentius was to deal more largely with her, and declare his fatherly affection towards her; She being in like sort desired to receive him lovingly, hear to him diligently, and to give the same credit to his speeches, as she would to the Pope himself. This letter of the Popes bears date on the 5th. of May, Anno 1560. before which time the Queen had caused the English Liturgy to be translated into Latine, using therein the pen and diligence of Walter Haddon, (as some sup∣pose) who afterwards appeared against Ossorius upon several Arguments. And being translated into Latine, it was commended by her Letters Parents of the first of April, not only to all Colleges and Hall in both Universities, but also to the Colleges of Eaton and Winchester, to be used by them in their several and respective Chapels. And she caused further, some selected Hymns to be added to it for some particular occasions, but most especially to be sung in fu∣nerals and solemn obsequies; which not being warranted by the Statute of the year preceding, were therefore authorized with a non obstante. All which as she was thought to do, to satisfie and instruct all forein Princes in the form and fashion of our Devotions; So did she so far satisfie the Pope then being, that he shewed himself willing to confirm it by his Papal power. The learned Ca∣den, who received all his choice intelligence from Sir William Caecl, (but bet∣ter known in his last times by the name of Lord Rurleigh) gives us to under∣stand, that this Parpalio was instructed to offer in the name of his Holiness, that the English Liturgy should be confirmed; the use of the Communion in both
kinds allowed of. And that all Sentences which had passed in the Court of Rome against the marriage of her Mother, should be rescinded and made void, conditioned onely, that she would re-unite her self to the Roman Church, and acknowledge the Primacy of that See. For the carrying on of which ac∣cord, the Abbot was commissionated to distribute some thousands of Crowns amongst such men, as should be found most forward to effect the same. Sanders makes this to be another of his secret mandates, that if she had any diffidence in her Title to the Crown of England, either in regard of the doubtfulness of her Legitimation, or any thing which had been done by the authority of the Pope and Church of Rome, all matters should be cleared and sweetned to her best advantage, by the benignity and favour of the See Apostolick. But for all this, the Abbot came no nearer than Bussels with his Bulls and Faculties, not being suffered to set foot upon English ground, whether it were upon a pro∣bable suspition, that under colour of such plausible and specious overtures, he was designed to encourage a Rebellion amongst the Papists, as was thought by some; or rather, that the Queen was grown so confident of her own just Title, and the affections of her people, as not to be beholden to the Pope for a confirmation, remains a matter undetermined by our best Historians. How it succeeded with this Pope in another project for the reducing of this Kingdom under his command, we shall see hereafter. But all this while there was no care taken to suppress the practice of ano∣ther Faction, who secretly did as much endeavour the subverion of the Eng∣lish Litugy▪ as the Pope seemed willing to confirm it; For whilst the Prelates o the Church, and the other learned men before remembred, bent all their forces toward the confuting of some Popish Errors, another enemy appeared, whch seemed not openly to aim at the Church's Doctrines, but quarrelled rather at some Rites and Extrinsecalls of it. Their purpose was to shew them∣selves so expert in the Art of War, as to take in the Out-works of Religion first, before they levelled there Artillery at the Fort it self. The Schismaticks at Franckfort had no sooner heard of Queen Mary's death, but they made what haste they could for England, in hope of fishing better for themselves in a troubled water than a composed and quiet Current; Followed not long af∣ter by the brethren of the Separation, which retired from thence unto Geneva, who having left some few behind to compleat their Notes upon the Bible, and make up so many of the Psalms in English Meeter as had been left unfinish∣ed by Sernhold and Hopkins, hastned as fast homewards as the others. But not∣withstanding all their haste, they came not time enough to effect their purposes, either in reference to the Liturgy or Episcopal Government, on which the Queen had so resolved according to her own most excellent judgment, that they were not able to prevail in either project. It grieved them at the heart that their own Prayers might not be made the rule of Worship in their Con∣gregations, and that they might not Lord it here in their several Parishe, as Calvin did in the Presbytery of the Church of Geneva. Some friends they had abou the Queen, and Calvin was resolved to make use of all his power and credit both with her and Cecil (as appears by his Letters unto both) to ad∣vance their ends; and he was seconded therein by Peter Martyr, who thought his interest in England to be greater than Calvin's, though his name was not so eminent in other places. But the Queen had fixed her self on her resolution of keeping up the Church in such outward splendor, as might make it every way considerable in the eye of the world; so that they must have faith enough to remove a mountain, before they could have hope enough to draw her to them. When therefore they saw the Liturgy imposed by Act of Parliament, and so many Episcopal Sees supplyed with able Pastors, nothing seemed more expediet to them than to revive the quarrels raised in King Edward's time against Capps and Surplices, and such particulars as had then been questioned in the publick Liturgy; And herein they were seconded (as before in King Edward's time) by the same Peter Martyr, as appears by his Letters to a name∣less
friend, bearing date at Zarick on the 4th. of November 1560. to which he added his dislike in another of his Letters to the same friend also, touching the same and other points proposed unto him, that is to say, the Cap, the Episcopal Habit, the Patrimony of the Church, the manner of proceeding to be held against Papists, the Perambulation used in the Rogation weeks, with many other points of the like condition, in which his judgment was de∣sired. But these helps being too far off, and not to be consulted with upon all inconveniencies, without a greater loss of time than could consist with the impatiency of their desires, they fell upon another project, which promised them more hopes of setting up their Discipline, and decrying the Liturgy, their quarrells about Caps and Vestments. Some friends they had about the Court, as before was said, and Grydal the new Bishop of London was known to have a great respect to the name of Calvin, the business therefore is so or∣dered, that by Calvin's Letters unto Gryndal, and the friends they had about the Queen, way should be given to such of the French Nation, as had repaired hit her to enjoy the freedom of their own Religion, to have a Church unto themselves, and in that Church not onely to erect the Genevian discipline, but to set up a form of Prayer, which should hold no conformity with the Eng∣lish Liturgy. They could not but remember those many advantages which John Alasco and his Church of Strangers afforded to the Zuingiian Gospel∣lers in the Reign of King Edward, and they despaired not of the like, nor of greater neither, if a French Church were setled upon Cavin's Principles in some part of London. A Synagogue had been built for the use of the Jews Anno 1231. not far from the place in which now stands the Hall of the Mer∣chant -Taylors near the Royal Exchange: But the Jews having removed them∣selves to some other place, the Christians obtained that it should be dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and by that name was given unto the Brotherhood of St. Anthony of Vienna by King Henry the 3d. After which time, an Hospital was there founded by the name of St. Anthony, consisting of a Master, two Priests, one School-master, and twelve poor men; Inlarged in the succeeding times by the addition of a fair Grammar-School, and other publick Buildings for the use of the Brethren. It was privileged by King Edward the 4th. to have Priests, Clerks, Scholars, poor men, and Brethren of the same, or Lay∣men, Quiristers, Proctors, Messengers, Servants in houshold, and other things whatsoever, like unto the Prior and Covent of St. Anthonie of Venna, &c. and being so privileged, it was annexed to the Collegiat Chapel of St. George in Windsor, under whose Patronage it remained, but muh impo∣verished by the fraud and folly of one of its School-masters, till the final dis∣solution of it, amongst other Hospitals and Brotherhoods, by King Edward the sixth; so that being vested in the Crown, and of no present use to the City, it was no hard matter to obtain it for the use of the French, as it still continueth. And now again we have another Church in London, as different from the Church of England in Government and forms of Worship, and some Doctri∣nals also, as that of John Alasco was in the Augustine Friers. Not must we marvail if we find the like dangerous consequents to ensue upon it: for what else is the setting up of a Presbytery in a Church, founded and established by the Rules of Episcopacy, than the erecting of a Commonwealth or popular Estate in the midst of a Monarchy? Which Calvin well enough perceived, and thereupon gave Gryndal thanks for his favour in it, of whom they after served themselves upon all occasions. Upon the news of which success, divers both French and Dutch repaired into England, planting themselves in the Sea∣towns, and openly professing the Reformed Religion, under which covert, they disguised their several Heterodoxies and blasphemous Dotages, some of them proving to be Anabaptists, others infected with unfound opinions of as ill a nature, but all endeavouring to disperse their Heretical Doctrines, and by invenoming the good people amongst whom they lived, to encrease their
Sects. Which being made known unto the Queen, she presently commands them all by her Proclamation to depart the Kingdom, whether they were Aliens or natural born English, and not to stay above the tearm of twenty days, upon pain of imprisonment, and forfeiture or loss of all their goods: Which Proclamation notwithstanding, too many of them lurked in Engand without fear of discovery, especially after the erecting of so may French and Dutch Churches in the Maritime parts, as at this time they did in London, in∣fecting the French and Dutch Churches there with some of their frenzies, and occasione such disputes amongst them upon that account, that Peer Maryr found it necessary to interpose his authority with them, to the composing of those Heats and differences which had grown amongst them; for which consult his Letter bearing date at Zurick on the 15th. of February, next following af∣ter the date of the said Proclamation, and superscribed, Unto the Church of Srangers in the City of London. Now for the date of the said Proclamation, it seemeth to have been about the 19th. of September, at which time it pleased the Queen to set forth ano∣ther, no less conducing to the honour, than did the other to the preservation of the Churches purity. She had given command by her Injunctions in the year foregoing, for destroying and taking away all Shrines, and coverings of Shrines, all Tables, Candlesticks, Trindals, and Rolls of Wax, together with all Pictures, Paintings, and other monuments of eigned Miracles, Pil∣grimages, Idolatry and Superstition, so that there remain no memory of the same in walls, glass-windows, or else-where, whether it were in Churches or mens private houses. But some perverting rather than mistaking her in∣tention in it, guided by covetousness, or over-ruled by some new fangle in Religion, under colour of conforming to this command, defaced all such Images of Christ and his Apostles, all Paintings which presented any History of the holy Bible, as they found in any windows of their Churches or Chapels. They proceeded also to the breaking down of all Coats of Arms, to the tearing off of all the Brasses on the Tombs and Monuments of the dead, in which the figures of themselves, their wives or children, their Ancestors, or their Arms, had been reserved to posterity. And being given to understand, that Bells had been bapized in the times of Popery, and that even the Churches themselves had been abused to Superstition and Idolatry, their zeal transported them in fine to sell their Bells, to turn the Steeples into Dove-coats, and to rob the Churches of those sheets of Lead with which they were covered. For the re∣straining of which Sacrilege and prophane abuses, she gave command in her said Proclamation of the 19th. of September, That all manner of men should from thenceforth forbear the breaking or defacing of any parcel of any Mo∣nument, or Tomb, or Grave, or other Inscription and Memory of any per∣son deceased, being in any manner of place; Or to break any Image of Kings, Princes, or Nobles, Estates of this Realm, or of any other that have been in times past erected and set up for the onely memory of them to their posterity, in common Churches, and not for any Religious honor; Or to break down or deface any Image in glass-windows in any Church, without the consent of the Ordinary, upon pain of being committed to the next Gaol without Bail or Mainprize, and there to remain till the next com∣ming of the Justices for Gaol-delivery, and then to be further punished by Fine or Imprisonment (besides the restitution or re-edification of the thing broken) as to the said Justices shall seem meet, and if need shall be, to use the advice of her Majesties Council in her Star-chamber. It was also signified in the said Proclamation, That some Patrons of Churches and others, who were possessed of Impropriations, had prevailed with the Parson and Parishioners, to take or throw down the Bells of Churches or Chapels, and the Lead of the same, and to convert the same to their private gain, by which ensued not onely the spoil of the said Churches, but even a slanderous desolation of the places of Prayer. And
thereupon it was commanded, that no manner of person should from thenceforth take away any Bells or Lead off any Church or Chapel, under pain of Imprisonment during her Majesties pleasure, and such further Fine for the contempt as shall be thought meet; With a charge given to all Bi∣shops and other Ordinaries, to enquire of all such contempts done from the beginning of her Majesties Reign, and to enjoyn the persons offending to repair the same within a convenient time, and of their doing therein to cer∣tifie the Privy Council, or the Council in the Star-chamber, that order may be taken therein. And in persute of this most seasonable and religions Act, she did not onely signe the said Proclamation, one for all, to authorise it for the Press, as the custom is, but signed them every one apart (amounting to a very great number) with her own Royal Hand, that so it might be known rather for her own proper act than an act of the council. With like care also she provided for the honor and prosperity of her estate, in affairs Politick and Civil. The monies of the Realm had been much de∣based by King Henry the 8th. to the great disprofit of the Merchant, and re∣proach of the Kingdom, for which, no remedy had been taken by her Brother or Sister, though they had better opportunities, and more advantages to go thorow with it. But this brave Queen, endeavouring nothing more, than the restoring of her Kingdom to its antient splendor, first caused all such base monies as were coined by any of her Predecessors, to be decryed to a less va∣lue, according to the fineness or alloy thereof; and that being done, by vertue of her Proclamation bearing date the 28th. of September, she caused all the said base monies, so reduced to a lower value, to be brought in to her Maje∣sties Mint, for which she gave them mony of the purest silver, (such as passed commonly by the name of Easterling or Sterling mony) since which time, no base mony hath been coyned in England, but onely of pure Gold and Silver, to pass for current in the same; save that of late times, in relation to the ne∣cessity of poor people, a permission hath been given to the coyning of Far∣things, which no man can be forced to accept in satisfaction of a Rent or Debt; which as it could not be affirmed of England in the times preceding, so neither can it now be said of any State or Nation in the Christian world, in all which, there are several sorts of copper mony, as current with them for pub∣lick uses, as the purest metal. She provided also in like manner for her peoples safety, and the encrease of Trade and Merchandise in English Bottoms; For towards the end of this second year, she made great preparation of Ordinance, Arms, Munition, and Powder of her own materials, to be in a readiness to defend her Realm in all emergencies of danger; For the advancing of which service it so pleased the divine Providence which watched over her actions, that a rich Mine of Brass was found near Keswick in Cum∣berland, such as sufficed not onely for furnishing her own Forts and Ships with all manner of Ordinance, but for supplying other Countries as their wants required. And to compleat so great a mercy in her preservation, the Stone called Lapis Calaminaris, exceeding necessary for all Brass-works, was at the same time also found in England in most plentiful manner. And whereas complaint was made unto her by the Merchants of the Hans-towns, or Mer∣chants of the Stilyard as then commonly called, that King Edward had first ceized their Liberties, and that afterwards Queen Mary had raised their Cu∣stoms upon all sorts of Merchandises from one to twenty in the Hundred, her Answer was, That as she was resolved not to Innovate any thing, so she could grant no other privileges and immunities to them than those in which she found them when she came to the Crown. Their Trading hereupon be∣ing intermitted, the English Merchants took the managing of it upon them∣selves, and thrived therein so well after some adventures, that Cloth, and other Manufactures, heretofore transported in the ships of those Merchants, were from henceforth fraughted and dispersed in English Vessels; By means whereof, the English in a very short time attained unto the reputation
of being the wealthiest Merchants, the most expert Mariners, and the ablest Commanders for Sea-fights of any Nation in the world. I shall conclude this year with a work of piety in the foundation of the Collegiat Church of St. Peter in Westminster, which in the space of twenty years had been changed from an Abbey to a Deanry, from a Deanry to a See Episcopal, reduced unto a Deanry again, and finally restored to the state of an Abbey. But the Abbey being dissolved in the foregoing Parliament, an offer was made to Fecknam and the rest of the Convent (if Sanders be to be believed in this particular) for continuing in their places and possessions as before they did, clogged with no other conditions than the taking of the Oath of Supre∣macy, and officiating all divine Offices by the English Liturgy. But this offer being by them rejected, the Act of dissolution passed in both Houses of Parlia∣ment; Concerning which there goes a story, that the Lord Abbot being then busied in planting some young Elms in the Deans yard there, one that came by advised him to desist from his purpose, telling him, That the Bill was just then passed for dissolving his Monastery. To which the good old man replied, That he resolved howsoever to go on with his work, being well assured, that that Church would be always kept for an encouragement and seat of Learn∣ing. And so it proved in the event; for the Queen having pleased her self in the choice of some of the best Lands which remained unto it, confirmed the rest upon that Church, which she caused to be called the Collegiat Church of St. Peter in Westminster, as appears by her Letters Parens bearing date in the second year of her most gracious and most prosperous Reign. A foundation of a large capacity, and as amply privileged, consisting of a Dean, and twelve secular Canons, two School masters, and forty Scholars, petit Canons and others of the Quire to the number of thirty, ten Officers belonging to the Church, and as many servants appertaining to the College diet, and twelve Alms-men, besides many Officers, Stewards, Receivers, and Collectors, for keeping Courts, and bringing in of their Revenue; the principal of which, called the High Steward of Westminster, hath ever since been one of the prime Nobility, and in great favour at the Court. The Dean entrusted with keeping the Regalia, honored with a place of necessary service at all Coronations, and a Commissioner for the Peace within the City of Westminster and the Liber∣ties of it by Act of Parliament. The Dean and Chapter vested with all manner of jurisdiction both Ecclesiastical and Civil, not onely within the City and liberties of Westminster, but within the precinct of St. Martins le grand, and some Towns of Essex, exempted in the one from the Bishop of London, and in the other from the power of the Archbishop of Canterbury. The Scholars an∣nually preferred by election, either to Christ-Church in Oxon, or Trinity Col∣lege in Cambrige, each College being bound by an Indenture made with Queen Elizabeth, to take off yearly two or three at the least (though since, that number is extended to four or five) to be preferred to Scholarships & Fellow∣ships in their several Houses. A College founded as it proved in such a happy conjuncture, that since this new foundation of it, it hat given bree∣ding and preferment to four Archbishops, two Lord Chancellors, or Lord Keepers of the Great Seal of England, twenty two Bishops, and thirteen Deans of cathedral Churches, besides Archdeacons and Prebendaries, and other dignitaries in the Church to a proportionable number; which is more than can be said of either of the two famous Colleges of Aeton and Winche∣ster, or of both together, though the one was founded 168, and the other 114 years before it.
Anno Reg. Eliz. 3. A. D. 1560, 1561.An. Reg. Eliz. 3. 1560. WE shall begin this third year of the Queen with the death of Francis the second, King of the French, who deceased on the 5th. day of Decem∣ber, when he had scarce lived to the end of his 17th. year, and had Reigned but one year and five months, or thereabouts. His death much altered both the counsels and affairs of Christendom, distracting the French Nation into schisms and actions, incouraging the Sots to proceed with confidence in their Reformation, and promising no small security to Queen Elizabeth, in regard of the pretensions of the Queen of Scots. But so little was her condition bettered by it, that she seemed to be in more danger by the acts of her enemies after his decease, than formerly in the time of his life and government. Francis of Gise, a man of great abilities for Camp and Counsel, had made himself a very strong party in the Court of France, which he intended to make use of for the Queen of Scots, whose Mother, the late Queen Regent of Scotland, was his only sister. And this he might the better do by reason of a division in the Court of France about the government of the Kingdom, during the minority of Charls the 9th. the second brother, and next heir to the King deceased. Katherine de Medices the Relict of Henry the 2d. and the Mother of Charls, layes claim to the Regency; for who could have a greater care either of the young Kings person or estate, than his natural Mother? But against her, a being a meer stranger to the Nation and affairs of France, Anthony of Burbo, Duke of Vendosme by descent, and King of Navarr, at the least in Title, in the Right of Joan d' Albret his wife, the sole Heir of that Crown, layes his claim unto it, as being the first Prince of the blood, and therefore fitter to be trusted with the Regency by the rules of that government. The Guisian faction joyn themselves to that of the Queen, of whom they better knew how to make ad∣vantage than they could of the other, and to that end endeavour by all subtil artifices, to invest her in it. To this end they insinuate themselves into the Duke, perswade him either to relinquish his demands of the Regency, or to associate himself with the Queen-Mother in the publick government; and to joyn counsels with the Catholick party for suppressing the Hgonots. Which that they might allure him to, or at least take him off from his first persute, they offered to procure a Divorce from his present wife, and that instead of holding the Kingdom of Navarr in Right of his wife, he should hold it in his own personal capacity by a grant from the Pope, his wife being first deprived of it by his Holiness, as suspected of Lutheranism; that being divorced from his wife, he should marry Mary Queen of the Scots, with whom he should not only have the Kingdom of Scotland, but of England also, of which Elizabeth was to be deprived on the same account; that for the recovery of that Kingdom, he should not only have the Popes authority, and the power of France, but also the forces of the King of Spain; and finally, that the Catholick King did so much study his contentment, that if he would relinquish his pretensions to the Crown of Navarr, he should be gratified by him with the soverainty and actual possession of the Isle of Sardinia, of which he should receive the Crown with all due so∣lemnities. By which temptations when they had render'd him suspected to the Protestant party, and thereby setled the Queen-Mother in that place and power, which so industriously she aspired to, they laid him by as to the Title, permitting him to live by the air of hope for the short time of his life, which ended on the 17th. of November, Anno 1562. And so much of the game was plaid in earnest, that the Dke of Guise did mainly labour with the Pope, to ful∣minate his Excommunications against Elizabeth, as one that had renounced his authority, apostated from the Catholick Religion, and utterly exterminated the profession of it out of her Dominions.
But the Duke sped no better in this negotiation, than the Count of Feria did before. The Pope had still retained some hope of regaining England, and meant to leave no way unpractised by which he might obtain the point he aimed at. When first the See was vacant by the death of Pope Paul the 4th. the Cardinals assembled in the Conclave bound themselves by oath, that for the better setling of the broken and distracted estate of Christendome, the Coun∣cil formerly held at Trent, should be resumed withall convenient speed that might be. Which being too fresh in memory to be forgotten, and of too great importance to be laid aside, the new Pope had no sooner setled his affairs in Rome, which had been much disordered by the harshness and temerity of his pre∣decessor, but he resolved to put the same in execution. For this cause he con∣sults with some of the more moderate and judicious Cardinals, and by his reso∣lution and dexterity, surmounts all difficulties which shewed themselves in the design; and he resolved not only to call the Council, but that it should be held in , to which it had been formerly called by Pope Paul the 3d. 1545. that it should rather be a continuance of the former Council which had been interrupted by the prosecution of the wars in Germany, than the beginning of a new; and that he would invite unto it all Christian Princes, his dear daugh∣ter Queen Elizabeth of England amongst the rest. And on these terms he stood when he was importuned by the Ministers of the Duke of Gvise, to proceed a∣gainst her to a sentence of Excommunication, and thereby to expose her King∣doms to the next Invader. But the Pope was constantly resolved on his first intention of treating with her after a fair and amicable manner, professing a readiness to comply with her in all reciprocal offices of respect and friendship, and consequently inviting her amongst other Princes to the following Coun∣cil; to which if she should please to send her Bishops, or be present in the same by her Ambassadors, he doubted not of giving them such satisfaction, as might set him in a fair way to obtain his ends. Leaving the Pope in this good humour, we shall go for England, where we shall find the Prelates at the same imployment in which we left them the last year, that is to say, with setting forth the Consecrations of such new Bishops as served to fill up all the rest of the vacant Sees. The first of which was Ro∣bert Horn, Dr. in Divinity, once Dean of Durham, but better known by hol∣ding up the English Liturgy, and such a form of Discipline as the times would bear, against the schismaticks of Franckfort, preferred unto the See of Winchester, and consecrated Bishop in due form of Law, on the 16th. of Fe∣bruary. Of which we shall speak more hereafter on another occasion. On which day also Mr. Edmond Scambler, Batchelor of Divinity, and one of the Prebendaries of the new Collegiat Church of St. Peter in Westminster, was consecrated Bishop of the Church of Peterborough. During the vacancy where∣of, and in the time of his incumbency, Sir William Caecil principal Secretary of Estate, possess'd himself of the best Mannors in the Soake which belonged unto it; and for his readiness to confirm the same Mannors to him, preferred him to the See of Norwich, Anno 1584. Next followes the translation of Dr. Tho∣mas Young Bishop of St. Davids, to the See of York, which was done upon the 25th. of February in an unlucky hour to that City, as it also proved: For scarce was he setled in that See, when he pulled down the goodly Hall, and the greatest part of the Episcopal Palace in the City of York, which had been built with so much care and cost, by Thomas the elder, one of his predecessors there, in the year of our Lord 1090. Whether it were for covetousness to make money of the materials of it, or out of fordidness to avoid the charge of Hospitality in that populous City, let them guess that will. Succeeded in the See of St. David's, by Davis Bishop of St. Asaph, translated thither the 21 of May, 1561. as he was by another of the same name, Dr. Thomas Davis, with∣in few months after. The Province of York being thus fitted with a new Archbishop, it was not long before the consecration of Dr. James Pilkinton to the See of Durham,
which was performed by the hands of his own Metropolitan on the second of March, at whose first coming to tha See, he found it clogged with an annu∣al pension of 1000. l. to be paid into her Majesties Exchequer yearly, towad the maintenance of the Garison in the Town of Barwck, first laid upon this Bishoprick, when that Town seemed to be in danger of such French forces as had been brought into that Kingdom, or otherwise might fear some practice of the popish party, for the advancing of the interess of the Queen of Scots. The Bishops Tenants were protected in their corn and cattel by the power of this Garison, and consequently the more inabled to make just payment of their rents; and it was thought to be no reason that the Queen should be at the sole charge of protecting his Tenants, and he enjoy the whole benefit of it without any disbursement. But this was only a pretence for raising some re∣venue to the Crown out of that rich patrimony; the pension being still chr∣ged upon it, though the Garison was removed in the first of King James. On the same day, that is to say the second of March, Dr. John Best was consecra∣ted Bishop of Carlisle, after the See had been refused by Bernard G. phin, Parson of Houghton in the Spring, betwixt Drham and Newcastle. The offer made him with relation to his brother George, a man much used in many imploy∣ments for the State; but on what ground declined by him, is not well assured. Whether it were that he was more in love with the retirements of a private life, or that he could not have the bird, without he yielded to the stripping of it of the most part of its feathers (as it came to Best) may be sooner questio∣ned than resolved. And finally on the 4th of May comes in the consecration of Mr William Dwnham (the Queens Chaplain, when she was but Princess, and afterwards made one of the Prebendaries of St Peter's in Westminster) to the See of Chester, by this preferment recompensed for his former services. By which last care the vacant Sees were all supplyed with learned Pastors, except Oxon, Glocester and Bristol. Of which we shall speak more in the following year. But neither this diligence and care in filling all the vacant Sees with learned Pastors,1561. nor the Queens Proclamation for banishing all Anabaptists and other Sectaries which had resorted hither out of other Countries, could either free the land from those dangerous inmates, or preserve the Church from the con∣agion of their poysonous doctrines. Too many of those Fanatical spirits still remained behind, scattering their tares, and dispersing their blasphemous fol∣lies amongst simple people. In which number they prevailed so far upon More and Geofrys, that the first profess'd himself to be Christ, the last belie∣ved him to be such, and did so report him. Continuing obstinate in this frenzy, Geofrys was committed prisoner to the Marshasea in the Burrough of Souh∣wark, and More to the house of mad men (commonly called Bethlem) with∣out Bishops Gate, in the City of London. Where having remained above a year, without shewing any sign of their repentance, Geofrys was whipt on the 0th. of April from the said Marsha sea to Bethlem, with a paper bound about his head, which signified that this was William Geofrys, a most blasphemous Here∣tick, who denyed Christ to be in Heaven. At Bethlem he was whipt again in the presence of More, till the lash had extorted a confession of his damnable error. After which More was stript and whipt in the open streets till he had made the like acknowledgement, confessing Christ to be in Heaven, and himself to be a vile, miserable, and sinful man. Which being done, they were again remitted to their several prisons for their further cure. At which the Papists made good game, and charged it on the score of the Reformation, as if the Principles thereof did naturally lead men to those dreams and dotages. Whereas they could not chuse but know, that Christ our Saviour prophesied of the following times, that some should say le here is Christ, and others would say loe there is Christ; that Simon Magus even in the dayes of the Apostles, assumed unto himself the glo∣rious Title of the great power of God; that Menander in the age next following, did boldly arogate to himself the name of Christ; and finally that Montanus,
when the Church was stored with Learned and Religious Prelates,An. Reg. Eliz. 3. 1561. would needs be taken and accounted for the holy Ghost. Or if they think the Re∣formation might pretend unto more perfection than the Primitive times, they should have looked no farther back than to King Henry the 3d. in whose Reign the Popes authority in England was at the highest; and yet neither the Pope by his authority, nor by the diligence of his Preachers and other Mini∣sters, could so secure the Church from Mores and Geoffrys, but that two men rose up at that very time, both which affirmed themselves to be Jesus Christ, and were both hanged for it. And as Montanus could not go abroad without his Maximia and Priscilla to disperse his dotages, so these impostors also had their female followers, of which the one affirmed her self to be Mary Magdalen, and the other that she was the Virgin Mary. So that the Reforma∣tion is to be excused from being accessary in the least degree to these mens heresies, or else the Apostolical Age, and the Primitive times, yea and the Church of Rome it self (which they prize much more) must needs come under the necessity of the like condemnation. Nor did the Zuinglian Gospellers, or those of the Genevian party, rejoyce much less at a most lamentable accident which hapned to the cathedral Church of St. Paul on the fourth of June, on which day, about four or five of the clock in the afternoon, a fearful fire first shewed it self near the top of the Steeple, and from thence burnt down the Spire to the stone-work, and Bells, and raged so terribly, that within the space of four hours the Timber and Lead of the whole Church, and whatsoever else was combustible in it, was miserably consumed and burnt, to the great terror and amazement of all be∣holders; Which Church, the largest in the Christian world for all dimensions, contains in length 720 foot, or 240 Taylors yards, in breadth 130 foot, and in heighth from the pavement to the top of the roof 150 foot. The Steeple from the ground to the cross or Weather-cock contained in height 520 foo, of which the square Tower onely amounted to 260. the Pyramid or Spire to as many more. Which Spire being raised of maie Timber, and covered over with sheets of Lead, as it was the more apt to be inflamed, so was the mischief more incapable of a present remedy. The terror being over, most men began to cast about for the first occasion of such a miserable misfortune; the generality of the Zuinglian or Genevian party affirmed it for a just judgment of God upon an old idolatrous Fabrick, not throughly reformed and purged from its Superstitions, and would have been content that all other Cathedrals in the Kingdom had been so destroyed. The Papists on the other side ascribe it to some practice of the Zuinglian faction, out of their hatred unto all solem∣nity and decency in the service of God, performed more punctually in that Church, for examples sake, than in any other of the Kingdom. But generally it was ascribed by the common people to a flash of lightning, or some such suddain fire from heaven, though neither any lightning had been seen, or any clap of thunder had been heard that day. Which fiction notwithstanding got such credit amongst the vulgar, and amongst wiser persons too, that the burning of St. Paul's Steeple by lightning was reckoned amongst the ordina∣ry Epoches or accounts of time in our common Almanacks; and so it stood till within these thirty years now last past, when an old Plumber at his death confessed that wofull accident to have hapned through his negligence onely, in leaving carelesly a pan of coals and other fewel in the Steeple when he went to dinner, which catching hold of the dry timber in the Spire before his return, was grown so dangerous, that it was not possible to be quenched, and therefore to no purpose (as he conceived) to make any words of it. Since which discovery, that ridiculous Epoche hath no more been heard of. But the Queen quickly hearing what a great misfortune had befallen the City, regarded not the various reports of either party, but bent her thoughts upon the speedy reparation of those fearful ruines; And knowing right well (without the help of an Informer) that the Patrimony of that Church had
been so wasted in these latter times, that neither the Bishop, nor the Dean and Chapter were able to contribute any thing proportionable to so vast a charge; She directed her Letters to the Lord Mayor and city of London to take care therein, as most concerned in the preservation of their Mother-Church, and in the honor of their City. In obedience to whose Royal pleasure, the citi∣zens granted a Benevolence and three Fifteens to be speedily paid, besides the extraordinary bounty of particular persons, or was to be issued from the chamber. And that they might proceed therein with the greater zeal, the Queen sent in a thousand Marks in ready money, and warrants for one thou∣sand load of timber to be served out of her Majesties woods. Incouraged by which brave example, the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury contributed towards the furtherance of the work, the fortieth part of their Benefices which stood charged with first fruits, and the thirtieth part of those which had paid the same. The Clergy of the Diocess of London bestowing the thirtieth part of such of their Livings as were under the burthen of that payment, and the twentieth part of those which were not. To which the Bishop added at seve∣ral times the sum of 900 l 1 s. 11 d. the Dean and Chapter 136 l. 13 s. 4 d. By which and some other little helps (the benevolence, the three fifteens, and the contributions of the Bishop and Clergy, with the aid aforesaid, amounting to no more than 6702 l. 13 s. 4 d.) the work was carried on so fast, that be∣fore the end of April 1566. the timber work of the roof was not only fitted, but compleatly covered. The raising of a new spire was taken also into con∣sideration, but conceived unnecessary; but whether because it was too chargeable, or that some feared it might prove a temptation, is not yet de∣termined. And now the season of the year invites the Popes Nuncio into England, ad∣vanced already in his way as far as Flanders, and there expecting the Queens pleasure touching his admittance; For the Pope always constant to his reso∣lutions, could not be taken off from sending his Nuncio to the Queen, with whom he conceived himself to stand upon tearms of amity. It had been much laboured by the Guisiards and Spanish faction to divert him from it, by telling him that it would be an undervaluing of his power and person, to send a Nun∣co into England, or to any other Princes of the same perswasions, who openly professed a separation from the See of Rome. To which he made this prudent and pious answer, that he would humble himself even to Heresie it self; in regard that whatsoever was done to gain souls to Christ, did beseem that See. And to this resolution he adher'd the rather, because he had been told and assu∣red by Karn the old English Agent, that his Nuncio would be received by one half of the Kingdom with the Queens consent. But as it proved, they recko∣ned both without their Host and Hostess too, who desired not to give enter∣tainment unto any such guests. For having designed the Abbot Martiningo to this imployment, and the Abbot being advanced as far as Flanders, as before was said, he there received the Queens command not to cross the seas. Upon advertisement whereof, as well the King of Spain himself, as Ferdinand of Tole∣do Duke of Alva, (the most powerful Minister of that King) did earnestly in∣treat that he might be heard; commending the cause of his Legation, as visi∣bly conducing to the union of all the Christian Church in a general Council. But the Queen persevered in her first intent, affirming she could not treat with the Bishop of Rome, whose authority was excluded out of England by consent of Parliament. Nor had the Popes Nuncio in France any better fortune in treating with Throgmorton the English Agent in that Court, to advance the business; who though he did solicit by his Letters both the Queen and the Council, to give some satisfaction in that point to the French and Spaniards, (though not unto the Pope himself) could get no other answer from them, but the same denyal. For so it was, that on the first noise of the Nuncio's coming, the business had been taken into consideration at the Council Table, and strongly pleaded
on both sides, as mens judgements varied. By some it was alleged in favour of the Nuncio's coming, that Pope Pius was nothing of so rugged a nature, as his Predessor; that he had made a fair address unto the Queen by his last years Letters; that his designs did most apparently tend to the peace of Christen∣dome; that the admitting of the Nuncio was a matter which  nothing, it being ill left in her Majesties power, whether she would embrace or reject his Overtures; but that the refusing to admit him to a publick audience, was the most ready way to disoblige all Catholick Princes, with whom she stood at that time in terms of amity. On the other side it was alleged, that King Henry, a most prudent Prince, had formerly protested against the calling of this Council by Pope Paul the 3d. who did as much pretend to the peace of Christendome, as the Pope now being; that to admit a Minister of the Pope, in the quality or capacity of a Nuncio, inferred a acit acknowledgement of that supemacy, whereof he had been deprived by Act of Parliament; that the Popes of Rome have alwaies raised great advantages by the smallest conces∣sions, and therefore that it was most expedient for the good of the Kingdom, to keep him alwaies at a distance; that Queen Mary in favour only unto Pl, refused to give admittance to Cardinal Peitow, though coming from the Pope in quality of a Legate a Latee; that a great part of the people were in discon∣tentment with the change of Religion, and wanted nothing but such an op∣portunity to break out into action, as the Nuncio's presence might afford them; and therefore that it concerned the Queen to be as zealous for Religion and the weal of her people, as her sister the late Queen Mary was in maintenance of Cardinal Pole and his private authority. And to say truth, the greatest ob∣stacle in the way of the Nuncio's coming, was partly laid in it by the indis∣cretion of some Papists in England, and partly by the precipitancy of the Popes Ministers in Ireland. For so it was, that the only noise of the coming of a Nuncio from the Pope, had wrought in sundry evil-disposed persons such a cou∣rage and boldness, that they did not only break the Laws made against the Pope and his authority, with great audacity, but spread abroad false and slan∣derous reports, that the Queen was at the point to change her Religion, and alter the government of the Realm. Some also had adventured further, even to a practising with the Devil by conjurations, charms, and casting of Figures, to be informed in the length and continuance of her majesties Reign. And on the other side, the Popes Legate being at the same time in Ireland, not only joyned himself to some desperate Traytors, who busied themselves in stirring up rebellion there, but for as much as in him was, had deprived her Majesty of all Right and Title to that Kingdom. Upon which grounds it was carried clearly by the Board against the Nuncio. Nor would they vary from the Vote upon the intercession of the French, the Spaniard, or (whose displeasure was more dangerous) of the Duke of Alva. Nothing discouraged with the repulse which had been given to the French and Spaniard, the Emperour Ferdinand must make tryal of his fortune also, not as they did, in favour of the Nuncio's coming, but in perswading her to return to the old Religion. To this end he exhorts her by his Letters in a friendly way, not to relinquish the Communion of so many Catholick Kings and Princes, and her own Ancestors into the bargain; nor to prefer her sin∣gle judgement, and the judgement of a few private persons, and those not the most learned neither, before the judgement and determination of the Church of Christ. That if she were resolved to persist in her own opinion, she should deal favourably with so many reverend and Religious Prelates as she kept in prison, and which she kept in prison for no other reason but for adhering un∣to that Religion which himself professed; and, finally he intreats most earnest∣ly, that she would set apart some Churches to the use of the Catholicks, in which they might with freedome exercise their own Religion, according to the Rites and Doctrines of the Church of Rome. To which desires she made a full and sufficient answer, by satisfying him touching her merciful dealing with
those Bishops, whom for their obstinacy and many other weighty reasons, she had deprived of their preferments in the Church. And to the rest she answered, That she had setled her Religion on so sure a bottome, that she could not easi∣ly be changed; that she doubted not but that she had many learned men in her Dominions, which were able to defend the doctrine by them taught, a∣gainst all Opponents; and that for granting any Churches to the use of the Papists, it was a point so contrary to the polity and good Lawes of the Land, that she desired to be excused for not yielding to it. In which last she seemed to have an eye upon the Edict of the Emperour Constantine, touching the mee∣tings of the Marcionites, Novatians, Valentinians, and other Hereticks of that age; In which it was enjoined, that none of them should from thenceforth hold any assemblys, and that for the more certain conforming unto his De∣cree, those Churches or other houses whatsoever they were, in which they used to hold their Meetings, should be demolished to the ground, to the end that there might be no place in which such men as were devoted to their su∣perstitious faction, might have the opportunity of assembling together. For which the Reader may consult Eusebius in the life of Constantine, l. b. 3. cap. 63. But that it might appear both to him and others, that she was ready to shew all just favours, she laid a most severe command upon all her Officers, for the full payment of all such pensions, as had been granted unto all such Abbots, Monks and Friers, in the time of her father, as were not since preferred in the Church to cures or dignities. And this to be performed to the utmost far∣thing, on pain of her most high displeasure in neglect thereof. It could not be but that the governing of her affairs with such an even and steady hand, though it occasioned admiration in some, must needs create both envy and displeasure in the hearts of other Christian Princes, from none of which she had a juster cause to fear some practice, than the King of Spain, or rather from the fierce and intemperate Spirit of the Duke of Alva, as appeared afterwards when he was made Lord Deputy, or Vice-Gerent of the Belgick Provinces. They had both shewed themselves offended, because their inter∣cession in behalf of the Nuncio had found no better entertainment; and when great persons are displeased, it is no hard matter for them to revenge them∣selves, if they find their adversaries either weak or not well provided. But the Queen looked so well about her, as not to be taken tardy in either kind. For which end she augments her store of Arms and Ammunition, and all things ne∣cessary for the defence of her Kingdom; which course she had happily begun in the year foregoing. But holding it a safer maxim in the Schools of Polity, not to admit, than to endeavour by strong hand to expel an enemy, She entertains some fortunate thoughts of walling her Kingdom round about with a puissant Navy, for Merchants had already increased their shipping, by managing some part of that wealthy trade which formerly had been monopolized by the Hase or Easterlings. And she resolves not to be wanting to her self in building ships of such a burthen, and so fit for service, as might inable her in short time, not only to protect her Merchants, but command the Ocean. Of which the Spaniard found good proof to his great loss, and almost to his total ruine, in the last 20 years of her glorious government. And knowing right well that mony was the inew of war, she fell upon a prudent and present course to fill her coffers. Most of the monies in the Kingdom were of forein coynage, brought hither for the most part by the Easterling and Flemish Merchants. These she called in by Pro∣clamation, ted the 15th. of November (being but two dayes before the end of this 3d. year) commanding them to be brought to her Majesties Mint, there to be coyned, and take the stamp of her Royal authority, or otherwise not to pass for current within this Realm, which counsel took such good effect, that mo∣nies came flowing into the Mint, insomuch that there was weekly brought in∣to the Tower of London, for the space of half a year together, 8000. 10000. 12000. 16000. 20000. 22000 l. of silver plate, and as much more in Pistols, and other gold of Spanish coins, which were great sums according to the stand∣ard
of those early dayes, and therefore no small profit to be growing to her by the coynage of them. The Genevians slept not all this while, but were as busily imployed in practi∣sing upon the Church, as were the Romanists in plotting against the Queen. Nothing would satisfie them, but the nakedness and simplicity of the Zuingli∣an Churches, the new fashions taken up at Franckfort, and the Presbyteries of Geneva. According to the pattern which they saw in those mounts, the Church of England is to be modell'd; nor would the Temple of Jerusalem have served their turn, if a new Altar fashioned by that which they found at Damascus, might not have been erected in it. And they drove on so fast upon it, that in some places they had taken down the steps where the Atar stood, and brought the Holy Table into the midst of the Church; in others they had laid aside the antient use of Godfathers and Godmothers in the administration of Baptism, and left the answering for the child to the charge of the father. The weekly Fasts, the time of Lent, and all other dayes of abstinence by the Church com∣manded, were looked upon as superstitious observations. No fast by them al∣lowed of but occasional only, and then too of their own appointing. And the like course they took with the Festivals also, neglecting those which had been instituted by the Church, as humane inventions, not fit to be retained in a Church reformed. And finally, that they might wind in there outlandish Doctrines with such forein usages, they had procured some of the inferiour Ordinaries to impose upon their several Parishes, certain new books of Ser∣mons and Expositions of the holy Scripture, which neither were required by the Queens Injunctions, nor by Act of Parliament. Some abuses also were discovered in the Regular Clergy, who served in Churches of peculiar or exempt jurisdiction. Amongst whom it began to grow too ordinary, to marry all such as came unto them, without Bains or Licence, and many times not only without the privity, but against the express pleasure and command of their Parents. For which those Churches past by the name of Lawlesse Church∣es in the voice of the people. For remedy whereof it was found necessary by the Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry, to have recourse unto the power which was given unto him by the Queens Commission, and by a clause or passage of the Act of Parliament for the Uni∣formity of Common Prayer and Service in the Church, &c. As one of the Com∣missioners for Causes Ecclesiastical, he was authorized with the rest of his as∣sociates, according to the Statute made in that behalf, To reform, redresse, order, correct and amend all such Errours, Heresies, Schisms, abuses, offences, conempts and enormities whatsoever, as might from time to time arise in the Church of England, and did require to be redressed and reformed to the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of vertue, and conservation of the peace and unity of the Kingdom. And in the passage of the Act before remembred, it was especially provided, That all such Ornaments of the Church, and of the Ministers thereof, should be retained and be in use, as were in the Church of England by authority of Parliament, in the second year of the Reign of King Edward the 6th. until further Order should be therein taken by authority of the Queens Majesty, with the advice of her Commissioners Appointed & Ordered under the Great Seal of England for Causes Ecclesiastical, or of the Metropolitan of this Realm. And also if there shall happen any contempt or irreverence to be used in the Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, by the misusing of the Or∣ders of the said Book of Common Prayer; the Queens Majesty might by the like advice of the said Commissioners or Metropolitan, Ordain or publish such further Ceremonies or Rites, as should be most for the advance of Gods glory, the edifying of his Church, and the due reverence of Christs holy My∣steries and Sacraments. Fortified and assured by which double power, the Archbishop by the Queens consent, and the advice of some of the Bishops, Commissionated and instru∣cted to the same intent, sets forth a certain book of Orders to be diligently
observed and executed by all and singular persons whom it might concern. In which it was provided, That no Parson, Vicar or Curate of any exempt Church, (commonly called Lawless Churches) should from thenceforth at∣tempt to conjoin, by solemnization of Matrimony, any not being of his or their Parish Church, without sufficient testimony of the Bains being ask'd in the several Churches where they dwel, or otherwise were sufficiently licenced. That there should be no other dayes observed for Holy days or Fasting dayes, as of duty and commandment, but only such Holy dayes as be expressed for Holy dayes in the Calendar lately set forth by the Queens authority; and none other Fasting dayes to be so commanded, but as the Lawes and Proclamations of the Queens Majesty should appoint; that it should not be lawful to any Ordinary, to assign or enjoyn the Parishes to buy any Books of Sermons or Expositions in any sort, than is already, or shall be hereafter appointed by publick Authority; that neither the Curates, or Parents of the children which are brought to Baptism, should answer for them at the Font, but that the antient use of Godfathers and Godmothers should be still retained; and finally, that in all such Churches in which the steps to the Altar were not taken down, the said steps should remain as before they did; that the Communion Table should be set in the said place where the steps then were, or had formerly stood; and that the Table of Gods Precepts should be fixed upon the wall over the said Communion Board. Which passage compared with that in the Advertisements, published in the year 1565. (of which more hereafter) make up this construction, that the Communion Table was to stand above the steps, and under the Command∣ments; and therefore all along the wall, on which the ten Commandments were appointed to be placed, which was directly where the Altar had stood be∣fore. Some other Innovations and disorders had been obtruded on the Church at the same time also by those of the Genevian faction; for the suppressing whereof, before they should prescribe to any Antiquity, the like course was taken. But what those Innovations and disorders were, will easily be seen by the perusal of the Orders themselves, which were then published in Print by the Queens command; as a judicious Apothecary is able to conjecture by the Doctors Recipe at the distemper of the Patient, and the true quality of the disease. Nothing else memorable in this year of a publick nature, but the foundation of the Merchant-Taylors School in London, first founded by the Master, War∣den and Assistants of the Company of Merchant-Taylors, whence it had the name, and by them founded for a seminary to St John's in Oxon, built and endowed at the sole costs and charges of one of their Livery. The School kept in a fair large house in the Parish of St Laurence Poutney, heretofore called the Mannor of Roose, belonging to the Dukes of Ruckingham; towards the pur∣chase and accommodating whereof to the present use, five hundred pounds was given by one Richard Hills, who had been once Master of the Company, and still lives in the charity of so good a work. The day of the foundation is affirmed by Stow to have been the 21 of March, and so may either fall in the year 1560. or 1561. according to the several computations which are now in use; but howsoever within the compass of this third year of the Queen. And it is probable, that it may be fixed by him upon that day, either because the purchase of the House doth bear date upon it, or because it was then first open∣ed for a Grammar School. And of this kind, but of a far more private nature, was the foundation of another Grammar School in the Town of Sandwich, built at the charge of Sir Roger Manwood, and indowed with 40 l. per annum, which was a very large allowance as the times then were.
Anno Reg. Eliz. 4. A. D. 1561, 1562. GReat preparations had been made in the former year in order to the hold∣ing and continuance of the Council of Trent,An. Reg. Eliz. 4. 1561. many Italian Bishops (which were to be maintained at the Popes charge) being sent before, and the Popes Legats hastning after, to be there in readiness when the Ambassadors and Prelates of forein Nations should give attendance on the same;1561/2. After long expectation it begins at the last on the 18th. of January, the Legats having first obtained in a privat Session, that nothing should be discussed in the Council but what should be first proposed by them; which in effect was to subvert the whole hopes of that Reformation, which was desired by many pious men amongst them. Which day being come, a Proession was made of the whole Clergy of the city, of the Divines & Prelates, (who besides the Caroinals were 112 that did wear Miters) accompanied by their families, and by many country people armed, going from St. Peters Church to the Cathedral, where the Cardinal of Mantua sung the Mass of the holy Ghost, and Gasparo del Fosso Archbishop of Rheggio made the Sermon; his subject was the Au∣thority of the Church, Primacy of the Pope, and Power of Councils; He said, That the Church had as much authority as the Word of God, that the Church hath changed the Sabbath ordained by God, into Sunday, and taken away Cir∣cumcision, formerly commanded by Divine Majesty, and that these precepts are changed, not by the preaching of Christ, but by the authority of the Church. Turning himself unto the Fathers, he exhorted them to labour constantly against the Protestants, being assured, that as the Holy Ghost could not erre, so neither could they be deceived. And having sung the Hymn of Come holy Ghost, the Secretary, who was Bishop of Tilesie, read the Bull of the Convoca∣tion, and the foresaid Archbishop propounded the Decree for opening the Council, saying, Fathers, doth it please you that the General Council of Trent should be celebrated from this day, all suspension whatsoever being removed, to han∣dle with due order that which shall seem fit to the Synod, the Legats and Presidents propsing, to remove the controversies of Religion, correct Manners, and reconcile the Peace of the Church? To which they answered Placet with so full a vote, that there were found no more than four Bishops, and those four all Spaniards, who stumbled at the clause about discussing nothing in the time of that Coun∣cil, but what the Legats should propose; so servile were the rest, in prostitu∣ting the Authority of the Council to the lust of the Pope. In the first opening of the Council it was propounded by the Legates amongst other things, Whether a safe conduct should be given unto those who were fallen into heresie, with a large promise of great and singular clemency, so that they would repent, and acknowledge the power of the Catholick Church. In the discus∣sing of which point, the Cardinal of Manua was for the affirmative, seeing that it was a remedy used by all Princes, in Seditions or Rebellions, to pardon those whom they could not overcome, because by that means, those which were least faulty did retire, and the other did remain more weak. But as for the safe conduct, after it had been considered of and resolved at Rome, it was again disputed in the Council on the third of March, whether it was to be given by name to the French, English, and Scots, and some spake of the Greeks and other Nations of the East. It was presently seen, that these poor men, af∣flicted in servitude, could not without danger and assistance of mony think of counsels; And some said▪ that there being a division of the Protestants, it was good to let them alone, and not to name them, alleging the danger of moving ill humors in a body which was then quiet. To give a safe conduct to the English-men, which neither they nor any of them did require, would be a great indignity; they were content it should be given to the Scots, because their Queen would demand it, but so, as that the demand should first be made.
For France there was a doubt made,An. Reg. Eliz. 4. 1560. whether the Kings Council would take it ill or not, because it would be thought to be a declaration that that King had Rebels. Of Germany none would doubt, because it had been formerly granted unto them; and if it were granted to that Nation alone, it would seem that the others were abandoned. But at the last, all difficulties were resolved into this conclusion, that the safe conduct should be given unto those of Germany in the same words wherein it formerly had passed, An. 1552. & that the like con∣duct in the self-same words wherin it was given to the Germans, should be given to all of every Nation, Province, City and Place, where any thing was preached, taught, & believed, contrary to that which was believed in the Church of Rome. But the Legats might have spared themselves the trouble of these conside∣rations, the Protestant Bishops of England not being so forward to venture themselves into that Council on such weak assurance, considering how ill the safe conduct had been formerly kept to John Hus and Jerom of Prague at the Council of Constance: And as for those of the Papal party, though they might have a good will to be gadding thither, yet the Queen kept them safe enough from going abroad. So that there was no hopes for any English Bi∣shops of either party to attend that service; The Queen had absolutely refused to admit the Nunci, when he was sent on purpose to invite them to it. And some of the most learned of that sacred Order had shown sufficient reasons in their printed Manifest, why no such service or attendance could be looked for from them. One Scipio, a Gentleman of Venice, who formerly had some ac∣quaintance with Bishop Jewel when he was a student in Padua, had heard of Martiningo's ill success in his Negotiation, which notwithstanding, he re∣solved to spend some eloquence in labouring to obtain that point by his pri∣vate Letters, which the Nuncio could not gain as a public Minister; And to this end he writes his Letters of expostulation to his old friend Mr. Jewel, preferred not long before to the See of Salisbury, in which he seemed to ad∣mire exceedingly that England should send no Ambassador, nor Message, or Letter, to excuse their Nations absence from the general Appearance of Christianity in that Sacred Council, In the next place, he highly extolled the antiquity and use of General Councils, as the onely means to decide contro∣versies in Religion, and compose the distractions in the Church, concluding it a superlative sin for any to decline the authority of it. But this Letter did not long remain unanswered, that learned Prelate was not so unstudied in the nature of ouncils, as not to know how little of a General Council could be found at Trent; And therefore he returns an Answer to the Proposition, so eloquently penned, and so elaborately digested▪ that neither Scipio himself, nor any other of that party, durst reply upon him; the Answer to be found at large in the end of the history of this Council, translated into English by Sir Natha∣niel Brent, late Warden of Merton College in Oxon, &c. which though it were no other than the Answer of one single Prelate, and writ on a particular oc∣casion to  private friend, yet since it speaks the sense of all the rest of the , nd to justifie the result of the Council-Table on the debate about or refusing the Popes invitation, it will not be amiss to present the sum and substance of it in a short Epitome. In the first place he signifies to the said Scipo, that a great part of the world professing the name of Christ (as Greeks, Armenians, Abssines, &c. with all the Eastern Church) were neither sent o nor summoned to this Council. Secondly, That England's absence was not so great a wonder, seeing many other Kingdoms and Free states (as Denmark, Sweden, Scotland, Princes of Germany, and Hanse-towns) were not represented in this Council by any of their Ambassadors. Thirdly▪ That this pretended Council was not called according to the antient custom of the Church, by the Imperial Authority, but by the Papal Usurpation. Fourthly, That Trent was a petty place, not of sufficient receit for such multitudes as necessarily should repair to a General Council. Fifthly, That Pope Pius the 4th. by whose command the Council
was re-assembled, purchad his place by the unjust practices of Simonie and Briberie, and managed it with murder and cruelty. Sixthly, That repairing to Councils was a free act, and none ought to be condemned of Contumacy, if it stood more with their conveniency to stay at home. Seventhly, That an∣tiently it was accepted as a reasonable excuse of holy Pisops, absenting or withdrawing themselves from any Council, if they vehemently suspected ought would be acted therein prejudicial to the truth, lest their (though not actual) included concurrence might be interpreted a countenancing thereof. Eighthly, That our Bishops were employed in feeding their Flocks, and go∣verning their Churches, and could not be spared from their charge without prejudice to their consciences. Ninthly, That the Members of that Council of Trent, both Bishops and Abbots, were by Oath pregaged to the Pope, To defend and maintain his authority against all the world. And lastly, He desired to know in what capacity the English Clergy should appear in this Council, not as free persons to debate matters therein, in regard they had been pre-con∣demned as Hereticks by Pope Julius the 3d. nor as offenders to receive the sentence of condemnation, to which they had no reason to submit themselves. Of these refusals and the reasons of them, neither the Pope at Rome, nor the Cardinal Legts in the Council could pretend to be ignorant, yet still the expectation of the comming of some English Bishops must be kept on foot, partly for the encouragement of such as were there already, and partly for the drawing on of others who came slowly forwards, and sometimes also it was used for an artifice to divert the Prelates when any business was in agitation which seemed dangerous to them. For so it hapned, that some of the Prelates being earnest in the point of Residence, none of the Legats could devise a bet∣ter expedient to put off that Question, than to propose that some means should be used to set at liberty the English Bishops which were imprisoned by their Queen, that comming to the Council it might be said, that that noble Nation was present also, and not wholly alienated from the Church. This pleased all, but the common opinion was, that it might sooner be desired than hoped for: They concluded, that the Queen having refused to receive a Nuncio expresly sent from the Pope, it could not be hoped that she would hearken to the Council; therefore all they could do was, to perswade the Catholick Princes to mediate for them: And mediate though they did, as before was said, both for the admitting of the Nuncio, and the restoring of those Bishops to their for∣mer liberty, they were not able to prevail, especially as to the licensing of any of them to attend the Council; which if the Queen had yielded to, she must have armed so many of her enemies to disturb her peace, who questionless would have practised with the Ambassadors of all Princes, and with the Pre∣lates of all Nations whom they found there present, to work some notable al∣teration in the Government and affairs of England. Of all the Bishops which were left in England at the end of the Parliament, I find none but Pates of Worcester and Goldnel of St. Asaph who forsook the Kingdom, though possibly many of the rest might have done so also, if they had not either been well watched, or trusted upon their Parol to be forth-comming (as the phrase is) upon all occasions. And though I find the name of Pates subscribed to some of the former Sessions, yet it is not to be found to this, the man being of a moderate and gentle spirit, and possibly not willing to engage himself in any Counsels which might prove detrimental to his native country; And as for Goldnel, though his zeal to Popery was strong enough to carry him beyond the Seas, yet it did not carry him so far as Trent, there being so many retire∣ing places nearer home in which he might repose himself with more con∣tentment. But leaving the Fathers in Trent to expect the comming of the holy Ghost in a cloak-bag from Rome, according to the common scorn which was put upon them, we must prepare our selves for England, first taking in our way the affairs of France, which now began to take up a great part of the
thoughts of the Queen and her Council. The Reformed Religion had made some entrance in that kingdome during the Reign of king rancis the first,An. Reg. Eliz. 4. 1562. exceedingly dispersed and propagated in most parts thereof, notwithstanding the frequent Martyrdoms of particular persons, the great and terrible Massacres of whole Townships, Commonalties, and Churches, even by hundreds and thousands in divers places of the Realm. To which encrease, the fickle nature of the French, the diligence of their Preachers, and the near neighbourhood of Genev, were of great advantage; all which advantages were much improv∣ed by the authority and reputation which Calvin carried in those Churches, and the contentment which the people took in a form of Government, where∣in they were to have a share by the rules of their Discipline, and thereby draw the managery of affairs unto themselves. Being grown numerous in the City of Tours, and not permitted to enjoy the liberty of assembling within the walls, they held their meetings, at a village not far off, for their publick De∣votions; the way to which leading through the gate of St. Hugo is thought to have occasioned the name of Hugonots, which others think to have been given them by reason of their frequent nightly meetings, resembled by the French to the walking of a Night-spirit which they called St. Hugh; but from what ground soever it came, it grew in short time to be generally given as a by∣name to those which professed the Reformed Religion, (whether in France or else-where) after Calvin's platform. Their numbers not diminished by so many butcheries, gave them the reputation of a party both stout and active, which rendred them the subject of some jealousie to the Roman Catholicks, and specially to those of the House of Guise, who laboured nothing more than their extirpation. But this severity sorted to no other effect than to confirm them in their Doctrines, and attract many others to them, who disdained to see poor people drawn every day to the Stake to be burned, guilty of nothing but of zeal to worship God, and to save their own souls: To whom were joyned many others, who thinking the Guisiards to be the cause of all the dis∣orders in the Kingdom, judged it an Heroick Act to deliver it from oppressi∣on, by taking the publick Administration out of their hands. But nothing more encreased their party than the accession of almst all the Princes of the Blood of the House of Burbon, the Chiefs whereof were the Duke of Vendosm, (who called himself King of Navarr in right of his Wife) the Princes of Conde, the Duke of Montpensier, who finding themselves neg∣lected by the Queen-Mother, and oppressed by the Guisiards, retired in no small discontments from the Court, and being otherwise unable to make good their quarrels, offered themselves as Leaders of the Hgonot-faction, who very cheerfully submitted to their rule and conduct. The better to con∣firm their minds, they caused the principal Lawyers of Germany and France, and the most famous Protestant Divines, to publish in writing, that without violating the Majesty of the King, and the dignity of the lawful Magistrate, they might oppose with Arms the violent Domination of the House of Guise, who did not onely labour to suppress the true Religion, and obstruct the free passage of Justice, but seemed to keep the King in prison. Having thus formed their Party in the minority of King rancis the second, their first design was, that a great multitude should appear before the King without Arms, to de∣mand, that the severity of the judgments might be mitigated, and liberty of conscience granted; intending that they should be followed by Gentlemen, who should make supplication against the Government of the Guisiards. But the purpose being made known to the Court, the King was removed from Blos n open Town, to the strong Castle of Amboise, as if he could not other∣wise be safe from some present Treason: After which followed a strict inquiry after all those who had a hand in the design, the punishment of some, and the flight of others, with the conclusion taken up by the Guisian faction, to settle the Spanish Inquisition in the Realm of France. To pacifie the present troubles, an Edict is published by the King on the 18th. of March 1560, (in the French
account) for the pardoning of all, who simply moved with the zeal of Reli∣gion, had ingaged in the supposed conspiracy, upon condition that they disar∣med within 24 hours; and after that another Edict, by which a general pardon was indulged to all Reformati, but so, that all assemblies under the colour of Religion were prohibited by it, and a charge laid upon the Bishops to take unto themselves the cognisance of all causes of Heresie in their several Dioces∣ses. But this so little edified with those of that party, that greater tumults were occasioned by it, in Provence, Languedock, and Poicto. To which places the Ministers of Geneva were called, who most willingly came. By whose Ser∣mons the number of Protestants so increased in those Provinces, and by their Agents in most others, that in this year 1562. they were distributed into two thousand one hundred and fifty Churches, as appeared upon a just computati∣on of them. But in the midst of these improvements, the power and reputation of the side was shrewdly weakned by the falling off of Anthony Duke of Vendosme, and King of , who did not only openly forsake the party, but afterwards joined himself in counsel and design against it with the Duke of Guise. The founding of so great a pillar, threatned a quick ruine to the fabrick, if some other butteress were not found to support the same. The war was carried on from one place to another, but seemed to aim most at the reduction of Nor∣mand, where the Hugonos had possessed themselves of some Towns and Ca∣sles, by which they might be able to distress the City of Paris, and thereby make a great impression on the rest of the Kingdom. It was thereupon advised by Lewis Prince of Code, the Cardinal Chastilion, and other of the principal Leaders. that they should put themselves under the protection of the Queen of England, wh had not long before so seasonably relieved the Scots in the like distress. No better counsel being offered, nor any hope of succour to be had elsewhere, the Vidame of Chartresse, Governour at that time of the Port of Newhaven, together with the Bayli of Rowen, the Seneshal of Diep, and others, made their address unto the Queen in the name of the Prince of Conde, and of all the rest of the Confederates, who professed the Gospel in that King∣dom; they profered to her the said Towns whereof they had charge, if it would please her Majesty to further their proceedings in defence of the Go∣spel (as they called it.) And seemed to justifie their offer by a publick ac∣knowledgement, that her Majesty was not only true inheritour to those Towns, but also to the whole Kingdom of France. But neither their coming, not their message was unknown unto her, who had been secretly advertised of all passages there by Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, a vigilant and dexterous man, who being her Majesties Resident in that Kingdom, had driven the bargain be∣fore hand, and made all things in readiness against their coming. Nor was the Queen hard to be intreated to appear in that cause which seemed so much to her advantage. She was not ignorant of the pretensions of the Queen of Scots, and the practices of her Uncles of the House of Guse to advance her interess. Who if they should possess themselves of all the strengths in the Dukedom of Normandy, might from thence find an easie passage into England, when she least looked for them. On these and other considerations of the like importance, it was agreed up∣on between them, that the Queen should supply the Prince of Conde and his associates, with a sufficient quantity of money, corn, and ammunition, for the service of the French King, against the plots and practices of the House of Guise; that she should aid them with her forces both by land and sea, for the taking in of such Castles, Towns, and Ports, as were possessed by the faction of the said Duke; that the said Prince of Conde and his associates should not come to any terms of peace with the opposite party, without the privity and approbation of the Queen; and that as well for securing the payment of all such monies, as for the safe going in and out of all such forces as her Majesty should supply them with, the Town and Port of Newhaven should be put unto
her Majesties hands, to be garrison'd by English souldiers, and commanded by any person of quality, whom her Majesty should authorise to keep and defend the same. Immediately on which accord, a Manifest was published in the name of the Queen; in which it was declared, how much she had preferred the peace of Christendom before her own particular interes; that in persuance of that general affection to the publick peace, she had relinquished her claim to the Town of Calais for the term of eight years, when as all other Princes were re∣stored by that Treaty to their lost estates; that for the same reasons she had undertaken to preserve the Scots from being made vassals to the French, with∣out retaining any part of that Kingdom in her own possession after the service was performed; that with the like bowels of commiseration, she had observed how much the Queen-Mother of France was awed, and the young King him∣self inthralled by the Guisian faction, who in their names, and under pretence of their authority, endeavoured to root out the professors of the Reformed Religion; that in persuance of that purpose, they had caused such terrible massacres to be made at Vassey, Paris, Sene, Tholouse, loys, Towers, Angier, and other places, that there were thought to be butchered no fewer than one hundred thousand of the naturall French, between the first of March and the 20th. of August then last past; that with like violence and injustice, they had treated such of her Majesties subjects as traded in the Ports of Bretagne, whom they caused to be apprehended, spoiled, and miserably imprisoned, such as en∣deavoured to preserve themselves to be cruelly killed, their goods and mer∣chandise to be seized, without charging any other crime upon them, but that they were Hgonos; and finally, that in consideration of the Premises, her Majesty could do no less than use her best endeavors for rescuing the French King and his Mother, out of the power of that dangerous faction, for aiding such of the French subjects as preferred the service of their King, and the good of their Country, before all other respects whatsoever, for preserving the Reformed Religion from an universal destruction, and the maintaining of her own subjects and Dominions in peace and safety. Nor did she only publish the afoesaid Manifest, the better to satisfie all those whom it might concern in the reasons of her taking arms upon this occasion, but she gives a more particul account of it to the King of Spain, whom she considered as the chief Patron of the Guisian League. And knowing how un∣safe it was for her to appear alone in a cause of that nature and importance, she deals by Knollis and other of her Agents, with the Princes of Germany, to give their timely assistane to the Prince of Conde, in maintenance of that Re∣ligion which themselves professed. But howsoever, not expecting the success of those counsels, she proceeds to the supplying of the said Prince and his party, with all things necessary for the war, and sends over a sufficient strength of ships, arms, and men, as well to scour the seas, as secure the land. The men amounting to 6000, were divided into two equal parts, of which the one was destined to the defence of Rowen and Diepe, then being in the hands of the Confederates; the other to take possession of the Town of Newhaven, which by the Townsmen and Inhabitants was joyfully surrender'd into the hands of the English. The Town commodiously seated at the mouth of the Seine, and having the command of a spacious Bay, in former times not much observed or esteemed. But being more carefully considered of by King Francis the first, he cased the Bay to be inlarged, the passages into i cleared, and the entran∣ces of it to be strongly fortified; which falling into the hands of any enemy, might have destroyed the trade of Rowen and Paris, being both built upon the River. Called for this reason Franciscopolis, by our Latine Writers, Newha∣ven by the English Merchant, and Haver d' Grace (by reason of the beauty of it) amongst the French, it hath been looked on ever since as a place of con∣sequence. For her Commander in Chief, she sends over the Lord Ambrose Dudley, the eldest son then living of the late Duke of Northumberland, whom on the 26th. of December, she had created Lord Lisl, and Earl of Warwick. And he
accordingly preparing for his passage over, took shipping at Portsmouth on the 17th. of October, but was so hindered by cross winds, that he could not reach the Town till the 29th. where he was solemnly received with a peal of Ordnance. On the morrow after he received into the Town a Troop of Light∣horse-men, all Scots, and of the Regiment of Count Montgomery, which were sent to him from the Port of Diep; and the next day he took the Oath of his principal Officers, on whose fidelity and courage the safty of the place see∣med most to depend. On the 4th. of November, a Bark belonging to the Town, brought in four Merchants Ships of Bretagne, fraughted for the most part with Gascoin Wines; as afterwards two more with the like commodity, which proved a great refreshment to the souldiers in it. And on the 6th. the Reingrave shewed himself upon the top of the hills with two thousand foot; betwixt whom and the garison souldiers of Hareflew on the one side, and those of Newhaven on the other, the remainder of the year was taken up in continu∣al skirmishes. Cross we next over into Scotland, that we may see in what condition our affairs stood there. The death of the late French King had made that King∣dom so uncomfortable to the Queen of Scots, that she desired to hasten back into her own. And thereunto she was much animated by the Heads of either faction, but on different ends. Her presence earnestly solicited by the Popish party, in hope by her authority to suppress their opposites, and by the Prote∣stants, on some strong presumptions, that they could deal better with her when they had her there, than when she was protected by the power of France, and governed by the counsels of the Guisian faction. Before her leaving of that Kingdom, she had been pressed by Throgmorton the English Resident, to ratifie the Pacification mde at Edenborough, to which she would by no means yield, till she had advised with the nobility, and other of her subjects of the Realm of Scotland. This makes the Queen of England doubtful that she should be deserted by the Scots of the Congregation, to whom she had done so many good offices in the time of their troubles. But having dealt with some of the chief amongst them, she found a resolution in them, for adhering to her, which so assured her on that side, that she feared but little danger from the Queen and her party, whensoever she came. Which notwithstanding, it was held to be the safer course to intercept her if they could in her passage thither. And to that end a squadron of ships was sent to sea, but under colour of suppressing some Pirates, by whom the trade of merchandise was given out to be hindered. But the taking of one of the Scotish ships, with the Earl of Eglington, and other passengers of that Nation were making homewards, declared sufficiently that they looked for a far richer prize. But for the Queen of Scots her self, by rea∣son of a thick fog which hung over the seas, she past by the English unpercei∣ved, and landed at the Port of Leeth on the 20th. of August, Anno 1561. From thence she sends Lethington the younger, with Letters to the Queen of Eng∣land, tending especially to express that great love and kindness which she bare to her, as to her dearest friend and Sister, and the desire she had to continue in true and sincere friendship with her. At what time she received letters also to the same effect from some of the Nobility of that Kingdom. In which they sig∣nified withall, That the surest way to continue amity and friendship betwixt them two, were to declare the Queen of Scots to be her next and lawful heir to the Kingdom of England. But this demand, as it was unlooked for, so was it of too high a nature to be hastily answered. So that the Laird of Lethington could prevail no further at that time, than to gain a promise from the Queen, that she would do nothing to the prejudice of the Title of her Cosen of Scotland. The rest was left to be considered of in a personal conference, appointed to be held at York in the end of June. Which motion first proceeded from the Queen of Scots, who was thought to have been earnest and real in it, partly for making a firm peace with her  of England, and partly to make her self known to the principal subjects
of that Country. Neither was the meeting disliked of the better sort, as think∣ing it would serve, besides the preservation of the common peace, to bring her to a liking of the Reformed Religion. But they who were popishly set, fearing greatly the conference, spake openly against it, saying, that of such in∣terviews, there was never seen any good effect; and that it would not be safe for the Queen of Scots to put he self into the power of her, to whose King∣dom she had made a claim. But notwithstanding these unprofitable delibera∣tions, the interview was agreed upon, and the numbers on either side determi∣ned, and all things provided for the journey, when suddenly the Queen of England by her Letters excused her self, desiring that it might be respited till the year next following. Which the Scots Queen was not sorry to hear upon further thoughts, considering how much the French King and her Uncles of the House of Guise, might have been dissatisfied on the newes of that Inter-Parleance. Neither did Queen Elizabeth want her reasons to decline the meeting, which some believe was never really intended by her; but that she ho∣ped the fail would have been on  other side, which would have given her the same cause of quarrel against the daughter, which King Henry took against the father, on the like disappointment. Others conceived, that she might fear a growing less by it in the eyes of her people, the Queen of Scots having so ma∣ny advantages above her both in youth and beauty. But it was generally con∣cluded to be against all reason of State, to give her Rival opportunity of grow∣ing gracious with the Nobility and Gentry of England, and laying the founda∣tion of a faction in the Court it self. But the Queen had deeper matters to take up her thoughts than any such feminine jealousies and emulations, though these perhaps might also have their place amongst them. A spirit of sedition had begun to shew it self in the year last past, upon the bare noise of the coming of the Nuncio hither. Not much diminished (if it were not much increased) by the sitting of the Council of Trent, in which it was believed that some proceedings would be had against her. Which seeds being sowen, began first to shew themselves in a petit rebellion, in Merton College in Oxon; sufficiently discovered by those small beginnings, that some design of greater consequence was in agita∣tion. The Wardenship of that house being void by the death of Gervase, one Man is chosen to the place. But his election being questioned, and his admis∣sion thereupon opposed by a contrary faction, the goverment of the College devolved of course upon one Hall a Senior Fellow, sufficiently known to be of Popish inclinations, though for the saving of his place he had conformed as others did, to the present time. No sooner was he in this power, but he re∣trives some old superstitious hymns, which formerly had been sung on several Festivals in the times of Popery, prohibiting the use of such as had been intro∣duced by Gervase the late Warden there. This gave incouragement and op∣portunity to the Popish party, to insult over the rest, especially over all those of the younger sort, who had not been trained up in their Popish principles; so that it seemed a penal matter to be thought a Protestant. Notice whereof being given to Archbishop Parker, (the Ordinary Visitour of that College in the Right of his See) he summoneth Hall on the 20th. of May to appear before him, and caused the Citation to be fastned to the Gate of the College. But his authority in that case was so little regarded, that the seal of the Citation was torn off by some of that party. Hereupon followed a solemn visitation of the College by the said Archbishop. The result whereof was briefly this, that all were generally examined; Man confirmed Warden, Hall justly expelled, his party publickly admonished; the young scholars relieved, the Papists cur∣bed and suppressed, and Protestants countenanced and incouraged in the whole University. But this was only the Essay of those greater commotions which were to have insued upon it; though withall it proved a prognostick of their ill success, which constantly attended the designs of the Romish faction. For presently
on the neck of this a far more dangerous conspiracy declared it self in some chief Leaders of that party; The present sitting of the Council, the practices of some forein Ministers, and the Queens countenancing the French Hugoots, then being in Arms against their King, might serve both as encouragements and exasperations to put that party upon dangerous and de∣structive projects: And it is possible enough that somewhat might be aimed at by them, in favour of the Title of the Queen of Scots, or of some other of the Race of King Henry the 7th. by Margaret his eldest daughter, married to James the 4th. of Scotland; which may the rather be supposed, because I find the Lady Margaret Countess of Lenox, daughter of the said Queen Margaret by her second husband, and mother of Henry Lord Drnley (who was after married to Queen Mary of Scotland) to have been confined unto her House with the Earl her husband, upon suspition of some practice against the Queen. Certain it is, that many strange whispers were abroad, and no small hopes con∣ceived by those of the Popish faction for suppressing the Protestants in all parts of the Kingdom, and setting up their own Religion as in former times; a matter neither to be entertained without strong temptations, nor compassed without stronger forces, than they could raise amongst themselves, but by in∣telligence & supply from some forein Princes. On which account, amongst some others which were found to be of the Plot, Arthur Pole, granchild of Marga∣ret Countess of Salisbury by Geofry her third son, the younger brother unto Regnald Pole the late Cardinal Legat, was apprehended and arraigned, together with his brother Geofry, Fortescue who had married his sister, & divers others: The substance of their Chage (as it is generally in all Treasons) was, a design of levying war against the Queen, and otherwise entertaining many dangerous counsels against the peace and safety of her Dominions, with a particular in∣tention of advancing the Queen of Scots to the Crown of England, and Pol himself unto the Title of Duke of Clarence. All which they confessed upon the Indictment, and did all receive the sentence of death; but were all after∣wards pardoned by the Queens great clemency, out of that great respect which she carried to their Royal extraction. And yet it may be possible that there was something in it of State-craft as well as clemency, which might induce the Queen to spare them from the stroke of the Ax, which was, to keep them for a ballance to the House of Suf∣folk, of whom she now began to conceive some jealousies. The Lady Katharine Gray one of the younger daughters of Henry Duke of Suffolk, and sister to the late Queen Jane, had been marryed to the Lord Henry Herbert son and heir to the Earl of Pembrock, at such time as the said Queen Jane was married to the Lord Guilford Dudley at Durham-House. But the old Earl seasonably apprehen∣ding how unsafe it was to marry into that Family which had given so much trouble to the Queen, took the advantage of the time, and found some means to procure a sentence of Divorce, almost upon the very insant of the Con∣summation. And knowing how well Queen May ood affected to the Earl of Shrewsbury, he presently clapt up a marriage for his son with another Ka∣therine, one of the daughters of that Earl, who dying about the begining of the Reign of this Queen, he married him as peedily to Mary Sdey the daugh∣ter of Sir Henry Sidney, and of Mary his wife, one of the daughters of John Dudley the late Duke of Northumberland; in which last marriage he as much endeavoured to ingratiate himself with Sir Robert Ddle, who at that time began to grow Lord Paramount in all Court-favours, as by the first Match to insinuate into old Duke Dudley, who did then predominate. In the mean time the Lady Katherine Gray languisheth long under the disgrace of this rejection, none daring to make any particular addresses to her, for fear of being involved in the like calamities as had befallen her father and the rest of that Family. But at the last the young Earl of Hertford contracts himself privately unto her, and having consummated the marriage with her, gets leave to travail into France; But long he had not left the Kingdom when the Lady was found
to be with child, & being imprisoned in the Tower she makes known her mar∣riage, till then kept secret by agreement; the Earl is thereupon called home, and standing honestly to the Marriage, for which he could produce no sufficient witnesse, is committed prisoner also. The Queen exceeding jealous of all Competitors, refers the cognisance of the cause to the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, and some other Delegates, by whom a certain time is set for the bringing in of Witnesses to prove the Marriage, and on default thereof, a sentence of un∣lawful copulation is pronounced against them; during which troubles and disquiets, the Lady is delivered of the Lord Edward Semer her eldest son in the Tower of London, and conceived after of another by some soln meetings which she had with the Earl her husband, their Keepers on both sides being corrupted to give way unto it. Which practice so incensed the Queen, that hurried on with jealousie, and transported with passion, she caused a fine of five thousand pounds to be set upon him in the Star-chamber, and kept him close prisoner for the space of nine years, at the end whereof he was restored to liberty by the death of the Lady, who died a prisoner in the Tower. And though the Lady Francis Dutchess of Suffolk might hope to have preserved her self from the like Court-thunder-claps by her obscure marriage with Adrian Stokes, who had bin Gentleman of the Horse to the Duke her husband, yet neither could that save her from abiding a great part of the tempest, which fell so heavily upon her and all that family, that William the nephew of this Earl by Edward Viscount Beauchamp his eldest son, was prudently advised by some of his friends, to procure a confirmation of his grand-fathers honors from the hand of King James, which without much difficulty was obtained and grant∣ed by his Majesties Letters Patents, bearing date the 14th. of May in the 6th. year of his Reign. But such was the fortune of this House, that as this Earl, being newly restored unto the Title of Hertford, by the great goodness of the Queen, incurred her high displeasure, and was thereupon committed prisoner for his marriage with the Lady Katherine Gray, the onely heir then living of Mary the youngest daughter of King Henry the 7th. so William above men∣tioned being confirmed in the expectancy of his grand-fathers honors by the like goodness of King James, was committed prisoner by that King for mar∣rying with the Lady Arabella, daughter and heir of Charls Earl of Lennox, de∣scended from the eldest daughter of the said King Henry. Such were the principal occurrences of this present year, relating to the joynt concernments of Church and State; In reference to the Church alone, nothing appears more memorable than the publishing of an elegant and acute Discourse, entituled, The Apology of the Church of England, first wait in Latin by the right reverend Bishop Jewel, translated presently into English, French, Italian, Dutch, and at last also into Greek, highly approved of by all pious and judicious men, stomached by none excepting our own English fugitives, and yet not undertook by any of them but by Harding only, who had his hands full enough before in beating out an answer to the Bishop challenge: By him we are informed (if we may believe him) that two Tractats or Discourses had been writ against it, the one by an Italian in the Tongue of that Country, the other in Latine by a Spanish Bishop of the Realm of Naples; both finished, and both stopped as they went to the Press, out of a due regard, orsooth, to the Church of England, whose honour had been deeply touched, by being thought to have approved such a lying, unreasonable, slanderous, and ungodly Pamphlet; which were it true, the Church was more beholden to the modesty of those Spaniards and Italians, than to our own natural English. But whether it were true or not, or rather how untrue it is in all particulars, the exchange of writings on both sides doth most plainly manifest. In general it was ob∣jected, That the Apology was published in the name of the Church of England, before any mean part of the Church were privy to it, as if the Au∣thor either were ashamed of it, or afraid to stand to it; that the Inscription of it neither was directed to Pope nor Emperor, nor to any Prince, not to
the Church, nor to the General Council then in being, as it should have been; that there was no mans name se to it; that it was printed without the privilege of the Prince, contrary to the Law in that behalf; that it was al∣lowed neither by Parliament nor Prolamation, nor agreed upon by the Clergy in a publick and lawful Synod and therefore that the Book was to be accounted a famous Libel, and a scandalus Writing. To which it was answered in like Generals by that learned Prelate, That the profession of the Doctrine contained in it was offered unto the whole Church of God, and so unto the Pope and the Council too, if they were any part or member of the Church; that if names be so necessary, he had the names of the whole Clergy of England to confirm that Doctrine, and Har∣ding's too amongst the rest in the time of King Edward; that for not having the Princes privilege, it might easily be disproved by the Printer; that it was not conceived in such a dark corner as was objected, being afterwards imprinted at Paris in Latine, and having since been translated into the French, Italian, Dutch, and Spanish Toungs; that being sent afterwards into France, Flanders, Germany, Spain, Poland, Hungary, Denmark, Sweden, Scot∣land, Italy, Naples, and Rome it self, it was tendred to the judgment of the whole Church of God; that it was read and seriously considered of in the convent of Trent, and great threats made that it should be answered, and the matter taken in hand by two notable learned Bishops, the one a Spaniard, and the other an Italian, though in fine neither of them did any thing in it; and finally, that certain of the English Papists had been nibling at it, but such as cared neither what they writ, nor was cared by others. And so much may suffice in general for this excellent Piece, to the publishing whereof, that learned Prelate was most encouraged by Peter Martyr, (as appears by Martyr's Letter of the 24th. of August) with whom he had spent the greatest part of his time when he lived in Exile: And happy had it been for the Church of England if he had never done worse offices to it, than by dealing with that reverend Bishop to so good a purpose. But Martyr onely lived to see the Book which he so much longed for, dying at Zurick on the 12th. day of No∣vember following, and laid into his grave by the Magistrates and People of that Town with a solemn Funeral. Nothing remains for the concluding of this year, but to declare how the three vacant Bishopricks were disposed of, if those may say to be disposed of which were still kept vacant; Glocester was onely filled this year by the prefer∣ment of Mr. Rchad Cheny Archdeacon of Hereford, and one of the Prebenda∣ries of the Collgiat Church of St. Peter in Westminster, who received hs Epis∣copal consecration on the 19th. of April. Together with the See of Glocester, he held that of Bristol in commendam, as did also Bullingham his Successor, that is to say, the Jurisdiction, with the Profits and Fees thereof, to be exercised and enjoyed by them, but the temporal Revenue of it to continue in the hands of some hungry Courtiers, who gnawed it to the very bone; in which condition it remained under the two Bishops, till the year 1589. when the Queen was pleased to bestow the remainders of it, together with the title of Bishop, on Doctor Richard Flesher Dean of Peterborough, whom afterwards she preferred to the See of London. And as for Oxon, it was kept vacant from the death of King, the first Bishop of it, who died on the 4th. of December 1557. till the 14th. of October 1567. at which time it was conferred on Dr. Hugh Curwyn Archbishop of Dublin, and Chancellor of the Realm of Ireland, who having held it but a year, it was again kept vacant twenty years together, and then bestowed on Dr. John Underhil, who was consecrated Bishop thereof in Dcember 1589. but he dying also shortly after, viz. Anno 1592. it was once more kept void till the year 1603. and then took up by Dr. John Bridges Dean of Salisbury, rather to satisfie the desires of others than his own ambition. So that upon the point, this Church was filled but little more than three years in forty sx, the Jurisdiction of it was in the mean time managed by some Of∣ficers
thereunto authorised by the Archbishop of Canterbury,An. Reg. Eliz. 5. 1562/3;. the Patrimony and Revenues of it remaining in the hands of the Earl of Leicester, and after his decease of the Earl of Eex, by whom the Lands thereof were so spoiled and wasted, that they left nothing to the last Bishops but Impropriations; by means of which havock and destruction, all the five Bishopricks erected by King Henry the 8th. were so impoverished and destroyed, that the new Bishops were necessitated to require the benevolence of their Clergy at their first comming to them, to furnish their Episcopal Houses, and to enable them to maintain some tolerable degree of Hospitality in their several Diocesses, of which we shall hear more hereafter from the pen of an Adversay. An. Reg. Eliz. 5. An. Dom. 1562, 1563. THe last years practices of the Papists, and the dangers thereby threatning both the Queen and State, occasioned her to call a Parliament on the 12th. of January, in which first passed an Act, For assurance of the Queens Royal power over all Estates and Subjects within her Dominions. In the body whereof it was provided, That no man living or residing in the Queens Domini∣ons, under the pains and penalties therein appointed, should from thence∣forth, either by word or writing, or any other open deed, willingly and ad∣visedly endeavour to maintain the Power and Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, heretofore claimed and usurped within this Realm. And for the better discovery of all such persons as might be popishly affected, it was en∣acted, That none should be admitted unto holy Orders, or to any Degree in either of the Universities, or to be Barrester or Bencher in any of the Inns of Court, &c. or to practise as an Atturney, or otherwise to bear any Office in any of the Courts at Westminster Hall, or any other Court what∣soever, till he or they should first take the Oath of Supremacy on the holy Evangelists; With a Power given to every Archbishop and Bishop within this Realm and the Dominions of the same, to tender or minister the Oath aforesaid, to all and every spiritual person in their proper Diocesses, as well in places exempt as else-where. Of which last clause the Reader is to take especial notice, because of the great controversie which ensued upon it, of which, more hereafter. And because many of the Popish party had lately bu∣sied themselves by Conjurations, and other Diabolical Arts, to enquire into the length or shortness of her Majesties life, and thereupon had caused some dark and doubtful prophecies to be spread abroad; There passed two other Statutes for suppressing the like dangerous practices, by which her Majesties person might be endangered, the people stirred to rebellion, or the peace otherwise disturbed. For which consult the Acts of Parliament, 5 Eliz. c 15, 16. By which three Acts, and one more for the better executing of the Writ de Ex∣communicato capiendo, the Queen provided very well for her own security, but more provoked the Pope & his adherents to conspire against her in the time to come; against whose machinations, back'd by the power and counsels of forein Princes, nothing was more conducible than her strength at Sea, for the en∣crease whereof, and the continual breeding of a Seminary of expert Mari∣ners, an Act was made for adding Wednesday to the number of the weekly Fass, which from thenceforth was called Jejunium Cecilianum, as being one of the devices of Sir William Cecil. In reference to Religion, and the advancement of the service and worship of God, it had been declared by the Bishops and Clergy assembled at the same time in their Convocation, To be a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the custom of the Primitive Church, to have publick prayer in the Church, or to minister the Sacraments in a Toung not understood by the people. To comply with which pious Declaration, and take off all retortion which possibly might be made by those of Rome, when they were charged with the administration of the Service and Sacraments in an unknown Toung, it was enacted, That the Bishops of Hereford, St. Davids, Bangor, Landaff, and St. Asaph, should
take care amongst them for translating the whole Bible with the Common-Prayer Book into the Wech or British Toung, on pain of forfeiting 40 l. a piece in default thereof. And to encourage them thereunto it was ordered, That one Book of either sort being so translated and imprinted, should be provided and bought of every Cathedral, or Parish Church, as also for all Parish Churches & Chapels of Ease where the said Toung is commonly used; the Ministers to pay one half of the price, and the Parishioners the other. The like care was also taken for translating the Books of Homilies; but whe∣ther it were done by any new order from the Queen, or the piety of the four Welch Bishops, or that they were considered as a necessary part of the pub∣lick Litugy, by reason of the Rubrick at the end of the Nicene Creed, I have no whe found. As for the Convocation which accompanied the present Parliament, it be∣gan on the 13h. day of Jauary in the Cathedral of St. Pal, the Latine Ser∣mon by Mr. William Day, then Provost of Eaton College, afterwards of  also, and Bishop of Winchester; which being finished, the Bi∣shop of Lnd presents a list of the several Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, which had been cited to appear; the catalogue of the Bishops ending with Ga∣briel Goodman Dean of Westminster, that of the Deans beginning on another file with Alexander Novel Dean of St. Pauls, elected by the Clergy for their Pro∣locutor. The Convocation after this is adjourned to Westminster for the con∣veniency of the Prelates, by reason of their attendance on affairs of Parlia∣ment. Goodman the Dean of Westminster had made his Protestation in the Church of St. Paul, that by appearing as a Member of the Convocation by vetue of the Arch-bishops Mandat, he subjected not himself nor the Church of Westminster to the authority or jurisdiction of the See of Canterbury. And now on the Archbishops personal comming to the Church of Westminster, he delivers the like Protestation in writing for preserving the Liberties of the Church, in which it was declared, according to the privilege & just rights ther∣of, that no Archbishop or Bishop could exercise any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in it, without leave of the Dean for the time then being; and therefore that he could not consent to the holding of a Convocation in that place, without some Declaation to be made by the Archbishops & Bishops, that their holding the Convocation in the same should not be taken or intended for any violation of the rights & privileges that belong'd unto it, which was accordingly perform'd. It was n the 19th. day of January that these formalities were transacted, at wht time the Archbishops and Bishops having first had some secret com∣munication amongst themselves about the Articles of Religion established in King  time, rquired the Prolocutor and six others of the Lower Huse of Convocation, to repair unto them; By whom it was signified unto their Lordships, that some of the Clergy had prepared certain Bills, containing a specification of such matters as were conceived to be amiss in the state of the Church, and that the Articles of Religion agreed upon in the Reign of King Edward the 6th. had been delivered unto others to be considered of, corrected, and accommodated as they found it necessary. Being encouraged in the last, and furthered by the diligence of some of the Bishops who were employed in the same work, the Articles were agreed upon, publickly read before the Bi∣shops in the Chapter-house of St. Paul, on the 29th. of the same month, and by all of them subscribed with great unanimity. The Prelates had observed some deviation from the Doctrine of King Edward's Reign, which had been made by the Calvinin on Zuinglian Gospellers, in the Articles of Predestina∣tion, Grace, Free-will, and final perseverance: Nor could they but take notice with how little reverence the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was admini∣stred, and the Authority of the Church despised by too many of the same par∣ty also; which they were willing to impute to the want of some known rule amongst them, by which they were to regulate their judgments, and conform their actions: To which end it was thought expedient, that the Book of Ar∣ticles
agreed upon in Convocation, Anno 1552. should be revised and accom∣modated to the use of the Church, the Queens leave being first obtained for their warrant in it. In the managing of which great business, I know not whe∣ther I should more admire their moderation, or their wisdome. Their wis∣dome eminent, in not suffering any Outlandish Divine who might drive on a different interess from that of the Church, either to vote amongst them, or carry any stroke in their consultations. Their moderation no less visible, in declining all unnecessary determinations, which rather tended to the multi∣plying of controversies, and ingendring strifes, than either unto edification or increase of piety. So that they seemed to have proceeded by those very Rules which King James so much approved of in the conference at Hampton Court, First in not separating further from the Church of Rome in points of Discipline or Doctrine, than that Church had separated from what she was in her purest times; Secondly, in not stuffing the Book of Articles with all Conclusions Theological, in which a latitude of judgement was to be allow∣ed, as far as it might be consistent with peace and charity; and Thirdly, in not thrusting into it every opinion or Position negative, which might have made it somewhat like Mr. Craiges Confession in the Kirk of Scotland, who with his I renounce, and I abhor, his detestations and abrenunciations, did so amaze the sim∣ple people (as the King observeth) that not being able to conceive or under∣stand all those points, utterly gave over all, and fell back to Popery, or else remained in their former ignorance. Upon which grounds, as they omit∣ted many whole Articles, and qualified the expressions of some others in King Edward's book; so were they generally very sparing in defining any thing which was meerly matter of moduliy, or de modo only: As namely, touching the manner of Christs presence in the Holy Eucharist, the manner of effecting grace by the blessed Sacraments, or of the operation of Gods grace in a mans conversion. Which rules being carefully observed by all the Bishops, on whose authority and consent, the greatest part of the whole Work did seem to rest, and all particulars agreed upon amongst themselves, it was no won∣der if they passed their Votes without contradiction. But in taking the subscriptions of the lower house, there appeared more difficulty. For though they all testified their consent unto them, on the said 29th. of January, either by words express, or by saying nothing to the con∣trary, which came all to oe; yet when subscription was required, many of the Calvinians, or Zuinglian-Gospellers, possibly some also which enclined rather to their old Religion, and who found themselves unsatisfied in some par∣ticulars, had demurred upon it. With this demur their Lordships are ac∣quainted by the Prolocutor, on the 5th. of February. By whom their Lord∣ships were desired in the name of that House, that such who had not hitherto subscribed the Articles, might be ordered to subscribe in their own proper house, or in the presence of their Lordships. Which request being easily granted, drew on the subscription of some others, but so, that many still re∣mained in their first unwillingness. An Order thereupon is made by their Lordships, on the oth. then following, that the Prolocutor should return the names of all such persons who refused subscription, to the end that such fur∣ther course might be taken with them, as to their Lordships should seem most fit. After which we hear no news of the like complaints and informations; which makes it probable (if not concluded) that they all subscribed. And be∣ing thus subscribed by all, they were soon after published both in English and Latine, with this following Title, that is to say, Articles agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy, in the Convocation holden at London in the year 1562. for the avoiding of diversities of opinions, and establishing consent touching true Religion. But what they were, and wherein they agreed or differed with or from those established by King Edward the 6th. shall be referred (for the avoiding of all interruptions in the course of this Hi∣story) to a place more proper. Nothing else brought to a conclusion by them,
but the Bill of Subsidy, which having past that House, was confirmed in Parlia∣ment. Nothing else brought into conclusion, though many things were had in de∣liberation. On Friday the 5th. of February, the Bishops of Salisbury, Exon, St David's and Lichfield, were appointed by the rest of the Prelates, to examine a Catechism which it seems was presented to them. But being by them remit∣ted to the consideration of the lower house, they were advertised by Day and Sampson on the 3d. of March, that the said house unanimously had approved thereof. And there it rested for that time, and for ever after, nothing being done in confirmation of it, as a publick Doctrine, (by whomsoever it was writ∣ten) nor any further speech made of it in the time succeeding. Which fortune also hapned to a Book of Discipline projected amongst some of the Clergy, and render'd to the Bishops by the Prolocutor, and ten others of that House, on the 26th. of February. To which some additionals being made by the first contri∣vers, it was a second time tender'd to them by the Prolocutor, in the name of the lower House of Convocation, by whom it had been generally and una∣nimously recommended to them. But the Bishops let this sleep also as they did the other. More was it to the profit of the Clergy generally, to make in∣quiry into certain Articles, which by the Archbishop, with the consent of all the rest of the Prelates, were delivered in writing. The Tenour of which Ar∣ticles was, 1. Whether if the Writ of Melius inquirendum be sent forth, there be any likelyhood that it will return to the Queens profit? 2. Whe∣ther some Benefices ratably be not less than they be already valued? 3. That they enquire of the manner of dilapidations, and other spoliations that they can remember to have passed upon their Livings, and by whom. 4. To signifie how they have been used for the levying of the arrerages of tenths and Subsidies, and for how many years past. 5. As also how many Benefices they find that are charged with pensions newly imposed to dis∣charge the pensions of Religious persons. 6. And lastly, to certifie how many Benefices are vacant in every Diocess. But what return was made up∣on these enquiries, I find as little in the Acts of this Convocation, as either in allowance of the Catechism, or the Book of Discipline. Religion and the State being thus fortified and secured in England, it will not be amiss to see what they do in Scotland; where the young Queen was graci∣ously enclined to forget all injuries, and grant more liberty to her subjects, in the free exercising and enjoying of their own perswasions, than she could gain unto her self. For in a Parliament held in May, within few months after the end of that in England, the Act for oblivion, formerly condescended to in the Treaty at Edenborough, was confirmed and ratified; but without reference to that Treaty, the results whereof, the Queen by no means would ac∣knowledge to be good and valid. And thereupon it was advised that the Lords should supplicate on their knees in the House of Parliament for the passing of it, which was accordingly performed by them, and vouchsafed by her. There also past some other Acts of great advantage to the Church, as affairs then stood; that is to say, one Act for the repairing and upholding of Parish Churches, and the Church-yards of the same, for burial of the dead. Another against letting Parsonages, Glebes, or Houses, into long Leases or Fee. But this came some∣what of the latest, a great part of the Tythes, Houses, and possessions which be∣longed to the Church, having been formerly aliened or demised for a very long term by the Popish Clergy, when they perceived they were not likely to enjoy them longer for themselves. But on the other side, no safety or prote∣ction could be found for her own Religion; no, not so much as in the Chapel-Royal, or the Regal City. In contempt whereof, a force was violently com∣mitted in the month of August, in the Chapel of the Palace of Holy Rood House, (the Whitehall of Edenborough) where certain of the Queens servants were assembled for their own devotions, the dores broke open, some of the company haled to the next prison, and the rest dispersed, the Priest escaping
with much difficulty by a private passage.An. Reg. Eliz. 5. 1563. The Queen was then absent in the North, but questioned Knox at her return, as the cause of the uproar. By which expostulation she got nothing from that fiery spirit, but neglect and scorn. Return we back again to France, where we find some alternations of affairs between the French King and the Reingrave on the one side, the English and confederate Princes on the other, but so, that fortune seemed most favoura∣ble to the English party. The Church of Hattivil (a neighbouring Village to Newhaven) taken and garrison'd by the Reingrave, but presently abando∣ned and repossessed by the English. The Castle of Tankervile cunningly ta∣ken by the English, and soon after regained by the Reingrave. The City and Castle of Cane held with a strong Garison by the Marquiss d' Elbeuffe, and besi ged by the confederate forces, both French and English, and finally, surrender'd to the Admiral Chastilion to the use of the Princes, March the 2d. After which followed the surrendry of Bayeulx, Faleise, St. Lods, and divers other Towns and Castles. The Town of Hareflew on the Seine gallantly taken by the help of the English of Newhaven, on the 10th. and garrison'd by such soul∣diers and inhabitants as was sent from thence. Which fortunate successes so amazed the heads of the Guisian faction, that they agreed unto an Edict of paci∣fication, by which the French Princes were restored to the Kings favor, the Hu∣gonots to the free exercise of their own Religion, and all things setled for the present to their full contentment. But they must buy this happiness by betray∣ing the English whom they had brought into the Country, and join their forces with the rest, to drive them out of Newhaven, if they would not yield it on demand. Of this the Queen had secret notice, and offereth by Throgmorton, to deliver up Newhaven in exchange for Callis. The French resolve to hold the one, and recover the other; so that new forces are sent over to make good the Town. The French draw toward it in great numbers, under the conduct of the Marshals of Brissack and Mont Morency; followed not long after by the Constable himself, with many other French Lords of the highest quality. The siege growes close, and the service very hot on both sides; but the English had a fiercer enemy within the Town, than any whom they found without. The pesilence had got in amongst them, and raged so terribly for the time, that the living were scarce able to bury the dead. And to compleat the miseries of the besieged, the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Montpensier, shewed themselves openly amongst the rest in the Camp of the enemies, that the last act of the Tragedy might be plaid in their presence. All things conspiring thus against them, the English are necessitated to a capitulation, by which they left the Town behind them on the 29th. of July, but carried the plague with them in∣to England. Which might by some be looked on as an argument of Gods dis∣pleasure on this Nation, for giving aid unto the Rebels of a Christian Prince, though masked with the vizard of Religion. Passe we on further toward Trent, where we find the Fathers in high displeasure against Queen Elizabeth, exasperated by her aiding the French Hugonots against their King. But more for passing the Statute above mentio∣ned, for punishing all those which countenanced and maintained the Popes authority within her dominions. The Pope hereby so much incensed, that he dispatched a Commission to the Fathers of Trent, to proceed to an excommu∣nication of the Queen of England. The Emperour had his aims upon her, be∣ing at that time solicitous for effecting a mariage betwixt her and Charles of Inspruch, his second son; of which his Ministers entertained him with no doubtful hopes. In contemplation of which mariage, on the first notice which was given him of this secret purpose, he writ Letters both to the Pope and to the Legates, in which he signified unto them, that if the Council would not yield that fruit which was desired, that they might see an union of all Catho∣licks to reform the Church; at least they should not give occasion to the Hereticks to unite themselves more, which certainly they would do, in case
they proceeded so against the Queen of England; by means whereof they would undoubtedly make a league against the Catholicks, which must needs bring forth many great inconveniences. Nor did this Admonition coming from a person of so great authority, and built on such prudential reasons, want its good effect: Insomuch that both the Pope desisted at Rome, and revoked the Commission sent before to the Legates in Trent. But the Ministers of the King of Spain would not so give over, the Archbi∣shop of Otranto in the Realm of Naples, keeping the game on foot when the rest had left it. And because he thought the proposition would not take, if it were made only in relation to the Queen of England, he proposed a general anaheatizing of the Hereticks, as well dead as living, Luther and Zuinglius, and the rest; which he affirmed to be the practice of all Councils, in the Pri∣mitive times, and that otherwise it might be said that the Council had labou∣red all this while in vain. To which it was replyed by one of the Legates, that dives times required different Counsels; that the differences about religion in those elder times, were between the Bishops and the Priests; that the people were but as an accessory; that the Grandees either did not meddle, or if they did adhere to any Heresie, they did not make themselves Heads and Leaders. But now all was quite contrary, for now the Hereticks Ministers and Preach∣ers could not be said to be heads of the Sects, but the Princes rather, to whose interess their Ministers and Preachers did accommodate themselves; that he that would name the true Heads of Hereticks, must name the Queens of England and Navarr, the Prince of Conde, the Elector Palatine of the Reine, the Elector of Saxonie, and many other Dukes and Princes of Germany; that this would make them unite, and shew they were sensible of it; and that the condemnation of Luther and Zuinglius only, would so provoke them, that some great confusion would certainly arise; and therefore they must not do what they would, but what they could, seeing that the more moderate re∣solution was the better. After which grave and prudent Answer, it was not long before the conclusion of the Council (which ended on the 3d. of Decem∣ber) had put an end to all those practices or designs, which otherwise might have much distracted the peace of Christendom, and more particularly the tranquil∣lity of the Realm of England. And so I take my leave of the Council of Trent, without making any other character or censure of it, than that which is given by the Historian, that is to say, That being desired and procured by godly men to reunite the Church which then began to be divided, it so established the schism, and made the party so obstinate, that the discords are become irre∣concilable; that being managed by Princes for the Reformation of Eccle∣siastical Discipline, it caused the greatest deformation that ever was since Christianity began; that being hoped for by the Bishops to regain the Epis∣copal authority, usurped for the most part by the Pope, it made them lose it altogether, and brought them into a greater servitude; and on the contra∣ry, that being feared and avoided by the See of Rome, as a otent means to moderate the exorbitant power of the Pope, mounted from small begin∣nings, by divers degrees unto an unlimited excess, it hath so established and confirmed the same over that part which remaineth subject to it, that it ne∣ver was so great, nor so soundly rooted. Anno Reg. Eliz. 6. A. D. 1563, 1564. HAving dispatched our businesse in France and Trent, we shall confine our selves for so much of our Story as is to come to the Isles of Britain. In the fouth part thereof, the plague brought out of France by the Garison soul∣diers of Newhaven, had so dispersed it self, and made such desolation in many parts of the Realm, that it swept away above 20000 in the City of London. Which though it seemed lesse than some great plagues which have hapned since,
yet was it the greatest at that time,An. Reg. Eliz. 6. 1563. which any man living could remember. In which regard as Michaelmas Term was not kept at all, so Canlemas Term then following was kept at Hartford, the houses in London being not well cleansed, nor the air sufficiently corrected for so great a concourse. Under pretence whereof, the Council of the King of Spain residing in Brussels, commanded Pro∣clamation to be made in Antwerp and other places, that no English ship with cloths, should come into any parts of the Low Countries. Besides which, they alleged some other causes, as namely, the raising of Impost upon goods, as well inwards as outwards, as well upon English men as upon strangers, &c. But the true reason of it was, because a Statute had been passed in the first year of the Queen, by which divers Wares and Commodities were forbidden to be brought into this Realm out of Flanders, and other places, (being the Manu∣factures of those Countries) to the end that our own people might be set on work; as also that no English or stranger might ship out any white cloths undrest, being of price above 4 l. without special licence. But at the earnest sute of the Merchant Adventurers, the Queen prohibited the transporting of Wool unwrought, and the Cloth-Fleet was sent to Embden, the principal City in East Fruzland, about Easter following, where it was joyfully received, and where the English kept their Factory for some years after. And though the Hanse Towns made such friends in the Court of the Emperour, that the English trade was interdicted under the pretence of being a Monopoly, yet by the con∣stancy of the Queen, the courage of the Merchants, and the dexterity of their Agents, they prevailed at last, and caried on the trade themselves, without any Competitours. The apprehension of this dealing from the Council of Spain, induced the Queen to hearken the more willingly to a peace with France. Which she con∣cluded upon terms of as good advantage as the times would bear, the demand for Calais being waved till the eight years end, at which it was to be restored unto her by the Treaty of Cambray. Which peace was first Proclaimed before her Majesty in the Castle of Windsor, the French Ambassador being present; and afterwards at London on the 13th. of April. And for creating the greater con∣fidence and amity between both Princes, it was not long before she sent the Lord Henry Hunson, accompanied with the Lord Strange, and divers Knights and Gentlemen, to the Court of France, to present that King with the Col∣lar and Habit of the Garter, into which Noble Order he had been elected at a General Chapter. Garter the King at Arms was also sent along with them to invest him in it, with all the Ceremonies and Solemnities thereunto belon∣ging, to make it the more acceptable in the sight of that people. But not∣withstanding these courses on the one side, and the indignities put upon her by the Hugonot Princes on the other, Reason of State prevailed with her not to lay aside the care of their safety and affairs. For wel she knew, that if the Hu∣gonots were not incouraged under hand, and the Guisian faction kept in breath by their frequent stirrings, they would be either hammering some design a∣gainst her in her own Dominions, or animate the Queen of Scots to stand to her Title and pretensions for the Crown of England. Upon which general ground of self-preservation, as she first aided those of Scotland for the expelling of the French, and the French Protestants from being ruined and oppressed by the House of Guise, so on the same, she afterwards undertook the Patronage of the Belgick Neatherlands, against the tyranny and ambition of the Duke of Alva, who otherwise might have brought the war to her own dores, and hazar∣ded the peace and safety of her whole Estate. Having secured her self by this peace with France, and being at no open enmity with the King of Spain, she resolves to give her self some pleasure, and thereupon prepareth for her Summers progress. In the course whereof she bestowed a visit upon Cambridge on the 5th. of August, where she was ho∣norably received by Mr. Secretary Cecil, being then Chancellor of that Uni∣versity; together with all the Heads of Houses, and other Students attired in
their Academical Habits,An. Reg. Eliz. 6. 1564. according to their several and distinct degrees. Her lodging was provided in Kings College, the dayes of her abode there, spent in Scholastical exercises of Philosophy, Physick, and Divinity; the nights in Comedies and Tragedies, and other pleasing entertainments. On Wednesday the 7th. of the same month, she rode through the Town, and took a view of all the Colleges and Halls; the goodly Monuments of the piety of her prede∣cessors, and of so many men and women famous in their generations. Which done, she took her leave of Cambridge in a Latine Oration, in which she gave them great encouragement to persue their studies, not without giving them somes hopes, that if God spared her life and opportunity, she would erect some Monument amongst them of her love to Learning, which should not be infe∣riour unto any of her Royal Ancestors. In which diversion she received such high contentment, that nothing could have seemed to be equal to it but the like at Oxon, where she was entertained about two years after for seven days together, with the same variety of Speeches, Enteludes, Disputations, and other Academical expressions of a publick joy. In one point, that of Oxford seemed to have the preheminence, all things being there both given and taken with so even an hand, that there could be no ground for any emulation, strife, or discord to ensue upon it. But in the midst of those contentments which she had at Cambridge, were sown the seeds of those divisions and combustions, with which the Church hath been continually distracted to this very day: For so it hapned, that Mr. Thomas Preston of Kings College, and Mr. Thomas Cartwright of Trinity College, were appointed for two of the Opponents in a Disputation; In which the first, by reason of his comely gesture, pleasing pronunciation, and graceful personage, was both liked and rewarded by her, the other receiving neither reward or commendation; Which so incensed the proud man, too much opinionated of himself and his own abilities, that he retired unto Geneva, where having throughly informed himself in all particulars, both of Doctrine and Discipline, wherein the Churches of that platform differed from the Church of England, he returned home with an intent to repair his credit, or rather to get himself a name, (as did Erastrotus in the burning of Diana's Tem∣ple) by raising such a fire, such combustions in her, as never were to be extin∣guished (like the fire of Taberah) but by the immediate hand of Heaven. The Genevians had already began to blow the coals, and brought fewel to them, but it was onely for the burning of Caps and Rochets. The Common-Prayer book was so fortified by Act of Parliament, that there was no assault∣ing of it without greater danger than they durst draw upon themselves. And as for the Episcopal Government, it was so interwoven and incorporated with the Laws of the land, so twisted in with the Preogative of the Crown and the Regal Interess, that they must first be in a capacity of trampling on the Laws and the Crown together, before they could attempt the destructi∣on of it. But Caps and Typpets, Rochets and Lawn sleeves, and Canonical Coats, seemed to be built upon no better foundation than superstitious cu∣stom, some old Popish Canon, or at the best some temporary Injunction of the Queens devising, which could not have the power and effect of Law. This Game they had in chase in King Edward's time, which now they are resolved to follow both with horn and hound, and hunt it to the very last: But as good Huntsmen as they were, they came off with loss, they that sped best in it, be∣ing torn by the briers and bushes, through which the fury of their passion car∣ried them in pursute of the sport: Amongst which, none sped worse than Samp∣son, because none had so much to lose in the prosecution; for resting obsti∣nate in refusing to wear that habit which of right belonged unto his place, he was deprived of that place by the High Commissioners, to which the habit did belong. So eminent a Preferment as the Deanry of Christ-church deserved a man of a better temper, and of a more exemplary conformity to the rules of the Church; Both which were found in Dr. Thomas Godwin, Chaplain in Or∣dinary to the Queen, advanced unto this Deanry first, and after to the Bi∣shoprick
of Bath and Wells; more fortunate in being father to Dr. Francis God∣win a late Bishop of Hereford, never to be forgotten for his Commentaries of the English Bishops, digested with such infinite pains, and no less in∣genuity. The obstinacy of these men in matter of Ceremony, prompted the Bishops to make trial of their Orthodoxie in points of Doctrine. The Articles of Re∣ligion lately agreed upon in Convocation, had been subscribed by all the Cler∣gy, who had voted to them, subscribed not onely for themselves, but in the name of all those in the several Diocesses and Cathedral Churches, whom they represented. But the Bishops not thinking that sufficient to secure the Church, required subscription of the rest in their several places, threatning no less than deprivation to such as wilfully refused, and obstinately persisted in that refusal. Many there were who bogled at it, as they all did, but did it not so perversely, nor in such great numbers as when their faction was grown strong and improved to multitudes. Some stumbled at it in regard of the first clause added to the 20th Article, about the Authority of the Church, others in reference to the 36th. touching the Consecration of Archbishops and Bi∣shops; some thought they attributed more authority to the Supream Magi∣strate, over all persons and causes both Ecclesiastical and Civil, than could consist with that Autocratie and Independency which Calvin arrogated unto his Presbyteries and other Churches of that platform: And others looked up∣on the Homil es as beggarly rudiments, scarce milk for Babes, but by no means to be served in for a stronger stomach. In general, thought by the Ge∣nevians and Zuinglian Gospellers to have too much in them of the Pope, or too little of Calvin, and therefore not to be subscribed by any who desired the reputation of keeping a good conscience with faith unfeigned. Of which number none so much remarkable as father John Fox the Maryrologist, who had before appeared in the Schism at Franckfort, and left that Church (when Cox had got the better in it) to retire to Geneva; being now called on to subscribe, that the opinion which was had of his parts and piety might advance the ser∣vice, he is said to have appeared before the Bishop (but whether before the Archbishop or his own Diocesan is not much material) with the New-Testa∣ment in Greek, To this (said he) I will subscribe, and it this will not serve, take my Prebend of Salisbury, the onely preferment which I hold in the Church of England, and much good may it do you. This refractory answer (for it was no better) might well have moved the Bishop to proceed against him, as he did against some others who had stood on the same refusal; but kissing goes by kindness, as the saying is, and so much kindness was shewed to him, that he both kept his resolution and his place together; which whether it might not do more hurt to the Church, than that preferment in the Church did advantage him, I think no wise man will make a question; for commonly the exemption or indemnity of some few particu∣lars, confirms the obstinacy of the rest, in hope of being privileged with the like indemnity. And therefore it was well observed by Bishop Bancroft, when King James proposed the writing of a Letter to the Bishop of Chester, for re∣spiting some Ministers of his Diocess from a present conformity, That if this purpose should proceed, the copy of those Letters would fly over the King∣dom, and then others would make the same request for some friends of theirs, and so no fruit would follow of the present Conference, but that all things would be worse than before they were. But Queen Elizabeth was not drawn so easily to the like indulgencies, for which she received her own just praises from the Pen of an Adversary, Harding by name, in his Epistle Dedicatory prefixed before his Answer to the Bishops Apology, commends her earnest zeal and travail, in bringing those disordered Ministers into some order of decent appa∣rel, which yet some of them wanted reason to apply themselves to. And Sanders (who seldom speaks well of her) first informs his Reader, What bickerings there were in England about the Rochet, and other Vestments of the Cler∣gy;
that many of the opposite party regarded not the Queens judgment in it, but sent for counsel and advice to Germany, France, Savoy, and Switzer∣land, but specially to Theodore Beza and Peter Martyr; but finally that not∣withstanding the advice of the one, and the addresses of the other, the Queen proceeded vigorously to the deprivation of all such persons as wilfully op∣posed her order made in that behalf. It seems by this that our Genevians, for the greater countenancing of their inconformity, had stirred up the most eminent Divines of the Gallick and Helvetian Churches to declare in favour of their doings; And it appears also, by remembrances in some Authors, that Calvin apprehending some neglect from Mr. Secretary Cecil, in making either no return, or a return which sig∣nified nothing, to his first addresses, had laid aside his care of the Church of England, for which he could expect no thanks from the Bishops, or had receiv∣ed so little from the grea men of the Court. But Peter Martyr while he lived, conceived himself to have some interess in this Church, in which he had en∣joyed such a good preferment, but more in some particular persons and members of it, who seemed to depend upon his judgment, and to ask counsel of him as their surest Oracle: In which, how much he countenanced that faction in King Edward's time, both by his practice and his pen, and what en∣couragement he gave them in this present Reign, hath been shewn before; how much out-gone by Theodore Beza, who next usurped a super-intendency over all the Churches of this Island, may be seen hereafter: All that shall now be said of either of them, or of all together, shall be briefly this, that this poor Church might better have counted their best helps in points of Doctrine, than have been troubled with their intermedlings in matter of Discipline. More modestly then so dealt Bullinger and Gualter, two Divines of Suitzerland, as eminent in all points of learning as the best amongst them; who being solli∣cited by some some zealous brethren to signifie their judgment in the present controversie, about the Aparel of the Clergy, return an approbation of it, but send the same inclosed in several Letters to Sandys, Horn, and Gryndal, that they might see that neither of them would engage in the affairs of this Church, without the privity of the Governors and Rulers of it. To bring this quarel to an end, or otherwise to render all opponents the more inexcusable, the Queen thought fit to make a further signification of her Royall pleasure, not grounded onely on the Soveraign Power and Prero∣gative Royal, by which she published her Injunctions in the first year of her Reign, but legally declared by her Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical, ac∣cording to the Acts and Statutes made in that behalf; for then it was to be presumed, that such as had denyed obedience to her sole commands, would at least give it to the Laws. The Archbishop is thereupon required to consult together with such Bishops and Commissioners as were next at hand, upon the making of such Rules and Orders as they thought necessary for the peace of the Church, with reference to the present condition and estate thereof: Which being accordingly performed, presented to the Queen, and by her approved, the said Rules and Orders were set forth and published in a certain book, en∣tituled, Advertisements, partly for due order in the publick Administration of the Common-Prayers, and using the holy Sacraments; and partly for the Apparel of all persons Ecclesiastical, by vertue of the Queens Majesties Letters commanding the same, the 15th. day of January, &c. And that they might be known to have the stamp of Royal Authority, a Preface was prefixed before them, in which it was expressed, That the Queen had called to her remembrance how ne∣cessary it was for the advancement of God's glory, &c. for all her loving subjects of the state Ecclesiastical, not onely to be knit together in the bonds of Uniformity touching the ministration of Gods Word and Sacra∣ments, but also to be of one decent behaviour of outward aparel, that by their distinct habits they might be known to be of that holy vocation, whereby the greater reverence might be given unto them in their several
Offices, that thereupon she had required the Metropolitan, by her special Letters, that upon conference had with such other Bishops as were autho∣rised by her Commission for causes Ecclesiastical, some order might be took, whereby all diversities and varieties in the premises might be taken away; And finally, that in obedience unto her commands, the said Metropolitan and the rest there named had agreed upon the Rules and Orders ensuing, which were by her thought meet to be used and followed. Now in these Articles or Advertisements, it was particularly enjoyned amongst other things, That all Archbishops and Bishops should continue their accustomed Aparel; that all Deans of Cathedral Churches, Masters of Colleges, all Archdeacons, and other dignitaries in Cathedral Churches, Doctors, Batchelors of Divinity, and Law, having any Ecclesiastical Liv∣ing, should wear in their common apparel abroad a side Gown with sleeves streight at the hand, without any cuts in the same, and that also without any falling cape, and to wear tippets of arsnet, as was lawful for them by Act of Parliament, 24 Hen. 8. That all Doctors of Physick or any other facul∣ty, having any Living Ecclesiastical, or any other that may dispend by the Church 100 Marks, he to be esteemed by the fruits or tenths of their Pro∣motions; or all Prebendaries, whose promotions are vallued at 20 l. and upward, to wear the like habit; that they, or all Ecclesiastical persons, or other having any Ecclesiastical Living, do wear the cap appointed by the Injunctions, and no hats, but in their journeyings; that they in their jour∣neys do wear the cloaks with sleeves put on, and like in fashion to their Gowns, without gards, welts, or cuts; that in their private houses or stu∣dies they use their own liberty of comely apparel; that all inferiour Ecclesi∣astical persons shall wear long gowns of the fashion aforesaid, and caps as before is described; that all poor Parsons, Vicars, and Curas, do endea∣vour themselves to conform their aparel in like sort, so soon and as conve∣niently as their abilities will serve for the same; provided, that their ability be judged by the Bishop of the Diocess; and if their ability will not suffer them to buy them long gowns, of the form aforesaid prescribed, that then they shall wear their short gowns, as before expressed; that all such peons as have been, or be Ecclesiastical, and serve not the Ministry, or have not accepted, or shall refuse to accept, the Oath of obedience to the Queens Majesty, do from henceforth wear none of the said aparel, but to go as meer lay-men, till they be reconciled to obedience; and who shall obstinately re∣fuse to do the same, be presented by the Ordinary to the Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical, and by them to be reformed accordingly. But this be∣longs more properly to the year next following. To return therefore where we left, the next considerable action which fol∣lowed on the Queens reception at Cambridge, but more considerable in the consequents than in the act it self, was the preferring of Sir Robert Dudley, the second son then living to the Duke of Northumberland, to the Titles of Lord Denbigh and Earl of Leicester, which honour she conferred on him on Mi∣chaelmas day, with all the Pomps and ceremonies thereunto accustomed; She had before elected him into the Order of the Garter, made him the Master of her Horse, and Chancellor of the University of Oxon, suffered him to carry a great sway in all affairs both of Court and Council, and given unto him the fair Mannor of Denbigh, being conceived to be one of the goodliest Territo∣ries in England, as having more Gentlemen of quality which owes sure and service thereunto, than any other whatsoever in the hands of a subject: And now she adds unto these honors the goodly Castle and Mannor of Kenelworth, part of the patrimony and possession of the Dutchy of Lancaster. Advanced unto which heighth, he ingrossed unto himself the disposings of all Offices in Court and State, and of all preferments in the Church, proving in fine so un∣appeasable in his malice, and unsatiable in his lusts, so sacrilegious in his ra∣pines, so false in promises, and trecheous in point of trust, and finally so
destructive of the rights and properties of particular persons, that his little finger lay far heavier on the English subjects, than the loins of all the Favo∣rites of the two last Kings. And that his monstrous vices (most insupportable in any other than himself) might either be connived at, or not complained of, he cloaks them with a seeming zeal to the true Religion, and made himself the head of the Pritan faction, who spared no pains in setting forth his praises up∣on all occasions, making themselves the Tromparts to this Bragadocio; Nor was he wanting to caresse them after such a manner, as he found most agreea∣ble to those holy hypocrites, using no other language in his speech and let∣ters than pure-scripture phrase, in which he was become as dextrous, as if he had received the same inspirations with the sacred Pen-men. Of whom I had not spoke so much, but that he seemed to have been born for the destruction of the Church of England, as may appear further in the prosecution of the Presbyterian or Puritan History, whensoever any able Pen shall be exercised in it. But leaving this Court-Meteor to be gazed on by unknowing men, let us atend the Obsequies of the Emperor Ferdinand, who died on the of  in the year now being, leaving the Empire and the rest of his Dominions to Mxmilian his eldest son, whom he had before made King of the Rmans. A Pince he was who had deserved exceeding well of the Queen of England, and she resolved not to be wanting to the due acknowledgment of so great a merit; the after-noon of the second day of October, and the fore-noon of the third, are set apart by her command, for this great solemnity, for which there was erected in the upper part of the Quire of the said Church a goodly Hese, richly garnished and set forth, all the Quire being hanged with black cloth, adorned with rich Scutcheons of his Arms of sundry sorts: At the so∣lemnization of which Funeral there were twelve Mourners, and one that presented the Queens person, which was the Marquis of Winchester Lord Treasurer of England, the other twelve being two Earls, six Lords, and four Knights; the sacred part thereof performed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, assisted by the Bishops of London and Rochester, the funeral Sermon being peached by the Bishop of London, which tended much unto the praise and commendation of that famous Emperor. By which solemnity, as she did no small honor to the dead, so she gave great contentment to the living also, the people being generally much delighted with such glorious pomps, and the Church of England thereby held in estimation with all forein Princes. Nothing else memorable in this year but the comming out of certain books, and the death of Cavin. Dorman, an English fugitive, first publisheth a book for proof of certain of the Articles denyed in Bishop Jewel's challenge; en∣countred first by Alexander Nowel Dean of the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, who first appeared in print against those of Lovain, and is replyed upon by Dorman, in a book, entituled, A Discovery of Mr. Nowel's untruths, not pub∣lished till the year next following. But of more consequence to this Church was the death of Calvin, by whose authority so much disorder and confusion was to be brought upon it in the times succeeding; a name much reverenced, not onely by those of his own party and perswasions, but by many grave and moderate men, who did not look at first into the dangers which ensued upon it. His platform at Geneva made the onely pattern, by which all reformed Churches were to frame their Government; his Writings made the onely rule, by which all Students in Divinity were to square their Judgments. What Peter Lombart was esteemed to be in the Schools of Rome, the same was Cal∣vin reckoned in all those Churches, which were reformed according to the Zuinglian doctrine in the point of the Sacrament. But, Hic Magister non te∣netur, as the saying was, he was not so esteemed in England, nor was there any reason why it should be so; for though some zealous brethren of the Presbyte∣terian or Puritan faction appeared exceeding ambitious to wear his Livery, and thought no name so honorable as that of Calvinist, yet the sounder members
of the Church,An. Reg. Eliz. 7. 1564. the Royal and Prelatical Divines, as the others called them, conceived otherwise of him: And the right learned Adrian Sararia, though by birth a Dutch-man, yet being once preferred in the Church of England, he stomached nothing more than to be called Calvinian. Anno Reg. Eliz. 7. A. D. 1564, 1565. WE shall begin this year with the concernments of the Kirk of Scot∣land, where Queen Eizabeth kept a Stock still going, the Returns whereof redounded more to her own security, than to the profit and advantage of the Church of England. The Queen of Scots was young, poffessed of that Kingdom, and next Heir to this; first married to the Daulphin of France, and sued to after his decease in behalf of Charls, the younger son of the Emperor Maximilian, as also of the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Bavaria; But Queen Elizabeth had found so much trouble and danger from her first alliance with the French, that she was against all Marriages which might breed the like, or any way advance the power of that Competitor: But on the contrary, she commended to her the Earl of Leicester, whom she pretended to have raised to those eminent honors, to make him in some fort capable of a Queens affection. Which proposition proved agreeable to neither party, the Queen of Scots disdaining that unequal offer, and Leicester dealing underhand with Randolph the English Resident, to keep her still in that averseness. He had foolishly given himself some hopes of marrying with Elizabeth his own dread Mistress, interpreting all her favours to him to proceed from affection, and was not willing that any Proposition for that purpose with the Queen of Scots should be entertained. During these various thoughts on both sides, the English began to be divided in opinion concerning the next heir to the Crown Imperial of this Realm; One Hales had writ a discourse in favour of the House of Suffolk, but more particularly in defence of the late marriage between the Earl of Hertford and the Lady Katherine, for which he was apprehended and committed prisoner. The Romish party were at the same time sub-divided, some standing for the Queen of Scots as the next heir apparent, though an alien born; others for Henry Lord Darnlie, eldest son to the Earl of Lenox, born in the Realm, and lineally descended from the eldest daughter of King Henry the 7th. from whom the Queen of Scots also did derive her claim. The Queen of Scots also at the same time, grown jealous of the practices of the Lord James her bastard-brother, whom she had not long before made Earl of Murrey; and being over-powered by those of the Congregation, was at some loss within her self for finding a fit person, upon whose integrity she might depend in point of counsel, and on whose power she might rely in point of safety: After a long deliberation, nothing seemed more conducible to her ends and purposes than the recalling of Matthew Earl of Lenox to his native Country, from whence he had been forced by the Hamiltonians in the time of King Henry. Being of great power in the West of Scotland, from the Kings whereof he was extracted, Henry conceived that some good use might be made of him for advancing the so much desired marriage between his onely son Prince Edward and the Infant-Queen: The more to gain him to his side, he bestowes upon him in marriage the Lady Margaret Dowglas, daughter of Queen Margaret his eldest sister, by Archibald Dowglas Earl of Angus her se∣cond husband; of which marriage were born Henry Lord Darnly (of whom more anone) and Charls the second son (whom King James created Earl of Lenox) father of Arabella, before remembred. And that they might support themselves in the nobler equipage, he bestowes upon him also the Mannor of Setrington, with other good Lands adjoyning, in the County of Yok, passing since by the name of Lenox his Lands in the style of the people. In England he remained above twenty years, but kept himself constant in all changes to
the Church of Rome, which made him the more estimable both with his own Queen, and the English Papists. Being returned into his Country, he found that Queen so gracious to him, and such a handsome correspondence with the chief Nobility, that he sends for his two sons to come thither to him, but leaves his wife behind in the Court of England, lest otherwise Queen Elizabeth might take some umbrage or displeasure at it, if they should all remove at once. It was about the middle of February that the Lord Darnly came to the Court of Scotland.1564/5;. Who being not full twenty years old, of lovely person, sweet be∣haviour, and a most ingenuous disposition, exceedingly prevailed in short time on the Queens affection. She had now met with such a man as might please her fancy, and more secure her title to the Crown of England, than any of the great Kings in Europe. What then should hinder her from making up a mariage so agreeable to her, so acceptable to the Catholick party in both Kingdoms; and which she thought withall of so safe a condition, as could create no new jealousies in the brest of Elizabeth? But those of the Leicestrian faction conceived otherwise of it, and had drawn most of the Court and Coun∣cil to conceive so to. For what could more secure the interess of the Queen of Scots, than to corroborate her own Title with that of Darnly? from which two, what children soever should proceed, they would draw to them many hearts in the Realm of England, who now stood fair and faithful to their na∣tural Queen. In this great fear (but made much greater of set purpose to create some trouble) it was advised that the Queen should earnestly be intrea∣ted to think of mariage, to the end, that the succession might be setled in her own posterity; that all Popish Justices (whereof there were many at that time) might be put out of Commission, and none admitted to that office, but such as were sincerely affected to the Reformed Religion; that the old depri∣ved Bishops, which for the most part lived at liberty, might be brought to a more close restraint, for fear of hardning some in their errours, and corrup∣ting others with whom they had the freedom of conversation; that a greater power might be conferred upon the English Bishops, in the free exercise of their jurisdiction, for suppressing all such Popish Books as were sent into England, depriving the English Fugitives of all those Benefices in this King∣dom, which hitherto they had retained; and all this to be done without incur∣ring the danger of a Premunire, with which they were so often threatned by the common Lawyers. It was advised also, that for a counterpoise unto the Title of the Queen of Scots, some countenance should be given to the House of Suffolk, by shewing favour to the Earl of Hartford and the Lady Katherine; and that to keep the ballance even with the Romish Catholicks, some mode∣ration should be used to such Protestant Ministers, (you may be sure the Earl of Leicester had a hand in this) as hitherto had been opposie in exter∣nal matters, to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, here by Law esta∣blished. Nor was this mariage very pleasing to the Scots themselves; the chief Lords of the Romish party, who faithfully had adher'd to their natural Queen in all her former troubles, conceived that some of them might be as capable of the Queens affections, as a young Gentleman born in England, and one that never had done any service which might enoble and prefer him before all the rest. The Ministers exclaimed against it in their common preachings, as if it were designed of purpose to destroy Religion, and bring them under their old vassalage to the Church of Rome. The Noble men and others of the Con∣gregation, who had sold themselves to Queen Elizabeth, were governed whol∣ly by her Counsels, and put themselves into a posture of Arms to disturb the Mach, the Edenburgers do the like, but are quickly scatter'd, and forc'd to submit themselves to their Queens good pleasure, who was so bent upon her mariage with this young Nobleman, that neither threatnings nor perswasions could divert her from it. And tha he might appear in some capacity fit for
the mariage of a Queen,An. Reg. Eliz. 7. 1565. she first confers upon him the Order of Knighthood, and afterwards creats him Baron of Ardamanack, Earl of Rosse, and Duke of Rothsay, which are the ordinary Titles of the eldest and second sons of Scot∣land. In May she had convented the Estates of Scotland, to whom she com∣municated her intention, with the reasons of it. Which by the greatest part of the Assembly seemed to be allowed of, none but the Lord Ochiltrie oppo∣sing what the rest approved. About the middle of July, the mariage Rites were celebrated in the Royal Chapel by the Dean of Restairig, and the next day the new Duke was proclaimed King by sound of Trumpet, and declared to be associated with the Queen in the publick government. The newes where∣of being brought unto Queen Elizabeth, she seemed more offended than in∣deed she was. For well she knew, that both the new King, and the Earl his Father, were men of plain and open natures, not apt to entertain any dange∣rous counsels to the disturbance of her quiet; that as long as she retained the Countesse with her (who was the Mother of the one, and the Wife of the o∣ther) they seemed to stand bound to their good behaviour, and durst act no∣thing to the prejudice of so dear a pledge; but by the precipitation of this ma∣riage, the Queen of Scots had neither fortified her self in the love of her peo∣ple, nor in alliances abroad; and that it could not otherwise be, but some new troubles must break out in Scotland upon this occasion, by which it would be made uncomfortable and inglorious to her. And so it proved in the event, for never was mariage more calamitous to the parties themselves, or more dishonourable to that Nation, or finally more scandalous to both Reli∣gions; in nothing fortunate but in the birth of James the 6th. born in the Palace of Edenborough on the 19th. of July, Anno 1566. solemnly Crowned King of the Scots on the same day of the Month, Anno 1567. and joyfully re∣ceived to the Crown of England, on the 14th. of March, Anno 1602. In greater glory and felicity reigned the Queen of England. Whose praise resounding in all Kingdoms of the North and West, invited Caecille, sister to the King of Sweden, and wife of Christopher, Marquisse of Baden, to undertake a tedious journey both by land and sea, from the furthest places of the North, to see the splendor of her Court, and observe the prudence of her Govern∣ment. Landing at Dover in the beginning of September, they were there recei∣ved by the Lord Cobham, with a goodly train of Knights and Gentlemen; at Canterbury by the Lady Cobham, with the like honourable train of Ladies and Gentlewomen; at Gravesend by the Lord Hunsdon, with the band of Pensio∣ners; at London on the 11th. of September by the Earl of Sussex and his Coun∣tesse, who waited on them to the Lodging appointed for them. Scae had she rested there four dayes, when she fell into a new travel, of which she was happily delivered by the birth of a son; whom the Queen Christned in her own person, by the name of Edwardus Fortunatus, the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Duke of Norfolk being Sureties with her at the Font. She called him Edward, with relation to the King her brother, whose memory she dearly lo∣ved; and Fortunatus in regard that he came so luckily into the world, when his Mother after a most painful pilgrimage, was safely come to pay her Devotions at that Shrine which she so much honoured. Having remained here till the April following, they were dismist with many rich Presents, and an annual pension from the Queen; conducted honourably by the Lord Aburgavenny to the Port of Dover, and there shipped for Calais; filling all places in the way betwixt that and Baden, with the report of the magnificence of their enter∣tainment in the Court of England. And that the Glories of their entertain∣ment might appear the greater, it hapned that Rambouillet a French Ambassador came hither at that time upon two solemnities; that is to say, to be instal∣led Knight of the Garter in the place and person of that King, and to present the Order of St Michael, (the principal Order of that Kingdom) to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Leicester. The one performed with the accu∣stomed Pomps and Ceremonies in the Chapel of St George at Windsor, the other
with like State and splendour, in the Royal Chapel at Whitehall. Such a well tempered piety did at that time appear in the Devotions of the Church of England, that generally the English Papists, and the Ambassadors of forein Prin∣ces still resorted to them. But true it is, that at that time some zealots of the Church of Rome had be∣gun to slacken their attendance, not out of any new dislike which they took at the service, but in regard of a Decree set forth in the Council of rent, prohi∣biting all resort to the Churches of Hereticks. Which notwithstanding the far greater part continued in their first obedience, till the coming over of that Roaring Bull from Pope Pius the 5th. by which the Queen was excommuni∣cated, the subjects discharged from their obedience to the Laws, and the go∣ing or not going to the Church, made a sign distinctive to difference a Ro∣man Catholick from an English Protestant. And it is possible enough that they might have stood much longer to their first conformity, if the dis∣cords brought into the Church by the Zuinglian faction, together with their many innovations both in Doctrine and Discipline, had not afforded them some further ground for the desertion. For in this year it was that the Zuinglian or Calvinian faction began to be first known by the name of Puri∣tans, if Genebrard, Gualier, and Spondanus (being all of them right good Chro∣nologers) be not mistaken in the time. Which name hath ever since been ap∣propriate to them, because of their pretending to a greater Purity in the ser∣vice of God, than was held forth unto them (as they gave it out) in the Com∣mon Prayer Book; and to a greater opposition to the Rites and Usages of the Church of Rome, than was agreeable to the constitution of the Church of England. But this Purity was accompanied with such irreverence, this opposi∣tion drew along with it so much licenciousnesse, as gave great scandal and offence to all sober men; so that it was high time for those which had the care of the Church, to look narrowly unto them, to give a check to those disor∣ders and confusions, which by their practices and their preachings they had brought into it, and thereby laid the ground of that woful schism which soon after followed. And for a check to those disorders, they published the Ad∣vertisement before remembred, subscribed by the Archbishop of Canerbury, the Bishops of London, Winchester, Ely, Lincoln, Rochester, and other of her Ma∣jesties Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical, according to the Statute made in that behalf. This was the only present remedy which could then be thought of. And to prevent the like confusions for the time to come, a Protestation was devised to be taken by all Parsons, Vicars and Curates in their several stations, by which they were required to declare and promise, That they would not preach, not publickly interpret, but only read that which is appointed by publick authority, without special Licence of the Bishop under his Seal; that they would read the Service plainly, distinctly, and audibly, that all the people might hear and understand; that they would keep the Register book according to the Queens Majesties Injunctions; that they would use sobri∣ety in apparel, and especially in the Church at Common Prayers, according to Order appointed; that they would move the Parishioners to quiet and concord, and not give them cause of offence, and help to reconcile them that be at variance, to their utmost power; that they would read dayly at the least one Chapter of the Old Testament, and another of the New, with good advisement, to the increase of their knowledge; that they would in their own persons, use and exercise their Office and Place, to the honour of God, and the quiet of the Queens subjects within their charge, in truth, con∣cord and unity; as also observe, keep and maintain such Order and Unifor∣mity in all external Policy, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, as by the Lawes, good usages and Orders, are already well provided and established; and finally, that they would not openly meddle with any Artificers occu∣pations, as covetously to seek a gain thereby, having in Ecclesiastical Li∣vings,
twenty Nobles or above by the year.An. Reg. Eliz. 8. 1565/6. Which protestation, if it ei∣ther had been generally pressed upon all the Clergy (as perhaps it was not) or better kept by them that took it, the Church might questionlesse have been saved from those distractions, which by the Puritan Innovators were occa∣sioned in it. Anno Reg. Eliz. 8. A. D. 1565, 1566. THus have we seen the publick Liturgy confirmed in Parliament, with di∣vers penalties on all those who either did reproach it, or neglect to use it, or wilfully withdrew their attendance from it; the Doctrine of the Church declared in the Book of Articles, agreed upon in Convocation▪ and ratified, in due form of Law, by the Queens authority; external matters in officiating Gods publick service, and the apparel of the Clergy, regulated and reduced to their first condition, by the Books of Orders and Advertisements. Nothing remaineth, but that we settle the Episcopal Government, and then it will be time to conclude this History. And for the setling of this Government by as good authority as could be given unto it by the Lawes of the Land, we ae be∣holden to the obstinacy of Dr Edmond Bonner, the late great slaughter-man of London. By a Statute made in the last Parliament, for keeping her Majesties Subjects in their due obedience, a power was given unto the Bishops to ten∣der and receive the oath of Supremacy, of all manner of persons, dwelling and residing in their several Diocesses. Bonner▪ was then prisoner in the Clink or Marshalsea, which being in the Burrough of Southwark, brought him within the Jurisdiction of Horn Bishop of Winchester, by whose Chancellor the Oath was tender'd to him. On the refusal of which Oath, he is endicted at the Kings Bench upon the Statute, to which he appeared in some Term of the year fore∣going, and desires that counsel be assigned to plead his cause, according to the course of the Court. The Court assigns him no worse men than Christo∣pher Way, afterwards chief Justice of the Common Pleas, that famous Law∣yer Edmond Ploydon, whose learned Commentaries do sufficiently set forth his great abilities in that Profession; and one Mr. Lovelace, of whom we find no∣thing but the name. By them and their Advice, the whole pleading chiefly is reduced to these two heads, (to omit the nicities and punctilioes of lesser moment) the first whereof was this, That Bonner was not at all named in the indictment, by the stile and title of Bishop of London, but only by the name Dr. Edmond Bonner, Clerk, Dr. of the Lawes, whereas at that time he was legally and actu∣ally Bishop of London, and therefore the Writ to be abated, (as our Lawyers phrase it) and the cause to be dismissed our of the Court. But Ploydon found here that the Case was altered, and that this Plea could neither be allowed by Catiline, who was then Chief Justice, nor by any other of the Bench, and therefore it is noted by Chief Justice Dyer who reports the Case, with a Non allocatur. The second principle Plea was this, That Horn at the time when the Oath was tender'd, was not Bishop of Winchester, and therefore not impow∣red by the said Statute, to make tender of it by himself or his Chancellor. And for the proof of this, that he was no Bishop, it was alleged that the form of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, which had been ratified by Parlia∣ment in the time of King Edward, had been repealed in the first year of Queen Mary, and so remained at Horn's pretended consecration. The Cause being put off from Term to Term, comes at the last to be debated amongst the Jud∣ges at Serjeants Inne. By whom the cause was finally put upon the issue, and the tryal of that issue Ordered to be committed to a Jury of the County of Surry. But then withall it was advised, that the decision of the Point should rather be referred to the following Parliament, for fear that such a weighty matter might miscarry by a contrary Jury, of whose either partiality, insuffi∣ciency,
there had been some proof made before,An. Reg. Eliz. 8. 1566. touching the grants made by King Edward's Bishops; of which a great many were made under this pre∣tence, that the Granters were not actually Bishops, nor legally possessed of their several Sees. According to this sound advice, the business comes under consideration in the following Parliament, which began on the 30th. of September, where all particulars being fully and considerately discoursed upon, it was first declared, That their not restoring of that Book to the former power in terms signi∣ficant and express, was but Casus omissus; and Secondly, That by the Statute 5th. and 6th. Edw. 6th. it had been added to the Book of Common Prayer and administration of the Sacraments, as a member of it, or at least an ap∣pendant to it; and therefore by 1. Eliz. was restored again, together with the said Book of Common Prayer, intentionally at the least, if not in terminis. But being the words in the said Statute were not cleer enough to remove all doubts, they did therefore revive it now; and did accor∣dingly Enact, that all persons that had been, or should be made, Ordered, or Consecrate Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Ministers of Gods Holy Word and Sacraments, or Deacons after the form and order prescribed in the said Book, be in very deed, and also by authority hereof, declared and enacted to be, and shall be, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Ministers and Deacons, rightly made, Consecrate, and Ordered, Any Statute, Law, Canon, or any thing to the contrary notwithstanding. Nothing else done in this Parliament which concerned the Church, not any thing at all in the Convocation, by which it was of course accompanied, more than the granting of a Subsidy of six shillings in the pound out of all their Benefices and promo∣tions. And as for Bonner, who was the other party to the cause in question, it was determined, that neither he, nor any other person or persons, should be impeached or molested in regard of any refusal of the said Oath heretofore made, and hereafter to be made before the end of that Parliament. Which favour was indulged unto them of the Laity, in hope of gaining them by fair means to a sence of their duty; to Bonner and the rest of the Bishops, as men that had sufficiently suffered upon that account, by the loss of their Bi∣shopricks. By this last Act the Church is strongly setled on her natural pillars of Do∣ctrine, Government and Worship, not otherwise to have been shaken, than by the blind zeal of all such furios Sampsons as were resolved to pull it on their own heads, rather than suffer it to stand in so much glory. And here it will be time to conclude this History, having taken a brief view of the State of the Church, with all the abberrations from its first constitution as it stood at this time, when the Puritan faction had began to disturb her Order, and that it may be done with a greater certainty, I shall speak it in the words of one, who lived, and writ his knowledge of it at this time, I mean John Rastel, in his answer to the Bishops challenge. Who though he were a Papist, and a fu∣gitive Priest, yet I conceive that he hath faithfully delivered to many sad truths in these particulars. Three books he writ within the compass of three years now last past against Bishop Jewel, in one of which he makes this address unto him, viz. And though you Mr. Jewel (as I have heard say) do take the bread into your hands when you celebrate solemnly, yet thousands there are of your in∣feriour Ministers, whose death it is to be bound to any such external fashion, and your Order of celebrating the Communion is so unadvisedly conceived, that every man is left unto his private Rule or Canon, whether he will take the bread into his hands, or let it stand at the end of the table, the Bread and Wine being laid upon the table, where it pleases the Sexton or Parish-Clerk to set them. p. 28. In the Primitive Church Altars were allowed amongst Christians, upon which they offered the unbloody sacrifice of Christs body; yet your company, to declare what followers they are of antiquity, do account it, even among one of the kinds of
Idolary, if one keep an Altar standing. And indeed you follow a certain Anti∣quity, not of the Catholicks, but of desperate Hereticks. Optatus writing of the Donatists, that they did break, raze, and remove the Altars of God upon which they offered. p. 34. and 165. Where singing is used, what shall we say to the case of the people, that kneel in the body of the Church? yea, let them hearken at the Chancel dore it self, they shall not be much wiser. Besides, how will you provide for great Parishes where a thousand people are, &c? p. 50. Then to come to the Apostles, where did you ever read that in their external beha∣viour, they did wear Frocks or Gowns, or four-cornered Caps? or that a company of Lay-men-servants did follow them all in one Livery? or that at their Prayers they sae in sides, or lay on the ground, or fell prostrate, or sung Te Deum, or looked toward the South? or did wear Copes of Tisse or Velvet? with a thousand more such questions. p. 446. Whereas the Church of God so well ordered with excellent men of learning and godlinesse, is constrained to suffer Coblers, Weavers, Tinkers, Tanners, Cardmakers, apsters, Fidlers, Gaolers, and other of like profession, not only to enter into disputing with her, but also to climb up into Pulpits, and to keep the place of Priests and Mini∣sters, &c. p. 2. Or that any Bagpipers, Horse coursers, Jaylers, or Ale basters, were ad∣mitted then into the Clergy, without good and long tryal of their conversation? p. 162. Or that any Bishop then did swear by his honour, when in his visitation abroad in the Country, he would warrant his promise to some poor prisoner Priest under him; or not satisfied with the prisoning of his adversary, did cry out, and call upon the Prince, not disposed that way, to put them to most cruel deaths; or refused to wear a white Rochet, or to be distinguished from the Laity by some honest Priests ap∣parel, p. 162. or gathered a Benevolence of his Clergy to set him up in his houshold? p. 163. Or that the Communion Table (if any then were) was removable up and down, hither and thither, and brought at any time to the lower parts of the Church, there to execute the Lords Supper—or that any Communion was said on Good Friday, or that the Sa∣crament was ministred then, sometimes in loaf Bread, sometimes in Wafers, and those rather without the name of Jesus or the sign of the Crosse, than with it; or that at the Communion time the Minister should wear a Cope, and at all other Ser∣vice a Surplice only; or as at some places it is used, nothing at all besides his common apparel, or that they used a common and prophane cup at the Communion, and not a consecrated and hallowed vessel? p. 162, 163. Or that a solemn curse should be used on Ah Wednesday; or that a Procession about the fields was used in the Rogation week, rather thereby to know the bounds and borders of every Parish, than to move God to mercy, and shew mens hearts to devotion; or that the man should put the Wedding ring upon the fourth fin∣ger of the left hand of the Women, and not on the right, as hath been many hundred years continued? p. 163. Or that the resiue of the Sacrament unreceived, was taken of the Priest, or of the Parish Clerk, to spread their young childrens butter thereupon, or to serve their own tooth with it at their homely table; or that it was lawful then to have but one Communion in one Church in one day, p. 164. or that the Lent or Friday was to be fasted for civil policy, not for any devotion, p. 165. or that the Lay peo∣ple communicating, did take the cup at one another hands, and not at the Priests? p. 166. Or that any Bishop then, threw down the Images of Christ and his Saints, and set up their own, their wives, and their childrens pictures in their Chambers and Par∣lours, p. 164. or that being a virgin at the taking of his Office, did afterwards, yet commendably, take a wife unto him, p. 165. or that was married on Ash Wednesday; or that preached it to be all one to pray on a dunghil and in a Church; or that any Fryer of 60 years, obteining afterwards the room of a Bishop, married a young woman of nineteen years, &c? p. 166.
Thus have we seen the Church established on a sure foundation the Doctrine built upon the Prophers and Apostles, according to the explication of the anci∣ent Fathers; the Government truly Apostolical, and (in all essential parts thereof) of Divine institution; the Liturgy an extract of the Primitive forms; the Ceremonies few, but necessary, and such as tended only to the preservation of decency, and increase of piety. And we have seen the first Essays of the Pu∣ritan faction, beginning low at Caps and Surplices, and Episcopal habits; but aiming at the highest points; the alteration of the Government both in Church and State, the adulterating of the Doctrine, and the subversion of the Liturgy and form of worship here by Law established. But the discovery of those dangerous Doctrines, and those secret Plots, and open practises, by which they did not onely break down the roofe and walls of this goodly building, but digged up the found∣ation of it, will better fall within the compasse of a Presbyterian, or Acrian Histo∣ry, for carring on of whose designes since the dayes of Calvin, they have most mi∣serably imbroyled all the Estates and Kingdomes of these parts of Christendome; the Realmes and Churches of Great Brittaine more than all the rest. Let it suffice me for the present if I have set the Church on its proper bottom, and shewed her to the world in her Primative lustre, that we may see how strangely she hath been un∣setled, how monstruously disfigured by unquiet men, whose interess is as incompa∣tible with the rights of Monarchy, as with distinction of apparrell, the Government of Bishops, all set formes of Prayer, and whatsoever also they contend against. And therefore heare I will conclude my History of the Reformation, as not being wil∣ling to look further into those disturbances, the lamentable effects whereof wee feele to this very day.
AN APPENDIX To the former BOOK: CONTAINING, 1. The Articles of Religion agreed upon in Convocation Anno 1562. compared with those which had been made and published in the Reign of King Edward the 6th Anno 1552. 2. Notes on the former Articles, concerning the Particulars in which they differed, and the reasons of it.
A PREFACE to the following ARTICLES. THe Lutherans having published that famous Confession of their faith, which takes name from Ausbrge, at which City it was tendered to the consideration of Charls the 5th. and the Estates of the Empire there assem∣bled, Anno 1530. In tract of time, all other Protestant and Reformed Churches followed that example; And this they did, partly to have a constant Rule a| mongst themselves, by which all private persons were to frame their judgments, and prtly to declare that consent and harmony which was betwixt them and the rest of those National Churches, which had made an open separation from the Popes of Rome. Upon which grounds, the Prelates of the Church of Eng∣land having concurred with the godly desires of King Edward the sixth, for framing one uniform Order to be used in God's publick Worship; and publish| ing certain pious and profitable Sermons in the English Toung for the in∣struction of the people, found a necessity of holding forth some publick Rule, to testifie as well their Orthodoxie in some points of Doctrine, as their abhorrency from the corruptions of the Church of Rome, and the extravagancies of the Anabaptists and other Sectaries. This gave the first occasion to the Articles of Religion published in the Reign of King Edward the sixth, Anno 1552. as also of the Review thereof by the Bishops and Clergy assembled in their Convo∣cation under Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1562. which being compared with one another will appear most plainly, neither to be altogether the same, nor yet much different, the later being rather an explication of the former, where the former seemed to be obscure, or not expressed in such full and significant tearms as they after were, than differing from them in such points, wherein they dis∣sented from the Romanists and some modern Hereticks: But what these dif∣ferences were, both for weight and number, the Reader may observe by seeing the Articles laid before him in their several Columns (as hereafter followeth) wherein the variations are presented in a different character, or otherwise mark∣ed out by their several figures in the line and margin: Which was first done with reference to some Annotations intended once upon the same, for shewing the reason of those Additions, Substractions, and other alterations which were thought necessary to be made to, and in, King Edward's Book, by the Bishops and Clergy in their Convocation, Anno 1562. But that design being laid aside, as not so compatible with the nature of our present History, the Arti∣cles shall be laid down plainly as they are in themselves, leaving the further consideration of the differences which occur between them to the Reader's care.
Articles agreed upon by the Bi∣shops and other learned men (1) in the Convocation held at Lon∣don, in the year 1552. for the avoid∣ing of Diversitities of Opinions, and stablishing consent touching true Religion: Published by the Kings Authority. Articles agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy, in the Convocation holden at Lon∣don, in the year 1562. for the avoid∣ing of Diversities of Opinions, and sta∣blishing consent tonching true Religion: Publish'd by the Queens Authority. I. Of Faith in the holy Trinity. THere is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts, or passions; of infinite power, wisdom and goodness; the Maker and Preserver of all things both visible and invisible. And in Unity of this Godhead there are three Persons, one Substance, Power, and Eternity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. I. Of Faith in the holy Trinity. THere is but one living and true God, Everlasting, without body, parts, or passions; of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness▪ the Maker and Preserver of all things both visible and invisible. And in Unity of this God∣head there be three Persons, of one Substance, Power, and Eternity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. II. The Word of God made very Man. The Son, which is the Word of the Father, took mans nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin, of her substance: So that two whole and perfect Natures, that is to say, the (2) Godhead & Manhood, were joyn'd together in one Person, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very God and very Man, who truly suffer∣ed, was crucified, dead, and buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and to be a sacrifice not onely for original guilt, but also for actual sins of men. II. Of the Word or Son of God which was made very Man. The Son, which is the Word of the Father, begotten from everlasting of the Father, the very and eternal God, of one Substance with the Father: (2) took Man's nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin, &c. III. Of the going down of Christ into Hell. As Christ dyed for us, and was bu∣ried, so also is it to be believed that he went down into Hell: (3) For his Bo∣dy lay in the Grave till his Resurrection, but his Soul being separate from his Body, remained with the Spirits which were detained in prison, that is to say, in Hell, and there preached unto them, as witnesseth that place of Peter. III. Of the going down of Christ into Hell. As Christ dyed for us, and was bu∣ried, so also it is to be believed that he went down into Hell.
IV. The Resurrection of Christ. Christ did truly rise again from death, and took again his Body, with flesh, bones, and all things appertain∣ing to the perfection of man's nature, wherewith he ascended into heaven, and there fitteh till he return to judg all men at the last day. IV. Of the Resurrection of Christ. Christ did truly rise again from death, and took again his Body, with flesh, bones, &c. (5) V. Of the holy Ghost. The holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son, is of one Substance, Majesty and Glory with the Father and the Son, very and eter∣nal God. V. The Doctrine of the holy Scripture is sufficient to salvation. Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary to salvation, so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, although some∣times it may be admitted (6) by Gods faithful people as pious, and conducing unto order and decency, yet is not to be required of any man that it should be (7) believed as an Article of the faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation. VI. Of the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures for salvation. Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary to salvation, so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man that it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or be thought necessary or requisite to salvation. In the name of the holy Scripture (7) we do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church; that is to say, Genesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomy Joshua Judges Ruth 1st. of Samuel 2d. of Samuel &c. And the other Books (as Hierom saith) the Church doth read for example of life, and instruction of manners, but yet doth it not apply them to establish any Doctrine; such are these following, The 3d. of Esdras The 4th. of Esdras The Book of Tobias The Book of Judeth The rest of the Book of Hester The Book of Wis∣dom, &c. All the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do re∣ceive and account them Canonical. VI. The Old Testament is not to be rejected. The Old Testament is not to be rejected, as if it were contrary to the New, but to be retained. Forasmuch as in the Old Testament as in the New, everlasting life is offered to Mankind by Christ, who is the onely Mediatior betwixt God and Man, be∣ing both God and Man. Wherefore they are not to be heard, who feign, that the old Fathers did look onely or transitory Promises. VII. Of the Old Testament. The Old Testament is not contray to the New, for both in the Od and the New Testament Everlasting life is offe∣red Mankind by Christ, &c. (8) Although the Law given from Gd by Moses, as touching Ceremonies and Rites, do not bind Christian men, nor the Civil Precepts theeof ought of necssiy to be received in any Commonwealth; yet notwithstanding no Christian man what∣soever is free from the obedience of the Commandments, which are called Mo∣ral. VII. The three Creeds. The three Creeds, Nice Creed, A hansius Creed, and that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received; for they may be poved by most certain warrants of the holy Scripture. VIII. Of the three Creeds. The three Creeds, Nce Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be eceived and belvd for they my be proved by most certain warrants of holy Scrip∣ture. VIII. Original Sin. Original sin standeth not in the following of Adam, (as the Pelagan do vainly talk, and at this day is assim∣ed by the Anabaptists) (9) but it is the fault and corruption of every man, that naturally is ingendred of the off∣spring of Adam, whereby Man is very far from God, from Original Righte∣ousness, and is of his own nature in∣clined to evil, so that the flesh lusteh always contrary to the spiit, and therefore in every person born into this wold it deserveth Gods wrath and damnation. And this infection of nature doth remain, yea in them that are regenerated, whereby the lust of the flesh, called in Greek , which some do expound the wis∣dom, some sensuality, some the af∣fection, some the desire of the flesh, is not subject to the Law of God. And although there is no condemnation for them that believe and are bapti∣zed, yet the Apostle doth confess, that conpiscence and lust hath of it self the nature of sin. IX. Of Original or Birth sin. Original sin standeth not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do vainly talk) but is the fault and the corruption of the nature of every man, &c.
IX. Of Free-will. We have no power to do good works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we may have a good will and working with us, when we have that good will. X. Of Free-will. The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, (10) that he cannot turn and prepare himself, by his own natural strength and good works, to faith and calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and acceptable unto God, &c. X. Of Grace. The Grace of Christ, or the holy Ghost which is given by him, (11) doth take from man the heart of Stone, and giveth him a heart of flesh. And though it rendreth us willing to do those good works which before we were unwilling to do, and unwilling to do those evil works which before we did, yet is no violence offered by it to the will of man; so that no man when he hath sinned can excuse him∣sel, as if he had sinned against his will, or upon constraint, and therefore that he ought not to be accused or con∣demned upon that account. IX.  Of the Justification of Man. (12) Justification by faith onely in Je∣sus Christ, in that sense wherein it is set forth in the Homily of Justification, is the most certain and most whole∣some doctrine for a Christian man. XI. Of the Justification of Man. We are accounted Righteous be∣fore God onely for the merit of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own works or deservings. Wherefore that we are justified by faith is a most wholsome Doctrine, and very full of comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Ho∣mily of Justification.
XII. Of good Works. Albeit the good works which are the fruits of faith, (13) and follow after Justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity of Gods judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable unto God in Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true and lively faith, insomuch that by them a lively faith may be as evidently known, as a tree discerned by the fruit. XII. Works before Justification. Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spi∣rit, are not pleasant to God, foras∣much as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ; neither do they make men meet to receive Grace, or (as the School-Authors say) deserve Grace of Congruity; yea rather for that they are not done as God hath willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of sin. XIII. Of Works before Justification. Works done before the Grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spi∣rit, are not pleasant to God, &c. XIII. Works of Supererogation. Voluntary works besides, over and above Gods Commandements, which they call works of Supererogation, cannot be taught without arrogancy and impiety; for by them men do de∣clare, that they do not onely render unto God as much as they are bound to doe, but that they do more for his sake, than of bounden duty is requir∣ed; Whereas Christ saith plainly, When you have done all that are com∣manded to you, say, We are unprofitable servants. XIV. Of Works of Supererogation. Voluntary works besides, over and above Gods commandments, which they call works of Supererogation, &c.
XIV. None but Christ without sin. Christ in the truth of our nature, was made like unto us in all things (sin onely except) from which he was clearly void both in his flesh and in his spirit: He came to be a Lamb without spot, who by sacrifice of himself once made, should take away the sins of the world; and sin (as St. John saith) was not in him: But all we the rest (although baptized and born in Christ) yet offend iu many things, and if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. XV. Of Christ alone without sin. Christ in the truth of our nature, was made like unto us in all things, (sin onely except) &c. XV. Of the sin against the holy Ghost. Not every deadly sin, willingly committed after Baptism, is sin against the holy Ghost, and unpardo∣nable. Wherefore the grant of Repen∣tance is not to be denyed to such as fall into sin after Baptism. After we have received the holy Ghost, we may depart from Grace given, and fall into sin, and by the Grace of God (we may) arise again and amend our lives. And therefore they are to be con∣demned which say, They can no more sin as long as they live here, or deny the place of Penance (14) to such as truly repent. XVI. Of sin after Baptism. Not every deadly sin, willingly com∣mitted after Baptism, is sin against the holy Ghost, and unpardonable, &c. And therefore they are to be con∣demned which say, They can no more sin as long as they live here, or deny the place of Forgivenesse to such as tru∣ly repent. XVI. The Blasphemy against the holy Ghost. The blasphemy against the holy Ghost is then committed, (15) when any man, out of malice and hardness of heart, doth wilfully reproach, and persecute in an hostile manner, the truth of Gods Word, manifestly made known unto him. Which sort of men, being made obnoxious to the curse, subject themselves to the most grievous of all wickednesses; from whence this kind of sin is called unpardonable, and so
affirmed to be by our Lord and Sa∣viour. XVII. Of Predestination and Election. Predestination unto life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the foundations of the world were laid) he hath constantly decreed by his counsel, secret nto us, to de∣liver from curse and damnation those whom he hath chosen out of Man∣kind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor. Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose, by his Spirit working in due season; they through grace obey the calling, they be justified freely, they are made sons by Adoption, they are made like the image of the onely be∣gotten Jesus Christ, they walk re∣ligiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy they attain to ever∣lasting felicity. As the godly consideration of Predestination and Election in Christ, is full of sweet, pleasant, and un∣speakable comfort to godly persons, and such as feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ, mor∣tifying the works of the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up their mind to high and heavenly things, as well because it doth greatly establish and confirm their faith of eternal salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it doth fervently kindle their love towards God: So for curious and carnal per∣sons, lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the sentence of Gods Predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, where∣by the devil doth thrust them either into desperation, or into wretch∣lesness of most unclean living, no lesse perilous than desperation. Furthermore, though the Decrees of Predestination be unknown to us, (17) yet must we receive Gods promises in such wise as they be generally set forth to us in holy Scripture; and in our doings that will of God is to be followed, which we have expresly declared unto us in the Word of God. XVII. Of Predestination and Election. Predestination unto life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the foundations of the world were laid) he hath constantly decreed by his counsel, secret unto us, to de∣liver from curse and damnation those whom he hath chosen in Christ, (16) out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation. — they are made the sons of God by Adoption, they be made like the Image of His onely begotten Son Je∣sus Christ, &c. Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises in such wise as they be gene∣rally set forth to us, &c.
XVIII. Everlasting Salvation to be obtain∣ed onely in the Name of Christ. They also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, That every man shall be saved by the Law or Sect which he professeth, so that he be di∣ligent to frame his life according to that Law, and the light of Nature: For holy Scripture doth set out unto us onely the Name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must be saved. XVIII. Of obtaining Eternal Salvation by the Name of Christ. They also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, That every man shall be saved by the Law or Sect which he professeth, &c. XIX. All men are bound to keep the Pre∣cepts  of the Moral Law. (18) Although the Law given from God by Moses as touching Ceremonies and Rites, do not bind Christian men, nor the Civil Precepts thereof ought of necessity to be received in any Common-wealth; yet notwithstand∣ing no Christian man whatsoever is free from the obedience of the Commandments which are called Moral. Wherefore they are not to be heard (19) which teach, that the holy Scriptures were given to none but to the Weak, and brag continually of the Spirit, by which they do pre∣tend, that all whatsoever they preach is suggested to them, though mani∣festly contrary to the holy Scrip∣ture.
XX. Of the Church. The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministred, according to Christs Ordinance, in all those things, that of necessity are requisite to the same. As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred, so also the Church of Rome hath erred, not onely in their Livings, and manner of Ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith. XIX. Of the Church. The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in which the pure Word of God is preached, &c. XXI. Of the Authority of the Church. It is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods Word written, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to aother; Whereore although the Church be a witnesse and keeper of holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any thing against the same, so besides the same ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed, for necessity of Salvation. XX. Of the Authority of the Church. The Church hath power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith. (20) It is not lawful for the Church, &c. XXII. Of the Authority of General Councils. General Councils may not be ga∣thered together without the com∣mandment and will of Princes. And when they be gathered together, (for∣asmuch as they be an Assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and word of God) they may erre, and sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining unto God. Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to Salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unless it may be declared, that they be taken out of holy Scripture. XXI. Of the Authority of General Councils. General Councils may not be ga∣thered together without the com∣mandment and will of Princes, &c.
XXIII. Of Purgatory. The Doctrine of the School-men concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping, and Adoation, as well of Images as of Relicts, and also in∣vocation of Saints, is a fond thing vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather perniciously repugnant to the Word of God. XXII. Of Purgatory. The Doctrine of the School-men concerning Purgatory, &c. XXIV. No man to minister in the Church ex∣cept he be called. It is not lawfull for any man to take upon him the office of publick Preaching, or ministring the Sacra∣ments in the Congregation, before he be lawfully called and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge lawfully called and sent, which be hosen and called to this work by men, who have publik Authority, given unto them in the Congegation, to call and send Ministers into the Lords Vineyard. XXIII. Of ministring in the Congregation. It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of publick Preaching, &c. XXV. All things to be done in the Congre∣gation in such a Toung as is under∣stood by the People. It is most fit, and most agreeable to to the Word of God, (21) that nothing be read or rehearsed in the Congrega∣tion, in a Tongue not known unto the People; which Paul hath forbid∣den to be done, unless some be pre∣sent to interpret. XXIV. Of speaking in the Congregation in such a Toung, as the people understandeth. It is a thing plainly repugnant to the VVord of God, and the custom of the primitive Church, to have pub∣lick prayer in the Church or to mini∣ster the Sacraments in a Tongue not understanded by the people. XXVI. Of the Sacraments. Our Lord Jesus Christ gathered his people into a Society (22) by Sacra∣ments very few in number, most easie to be kept, and of most excellent sig∣nification, that is to say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon or to be carried about, but that we should du∣ly use them. And in such onely as worthily receive the same they have a wholesome effect or operation, not as some say, Ex opere operato. (24) Which terms as they are strange and utterly unknown to the Holy Scripture, so do they yield a sense which savoureth of little piety, but of much superstition: but they that re∣ceive them unworthily receive to themselves damnation. The Sacraments ordained by the Word of God, be not onely badges or tokens of Christian mens profession; but rather they be certain sure wit∣nesses, effectual signs of grace, and Gods Good will toward us, by the which he doth work invisibly in us, and doth not onely quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our faith in him. XXV. Of the Sacraments. Sacraments ordained of Christ (23) be not onely badges and tokens of Chri∣stian mens profession, but rather they be certain sure witnesses, and effectual signes of Grace, and Gods good-will towards us, by the which he doth work invisibly in us, and doth not onely quicken, but also strengthen and con∣firm our faith in him. There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lod in the Gospel, that is to say, Baptism and the upper of the Lord. Those five commonly called Sacra∣ments (25), that is to say Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and Extream Unction, are not to be count∣ed for Sacraments of the Gospel, being such as have grown, partly of the cor∣rupt following of the Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the Scrip∣tures, but yet have not like nature of Sacraments, with Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they have not any visible Sign or Ceremony ordained of God. The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed on or to be carried about, but that we should duly use them. And in such onely as worthily receive the same, they have a wholsome effect or operation; But they that re∣ceive them unworthily purchase to themselves Damnation, as St. Paul saith.
XXVII. The wickedness of the Ministers takes not away the Efficacy of Divine Institutions. Although in the visible Church, the Evil be ever mingled with the Good, and sometimes the Evil have chief Authority in the Ministration of the Word and Sacraments; yet for∣asmuch as they do not the same in their own name, but in Christs, and do minister by his Commission and Authority, we may use their Ministry both in hearing the Word of God, and in receiving of the Sacraments; Neither is the effect of Christs Ordi∣nance taken away by their wicked∣nesse, nor the Grace of Gods of Gifts diminished from such as by faith and rightly do receive the Sacraments, ministred unto them which be effectu∣al, because of Christs Institution and promise, although they be ministred by evill men. Neverthelesse it appertaineth to the Discipline of the Church, that inqui∣ry be made after them, and that they be accused by those, that have know∣ledge of their offences; and finally be∣ing found guilty by just judgment be deposed. XXVI. Of the unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the Effect of the Sacraments. Although in the visible Church, the Evill be ever mingled, &c. —that inquiry be made after evill Ministers, &c.
XXVIII. Of Baptism. Baptism is not onely a sign of Pro∣fession, and mark of Difference, whereby Christian men are discerned from others, that be not Christned; but it is also a sign of Regeneration, or new birth, whereby, as by an In∣strument, they that receive Baptism Rightly, are grafted into the Church; the promises of forgivnesse of sin, and of our Adoption to be the sons of God, by the holy Ghost are visibly signed and sealed; Faith is confirmed, and Grace increased by vertue of Prayer unto God. The custom of the Church (26) for Baptising young Children is both to be commended, and by all means to be retained in the Church. XXVII. Of Baptism. Baptism is not onely a sign of Pro∣fession, and mark of Difference, &c. —The Baptism of young children is in any wise to be retained in the Church, as most agreeable to the Institu∣tion of Christ. (27) XXIX. Of the Lords Supper. The Supper of the Lord is not one∣ly a sign of the Love that Christians ought to have amongst themselves, one to another; but rather it is a Sa∣crament of our Redemption by Christs death. Insomuch, that to such as Rightly, Worthily, and with Faith receive the same, the Bread which we break is a partaking of the Body of Christ, and likewise the Cup of Blessing is a partaking of the Blood of Christ. Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord cannot be proved by Holy Writ; but it is repug∣nant to the plain words of Scripture, and hath given occasion to many Su∣perstitions. Since the very beeing of human nature doth require, (29) that the bo∣dy of one and the same man cannot be at one and the same time in many places, but of necessity must be in some certain and determinate place; therefore the Bo∣dy of Christ cannot be present in many different places at the same time. And since, as the holy Scriptures testifie, Christ hath been taken up into Heaven, and there is to abide till the end of the world; it becommeth not any of the faith∣ful to believe or professe, that there is a Real or Corporal presence (as they phrase it) of the Body and Blood of Christ in the holy Eucharist. The Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per, was not by Christs Ordinance, reserved, carried about, lifted up, or worshiped. XXVIII. Of the Lords Supper. The Supper of the Lord is not one∣ly a sign of the Love, &c. — but is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament (28), and hath given occasion to many Supersti∣tions. The Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, onely after an heavenly and spiritual manner (30); And the mean whereby the Body of Christ is received and eaten in the Supper is Faith. The Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per was not by Christs Ordinance, &c. XXIX. Of the Wicked which eat not the Body of Christ in the Lord's Supper. (31) The wicked and such as be void of a lively faith, although they do car∣nally and visibly presse with their teeth (as St. Augustine saith) the Sa∣crament of the Body and Blood of Christ; yet in no wise are they parta∣kers of Christ, but rather to their condemnation, do eat and drink the Sign or Sacrament of so great a thing. XXX.  Of Both Kinds. (32) The Cup of the Lord is not to be denyed to the Lay People; For both the parts of the Lords Sacrament, by Christs Ordinance and Command∣ment, ought to be ministred to all Christian People alike.
XXX. Of the one Oblation of Christ finished upon the Crosse. The Offering of Christ once made, is the perfect Redemption, Propitia∣tion, and Satisfaction for all the sins of the whole World, both Original and Actual, and there is none other Satisfaction for sin but that alone; Wherefore the Sacrifices of Masses, in which it was commonly said, that the Priests did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have remission of pain or guilt, were fables and dan∣gerous deceits. XXXI. Of the one Oblation of Christ finished upon the Crosse. The offering of Christ once made is the perfect Redemption, &c. — were blasphemous fables and (33) dangerous deceits. XXXI. A single Life is imposed on none by the Word of God. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are not commanded by God's Law, either to vow the estate of a single life, or to abstain from Marriage. XXXII. Of the Marriage of Priests. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are not commanded by Gods Law, &c. Therefore it is lawful also for them, (34) as for all other Christian men, to marry at their own discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to godlinesse. XXXII. Excommunicated Persons are to be avoided. That person which by open De∣nunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off from the unity of the Church, and Excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole multitude of the faithful as an Heathen, and Publican, untill he be openly reconciled by Penance, and received into the Church by a Judge which hath autho∣rity thereunto. XXXIII. Of Excommunicated Persons, how they are to be avoided. That person which by open Denun∣ciation of the Church, &c. XXXIII. Of the Traditions of the Church. It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, and utterly like; for at all times they have been divers, and may be changed according to the diversities of Coun∣tries, Times, and mens Manners, so that nothing be ordained against Gods Word. Whosoever through his pri∣vate judgment willingly and purpose∣ly doth openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained and approved by common Authority, ought to be re∣buked openly, (that others may fear to do the like) as he that offendeth against the common Order of the Church, and hurteth the Authority of the Magistrate, and woundeth the Consciences of the weak Brethren. XXXIV. Of the Traditions of the Church. It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies, &c. Every particular or National Church (35) hath Authority to ordain, change or aboish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained onely by Man's Au∣thority, so that all things be done to edi∣fying. XXXIV. Of the Homilies. The Homilies lately delivered (36) and commended to the Church of England by the Kings Injunction, do contain a godly and wholsome Do∣ctrine, and fit to be embraced by all men; and for that cause they are dili∣gently, plainly, and distinctly to be read to the People. XXXV. Of Homilies. The second Book of Homilies, the several Titles whereof we have joyned under this Article, doth contain a godly and wholsome Doctrin, and ne∣cessary for the times; as doth the for∣mer Book of Homilies, which were set forth in the time of Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be read in Churches, by the Ministers diligently and distinctly, that they may be understood of the People. The names of the Homilies. Of the Right use of the Church. Of Repairing Churches. Against the Peril of Idolatry. Of Good Works, &c.
XXXV. Of the Book of Common Prayer, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England. The Book lately delivered to the Church of England, by the Authority of the King and Parliament (37), con∣taining the manner and form of pub∣lick Prayer, and the ministration of the Sacraments, in the said Church of England; as also the Book published by the same Authority for Ordering Ministers in the Church, are both of them very pious, as to uth of Do∣ctrine, in nothing contrary, but agree∣able to the wholsome Doctrine of the Gospel, which they do very much promote and illustrate. And for that cause they are by all faithful Members of the Church of England, but chiefly of the Ministers of the Word, with all thankfulness and readiness of mind, to be received, approved, and commend∣ed to the People of God. XXXVI. Of Consecration of Bishops and Ministers. The Book of Consecration of (38) Archbishops and Bishops, and ordering of Priests and Deacons, late∣ly set forth in the time of King Ed∣ward the sixth, and confirmed at the same time by Authority of Parlia∣ment, doth contain all things neces∣sary to such Consecration and Orde∣ring. Neither hath it any thing that of it self is superstitious and ungodly; And therfore whosoever are Consecra∣ted or ordered according to the Rites of that Book, since the second year of the afore-named King Edward, unto this time, or hereafter shall be Conse∣crated or ordered, according to the same Rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and lawfully Conse∣crated and Ordered. XXXVI. Of the Civil Magistrates. The King of England is after Christ (39) the Supream Head on Earth of the Church of England and Ireland. The Bishop of Rome hath no Ju∣risdiction in this Realm of England. The Civil Magistrate is ordained and approved by God, and therefore are to be obeyed, not onely for fear of wrath, but for conscience sake. Cvil or temporal Laws may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and grievous offences. It is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to wear Weapons, and serve in the Wars. XXXVII. Of the Civil Magistrates. The Queens Majesty hath the chief Power in this Realm of England, and other her Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesi∣astical or Civil, in all cases doth ap∣pertain, and is not, nor ought to be subject to any Forein Jurisdiction. Where we attribute to the Queens Ma∣jesty the chief Government (40), by which Titles we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to be offend∣ed: We give not to our Princess the Ministry, either of Gods Word, or of the Sacraments, the which thing the Injunctions lately set forth by Eliza∣beth our Queen, do most plainly testi∣fie: but that onely Prerogative, which we see to have been given always to all godly Princes, in holy Scriptutes by God himself, that is, that they should rule all Estates committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and re∣strain with the Civil Sword the stub∣born and evil doers. The Bishop of Rome hath no Juris∣diction in this Realm of England. The Laws of this Realm may punish Christian men with death, &c.
XXXVII. The goods of Christians are not common. The Riches and Goods of Christi∣ans are not common, as touching the right title and possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsly boast. Notwithstanding every man ought, of such things as he possesseth, liberally to give alms to the poor, according to his ability. XXXVIII. Of Christian mens Goods which are not common. The Riches and Goods of Christian men are not common, &c. XXXVIII. It is lawful for a Christian to take an Oath. As we confesse that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle; so we judge that Christi∣an Religion doth not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate requireth, in a cause of Faith and Charity, so it be done according to the Pro∣phets teaching, in Justice, Judgment, and Truth. XXXIX. Of a Christian man's Oath. As we confesse that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men, &c. XXXIX.  The Resurrection of the Dead is not past already. (41) The Resurrection of the dead is not past already, as if it belonged onely to the Soul, which by the grace of Christ is raised from the death of sin, but is to be expected by all men in the last Day: for at that time, as the Scripture doth most apparently testifie, the dead shall be restored to their own bodies, flesh and bones, to the end that the wicked man, according as either righteously or wickedly he hath passed this life, may, according to his works, receive rewards or punishments.
XL.  The Souls of men deceased do neither perish with their Bodies. (42) They who maintain, that the Souls of men deceased do either sleep without any manner▪ of sense to the day of Judgment; or affirm that they dye together with the Body, and shall be raised therewith at the last Day, do wholly differ from the Right▪ Faith and Orthodox Belief, which is delivered to us in the Holy Scriptures. XLI.  Of the Millenarians. (43) They who endeavour to revive the Fable of the Millenarians, are therein contrary to the holy Scriptures, and cast themselves down headlong into Jew∣ish Dotages. XLII.  All men not to be saved at last. (44) They also deserve to be condemned, who endeavor to restore that pernici∣ous Opinion, that all men, though never so ungodly, shall at last be saved; when for a certain time, appointed by the Divine Justice, they have endured punishment for their sins committed. FINIS.
