H211 12152268 55081
THE MANNER HOW STATƲTES Are enacted in PARLIAMENT BY Passing of Bills. Collected many yeares past out of the Iournalls of the house of Commons. By W. Hakewil of Lincolnes Inne, Esquire. Together with a Catalogue of the Speakers Names. London, printed by T. H. for Iohn Benson, at St. Dunstans Church yard. 1641. Cum Privilegio.
THE PREFACE. HAving about thir∣ty yeeres past, the free use and pe∣rusall of all the Iournalls of the Commons house of Parliament, from the first yeare of K. Edward the sixth, being the most ancient that they have) untill that time. And being unwilling to
lose the advantage of that op∣portunity, I read them all through, and whatsoever I conceived to tend to the rule of the house, (wherein I was the better inabled to udge, in respect I had served in divers Parliaments, or Sessions of Parliament before that time) I reduced under apt Parlia∣mentary Titles: Amongst the rest in this Chapter of passing of Bills, I was the more sedu∣lous, because it is indeed the daily and most proper worke of that house, wherein I have beene carefull, not to propose
any thing for a rule, for which I have not vouched the autho∣rity of the Iournall. Those my collections, I imparted many yeeres since to some of my friends (which being by the length of time multiplied into very many copies) one of them (and I thinke the falsest writ∣ten of all the rest) was with∣out my knowledge lately prin∣ted, and by the negligence of the Printer, the errors of the copie were much increased, in∣somuch that it pleased the ho∣nourable house of Commons, (because it concerned their or∣ders)
to take notice thereof, and take some order therein; by which I was induced to make this publication, being otherwise very unwilling to have appeared in print, and to have subjected my selfe to publique censure. It were (in my poore opini∣on) to be wisht, that the same course were taken by the house of Commons, as was by the Lords in 18. Iacobi Regis, who appointed a Committee for the collecting of the rules and orders of that house; which being collected, they caused to
be fairly ingrossed in a roll of parchment, which by order is alwaies read in the beginning of every Parliament, and re∣steth in the custody of the Clarke of that house, to be pre∣sently resorted unto upon all occasions, where by much of their pretious time is saved, which other wise perhaps would have beene spent in the deba∣ting of the Rules and Orders of their house. Another excellent Order was made by their Lordships, that once every weeke, a Committee appointed for
that purpose, that should per∣use and perfect the Clarkes notes, and that at the end of every Session, all the orders of that Session should bee ingrossed in vellam, and fairely bound up, which course first began in the time, when my worthy friend Master Henry Elsynge that most industri∣ous and able Gentleman, was Clarke of that house, and hath continued ever since; whereas before that time all their Iour∣nalls (of which the most anci∣ent are from the begining of King Henry the eight) are in paper,
as are those of the Commons house, but more fairely written. If to this care of perfecting of the Iournalls of the house of Commons, there were some provision made by that house, for the safe preserving of them, answerable to that which the Lords have, whose Clarke hath a house belonging to him, and his successors, where all their Records are kept to po∣sterity, the Iournalls and Re∣cords of the Commons house, would not (as now they may) come to the hands of Ex∣ecutors
or Administrators, and bee removed to and fro in hazard of being lost, or cor∣rupted and defaced, as is well knowne that some of them have beene, and that in pas∣sages of the greatest moment, whereby the Common wealth may receive great prejudice if it be not prevented, which my humble propositions, I do (to∣gether with this Treatise) in all humility submit to the great wisdome of that honourable Assembly, by whose favor this is published: WIL. HAKEWIL.
The Contents BY whom Bills are drawne and presented to the Parliament, Fol. 1 Orders to be observed in preferring of Bills to be read, 6 Touching the first reading of Bills, 10 Touching the second reading and committing of Bills, 19 Touching the third reading of Bils, 33 Touching Provisoes, Schedules, A∣mendments, and Amendments of Amendments, 45 Touching the sending of Bills from one house to the other, 68
Touching the Royall Assent, 74 A report of divers memorable pas∣sages between both Houses in the Parliament, 18. Eliz con∣cerning the adding of a proviso by the Commons, unto a Bill sent to the Lords, ingrossed and sign∣ed by the Queene, and passed by the Lords for the restitution in blood of a certaine Lord, and sent downe by the Lords to the house of Commons.
A Catalogue of the Names of the Speakers of the Commons House of Par∣liament. Pag. 105 PEtrus de Mountford. Pag. 106 Scroope. 107 Sir Peter de la Mare. 107 Sir Thomas Hungerford. 108 Sir Peirce de la Mare Ibid. Sir James Pickering. Ibid. Sir John Goldesborough. Ibid. Sir Richard Walgrave. 109 Sir James Pickering. Ibid. Sir John Bushey. Ibid. Sir John Bushey. 110 Sir John Cheney. 111
John Dorewood. 112 Sir Arnold Savage. Ibid. Sir Henry de Redeford. 113 Sir Arnold Savage. Ibid. Sir William Sturney. 114 Sir John Cheyney. Ibid. Sir John Tibtoft. Ibid. Thomas Chanser. 116 William Stonrton. Ibid. John Doreward. 118 Thomas Chanser. Ibid. Walter Huugerford. Ibid. Richard Redman. Ibid. Sir Walter Beauchamp. Ibid. Roger Flower. 119 Richard Bayuard. Ibid. John Russell. 120 Sir Thomasa Wuton. Ibid. Richard Vernon. Ibid. John Tirell. Ibid. Mr. William Allington. Ibid. Iohn Tirell. 121 Iohn Russell. Ibid. Roger Hurst. Ibid. Iohn Bowes. Ibid.
Sir Iohn Tirell. Ibid. Sir Iohn Tirell. 122 William Boerly. Ibid. William Tressam. 123 William Burley. Ibid. William Tressam. Ibid. Iohn Day. Ibid. Sir Iohn Popham. Ibid. William Tresham. 124 Sir William Oldham. Ibid. Thomas Thorpe. 125 Sir Thomas Charlton. 126 Sir Iohn Wenlock. Ibid. Thomas Tresham. Ibid. Iohn Greene. Ibid. Sir Iames Strangwayes. 127 Iohn Say. Ibid. William Allington. Ibid. Iohn Wood. Ibid. William Catesbey. Ibid. Thomas Lovell. 129 Iohn Mordant. 130 Sir Thomas Fitzwilliams. Ibid. Richard Empson. Ibid. Sir Reginald Bray. 131
Robert Drury. Ibid. Thomas Inglefield. Ibid. Edmond Dudley. Ibid. Sir Thomas Inglefield. 132 Sir Robert Sheffeild. Ibid. Sir Thomas Nevill. Ibid. Sir Thomas More. 133 Thomas Audeley. 134 Richard Rich. 135 Sir Nich. Hare. Ibid. Thomas Moyle. 136 Sir Iohn Baker. 137 Sir Iames Dyer. Ibid. Iohn Pollard. 138 Clement Higham. Ibid. Iohn Pollard. 139 William Cordall. Ibid. Sir Thomas Gargrave. 140 Thomas Williams. Ibid. Richard Ousloe. 141 Christopher Wray. Ibid. Robert Bell. 142 Iohn Popham. Ibid. Mr. Serjeant Puckering. 143 Mr. Serjeant Snagg. Ibid.
Edward Cooke. 144 Mr. Serjeant Yelverton. Ibid. Mr. Serjeant Crooke. 145 Mr. Serjeant Phelips. Ibid. Sir Randall Crew. Ibid. Sir Thomas Richardson. 146 Sir Thomas Crew. Ibid. Sir Thomas Crew. 147 Sir Heneage Finch. Ibid. Sir Iohn Finch. Ibid. Iohn Glanvile. 148 William Lenthall. Ibid. FINIS.
THE PASSING OF BILLS. CHAP. I. Sect. I. By whom Bills are drawne, and pre∣sented to the Parliament. PUblique Bills are usu∣ally drawne by such of the House (with the advice of Law∣yers) as of themselves are earnest∣ly inclined to the effecting of
some publique good, which re∣quireth the assistance of some new Law, which being faire written in paper, with wide lines, they are either by some member of the house publiquely pre∣sented to the Speaker in the house, with some short speech setting forth the needfulnesse of a Law in that behalfe, or are de∣livered in private to the Speaker or the Clarke of the Parliament, to bee presented to the house at some time convenient. And it is in the choice of the party to pre∣ferre his Bill. First, into the Lords house, or the house of Commons which he list, and as he shall thinke it may most ad∣vantage his cause. Many times upon the motion of some one of the house (wish∣ing
a Law were made for provi∣sion to bee had in such a case,) a Committee is purposely appoin∣ted by the house to draw a Bill to that effect; which being done, one of them presenteth it to the Speaker. This is usuall in cases of great moment and difficulty. The Bill for Subsidies is usu∣ally drawn by some of the Kings Councell, after the substance thereof, for the number of Sub∣sidies & fifteenes to be granted, and the times of payment, is first agreed in the house. The pre∣amble thereof containeth the causes of the grant, which is usu∣ally drawne by some principall member of the house, being a se∣lected committees for that pur∣pose.
Bills for the Revivall, Repeal or continuance of Statutes, are u∣sually drawn by Lawyers being members of the house, appoin∣ted thereunto by the house upon some motion to that purpose made, which is usuall at the be∣ginning of every Parliament. Private Bills are usually drawn by Councellors at Law not be∣ing of the house, and sometimes by those of the house (and that for their fees) which howsoever it hath beene held by some to be lawfull, yet it cannot be but ve∣ry inconvenient, seeing they are afterwards to bee Judges in the same cause. A Bill hath beene sent to the Speaker signed by the hand of Queene Elizabeth with speciall commandment to be expedited,
but that is a rare case and very extraordinary, yet such was her Majesties favour to Sir Thomas Perrot in a Bill for his restitution in bloud as it appeareth by the Clerkes Iournall 35. Elizabeth 26. Martii. Such Bills as being first passed in one house are sent unto the o∣ther, are alwaies sent in parch∣ment fairely ingrossed. Thus much touching the first drawing and presenting of Bills to the Parliament.
Sect. 2. Orders to be observed in preferring of Bills to be read. PUblique Bills are in due course to be preferred in rea∣ding and passing before private: and of publique, such as concerne the service of God and good of the Church. Secondly, such as concerne the Common-wealth, in which are included such as touch the person, revenue, or houshold of the King, Queene or Prince, and they ought specially to be preferred in passing. Lastly, private Bills should bee offered to be read and passed in such or∣der as they were preferred.
There have beene oftentimes orders in the house, that after nine of the clocke, when usually the house groweth to bee full, they should not bee troubled with the reading of any private Bill: And towards the end of the Parlia∣ment, when there remaineth ma∣ny Bills in the house undispat∣ched, there hath beene a speciall Committee appointed to take a survey of them, and to Marshall them by their titles in such order as they should thinke fit; they should bee preferred to their pas∣sage, having respect to the impor∣tance of the matter which they concerne. It hath at sometimes beene or∣dered, that every one that prefer∣reth a private Bill should pay five pound to the poore, which was
done 43. Eliz. towards the end of the Parliament when they were troubled with much busi∣nesse, but it holdeth not in other Parliaments. In the Treatise de modo tenend. Parliamet. which I have seene exemplified under the great Seal of Ireland in the sixt of Henry the fourth, testifying the same to have beene sent into Ireland by Henry the second, for a forme of holding Parliaments in that Kingdome, of which I have a copy there is (touching the or∣der of preferring of Bills) this clause found. Petitiones suntaffilate sicut delibe∣rantur, & sic per or dinem leguntur & respondiantur, sed prime deter∣minentur quae ad guerram perti
nent, postea de persona Regis & Regine & puris suis, ac gubernati∣onem corum & postea de communi∣bus negotiis terrae; sicut est de le∣gibus faciend. & emendend. (viz.) originalibus judicialibus & executoriis post judicium reddit, & post singulares petitiones secundum quod sunt super filariis. But the Speaker is not precise∣ly bound to any of these rules for the prefering of Bills to bee read or passed, but is left to his owne good discretion (except he shall bee especially directed by the house to the contrary) and how∣soever hee bee earnestly pressed by the house for the reading of some one Bill; yet if he have not had convenient time to read the same over, and to make a breviat
thereof for his memory; the Speaker doth claime a priviledge to deferre the reading thereof to some other time. And thus much touching the order of preferring of Bills, to be read or passed. Now followeth touching the reading or passing of them. Sect. 3. Touching the first reading of Bills. THE Clarke being usually directed by the Speaker (but sometimes by the house) what Bill to read, with aloud and di∣stinct voice, first reseth the title of the Bill, and then (after a little
pause) the Bill it selfe; which done (kissing his hand) hee deli∣vereth the same to the Speaker, who standeth up uncovered (whereas otherwise hee sitteth with his hat on) and (holding the Bill in his hand) saith, this Bill is thus intitn'ed; and then readeth the title; which done, he openeth to the house the substance of the Bill, which hee doth either, tru∣sting to his memory, or using the helpe or altogether the reading of his Breviat, which is filed to the Bill, sometimes reading the Bill it selfe, especially upon the passage of a Bill, when it hath beene much altered by the Com∣mittees, so that thereby it diffe∣reth very much from the Breviat. Tertia Sessione 1. Parliament. Iac Reg. It was ordered that the
com∣mittees which amended the Bill, should likewise amend the Brevi∣at in the principall matters for the case and direction of the Spea∣ker. When hee hath thus opened the effect of the Bill he declareth to the house that it is the first reading of the Bill, and deli∣vereth the same againe to the Clarke. The Bill containing the Kings generall pardon hath but one rea∣ding in the Lords house, and one below: The reason is, because the subject must take it as the King will give it, without any al∣teration: and yet many times ex∣ceptions are taken at the reading thereof, for that it is not so fa∣vourable as in former times. The like of the Bill of Sub∣sidies
granted by the Clergie. That day that the Speaker be∣ing approved by the King, com∣meth downe into the Commons house to take his place, the cu∣stome is to read for that time on∣ly one Bills, left unpast the last sessions, & no more, to give him seisin as it were of his place, 39. Eliz. 27. Octo. The usuall course is to spend the morning before the house grow full in the first readings, and to defer the second or third reading till the house grow full. At the first reading of the Bill it is not the course for any man to speak to it, but rather to consider of it, & to take time til the second reading; yet it is not altogether without president that a Bill hath beene spoken for, and against up∣on
the first reading, which is ve∣ry seldome, and onely in cases where the matter of the Bill is apparently inconvenient and hurtfull to the Common-weale, and so not fitting to trouble the house any longer; but at the first reading no man in ordinary course should speake to any one part of the Bill, or for any addi∣tion, for thereby it is implied that the body of the Bill is good, which till the second reading doth not regularly come to the triall. If any Bill originally begunne in the Commons house upon the first reading happen to bee deba∣ted to and fro, and that upon the debate the house do call for the question, it ought to be not whe∣ther the Bill shall be secondly read,
for so it ought to bee of ordinary course, but whether it shall be re∣jected in this sort As many as are of opinion that this Bill shall be reje∣cted (say yea) As many as are of the contrary mind (say no) and the greatest number of voices shall carry it, 43 Eliz. 17. November. The Bill against unlawfull hunting. 5. Sess. Iac. Reg. 25. October. If a Bill comming from the Lords bee spoken against, and pressed to be put to the question upon the first reading, the Spea∣ker in favour and respect thereto, should not make the question for the rejection, as in Bills originally begunne in the Commons house upon the first reading, but should first make the question for the second reading: And if that bee denied, then for rejection. This
course was usually held by Sergeant Phillips when he was Speaker. But usually when any such debate is upon the first reading of a Bill, the Speaker doth forbeare to make any question at all thereupon, ex∣cept he be much pressed thereto, for that it were fit better to con∣sider of it before it be put to such a hazard. If the question for the rejecti∣on bee made, and the greater voice be to have it rejected, the Clarke ought to note it rejected in his journall, and so to indorse it upon the backe of the Bill, and it shall bee no more read; if the voice be to have the Bill retained it shall have his second reading in course. It is against the ordinary course that the same Bill should be read
more then once in one day, yet for speciall reasons it hath beene suffered, that private Bill have beene in one day read twice; As in the aforesaid case of Sir Thomas Perrot though it were a private Bill; so was it likewise done in the Bill for the assurance of lands given by Master Sutton for charitable uses, because he was ta∣ken then extreame sick, and that it was doubtfull whether hee might live while the Bill might have his passage in ordinary course. And it is likewise done some∣times when the house lacketh o∣ther businesses wherein to im∣ploy themselves, especially if the Bill be of no great importance, howsoever it is never but upon motion and speciall order. When speciall Committees
appointed for the drawing of some one speciall Bill, present the same ready drawne unto the house: it hath beene often seen that the same Bill hath beene not onely twice read, but ordered al∣so to bee ingrossed the same day as it was in the Bill against coun∣terfeit seales, 23. Eliz. 16. Feb. And in the Bill against disobedi∣ence to the Queene 4. Martii of the same Parliament. Neither is it without president that a Bill hath beene thrice read and passed in the same day; as was the Bill of recognition of his Majesties title which came from the Lords, 1. Iac. Reg. Sess. 1. but this is a president that standeth alone, and in that case it was re∣solved that the Bill might not be returned to the Lords without a
copy, first taken thereof by the Clarke to bee reserved in the Commons house. Sect. 4. Touching the second reading and committing of Bills. A Bill may bee preferred to be secondly read the next day after the first reading, but the u∣suall course is to forbeare for two or 3. daies, that men might have more time to consider upon it, except the nature of the businesse be such that it requireth haste. After the Bill is secondly read, the Clarke as before in humble manner delivereth the same to the Speaker, who againe readeth the
Title and his Breviat as hee did upon the first reading, which done, hee declareth that it was now the second reading of the Bill, and then hee ought to pause a while, expecting whether any of the house will speake to it, for before the Speaker hath so de∣clared the state of the Bill, no man should offer to speake to it; and then and not before is the time when to speake. If after a pritty distance of time no man speake against the Bill for matrer or forme, he may make the question for the en∣grosing thereof, if it be a Bill o∣riginally exhibited into the Commons house. So likewise if divers speak for the Bill without taking excepti∣on to the forme thereof, hee
may make the same question for the ingrosing. The like questi∣on for the ingrosing ought to bee made, if the greater voice bee that the Bill shall not be commit∣ted, for it were to no end further to delay the proceeding of the Bill if there bee no exception ta∣ken to the matter or forme there∣of, but upon the second reading, and after the Speaker hath dili∣vered the state thereof, the house doth usually call for the comit∣ting of the Bill, and then if any man will speake against it either for matter or forme, he ought to be heard. After the first man hath spo∣ken, the Speaker ought to rest a while expecting whether any o∣ther man will speake thereto, so ought he likewise to doe after e∣very
speech ended, when he per∣ceiveth that the debate is at an end, hee ought then to make the question for the committing thereof in this sort. As many as are of opinion that this Bill shall bee committed say (yea.) And after the affirmative voice given, as many as are of the con∣trary opinion say (no.) And hee ought by his eare to judge which of the voices is greatest, if that be doubtfull, the house ought to bee divided tou∣ching the manner, whereof there shall bee more said in another place. If upon division of the house it appeares that the numbers are equall, the Speaker hath the ca∣sting voice upon all questions.
If it appeare that the affirma∣tive voice bee the greater, then ought hee to put the house in minde touching the naming of Committees, which is done in this sort. Every one of the house that list may call upon the name of a∣ny one of the house to be a Com∣mittee, and the Clarke ought in his journall to write under the title of the Bill the name of eve∣ry one so called upon, at least∣wise of such whose names (in that confusion) he can distinctly heare, and this hee ought to doe without partiality either to those that name, or to the party named. But touching the naming of Committees, and their duties, more shall bee said in another Chapter.
But hee that speaketh directly against the body of the Bill, may not be named a Committee, for he that would totally destroy will not amend. When a convenient number of Committees are named, then ought the Speaker to put the house in minde to name time and place, when and where the Com∣mittees may meete, which the Clarke ought likewise to enter into his journall booke, and when the house is in silence, he ought with a loud voice to read (out of his booke) the Committees names, and the time and place of the commitment, that the Commit∣tees may take notice thereof. After a Bill which is sent from the Lords hath beene twice read, the question ought to bee for
the Commitment, if it be denied to be committed, it ought then to be read the third time, and then the next question ought to be for the passage and not for the ingro∣sing, as it is where the Bill origi∣nally beginneth in the lower house, for Bills which come from the Lords come alwaies ingrossed. This question for the passage should in ordinary course be then made when the Bill is denied to be committed, but not till the Bill have beene read the third time. If that question for passage be deferred till another day, it hath beene much doubted whether it may then bee then offered to the passage; but upon debate of this point after many arguments to and fro, Anno 27. Eliz. 18. Fe∣bruary
by the opinion of Sir Francie Walsingham, then one of the house, and by order of the whole house it was agreed it might be done. The Bill then in question was the Bill against fraudulent conveian∣ces. Fol. 85. & 86. in the Clarkes booke for that yeare, so it was done 1. Sess. 1. Parliament. Iac. Regis for the Bill of hunting. But this pre∣sident is not so safe, for the house considering that oftentimes the Bill is denied to bee committed upon utter dislike thereof, after it hath beene long debated; and yet if that rule should hold, there may be a time picked out of great disadvantage to the house to put it to question for the passage. In the debating of Bills in the house no man may speake twice in one day, except the Bill bee
oftner read then once, and then a man may speake as often as the Bill is read, otherwise it is at Com∣mittees, or when in the house the debate ariseth upon some motion concerning the order of the house; but touching the man∣ner of speaking, and what orders shall be observed therein, more shall be said elsewhere. When the Committes have ful∣ly resolved touching the Bill, and the amendments thereof; one of them by the consent of al the rest ought to make report thereof to the house, opening the substance of the things amended, and the reasons thereof; which done, hee ought to bring the Bill so amen∣ded to the Clarke, and to stand by the Clarke all the while that the Clarke is reading of thea∣mendments,
and ought to helpe the Clarke in reading of the same in case it be difficult to bee read, which falleth out very of∣ten by reason of interlineing or ill writing. The Clarke ought to read e∣very amendment and interline∣ing twice, that so it may have as many readings as the rest of the Bill hath had, and very many times it will fall out that the in∣lineing and amendments so read by the Clarke, will of it selfe (without reading of the clause going before or following) bee no sense, yet notwithstanding the Clark ought only to read the new amendments without med∣ling with any of the rest of the Bill, for it is intended that the re∣porter hath declared to the house
the reason of the amendment, and the connexion thereof to the rest of the Bill to make it sense. And it hath sometimes beene permitted (when the amend∣ments have beene many, and ill written) that the whole Bill hath beene first read, and then the alterations by themselves. The Bill of hostile Lawes. 3. Sess. 5. Parliamen. Iac. Reg. 4. Iunii 1607. After the amendments thus read, the Clarke ought to deli∣ver the Bill unto the Speaker, who (holding the same in his hand) ought againe to read the Title thereof, and to put the que∣stion whether or no it bee the pleasure of the house that the Bill thus amended shall be put to the question for ingrossing, and then
ought to pause a while, expecting whether any man will speake to it or no; for it is as free for any man to speake against the Bill at this time, though it hath passed the approbation of the Commit∣tees, as it was at the second rea∣ding before the same was com∣mitted. And after the debate is en∣ded, the Speaker ought to put the question for ingrossing. If the greater number of voi∣ces be that the Bill ought not to be ingrossed, the Clarke ought to make an entry in his journall, that the same was dashed, and so ought hee likewise to note upon the backe of the Bill, and the day when. If the voice be to have it ingrosed, it is the office of the Clarke to do it.
It is alwaies to bee observed that when the Bill is ingrosed, the Clarke ought to indorse the title thereof upon the backe of the Bill and not within the Bill in any case. So ought likewise such Bills as come from the Lords to have Titles ingrossed upon the backe of the Bill, and not within: In defect whereof, divers Bills com∣ming from them, have beene re∣turned to bee amended, As may appear by the journalls 27. Eliz. 19. Decem. 13. E. 27. May, 39. E. 24. Octob. 4. Sess. 1. Parliament. lac. Reg. 5. Maii. The Bill as it is Amended by the Committees ought to remaine with the Clarke for his warrant, and it is not an ordinary course to cause the Bill so amended to bee
fairely written for the better in∣grosing thereof; yet hath it been seene that a Bill ill written in the amendments hath beene retur∣ned to the Committees to bee fairely written, and by them pre∣sented to the house; and upon the reading thereof ingrosed, 27. Eliz. fo. 91. in the journall. At sometimes it hath beene ordered that a Bill so written should bee proceeded in as a new Bill, 23. Eliz 28. Feb. 27. Eliz. fo. 91. in the clarkes booke or journal. After a Bill hath beene com∣mitted and is reported, it ought not in an ordinary course to bee committed, but either to bee dashed or ingrosed; and yet When the matter is of impor∣tance, it is sometimes for speciall reasons suffered: But then usual∣ly
the recommitment is to the same Committees. The Bill against the Marshall sea, 3. Sess. 1. Parlia∣ment. Iac. Reg. 30. Aprill 1607. was committed and reported and councell heard at the bar. Where∣upon it was recommitted and o∣ther Committees added who al∣tered the former proceedings, and it was agreed that the for∣mer proceedings were waved, and the latter good. Sect. 5. Touching the third reading of Bills. SOme two or three daies after the Bill is thus ordered to bee
thus ingrosed, and is accordingly ingrosed; it is offered by the Speaker to bee read the third time for the passage thereof. For the most part, the Spea∣ker putteth not any one Bill to the passage by it selfe alone, but staieth till there bee divers Bills ready ingrosed for the third rea∣ding; and when he hath a con∣venient number (which may bee five or six, rather lesse then more) then hee giveth notice to the house that he purposeth the next day to offer some Bills to the passage, and desireth the house to give speciall attendance for that purpose, and then the day following he doth accordingly put them to the third reading. First, private Bills untill the house bee growne to some ful∣nesse,
and then offereth to bee read the publique Bill which are ingrosed. It hath at sometimes beene or∣dered for the preventing of car∣rying of Bills, with few voices, that no Bills shall bee put to the passage untill nine of the clock, at which time the house is com∣monly full, or shortly after. When the Bill is read the third time, the Clarke delivereth it to the Speaker, who readeth the Title thereof, and openeth the effect of the Bill, and telleth them that the Bill hath now beene thrice read, and that (with their favours) hee will put it to the question for the passing, but pauseth a while, that men have li∣berty to speake thereto, for up∣on the third reading the matter
is debated afresh, and for the most part it is more spoken unto this time then upon any of the former readings. When the argument is ended the Speaker (still holding the Bill in his hand) maketh a question for the passage in this sort; As many as are of opinion that this Bill should passe say yea &c. If the voice be for the passage of the Bills, the Clarke ought to make a remembrance thereof in his Journall. If otherwise, then his remembrance must be made accordingly. Upon the Bill thus passed (if it be the Bill originally exhibited in the house of Com∣mons) the Clarke ought to write within the Bill on the top to∣wards the right hand these words Soit baille aux Selgneurs.
If the Bill passed be a Bill ori∣ginally begunne in the Lords house, then ought the Clarke to write underneath the subscripti∣on of the Lords, which alwayes is at the foot of the Bill, these words, A cest Bille les comuns sont as∣sentus. There are divers other formes of signing of Bills, sometimes when new Additions are made, sometimes when Provisoes are added, of which more ample mention shal be made in the chap∣ter which treateth of the dutie of the Clarke. If the house see cause to amend any thing in a Bill originally begunne in the Commons house upon the third reading thereof, and that the amendment thereof
will not much deface the Bill, nor spend much time, the use is to cause the Serjeant to call in the Clarke that did ingrose it (being usually a servant to the Clarke of the house and to cause him stan∣ding at the Table, by his master, in the presence of the whole house, to amend the same accor∣ding to their direction. Some∣times if the amendments bee but of a few words, it is done by the Clarke himselfe, writing of a faire hand. It hath sometimes beene seene (which is rarely yeeleded unto, and onely in cases where the Bill to bee passed is of good impor∣tance) that if a question grow for the amendment of some clause, or for the making of some addi∣tion thereunto, that it hath beene
recommitted for the amendment thereof: but then usually the Committees are appointed forth∣with to withdraw themselves in∣to the Commitee Chamber, and presently to dispatch the same. The Bill concerning Rites and Ceremonies, at the third reading was referred to bee farther conside. red of, 14. Elizab. 20 Maii, and in 43. Elizab. 2. Decembr. The Bill to avoid double payment of dibts, 13. Sess.1. Parliament. Iac. Reg. Master Bathwests Bill being ready for the question to passe, was deferred for eight dayes, that the other part might have notice, and then passed without further open∣ing. Quod nota. No Bill upon the third rea∣ding for the matter or body ther∣of, may be recommitted, as hath
been said, but for some particular clause or proviso it hath bin some times suffered; and that difference was taken for a rule in the Bill for Seasands, 4. Sess. 4. Maii 1610. In the third Sessions of the first Parliament of King James, 12. die Maii, the Bill of cloathing being ingrossed, and read the third time, exception was taken to the last pro∣viso thereof, whereupon after much debate it was recommitted; which is to bee observed as a thing un∣usuall after the third reading. The next day if was retur∣ned againe by the Committees, with their opinions that they held it fit that a proviso therein should be strucke out; whereupon the question grew whether the pro∣viso being put to the question a∣lone, and rejected, the whole Bill
should not be dashed, thereby at last resolved no; whereupon the proviso being put to the question and rejected, it was ordered it should bee razed out of the Bill, which was presently done at the board, by the Clarke, and the Bill was put to the question, and so passed. The like in the Bill concerning Wherrymen the same Session, 18. Maii 1607. It hath beene much doubted, whether when a Bill is in debate for the passage, it ought not to receive the resolution of the house the same day wherein it is first offered to the passage, but there have of late been some pre∣sidents, where the case being of some importance, and the debate growing long, the argument hath beene put over till the day fol∣lowing,
in which case hee that hath already spoken to the Bill the fist day, may not againe speake the second, no more then he may speake twice in one day where the argument is not defer∣red to another day. If a Bill be rejected, the same Bill may not bee offered to the house again the same Session; but if it bee altered in any point ma∣teriall both in the body and in the title, it may bee received the se∣cond time. In the time of the reading of a Bill, the house should not bee in∣terrupted with any other busines, and yet in 1. Eliz. 24. Maii, the house adjourned it selfe till the next day, after the Bill for sealing cloathes was halfe read, onely to bee present at the conference a∣bout
Religion in Westminster Abbey. Sometimes the house concei∣ving much offence against some Bills, doth not onely order it to be rejected, but to be torne in the house; as it was done in the Bill to avoid Aliens not being here for Religion; 1. Eliz. 23. Iannar. It hath beene seene that two Bills being apt to bee joyned to∣gether, have by order of the house, after they have beene twice read, ordered to be ingros∣sed as one Bill, and so passed, which is somewhat strange, for that both being made into one Bill, it is thereby become a new Bill; neverthelesse it was so done in two Bills concerning Treason, 13. Eliz. 26. Apr. When a Bill is thrice read and
passed in the house, there ought to be no further alteration there∣of in any point. Neverthelesse if it doe appeare that there be some apparent mistakings therein, ei∣ther by false writing, or other∣wise, the house upon notice ther∣of hath caused the same to bee amended the day following, and reading the amendments three times, have againe passed the Bill upon the question, which is a rare president; yet was it so done 23. Eliz. 20. Ianuarii, Popham being Speaker, which is a memorable case. Anno 23. Eliz. 14. Martii, the Lords sentdown a Bill touching the maintenance of the borders of Scot∣land, the house proceedeth with another Bill to the same effect, the Lords complains that it is a∣gainst
order so to doc, without praying a conference with them which was spoken by the Lords at a conference and answered by the Committees of the Commons house, they might lawfully so doe. Sect. 6. Touching Provisoes, Schedules, A∣mendements, and amendments of Amendements. TOuching the offering and passing of Provisoes, the course is thus; If any man will offer a Provisoe to a Bill original∣ly begun in the Commons house, it ought to be offered in paper as
long as the Bill it selfe is not in∣grosed; but when the Bill is once ingrosed it ought to be offered in parchment, and not in paper. If a Provisoe or Schedule of addition, bee offered to any Bill comming from the Lords at first or secōd reading, it must be offe∣red in paper & not in parchment, though the Bill bee a Bill ingro∣sed, for that it may receive much amendment at the Committee, and when it is together with the Bill returned to the Committees, there ought to bee a speciall question made by the Speaker whether the Provisoe shall be ingrosed, if it be denied, he may put the Bill to the passage at the third rea∣ding without the Provisoe, if o∣therwise, then he ought to deli∣ver the Provisoe to bee ingrosed,
and some other day when the Provisoe is ingrosed must put the question upon the passage. If it be offered at the first rea∣ding to a Bill begun in the Com∣mons house, which is seldome, it ought to be but once read at that time, and so filed to the Bill; If at the second reading it ought to be read twice as the Bill it self hath beene, and ought to bee committed together with the Bill; if it bee offered at the third reading, the Bill being ingrosed, it ought to bee read three times before the question bee put for the passage of the Bill; but after every severall reading thereof, the Clarke ought to pause a while to give men time to speake thereto: many times upon the se∣cond reading it is spoken unto,
and sometimes committed or a∣mended at the Board, sometimes rejected without more reading: upon the third reading thereof the question ought to bee made whether or no the house doth thinke fit to annex that Proviso to the Bill read, which question ought to be made singly upon the Proviso, and afterwards the que∣stion ought to bee made for pas∣sage of the Bill, together with the Proviso annexed. If the Bill with the Proviso annexed doe passe upon the third reading, the Clark ought to signe the same in this sort upon the Bill towards the right hand. Soit baille Anx Seigneurs ave. que un provission annex. And ought to signe the Proviso it selfe.
Soit baille anx Seigneurs. The like rules here given for Provisors are to bee observed, when any Addition (which al∣wayes containeth in it another clause) or branch of the Bill, is desired to be enacted, and offer∣ed by any of the house, with this difference, that wheras the Clark in case of a Proviso maketh men∣tion of the Proviso annexed, he ought in this case to write avec un Schedule annex, for that which containeth an Addition, is called a Schedule. After a question pro∣pounded in the affirmative, upon the passage of a Bil, & before the question for the negative part, a Proviso was offered, and judged to be received, 1. Iacobi 13. Iun. 1604. Such Bills as come from the Lords, have their passage in
the Commons house by three rea∣dings, as well as those that origi∣nally begunne, there when they are committed, and the Committee see cause to make some amend∣ment in them, they ought not to interline, or raze, or make any o∣ther alteration in the Bill it selfe, as they doe in their owne Bills, but in a paper thereto annexed they ought to expresse in what line, and betweene what words they desire the amendments to bee made, which they ought to returne up to the house. If upon the report thereof, the house shall approve the doings of the Com∣mittees, then ought the Bill with the Paper affixed, to bee sent to the Lords house, to bee accor∣dingly amended by the Lords, if they shall so thinke good. So
likewise ought the Lords to doe where they desire alterations in any Bill passed from the Commons house unto them. And in this case after the amendments read three times, the question ought first to bee put whether the a∣mendments shall accordingly be assented unto. Secondly, for the passage of the Bill, which the a∣mendments (if it passe) the Clark ought to signe it in these words underneath, the signing of the Lords at the foote of the Bill. Acest bille avecque les amend∣ments les comuns one assentus. When the Lords send downe amendments they ought to bee read two times, and then if exce∣pted unto, put to the question for the committing. If they be ap∣proved by the Committees, and so
reported then ought the question to bee put for the amendment of the Bill accordingly. Anno 29. Eliz. 25. Decem. the Bill touching labourers, passing first from the commons house, was sent from the Lords with a∣mendments in parchments, & the parchments formally indorsed, Solt baille aux comuns; to which, exception being taken, there was much contention about it betwen the houses, and Presidents sought up, and at last resolved it ought to be in paper without any indorse∣ment at all; otherwise it is where there is a Schedule of additions, or a Proviso annexed, for they ought alwaies to be sent in parch∣ment; the journall booke in this place handleth this point at large.
If there bee cause to make al∣teration in some Proviso or Schedule sent from the Lords, the amendment ought to be ten∣dred in paper, and so passed to the Lords, 3. Sess. Iac. Reg. 30. Iunii. If besides the amendments a Proviso be added thereunto or a Schedule of additions, there ought to bee mention thereof made by the Clarke in the sign∣ing of the Bill. If the Commons house passe a Bill sent from the Lords with some additions by way of Sche∣dule (which ever containeth some new clause or entire branch ad∣ded to the Bill) or with some Proviso to be added thereto, the same ought to be signed as a new Bill.
Soit baille aux Segneurs. For the omission of which the Lords conceiving that they have not had warrant to proceed, thereupon, have returned the same to the Commons house to be amended, and the same hath been reformed accordingly, in the Bill against scandalous rumors, 23. Eliz. 8. Maii. If the Lords doe absolutely disallow of any thing required by the Commons house to be put out, or of any addition or alteration to be made by way of amend∣ment, the Bill can then have no further proceeding; for if the Commons say put out, and the Lords say let it stand as it was, the same being before determi∣ned by question in the Commons house, cannot be brought to the
question againe, 23. Eliz 9. Mar. The Bill of scandalous Rumours &c. But if the Lords for ex∣planation of such a sentence as is in question, do add words to the additions of the Commons, with∣out putting out of any part of that which is required to bee ad∣ded or altered by the Commons, the same being set downe in wri∣ting by the Lords, and sent to the Commons, together with the Bill, if the Commons do allow thereof, they are to add the words requi∣red by the Lords paper, and to insert the same into their owne paper, and so returne the same to the Lords; who thereupon ought to enter it into their Bill in∣grosed, and so the Bill hath his passage. The like in all points mutatis mutandis, in Bills origi∣nally,
begunne in the Commons house, and sent to the Lords; but if to the Bill comming from the Lords, any Proviso or entire new matter bee added by the Commons (because it is adjudged as a new Bill) and hath not beene at the question in both houses, the Lords may by their paper re∣quire to have part thereof put out, or may offer additions there∣unto, which being returned to the Commons, and they giving allowance thereof, they are ac∣cordingly to amend the same in their owne house, without sen∣ding it backe to bee amended by the Lords; for amendments ought alwaies to bee in that house from whence the thing to bee amen∣ded originally proceedeth; though the directions for the amendments
came from the other house; and so mutatis mutandis, in Provisoes or other entire additions required by the Lords to be added to any Bill proceeding from the Com∣mons: And it is held for a generall rule, that neither house may of themselves put out any thing which they have before passed, otherwise then requested by the house which hath not passed the same: In the Parliament 31. Eliz. when Mr. Snagge was Speaker, It was usuall when either house desired the cleare passage of any Bill sent unto them from the other house, in which they though fit to make alterations to acquaint the house from whom it came, with the alterations which they intended to make, and to desire to know their willingnesse thereto, thereby to prevent the
hazard of the Bill; If perhaps they should make alterations not approved of. In like sort they some∣times used conferences onely, to prevent the casting away of Bills for some small difference about the amendments. See for this the Clarkes booke of the Parliament 21. Martii, and 27 Elizab. 10. Martii; the Bill against Iesuits: The like 23. Eliz. 17. Martii, the Bill against seditious rumours. Anno 23. Eliz. 24. Martii, In the Bill for the better government of Westminster, the Commons at the request of the Lords doe alter their owne amendments. The like was done by the Lords at the request of the Commons upon a confe∣rence for that purpose. In the Bill of Hostile Lawes, 3. Sess. 1. Par∣liament. Iac. Reg. 29. Iunii 27.
Eliz 22. Feb. The Lords by a message without any paper sent unto them, have beene prayed by the Commons house to amend the sense of some of their amend∣ments, that so the house might further proceed there with all, which hath accordingly beene performed, and then their a∣mendments have beene consi∣dered, allowed and returned, 23. Eliz. 17. Martii, In the Bill touching Scottish orders. In the Bill against vagabonds 13. Eliz. It was resolved that certaine words required by the Lords to be put out, should not be put out of the Bill, but staied still in the same, qualified with other words, with condition that if the Lords should not agree to the said qualification, the house
would not bee bound by the said resolution, which was done of purpose to avoid the hazard of the Bill, in case the Lords should not agree thereto. When amendments of any Bill comming from the Lords are returned by the Committees or o∣therwise added by the house, they ought presently to bee read three times before they be put to the passage with the Bill. In the Parliament 13. Eliz. at the third reading of a Bill which came from the Lords, an addition in paper was by question affiled to it, the addition having beene but once read, the Bill was put to the que∣stion, and the house divided upon the passage, the error being espi∣ed, after long argument there∣upon, the additions were orde∣red
to bee read twice more, and the Bill was againe put to the question and passed: this was the Bill against taking up of previsions within 5. miles of Oxford, which passed 25. May, in the Parliament Anno 2. & tertio P. & M. the Bill for exactions at musters, had a Proviso annexed by the Com∣mons house, and the Lords retur∣ned the Bill, desiring the Proviso annexed might be taken off, and a new devised by themselves put in place thereof. Anno 27. Eliz. 5. Feb. The Lords having made additions to a Bill passed from the Commons house, the Commons pray con∣ference with them, and desire that they themselves may have leave to make a further addition to their owne Bill, or that the
Lords would bee pleased to sup∣ply the same with an addition of theirs, which the Lords refused to doe, because they found no such president, Anno 27. Eliz. Fol. 81. In the Iournall, The Bill against fraudulent conveiances passed from the Lords, was upon the second reading refused by the house to bee committed; whereupon the Lords craved a conference, and shewed it was a Bill which her Majesty called her Bill, drawne by the Councell, with the advice of her Judges, and therefore wondred at the proceedings of the house, and concluded that they expected and desired that the house would take it into their further conside∣ration; afterwards the house by a special Committee praying their
Lordshippes to joine in petition to the Queene about matters of Religion, causing the messengers to stay in the painted Chamber, after a while sent out unto them the chiefe Justice and others to tell them, that when they recei∣ved an answer from the house touching the Bill of fraudulent conveiances, the house should have an answer touching the pe∣tition. An. 27. Eliz. 10. Mar. Fo. 130. in the Iournall to the Bill against Je∣suits, which passed from the the Commons house, there were some amendments desired to bee made by the Lords, the Com∣mons by message desire the Lords to reforme their desired amendments in some points, which the Committees for the
Lords thought could not bee done by order; but the Com∣mons house resolved it might bee well helped by a Proviso in the Commons house, and chose ra∣ther to take the course, then fur∣ther to urge their Lordships therein. Anno 27. Eliz. 13. Mar. The Bill touching the sabbath, which upon divers conferences of the houses, received divers additi∣ons, alterations and amendments of amendements, and by that meanes was much defaced, was sent downe by the Lords and praied by them that it might be new written, which was done, and so it passed again in both the houses. Anno 25. Eliz. 31. Mar. The Bill against popish recusants, first
passing from the Lords, was re∣turned with amendments, which the Lords aseented to, and sent downe the same againe amended by them accordingly; And also a Proviso annexed thereto to bee passed, if the house should thinke good, which was yeelded to; and the Proviso being thrice read, was with the Bill passed accor∣dingly, 6. Apr. This is a very remarkeable president, that a Proviso should be added by them who first passed the Bill, and not to have any reference to any alteration or amendment in∣serted by direction from the other house. When amendments are desi∣red by the Lords to a Bill past from the lower house, and thrice read, the question ought to bee
whether the house wil be pleased to admit of those amendments, and that being yeelded unto, the Bill it selfe ought not againe to be put to the question. If it be resolved to allow the a∣mendments, the alterations are usually made by the Clarkes ser∣vants sitting without the Parlia∣ment doore, according to the di∣rection in paper annexed to the Bill, and the Clarke is trusted with the examination thereof. In the fourth session of the first parliament of king James, it was conceived by some of the com∣mens house, that by reason that Bills which are passed in both houses and oftentimes razed in either house, and no mention made any where of such razures lawfully made, that it might give
occasions to persons ill disposed, to make razures in Bills past, much to the prejudice of the Common wealth; it was there∣fore moved that the L. Chancel∣lor for the upper house, who sup∣plies the place of Speaker there, and the Speaker in the house of Commons should subscribe their hands to every Bill so razed; and that mention should bee made upon the Bill of all the razures therein, but this motion was not further prosecuted.
Sect. 7. Touching the sending of Bills from one house to the other. WHEN the Speaker hath in his hands a convenient number of Bills ready passed, as five or six or thereabouts, hee then putteth the house in minde of sending them up to the Lords, and desireth the house to appoint messengers, who accordingly do appoint some one principall member of the house for that purpose, to whom the Bils are de∣livered in such order as he ought to present them to the Lords,
which is done by direction of the Speaker, except the house bee pleased to give speciall direction therein. The order which hath usually beene observed in ranking of them, is first to place them that came originally from the Lords. Secondly, those that being sent up unto the Lords from the Commons house, were sent backe to be amended. Thirdly, publique Bills origi∣nally comming from the Com∣mons house, and they to bee mar∣shalled according to their de∣grees in consequence. Lastly, are to be placed private Bills in such order as the Speaker pleaseth. Many times the house (with a purpose specially to grace some
one Bill) sendeth it alone some∣times with a speciall recommen∣dation thereof. The messenger for this purpose is usually atten∣ded by thirty or forty of the house, as they please and are affe∣cted to the businesse. In the Parliament Anno 31. Eliz. Mar. A private Bill for the releefe of one Thomas Haselridge, being passed, the Commons house was sent up only with four or 5. messengers, to which the Lords taking exceptions, returned the Bill, saying, they had cause to doubt that it passed not with a generall consent of the house; because it passed not graced with a greater number, and left it to the consideration of the house, to send it backe in such sort as was fit. The principall messenger
which delivereth the Bills to the Lords comming in the first ranke of his company to the Barre of the Lords house, with three con∣gees telleth the Lords, that the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons house, have sent unto their Lordships certain Bills, and then reading the title of every Bill as it heth in order, so delivereth the same in an humble manner unto the Lord Chancel∣lor, who of purpose commeth to the Bat to receive them. Bills sent from the Lords to the Commons house, if they be ordi∣nary Bills, are sent down by Ser∣gents at Law, or by two Do∣ctors of the civill Law, being Ma∣sters of the Chancery, and being attendants in the upper house, ac∣companied sometimes with the
Clarke of the Crowne an atten∣dant there. Bills of greater moment are u∣sually sent down by some of the Judges assistants, there accom∣panied with some of the Masters of the Chancery, who being ad∣mitted entrance, doe come up close to the table where the Clarke sitteth, making three con∣gies, and there acquainting the Speaker that the Lords have sent unto the house certaine Bills, doth read the Titles and delivereth the Bills to the Speaker, and so a∣gaine departeth with three con∣gies; when they are out of the house, the Speaker holdeth the Bills in his hands and acquain∣teth the house that the Lords by their Messengers have sent to the house certaine Bills, and then
reading the Title of every Bill, delivereth them to the Clarke to be safely kept, and to bee read when they shall be called for. Bills originally preferred to the Lords house, have such pro∣ceeding in that house in all points, as Bills preferred to the Commons house have there, only when any question is made in the Lords house, the triall thereof is by saying content or not content, and if that be doubtfull, then by telling the Poles, without divi∣ding the house.
Sect. 8. Touching the Royall Assent. VVHEN Bills are thus passed by both the houses upon three severall readings in either house, they ought (for their last approbation that so like to silver they may be seven times purified) to have the Royall As∣sent, which is usually deferred till the last day of the Session; But it may bee given at any time during the Parliament; touching which it hath been much doub∣ted, and oftentimes debated, whether the Royall Assent gi∣ven
to any one Bill, doth not ipso facto conclude that present Sessi∣on, which question is of great consequence; for if thereby the Session be at an end, then ought every other Bill not having the Royall Assent (though it hath passed both the houses) to bee a∣gaine read three times in either house, and to have the same pro∣ceedings as at first, as if nothing had beene formerly done there∣in; so must it bee of all other Acts of the house. But in the last Session of the first Parliament of King James, the house being then desirous to have a Bill to bee forthwith passed, declared, that the Royall Assent to one Bill or more, did not dissolve the Session without some speciall declaration of his Majesties pleasure to that pur∣pose,
8. April 1604. in the Jour∣nall. So likewise it appeareth by the Iournall 1. & 2. Phil. & M. 21. November, that the King and Queene came of purpose into the Parliament house to give their As∣sent to Cardinall Pooles Bill. And upon question made, it was then resolved by the whole house that the Session was not thereby con∣cluded, but that they might pro∣ceed in their businesse, notwith∣standing the Royall Assent gi∣ven, but for more security it is usuall to insert a Proviso to that purpose. At the giving the Royall assent it is not requisite that the King be present in person for by expresse words of the Stat. of 33 of Hen.8. Ca.21. The Kings Royall assent by
his letters pattents under the great Scale signed by his hand, and de∣clared and notified in his absence to the Lords Spirituall & Temporall, and to the Commons assembled in the higher house, is and ever was of as good strength and force, as though the person of the King had beene there personally present, and had assented openly and publiquely to the same; According to which Statute the Royall Assent was given by commission, Anno 38. Hen. 8. unto the Bill for the At∣tainder of the Duke of Norfolke, and very oftentimes since. The Royall Assent is given in this sort: After some solemnities ended, of which mention shall be made in the Chapter which trea∣teth of the conclusion of the Par∣liament, the Clarke of the Crown
readeth the Title of the Bills in such order as they are in conse∣quence, after the Title of every Bill is read, The Clarke of the Par∣liament pronounceth the Royall Assent, according to certaine in∣structions given him from his Majesty in that behalfe. If it bee a publique Bill to which the King assenteth, the an∣swer is Le Roy leveult. If a private Bill allowed by the King, the answer is, Soit fait come il est desire If a publique Bill (which the King forbeareth to allow) Le Roy se avisera. To the Subsidie Bill, Le Roy remercy ses Loaulx Sub∣jectes accept lout benevolence, et auxy le veult. To the generall pardon,
Les Prelates, Seigneurs et Comons en cest Parliament assembles au nom de touts vous auters subjecte temoreient treshumblement vostre Majesty, et prient dieu vous doner en sante, bone vie, et longe. And thus much concerning passing of Bills according to the moderne practice: In ancient times the practice was much dif∣fering as elsewhere shall bee de∣clared; but that ancient order as it was nothing so curious as this, so was it not so safe for the Sub∣ject, as by comparing both toge∣ther will easily appeare.
A report of divers memorable pas∣sages between hath Houses in the Parliament 18. Eliz. concer∣ning the adding of a proviso by the Commons, unto a Bill sent to the Lords, ingrosed & signed by the Queen, and passed by the Lords for the restitution in blood of a certaine Lord, and sent down by Lords to the house of Commons. A Noble Lord, whose Fa∣ther was attainted of murther, (and thereby his bloud corrupted) made suite to the Queene to bee restored in bloud by Parliament, which shee inclined unto, and in declaration
of her good liking thereof, signed his Bill ingrosed, which passed the Lords house, and was sent downe to the Commons. The Bill upon the second rea∣ding by some was impugned, through mistake of the person, and by some others, for that there wanted a Proviso for pur∣chasors from his Father and o∣ther Ancestors. To the first, it was answered, that seeing her Majesty had signed the Bill, no doubt she was satisfied touching the person, and hee being a yong Noble man there was great hope of him. To the second, that if the sa∣ving (which was already in the Bill) were not sufficient, there might be other provision. The Bill was committed, and
the Committees thought to adde a Proviso to barre the Lord, that he should not take advantage of any errors in any fine or other conveiance by his Father or An∣cestors, but should bee in that case as though his bloud were not restored, in which state hee can bring no writ of error: The occasion of which Proviso grew chiefely, for that the Lords had within few daies before in this Session dashed a Bill that passed in the Commons house for the helping of such errors; where∣upon they thought it dangerous to give that scope to any man that should be restored in bloud; and therefore they added such a Pro∣viso both in this Bill and other Bills of the like kind. The said Lord endeavoured
by his councell to satisfie the Committee, that the saving in the Bill was sufficient without a new Proviso; but they being not sa∣tisfied therewith, he procured a message from the Lords to the Commons, that the Bill might passe in such sort as was signed by the Queene without any ad∣dition, which they thought could not bee made without the consent of her Majesty, which message was sent after the Com∣mittees had agreed upon the Pro∣viso, and reported the same to the house. The Commons tooke this manner of dealing to be very strange, not having heretofore received any such message from the Lords tending to prescribe them what they should do in the actions of that Councell, and
notwithstanding that message in∣tended to proceed as they had begun. The next day the Lord pro∣cured another message from the Lords, desiring a meeting and conference with the Commons a∣bout it, which message the Com∣mons conceiving it to be strange to be in this manner pressed, they gave the Bill a third reading, and the new Proviso as the course is, & so sent up the Bill to the Lords with the Proviso annexed, with one other Bill. Herewith the Lords were greatly moved, and the same af∣ternoone sent a message to the Commons house by Mr. Justice Munson, and Sergeant Barham, that some of them should come to speake with certaine of the
Lords in such matters as they had to say to them, & to the Com∣mons house; according to which message certaine of the Commons house were appointed, and did give attendance on the morrow morning between 8. and nine of the clocke in the painted cham∣ber, sending in word by the Usher of their being there. The Lords, after a great pause, at last came fotrh into the pain∣ted chamber; the number of them were many, and the persons of the principall Noblemen of that house, after they had taken their places at a long table, and used some conference amongst themselves, they called for those of the Commons house, to whom the Lord Treasurer in the name of all the rest present and
absent, said in effect; That the Lords of the upper house could not but greatly mis∣like the dealing of the Commons house in their passage of that Bill, especially for that they had pas∣sed the Bill with a Proviso an∣nexed, notwithstanding their sundry messages sent to them in his favour; and lastly, one mes∣sage to have conference with them for resolution of such doubts as were moved; wherein they tooke themselves greatly touched in honour, and thought that the Commons house did not use that reverence towards them as they ought to doe: The cause besides, (hee said) was such as they saw no reason why the Commons house should proceed in that order, for the Bill being
signed by her Majesty (hee said) none might presume to alter or adde any thing to it without the assent of her Majesty, which they for their parts durst not to doe; for proofe whereof he shewed the Committees sundry provisoes in King H. 8 time annexed to the like Bill signed by the King, infer∣ring thereby that none might passe otherwise; moreover he said that by the opinion of the Judges which were in the upper house; the saving which was in the Bill was so sufficient as there needed no addition of such Proviso as the Commons house have annex∣ed; and therefore required them to know what reasons did lead them to proceed in this order. This and some other large speeches being uttered to this
end the Committees answered, that their commission was onely to heare whit their Lordshippes would say, they would returne and make report to the House, and so attend upon them againe with answer. When this was reported to the Commons house, it moved them all greatly, and gave occasion of many arguments and speeches, all' generally misliking that kind of dealing with them, and think∣ing their liberty much trenched on in three points: One that they might not alter or adde to any Bill signed by the Queene; Another that any conference should be looked for, the Bill remaining with them, except themselves saw cause to desire it: And the third, to yeeld a reason why they paffed the Bill in that sort.
After all these things were sufficiently debated, an answer was agreed upon to bee returned to the Lords by the same Com∣mittees, and they gave their at∣tendance upon the same Lords in the same place, to whom was said in effect, by one of the Com∣mittees, and by the consent of the rest, That they had delivered to the Commons house the sense of that which their Lordships had said unto them, which as they had conceived did stand upon two parts; One on the manner of their proceeding in this case; And the other on the matter wherein they had procee∣ded. To both which they had com∣mission from the house to make unto their Lordships this answer:
First, That they were very sory, that their Lordships had concei∣ved such an opinion of the house as though they had forgotten their duty to them, praying their Lord∣ships to thinke that the Commons house did not want consideration of the Superiority of their honorable estate, in respect of their honorable calling, which they did acknow∣ledge with all humblenesse, prote∣sting that they would yeeld unto their Lordships all dutifull respects, so far as the same was not prejudi∣ciall to the liberties of their house, which it behooveth them to leave to their posterities in the same free∣dome they have received them. And touching the particular case, the manner of their procee∣dings (as they thinke) hath not bin any waits undutifull or unseemly.
For the Bill being sent from their Lordships to the Commons house received there (within little space) two readings, and because upon the second reading, some ob∣jections were made to let the course of the Bill, the house thought fit to commit it, which doth shew that they had no disposition to overthrow the Bill, but to further it, both in respect of her Majesties signature and that it came passed from their Lordships; and whether the Lord whom it concerned had cause or not to thinke himselfe favourably used in being heard by the Comittees, with his learned council they re∣ferred to their Lordships judge∣ments. That after the Commit∣tees report of their doings the house gave the Bill a third reading, and so passed the same in such sort as
now their Lordships heare it not∣withstanding their sundry messa∣ges to the contrary. And lastly, not∣withstanding their message of con∣ference, They said they could not otherwise have done without breach of their liberties, for they tooke the order of Parliament to bee that when a Bill is passed in either house, that house wherein the Bill remaineth may desire con∣ference with the house that passed the Bill, if they thinke good, but not otherwis;e; and this Bill pas∣sing from the Lords to the Com∣mons house, they might desire con∣ference, but not their Lordships, the Bill passing from themselves. And thus much for the manner of their proceedings touching the matter wherein they have procee∣ded, in that they annexed a pro∣viso
to this Bill, the same being signed with her Majesties hand, they thought they might lawfully do it without offence to her Maje∣sty, taking her signature to be on∣ly a recommendation of the cause to both the houses, without which they could not treate of any Bill of that nature, the house not be∣ing thereby concluded, but that they might alter or adde any thing that should be thought meet either for her Majesty or the sub∣ject: which proviso they have delivered upon good considerati∣on, not hastily and inconsiderately, but upon great and sufficient rea∣sons moving them, praying their Lordship so to conceive it: Ne∣verthelesse to declare the reasons in particular to their Lordships as they were required on that part,
the house desired their Lordships to beare with them, for that were to yeeld an account of their doings of things passed in their house, which they could not in any wise agree unto, being so prejudiciall to their liber∣ties. This speech finished, the com∣mittees were willed by the Lords to returne unto the nether end of the Chamber, and after some pause and consultation amongst the Lords, they called againe the Committees, and to them was said by the Lord Treasurer, that the Lords had considered the answer that the Committees had brought to them from the Commons house, and touching the first part thereof, he said that although through such information as was
given them, they might have cause to conceive amisse of the house in the manner of their pro∣ceedings, yet because themselves were the truest reporters of their own actions, and the best inter∣preters of their owne meanings, the Lords did therefore accept thereof and rested satisfied with the same. But touching the other part, he once againe pressed the Commit∣tees to shew cause why the house added that Proviso which the Lords took to be suspitious; the Bill (as he said) containing in it a saving that was sufficient for all causes that might happen. To that was said by one of the Committees, that they, humbly thanked their Lordships that it pleased them to accept of their an∣sweres
to the first part; but for the second which concerned the matter it selfe, and the reasons that mo∣ved the house, he said the Com∣mittees had no further authority to deale in, having onely commission to deliver to their Lordships the answers which they received from their house. Whereupon the Assembly brake up, the Lords returning to the higher house, and the Com∣mittees to their house, where at their comming, one of them re∣ported their whole proceedings with the Lords, where with the house was much satisfied, seeing that so great a storme was so well calmed, and the liberties of the house preserved; which o∣therwise in time to come might have beene prejudiced in those
three points before remembred which are indeed if they be well considered of great weight and importance. The Bill (as it appeared after) passed no further; the Lords not∣liking the Proviso, nor the Com∣mons house yeelding to the with∣drawing of it, for the causes a∣fore declared.
Concerning amendments of Bills in the Iournall of 31. Hen. 8. Die veneris 23. die Maii existen. 15. Parliamenti. A Bill passed both houses in one day. HOdie per dominum vicege∣rent. quedam introducta est Billa concedens Reg. Majestati authoritatem constituendi Epis∣copos in diversis locis hujus Re∣gni sui, quae quidem Billa prima secunda & tertia vice lecta tra∣ditur
Regis Attornato in domum communem deferend & immedi∣ate per ipsos de domo commun re∣lata & expedita. Die Martis 24. die Junii 20. die Parliamenti post proroga. &c. A Bill by assent amended after it had passed both houses. MEmorandum quod hodier∣no die, concordatum est in∣ter Proceros & Cōmunes, quod cum in Billa concernente stabi∣liamentum opinionum inactita∣tum sit ut hujusmodi sacerdotes qui ante hac uxores duxerint eas∣dem
ante festum Sancti Iohannis Baptiste, (qui hodierno die est) repudiarent, ut nunc alter dies illis ad easdem repudiend. limi∣taretur, qui eft duodecimus dies instantis mensis Junii, & ut eadem billa indicta sententia raderetur & emendaretur. Quod nota. Die Sabbati 28. die Junii 24. die Parliamen. post prorog. &c. Concerning the adding of a Provi∣so by the Commons to a Bill by them sent up. MEmorandum quod imme∣diate post decessum prefati Willielmi Kingston & aliorum,
Richardus Riche Miles (ancella∣rius augmentationis reventionum coronae domini Regia, & alii de domo inferiori proceribus decla∣raverunt eos Regiam Majestatem convenisseillique supplicasse qua∣tenus eis liceret annectere billae con∣cernenti punitionem eorundem qui accipitres, damas, aut cuniculos ue Majestati pertinentes furaciter ca∣pient, provisione quandam limi∣tantem tempus accusationis per transgressoribus ejusdem Billae Re∣giamque Majestare eis petitionem suam hac in parte concessisse verum priusquam in domum Commu∣nem reversi sint dictam Billam per Willielm. Kingstone, militem & alios ad Proceres fuisse allatā. Itaque prefatus Richardus Proce∣res (nomine Communitatis) ro∣gavit, ut vel predictam Billam il∣lis
remitterent ut illi hujusmodi provisionem eidem annecterent, aut ut illis placeret talem provisi∣onem componere, & eam dictae Billae annex. in dom. Com∣muni mittere, cui per domi∣num Canc. ex assensu Procerum responsum est, quod si prefatus Richardus hujusmodi provision. componeret eandemque Proce∣ribus afferret, illi circa eandem procederent, prout inde causam cernerent.
A Catalogue of the Names of the Speakers of the Commons house of PARLIAMENT. IN the reigne of William Rufus, there was a great Councell or Par∣liament held at Rockingham, as may bee col∣lected out of the History of Eadmerus, for he tearmeth the same, Totius Regni Adunatio, and saith, that a certaine Knight came forth and stood before the people, and spake in the name and behalfe of them all, whereby
the minde and consent of the people was understood, who (as is conceived) was the Speaker of the Commons; but the author nameth him not; this is mentio∣ned onely because of the antiqui∣ty thereof. Petrus de Mountford. 44 H.3. That he was Speaker of the house of Commons may bee col∣lected out of the Register of Saint Albane Fol. 207. where it is said, that he Vice totius com∣munitatis consented to the ba∣nishment of Adomar de Valence Bishop of Winchester, by which also it may be conceived that the Lords and the Commons in that
time sate in severall houses, or at leastwise gave their assents seve∣rally. Scroope. 6. Ed.3. Monsi. Wil∣liam Trussell. 13. Ed. 3. The Commons answer by his mouth, and therefore it is con∣ceived hee was their Speaker, though not so named in the re∣cord. Sir Peter de la Mare. 49. Ed 3.
Sir Thomas Hungerford. 51.Ed.3. This is the first named Spea∣ker upon Record 51. Ed. 3. n. 89. Sir Peirce de la Mare. 1.Rich.2. Sir Iames Pickering. 2.Rich.2. Sir Iohn Goldesborough 3.R.2. Sir Iohn Goldesborough 4.R.2.
Sir Richard Walgrave. 5.Rich.2. He was the first that made ex∣cuse, desiring to be discharged (for ought appearing in Record) but the King commanded him upon his allegiance to except the place, seeing hee was chosen by the Commons. Sir Iames Pickering. 6. Rich.2. No Speaker recorded from 6. R. 2. to 17. Sir Iohn Bushye 17.Rich.2. He was presented to the King in full Parliament by the Com∣mons,
the first I finde so presen∣ted, he was a speciall Minion to the King. Sir Iohn Bushey. 20.Rich.2. There are many P Rol. of R. 2. which meno no Speaker as 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18. Sir Iohn Bushey. 21.Rich.2. This Parliament was held in the Palace yard of Westmin∣ster, in a long house, built with timber of purpose, left open at both ends, both the houses fate together therein, an especiall place made for the Speaker: the cause of this extraordinary mee∣ting was the impeachment of the
Duke of Gloucester, the Earle of Arundell and Warwicke. Sir Iohn Cheyney. 1.H.4. He is stiled in the Roll not on∣ly Parlour, but Procurator de les Commons; the next day after he was presented he grew sicke, and the Commons made choice of Mr. Iohn Darwood in his place, and yet hee came up with the Commons to the Lords house, and praied to bee discharged by reason of this infirmity, decla∣ring whom the Commons had made choice of, and praied hee might bee accepted, which was granted, and hee made the like protestation as Sir Iohn Cheyney had done, which was that hee
might have liberty to amend any mistaking in that which hee should deliver from the Com∣mons, and made none of the other requests now usuall. lohn Dor∣wood Esq. 1.H.4. He made no excuse, for ought appeareth. Sir Arnold Savage. 2.H.4. The first time appearing upon any Record that the Commons were required by the King to choose a Speaker, but after∣ward it is still continued,
onely omitted 16. of Henry the fourth. Sir Henry de Redeford. 4.H.4. Sir Arnold Savage. 5.H.4. After he had made the ordina∣ry protestation concerning his owns mistakings, he further desi∣red the King in the names of the Commons that they might freely make complaint of any thing a∣misse in the government, and that the King by the sinister in∣formation of any person would not take offensively that which they should complaine of in that
behalfe: which petition was yeelded unto by the King, 5. H. 5.11.8. Sir VVilliam Sturmy. 6.H.4. Sir Iohn Cheyney. 6.H.4. Parliamentum indoctorum, so called because in the writ of summons there was a clause no Lawyer should be chosen. Sir Iohn Tibtoft 7.H.4. He desired to bee discharged,
because of his youth, but he was neverthelesse allowed of, but ha∣ving forgotten to make the usu∣all protestations upon the day of his allowance; hee came up the next day and made it, and added further (which never any Speaker did before or since) that if any writing were delivered by the Commons, this Parliament and they should desire to have it a∣gaine to amend any thing there∣in, it might bee restored to them, which was granted, R. Pav. 7. H. 4 n. 6. he was the sonne of Iohn Lord Tiptoft, and in the tenth yeare of Henry the fourth was made Lord Treasuret of Eng∣land, and created Earle of Wor∣cester by H. 6. while he was Spea∣ker hee signed and sealed the Deed of the intailing of Crowne.
7. H. 4. with these words, Nomi∣ne totius Commutatis. Thomas Chauser Esq. 9.H.4. Thomas Chauser Esq. 10.H.4. Thomas Chauser Esq. 13.H.4. VVilliam Stourton Esq. 1.H.5. This Speaker Without the as∣sent of his companions, did agree before the King to de∣liver
in Parliament certaine Ar∣ticles, but about three daies fol∣lowing, the Commons finding themselves agreeved therewith, sent unto the Lords (the King be∣ing then present) Mr. Iohn Dore∣wood and divers of the Commons with him, & declared to the King that their Speaker had no autho∣rity from them to yeeld thereun∣to, & therefore they desired to be excused therein, which the King was pleased to accept, about two months after, the Commons com∣ming before the King did pre∣sent for their Speaker the same Mr. Iohn Dorwood, because their old Speaker being sicke in his bed was not able to execute the place, whom the King allow∣ed of.
Iohn Dore∣ward Esq. 1.H.5. Thomas Chaucer Esq. 3.H.5. VValter Hun∣gerford Esq. 2.H.5. Richard Red∣man Esq. 3.H.5. Sir VValter Beauchamp 3.H.5.
Roger Flower Esq. 4.H.5. Roger Flower Esq. 5.H.5. Roger Flower Esq. 7.H.5. Richard Baynard 9.H.5. Roger Flower Esq.1.H.6.
Iohn Russell Esq. 2.H.6. Sir Thomas VVauton. 3.H.6. Richard Ver∣non Esq. 4.H.6. Iohn Tirell Esq. 6.H.6. VVilliam Al∣lington Esq. 8.H.6.
Iohn Tirell Esq. 9.H.6. Iohn Russell Esq. 10.H.6. Roger Hurst Esq. 11.H.6. Iohn Bowes Esq. 14.H.6. Sir Iohn Tir∣rell 15.H.6.
Sir Iohn Tir∣rell 17.H.6. The King taking notice of the sicknesse of the Speaker, and that by reason there of hee could not intend the affaires of the Par∣liament, commanded the Com∣mons to make choice of a new Speaker, who accordingly did make choice of one Mr. William Boerly, and did by one Iohn Hody (Knight of a Sheere) informe the King thereof, who there upon was allowed of by the King without any more ceremony. VVilliam Bo∣erly Esq. 17.H. 6.
Willam Tressam Esq. 18.H.6. William Burley Esq. 23.H.6. William Tressam Esq. 25.H.6. Iohn Day Esq. 27.H.6. Sir Iohn Popham 28.H.6.
This excuse by reason of his age and impotency by his ser∣vice in the warre, was allowed of by the King, and the same day the Commons presented M. Wil∣liam Tresham for their Speaker, and he was allowed. VVilliam Tresham Esq. 28.H.6. Hee made no excuse at all, for ought appearing on the Record. Sir William Oldham 29.H.6. He made no excuse.
Thomas Thorpe Esq. 21.H.6. Thomas Thorpe Esq. 31.H.6. He was arested in execution at the suite of the Duke of Yorke betweene two Sessions of Parlia∣ment, wherein the opinions of the Judges being demanded by the Lords, the Judges answered, it belonged not unto them to judge of the liberties of Parlia∣ment, whereupon (without them) it was adjudged that hee was not to have priviledge, which was signified to the Commons by some of the Lords, and the Kings pleasure for present choosing of
a new Speaker was declared unto them, whereupon they forth with chose Sir Shomas Charlton. Sir Thomas Charlton 31.H.6. Sir Iohn VVenlock 33.H.6. Thomas Tresham Esq. 38.H.6. Iohn Green Esq. 39.H.6.
Sir Iames Ttrangwaies 1.Ed.4. Iohn Say Esq. 7.Ed.4. VVilliam Al∣lington Esq. 12.Ed.4. VVilliam Al∣lington Esq. 17.Ed.4. Iohn VVood Esq. 22.Ed.4. VVilliam Ca∣tesbey Esq. 1.R.3.
In these times the Lord Chan∣cellor, Speaker of the Lords house (being for the most part a Bishop) tooke a text out of Scripture, or some other Theame, and grounded his Oration thereupon, therein declaring the cause of the Summons of the Parliament, and in conclu∣sion thereof, as the use now is, de∣clared to the house of Commons the Kings pleasure, that they should repaire to their house and make choice of a Speaker, not na∣ming any day when they should present him (as is now used) and when the Commons had chosen their Speaker, they sent up some of their house to the Lords to desire them to intimate to the King that they had made choice of a Speaker, not naming whom,
and to move the King to ap∣point a time when they should present him, and (commonly the King having beene formerly spoken unto) the day agreed up∣on by the King, was declared un∣to them; at the day appointed, the Commons presented their Speaker, who prayed that hee might bee excused; but his ex∣cuse not being admitted, hee ma∣keth the common protestation touching his owne mistakings, without any petitions in the be∣halfe of the Commons, as is now usuall. Thomas Lo∣vell. Esq. 1.H.7.
After Knighted and made of the privy Councell to King Hen∣ry the 7. and H. 8. Iohn Mor∣dant 3.H.7. Sir Thomas Fitz williams 4.H.7. Richard Empson Esq. 7.H.7. Learned in the Lawes, Recor∣der of Coventry, afterwards of the privy Councell to H. 7.
Sir Reginald Bray 11.H 7. He made the usuall protestati∣on for himselfe, but there is no mention at all upon the Record concerning any petition the liber∣ty of the Commons. Robert Dru∣ry Esq. 11.H.7. Thomas Ingle∣field Esq. 12.H.7. Edmond Dudley Esq. 19.H.7.
Learned in the Lawes, he was af∣terward of the privy Councell to H. 7. Sir Thomas Ing'efeild 1.H.8. Sir Robert Sheffeild 3.H.8. Recorder of London. Sir Thomas Nevill 6.H.8. The Speakers presentment, ex∣cuse and protestation, are one∣ly entered on Record before this time, but no Oration of
theirs till this time. Sir Thomas More 14.&15. H.8. Chancellor of the Dutchy of Lancaster, after Lord Chancellor of England, hee was Speaker of the house of Commons in this Parliament, and Speaker of the Lords house the next; hee made the usuall protestation for him∣selfe, and prayed if any of the Commons should in debate of matters speake more largely then they ought, that it might be par∣doned by the King, which the King granted.
Thomas Audeley 21.H.8. Sergeant at Law, Chancellor of the Dutchy of Lancaster, Lord Keeper of the great Seale, in 24. H. 8. made Lord Chancellor of England, and lastly created a Ba∣ron: He made the usuall protesta∣tion for himselfe, but there is no mention upon the Record of any petition by him made in the be∣halfe of the Commons. I have not found any Speaker named in the Record or Chro∣nicles in these yeares of H. 8. viz. 22. 23. 24. 25.
26. 27. Richard Rich 28.H.8. Afterwards made L.Chancel∣lor, and created a Baron; the first that is recorded to have made re∣quest for accesse to the King: from him are discended the Earles of Warwicke and Holland, now living. Sir Nich. Hare 31.H.8. Afterwards Master of the Rolls, and after that Lord Kee∣per of the great Seale of Eng∣land,
after which hee lived but 14. daies. Thomas Moyle Esq. 34.H.8. The first that is recorded to have made petition for freedome of speech, the petition for privi∣ledge from arrest is of latter daies, but it appeares in the first of H. 4. that Sir Iohn Cheney then Speaker, made a generall request that the Commons might injoy their ancient priviledges and li∣berties, not naming any liberty in particular, and hee is noted to be the first that is recorded to have made that request, but they all make the usual request or pro∣testation touching themselves.
In the latter end of the reigne of K. H. 8. there is no mention made in the Parliament Roll of the presenting of any Speaker, nor in the time of Ed. 6. or Queen Mary, nor during the Reigne of Queen El. when Sir Iohn Puckering was Speaker, but the memories of the Speakers names of those latter times is onely presented in the Journalls of both Houses. Sir Iohn Baker 1.Ed. 6. to 5. Foure Sessions. Chancellor of the Augmentations. Sir Iames Dyer K t. 7.Ed.6.
Sergeant at Law, afterwards Kings Sergeant and Lord chiefe Justice of the Common Pleas. Iohn Pollard Esq. 1. Mary Learned in the Lawes, he con∣tinued Speaker during two Ses∣sions. Clement Higham Esq. 1. & 2.P.M Learned in the Lawes and one of the privy Councell, afterward Knighted and made L. Chiefe Baron of the Exchequer.
Iohn Pol∣lard Esq. 2. and 3. P. M. Learned in the Lawes, after∣ward made Sergeant. VVilliam Cordall Esq. 1. & 2. P. M. Master of the Rols & one of the privy Councell, he was Knighted the day he made his oration, and was Master of the Rolls when he was chosen Speaker, as may ap∣peare by comparing the date of his letters pattents, with the time of his being chosen Speaker.
Sir Thomas Gargrave 1.Eliz. Learned in the Lawes, and one of the Queenes Councell in the North, he made the foure Requests, ever since and now u∣sually made by most Speakers, as appears by his Oration. First, for free accesse to the Queene. Secondly, liberty of speech. Thirdly, for priviledge from Arrests. Fourthly, that his mistaking might not prejudice the house. Thomas VVilliams Esq. 5.Eliz.
Learned in the Lawes. Richard Ousloe Esq. 8. Eliz. The Queens Solicitor, hee was first chosen member of the Com∣mons house, and then being made Queens Solicitor had a writ to attend in the upper house, and upon the death of Mr. Williams, at the request of the Commons, was sent unto them, and they chose him their Speaker, but so, as the house was divided upon the question. Christopher Wray Esq. 13.Eliz.
Learned in the Laws, afterwards Lord chiefe Justice of the Kings bench. Robert Bell Esq. 14. Eliz. Learned in the Lawes, after made Sergeant and Lord chiefe Baron. Iohn Popham Esq. 23.Eliz. Sollicitor to the Queene cho∣sen in place of Sir Robert Bell who was made Lord chiefe Baron, and died also before this Session. Mr. Popham was afterwards made the Queenes Atturney, and after
chiefe Justice of the Kings Bench, and one of the privy Councell; when hee was chosen Speaker he was an assistant in the upper house, and sent for as Mr. Ousloe was. Mr. Sergeant Puckering 27. Eliz. Till twenty eight during two Sessions: afterwards made the Queenes Sergeant, and Lord Keeper of the great Seale. Mr. Sergeant Snag 31. Eliz. Afterward made Queenes Ser∣geant.
Edward Cook Esq 35.Eliz. Solicitor generall, afterward made Queenes Atturney, and Knighted, Lord chiefe Justice of the Common Pleas, a privy Councellor, and lastly made Lord chiefe Justice of the Kings Bench. Mr. Serjeant Yelverton 39. Eliz. Afterward made Queenes Serjeant, and after that one of the Judges of the Kings Bench, and Knighted.
Mr. Sergeant Crooke 43.Eliz. Recorder of London, after∣wards made Sergeant to Ring Iames, and one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, and Knighted. Mr. Sergeant Phelips 1. Iacobi He was during the time hee was Speaker made Master of the Rolls, and yet sate as Speaker. Sir Ranulph Crew 12.Iac.
Sergeant at Law, afterwards made Kings Sergeant and chiefe Justice of the Kings Bench. Sir Thomas Richardson 18. Iac. Sergeant at Law, afterwards made Kings Sergeant and chiefe Justice of the Common Pleas, and after chiefe Justice of the Kings Bench. Sir Thomas Crew 21.Iac. Sergeants at Law, afterwards made King Sergeant.
Sir Thomas Crew 1. Caroli R. Sir Heneage Finch 1.Car.Reg. Recorder of London Sergeant at Law. Sir Iohn Finch 3.&4.Car. Queenes Atturny, afterwards made one of the Kings Councell at Law, then chiefe Justice of the Common Pleas, and lately Lord Keeper of the great Seale.
Iohn Glan∣vile Esq. 16.Car. Sergeant at Law, at the Parlia∣ment begun the 13. of Aprill 1640. and was dissolved 5. May following, and so continued but 22. daies; afterwards he was made the King Sergeant. William Len∣thall Esq. 16.Car. Learned in the Laws, one of the Benchers and Readers of Lin∣colns Inne at the Parliament which began the 3. of Novem∣ber, 1640.
FINIS.
