H672 27058056 109936
The Happy Lovers Pastime: Shewing how a Nymph and Shepherd vow'd to love, As long as they had life and strength to move; They count all pleasure else but a toy, To that of Love, it is the life of joy: They constant prove, in all things do agree, To Lovers all I wish the like may be. To a Pleasant new Tune, called: On the Bank of a Brook. ON the bank of a brook as I sat Fishing, hid in the Oziers that grew on the side, I overheard a Nimph and Shepherd wishing, no time nor fortune their love might divide; To Cupid and Venus each offered a vow, For to love ever as t hey loved now. Oh! sid the Shepheard, and sigh'd! what a pleasure, is love concealed betwixt Lovers alone▪ Love must be secret, and like fayry treasure, when once discovered, 'twill quickly be gone▪ So envy and jealousie where they do stay, Oh! too soon, alas, will make a decay. Then let us leave the World and care behind us, said the Nimph smiling, and gave me her hand, All alone, all alone, where none can find us, in some far Desart we'l seek a new Land. And there live from invy and jealousie frée, And a whole world to each other we'l be. Up rose the Shepheard, and said that a blessing, more sweet no Lover could ever enjoy, Were I departing, these words then expressing, would fetch me to life, and sorrow destroy, Nay, add but a Kiss, and grim death will soon say, I will never take such a Lover away▪
The Second Part, To the same Tune. THen said the Nymph, if they have so enflamed, wh would those do which I do conceal▪ They wold far exceed what hath been yet named, but hath not power them yet to revea▪ For when I do think for to utter them plain, They back from my tongue do soon slp again. But shepherd i'le tell thee how long I've lov'd thée and where thou at first didst kindle my flame, 'Twas in the month of May that you first mov'd me, but with what charms I need not to name; And 'was neer a River that run by a Grove, You tryed to taste the pleasure of Love. But under a shady Tree Cupid did wound me, and in my kind breast he fixed his Dart. But oh! the tme was too short when he crown'd me, I wish'd that sweet minute might never depart. And I long to be crown'd with the pleasure again, For all our long wishes to that is but vain. My dearest I hope I an't gain'd thy displeasure, for what my kind tongue hath uttered now, Oh! think, 'tis my love that burns without mea∣sure, making me keep to the words of my vow, But think what we promis'd loves Quéen and her son, 'Twas to love ever as when we begun. Fair nimph, said the youth, thou dost not offend you banish my grief, and pleaseth my mind, Ile venture my life in fight to defend thee, and think i'm happy such honour to nd. And if ever I prove disoal to thee, Blind Cupid I wish to sacrifice me. But my dear do not ever once fear me, for I adore all thy beauties ivne, And that for the true ove I do now have thée, i'de make thee a Dutchss were power but mine But sice that such honour I cannot bestow, I'le give you such gifts you never did know. Now on thy Rosie lips i'le give thee sweet kisses, whilst my arms shall most loving imbrace; But if thou art disposed to have thy sweet wishes, then let us depart to some other place, Then said the fair Nymph, let us hast to a Grove, And there we'l enjoy the pleasure of Love. So then they kissed and imbraced each other, but they resolved there no longer to stay; They wsh't no misfortunes their joys might smo∣ther, and sung this as they past on their way, My dear let us joyn both together and try, Which can love the most my dearest or I. Printed for Charles Passinger, at the Seven Stars, on London-Bridge,
