h947 11215970 46844
Englands faithful Physitian.
ENGLANDS FAITHFUL PHYSICIAN, OR Precious Soul-saving and Soul-searching Remedies through Grace faithfully ap∣plyed for the healing and preserving this sinful sin sick Nation from ru∣ine and Destruction. Whereby this heavy Judgment of God in visiting us with the Plague and Pesti∣lence, which we have lain under may upon our hearty, and unfeined repentance be prevented for the future among us. Together with a speedy way to Grace and Salvation through Jesus Christ. Jer. 8 22 Is there no balm in Gilead is there no Physician there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered Hos. 6.1. Come and let us return unto the Lord, for he hath torn and he will heal us he hath smitten, and he will bind us up. Printed by P. L. for William Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-lane. 1674.
ENGLANDS Faithful Physitian, Isaiah 1.16, 17, 18, 19, 26. Wash you make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before  eyes, cease to do evil. Learn to do well, seek judgement, re∣lieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the Widdow. Come now and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be red as crimson, they shall be as wooll. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land. But if ye refuse and rebell ye shall be devoured with the sword: For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. IN the beginning of the Chapter, be∣loved we find the Prophet Isaiah bit∣terly bewailing and lamenting the sin∣full
estate and condition of the children of Israel and I think now if ever there is a great cause to bewait and lament the  sick estate and condition of this Na∣tion as the Prophet Jeremiah once said of the Jews, in Jerem. 9 1. so say I of this sinfull Nation, O that my head were water and mine eyes were a fountain of tears that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people. In the words now read unto you, he comes like a faithful Physician to shew them the means of their recovery, and like a wise Physician he first endea∣vours to search out the cause and depth of their wound, that so having found out the nature of their disease, he might the better know how to prescribe reme∣dies for their cure. And the more to aggravate the hain∣ousness of their sins in the second verse he calls Heaven and Earth to witness against them. Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken. I do not speak after the fancies and the immaginations of my own heart, as too too many do in these
our days No, but the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it I have nourished and brought up children and they have rebelled against me. O horrid iniquity▪What sinful men to stand it out and rebell against the Lord their maker. Why saith the Prophet for the very Ox and the Ass shall rise up in judgement against such rebel∣lous sinners as these. In the third verse saith he. The Ox knoweth his owner and the Ass his Ma∣sters crib but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider. And is not England at this very day as insensible and forgetful of God as they were, and this their sinful stupi∣dity provokes the Prophets in the next words bitterly to lament and bewall the sinful estate and condition of those people. Ah sinful Nation saith he in the third verse, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil dooers, children that are corrupters they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy one of Israel unto anger they are gone away backward gone away I, and so far gone that God e∣ven as it were gives them up for lost, for
the more God punished them for their sin, the more they did persevere in there sin. Why should ye be stricken any more, saith God in the first verse. The more I bett you the worse you are  ye will revolt more and more ye are univerally tain∣ted and infected with the poison of sin, even to your very hearts; the whole head is sick▪ the whole heart is faint, from the sole of the foot even to the head, there is no soundness in it but wounds and bruises, and putrifying sores they have not been closed neither bound up neither mollified with ointment. They were so far gone in sin and misery that had it not been for the sake of some few righteous persons that were among them they had been destroyed even as Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed by fire from heaven; a fearful example for sinners to take warning by, verse 6. Except the Lord of hosts had left us a very small remnant, we should have been a So∣dom, and like unto Gomorrah yet not∣withstanding they returned not and thereupon the Lord abhorred them and their Sacrifices as loathsome in his
sight: To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me saith the Lord? your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them: When you spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes; yea when you make many prayers I will not hear. Why what is the reason of all this? Why, saith he in verse 15. Your hands are full of blood, From whence; be∣seech you take this note, that bloud∣guiltiness is a damning sin in the sight of God, Bloody and deceitfull men, saith David in the 25. Psalm and the 23 verse, Shall not live out half their days. He that sheds mans blood, by man shall his blood be shed, saith the Lord bloudthirsty men are an abomination to the Lord. Having as it were ript up and laid open the horridness of their sins, he comes now like a merciful God to pro∣claim pardon to blood guilty sinners, if they will but return and wah them∣selves: yet there is mercy to be had, even for the greatest of sinners upon re∣pentaunce, Isa. 55 11. Let the wicked for∣sake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts and let him return unto the Lord and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God for he will abundantly pardon. Your hands are full of bloud ye are altogether all over defiled & polluted with sin, yet saith he verse 16. Wash you make you clean put away the evil of your doing from before mine eyes, cease to do evil learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widdow and then see what I will do unto you Come now, and let us reason together saith the Lord though your sins be as scarlet they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like crimson they shall be as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land, but if you refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword. For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. Thus having briefly opened the words unto you, I shall as briefly as I can pro∣ceed to Application. 1 Jerusalem ye know was called the holy City of God, and unto the people of Israel above all other Nations in the world did God manifest his love and I pray you what nation or people is
there at this day to whom God hath so manifestly appeared, s unto us May not the people of England as well as of Judah be called the people of God the joy of the whole earth. What Nation or people is there at this day in the world that hath statutes and judgements like unto us is their any nation under the sun that hath such plenty of the means of grace as we have: Have we not line upon line, pre∣cept upon precept, Sermon upon Ser∣mon Mercy upon Mercy one mercy up∣on the neck of another, mercy for our bodies peace and plenty in abundance: mercy for our souls, the glorious light and liberty of the Gospel, and yet not∣withstanding we remain as sinfull as ever▪ Are not we with Capernaum lift∣ed up to heaven in Gospel mercies: I pray God we be not for our unbelief and unfaithfulness under all the means of grace thrown down ere long to hell in Gospel vengeance. Did the Lord by fire from heaven utterly destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, with the Cities about them, for their sins who never had the Gospel preacht
amongst them assuredly then if we, who have the Gospel so abundantly, repent not we also shall likewise perish: For let me tell you in the words of the Apo∣stle Heb. 10.26. If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgement, and fiery indignation. For as Jude saith, Behold the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgement upon all; and to convince all that are ungodly. O sinners consider I beseech you 'tis time to look about you: O consider what will everlastingly become of thy precious and immortal Soul: is life and Salvation worth nothing? Christ offers life and salvation to every one of you and will not ye come to him that ye may have life, life everlasting O for the Lords sake sinners do not delay the time any longer now is the day of salvation, get life and salvation when it may be had, do not leave the undone, which will be the utter undoing of thy own soul: if the work of grace and turning to God be repentance be left undone, thy soul
will be undone; had you rather lose your souls then leave your sins? O what fools and madmen are ye sinners to neglect an inheritance with the Saints in light, an everlasting king∣dom and Crown of Glory, for a few base sinful pleasures, whose latter end will be bitterness. O sinners I beseech you, for the Lords sake I beseech you, let the time past of your lives suffice you to have lived in sin and now even now while it is called to day, that ye would consider the things which concern your everlasting peace: You do not know whether ever ye shall have another call or no: this may be for ought you know the last hour of the day to you: death is at hand, the bell must toll, thy soul and body must part, and if it part in sin, it shall meet again in sorrow. Is there any thing of greater concern∣ment to you then the salvation of your souls? I am sure there is not. The re∣demption of the soul is precious nothing but the bloud of Christ is able to save a soul: and will ye despise and trample up∣on that bloud by which you may be saved▪
Consider that of our Saviour. What shall it profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his own soul▪ Ten thou∣sand worlds will never be able to coun∣tervai the loss of one soul. I beseech you then in the words of the Prophet Wash you make you clean the bloud of Christ is as a fountain opened for you to wash you from your sins put a way then the evil of your doings cease to do ell learn to do well, and then who knows whe∣ther the Lord will turn and have mercy upon us. See what the Lord saith, Jer. 16 17. Amend your ways and your doings end obey the voice of the Lord your God, and the Lord will repent him of the evil he hath pronounced against you. If you will unfeidly repent you of your sins, God will certainly repent him of his punishments as he did unto the Nine∣vites, Yet forty days saith the Lord and Nineve shall be destroyed, and yet you see upon their speedy and unfeined re∣pentance the Lord was appeased. Now surely Englands sins cry a loud in the ears of God for judgments upon us, may not God say unto us as the Prophet
Isaiah saith Isa, 5. O England what could I have done more then I have done unto thee? How hath the Lord as it were digged about us with a wall of defence, in preserving us from those judgements which other nations have so severely tasted of: how hath God kept us from the hands of bloudy persecutors: how hath the Lord appeared to us in preser∣ving us from the devouring sword, that we have not as other Nations been swept away in a moment by the raging of cruel enemies. What heavenly and blessed influences of the Gospel we have long enjoyed: Ah, but how little fruit have we brought forth: We have not lived Gospel lives, neither have our conversations been sui∣table to it. Instead of grapes we have brought forth wild grapes: this many years hath God waited upon us ex∣pecting fruits of repentance, and emend∣ment of life, and may we not fear if we do not suddenly repent us that God may as he said of that fruitless fig tree, cut us down and destroy us: for hither∣to we have brought forth nothing but leaves, the leaves of profession: we have
protest much of the knowledge of God, but how little of the power and practice of Religion and Holiness hath appeared in our lives and conversations. Doth not envy and wrath, and malice, and all manner of wickedness and cru∣elties abound at this day? Hath God given us our lives for a prey, and shall we thus wickedly require the Lord? Ah sinful Nation and unthankful people, laden with iniquity: shall the mercy of God in sparing us thus long, and giving us so long a time of repentance incou∣rage and imbolden us in our sins God forbid. The grace of God, saith the Apo∣stle, Tit 2. that brings salvation, teaches us, that denying ungodlyness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. There is no getting to heaven in the broad way of sin: for broad is the way saith our Sa∣viour, that leadeth unto death? heaven would no more become an impenitent wicked sinner, then the most lovely and costly Palace of the greatest Empe∣ror, would become a swine that has been wolowing in the mire. Heaven is a City of happiness, ever∣lasting
happiness, and there is no co∣ming thither but through the gates of holiness, without holiness no man shall see God, Heb. 22 14 The good Lord awaken every sinful soul out of their se∣curity: that so the judgements we now feel in this our visitation may be remo∣ved, and the judgements of God we fear, may by our true and timely repentance be prevented for it is greatly to be feared that the Lord hath a controver∣sie, even a very great controversie with this sinful Land and Nation. How justly might ruine and destru∣ction come upon us by the sword, or by the Plague and that lately swept away may thousands of our neighbours round about us; or by fa∣mine or by some other extraordinary judgement, or by all these together, because we have been so unholy and so unthankful for our Peace, and so forget∣ful of God in preserving of us us long from those sore and heavy judgements that now are justly false upon us See  sad Scripture for this in Hos. 4.1.2 3. Hear the word of the Lord ye children of Israel, for the Lord hath a controversie
with the inhabitants of the Land, because there is no truth nor mercy, nor know∣ledge of God in the Land, by swearing and killing and stealing, and comitting Adul∣tery, they break out and bloud outcheth bloud; therefore shall the Land mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein shall languish with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, yea the fishes of the Sea also shall be taken away. If men will not mourn for their sins, God will make them, yea, the very land, and all that is therein mourns for your sins; if the mercy of God cannot work a godly sorrow for your sins, if mercy cannot melt your hearts by re∣pentance, God hath judgements to lay upon you: if he cannot by intreaties per∣swade sinners to forsake their sins, he will by compulsion, and that irresista∣bly cast sinners even into Hell fire for their sins. The wicked saith the Psalmist shall be turned into Hell. O consider this ye that forget God▪ least he tear you in pie∣ces; How fully doth the Prophet here picture out Englands sins: was there ever less mercy and truth amongst us
then is at this day; and though know∣ledge seems to abound, yet how little is there of the true knowledge of Jesus Christ? we do all profess to know God with our mouths ah but how greatly do we deny him in our lives: never was there more swearing: and lying, and profanness, and stealing and all man∣ner of wickness then is now amongst us. How doth our Land even begin to mourn for our abominations? how sad∣ly is the Lord departed from us of late, because we by our iniquity have depar∣ted from him? Is not the Lords hand now stretched out against us in all parts and places of this Nation? how sorely is both the City and Countrey assisted by infectious diseases? How many thousands are there suddenly swept away from us by this heavy judgement of God▪ the noisome Plague and Pestilence? And unless we that are lest do speedily repent us of our mani∣fold sins and wickednesses; we may justly fear to be taken our of the land of the living for our blessed Saviour saith, Luke 13.3. Except ye repent ye shall all
likewise perish. Consider how death hath ridden a horse-back for some years by past, whereby the dumb creatures have smarted for our sins: and shall not we mourn for these things: shall the beasts of the Land mourn, and shall not we mourn for our sins, which have caused these Judgements: Shall the judgements of God be abroad in our Land, and shall not we the inhabitants thereof learn righteousness: God smites us now as it were with small rods, but surely if we repent not, he will certain∣ly scourge us even with Scorpions, for if that smaller judgements will not affrighten us from our evill ways▪ God hath greater judgements then all these yet to bring upon us God doth yet but let us see the rod of his anger but if we repent not we shall surely feel the weight of his sore displeasure ere long poured down upon us. The good Lord awaken us unto repen∣tance, that we may all of us from the highest to the lowest turn from our evil ways, that so the anger of the Lord may be turned away from us that so our sins may be blotted out of his re∣membrance
and the Lords hand now stretched out against us in wrath, may be turned to us again in love: Then shall the Lord greatly delight in us, and cause us to dwell in our land: but if we will refuse and rebel, we shall certainly be destroyed; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. And because the Lord hath now given a commission to his destroying Angel to cut us off by a sudden stroak, and that the King of Terrours, as holy Job calls Death is reigning in all our streets ta∣king away whole families in a small space of time: and that many of our neighbours and loving friends, and fa∣miliar acquaintance are shut up and imprisoned in their own houses by rea∣son of this sad judgement that is now amongst us, and that they may justly call upon us, and say unto us as the in∣habitants of Jerusalm did in another case, as you may read, Lament 1.12. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pas's by? be∣hold and see if there is ay sorrow like unto our sorrow which is done unto us, where∣with the Lord hath afflicted us in the day of his fierce anger. This should cause every one of us,
even now in this our day, seriously to consider and to lay it to our hearts, and to pray unto God day and night that he would remove this heavy judgement from us: for the Lord hath promised, Ezek 18.27. When the wicked turn away from their wickedness that they have com∣mitted, and doth that which is lawful and right they shall save their souls alive. And likewise the Lord hath shewed us in 2 Chron. 7 13 14. How we may remove his judgements from us: at the 13. ver. he says: If I sht up heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the land: or if I send the Pestilence among my people, (as we of the City of London, any many other places of this kingdom do now sadly feel) If my peo∣ple which are called by my nature, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear from heaven, and will for give them their sin, and will heal their Land. And if the Lord be our Physician, we shall not need to fear any relapse. Now the Lord help every one of us seriously to consider of these things O that every one of us would turn from all
our evil ways, and seek unto, the Lord by prayer and fasting: For who knoweth whether God will turn and repnt and turn away his fierce anger that we perish not. I shall conclude with the words of the the Prophet Joel, Chap. 2 12 13.14. Therefore also now saith the Lord, Turn ye even to me, with all your hearts, and with fasting, and with Weeping, and vvith mourning and rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God for he is gracious and merciful, slovv to anger and of great kindness, and repen∣teth him of the evill: vvho knovveth if the vvith return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him. For the Lord our God is gra∣cious and mercifull, and desires not the death of a sinner, but that he would turn from his evil way and live: which that we may all do, that so we may be all for ever happy▪ The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God the Father, and the comfortable felliwship of God the holy Spirit be with us, and dwel in all our hearts and consciences, from this time forth and for evermore. Amen. FINIS.
Books Printed for William Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-lane. THe School of Grace, or a Book of good Nature. Christs first Sermon. Christs last Sermon, Christians best Garment. Christians blessed choice. Heavens glory, and Hells horror, A warning piece to the sloathful, Idle, and careles drunken and secure ones of these times. Mr. Fenners Sermons of Repentance. A Sermon on Dives and Lazarus. The Christians comfort. These are all very good Books, and are but, three pence a peice. The plain mans path way to Heaven. The sin of pride arrained and condemned. The black Book of Conscience. The dreadful character of a drunkard, The Fathers last blesing to his Child∣ren. Read them over carefully and practice them constantly: and rest assuredly thou wilt find much comfort in them to thy own Soul: And are but two pence a peice. FINIS.
