I987 16170504 104971
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms BY THE Lord Lieutenant and Council. ORMONDE, WHereas We have been necessarily occasioned to take especial notice, That His Majesties Re∣venue arising by Hearths, Firing places and Stoves within this Kingdom, hath of late be∣come very much impaired, and still continues deeply in arrear, and unsatisfied into His Maje∣sties Exchequer, partly through the great dis∣couragement and obstructions given unto His Majesties Officers, and their Deputies, in the improvement and collection of the same, and the misdemeanors of several persons who have la∣boured to conceal many Hearthes, Firing places and Stoves, which by the Law are chargeable, and partly by the obstinacy of such persons of Quality, and Commanders of His Majesties Castles and Forts, as refuse to permit His Majesties Officers, or their Deputies to enter into their houses to view and number the several Hearths, Firing places and Stoves therein, or to take Distresses for the duty arising there∣out; as also through the Combination of several Inhabitants, who pur∣posely to defraud His Majestie, do take upon them to shelter the Distresses of their neighbours, who by their Delinquency are become liable thereun∣to; and lastly through the negligence or counivance of several Magistrates, Ministers, Constables and other Officers, who have given too much countenance to such undue proceedings, and too little assistance to His Ma∣jesties said Officers and their Deputies, in levying and improving the said Revenue, whom they have in some places suffered to be reproached, and vio∣lently abused, without punishing the Malefactors, although it be the duty of all Constables and other inferior Officers, to accompany, assist and de∣fend His Majesties Officers and their Deputies, as well in the viewing and numbering of the several Hearths, Firing places and Stoves, as in their collecting of the Revenue arising thereout, and the duty of all Iustices
of Peace and chief Magistrates, in their respective places and callings, and with the utmost of their Authority, to support His Majesties said Revenue, so well established by Law, and so necessary to the safety and defense of His Majestie and His good Subjects: We therefore being resolved to redress the aforesaid abuses, and for the time to come to remove all impediments to the levying and collecting of the said Revenue, and to take a strict account of all such persons as shall hereafter be found wanting in their duty to His Majestie, and to the Laws of this Kingdom, have thought fit to publish and declare, That all arrears of the said Revenue, as well those which were incurred from the 24th day of June, 1665. to the 25th of March 1666. as those which have accrued since, and all future growing duties shall forth∣with, and with all possible speed, and diligence be collected and levyed by and paid unto His Majesties respective Officers and their Deputies aforesaid, published, nominated and appointed for that purpose by our Proclamation of the 15th of August, 1666. and no others; And we do hereby strictly charge and command all Iustices of Peace, chief Magistrates, Constables and all other Officers and Ministers of Iustice, whom it doth or may concern, that upon pain of being proceeded against as contemners of His Majesties au∣thority, and as persons ill affected to the Peace and safety of this his King∣dom, they be ayding and assisting to His Majesties said Officers and their Deputies, aswel in viewing and numbring the said Hearths, Firing places and Stoves, as in collecting and levying all such sum or sums of money as is already become due, and in arrear, or which hereafter shall become due and payable for or by reason of the dutie arising out of the said Hearths, Firing places and Stoves, And herein we do expect and require from them, and eve∣ry of them such vigorous and effectual assistance to be given to His Maje∣sties said Officers and their Deputies, that all concealments of any Hearths, Firing places and Stoves may be speedily detected, all illegal and undue practices for exempting any persons lyable, or sheltering of their distresses prevented, all obstructions in the collecting of His Majesties said Revenue removed, and all persons who shall deny admission into their Houses, or any wayes affront, or abuse His Majesties said Officers or their Deputies in word, or deed exemplarily punished; And we do hereby will and require all Sheriffs, Mayors and Bayliffs in the several and respective Counties, Cities and Towns Corporate of this His Majesties Kingdom to cause this our Proclamation to be published in all and every the Market places within their limits upon some Market day within fourteen dayes next after there∣ceipt hereof, as they will answer the contrary at their perils. Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 21 day of March, 1666. Ja. Armachanus. Mich. Dublin. Canc. Ossory. R. Coote. Hen. Midensis. Kingston. Fra. Aungier. Santry. J. Temple. Rob. Byron. GOD Save the KING. Dublin, Printed by John Crooke, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majestie, and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castlestreet. 1666.
