j1261a 11111968 46354
JUSTIFICATIO Of the Members within Doors, to the Objections and Cavils  Against The carrying up to the Lords, the Engrossed Bill for the Releis and Discharge o  ¦gulation of Goals and Goalers. THAT here are every where, and will be Men querulous, bitter of Spirit, Revengeful, and of a Moross Uncharitable Disposition, kicking at all Laws and Religion, but what they frame to themselves, is a Truth indisputable. That this Charitable Law should meet with Men of such at Temperament to destroy it, is evident, and none can imagine but some of these must be in love with Goals, and pleas'd with the rendring their Fellow-Subjects useless to the World, and Sacrifices to greedy Jaylors, and the interest or re∣venge of Scrivenors, Attornies, Sollicitors, Brokers, Usurers, overgrown Extortioners, Eaters into the Antient Fortunes of Gentlemen, to aggrandize their upstart Qualities, looking down upon the Persons of more Honour than themselves; and by such Moth-natur'd Vermine, kept, confin'd, whilst the Debtor (is put upon the necessity of being deliberately fed by them, till a De∣cree in Chancery is obtained to foreclose the equitable remains of a Noble Inheritance, or until a Release of the Equity of a forfeit∣ed Estate is procured for a small Summ, to discharge a poor Pri∣soner, that such Viperous Morgagees may domineer securely in the morgaged Premises (to the Capital Seat whereof it's proba∣ble) the Fathers of these overgrown Harpies have been beholden for their necessary Sustenance:) And yet the Lobby is filled with such whispering into the Ears of the Gentlemen of the Long Robe, and other Members, objections to, and cavils at, a Bill proceeding with all the fairness, caution, form, and inspection that ever pass'd that Honourable Assembly. And least some Worthy Mem∣bers should be captivated, it is thought, by others but necessary that all the Scruples, which may be pretended to obstruct this Bill, having had so ripe a Production) may be solved, that none of our generous and merciful Representatives may suffer in their Cha∣recter of Wisdom and Iudustry, or any Person be thought asleep, during the passing of this so necessary an Act. First, it is objected, that this Bill differs from the former Acts past to this purpose. Ans. So it was intended, for that the Defects in those Acts were foreseen, and by this prevented, many hundreds being by that freed from their Debts, never imprisoned; for, by that it was but bribing the Jaylor, and the deceit was effected; but by this Act the Book, Copies of the Prisoners Causes (which are upon Record) must be produced, and Oath made by the Prisoner of the time he was imprisoned and other evidence of his Commitment. Object. 2. The Oath is too narrow, the Person not swearing what value the Estate is of that he doth discover to his Creditor, and swear∣ing only that he hath not wherewith to pay the Debts, for which he is imprisoned. Ans He Swears, That he hath without any reservation discovered All such Estate real or personal, as he hath in Possession, Reversion or Remainder, of which he is seised or possessed in his own Right, or any other Person or Persons in trust for him; and that he hath not direct∣ly or indirectly, sold leased, or otherwise conveyed, assigned, or secured all, or any part of his Estate, to deceive any Creditor or Creditors, and what he hath been an actual Prisoners, &c. And then comes in the Clause, that he hath not wherewith to satisfie the Debt due, or Damage, for which he is imprisoned; and the words in the Act of 22. 22 Cor.2. are sufficient to pay the Debt or Damage, and  Act  are reserved: Here those are trained to 10 l. and if a Debtor have 100 l. and  men discovers that 100 l. and is bound by this Act to give every Creditor a Judgment: And so, if the value be in Monies, and the Creditors will not agree to a Dividend; if Chattels, a Fieri Facias will attack it, if Laid, and Elegit will lay hold on it, and so what doth the Debtor do, but compound for his Liberty with all he hath to diliver himself from Bondage, and the excessive Rent he is obliged to pay to a meciless Keeper. Besides, it is well known to Lawyers, that the Perons of Englishmen was not originally subject to imprisonment f Debt; and if Magma Charta be of force, so as to annul all Law made contrary to it: Imprisonment of Mens Persons for Debt is bt a tortious detention; and what is here desired, is not so much a was allowed to a Debtor by the Common Law, when imprisonment was not: For by the Writ De Moderata Misericordia, in whi is recited Magna Charta, and thereby the Salvo contenemento suo, & Villanis salvo Waynagio suo, and here is saved less than  hath his Freehold occupie  ¦chandize, no Villain his W  reasonable, and was the a  on to ten times the value, th Object. 3. That it is not  Creditor to continue his D  week, for the time the Cr Ans. That by the Act o  Clause, but by the Act of  said allowance shall be paid  ¦lor and if in case he lye th  Estate of the Debtor be dis  then the Prisoner to be disch  if ever that Clause was put  upon the Creditor, and hi  if that be agreeable to Chri  principles of our Religion Object. 4. That in this B  imposed, in case of Perjury, a Ans. But this imposeth t  standing in the Pillory with  in all Courts, pay all Dama  imprisoned as before, till h  his Life long. Object. 5. That this Act Regulates Jaylo  given great sums of Money for heir Places,  Rents for Farming of their Goals and make ma to Judges and others, for Favour to be shewed  ¦ceptable Members of a Common Wealth, and m  ¦blesh, by Law, the Writ De di in Diem,  vantage to the Creditor, who should he o  may be intterupted by the Liber, the Debtor m  relief in equity. Ans. This is only to take from the aylor, and pu the Co¦ssioners for the Great Seal, to allow or not allow that W  moderating the Fees and the Writs of Habeas Corpus  wich the beneficial Law ( case of Criminals) was mad  2. and which was then ooked upon worth a supp  two hundred six thousa our hundd  nds, an the an if breaking of Laws buying and selling of  and gaing by oppression, be thought a matter at this me  to e countenanced. astly. It may be Objected  too well known t m  At Prtitioners in the Law, that many Pers Marry r Son nd Dauhters Settle great Esstates and lye  Prison  a Certiorari for their Souls, and there are too t many Pr thof. Ans. They cannot (beside disgrace) ure the  of a Prison, the extraordinary sums of Money pa  le ease, from intolerable Hardhips and be subject  man n∣dignities put upon them, but, that th would witgly rt with what they have in thr power  their arty,  at least compound for what the have t  in the harge  a Goal, over and above, their necessar  let tm continue, none can go furthe  w and if they will offend, they can b  intend∣ed to help impossibilities,  s a help and releif for those Honest  be most of them  and Country by  ¦ment, who are now burthen  the whole  which keeps the Husbands usless whilst  chilren are maintained by, and chargeable  the Farm fo whh  they did last belong. BƲT if nothing will satisfied the angry Rats witht doors, by this Bill setled within i is hoped the Claiman will satisfie the Costs, and then let the Wisdom of the Nion Jue, whether 40000 Subjects, who in the  Revolution might hve delivered themselves from Thraldom, an  de a consirable ure in the juncture of Affairs, are not the y Englishm who have had no Relief by this happy Reformation  And his eossed Lw must; be last (in an Ʋnparliamentary way)  humor the, and he Relief in∣tended must be denyed. For to t  a nw Bil is to av none at all.
