J363 07951313 40659
royal blazon or coat of arms J R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT A PROCLAMATION OF THE Kings Majesties most Gracious and General Pardon. JAMES R. WHereas soon after Our Coronation, We had given Order for preparing of a Bill, containing Our most Gracious, General, and Free Pardon to Our Loving Subjects, with intention to have passed the same into an Act in the first Session of Our Parliament, but were unhappily prevented therein, by the late most Vnnatural Rebellion; which since it hath pleased Almighty God by his Blessing upon Our Arms, to Suppress, We have thought fit to renew Our Princely Intentions of Grace and Mercy to Our Subjects, especially considering the stedfast Loyalty of the far greater number of Our Subjects, who continued firm in their Obedience to Vs notwithstanding that Rebel∣lion: And being perswaded that many of those who joyned themselves in that Rebellion being poor Labourers and Handicraftsmen, were drawn and seduced thereinto by the subtile and crafty Insinuations of some Ill-disposed Persons of greater Note and Quality then themselves, and not from their own Evil Rancour of mind, and Traite∣rous Aversion to Vs or Our Government, whose Condition We in Our Princely Clemency commiserating; And to the end their fears and dispair of Our Mercy, may not betray them to evil and lewd courses of Life, but that they may with safety return to their Obedience to Vs, and to their former Habitations, Labours, and Imploy∣ments. And that the minds of other Our Subjects may be quieted; and that all Fears and Iealousies which may concern their security for any matter since Our Reign, or in the Reign of Our late Dearly beloved Brother, be removed and wholly taken away, as much as in Vs lies, We of Our especial Grace and Tenderness to Our People, do hereby Publish and Declare this Our most Royal and Graci∣ous Pardon; And We do hereby for Vs, Our Heirs and Successors Pardon, Acquit, Release and Discharge all and every Our Subjects (ex∣cept Bodies Politick and Incorporate, and such other Persons who shall be herein or hereby excepted) of this Our Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, them and every of them against Vs, Our Heirs and Successors, of, and from all manner of Treasons, Felonies, Misprisions of Treason or Felony, Treasonable or Seditious Words or Libels, Seditious and unlawful Meetings and Conventicles, all Offences whereby any Person may be Charged with the Penalty and Danger of Prae∣munire; All Riots, Routs, Offences, Contempts, Trespasses, and Misdemeanours, and all Iudgments and Convictions for not coming to Church and of and from the Forfeitures and Securities for the same, or any of them heretofore had, committed or done, except as herein or hereby after is excepted. And Our Will and Pleasure is, That neither Our said Subjects, nor any of them, nor the Heirs, Executors or Administrators of any of them, be, or shall be sued, vexed or disquieted in their Bodies, Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements, for any manner of Matter, Cause, Contempt, Misdemeanour, Forfeiture, Offence, or any other thing heretofore suffered, done, or committed, or o∣mitted against Vs or Our late brother, His or Our Crown, Dignity, Prerogative, Laws or Statutes, and not herein or hereby after except∣ed. And that this Our Grant of General Pardon, by the General Words, Clauses and Sentences before rehearsed, shall be reputed, deemed, adjudged, expounded, allowed and taken in all manner of Our Courts and elsewhere, most beneficially and liberally for Our said Subjects, thereby Pardoned in all things not hereafter excepted, as if their particular Persons and Crimes had herein been at large and fully expressed.
Excepted and always foreprized out of this Our Pardon, all Treasons Committed or Done in the Parts beyond the Seas, or in any other Place out of this Realm; And also Excepted all Offences in Forging or false Counterfeiting the Great or Privy Seal, Sign Manual, or Privy Signet, or any of Our Moneys Currant within this Our Realm, or of unlawful Diminution of any of the said Moneys by any ways or means whatsoever, and all Abetting, Aiding, Comforting, or Procuring the said Offences, or any of them. And also Excepted all voluntary Murders, Petty Treasons, Wilful Poysonings, and all Offences of being accessary to the same, or any of them, before the Fact committed; And also all Piracies and Robberies committed upon the Sea, Robberies upon the High-ways, Burglaries in Houses, and all Offences of being Accessary to the said Offences, or any of them. And also Excepted the detestable and abominable Vice of Buggery, committed with Man or Beast; All Rape and Carnal Ravishments of Women; All Ravishments and wilful taking away or Marrying of any Maid, Widow or Damsel against her will, or without the Consent or Agreement of her Parents, or of such as then had her in Custody, and all Offences of Aiding, Comforting, Abetting, or Procuring the said Offences, or any them. And also Excepted, all Offences of Perjury, Subornation of Witnesses, Razing, Forging or Counterfeiting any Deeds, Escripts, In∣quisitions, Indentures of Appraisment, or other Writings, or Publishing the same; Forging or Counterfeiting any Examinations or Testi∣monies of any Witness or Witnesses tending to bring any Person or Persons into danger of his Life, and all Procuring and Counselling of any of the said Offences. And also Except, all Treasons, Offences, Misdemeanours and Contempts, other then such for which Iudgment of Praemunire hath or may be given, or for not coming to Church, of, and for which any Indictments, Actions, Bill, Plaint or Information, or other Process at any time within six years last past, hath been commenced, sued or depended in any of His Majesties Courts at Westminster, or other His Ma∣jesties Courts of Record held within the Cities of Lodon and Westminster, and County of Middlesex, and is there depending or remaining to be prosecuted, or whereupon any Verdict, Iudgment, Outlawry, or Decree is already Given, Awarded or Entred; And all Fines, Forfei∣tures and Penalties thereupon now due or accrued, or which shall or may be due, accrue, or grow to the Kings Majesty, and all Executions for the same. And also Except, all Informations and other Proceedings concerning High-ways and Bridges, or for Repairing County Goals, and all Fines and Issues set or Returned thereupon since the year One thousand six hundred seventy nine. And also Except, all Offences in taking away, imbezling, or purloyning any Goods, Moneys, Chattels, Iewels, Armore, Munition, Stores, Naval Provisions, Shipping, Ordnance, or other Habiliments of War belonging to Vs or Our late Brother. And also Except, all Offences of Incest, Dilapidations, or Simony. And also Except, all Contempts and Process thereupon issuing in or out of any Court of Equity. And also Except, all Recognizances, Conditions and Covenants, and all Penalties, Titles and Forfeitures of Offices, Conditions, or Co∣venants forfeited, accrued, or grown to Vs or to Our late Brother, by reason of the Breach or not performing of any Office, Covenant, or Con∣dition whatsoever. Also Excepted all Concealments, Frauds, Corruptions, Misdemeanours, and Offences whereby We or Our late Brother have been deceived in the Collection, Payments, or Answering of Our Revenues, or any part thereof, or any other Money due to Vs or received for Vs or Him, and all Forfeitures, Penalties, and Nomine penes thereupon arising. Provided always, That nothing in this Our Pardon contained shall Extend or be Construed to discharge any Fines, Sums of Money re∣covered by Iudgment, Fines pro Licentia concordandi, Post Fines, Issues, or Amerciaments, lost, imposed, assessed, set or entred, in any Court of Record whatsoever. And also Except all Persons who are as to any Pains, Penalties, or Disabilities whatsoever Excepted out of the Act of Freé and General Pardon, Indemnity, and Oblivion, made in the Twelfth year of Our late Brothers Reign, and also out of any other Act of Freé and Gene∣ral Pardon since that time. Excepted also all Persons who after Conviction or Attainder of, or for any manner of Treason, or Misprisions of Treasons have been Trans∣ported, and such Attainted of other notorious Crimes or Felonies have been Ordered or Directed to be Transported into any of Our Foreign Plantations. Except also all and every Person and Persons who in a Traiterous and Hostile manner Invaded this Our Realm with James Scott late Duke of Monmouth, and all and every other person or persons who in the time of the late Rebellion under the said late Duke of Monmouth were Offi∣cers, or had the Name or Repute of being Officers in his Army. Except also all Fugitives and Persons fled from Our Iutice into parts beyond the Seas, or out of this Our Realm, who shall not return and render themselves to Our Chief Iustice, or some Iustice of the Peace, before the Nine and twentieth day of September next ensuing. And also Excepted out of this Our Pardon the Persons hereafter particularly mentioned, viz. George Speke of White Lackingtone Esq Mary Speke his Wife, John Speke Esq their Son, Samuel Townesend of Ilmister, Reginald Tucker of Long Sutton, James Hurd of Langport, George Pavior of the same, Gabriel Spratt of Aish Priors, George Cary of Glaston, John Lewis of Babcary, Thomas Lewis of the same, John Parsons of the same, Thomas Cram of Warmister  Place of Eddington, Robert Gee of Martock, Hugh Chamberlain, William Savage of Taunton, Richard Slape of the same, John Palmer of Bridgwater, John Webber of the same, Henry Herring of Taunton, Thomas Hurd of Langport, Christopher Cooke of Wilton Clothier, Amos Blinham of Galhamp∣ton, Mrs. Musgrave School-mistress, Mrs. Sarah Wye, Mrs. Elizabeth Wye, Mrs. Catherine Bovet, Mrs. Scading, Mrs. Mary Blake, Mrs. Elizabeth Knash,
Mrs. Mary Bird, Mrs. Mary Mead, Mrs. Susan Peck, Mrs Elizabeth Barns, Mrs. Mary Burridge, Mrs. Hannah Burridge, Mrs. Grace Herring, Mrs. Anne Herring, Mrs. Mary Waters, Mrs. Sarah Waters, Mrs. Elizabeth Germain, Mrs. Grace Germain, Mrs. Hannah Whetham, Mrs. Easter Whitham, Mrs. Susan Tyler, Mrs. Mary Goodwyn, Mrs. Sarah Longham, Mrs. Margery Sympson, Mrs. Sarah Reynolds, Mrs. Mary Hucklebridge, Mrs. Margaret Hucklebridge, Mrs. Mary Baker, Mrs. Mary Tanner, Mrs. Anne Tanner, Mrs. Elizabeth Gammon, Mrs. Sarah Stacy, Mrs. Hannah Stacy, Mrs. Elizabeth Dyke, Mrs. Elizabeth Baker, Mrs Mary Smith, Mrs. Mary Page, Mrs. Elizabeth March, Mrs. Hannah Grove, Mrs. Elizabeth Bisgood of Taunton, John Tucker of Shepton Mallet, John Bennet of Alisbeere Gent. John Greenway of Crewkern, Thomas Skinner of Dawlish Esq John alias Robert Moor of Haychurch, William Way of Combe S. Nicholas, Robert Huc∣ker of Taunton  Penny of Shepton Mallet, Thomas Hooper, Edward Keetch, William Parbury,  Green, William Hussey, William Strode of Street Esq Mary Bath of Wrington, George Legg of the same, Edward Rogers of Banwell, John Rogers of the same, Ralph Green, William Jobbins,  Manning,  Whinnell, John Baker of Banwell  Worms of Warmister  Worms of the same, William Pardoe, Nicholas Smith, John Ed∣wards, John Collier, Henry Coles of Bridgwater, Richard Blucock of Stoke Gursey, Henry Ireton, John Cragg alias Smith, Mary Jennings, James Hooper, John Ben∣net, Joseph Gatch, William Thompson of London, Humphrey Aldwyn of the same Thomas Love alias Alexander of the same, Richard Tucker of Bishops Hull, Wil∣liam Crab of Aishill Gent. Francis Gough of the same, Francis Vaughan of Criston Esq Laurence French of Chard, Edward Matthews of Lincolns-Inn Esq Hugh Cross Senior of Bishops Hull, Samuel Bernardiston, Benedict Hack of Culliton, Henry Quick of Uppolry, John Combe of Luppit, Henry Gatchil, Nicholas Hore, George Pippen of Dalverton Gent. Abraham Carie of Taunton, John Huish of the same, Peter Terry of the same, Richard Raw of the same, Maurice Frith of Wincanton Gent. William Tiggens of Forde, John Kerridge of Lime Regis Mariner, Robert Parsons, Samuel Venner, Andrew Fletcher, John Fowke, Robert Bruce, Anthony Bruce, James Fox, Joseph Gaylard, William Oliver, John Woolters, Nathaniel Hook Clerk, Richard Lucas of Dulverton, John Bettiscomb near Lime Re∣gis, George Stucky of White Lackington, Thomas Saxon, John Jesse, George Nye of Cheddar, Joseph Francklyn of Worle Clerk,  Dore late Mayor of Liming∣ton, James Carrier of Ilmister, Nicholas Covert of Chichester Gent. John Tripp of Shippham, Joseph Hearse of Badgeworth, Francis Creswick of Fanham Esq  Fudge of Wedmore, Collonel John Rumsey, Joshuah Lock junior, Stephen Lobb Clerk, William Gaunt, Ralph Alexander, Bartholomew Vermeuyden, Major John Manley Isaak Manley his Son, Walter Thimbleton, Aaron Smith of London Gent. Sir William Waller, Slingsby Bethel Esq Francis Charlton Esq Richard Goodenough, Nathaniel Wade, John Tellier, Richard Edghill, Samuel Story, John Jones, John Vincent, George Bowyer, John Dutton Colt, Charles Earl of Machlesfield, John Trenchard Esq John wildman Esq Titus Oates Clerk, Robert Ferguson Clerk. Provided that no Process of Vtlary at the Suit of any person Plaintiff, shall be by virtue of this Our Pardon stayed or avoided, unless the Defendant appear and put in Bail, where by Law Bail is necessary, and take forth a Writ of Scire facias against the Party at whose Suit he was Outlawed. And that this Our Pardon be not allowed to Discharge any Outlawry after Iudgment, till Satisfaction or Agreement be made to or with the Party at whose Suit the Vtlary was obtained. And Our Will and Pleasure is, That this present Pardon shall be of as good Force and effect to Pardon and Discharge all and singular the Premisses above mentioned, and intended to be Pardoned and Discharged, as if We should by Letters Patents under the Great Seal have Granted particular Pardons to every one of Our Subjects. And for the better manifestation of Our Gracious Intentions and Desire herein, We do give leave that any of Our Subjects not herein Excepted, may take and Sue out Our particular Pardon, pursuant to the Tenor hereof. And for that purpose We shall Direct Our Secretaries of State to present Warrants to Vs for Our Signature, and give Order to Our Atturney General or Solicitor, to prepare Bills for Passing Pardons to such as shall desire the same. Provided always, That this Our General Pardon shall not extend to any person that were in actual Arms against Vs in the late Rebellion in the West, who being now within this Realm, shall not within Three Months after the Publication hereof, lay hold of this Our Pardon, and Testifie the same by their peaceable returning to their former Habitations, Labours and Imployments. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Tenth day of March 1685. In the Second Year of Our Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1685.
