J976 12013149 52480
From the College of Physicians, Oct. 5. 1700. Mr. Smith, I Have Read the Book you sent me, which, for the great Discoveries con∣tain'd therein, is justly En∣titled, The Mysteries of O∣pium Reveal'd: It has no need of Mine, nor of any other Approbation: For such Extraordinary Performances, as this is, are more secure of a Kind Reception in the World by their own great Worth, and Usefulness to the Publick, than by any other Recommendation what∣soever. Yours, THOMAS BURWELL.
THE MYSTERIES OF OPIUM Reveald, BY Dr. JOHN JONES, Chancellor of Landaff, a Member of the College of Physicians in LONDON: And formerly Fellow of Jesus-College in OXFORD. WHO, I. Gives an Account of the Name, Make, Choice, Effects, &c. of Opium. II. Proves all former Opinions of its Operation to be meer Chimera's. III. Demonstrates what its true Cause is; by which he easily, and Mechanically explains all (even its most myste∣rious) Effects. IV. Shews its noxious Principle, and how to separate it; thereby rendering it a safe, and noble Panacea; whereof, V. He shews the palliative, and curative Use. A DEO LUX. LONDON: Printed for Richard Smith at the Angel and Bible without Temple-Bar. MDCC.
TO THE KING'S Most Excellent Majesty, William III. &c. May it please Your Majesty, HAving no Means to attone for my bold Essay to express Your MAJESTY's glo∣rious Acts, and Virtues upon a small Pillar, (as much too narrow to con∣tain, as my Pen was too short to reach them) but by this Poor Sacri∣fice, making one Presumption the Advocate of the other, (as if Offences bore no Proportion to Your ROYAL Notice, and Clemency without accu∣mulating them) I humbly
implore GOD's Representative in Mercy, as well as Power, to be a Saviour in pardoning, as well as preserving. I confess my Attempt as daring and assuming, as that of the Arro∣gant, and Sturdy Giants to scale Heaven, being too great a Task or a general Consult of the most xalted Wits on Earth, if not of Angels, and refin'd separate Souls, of whose Number mine, by fre∣quent Ecstasies of Thanks, and Praises, for the Wonders Your MAJESTY has wrought for us, seems as it were ambitious to be one; as well knowing, that such miraculous Ex∣ploits far transcend the Conceptions, and highest Flights of those that are clog'd with Bodies; which had quite balk'd my Endeavours to describe them, but that those uncontrollable Raptures used Violence upon my Mo∣desty, and a long defeated Expectation of better Pens render'd my Impatience outragious, to find Men silent, where
they cannot be loud enough; as if the Impracticableness of adequate Thanks had pall'd their Spirits; Or the vast Cataracts of Blessings Your MAJESTY pour'd upon us had overwhelm'd; Or the consequent Ease, and Security lull'd them asleep; Or our exuberant Prosperity overgrown the Memory of its brave, and generous Author: The Thoughts of which Ingratitude, what Loyal, or Moral Heart can bear without the highest Indignation? The Fret, and Ferment whereof would have even bursted its Vessel without the Vent I gave it in expressing my Thoughts upon that Pillar; to mind the forgetful, excite the Lethargick, and give all a Model by my Paper∣building to erect more sumptuous and permanent Monuments of what GOD, and Your MAJESTY's unparallel'd Magnanimity, Courage, and Conduct, have done for us. Since that was my Design, Grati∣tude my Motive, Deeds and Quali∣fications,
that have no commensu∣rate Words, my Theme; I hope De∣fects in Expression will not intercept a gracious Aspect. If the Book affords any Thing new, or useful, Your MAJESTY is the Au∣thor, as Preserver of our Lives, and Establisher of the necessary Tranquil∣lity for Thoughtful Studies, and In∣ventions; therefore I humbly present it to Your most Sacred MAJESTY, as Men do Oblations to the DEITY from whom they receiv'd them▪ making it (as far as in me lies) doubly Yours, as is, ROYAL SIR, Your MAJESTY's Most Humble, Obedient, Thankful, Subject, And Servant, JOHN JONES▪
THE MYSTERIES OF OPIUM Reveal'd. CHAP. I. Shews how Opium had its Name, how 'tis made, whence it comes, &c. THE Opium, that was in Use in Ancient Times, was made thus: When the Poppy (which was gene∣rally the White, and sow'd then only in Gardens, and small Inclosures) was come to its full growth, and most turgid of Milky Iuice, which was in the hot Countries in May and Iune; they did, as soon as the Dew was up in the mornings, make several Incisions transversly or athwart the Heads of the Poppies, yet not di∣rectly horizontal, but somewhat obliquely, taking
care not to make them quite through into the cavity thereof; holding the Knife, or Instrument, with which the Incisions were made, with its Edge sloaping upward, while it wounded the Heads, and conveniently placing certain Shells to receive the Milky Drops, that issued out of the Incisions; and went backward among the Poppies, as they proceeded in this Work. 1. They chose the Time when the Poppy Heads were most turgid of Milk, to take it in the best Condi∣tion for their Purpose; for if they gathered it sooner, it was not so Mature, and if afterward, some of its Vertue expired; and the quantity of the Juice was less, because dry'd up in some measure, if not taken timely. 2. They made several Incisions in every Poppy's Head, to have the greater Plenty of Juice. 3. They made them immediately after the Dew was up, to prevent its being tainted with any of the Dew; and because the great Heat of the Day, in those Countreys, would much diminish the Quan∣tity of the Milky Iuice, and so thicken it, that it would not run out as freely as in the Morn∣ings. 4. They made the Incisions transversly, thereby to cut and lay open more of the Milky Vessels. 5. They made them somewhat obliquely, that the Drops might the better follow, and overtake one the other, and thereby coalesce, and grow more considerable in Bulk, and that the oblique Wound might the better conduct them into the same part of the Shells; that they might find all together in a mass, when it was sufficiently dried or inspis∣sated by the Heat of the Sun. 6. They did not make the Incisions quite through, (if they could avoid it) lest any of the Iuice should run into the Cavity of the Head, and so be lost among the Seeds contain'd therein.
7. They sloaped the Edge of the Knife, or Instru∣ment, upwards, as they made the Incisions, that the Iuice might the easier slide outwardly; especially in case they happened to make the Incisions quite through, which they could not always avoid, notwithstanding all the Care they used. 8. They went backward as they did it, to avoid going by the Shells, and incised Heads; lest they should disorder, or discompose, or throw them down, or wipe off any of the Iuice with their Cloaths. This being done, they left the Milky Iuice in the Shells, to inspissate by the Heat of the Sun into a Pilular Consistence. I have been the more particular, to shew Men how to make Opium of English Poppies, which you'll find of good use. The Milky Iuice, as it dry'd or thickened, did gradually change its colour from white to a kind of a reddish yellow (or tawny) colour, not unlike, that of a Lyon's Hair, which colour you may still observe on the inside of our common Opium, when rudely torn by force, if taken notice of upon the tearing; for the Air does soon blacken it. This sort of Opium gathered in Shells, &c. (as is aforesaid) the Grecians (our Masters in Physick, from whom we derive the Names of many of our Medicaments, Diseases, &c.) called , which signifies the Iuice, by way of Eminence▪ as we call the Iesuits Bark (the Bark) because most useful, and excellent. The Latines, who had also their Learning, and Words of Art, from the Grecians, called it Opium from ; it being usual with them in very many Cases, particularly in things made out of other Matter (as Opium is made out of  the Iuice) to change o to um or ium, so that  (or Opos) was by them call'd Opium.
The Latines becoming Masters of the World, and of every Thing that was good and excel∣lent; and all People observing their Manners, Fashions, Usages, &c. some of the Eastern People got the Use and Name of Opium from the Latines, which they in Process of Time called Oium, by changing  (or pi) into fi; which is very com∣mon in all Nations, because the natural Pursuit of Ease, and Pleasure, in the Run of Discourse, changes the harder, and harsher sounds, into such as are easier, and sweeter, when they are like in sound, as pi and fi are. The Sound of π (or pi) is harder than that of fi; 1. Because it quite stops the Breath, which the sound of fi does not. 2. Be∣cause the sound of π (or p) requires the motion of the Lower Lip upward, against its natural gravity, and the motion of the whole Lower Iaw upward, by consent, to help that of the Lip; whereas in forming the sound of f, the Lower Lip moves only horizontally; which is the easiest of Motions, except the Natural motion of weighty Things downward, or light Things upwards; yet are both those Sounds like in their formation in se∣veral other respects; as 1. Because both are non∣vocalized Sounds. 2. Both are labial. 3. The Tongue lies still in its Natural Psition in forming both. 4. The Uvula Valve, which shuts up the Passage of the Breath through the Nose, is shut in forming both; all which shews, that the sound of π (or p)  (or pi) is much hader to be form'd than that of f (or si) and yet considerably like; which is the true Cause why all Nations are apt to change the harder sound of pi into the sier and like Sund of fi (or of p into that of f): I put pi and fi for Instance, because the Likeness ap∣pears better in them by having the same Vowl after both; whereas when you say p (or pee) f (or ef) the Difference of the Vowels added, and the sound
of ee put after p, and of e before f, (to help the Consonants to sound) makes them seem unlike, by reason of the different Vowels, so dif∣ferently placed; whereas pi and fi, having the same Vowel alike placed after them, do truly shew their likeness without confusion. It is by Rea∣son of this Likeness, That Sapphick, Are sounded Saf-fick. That Sapphire, &c. Are sounded Saf-fire, or Safire. That  is Translated Trophaeum (or Tro∣faeum) a Trophy. Besides, that the Arabians did and do very commonly change p to f, Saying Faunia, For Poeonia. Saying Osium, &c. For Opium. &c. And this likeness of the Sound of p and f, is the Reason why ph is written for f, because h signifies the sound of Breath expired, which if you use upon sounding p, it will be the sound of f; so that f is a kind of a breathing p, that is ph. Of which Matter, the Curious in such Things may find more to their satisfaction in my Phono∣graphy, when published, which, I hope, will be suddenly, if not before this Book. They call it, in some of the Eastern Countries, Assium, or Affion, instead of Osium, it being usual in all Countries to change the harder, and harsher sound of o, to that of a, which is like it, but easier and sweeter. It is hence,
That we are apt to say Carat, For Carot. That we are apt to say Fagat, For Fagot. That we are apt to say Flagan, For Flagon. That we are apt to say Wagan, &c. For Wagon. &c. Changing the Sound of o to that of a; be∣cause the Sound of a is easier, and not unlike that of o (as was said.) Some in those Parts call it Amphion, (or Am∣pion) for like Reasons, all (doubtless) deriving the Names, that I have mentioned, from the Greek Word , the Latines saying Opium, (whence we have it) the Arabians Oium, and some other Eastern People Asium, or Affium, and others Am∣phion, &c. The best Opium, that was in Use in those ancient Times, was had from Thebes, the Chief Town (or City) of the Country of Thebais in Egypt, (not Thebes in Boeotia, or Cicilia) which is now called Theves; Because, as p is apt to take the sound of f, so p and b are much more apt to take the sound of v, which is (as it were) a sweeter sort of f, with which it exactly agrees in its formation, but that the sound of v is vocalized, (which sweetens it) and that of f is not. It is from the aptitude of the sound of b and p, to change into the most sweet sound of v▪ 1. That Children say, Marvel for Marble, &c. 2. That b or β in Ebur, Is tran∣slated to v in Ivory. 2. That b or β in Guberno, Is tran∣slated to v in Govern. 2. That b or β in  Is tran∣slated to v in David. 2. That b or β in  Is tran∣slated to v in Vado. 2. That b or β in  Is tran∣slated to v in Virgilius. 2. That b or β in  Is tran∣slated to v in Varro. 2. That b or β in  Is tran∣slated to v in Vita.
3. That p in Sapor, Is tran∣slated to v in Savour. 3. That p in Papilio, Is tran∣slated to v in Pavilion. 3. That p in Praepositus, Is tran∣slated to v in Provost. Which changing of b and p to v, must doubtless happen in other Languages, as well as those I mentioned, because the sound of v is so much easier, and sweeter, than either; yet like them in sound. But the sound of b is more like that of v, be∣cause the sound of both are vocalized, which that of p (as has been said) is not; so that b and v agree exactly as p and f; This makes the Egy∣ptians say Theves for Thebes, as the Arabians say Ofium for Opium. Who knows, but this may be the cause why P is a kind of shut F, and F a kind of an open P; for suppose P opened at the round part, to signifie that the Lips are not closed in sounding F, and that the lower stroak or part be left shorter, to signifie that the lower Lip is drawn inward in sounding F, the P becomes a perfect F. The Reasons why the Opium, that came from Thebes, (now called Theves) was, and is the best, are, 1. That Thebes (or Theves) being in Egypt, lies in a hotter Country, that is, nearer the Line (or Equator) than any of the Countries on the North-side of the Mediterranean; for it is observed, that the Heat of Climates contributes very much to the Strength of Opium, which is weaker if you make it in England or Germany, than in France; in the Northern Parts of France, than in Languedoc, which borders upon the Mediterranean; and weaker there than in Smirna, Natolia, Aleppo,
and Apulia, which are more Southern; and weaker in those Places than in Thebais in Egypt: For which cause we may Judge, that the Opium which comes to England from the East-Indies, that is yet hotter than Egypt, being much worse than that of Thebes, (or Theves) must in all probability be adulterated, or made of the Leaves and Stems of the Poppy, (as some say) otherwise it would be rather better, as coming from the hotter Coun∣try. 2. That of Thebes may be better, because the Heat of Egypt is more constant, and uniform, than in Natolia, Aleppo, Smirna, &c. The Quantity of Opium which was gathered by the Milky Iuice of the Poppy's Heads, dropping into Shells out of the Incisions aforesaid, being but small; and the Use of this most noble, pleasing, and generous of Cordials, and Medicaments, daily increasing, by the constant and insallible Benefit they found thereby; Men, partly to avoid the tediousness of gathering it by Drops, and partly out of necessity, but mainly ('tis to be doubted) out of covetousness, began to bruise and pound the Poppy's Heads, and to squeeze out the Iuice, for Expedition and Quantitic's sake; which bruising, and squeesing, caused it to look blackish. This the Greeks, for Distinction's sake, called , from the Word , which signifies Poppy; still calling the better sort, which was ga∣thered in Shells out of the Incisions of the Poppy's Heads, . Thus have you the true Original of , and , which the Latines (and we from them) call Opium, and Meconium; Tho' (as it happens in most Things in Merchandise, to recommend the Goods) we now call the Meconium, Opium, by the better Name, as they do in another case (out of abundance of absurd Civility) call every Quack a Doctor.
Afterward (its Use growing more and more) they added the Leaves to the Poppy's Heads in the pounding, bruizing, and expressing the Iuice, boiling it for speed's sake to the consistence of a Confection; which cooling, comes to the consi∣stence that we have it in (I mean the fresher and softer sort that we have) which by the forcible poun∣ding, squeezing, and boiling, contracts a blackish Colour like that of Horse-Aloes on the out-side, to which Colour the Air does very much contribute, and pressing the Superficies close together; for if you rudely tear a piece of that we have (which is all of this last kind) it looks at first (as was said) of a reddish Yellow; but the Air, especially if moist, or any Moisture, and handling of it, and closing the Superficies together, soon makes it look blackish again. This (as was intimated) is that we now call Opium, and have in common Use. Which being also in common Use among the Grecians when the Turks Conquer'd them, was by the Grecians themselves called Pous (or Pos with the o mouthed widely) which came doubtlesly from ; the Meconium at last gaining the bet∣ter Name of  (or Pous or Pos) after the manner aforesaid to recommend it (as all Opium is now call'd Theban) and the O in the beginning of , passed over in the Run of Discourse, which is not uncommon with Vowels, because of their flat Sound, which is so by reason of the wide Passage that the Breath has between the Tongue and the Palate in the Formation thereof; for Wideness of Passage is the cause of Flatness; as Narrowness (in Birds, Children, &c.) is the cause of Sharpness of Sound; therefore the Sound of Vowels being flat, fading, and consequently not as much missed as sharper Sounds, we often omit Vowels, particularly in the beginning of Words, for Ease and Shortness sake. Thus it comes to pass,
That Men say Pothecary For Apothecary. That Men say Prentice For Apprentice. That Men say Buttals For Abuttals. That Men say Larum For Alarum. That Men say Light For Alight. That Men say  (or  For And as  came to be sounded , so  (as naturally) to be sounded  (or Pous) because it is easier to sound u after o in this and some other cases, than to omit it, as it is easier to sound p between m and t &c. than not; as in tempt, crumpt, limpt, &c. which are more easily so sound∣ed, than if the sound of p were left out which I call Easmess of Consequence. Hence it is That Bold Are sounded Bould. That Sold Are sounded Sould. That Hold Are sounded Hould. That Bolt Are sounded Boult. That Ioll▪ Are sounded Joul. That Toll &c. Are sounded Toul. &c. Changing the o into ou, as the Grecians did Pos to Pous. For this and such reasons it is, that the National Greek can hardly be un∣derstood by Scholars, when spoken by the Natives. It is for the same Reason, that the Greeks write Greek, (as we do English, and the French do their Language) different from what they speak; so that if any Man should learn French, or English, and always sound it as it is writ, or printed, he would very hardly understand them, as they are vulgarly spoken; which is the very Case of such as learn Greek by Book, who always sound every
Letter, whereas the Native Greeks do (what all Nations do more or less) shorten, and alter the Sound of Words in the Common Run of Dis∣course by a natural Propensity unto, and Pursuit of Ease, Pleasure, and Speed, which by degrees very much alters the Sound of Words. The Turks having been used to call the better Sort, that dropt out of the Incisions made in the Poppy Heads, Maslack, continued that Name to that Sort after they Conquer'd Greece, and call'd the other Sorf, which they found in Use among the Grecians by the Name that the Grecians gave it, viz. Pous; and such as commonly use it they call Pou∣sti by way of Contempt, as if we should say Small beer-Drinkers, in comparison of Wine-Drink∣ers. You may easily perceive by what has been said, Why our Opium hath so much Filth in it. Why it tastes sometimes of an Empyreum, or Burning, in not stirring it well while it is boiling into a Consistence, and not giving it only a gentle Heat when it begins to thicken, gradually lessen∣ing the Fire, or letting it conveniently decay, and go out of it self; which is a very good Way for such as have not other Conveniences; for as the Matter thickens, the Heat declines, and so be∣comes safe from a Taste of Burning, if the Fire be duly proportion'd: But all this Trouble is avoid∣ed by inspissating by the Heat of the Sun, which is used in some Countries. Note, That the Poppy of which Opium is made, in all Turky, Egypt, Thebes, &c. is the great White Poppy, which grows very freely in those Parts, and (as I am inform'd) without any manuring of the Ground in some Places; certain it is, that they now have whole Fields of that White Poppy, out of which they make the Opium, as is aforesaid, by pounding, pressing, boiling, &c.
CHAP. II. Of the Election (or Choice) of Opium. ALL Opium being made in ancient Times by the Milky Drops that fell out of the Incisions mention'd in the last Chapter, which being a na∣tural and simple way, made no difference in the Opium, but what Nature it self did; all their Knowledge of the best Opium consisted in distin∣guishing the Theban from other Opium, which was not naturally so good. 1. Theban Opium was of a lighter Reddish Yellow than other sorts, therefore some call'd it White Opium, not that it was abjolutely white, but only relatively such in comparison with other kinds of Opium; as we say White Rosin, in respect of other Rosin, thô it is not white, but only lighter colour∣ed than other Rosins. 2. Theban Opium was most hot, bitter, and biting in taste, from whence you may infer, that the Opium which has those qualities in the highest degree is the best. 3. It smelled rankly, and vehemently of the Poppy, which gives you another good sign to judge of Opium. 4. It burnt with a clearer Flame than any other. 5. Some say, that it was weightier than other sorts. Notwithstanding all which Differences, they did in time find ways to adulterate it, which were these: 1. They adulterated it with Juice of Glauciam, (or Apple of Love.)
This was discernable by the Yellow Tincture, that it gave to Water, and other Menstruums; whereas the Theban, and all true Opium gives a Red Tincture. 2. It was counterfeited with resinous Things. This Cheat was discoverable by its not being uniform, nor so dissolvable in Water as good Opium. 3. It was mix'd with Juice of Lactuca Sylvestris, or Wild Endive leav'd Lettuce. This made it of a duller colour, and not to smell so perfectly and rankly of the Poppy. 4. It was sometimes mix'd with the Milky Iuice of Spurge, which being hot, bitter, and biting, was hardly discernable, but by its purging and disturb∣ing quality, and somewhat less and different. You may be sure, that this, and all the other Mixtures lessen'd its Vertue as an Opiate, if consi∣dered in the same quantity, because they must take up room in the Mass; but Lactuca Sylvestris being of the nature of Opium, made the loss of its Vertue less discernable. It is true, that we have none of the Opium that was gathered by the milky Drops out of the Inci∣sions; and therefore what is said, doth not much concern us as to that sort; however these Observa∣tions will enlighten us as to the Opium that we now have. Of which I cannot find, that there is much Adulteration used, because (I suppose) that it is now grown considerably cheaper, by reason of the vast quantities that is made, with so much ease, that it is not worth while to counterfeit it, there being now great Fields of Poppy in Turky; so that our business will be rather to distinguish the Sort, than the Adulteration; thô this shall not pass unre∣garded, as far as it may concern us.
There are two sorts brought over to us; one from Persia and the East-Indies; the other from Turky, as from Lesser Asia, (or Natolia) Smyrna, Aleppo, &c. I. That which is brought from East-India, Persia, Surat, &c. is (as I am inform'd) made of the Leaves and Stems of the Poppy, and is, 1. More full of Filth within it, (for the outside is not so much to be regarded, because of Acci∣dents.) 2. It is not so uniform, smooth, and supple, but harsh and rugged. 3. It is not so readily dissolvable in Water. 4. The Indian is brought over in larger Pieces. 5. It is not brought so wrapt in Leaves as the Turky Opium is. Bontius says, that they make it of the Stems and Leaves; if so, it must be much worse than the Turky Opium, that is made of the Heads and Leaves. II. Among those sorts that are brought out of Turky, (and indeed any sorts of Opium) 1. That is best that is most bitter, hot, and biting. 2. The lighter, whiter, and clearer its Flame is, when it burns, the better it is. 3. The more uniform, even, smooth, tough, yield∣ing, and complying it is to be wrought, or brought to any form, the better it is. 4. The more it gives, upon, or against moist Wea∣ther, or in a moist Air of any kind, and the bet∣ter, speedier, freer, and more perfectly it dissolves in Water, the better it is. 5. The redder the Tincture is that it gives in Wa∣ter, Spirit of Wine, or any Menstruum, the better it is; and 'tis never good if it gives only a yellow Tincture.
But Note, That even the best Opium, if you take but a very slight Tincture thereof, will appear yellowish, especially in a white Vessel. Therefore my meaning is, that the redder Tin∣cture Opium causes in Water, quantity for quantity, the better it is. 6. It should have no taste or smell of an Empyreum, or Burning; for that gives it a nauseous taste, and in some measure signifies a loss of its Vertue by burning, thô this may be inconsiderable. 7. The less Filth it has on the inside, the better it is. 8. The more it sparkles when cut, and afterward breath'd upon three or four times, the truer is the Opium; for those sparkling Particles are its noble Volatile Salt, (or Sal. Volatile-oleosum) and not its resinous Parts, as Wedelcus, and others affirm. 1. Because when the Rosin and Volatile Salt are separated, that sparkling follows the Volatile Parts and not the Rosin, wherein they do not appear in the least. 2. Because I find that they are the Parts that are most apt to dissolve in Water, which the Rosin is not. 3. Because they are much altered by a warm and moist Breath, which the resinous Part is not. 4. How could that Opium be the best (as 'tis found to be) that has most of them, if it were the Rosin, which is the worst Part of Opium? But 'tis highly consonant to Experience, that they should be the Volatile, or best Parts of Opium, which is so much the better, the more it abounds with them. 9. If it yields any other Tincture than Red, it is not right; and the duller or paler the Red is, the worse or weaker it is. 10. The best is heavier in proportion to its Bulk, which you may soon experiment thus:
Weigh an Ounce of each in the Air, then weigh them (just as they are) in the Brass Scales in Wa∣ter, and the heavier will out-weigh the other in Water; for the heavier any thing is, the less Wa∣ter takes from its Weight in proportion to its Bulk; this is an infallible, and most ready way to know the Weight of any thing in proportion to its Bulk. Note, That my Discourse is most particularly concerning the best sort of Crude Turky Opium; that is the best that we have in common Use, and that its Effects and not those of any Preparation thereof, are set down in the following Chapters.
CHAP III. The Effects of Opium used externally. OPIUM used externally has two sorts of Ef∣fects upon a Humane Body: 1. As, an Opiate to cause Sleep, take away Pain, &c. 2. As an Alterative of the Parts it is applied to. I. As an Opiate: It is of very uncertain and uneven Effects, when applied externally; for some∣times it causes Sleep, takes away Pain; but it often fails; therefore it is generally much better, safer, more certain, and effectual, to use it inter∣nally. I do scarce know the case wherein 'tis bet∣ter to use it externally than internally, unless it be to smell to in some cases: But of these Things▪ more particularly, when we come to the Use of Opium in Curing, Preventing, or Paliating Dis∣eases; for here we only lay down Effects, in order to a Disquisition of the Cause of the Operation of Opium, to which its internal Effects will mainly contribute; however, it may be very useful to that end, to lay down its alterative Effects, for thereby we shall in good measure know the Prin ciples by which it operates. II. Its external Effects, as an Alterative, are these, viz. 1. It incides, resolves, and discusses. 2. It relaxes and mollifies. 3. It maturates and suppurates. 4. It exulcerates, or causes Blisters, if it be very strong, and applied to Persons of a fine Texture,
where the Skin is tender; but this Effect belongs more properly to the Maslack, or true , that drops from the Incisions made in the Heads of the Poppies, especially the Theban, which affords a very powerful Juice. Hence you may observe, that the more it exulcerates, or blisters, the better is the Opium, & vice versâ. 5. It is a Psilotherick, for it prevents Hair to grow, and causes the shedding thereof. 6. It is hurtful to the Eyes and Ears. 7. It excites Itchings, applied (in a moderate manner) to the Skin. 8. It excites Venery, applied to the Perinaeum.
CHAP. IV. The Effects of Opium used Internally, in a moderate Dose. 1. THE moderate Dose in ordinary Use, to pro∣duce the following Effects, is from one to three Grains, (more or less) according to the Circumstance, Condition, Case, Constitution, Age, &c▪ of the Person who takes it. 2. It operates generally in a short time after it is in the Stomach, that is, in about half an Hour▪ (more or less) if taken in a liquid Form; and in about an Hour (more or less) if in a solid Form, drinking a Draught of Water, or some Liquor, af∣ter it; otherwise it may be sometimes near an Hour and a half before it has its full Effect. But the time of its Operation has a considerable Lati∣tude, according to the Disposition of the Stomack, and other Circumstances, as the Vehicle it is taken in, &c.
The constant Effects of Opium, used internally in a moderate Dose. 1. It causes a most agreeable, pleasant, and charming Sensation about the Region of the Stomach, which if one lies, or sits still, diffuses it self in a kind of indefinite manner, seizing one not unlike the gentle, sweet Deliquium that we find upon our entrance into a most agreeable Slumber, which, upon yiel∣ding to it, generally ends in Sleep: But if the Person keeps himself in Action, Discourse, or Busi∣ness, it seems (especially when given in a Morn∣ning, after a moderate Rest at Night) like a most delicious and extraordinary Refreshment of the Spirits upon very good News, or any other great cause of Ioy, as the sight of a dearly beloved Per∣son, &c. thought to have been lost at Sea, or the like, causing such a pleasant Ovation of the Spirits, Serenity, &c. as we find after a competent Mea∣sure of generous Wine ad Hilaritatem, (as Men use to say.) It is indeed so unexpressibly fine and sweet a Pleasure, that it is very difficult for me to describe, or any to conceive it, but such as actually feel it; for 'tis as if a Good Genius possessed, or informed a Man; therefore People do commonly call it a heavenly Condition, as if no worldly Pleasure was to be compar'd with it: Helmontianus would doubt∣less express it by the Archeus in his very best Humour. It has been compar'd (not without good cause) to a permanent gentle Degree of that Pleasure, which Modesty forbids the naming of; and 'tis well worth a Remark, that both are Pleasures of the same Sense, viz. that of Feeling; for it cannot be a Pleasure of any other Sense, since it is inter∣nal.
2. It causes a brisk, gay▪ and good Humour: Nor do I doubt but it has this Effect upon sleeping Persons, as far as their Condition is capable of observing it; for you shall have them often tell of pleasant Dreams after it, when they remember them, and speak of any. See Bauchin, and the Authors men∣tioned below under the 4th Effect of Opium. 3. It causes Promptitude, Serenity, Alacrity, and Expediteness in Dispatching and Managing of Business: To which end, and that of a good and gay Hu∣mour (which are near of kind) it is commonly taken in the Morning in the Eastern Countries, with most certain Effect. The truth of which Wedelius is forced to con∣fess, though quite contrary to his Hypothesis of Opium's fixing and coagulating the Spirits; giving an instance of a certain serene Person, who when she had any Affair of great moment to dispatch, did (be∣fore-hand) take Opium with great advantage; for she thereby found her self every way better disposed for Business, and more enabled to bear the Fatigue thereof. Which is the Substance of what he writes in Latin. Many other Authors confirm the Truth of these Effects; but (above all) the constant Experience of the Eastern Nations, puts it out of all doubt. 4. It causes Assurance, Ovation of the Spirits, Courage, Contempt of Danger, and Magnanimity, much after the manner that generous Wine does; instead of which, the Turks, &c. use Opium before En∣gagements, desperate Attacks, &c. (as is most no∣torious) to make them Courageous, which it cer∣tainly does: For your satisfaction as to this, and other Effects of Opium, not so commonly observed with us, for Reasons given in Chap. VIII. See Bel∣lonius, l. 3. c. 15. p. 179. Erastus Disp. de Sapor. p. 6. Georg. Andreae Itenerar. Ind. l. 2. c. 9. p. 12. Camerar. Oper. Subcis. l. 1. c. 93. p. 437. Erastus Disp. de Nar∣cot.
Oberndorf. Historians also add, That when the Great Turk makes a considerable War, the Soldiers buy up all or most of the Opium; which may be worth a Merchant's Observation; for it thereupon grows dear, and is much cheaper in times of Peace. 5. It prevents and takes away Grief, Fear, Anxi∣eties, Peevishness, Frefulness, &c. These are neces∣sary Consequences of the former Effects. 6. It causes Euphory, or easie undergoing of all La∣bour, Iourneys, &c. and that far beyond all Wines and hot Cordials, or Spirits; therefore it is very much used in Turky and the Eastern Countries, in labo∣rious Undertakings, great Iourneys, &c. which Men perform by the help of Opium, after a prodi∣gious and almost incredible manner: But the Mat∣ter of Fact is so common and usual, that there is no place of doubt; besides, that some who tried it among us, have found it so. 7. It lulls, sooths, and (as it were) charms the Mind with Satisfaction, Acquiescence, Contentation, Equanimity, &c. How should it fail to cause these Effects, since it causes all the former gay, pleasant, and brave Humours? Dr. Willis, and others, having no true Experience, or Knowledge, of Opium, imagined that it caused Courage, Bravery, Equanimity, &c. by stupifying the Senses, Brain, &c. making People inadvertent, dull, and inapprehensive; which is a great Mistake, and a groundless Conceit; for it is a most certain Truth (which millions can affirm) that it produ∣ces those Effects by an Ovation and Pleasure of the sensitive Soul and Spirits, as generous Wine does be∣fore Men are suddled, or overcome with it; How else could they at the same time be more serene, and apt for the Management of any Business, and neat Dispatch of Affairs, as it is most certain they are? These fundamental Mistakes about Opium, have
been (as you'll find hereafter) one great cause why its Operations have puzzled and quite baffled all En∣quirers. 8. It quiets, allays, and composes all Perturbations and Commotions of the Spirits, (or sensitive Soul) Bloud, Humours, &c. as in Hysterical Cases, Diary Fevers, that proceed from Passions; as, Anger, Grief, Ter∣rours, &c. from violent Motion, Labour, Heat, Iour∣neys, Convulsions, &c. or from Pain; and stops Bleed∣ings that proceed from such Commotions. 9. It causes a Relaxation of all the sensible Parts of the Body, as the Membranous and Nervous: This is notorious by its Effects, as causing Perspiration, Sweat, Relaxation of Sphincters, Vilatation of the Pupil of the Eye, Relaxation of the Cornea, and all other Effects of Relaxation, as you'll find more particular∣ly hereafter. 10. It causes Indolence, or exemption from Pain, (as all know and allow) and that when Sleep does not intervene. 11. It stops, moderates, cures, or paliates all Fluxes, excepting those by the Pores, or such as depend (as that does) upon Relaxation, as when Sphincters are weak, or paralytical; but these last are unna∣tural Accidents. 12. It mightily promotes insensible Perspiration. 13. It prevents Shiverings in Ague-Fits, and such∣like Cases, if given in due time and quantity, which shall be shown in the Curative Part. 14. It prevents and cures Colds. 15. It causes a larger and slower Pulse, supposing no accidental Cause to the contrary. 16. It causes Driness in the Mouth. 17. It has most Effect in warm and moist Wea∣ther. 18. It has more Effect upon lax and fine textured Persons, as Women, Children, &c. therefore Wo∣men seldom use it in Turky, and the other Eastern
Countries; where it is commonly used by the Men. 19. It causes an Efflorescence of the Skin, barring Accidents of Cold, &c. 20. It is observed by all, that it mainly affects the Genus Nervosum, and animal Spirits, and not the Bloud and Humors. 21. It increases Seed in some measure. 22. It causes a great promptitude to Venery, Ere∣ctions, &c. especially if the Dose be larger than ordi∣nary; which I would have Men believe without experimenting it; not that I fear to be confuted, but lest any should injure themselves by too great a Dose. This is one great Cause (if not the chief) why the Infidels of Turky, and the Eastern Nations (espe∣cially where Poligamy is allow'd, as among the Turks, &c.) use Opium so much, it never ailing to produce this Effect in hale and healthy People, if the Dose be sufficient; as is too notorious in all (or most) Countries from Greece to Iapan inclusively, who use Opium for that end. But as to the Truth of this Effect of Opium, not only Authors, and all the People of those Eastern Nations, but several Merchants, Factors, and Tra∣vellers, now living in London, can attest, That it is used, for that purpose, in those Countries with Effect; yea, some in our own Nation, that use Opium in large Doses, can attest the same, upon Experience in their own Bodies. Those who desire to be satisfied, may also read Ioh. Iacob Saar. his Itinerar. Ind. p. 11. Olearius's tinerar. Persio. l. 5. c. 15. & 18. B. D. D. Sacks, Tom. 11. Epher. Ger∣man. Obs. 69. p. 126. Bauchin, p. 450. Cardanus, Sca∣liger, Nich. Monordei, Foglius de Turcarum Nepenthe, Bellonius, and others; whose Words I do not re∣peat, partly for Modesty's, partly for Brevity's sake.
It does (I confess) look like a Riddle, that a most relaxing and stupifying Medicament, which takes away much of the Sense of Feeling, (and con∣sequently Irritations to Venery, as one would think) should notwithstanding irritate thereunto, cause Erections, &c. however, it is most certain, tho' a seeming Contradiction, of which sort you have many more among the Effects of Opium. Usual and frequent (tho' not constant) Effects of Opium, used internally in a moderate Dose. 1. Sleep, which is so far from being a constant Effect of Opium, that it will in me, and many other Persons, prevent Sleeping, even when other∣wise inclin'd to it. 2. Pleasant Dreams. 3. Stopping of Vomitings. 4. Stilling the Hiccough. 5. Taking off Convulsions and Contractions. 6. Causing Meat to stay long at Stomach. 7. Moderation, and prevention of Hunger. 8. Sweat. 9. The Flowing of the Menses, tho' not observed by vulgar Physicians. 10. The Flowing of the Lochia, which is as little observed. 11. Voiding of the Stone. 12. Delivery of Women. 13. Deadness of the Eyes, as you see in Drun∣kenness. 14. Dilatation of the Pupil. 15. Growth of the Breasts, Penis, and Increase of Milk. 16. Veneral Dreams. 17. Nocturnal Pollutions.
18. Itchings in the Skin. 19. Much Urine. 20. Nausea. 21. Swimmings in the Head. 22. Watching. 23. A kind of dubious State, between sleeping and waking. 24. It stops Hemorrhages in many cases. Many more Instances of this kind might be given of its frequent and usual Effects in Diseases; but it would be endless and needless, since we have mentioned the Prime, General, and Fundamental Effects, upon which all such do depend, and that the particular Enumeration of its Effects in Dis∣eases, belongs to its curative and paliative Virtue, which will be handled hereafter. The rare Effects of Opium, taken in a mode∣rate Dose. 1. Temporary Palsies, as of the Bladder, and some∣times of other Parts, tho' very rarely. 2. Faltring of the Tongue. 3. Loosness of the lower Iaw, as in the Drowsie, Drunkards, &c. 4. Prevention of Sweat, in such as sweat too much for want of Perspiration. 5. Abortion. 6. Prevention of Abortion in some Cases. 7. Intumescence of the Lips. 8. Curing of the Dropsie, of which Dr. Willis gives an Instance. 9. Curing of Stupors of some sorts, as those from Colds, &c. 10. Anxieties and Distresses. 11. Vomitings and Hiccoughs. 12. Convulsions.
13. Syncopes, Leipothimies, and Faintings. 14. Death, tho' very rarely, and that in very weak People. 15. Purging. 16. Raising and reviving some Persons that are just expiring. 17. A long stay thereof at Stomach sometimes. 18. Stoppage of Urine. 19. It sometimes proves dangerous after Hemorrha∣ges and large Evacuations. 1. Note, That the first Class of Effects being the most constant, are the most proper, genuine, and principal Effects, upon which all other Effects de∣pend, unless they are accidental: It must therefore be, that these should best guide us in the Disqui∣sition of the Cause of the Operation of Opium. 2. Note, That the second Class, tho' not so con∣stant, are natural Effects of Opium, and will be also good Guide for the same purpose. 3. Note, That there is but little notice to be taken of the rare Effects for that purpose, because most accidental. The Effects of the going off (or declination) of the Operation of Opium, taken internally in a moderate Dose. 1. A general return of all the Diseases and Disa∣sters that Opium paliated during its Operation; un∣less it happens that some are cured thereby; which (i they be) is generally by the Benefit of Sweat, or insensible Perspiration; as Colds, Pain from Wind, or Humours, that should have passed by the Pores; as in Coughs, Tooth-ach, &c. from Construction of the Pores; or by composing the Fury of the Spirits, or Bloud, which it very often (yea, generally) cures with one single Dose: But of these things, more in the Cura∣tive Part.
2. Sweat, tho' not constantly. 3. Frequent making of Water, sometimes. 4. A Loosness (sometimes) even when there was none before the giving of the Opium. 5. Diseases, seeming worse than before the taking of it. 6. A melancholy and sad Depression of Spirits. 7. A narrow Pulse. 8. Itching of the Skin.
CHAP. V. The Effects of Opium taken in an Excessive Quantity. 1. A Heat at Stomach. 2. A sense of Weight at Stomach (some∣times.) 3. Gaity of Humour at first. A after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 4. Sardonick Laughter afterward. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 5. Laxity, and Debility of all Parts. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 6. Alienation of the Mind. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 7. Loss of Memory. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 8. Darkness of the Eyes. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 9. Laxity of the Cornea. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 10. Appearance of divers Co∣lours. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 11. Deadness of the Eyes to the View. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 12. Faltring of the Tongue. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 13. A Sopor. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 14. A slow, and wide Pulse. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 15. A high Colour. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 16. Looseness of the Iaw, and Lips. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 17. Intumescence of the Lips. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 18. Difficulty of Breathing. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 19. Fury, and Madness. As after Drink∣ing a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 20. Venereal Fury. 21. Priapisms. 22. Violent Itchings. 23. Nausea's. 24. Swimmings in the Head. 25. Vertigo's.
26. Vomitings. 27. Hiccoughs. 28. A turbulent Pulse. 29. Convulsions, and Cold Sweats. 30. Faintings and Leipothymies. 31. Cold Breath. 32. Death. Such as escape it generally have, 33. Plentiful Purging. 34. Sweats that smell of the Opium. 35. Violent Itchings in the Skin. 1. Note, That all these Effects do not happen to all, but some to one, and some to others. 2. That these Effects are greater, or less, ac∣cording to the Dose, Constitution of the Person, and other Circumstances. 3. That they are most endanger'd thereby, that have a Lax, and fine Texture, and a weak Digestion. 4. That a Looseness upon it is a good sign. 5. That it affects some by making them Furi∣ous, (as Wine does) and others Stupid; Generally the Furious are most safe from danger of Death: But of these Things more hereafter (by God's Help.)
CHAP. VI. The Effects of a long, and lavish Use of Crude Opium. 1. RElaxation, and Weakness of all Parts. 2. Inhability, or Listlesness to do any thing, exept it be while the Opium Operates. 3. Inhability, or Listlesness to get up in the Morn∣ing. 4. A dull, moapish, and heavy Disposition, (as in old Drunkards) except it be during the Operation of Opium. 5. Diminution of Appetite. As is obser∣vable in old Drunkards. 6. Weakness of Digestion. As is obser∣vable in old Drunkards. 7. Dropsies. As is obser∣vable in old Drunkards. 8. Decay of Parts. As is obser∣vable in old Drunkards. 9. Weakness of Memory. As is obser∣vable in old Drunkards. 10. Stooping in the Back. As is obser∣vable in old Drunkards. 11. Early Decrepiteness. As is obser∣vable in old Drunkards. 12. Shortness of Life. As is obser∣vable in old Drunkards. 13. Acrimony of Blood. 14. Inclinations to Venery. 15. Frequent Inclinations to make Water. 16. Priapisms, and frequent Erections. 17. Nocturnal Pollutions.
The Effects of sudden Leaving off the Use of Opium, after a long, and lavish Use thereof. 1. Great, and even intolerable Distresses, Anxie∣ties, and Depressions of Spirits, which in few days commonly end in a most miserable Death, at∣tended with strange Agonies, unless Men return to the Use of Opium; which soon raises them a∣gain, and certainly restores them; if it has time to operate, before they die; which it soon does in a liquid Form. Or, if they have not Opium, or will not take it, they must use Wine very plen∣tifully, and often, as a substitute to the Opium, tho' it doth not perform half as well as Opium. 2. A return of all Diseases, Pains, and Disasters; that were palliated by the taking of Opium. 3. Dangerous Loosenesses. 4. Death follows the leaving it off, after a very long, and lavish use thereof. The Inconveniences of leaving off the Use of Opium, do bear a certain Proportion to the Time, and Quantity, that it has been used in. 1. Note, That the Turks do drink some Water always after the taking of Opium, as being the best Menstruum to dissolve it. 2. Note, That it is usual with them to take a Drachm in the Morning, and so much in the After∣noons, and so may we, as well as they, if used to it; and 'tis a very silly saying, that you'll find in Authors, That they are better able to bear it, because of the Climate, &c. whereas the more Northern Persons are better able to take it, than the Southern, as will hereafter appear most plainly.
I am told of one near Banbury, that takes Two Ounces a Day. 3. Note, That among the Effects of Opium may be observed many seeming Contradictions, yet is there nothing more certain than the several dif∣ferent Matters of Fact; which (no doubt) has been a great Cause to puzzle the World about it, and to run Men into strange Absurdities concerning its Operation; and all to deviate so far from the Truth, that nothing in Nature can be farther, un∣less you'll say, that Heat cools, or what pleases the sensitive Soul, is at the same time abhorr'd by it. Now, because these seeming Contradictions in the Effects of Opium, are the greatest Rubs to be met with, and that the Reader may take the better Estimate of the Undertaking, and my Explication of its Effects, when I come to it, I shall not fear to enumerate them distinctly, (tho' they will make the strangest Catalogue of Riddles, that ever was seen) trusting in Him, that created this wonderful Me∣dicament, that he will enable me to explain all its Effects.
The seeming Contradictions in the Effects of Opium. 1. It causes Sleeping, and Watching. 2. It causes, and prevents Sweat. 3. It relaxes, and stops Loosenesses. 4. It stops Fluxes, and causes that of Sweat, &c. 5. It stupifies the Sense of Feeling, yet irritates by that Sense to Venery. 6. It causes Stupidity, and Promptitude in Busi∣ness; Cloudiness, and Serenity of Mind. 7. It excites the Spirits, and quiets them. 8. It is very hot, yet cools in Fevers. 9. It is hot, and bitter; yet lessens Appetite, even in Cold Stomachs. 10. It stops, and promotes Urine. 11. It relaxes, and weakens; yet enables us to undergo Labours, Iourneys, &c. 12. It causes, and prevents Abortions. 13. It stops Vomiting above all things; yet causes most violent, tedious, and dangerous Vomitings. 14. It stops Purging in a most eminent manner; yet sometimes causes it. 15. It is very acrimonious, yet (as all say) ob∣tunds Acrimony; however, it allays Pain proceed∣ing from Acrimony. 16. It causes a furious Madness; yet composes the Spirits above all things. 17. It causes ; yet sometimes cures them (as Willis says.) 18. It causes Palsies; yet have I known it to cure a Palsie. 19. It causes Drinss in the Mouth; yet takes off Thirst in Fevers. 20. It cures, and causes a Hiccough.
21. It stanches Blood; yet causes the Blood to come outward, (as appears by the Efflorescence, or Redness of the Skin that it causes) yet moves the Menses and Lochia. 22. We have many Instances of it promoting, and hindering Critical Motions. 23. It raises very weak People, (when nothing besides will do it) yet it kills other weak People. 24. It causes, and cures Convulsions. 25. It causes Relaxation, and Contraction of the same Parts. 26. It Relaxes; yet causes Rigidity, Tension, and Erection of the Penis, Priapisms, &c. Thus have I fairly, and faithfully, laid the whole Onus of the Operations, Effects, and Con∣tradictory Phenomena's of Opium, upon my Shoul∣ders; however I come off, and clear my self of the Intricacy, Mazes, and cross Effects there∣of, by explaining them; which none upon the View thereof will think possible, and none be∣fore me durst as much as enumerate for that End.
CHAP. VII. The Author contrives a Compendious Way of Examining all Opinions concerning the Ope∣ration of Opium. HAving, without any sly or sordid Evasion, or considerable Omission, (which has been the persidious Course of Authors in this Case) fully and truly enumerated the sensible and certain Ef∣fects of Opium in Humane Bodies, and thereby empannel'd a Iust Iury for the Trial of Hypothesises, which must be Judged by the Effects or Pheno∣mena's of Opium; I will now proceed to their Exa∣mination. But because it would be endless to take every one particularly into Consideration, I will use their Stratagem, who blow up Foundations, to save the tedious Pecking at all the Parts of the Super∣structures, which in this Case would require an Age, and take up all my Time in demolishing them, which may be better employ'd in erecting some∣thing that may be useful. I have considered, and find, That the Foundation, in which all Authors, both Ancient and Modern, agree, and whereupon they have hitherto endea∣vour'd to build, (looking upon it as firm and War∣rantable in all Ages) is this, viz. That Opium operates by diminishing or disabling the Spirits (meaning the animal Spirits.) The Ancients affirming, That it did so by an ex∣treme cold Quality, &c. And
The Moderns (who observed it to act, while it is at Stomach, by affecting the Brain, Nerves, Animal Spirits, &c. and concluded no Action was perform'd without Contact) infer'd and agreed, (because no visible Passage could be found from the Stomach to the Head) that it must of absolute necessity act by Fumes, Vapours, Auras, or Effluviums sent up out of the Stomach to the Brain, Nerves, &c. So that all the remaining Question among the Moderns is, Which Way those Fumes or Vapours do the Feat? all allowing the Fumes do it. One saying, That they stuff the Pores of the Brain, and so hinder the Generation of Animal Spirits. A Second, That they constringed, and closed the Pores together, thereby hindering the said Genera∣tion. A Third, That they fix'd, and coagulated the Animal Spirits; as Wedelius, and others. A Fourth, That they clouded the Animal Spirits. A Fifth, That they acted as a Poison; as Willis, and many others. A Sixth, That they clog'd the Animal Spirits, by adhering to them, &c. Not knowing, nor (I think) caring what they said, so they humour'd their own Imaginations, and Hypothesises; tho' utterly incapable of solving the Effects of Opium, especially its most constant, proper, and genuine Effects. For, how can a cold Quality, (which Opium never had) cause a gay and brisk Humour, Bravery, Magnanimity, Euphory in Labour, Promptitude to Venus, &c. And, how can Clouds of Vapours hinder the Generation of Ani∣mal Spirits, by stuffing or constringing the Pores of the Brain? Poisoning, fixing, coagulating, clogging or
clouding the Animal Spirits, cause a fine Ovation thereof, a Gay, Brave, Couragious, and Magnani∣mous Disposition, Euphory, Promptitude to Venery, Serenity, Expediteness in Management, &c. Which are (as has been said) the constant and proper Effects of Opium. Nor, indeed, was any of those Authors so fool∣hardy as to attempt it; Why then did they write, and trouble the World to peruse their Books, when they were so far from explaining the Properties of Opium, that they scarce ever durst mention them, nor set their Hypothesises, and them, as much as in View of one another? Was not this a tacit Confession of the Incompetency of their Suppositions? I beg Pardon for calling them theirs, (tho' they themselves do) for I cannot of∣fer them a greater Abuse, than laying their Spu∣rious and lame Brats at their Doors. Tho' one scarce need say any more of them, yet, lest I be thought presumptuous, or saucy, for so much as offering to suspect the general Foundation of all the famous Authors that ever lived, (as Ga∣len, Avicenna, &c. among the Ancients; Etmul∣ler, Willis, &c. among the Moderns;) 1. I will shew you very just Causes to suspect the Insufficiency of the general Foundation, viz. That Opium diminishes or disables the Spirits. 2. I will prove, That it does not do it by a Cold Quality. 3. That it does not do it by Vapours, Fumes, Aura, or any such Way. 4. That it diminishes, or disables the Spirits, by no Means whatsoever.
Which diminishing, or disabling of the Spirits, Cold Quality, and Fumes, (or Aura) comprehend the Foundations of all Opinions concerning Opium, that ever I read, or heard of; and consequently if those Two Fundamental Opinions be refuted, all the Superstructures that have been (in this Case) must fall to the Ground.
CHAP. VIII. The Author shews Iust Causes of his Suspi∣cion, that all Authors have gone upon a wrong Foundation in their Disquisitions of the Cause of the Operation of Opium. I Have shewn you, That the general Foundation of both Ancient, and Modern Authors, is, That Opium doth diminish, or disable the Spirits. And now I will plainly shew Iust Causes of my Suspicion of its Insufficiency, which are these: 1. I observe, That all Learned Men are, to this day, highly dissatisfied as to the Cause, and Man∣ner of the Operation of Opium, notwithstanding all that has been written concerning it; and that it is the common Cry on all Hands, that none has illustrated the Operations of Opium to any Purpose, or given any Satisfaction therein; and therefore Learned Physicians are still as much upon the En∣quiry, as ever they were. It is much more Civil and Reasonable, to suspect the Foundation, that all former Authors have built upon, than a general Failure in all the most Judi∣cious Master Builders, that ever endeavour'd to build thereon; for if all the best Architects of the whole World fail to erect a firm Superstructure upon any one Foundation, what can we think, but that the Foundation is infirm? especially when (as in our Case) no Way (that Care, Iudgment, Perspi∣cacity, and Wit could invent, or think of) has
been left untried to build thereon; so that (tho' I modestly call it a Cause of Suspicion) it amounts almost (if not altogether) to a Demonstration, that the Foundation that all Authors have gone upon is naught. Would not any considering Man, when he sees all the Iudicious Architects of the World fail to erect a firm Building upon a certain Foandation, seek for another? Therefore who can blame me, if I do? and not blame them, that did not? The meanest: Bricklayer, or Carpenter, that should be guilty of such Stupidity, as to attempt to build upon such a Foundation as always deceiv'd the Builders, would be thought too great a Blockhead to be employ'd in Building. 2. I observed, That most Men do (notwith∣standing that Foundation is agreed upon) think it impossible to explain the inticate, various, con∣tradictory Phenomena's, and mysterious Effects of Opium; sitting contented, and perswaded, that it operates by an occult Quality, wholly unexplicable, and particularly reserved from the Knowledge of Mankind: But Nature works Mechanically in Weight, Measure, &c. Therefore it is more than probable, that it is only their being upon a wrong Bottom makes it seem absolutely occult; for it is impos∣sible to find a thing, where it is not; or to build firmly upon an insufficient Foundation; whereas had it been right, and true, it is not to be imagined, but some or other would have thereupon done something, that would have stood against all Winds, and Storms; which none have done. 3. I observed, That none durst venture to lay the whole, no; nor one half of the Burthen of the Phinomena's, or Effects of Opium, upon that Foundation; foreseeing (doubtless) that it could not bear them, and that if they laid any more Weight thereon, the whole would totter, and fall to the Ground. The Project in every Hypothesis is to per∣swade
Men of the Truth thereof; and the only way to do it, is to solve all Phenomena's thereby; for if it fails but in one, it is an infallible sign of its Insufficiency: There was no Reason to omit any of the Phenomena's, if they could have discern'd, that the Hypothesis would have born them; there∣fore (as has been intimated) it implies a Confes∣sion of its Incompetency. 4. I observed, That ancient Authors writ of O∣pium, before it came to be of common and general Use in the Day-time with Healthy Persons, (as it since is in many Nations) to cause a gay, pleasant, and good Humour, take off Sadness, Melancholy, and Anxiety; To cause Assurance, Boldness, Courage, Bravery, Magnani∣mity, Euphory, or easie undergoing of Labour, Iour∣neys; Promptitude in Business, Expediteness, and Se∣renity; To excite to Venery, &c. Which Effects cannot be explained by that Supposition of disabling the Spirits, and that they used Opium only Medi∣cinally for the sake of such other Effects as might be tollerably well explicated by that Hypothesis; so that they had not any Occasion, nor Inducement to look any farther. The Effects they gave it for was only; 1. To cause Sleep. 2. To take off Pain. 3. To stop Fluxes. 4. To Compose the Spirits. 5. To cause Perspiration, and Sweat. All which are not inconsistent with the Hypothesis of diminishing or disabling the Spirits, as the other are, and therefore might well deceive them; For, First, Sleep is caused by diminishing the Spirits by Labour, Watching, &c. as is most notorious over the whole World; so other Things that diminish the Spirits, as Bleeding, Vomiting, Purging, and many other Causes of diminishing thereof, do in∣cline us to Sleep.
Secondly, Indolence, or Exemption from Pain, is caused by nothing more than want of Spirits, as in Paralytical Cases, Stupor, Obstructions, or Com∣pressions of the Nerves, Syncopes, Leipothymies, De∣liquiums, Faintings after Bleeding, and Sleep; which (as was said) is so much caused by loss of Spi∣rits, &c. Thirdly, Fluxes are stopt, or moderated, by no∣thing better than Sleep, which generally (as was said) proceeds from loss of Spirits; What also stops, or moderates Fluxes, more than want of the Sense of the Irritation of Humours? And what takes away Sense more than want of Spirits? Thus want of Sense by the absence of the Spirits, in Paralytical Intestines, stops Fluxes; Thus fails a Paralytical Bladder to express the Urine. So a Palsie of the Membranes, that include the Glan∣dules, must (as in Sleep, which relaxes them) stop, or moderate all Defluxions, Catarrhs, &c. because they are not sensible o the Irritation of the Humour by Quantity, or Quality; which Irritation causes the Defluxions or Catarrhs, by ex∣citing the Membranes, to contract, and thereby to squeeze out the Humours contain'd in the Glan∣dules. Fourthly, The Composure of the Spirits is pro∣cured mainly by Sleep, which all loss of Spirits (as was shewn) inclines us to; so Bleeding, which diminishes the Spirits, compose their Fury in Fe∣vers, Deliriums, Madness, &c. Fifthly, Perspiration is caused by nothing more than Sleep; for we perspire twice as much in Sleep, as when we watch, as is most manifestly demonstrable by the Statick Experiments of Weighing People; nor is Perspiration ever so great as in Deliquiums, Syncopes, Leipothymies, and such like deadish Cases, which are caused by di∣minishing, or disabling of the Spirits, nay, 'tis so in
Animals, quite dead for a little time while they are hot, as is evident by like Statick Demonstra∣tions: The true Cause of which is Relaxation of the Pores, Skin, &c. for want of Spirits to contract, and constringe them; as shall be fully proved here∣after (by God's Help.) These Things were (doubtless) the occasion of that Hypothesis, of diminishing or disabling the Spirits by Opium; but how likely are they to err by establishing it without any consideration of its enlivening, encouraging, and brisk Effects, as Ova∣tion of the Spirits, Gaity, Bravery, Magnanimity, Euphory, Promptitude to Venery, &c. which can never be solved by Diminution, or Disability of the Spirits, till Depression and Elevation thereof are reconcilable, and consistent at the same time in the same subject; which can never be till Disabling and Not Disabling are the same thing? Have not we then good Reason to suspect that general Founda∣tion of diminishing or disabling the Spirits by Opium, which was laid by such as never considered any thing of its generous and sprightly Effects, which (as has been shewn) are its constant, and therefore most proper and genuine Effects? Who can doubt then but they must err, in laying a Foundation quite contrary to the very Properties of Opium? 5. I observed, That all our Modern Authors, and Physicians, receiving the Knowledge of Opium, its Effects, and Uses, from those Ancients, do use it only for the same Ends and Purposes as they did; and that our Modern Authors, living in these We∣stern Parts of the World, very remote from the Eastern Countreys, where it is used commonly, and in large Doses, by People in Health, in the day∣time, to enliven, invigorate, and encourage them, and cause the brave, generous, and magnanimous
Effects aforementioned, viz. Courage, Euphory, &c. and finding no Physician that went before them, to mention these noble, cordial, and glorious Effects; and, if they did at any time slightly touch them, to do it with all imaginable Disregard, Neglect, and Contempt, as if there was no Heed to be taken of them, but as idle Tales, and improbable Stories, be∣ing contrary, and utterly (as they thought) in∣consistent and irreconcilable with the daily, and most notorious Effects of Opium, observed among us; and to the Universal Opinion of all Authors, who stated Opium to be a Diminisher or Disabler of the Spirits, which could not produce (as they con∣cluded) such contradictory, and therefore (to them) utterly incredible Effects, and fabulons Flams, ari∣sing (as they fansied) from some silly Errours, as want of due Observation in Travellers, mistaken Discourses, and the like; so that (as the saying is) they let them in at one Ear, and out at the other, there being no such contrary Effects of any one Thing to be observed in the whole Creation; and they being well assured of the other Effects by daily Experience, and having never observed those lively Effects, (for the several plain Reasons that you'll meet in the following Paragraphs) had no cause to alter their Opinion, when all Things seem'd to them to make for their Hypothesis, for want of a Notion of those brisk Effects. 6. I observed, That those brisk Effects of Opium were not taken notice of by our Physicians, nor indeed, (all things considered) do I well see how they should, without getting out of the common Road of observing, which is sometimes (as I have found) very useful upon such Occasions. For, First, Opium is seldom (if ever) given in these Western Nations, but to Sick People, (as the An∣cients did) who are utterly incapable of those
brisk Effects, or (at least) to any remarkable de∣gree, that might call for a particular or special Advertency, or Attenion; without which, they passed off as they came, without any Reflection thereupon; and so signified nothing, as if they had never happen'd. Secondly, We (as the Ancients did) generally give Opium when People are going to Bed, by which means all Opportunity of Observation is lost; because darkness, and being alone, hide, or hinder the shewing of any such Effects; and the Physician (whose only Business it is to be more curious in such Matters) is gone to his own Rest, tho', if he were present, not likely to take any Observations of such Matters, whereof he has least Thoughts, or Belief, as being, in his Opinion, contrary to all Reason, Sense, Experience, and the Opinion of all Authors, of the Stupefactive Quality of Opium, in which they all agree. Thirdly, Opium is (as was said) given in these Countreys to cause Sleep, or such Effects to which Sleep conduces, as composing the Spirits, causing Indolence, stopping Fluxes, and promoting Perspirati∣on; and therefore always given with all careful Directions, and Injunctions, that may conduce to that End, as going to Bed, lying still, putting out Lights, keeping Silence, &c. which concurring with the Opium, cause Sleep, which is utterly incon∣sistent with shewing any of those lively Effects, that belong only to a waking Person to do; so that all Opportunity of Observation is utterly pre∣cluded. Now, (all the Premises considered) it cannot be conceiv'd, that such as set their mind upon con∣trary Effects, and expect no other, much less con∣trary ones, (against which also they are highly prejudiced by their Reason, Experience, and Read∣ing)
should observe such brisk Effects, if they did happen; and how can a brisk Humour, Courage, easie undergoing of Labour, Promptitude to Venus, &c. be observed in Sick, and Infirm People, lying in Bed, alone, and in the dark, or (which renders it utterly impossible) while they are asleep, and the Thing it self disbelieved, and esteem'd con∣trary to Common Sense, and the Universal Senti∣ment of the Learned, and all others. There∣fore, 7. If (after all) any such brisk Effect did ever happen, it must be either not regarded, or if observed, (which is no way likely, as was shewn) you may be sure (for the many plain Reasons, and Causes aforesaid) that it was not imputed to Stu∣pifying Opium, (as all esteem it) but to any other Cause, or Accident, rather than to a Thing well known to have quite contrary Effects. For In∣stance: If the Sick Person happen'd to be good humour'd, (of which he is seldom capable, and utterly in∣capable of all or most of the other brisk Effects, as Euphory, Promptitude to Venus, Exertion of Courage, &c.) it was either passed by as an ordinary Thing of Course, and so not heeded, or else imputed to Refreshment by Sleep, Ease from Pain, or some A∣mendment as to the Disease; or, indeed, to any Thing, rather than Dispiriting and Stupifying Opium, that is so far (in all Opinion) from exciting the Spirits, that all affirm, conclude, and agree, that it diminishes or disables them. The like is to be said of any of the lively Ef∣fects, in case they happen, and are observ'd; Tho' I do not see how they can, so (at least) as any Stander by will refer it to Opium; besides, that as to some of the brisk Effects, (especially that of
Venery) greater Doses are requisite, to render it any thing remarkable, than are used in these Western Parts, and that Modesty would much hinder the discovery of this Effect. Is it not therefore very manifest, that I had great cause to▪suspect, that both Ancient and Mo∣dern Physicians consider'd things by halves, since they did not take the most genuine Properties into their Consideration, and that they laid their Foun∣dation upon the most contrary Effects to them? It follows then, That the general Supposition of all the Learned can no more solve the true Properties of Opium in any Probability, than giving the Reason why Fire hardens Clay can explain why it softens Wax; The Reason, did I say! I should have said, than giving the wrong Reason why it hardens Clay, shews how it softens Wax; for it will appear in the following Chapters, that they gave no right Reason for any Effect of Opium, even those they ever allow'd to be its Effects; nor laid any true Foundation to explain the least, meanest and plain∣est Effect thereof; forasmuch as all their Suppo∣sitions are so false, that there never were any such Things as they lay down to explain the Effects of Opium, viz. 1. No such Thing as a Cold Quality in Opium. 2. No such Things as Fumes, &c. flying from O∣pium to the Brain, while it is at Stomach. 3. No such Thing as diminishing, or disabling the Animal Spirits by Opium, any way whatsoever. Of which in their Order in the following Chap∣ters.
CHAP. IX. It is proved, That Opium has no Cold Qua∣lity to diminish or disable the Spirits thereby. HAving shewn just Causes of my Suspicion of that Universal Foundation of Opium's Dimi∣nishing or Disabling the Spirits▪ I will now proceed to a more strict Examination thereof, beginning with the Opinion of the Ancients, who affirm'd, That Opium diminished or disabled the Spirits by an extream Cold Quality. I confess that much may be done towards the diminishing, or disabling the Spirits by Opium, if it had such a cold Quality as the Ancients attributed to it; for then it must be such a Coldness, as the coldest Things either actual, or potential, bore no Proportion to; for Ice, Snow, &c. bear no Propor∣tion to it, in causing the same Effects by a cold Quality. It was the manner of the Ancients implicitly to believe, and subscribe to what their great Au∣thors, and Masters in Physick, or Philosophy, taught them; whom they adored as infallible Gods, as soon as their Mortality proved the contrary; which was as absurd, as asserting, Tha Opium, which is one of the hotest Things that Vegetables afford, is extream cold; (blessed be God for our Light in Religion, and Liberty in Philosophy!) There∣fore some such admir'd Authors, or great Masters in Physick, having asserted, that Opium acted by an
extream cold Quality, all did implicitly subscribe to it. The Devil, whom they worship'd, could not (tho' a Deceiver from the Beginning) impose more upon their Faith, than in causing them (for I cannot think but it was some such Evil Power) to believe, that Opium was cold, against all the Evidence of Sense and Experience; he might have as well told them, that Hell Fire had all the Pro∣perties of common culinary Fire, and yet nothing more refreshing by its cold Quality; for as many of our Senses, as can take notice of Heat and Cold, do plainly inform us, that it is very hot in it self, and Effects. For, 1. Its Taste is very bitter, rank, vehemently hot, burning and biting, all which Qualities are infallible Signs of great Heat, and the better the Opium is the more intense are those Qualities; Nay, it is observed, that its very Virtue is strictly combined to, or consisting in those Qualities, especially Bit∣terness, which if lost, the Virtue is gone, as is commonly observed, and easily observable. It was a wise Fetch of Amatus Lusitanus, in Defence of its Cold Quality, to attribute all its Bitterness to Glaucium, that was mixt therewith; whereas Glaucium always gives a yellow Tincture to Water, and Opium a red; but the Opium, that gave no yellow Tincture, was bitter also; yea, that was most bitter, that gave the reddest Tincture; How comes Theban Opium, and indeed all other Opium, to be bitter before any thing is mixt with it? How inadvertently absurd People will be to defend Absurdities; it is pretty to see how they will expose themselves to defend a false Opinion.
2. Its Smell, which is very rank, strong, hot, and such, as Things highly impregnated with Volatile Salt, and Sulphur, (the Two hottest Prin∣ciples in Nature) do afford. It is from Volatile Salt that Cantharides, Pismire, Spear-Wort, Crows∣foot, &c. are so very hot, as to blister, (or exul∣cerate;) and are not all hot Spirits such, upon the account of their Sulphur? as Spirits of Wine, Brandy, &c. 3. The best and strongest Opium will also exul∣cerate, (as all Authors agree) which only Fire, or such Things, as have the Particles of Fire lodged in them, as Lixiviates, &c. or the hottest Things in Nature, will do; as Cantharides, Spear-Wort, &c. It is, 4. For the like Reason, a Psilothrick, or Causer of Hair to fall; which only Lime, Orpment, and the hottest Things, do cause. 5. It is inflammable, which only Sulphurecus Things are. 6. It causes a Sense of a vehement Heat at Sto∣mach, tho' taken but in the Quantity of a Drachm. 7. It causes Driness of the Mouth, and Thirst, tho' taken but in the Quantity of 3 Grains, which nothing does but hot Things. 8. It discusses; and all Discussers are hot, for it is by Heat that they do discuss, as Spirit of Wine, Cummin-Seed, Volatile Salts, and all Hot Spirits. 9. It soon Operates, and in a small quantity, which is an infallible Proof of the Activity of its Parts, which argues Heat, not Cold. 10. It causes a gay, pleasant, and merry Humour, which only Wine, and hot Liquors, &c. do; and one Grain of Opium will cause them as much as several Glasses of Wine, which argues, that its Heat is much greater.
11. I would fain know how, or see any Instance of any Cold Things raising the Spirits, causing Courage, Magnanimity, enabling People to Labour, Iourney, &c. as Wine, hot Liquors, and Opium do. 12. Opium does very much open the Pores, and cause Perspiration, &c. which only Heat, as that in Baths, Bagnios, Hot Houses, and Hot Things do▪ but Cold shuts the Pores, as all know. There∣fore, 13. Opium cures, and prevents Colds; which is another Argument of its Heat. 14. It is a great Aphrodisiack, or Exciter to Ve∣nery, which Cold Things chill; but Hot Things, as Cantharides, Bees, Pismires, Onions, Garlick, Leeks, Rocket, Squills, Horse Radish, Sem. Human. &c. do promote. 15. Nothing causes Indolence, given internally, but Wine, Hot Liquors, &c. (as I can think of) and Opium causes it much after the same manner as Wine does, first causing Mirth, and Iollity, and, upon increase of Quantity, very considerable Indolence. It is true, that Cold will externally cause a Stupor, if it be intense, so as to constringe the Parts, and exclude the Spirits; but otherwise it makes the Feeling more nice, as all know by Experience, because every little Hurt affects us more when we are cold than hot: But this is not the Case of relaxing Opium, which is used inter∣nally to take away Pain, as Wine, &c. 16. Nothing takes away the Effects of Opium (or Drunkeness) better than cold Things inter∣nally, and externally; as acids, dipping in Cold Wa∣ter, &c. 17. Opium relaxes all Parts, which Heat does; and Cold constringes, as was intimated. 18. Wedelius confesses, (tho' it makes against what he says) that he never observed a Soporose
Distemper, where there was not a Preternatural Heat. Opiolog. Lib. 1. Sect. 1. Cap. 12. P. 46. 19. If it causes Sleep by its cold Quality, then all Things, that are cold, would do it proporti∣onably; Cucumers, Purslane, &c. would be so great Hypnoticks, that we should not be able to eat a Drachm of them, but that they would cause a great Sopor; but there is no such thing; and hot Things are much more apt to cause Sleep, or a Sopor, as Wine, hot Spirits, Onions, Garlick, and such like. 20. Opium causes a Redness, or Efflorescence of the Skin, making it sensibly warmer, as Heat, Wine, and Strong Liquors do. 21. It causes also an Itching of the Skin, which only hot Things do. 22. Half a Drachm of Opium in Clysters has caused a violent Heat in the Guts. 23. It stops Diarrheas, or Loosenesses, which Cold causes. 24. It stops Defluxions, Coughs, &c. which Cold causes. 25. To pin up all, its predominant Principles appear, by Autopsie upon its Chymical Analysis, to be Volatile Salt and Sulphur. Besides, this Opinion of the Coldness of Opium is very much exploded, and, indeed, it is so appa∣rently false, and absurd, that I should not have thought it worth while to argue against it, but that it lay so in my way, that regularly I could not well avoid it, without Breach of Order and Me∣thod. I might have added, that it resolves, attenuates, &c. but it is needless to say any more.
It is very false, and erroneous, that it stops Fluxes by incrassating, and binding, which are accounted cold Qualities; if so, how should it stop them when Pounds of Incrassatives and Binders have failed, tho' the Opium was given only in the Quan∣tity of a Grain or Two? How should it stop, or moderate Fluxes, even while it is yet at Stomach, as it most certainly does? It bears (as Etmuller well observes) no Proportion to the Bloud, and Humours, to have any Effect that may be re∣markable upon them, for a Grain is but as 1 to 115200 to the Blood of him that has 20 Pound of Blood, which an ordinary Man has: Besides, How can Altenuatives, Resolvers, and Discussers, incrassate or bind? But, more especially, How can so great a Relaxer of Parts, be a Constringer thereof? That is perfect Contradiction: And how can a meer Sal Volatile Oleosum, in which all its Vertue lies, (as will plainly appear) thicken and bind? The Truth is, that it stops Fluxes (as Sleep doth) by taking away the sense of the Irritation of Humours, which solicite the Parts to con∣tract, and so to extrude and squeese them out; it promotes Perspiration by relaxing the Pores (as Sleep doth;) it also seems to thicken Rheum, (as Sleep doth) because it causing Sleep, or (at least) taking away a sense of the Irritation of the Rheum, is thereby suffered to stay till it thickens by the Heat of the Body; the Irritation also at Windpipe being less, because the Flux of the Rheum is mo∣derated for the Reason aforesaid. But of these Things more fully when we come to explain the Cause or Causes of the Effects of Opium.
CHAP. X. It is proved, That Opium sends no Fumes, &c. from the Stomach to the Head, Brain, &c. and therefore that it does not dimi∣nish, or disable the Spirits, &c. by that means. THO' the Opinion of the Cold of Opium is much exploded, that of Fumes, Vapours, or Aura's, arising from the Opium at Stomach, and moun∣ting up to the Brain, &c. is as much received and embraced; I know none, but such as think it ab∣solutely necessary, considering that it is most cer∣tain, and allow'd by all observing Men, That Opium produces all, or most of its Effects, while it is at Stomach; That the Genus Nervsum is mostly concerned in its Operation; and that (as was said) there is no Operation, or Action, but by Contact: So that the Moderns, acquiescing in the Necessity of its operating that way, because they could conceive no other, (which is no Proof, but a Defect of their Conception) look upon it as invin∣cible and uncontrolable Evience o its operating by Detachments of Fumes, or , sent up to the Brain from the Stomach; which appear'd so undeniably conclusive, that neither the want of a sensible Passage, nor any other Inconvenience, signi∣fied any thing (with them) to the contrary; there∣fore it became an established Foundation by com∣mon Consent; only they differ'd (as was shewn) in the manner how those Fumes produced the Effects of Opium: And well they might, seeing there is no such thing, nor possibility (if they
were) of ever explicating the various Effects of Opium by that means, as will manifestly ap∣pear. I confess, that if Opium operated by such Fumes passing from the Stomach to the Brain, &c. it would be easie to conceive how it should diminish, or disable, nay, utterly ruine the animal Spirits; and indeed impossible rationally to conceive how they could do otherwise: But then the enlivening, invigorating, and encouraging Effects of Opium, which are its constant and most genuine Off spring, would lie upon our hands, without any possibility of giving an account thereof; for certainly dull, heavy, unnatural, undigested, and cloudy Fumes, or Vapours, could not advantage the animal Spi∣rits, cause a Triumph, or Ovation, thereof, at their access, Courage, Serenity, Promptitude, Magnanimity, Euphory, Inclination to Venery, &c. which we are most obliged to regard, as being its most natural and proper Effects. This Opinion of the Moderns does presume, or suppose, (for they prove nothing) First, That Fumes, or Vapours, do readily and freely pass from the Stomach to the Brain, because the gross Fumes (as they call them) of a Grain or two of Opium, always operate before it is out of the Stomach. But they never saw such Fumes pass, nor their Passage, only suppose both; and that meerly upon an Imagination that it must be so, because they (forsooth) cannot conceive any other way by which Opium can affect the Head, Nerves, &c. while it is at Stomach; whereas I can, and shall (God willing) shew them another means, or way, to do it, that is sensible, and not wholly precarious, as theirs is, and that in the meanest manner; because all their Grounds to suppose it, is their Inability to con∣ceive,
or apprehend, what is (as I shall shew) very sensible, nay obvious also. Secondly, They suppose, That such Fumes will serve to solve all the Phoenomena's and Operations of Opium; whereas it is utterly impossible they should solve the enlivening and invigorating Effects there∣of, (as has been shewn, and shall be further pro∣ved, if God permits.) It were easie to evidence, but that it would be tedious and needless, (for their Incompetency to solve the most proper Effects of Opium, is more than enough) that such Fumes, or Vapours, can truly solve no Effect of Opium, unless it be that of Death, or some deadly Symptoms; nay, they will not solve the most likely to be caused by Vapours, viz. Sleep, which all Men (as Wedelius says) al∣low to be the Effect of Fumes, or Vapours, (in his Opiologia, c. 11. p. 35.) Somnum naturalem (says he) omnes concedunt producere suaviores, & blandas , seu Vapores primum  de∣mulcentes, qui cum spiritibus animalibus mixti torpi∣dos quasi illos reddunt: That is, All grant that kind and gentle Fumes do cause natural Sleep, &c. Which is most certainly false; tho' I very much doubt, that this groundless Presumption, which (as he intimates) all embrace, has been a great cause of this airy Imagination of Fumes in the Case of Opium; because Men looked upon Sleep (agreed upon to be caused by Fumes) to be the prime, lea∣ding, and most proper Effect of Opium; which is also false, it being but a meer Accident, (as has been shown) and when it happens, generally requires lying, or sitting still, to assist it; whereas the Watching, that is the Effect of Opium, requires no help, and cannot be put off (as Sleep can, by Motion, Action, &c.) notwithstanding all Endea∣vours to the contrary. Now I would know of
any Man, which is the most proper and natural Effect of any Cause, That which nothing can hin∣der, or that which every Action can? But I run too far upon this matter, which belongs more aptly to that part of this Book, that explains all the Effects of Opium; and so must return to that of Fumes, which do not cause natural Sleep, as manifestly appears, 1. Because that which causes natural Sleep, must, in all Reason, (as it is always in the wise Work of Nature) bear a Proportion thereto; but Fumes (supposing their Being) bear no Proportion to our Sleep. Certainly a working Labourer, that toils all the Day, must spend the Fumes of his Body in the highest degree; and feeding upon dry Bread and Cheese, must breed fewest Fumes; yet none sleeps better or sweeter than he. The like is to be said of a travelling Man, a tired Person, &c. who often fall asleep before they eat or drink to renew their Fumes, which they had spent in an extraordinary manner. Why Sleep, that is de∣sign'd for Refreshment and Recruit, should depend upon Fumes, no Man can tell; for then our Refreshment would wholly depend thereon, and no Man have any Recruit by Sleep, but in propor∣tion thereunto. Who dares accuse our Wise and Good Maker of such Contrivances, who in Nature always proportions Things to the Exigencies there∣of? and therefore Sleep not to Fumes, but to that which was impair'd in us for want thereof; which is always contriv'd by Wise Nature (if you'll ob∣serve it) to be the prompting Cause to the Recruit; and then Proportion is duly observ'd, because we are prompted exactly according to the Exigence or Necessity of Nature, as becomes the Wisdom of our Creator and Preserver. This Rule (if duly at∣tended to) will easily, speedily, and certainly
lead you to the Knowledge of the true natural Causes of Hunger, Thirst, Inclination to Sleep, and all such Calls for Restauration. All which I could soon satisfie you in, but that it is not my Business at present, and that it will too much anticipate my designed Tract of Animal Mechanism. Nor doth Labour it self bear any exact Proportion thereunto, because many healthy People, that are idle all day, sleep long, soundly, and sweetly, every night, as well as Labourers: So that (in short) it must be somewhat that belongs to Watching as such; for Sleep generally bears the best Proportion to Watching. If we watch much, or little, our Sleep bears some Proportion thereto; tho' there may be in this, as well as in Hunger, Thirst, &c. Accidents, that cause the Promptitude to be more or less, and so vary the true natural Propor∣tion; all which have the Nature of Diseases, as canine Appetites, Coma's, Caros, preternatural Thrists, &c. What it is that Watching causes to prompt us to Sleep, must be some Impair made thereby as such, and not the foolish Conceit of Fumes: And it were easie for me to illustrate what it is, but that it will require some Sheets of Paper, and (as I said before) anticipate my Discourse of Animal Mechanism, which I hoped to have published be∣fore this Book, and would have been most conve∣nient, because the Principles therein stated may serve to explain the Effects of Opium; but that the want of a few Experiments has (to my Grief) hi∣therto delay'd it; and therefore I must be put to much Trouble in this Work for want thereof, be∣cause I am resolved not to spare my self, in order to satisfie the Reader in this great and unexplicated Mystery.
2. If Vapours were the cause of natural Sleep, it is impossible that the prick of a Pin, or a sharp Sound, &c. should awake one ten or twenty times in an Hour; for either the Prick must in an in∣stant discuss all the Fumes in being, which is im∣possible to be imagined, and they as often return to cause Sleep again; or intercept their Motion from the Stomach to the Head, which no Man can have any Conception of the Efficacy of the Pin, or Sound, so to do: Or they must both discuss and intercept the Fumes, (which indeed if the case were such, would be necessary to make a clear Awa∣king) which is yet far more unconceivable. What paltry Trifles does the World embrace, instead of Truth and Reason! 3. Several Persons (whereof I am one) do awake in a minute or two after they first fall asleep in Bed at night; which would be absolutely im∣possible, if Fumes caused Sleep; for the Fumes would increase more and more, and make one more and more remote from waking. 4. Why should warm Baths, Fomentations, Feet∣washes, Head-washes, warm moist Weather, the Act of Venery, the Pleasure of sweet Melody, gentle rubbing of the Head in a pleasant manner, scratching the Back where it itches, and all gentle Pleasures that are consistent with lying, or sitting still, which do all cause a very free Perspiration of Fumes at the Pores, (that are then most certainly opened by all those Causes, as may be proved by statick Demonstration, Magnifying Glasses, &c.) cause Sleep, seeing they all cause a spending of the Fumes? Obj. Some half-witted, unthinking Caviller may say, That such Things stir up the Vapours, &c.
Answ. What such mean by Vapours stirr'd, is not easily determinable; but this I know, that all stir of Humours, or any other thing, hinders Sleep; and that the longer such Causes of open∣ing the Pores, and consequently of perspiring Fumes do last, the more we are inclin'd by them to Sleep; so that the more our Fumes have been spent, the more we are inclined to sleep; which is a strange Contradiction, if Fumes be the cause of Sleep. I can but smile to think how most Physicians come to call several things Vapours: First, they say, that Sleep is from Vapours; then call every thing Vapours (right or wrong) that inclines us to sleep, by reason of that false Supposition: How then comes Camphire not to be a great Causer of Sleep, that is so apt to evaporate? 5. Fear, Sorrow, Grief, Melancholy, Depression of Spirits, Cold, &c. do most certainly close the Pores, (as appears by statick Experiments) by which means Vapours are much crowded in the Body; yet all such Grievances do hinder Sleep, as they al∣so do the Effects of Opium and Drunkenness: There∣fore they do not proceed from Fumes, as the World imagines; for then these things that crowd in the Fumes and Vapours, would promote, not hinder Sleep. 6. If Fumes are the cause of Sleep, then are the cause of Sleep and Vertigo's (as the Vaporanians allow) the same, it follows then that we could ne∣ver sleep without a Vertigo. 7. Many (as Dr. Willis says) eat their Meat, take their Drink, &c. as other People, yet do not sleep at all for many Weeks together; which were impossible, if the Fumes of Meat and Drink caused Sleep; for they, by eating and drinking,
must have those Fumes, and consequently Sleep, as other People, if that were true. Thirdly, They suppose and take it for granted, (which I do not, for I know the contrary) That Opium, while it is at Stomach, can affect the Brain, &c. no other way but by Fumes; which is a most groundless Supposition: For, 1. How should a Lump of Curd at Stomach, or the Hast of a Knife swallow'd, and many such things, which can send no Fumes to the Head, cause Convulsions, Head-achs, Vertigo's, Syncopes, Leipothymies of the whole Man, Manias, Furors, &c. if there were not another way for things to affect the Nervosum Genus, &c. while at Stomach, besides sending up Vapours to do it? But of this matter, to shew how a thing at Stomach may af∣fect the Brain, and the whole System of the Nerves, &c. and how Opium does it without Fumes, the 17, 18, 19, 20, &c. Chapters will shew you at large: Therefore I shall say no more of this at present, for it is fit for us first to overthrow that Supposition of Fumes and Vapours, before we establish our own. For farther Satisfaction then, as to that general Supposition of Fumes, let us duly and fully consider Things; for it is not a slight matter to proceed against a General Opinion, that has continued through all Ages, or to wipe off the Prejudices ac∣quired thereby. Observe, 1. That the Brain is a Principal Part. 2. That it is very soft, tender, and next to a Fluid. 3. That very small, fine, and gentle Things do highly offend it, as the Effluvia's of sweet, or ill∣scented Things, causing hysterick and epileptical Fits, Syncopes, Faintings, &c. It is also notorious
among us Physicians, that a little Fume, scarce sen∣sible as to Quantity or Quality, rising from a Toe, Finger, &c and arriving at the Brain, causes dread∣ful epileptical Fits, Vertigo's, &c. 4. That our Wise and Provident Creator, has therefore secured and fortified all the Avenues of the Brain, in a more particular manner, by seve∣ral Circumvallations, viz. First, With the Pia Mater. Secondly, With the Dura Mater, called so from its Hardness, Solidity, and Strength. Thirdly, With a strong Skull, of a round or arch∣ed Figure. Fourthly, With the Pericranium. All which belong to it particularly, besides other Integuments common to it, with other Parts; as, 1. The Skin. 2. The Cuticle. 3. The Membrana Carnosa. 4. The Periostium: All which do sur∣round it; and after all, it is Thatched (as it were) with Hair. 5. That the same Providence has taken care (which is very observable) that none of the Ob∣jects of Sensation, nor (probably) any Particle, or Effluvium, that flies from them, should ever reach the Brain, but only bare Impulses, and they not immediately convey'd, but by the Intervention of a fine, tenuious, soft, gentle, and most agreeable Aura, viz. the Animal Spirits, lest any Offence should be given in the least manner to this most tender, delicate, principal Part, and Royal Seat of the Soul; all which Care had never been, with∣out Necessity; for God and Nature do nothing in vain.
And if you'll duly consider the Organs of Sen∣sation, that are near the Brain, you'll find that they are contrived as Shutters, to exclude all ex∣traneous Particles from the Brain; for Impulses might have been contrived without their Interven∣tion, because they do not alter or improve the Im∣pulses received from Objects; for if they did, we should not have true notice of Things: And see∣ing they do not alter, or improve the Impulses, of what Use should they be but to exclude extraneous Particles, Eumes, Effluvia's, &c. For instance: The tremulous Motion of the Air; in the case of Sound, would have as truly hit the Auditory Nerve, or Membrane, without the Tym∣pan; and very often much truer without it, be∣cause of the several Faults and Disorders that it is liable to: Yet so necessary was it thought by the best of Iudges, who cannot err, that it was ra∣ther to be placed there, with all its Inconveniences that might follow, than any way expose the Brain, though to the most gentle of Bodies, viz. the Air, by which (in all probability) the Animal Spirits themselves are nourished, or su∣stained. Were it not that extraneous Particles, or Air, would offend the Brain, What need is there of the Tympan, when we know as well by Experience, as by the aforesaid Reasons, that a Dog, &c. can hear as well without it, upon the first taking it off, but that the Hearing will afterward decay, because the Brain, &c. being exposed, will be in∣jured? What is evident in the case of the Ear, may be made so as to the Nose and Eyes; for though some of my Readers may not easily conceive it, the Re∣presentation of Things might have been conveyed by Reflections and Refractions of Light, without
excluding the Air, but that it was more conve∣nient and safe for the Brain, and Optick Nerve, (which is much the same matter with the Brain, and a Production thereof) that the Air should be excluded. 6. Notwithstanding all this Care to exclude extraneous Particles, how fine soever, we do find that those very Impulses, conveyed by the Ani∣mal Spirits themselves, in the most gentle manner imaginable, do often offend the Brain. Now fairly consider the great Excellency and Use of the Brain, viz. to separate the Animal Spirits, to accommodate the Soul with a fit Seat for it; its Tenderness and Softness to be next to Liquidity; how carefully it is guarded with about nine or ten Cir∣cumvallations, or considerable Integuments; that those we commonly call Organs of Sensation, are contrived for Shutters out (or Excluders) of the least extraneous Particles, Effluvia's, or Aura; that the least Fume that rises from any Part, and arrives at the Brain, causes such terrible and dis∣mal Effects, and that most gentle touches of the Animal Spirits do offend it, so as to cause tragical Events, as hysterick Fits, Vertigo's, &c. Is it likely, that notwithstanding the Considerableness, Tenderness, Use, and Excellency of the Brain, the extraordi∣nary Providence used in guarding it from Efflu∣via's, or extraneous Particles, how fine soever, and the apparent Mischiefs that the least Fume, nay, bare Impulses, presented by the Animal Spirits, do cause; that the same Providence that so guarded it (which does nothing in vain) should, after all its Care and nice Circumspection to exclude the least Fume, &c. permit, and freely let loose upon it, and into it, whole and even continual Gusts, Blasts, and Vulcano's, of acid, acrimonious, putrid, hot, stinking, corrosive Fumes, Vapours and Steams,
arising from glutted, debauch'd, and surfeited Sto∣machs, containing all imaginable Trash, Hodge∣podge, Vermine, Choler, &c. sure it is much fitter quite to discharge and rid Nature of them at Mouth, or rather send them downward with their fit Companions, the stinking Ordure and Excre∣ments, than prefer them to the Highest and Noblest Part of the Animal and Sacred Mansion of the Soul. For if there be so ready, free, open, and con∣stant a Passage (sensible, or insensible) for the Fumes of Opium, which never fails of its Effects; then certainly must the Passage be alike free to all other Fumes from the Stomach, seeing they are so to those gross, venomous, and pernicious Fumes of Opium, as Willis, and most of the modern and an∣cient Physicians do state them to be: Then fare∣wel Soul, Brain, Life, and all; for it is not con∣ceivable that the Man can hold out one Hou under such horrid and dismal Circumstances, and dreadful Eructations of rude and crude Fumes, who could not bear the arrival of the least Vapour, scarce sensible in Quantity or Quality, arising from any other Part; Or is it a peculiar Priviledge that the Stomach has, thus to send Farts with their Heels upward, (as Belching is call'd) without any offence, to perfume the Soul's Presence-Chamber, (saving your Presence however?) Foh! for shame! What sort of Opinions are these? What thick, stinking, and dark Clouds, Scotomies, and Stu∣pors, must the Opiniators be under, by their own Consent? 7. If this were the case, no Part in the whole Body would be in such a miserable state as the Chief; for the Rectum, or Colon, are fitted and fortified by Nature to bear such Things; so is not the tender Brain.
8. What Horse's Brain, much less Humane one, could bear, incessant Rakings, Penetrations, Stuf∣fings of such unnatural, indigested, heterogeneous, rugged, acid, acrimonious, putrid, and impetuous Fumes? If Gutta cavat Lapidem non vi sed saepe cadendo; What would become of the tender Brain, thus udely rubb'd and grated, all the days of our Lives, if it could hold out any? for it is incre∣dible it should. 9. How would the Pores of that soft Substance, which have no less Office (as 'tis universally re∣ceived) than to separate Animal Spirits, (which are or should be the finest and most subtile, te∣nuious, and principal Things in an Animal, next the Soul it self) be discomposed, torn, dilated, stuff∣ed? What a blessed Sretion of Animal Spirits (if any) would there be! 10. It is observed by all, That the Brain, tho' very soft, receives the least Change of any Part of the Body; which could never be (considering its ten∣derness) if it were so raked by all sorts of Fumes; for then doubtless such a Body would be most changed of any in Colour, Substance, Texture, Big∣ness, &c. What would become of Memory, and indeed of all the Faculties of the Brain? Can a soft, yielding Substance, continually discomposed, preserve Impressions made thereon? If Fumes flow'd continually through the Brain, they must wear out all Impression, yea, and the Brain it self, in a short time. 11. It would be very dangerous to eat or drink, if the Brain must suffer so much by the Fumes of Meat, Wine, &c. It would be hard to know whe∣ther it was best to eat or not, for both must be fatal.
12. What a vast Difference should we observe▪ as to Serenity of Mind, &c. when empty and full▪ For in this last case, the Brain must be all in a Cloud, or a Cloud in it, or both; yet are Men much more seren, prompt, and fit for any thing, after some Glasses of Wine, than before, and after moderate Eating, than when Hungry, which makes them faint, peevish, ill-humour'd, and listless. 13. If the Vapours, or Fumes, of Opium, flying up to the Brain, caused all its Effects, it is very strange that our Fumi venduli had not long since found out the Mountebank▪ Gambol of standing up∣on their Heads, to prevent all Mischief from Opium taken in a great Dose; for Fumes in a warm living Body would not descend into the Head. I wonder they did not find out such an easie and natural Con∣sequence of their Hypothesis, if true; they might then have boldly mounted any Stage, freely taken Opium in the sight of the admiring Rabble; their Summersets, Going upon their Hands, &c. would have secured them, and turn'd Danger topsie-turvy by the help of a comical Gesture. This is indeed somewhat to purpose, if it succeeds; if not, I should think 'twere enough to ridicule their Hypothesis out of all Credit, without any farther Arguments. I dare join Issue with them upon that Point, that it will not succeed, though a necessary Consequence of their Opinion, if true; wherein they will have this Advantage, That they'll confess with one that never did (or will) try it, as being well assured of the Falsity of both the Hypothesis, and the Experiment, without such a Trial of Skill. Now I think that I have said enough, and would willingly give over arguing, and spending any more Time to confute an Hypothesis so absurd, that it must needs appear so to any regular
Thinker without my Help; but all are not such, and the Prejudices general and inveterate, and of some thousands of Years standing, having conti∣nued through all Ages to this day; and I would fain quite put out this false Light, that (like Will of the Wisp) has brought many a Man into the Pit of Destruction, or Grave, while Physicians were guided thereby. Therefore it being no slight Work to undeceive many, and a very good Work (if possible) to undeceive all; I will (left what I have said be not sufficient to that end) add some∣what more to the same purpose; though (I doubt) some will not be convinced till I shew them how Things while at Stomach, may cause all the Ef∣fects of Opium, by a sensible Operation, without the Help of Fumes, Vapours, Effluvia's, Aura, or any any such thing; which have been the Asylum of the short-sighted, that could see no other Means, and therefore (as was said) concluded Things must be as they thought, presuming that nothing could be that they did not see. A special Infe∣rence, and a very improving one, which must cause People never to seek for any thing! For why should they, that think there is nothing but what they see, look any farther? To proceed then: 14. It is agreed on all hands, (as I take it) That the Animal Spirits are not generated till there is an Appulse of the Bloud at the Brain: Can it there∣fore be imagined, That Indulgent and Wise Na∣ture should contrive a speedier Way to destroy, di∣minish, or disable the Spirits, by Fumes and Vapours out of the Stomach, than to generate them? These are not the Ways of Equal Nature, which destroy and generates by the same Road; so that if Ani∣mal Spirits are generated by the Bloud, they are diminished by some Defect therein; as want of
Matter in the Bloud for that purpose; the Bloud not arriving at the Brain, and the like. Note, That I spoke in the last Paragraph of di∣minishing, (or destroying) not bare disabling the Spirits; for the Spirits, or sensitive Soul, may be depressed (or disabled) for some time, and exci∣ted, or elevated, by other means than that of the Bloud, as by Pleasure or Displeasure, Ioy or Grief, &c. Thus good News, or the Pleasure of any of the Senses, enliven, invigorate, or elevate the Spi∣rits, or sensitive Soul, in a moment; this is the way that God has provided for us upon sudden Exigen∣cies, Deliquiums, Lepothymies, &c. and thus Cor∣dials work so speedily (as you'll find hereafter;) so may there be a sudden Depression of the Spirits, as by ill News, Pain, &c. which (if you'll be pleased to remember) will much illustrate Things here∣after. 15. The ordinary Strainers of the Body are so ordered, that they will not admit Particles of ano∣ther Figure, especially if larger than the proper Particles; much more should it be so with the Principal Strainer of the whole Body, (I mean the Brain) both for its safety, and of the whole, which depends upon the Animal Spirits, that are strai∣ned, or separated, from the Bloud in the Brain; therefore the Particles of Opium, which are esteem'd gross by all, (however are more so than the most tenuious Animal Spirits) cannot enter in∣to the Pores of the Brain, to diminish or disable the Animal Spirits, in case its Fume arrived there. 16. It was never the Method of Nature to send Things crude, unprepared, and undigested, into the inmost and principal Recesses and Parts of the Body, without passing gradually by the several
Digestions, Concoctions, Changes, Percolations, Cir∣culations, &c. preparatory thereunto; therefore it will not permit crude and indigested Fumes any access to the Brain, till they have (as it were) per∣formed their Quarentine elsewhere; nor will Na∣ture, which always acts consentaneous to it self, provide any Passage for such rude and crude Foreign∣ers and Strangers, to ravage the principal Part of an Animal. 17. They cannot pass by the Arteries, which carry nothing out of the Stomach, but all into it, or towards it, and that with a violent Mo∣tion, which opposes any thing that would pass that way. 18. Nor by the Veins, which carry nothing in∣to the Brain; but if they enter'd the Veins at Sto∣mach, they must thence pass into the Right Ven∣tricle of the Heart, where being rarefied by Heat, they must take up much room, and sadly discom∣pose the Motion of the Bloud, and also enter this principal Part in a crude condition, (tho' much better able to bear them than the Brain) then must they pass into the Lungs, where you may be sure they will be so saucy as to take up the uppermost Room; and how they will be brought down again into the Left Ventricle of the Heart, (which they must vouchsase to do, before they can get into the Brain) none can tell: There then must they stick, and cause an Asthma, unless the Man has the good Luck to be rid of these Rovrs by ∣thing, and then (Joy be with them! as there wi be, when they are gone) they are lost, and never arrive at the Brain: And if it could be conceived, that they condescended to come down from the Lungs, (contrary to their Levity, which is not to be thought) what Pranks must they play in  Left Ventricle of the Heart, and what at  considering it cannot bear the
has been shewn;) whereas in this Case there must be a continual Stream thereof, and conse∣quently a discontinuance of the Bloud, and its Mo∣tion. See then how little Thought they must have, that assert it is convey'd with the Bloud ei∣ther to the Veins or Arteries! 19. Nor by the Lympheducts; for then they must, contrary to their natural Levity, descend into the Receptaculum Chyli, and out of the Sub∣clavials into the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and afterward run all that wild Risque mentioned in the last Paragraph, which was shewn to be im∣possible. 20. Nor by the Nerves; for then they must either run up in the Road of the Animal Spirits, or in some By-way. If they passed by the Road of the Spirits, then must the Spirits be stopp'd for that time, (which is no short one) and we suffer a Pa∣ralysis of the Stomach all that time, or be much distur∣bed and interrupted; then should we have Convul∣sions, or at least some degree of a Paralsis of the Stomach. And if they passed by some By-way, or Road, besides that of the Animal Spirits, then must it be a full, or an empty one; if full, that Humour (as suppose a Succus Nutricius, for once) must be disturbed and discontinued, (as the Animal Spirits were shown to be;) and if empty, it would fol∣low, that Nature had void and useless Ducts, which none ever had the Folly or Confidence to assert; or that Nature contrived them for that purpose, which is (as has been shown) directly against its Methods and Advantage. But after all, whither would you have them march in this By-Road? for they could not mix or communicate (as good Luck is) with the Spirits; and if they did, it is impossible it should be with∣out such Disturbances as I mentioned would fol∣low, if they passed in the Road of the Spirits; it
is not common Sense, that such cde Blasts should meliorate, or enliven the Spirits, to cause Briskness, Bravery, Serenity, Courage, Magnanimity, as Opium does, much less if those Fumes stopp'd and crowded in the Brain, and any way hinder'd the Genera∣tion of Animal Spirits, as the common Assertion is. The like is to be said of their passing between the Pia Mater, and the medullary Part of the Nerve, (which cannot be allow'd, because of its close adherence thereto) with this addition, That they would constantly cause a violent Head-ach, which Opium, and Meals, (to which Fumes are par∣ticularly attributed) do often cure. So if they got up to the Head, between the Pia and Dura Mater, it is Head-achs, and not the Sym∣ptoms of Opium, that they would produce; which Head-achs (as was said) Opium and Meals do cure. 21. Lastly, If they passed by any means quite on the outside of the Nerves and their Membranes, (viz. the Pia, and Dura Mater) then must they take their Lodgment (if within the Skull) between the Dura Mater and the Skull, and produce no other Symptom but a Head-ach, which (as was said) Opium and Meals rather cure than produce; and if without the Skull, it is quite beside the Cu∣shion, and the Vaporarians own Intention; for in all these last Cases, they could not affect the Ani∣mal Spirits for good or evil. Many and very many things may be added, to shew the Impossibilities, Inconveniences, Incoherences, Absurdities, &c. that at∣tend the Passage of the Fumes and Vapours into the Brain, Head, &c. 22. I had forgot mentioning the Absurdity of its passing up at Gullet, and so to the Head, because I could not imagine that▪ any one would be
so beastly an Animal as to belch up an Argument of that kind, considering our very Senses tell us, that what comes up that way passes out at Mouth or Nostrils, and because, if it were so, the Operation of Opium, &c. would be in proportion to our Belching, which is ridiculous. 23. The greatest Comfort of a Cordial is at first, or soon after it is taken; but if 'its Comfort were by Fumes, or Essluvia's, passing to the Bloud, or any where besides, the Comfort would (as their Cause of Fumes do) increase for a long time, and be more after a good while than at first. So, 24. If Opium operated by Fumes while at Sto∣mach, which must gradually increase continually, how comes Opium to be at the height of its Ope∣ration in a short time, viz. in about half an Hour after it begins sensibly to operate, or an Hour at farthest, and not increase continually in its Opera∣tion, as their pretended Cause the Fumes must do by continual steaming? 25. If Opium operated by sending Fumes by Passages, &c. from the Stomach to the Brain, I should think that when it has got out of the Sto∣mach, as into the Intestines, lacteal Veins, &c. there should be a kind of Interval of its Operation, (which is never observ'd) till it got into the Bloud again; therefore it does not operate by Fumes, for the Pylorus is always shut, but when somewhat is sent downward, which would hinder the mount∣ing of the Vapours into the Stomach, in order to pass to the Brain. 26. If Vapours were the cause of Sleep after Meals, then should we be more sleepy two or three Hours after Meals, because of the abundance of the Fumes that would be crowded into the Brain by that time; but we are more sleepy presently after Meals, and if we indulge it but for a quarter of an Hour, we are refreshed, and far from sleepiness
afterward, tho' the Fumes (if that Hypothesis were true) would be much more at Brain two or three Hours after the Meal: So it is in the case of Wine, if one take a short Nap after some Glasses, he may drink a great many afterward without being slee∣py; which plainly proves, that it is not the Fumes of the Wine is the cause of the Sleep, because he is not at all sleepy, when there must be more Fumes. 27. All allow, that hot Fumes assaulting the Brain cause Phrensies; if that be true, then the Fumes of Wine and Opium (which are both very hot) must always do so; but Opium and Wine also do often cause Composure, Good Humour, Sleep, &c. which are contrary to Phrensies; therefore they do not operate by Fumes. 28. If Sleep (says Helmont, the only Man that I have read who is against Vapours) is caused by Vapours ascending from the Stomach to the Head, obstructing and intercepting all the Passages of Sen∣sation, Motion, Speech, Iudgment, &c. (as the Schools say) then a Disease would have been be∣fore the Fall of Adam, because Sleep would have been a Disease, that is, a flatulent and vaporous Palsie. 29. All allow Vomitives and Purgers to operate by Irritation, or a grievous Sensation of the Mem∣branes of the Stomach; Why not Wine, Cordials, Opium, &c. by a pleasant Sensation? Cujus est Dolor (aut Gravamen) ejusdem est Voluptas; and as a grievous Sensation (or Pain) causes Melancholy, De∣pression of Spirits, Fretfulness, Lassitude, &c. so a pleasant Sensation causes Comfort, Elevation of the Spirits, Euphory, &c. But we have not cleared the Way sufficiently for these Matters yet, which will in due time be solemnly considered.
Obj. It may be said, That both Vomitives and Purgatives take some time before they operate, un∣less a Nausea upon Aversion causes them to work sooner; for Things must have time to insinuate themselves (or soak) through the Crusta Carnosa of the Stomach, and afterwards to affect its sensile Coat; which argues that Wine and Cordials, which operate immediately, do not operate that way, but by Fumes (or Effuviums) passing into the Brain, or Bloud. Answ. I doubt indeed, that this Difference may be an occasion of referring the Effects of Cordials, and those of Emitticks and Catharticks, to different Causes; but it is very strange, that they should go so far as the Bloud, or Brain, to seek for the Cause of the Operation of Cordials, which operate in a Moment, and go no farther than the Stomach for the Cause of the Operation of Vomatives and Purgatives, which take more time to operate; especially seeing the Bloud and Brain have no Sensation, and that all sensitive Comforts happen by that means, I think it were much more pro∣per, first, to consider the immediate Part upon which they insist, (when at Stomach) especially seeing it is so very sensible, before we run roving I know not whither, to seek for the Cause of a Thing that works, pleases, and comforts the Sto∣mach, as soon as it is down. I take my self run∣ning off the proper Subject Matter of this Chapter, and anticipating that of another; therefore I will be short, and deliver my Opinion in this Case by way of Position, with a familiar Instance to illu∣strate it, which may in some measure prepare you for the Proof of it, and what is to be said thereof more at large hereafter
I say then, that hot spirituous Cordials, (for such indeed all proper Cordials are) as Brandy, Dr. Ste∣phens's Water, and such-like, having sulphureous Particles so prepared and disposed towards Heat, or Fire, that they are as it were in Potentia pro∣xima (or next Disposition) thereto; are mighty apt to contract a Heat, as you find by Spirit of Wine, or Brandy, kept the least time in a warm Place, or (to come closer to the matter) in your Mouth; wherein being actuated by its Heat, they will as in an instant grow so hot and active, that you can hardly bear them, because Particles of Heat which penetrate any Metal, Glass, &c. im∣mediately as soon as applied thereto, will much more easily and sooner penetrate our soft Parts at Mouth, or the Crusta Carnosa at Stomach, and so reach the most sensile Coat thereof, pleasing, comforting, and exciting the Spiritus insitos as in a moment by their spirituous Heat, which we actu∣ally feel and sensibly find to please and comfort the Stomach. But if some Purging Tincture had been put into the Cordial, or Brandy, this would not have soaked through the Crusta Carnosa under some time, and consequently not operated till it had. This may be most manifestly illustrated by some hot Brandy, or indeed any hot Liquid put into a porous Dish set upon one's Hand, which presently warms it; but if the Liquid be tinged with any thing, that Tincture will not reach the Hand, till the Li∣quor, which is its Vehicle, soaks through, which may be in an Hour (more or less) according to the Porosity of the Wood, which Tincture is to be compared to the Purgative at Stomach. Hence it follows, That all Cordials should be a spirituous Liquid, if intended for sudden Refreshment, which Experience has taught, and be given actual∣ly warm'd, if a very nimble Comfort be required;
tho' the great Heat of the Stomach, above that of the Mouth, will generally be sufficient. Thus may the Stomach be pleased and comforted, grie∣ved and purged, with the same Draught; but Gra∣cious Providence has given the start to the Cordial, which immediately comforts us as a Heater. 30. If Opium operated by such Fumes, it would (at least in a liquid Form) begin its Operation as soon as it is at Stomach; for it would begin to send up Fumes as soon as it began to be warm, which is presently, and be at a very considerable Height of fuming, and consequently of Operation, in one minute, which is about the space of seventy ordinary Pulses; but we do not find it begin to operate in that Form, under twenty, thirty, or forty Minutes, which is much about the time that a more agreeable, and not nauseated Vomitive, or Purger, begin to affect the sensile Coat of the Stomach, and give intimation of their so doing. All which, and the Sense of Pleasure that we actually then seel at Stomach, makes it probable that it operates by affecting the Stomach pleasantly and comfortably, (after the manner of generous Wine) as Purgers and Vomatives do by af∣fecting it grievously, all of them (except the Wine, that pleases and comforts sooner because of its Particles of Heat gain'd by Fermentation) opera∣ting much in the same time, because they take like leisure to soak through the Crusta Carnosa to the sensile Coat of the Stomach. 31. All sensitive Pleasure, Comfort, &c. are re∣ceived by the Senses; and though any Part were some way benefited, that has no Sense, no Com∣fort would be perceived; without Perception, none could say that he is comforted: What fitter Part is there to be pleased, and comforted by Sensa∣tion▪ than the Stomach? which has such exquisite Sense, that it can discern the vomitory Particles in
Infusion of the Grocus, or Regulus of Antimony, which no Sensation but that at Stomach can discern; and so small, that a thousand Vomitories made thereof by Infusion, do not sensibly diminish the Grocus, or Regulus, as to Weight, or Bulk; nor can I con∣ceive where any sensible Comfort can be perceiv'd by a spoonful of Cordial but at Stomach, where it actually is, and upon whose Coats it immediately insists; Is it not there that we feel the Comfort? and where should we find it but there? What would the Effluviums of a Spoonful signifie, if mix'd with 100000 times as much insenile Bloud? and what Part (besides the Stomach) that the Bloud touches, can be sensible of it? So that if Effluviums were granted, 'tis thither they must re∣turn to cause any considerable Pleasure, or Comfort: But what need any Reurn of the inconsiderable Effluvia, when the main Body of the Cordial (yea, all) lies upon the Stomach already? I must forbear running into the Business of other Chapters, having been tedious enough upon the Subject of this, and the rather, because it was so general and so rooted an Opinion in the Minds of Men, in all Ages, and in all Sects of Physicians and Natural Philosophers, that I could not say too much to endeavour to free the World from the Slavery of such an Imposition, and the innumerable ill Con∣sequences of such a fundamental and overgrown Errour. Which certainly must have been long since ex∣ploded, if ingenious Men had first thought, and then spoke freely; but the Truth is, there were many and great Causes to the contrary, as those intimated in the last Paragraph, and the mighty Usefulness, and ready Officiousness of that Opinion of Fumes, to answer for all the more obscure and latent Causes of the Maladies and Disasters of the
Brain and Genus Nervosum. If any enquired or called for the Cause of a Vertigo, the Physician an∣swered (Fumes;) of Epilepsies, it was answered (Fumes;) of Scotomies, it was Fumes; of Head∣achs, Megrims, Coma's, Caros, Lethargies, &c. it was Fumes; of Hysterick Fits, Convulsions, Spasms▪ Cramps, &c. it was Fumes; nay▪ they answered as Causes to all Distillations, Catarrhs, Epiphora's, (or weeping Eyes) and all, even ordinary Tears; all which they said were only these Fumes turn'd into Water by the Coldness of the Brain, as they are in a Still, or Alembick; so hot Fumes accounted for Phrensies, Deliriums, Ravings, &c. So that how∣ever other Heads were, the Physician's was stuff'd therewith; and all Meteors of the Microcosm's Upper Region, whether hot or cold, were (as those in the Macrocosm) formed out of Fumes, as he ima∣gined. Thus you see all the Opinions and Hypothesises that have been, concerning the Operation of Opium, to be most absurd, and directly contrary to all Sense, Reason, and Experience.
CHAP. XI. Opium does not diminish or disable the Spirits by any means whatsoever. HAving sufficiently demonstrated, that Opium cannot diminish or disable the Spirits by the cold Quality of the Ancients, or Fumes of the Mo∣derns, and that neither of them have as much as any Being; I shall now add, that Opium does not diminish, or disable the Spirits by any other means whatsoever. I would not be mistaken, when I say, That Opium does not diminish, or disable the Spirits by any means, (for there is nothing so good in Na∣ture, but will do it, if used unduely, or immo∣derately, as Wine, Bread, Milk, Honey, Sugar, Beer, &c. in excess) for I intend, that it does not do it when duely and moderately used. 1. That which refreshes the Wearied, and highly prevents Weariness, must add to, or excite the Spirits, which is directly contrary to diminish∣ing, or disabling them; but Opium does in a most eminent manner refresh the Wearied, and pre∣vent Weariness, therefore it does not diminish, or disable the Spirits. Some have been so silly, and inadvertent, as to object, that it refresh'd the Weary only by Sleep; It is Matter of Fact, that it refreshes them whether they Sleep, or no, and that without fail∣ing as often as it is used in that Case.
Others (that were no Wiser) have said, that it only took off the sense of Weariness by stupify∣ing, which happened by the diminishing, or dis∣abling of the Animal Spirits. Bare Insensibleness cannot enable the Spirits to Labour with eminent Briskness and Alacrity, as Men most certainly do after Opium is taken, being finely enlivened, and invigorated, as with generous Wine; if they do not know this to be true, let them for shame hold their Tongues, till they know Matter of Fact, which if they will not, they proclaim themselves to be idle and impertinent Babblers; but if they will patiently and wisely abstain arguing, till they are satisfied as to Matter of Fact, then will they be past Opinion and Hypothesis in that Case; for they will have sensible and certain Knowledge of the contrary, and the Truth of what I say; which will end all Controversy, and precarious Squabbles upon false Suppositions, (as the manner is) that cannot lead them to what is Right, but by meer chance, and never to a true Knowledge, that they are in the Right, which makes it none in effect; for they can do nothing with Assurance, but only suppose, and hope they are in the Right, when they are as much out (to their Patient's sorrow) as Physicians have been in the cold Quality, and Fumes of Opium. It is true, that a Grain (or Two) of Opium, will, if a Man composes himself, sitting, or lying still, cause a Sleepiness, equal to that caused by spending the Spirits by a Day's Labour; but spend∣ing of the Spirits is not the only, no, nor best proportioned, or more adequate cause thereof, (as I have shewn:) If loss of Spirit were the adequate cause of Sleep, how should good and generous Wine cause Sleepiness after that eminent Rate as it does in most People? How should the most
pleasing Musick incline such as lie, or sit still, to sleep? but if one Dances thereto, it makes him more lively and brisk than ordinary. The like exactly do Wine and Opium, if Men lie, or sit still; but otherwise, they make them much more brisk and lively, and able to undergo Labour, Action, &c. Which Note, that you may not any more wonder, that Enliveners and Exciters of the Spirits do cause Sleep, as well as Diminishers thereof; and observe, that they are all pleasing things, as Musick, Wine, and Opium, which cause Pleasant Dreams, Pleasant Watchings, Pleasant Hu∣mours &c. Expect more of this Matter in the following Chapters, and all by degrees, according as I Judge the prejudiced World will bear Things: For a great Paradox (how true soever) must not be abruptly obtruded, but gently, and gradually ushered in by insinuating Reasonings, otherwise it will be entertained like a rude Stranger, that con∣tradicts a Multitude in Fashions and Customs that they have always used, and judged to be the very best (however blameable.) Consider, that if Opium diminished or dis∣abled the Spirits, proportionable to the Sleepiness that it causes, as a hard Day's Labour does, then if Opium were given a Man after a hard Day's Labour, it would be, as it were, adding another hard Day's Labour to cure it, the Day's Labour and Opium impairing the Spirits alike; Think what a miserable Condition the poor Man would be in, especially if Sleep did not make him some amends, it would be such as were utterly intol∣lerable; but so far is Opium from any such Effect, that it refreshes him tho' he Sleep; not at all after the hard Day's Labour, and not only so, but will enable him to Work all the following Night with great Alacrity, if need requires it.
What a Condition would those be in, who take a Drachm of it twice a day for 10, 20, or 30 years? Nay, how could any possibly do it for half 10 days, if a Grain or Two destroyed the Spirits so much, as to cause Sleepiness thereby, as hard Labour does? Which they must allow, that assert it causes Sleep by diminishing, or disabling the Spirits. But some may say, (tho' very inconsiderately) that it only disables them for the time of its Ope∣ration; That is strange, indeed, considering that even during that time they are mostly enabled to Work, or Labour, tho' tired before; and that it▪ 2. Causes Comfort, Refreshment, Ovation of the Spirits, all the time of its Operation, as Wine mo∣derately taken does, especially if People keep themselves in Action, Labour, &c. otherwise, in∣deed, they may fall asleep upon the comfortable satisfaction, contentation of Mind, and acquiescence of Spirit, that it occasions, as Wine does. 3. The first Effect that we find of Opium (which may therefore probably be a very leading, funda∣mental, and significant Effect) is, that it causes a most agreeable, pleasant, and charming sensation about the Region of the Stomach; which if one lies, or sits still, inclines him to Sleep, if not, it makes him gay, good humour'd, brave, &c. It is a Plea∣sure so sweet, and delicious, that tho' I endeavour'd to express it by the Ovation of the Spirits upon Joy, a good Genius informing a Man, or the Hel∣msians Archeus in his best Humour, or a continual Vreal Pleasure, Wine drank ad Hilaritatem, &c. yet (I doubt) all my Ways of expressing it do come short of the charming Complacency that it causes; Therefore if Wine, Musick, a good Meal, agreeable Frication of the Head or Back, the sound
of Waters, &c. do incline us to Sleep by the Plea∣sure thereof, which lulls and sooths us to it, (as is most certain, if we sit, or lie still) much more must the high Charms of Opium cause it. That it is a Pleasure that affects by one of our Senses, namely by Feeling, is indisputable; for it is not a Pleasure of the Eye, Nose, Tongue, or Ear, and it must be sensitive, because caused by Matter; and that Opium has (doubtless) the like Effect up∣on Brutes, who have no other Pleasure, but what is sensitive; That it is at Stomach is also evident, where we can be pleased only by the Sense of Feel∣ing; That it is involuntary, and pleases us whe∣ther we will or no, and that the same Particles excite Venery, Itching, &c. Now all the Senses (especially Feeling, and par∣ticularly that at Stomach) are given us for Watches, and Sentinels, to discover and give notice of what is, or is not good and agreeable to our Ani∣mal Nature; That upon notice of what is good, and agreeable, Pleasure, Comfort, Satisfaction, &c. are conceived; otherwise Displeasure, Discomfort, and Dissatisfaction. What diminishes or disables our Spirits, does us the greatest Evil that can be, and consequently Sensation would, according to its Office, give us such notice thereof as would cause Displeasure, &c. otherwise these Sentinels, that God and Nature have appointed for faithful Notice, would (instead of trusty service, which is the End they are made for) deceive us, and consequently do us mischief, rather than good; which is very Prophane (if not Blasphemous) to assert, as being highly abusive of God's Goodness and Wisdom, to make Things in Nature, that would not only not answer, but
act quite contrary to their Ends; it follows then, that what causes such a mighty agreeable, and pleasant Sensation at Stomach, which is the greatest, and most accurate Judge of what is, or is not agreeable to the Animal, cannot be destructive, or disabling of its Spirits, which are the most ex∣cellent, and useful Things, that belong thereto; Therefore Opium, which so mightily recommends it self to, pleases, and comforts the greatest Iudge that God has given to a sensible Creature to discern what is good and evil for it, cannot diminish or dis∣able our Spirits. One may say, (what I dare not) that the Sen∣sation at Stomach may deceive us. We may deceive our selves, and say so, when that which pleases the Stomach, does not please our perverted Imagination, which makes no Ar∣gument; let us therefore consider Things where there is no such vain Imagination to contradict the good Ends of Nature; if the Stomach and Senses in a Brute or meer Animal, which has no other means to Judge of what is good or evil for it, should not Judge aright, all the Animals in the whole World would soon perish. It is the vain Opinion of Men that perswades them that Things are cold, when hot, &c. as in the Case of Opium, when the Senses truely inform that it is hot; If you'll stand to your Imaginations, and Suppositions, (for such all must be without the Information of Sense) against the Dictates of Sensation, you must inevitably err. But one may say, Is the Sense at Stomach such an infallible Guide always?
I believe it will be very hard to give many In∣stances to the contrary, and prove it well; how∣ever, if we do, or may allow something of this Kind to a perverted Stomach at certain times, (to avoid a squabble about it) it is never to be allow'd, That all the Stomachs in the whole World should be pleased with one and the same Thing at all times, and yet that this Thing should be so highly perni∣cious to the Animal as to diminish or disable its Spi∣rits; Then, indeed, it would follow, that the most exquisite Sense at Stomach, to discern what is or is not agreeable to the Animal, were abso∣lutely in vain, which no Man of Reason, that has any Apprehension of the Wisdom of God and Na∣ture, can assert. 3. What is more notorious, than that Pleasure, or being pleased, raises, and Displeasure, or being grieved, depresses the Spirits? Are not all People pleasant, gay, and good humour'd, brisk, prompt, &c. when pleased? Do not Men Travel, or Labour with more Ease in Pleasant Company, &c. But of these Matters, and the Reasons thereof, more in the following Chapters. 4. How can Opium, that revives People when they are so dispirited that they are even almost dying, (as when Opium is wanted by such as use to take it in Deliquims and Agonies from Pai, &c.) diminish, or disable the Spirits? It is plain Contradiction to say that it should. Next to Opium, nothing revives People in such Cases better than Wine, and those Things that produce the same, or like Effects, have like Na∣ture; and who can say that Wine, that was made to glad the Heart of Man, diminishes or disables the Spirits? Or, that Opium, which produces all the sprightly, enlivening, and encouraging Effects of ge∣nerous
Wine, (in a more eminent manner than Wine, and in the 10000th Part of its Quantity, and for a longer time than Wine causes them) should diminish or disable the Spirits? For Instance, Wine and Opium, in a due quantity, (but Opium, in a far less quantity, as was said) cause a pleasant, gay, and good Humour, Courage, Bravery, Magnanimity, Promptitude in Business, Expediteness in Management, Serenity, Euphory, or easy undergoing of Labour, Iourneys, Fatigues, &c. Both take away Sadness, Grief, Melancholy, Fear, Depression of Spi∣rits, &c. Both cause Promptitude to Venery (Sine Cerere & Baccho friget Venus:) So Wine and Opium prevent and cure Cold, open the Pores, pro∣mote Perspiration and Sweat, especially the following Mornings, as Sir Theodore Mayern, my self, and others, have observ'd of Opium, and is notorious as to Wine. Both cause Sleep, and take away the Sense of Pain, and require a greater Dose than ordi∣nary in Proportion to the Pain; Both take off Shiver∣ings from Fear, Cold, or Ague Fits, and cause Mirth, Contentation, and Acquiescence, Driness of the Mouth, Thirst, a Sense of Heat within us, a Dreaming Con∣dition, pleasant Dreams, (if the Quantity of Wine be not grievous by its Heat, Load, &c.) Ncturnal Pollution, and in some Constitutions both cause Vigilancy; but Wine and Opium cause that more rarely than Sleep: Both stop, and cause Vomiting if they stay too long at Stomach; Both moderate Hunger, () and are good in a canine Appetite; Both cause Swimming in the Head, &c. So Both in an Excessive Dose, Do cause, at first, Mirth, and afterward a kind of Drunken Soper in some, in others Fury, or
Madness, Sardonick Laughter, and Weight at Sto∣mach, Vomitings, Hiccoughs, great Heat at Stomach, Debility, and laxity of all Parts, Faltring of the Tongue, Scotomies and Darkness of the Eyes, Ver∣tigo's, Laxity of the Cornea of the Eye, Dilatation of the Papilla, Deadness of the Eyes to the View, Loss of Memory, Venereal Fury, a high Colour, profuse Sweats, Purging sometimes, Alienation of the Mind, Loss of Memory; and lastly, greater or lesser Effects ac∣cording to the Dose, Constitution, &c. So A long and lavish Use of both, Causes a dull and moapish Disposition, Dropsies, Fall of Humours upon Weaken'd Parts, a Sleepy Disposition, Want of Appetite, Weakness of Digestion, Aptitude to Sterility, and Abortion, early Decrepite∣ness, Stooping in the Back, Trembling of the Hands, Weakness of Memory, Shortness of Life, Difficulty and Danger in suddenly leaving them off, Revive such as sink for Want of either, and supply the Want of each other. How can any have the Face to say, that a Thing which agrees so with generous Wine in Ef∣fects, can be a Diminisher or Disabler of the Spi∣rits? The Mischiefs of excessive Doses, and la∣vish Use of either, is no Argument against their inspiriting Nature; if it were, then Wine is no Cordial; tho' made to glad the Heart of Man, be∣cause of its ill Effects lavishly used: Therefore none can argue from that, that Opium diminishes or disables the Spirits, any more than Wine, or Bread does, a Surfeit of which is most dangerous. Omnis Repletio mala, Panis vero pessima; & corruptio optimi est pessima: That is, All Repletion is bad, but that of Bread is the worst; and the Corruption of the best is the worst.
The short is this; Wine and Opium agree in all their Effects, saving such as are Consequences of their different Accidents, as the Quantity of Wine that must be used to cause the same Effects with a little Opium; and Wine having been fermented; and Opium (as may be shewn) having some crude and viscid Rosin in it, which sometimes sticks to the Crusta carnosa, &c. of the Stomach; whence it happens, that Wine loads one more, heats more, and is more troublesome upon those Ac∣counts, and that Opium offends the Stomach oftner even in a moderate Dose, causing Vomitings, Hic∣coughs, Anxieties, Distresses at Stomach, Deli∣quiums, &c. because of the indigestible Rosin stick∣ing to the sides of the most sensile Stomach, as I shall farther prove hereafter, (by God's Help) shewing very easie Ways and Means to separate that Rosin, and so make it as safe, and less trouble∣some, as it is more effectual than Wine. Opium cannot diminish or disable the Spirits, be∣cause (as has been proved) it sends no Part, Fume, or Effluvium to the Brain, or Animal Spi∣rits, to cause such bad Effects while it is at Sto∣mach, yet does it produce them while it is there; for, as the Vaporarians themselves (and indeed all Men) allow, there can be no Destruction without contact. Sanctorius doth well and truely observe, by the Help of his Staticks, that nothing causes liberal Perspiration, but it raises the Spirits; it is most certain, that nothing in Nature opes the Pores, and causes Perspiration, more than Opium; There∣fore nothing should, according to his Observation, elevate the Spirits more, and, indeed, nothing does, as appears by all that has been said, and will yet more plainly appear.
Loss of Memory by Opium (as some argue) is not so much a Loss of Spirits, as Lanity of the Brain; for People in Drink do not want Spirits, but there is a great Relaxation of the Brain, and its Membranes, and of the whole Ienus , which Relaxation causes a soft, loose, and labile Brain, that like Liquid Things retains no Impres∣sion; besides, that I shall (God willing) shew you hereafter, that Impressions cannot be so well made upon the sensitive Soul, by the Animal Spi∣rits, upon Relaxations of the Sensible Parts, as in Sleep, &c. for a very plain Mechanical Reason to be shewn in due time. Thus have I, (by the Assistance of its Maker, who best knows it) cleared Opium from the false Aspersions of an extreme Cold Quality, and Parco∣tick Fumes, both which were commonly call'd Venemous, fatal, and by all the ill Names imagin∣able, but (as good Luck is) they abused nothing; because 'tis manifest, that there is no such Thing, nor has it any Quality by which it diminishes, or disables the Spirits, as is most evident from the Premises, so that all that has been said of Opium, by way of Hypothesis, to explain its Effects, de∣pending upon its diminishing or disabling the Spirits by a Cold Quality, or Fumes, is come to nothing, I wish it had been as innocent.
CHAP. XII. Shews what must be the true Cause of the Ope∣ration of Opium. ALL the general Foundations upon which Au∣thors, either Ancient or Modern, erected their several Hypothesises concerning the Operation of Opium, having (as manifestly appears) no real Existence; What Enchanted Castles in the Air, or vain Phantasms, must their Structures be? And, how like deluded Wizzards must they appear, while they seem'd to take high Flights and glorious Prospects of Causes that had no Reality? Thus am I left utterly distitute of either Foun∣dation or Model, unless I find out that, and frame this; which (I hope) may be easily done, be∣cause (the cloudy Supposition of Vapours having va∣nished away) there now remains but Two Ways by which an Internal Medicament can Operate, viz. 1. As an Alterative of the Blood, &c. Or, 2. As affecting the Sense of Feeling, either grie∣vously, as Vomits, Purgers, &c. Or pleasingly, as Cordials, generous Wines, titillating Amphrodisiacks, comfortable Warmth, Anodynes, and such like, that please the Nerves and Membranes; which way of Operating is too little observ'd by Physicians, tho' they take great Notice of the Operation of Things by grievous Sensation, as Irritatives to Vomit, Purge, Salivate, &c. by their Acrimony; whereas the Pleasers of Sensation, which must, as Contraries, have contrary Operations, are little regarded, or thought of.
1. Opium does not Operate as an Alterative of the Bloud, &c. First, Because it Operates while it is at Stomach, or (at least) before it arrives at the Bloud; which manifestly appears several Ways; as, 1. Because it often Operates in a Liquid Form in few Minutes, and very commonly in a Quarter of an Hour, in which time it must be at Stomach, or, at least, far from arriving at the Bloud. 2. Because it has been very often Vomited up after it has Operated, and produced its usual Ef∣fects for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, and sometimes more Hours; as evidently appear'd by the Smell, Colour, Taste, &c. of what was Vomited; and by its Operation ceasing after such Vomiting; of which common Experience, and Authors, do inform us: See Helmont Ius Duumvir. 62. where he tells of Opium Operating at Night, and Vomited up next Morning. 3. Its bare causing Vomiting after it has Ope∣rated for a good while, is of it self (tho' its Taste, Smell, &c. did not discover it) an infallible Argu∣ment of its Operating, while it is at Stomach; for 'tis against all Reason to imagine, that Things should irritate it to Vomit after they are gone into the Bloud, and not do it while they are in the Stomach it self, as all Vomitories do. The Reasons why it stays so long at Stomach, are, 1. Its Indigestibleness, which plainly appears by Stools, Urine, and Sweat, smelling of it, when taken in any considerable Quantity; all the Cocti∣ons, Digestions, Circulations, &c. that it passes in the Body, signifying very little to it, which its causing Itchings in the Skin, and affecting the Ve∣nereal
Membranes after its passing the Bloud, do also argue. 2. The clamminess of its resinous Parts sticking to the Stomach, cause (as I shall plainly prove hereafter) its long stay in it; for if the Rosin be separate from it, 'twill not then make such a long stay at Stomach, as I have often Ex∣perienced. 4. We actually feel it causing a sense of Plea∣sure at Stomach during its Operation, therefore it is then in it. 5. It has been carried off by Stool after it has produced its usual Effects; Therefore it Operated before it arrived at the Bloud. 6. All Observers do allow, that Opium Ope∣rates while it is at Stomach; which gave the Oc∣casion (as you may remember) to the Hypothesis of its Operating by Fumes rising out of the Sto∣mach; because they could not think of any other Means by which it might affect the Head, Brain, Animal Spirits, Nerves, &c. while it was at Sto∣mach, but by the Way of Fumes or Vapours. It is therefore past all doubt, That Opium pro∣duces its common Effects while it is at Stomach, and before it arrives at the Blood, and therefore does not Operate as an Alterative thereof. Secondly, Because a Grain of Opium, which Ope∣rates very remarkably, bears (as Etmuller well observes) so small a Proportion to the Bloud, that it cannot produce such great, and notable Effects, as an Alterative thereof; for a Grain of Opium to 20 Pound of Blood, (which an ordi∣nary Man has in his Body) is but as 1 to 115200, or (if 16 Oucnes be allow'd to the Pound) as 1 to 153600. But it is no Wonder if a Grain should affect the Membrane at Stomach, since the
1000 part of a Grain of the Vomitory Particles of Crocus Metallorum, or Regulus of Antimony, does affect it so eminently, as many other Things will in a very small Quantity; whereas the altering of the Blood to any observable degree, requires the Use of Alteratives in great Quantity for seve∣ral Weeks: Which confirms the former Conclu∣sion, That Opium does not Operate as an Alterative, as to its common and usual Effects. II. Opium does not Operate by grievous Sensation, (or Irritation) as Vomits, Purgers, Errhines, Sali∣vators, (or Apophlegmatizers) &c. do. First, Because it manifestly causes a very agree∣able, pleasant, and even charming Sensation. Secondly, Because it takes away grievous Sensa∣tion or Pain, thereby stopping Vomiting, Purging, and all other-Effects of grievous Sensation, by Acri∣mony, &c. As for the Vomiting that Opium sometimes causes, it is only (as shall be shewn) by its Resinous Parts sticking to the Coat of the Stomach, which being separated from it, Opium has no such Effect, tho' all its good Effects remain. So its Purging (which happens most rarely, and only when a great Quantity is given to Men of strong Digestion) it is only from its Rosin digested, and resolved in strong Stomachs; Hence it is that Dogs, and such as have canine Appetites, do generally Purge after a great Quantity of Crude or Rosinous Opium; whereas such as is not Rosinous causes no such Effect. But of these Matters more to your Satisfaction hereafter. Thirdly, Because it causes all Effects that are quite contrary to those of grievous Sensation; It
causing an Ovation of the Sensitive Soul and Spi∣rits; Pain (or grievous Sensation) a Depression of Spirits; It causing Euphory and Pain, Weariness; For what tires more than Pain, or labouring in Pain? It causing good Humour, Pain Peevishness, Fretfulness, and ill Humour; Opium causing Relaxa∣tion of all Parts, Pain Contraction; That causing free Perspiration, this checking it; That causing Sleep, this hindering it; That causing Conten∣tation Acquiescence, this Discontent and Uneasi∣ness; That composing, this discomposing the Spi∣rits, Bloud, &c. That causing Fluxes by Irritati∣on, &c. this moderating, or stopping them; That opening the Pores, Pain constringing them; Opium preventing the Shaking Fits in Agues, Pain bringing them on; That causing a large and slow Pulse, this a quick, hard, and narrow Pulse; That causing an Efflorescence of the Skin, this Pale∣ness; That pleasant, this unpleasant Dreams; That stills Hiccoughs, this causes them; That takes off Contractions, Convulsions, &c. this causes them. To be short, Opium causes all the Effects of pleasant Sensation, and takes off all the Effects of grievous Sensation. What can be a more evi∣dent Proof of its acting by causing a pleasant Sensation? It were endless to mention all the Proofs that may be made to the same Purpose, from Pleasers and Displeasers of Sensation. Therefore we fairly conclude, That Opium does not Operate by causing a grievoui Sensation, and there being no other Way left by which it may Operate, It must Operate by causing a pleasant Sensation; which is the true and plain Reason why (as has been shewn) it takes off Pain, and causes all Effects quite contrary to that of grievous Sensation;
Irritations by Acrimony, &c. which are most eminent upon the most sensible Parts, as the Sto∣mach, Intestines, Venereal Membranes, Skin, &c. as you may observe where the Effects of Opium are enumerated. Now (gentle Reader) consider, That Contraries are the true Cure of Contraries: What can then cure Pain, and all its Effects, better than Pleasure? 'Tis very strange then, that Millions for many Ages finding Opium cure, or take off Pain, and all its Effects, above all Things, should not attri∣bute its so doing to its causing a pleasant Sensation, which is the direct contrary to Pain, especially since every Man that took Opium felt an actual Pleasure upon taking thereof, pleasant Dreams, a pleasant Humour, &c. It may be said, What if it be granted, that O∣pium Operates by a pleasing Sensation, (which I will Thank none for, that have Feeling at Stomach, or Reason at Brain) how is it possible that such pleasant Sensation should cause and explicate all the various, strange, wonderful, mysterious, and very often seemingly contradictory Phenomena's and Effects of Opium? Answer. As easily as ever I explain'd any Thing in Nature, especially if my Tract of Ani∣mal Mechanism were published; but it is my Mis∣fortune that it is not, however it shall not be the Readers, tho' it will put me to a great Trouble; To evade which, is none of my Intention, by those Words, but rather to bespeak the Reader's Patience while I am premising some necessary Praecognita requisite to be known before I enter upon the Explication of the wonderful and seemingly inex∣plicable Effects of Opium.
I therefore desire the Reader's Leave to premise some Things of the Nature of Sensation, and sensitive Pleasure, in order to his more clear and ready Understanding my Explication of this My∣sterious and Momentous Matter, look'd upon as so dark and abstuse a Business to this day, that some have not only yielded it up as a Thing hidden from Mankind, but have earnestly and seriously argued, that it acted absolutely by an occult Quality, reserved in a special manner (as is the Nature of Spirits) from our Knowledge. That it has been so hitherto, I think none can deny, as the Circulation of the Bloud was for Thousands of years, tho' the very Motion was seen by Millions; so as the Cause of the Operation of Opium has been felt by a far greater number, it therefore will (if I fail not in explaining it) appear so clear, that it will be much wondered at (like that of the Circulation of the Bloud) why so obvious a Thing was not found by every one that used Opium. But (whatever Opium is) God's Methods are unsearchable, and often his Wise Providence bestows good Gifts upon the Un∣worthy, that his free Goodness may appear; To whom be all Glory, Praise, and Thanksgiving for ever and ever. Amen. Note, That while I am upon the Preparatory Discourse about Sensation, Pleasure, &c. in the fol∣lowing Chapters, you may sometimes wonder what I would be at, because you may not per∣ceive the Drift, yet do they require your Atten∣tion as being the Foundation of all that is to follow; which you'll plainly perceive afterward, when (I hope) you'll have good Satisfaction for your pa∣tient and attentive Perusal of the Two following Chapters.
CHAP XIII. Of the Oeconomy of Sensation, as far (at least) as it concerns our present Purpose. WHEN I had written this Tract thus far, I judged it best, first, to publish that of Animal Mechanism, because it contained those Principles that would explain the Matter of Opium; therefore laying this aside, I applied my self to that: But a New Art, rightly to Spell, Write, and Sweeten all Languages, (that I since call'd Phono∣graphy) coming into my Mind, and thinking it might be very useful, and likely to lie for ever in Darkness, (as it had always been) unless I under∣took the Drudgery, I set my self to it; which ta∣king up more Time than I imagined, has to this day hindred the finishing of that Tract of Animal Mechanism, which I now much want, (as was in∣timated:) Therefore because I resolv'd to publish this, (that was so long since promised) I am now forced, for want of that Book, to premise here some Things, concerning the Oeconomy of Sensa∣tion, and the Nature of sensitive Pleasure, in order to explicate the Effects of Opium, which might have been spared, if that of Animal Mechanism had been published. Considering that Opium must (as was shewn) operate by pleasing the Sense of Feeling, it will be requisite to consider, 1. The Oeconomy of Sensation, as far as it concerns the present Purpose, for which this Chapter is de∣sign'd.
2. The Nature of sensitive Pleasure, and its Effects upon the sensitive Soul and Body, which is to be the Subject of the following Chapter. Five Things mainly concern the Oeconomy of Sensation: 1. The Object. 2. The external Me∣dium. 3. The Organs of Sensation. 4. The Ani∣mal Spirits, (or internal Medium.) 5. The sensitive Soul. 1. The Object is the Thing perceiv'd by any of the Senses; as, Light by the Eye; Sound (or tremulous Motion of the Air) by the Ear; Odour by the Nose; Tastes by the Tongue; Opium by the Feel∣ing, or (as Helmont calls it) the Gustus (or Taste) at Stomach. 2. The External Medium of Sensation is that which receives Impressions from the Object, and conveys them to the Organs of Sensation. Thus the Air conveys Sound (or tremulous Motion) to the Ear, Light to the Eye, and Odour to the Nose. 3. The Organs are the Parts of the Body that God has fram'd to receive those Impressions, and communi∣cate them to the Animal Spirits, (or Internal Me∣dium.) Thus the Eye is the Organ to receive the Impression of Light, the Ear that of Sound, &c. And the Membranes in all Parts of the Body are the Organs that receive Impressions from Objects in the case of Feeling, which is our main Con∣cern. 4. The Internal Medium is the Animal Spirits that receive the Impressions from the Organs, and con∣vey them to the Sensitive Soul. 5. The Sensitive Soul, which perceives those Im∣pressions convey'd to him by the Animal Spirits; which Perception is Sensation.
I. The Part, Office, or Business, of the Object, in the Matter of Sensation, is to make a sufficient Impres∣sion either upon the External Medium, (or Air) as in the case of Hearing, &c. or immediately upon the Organ, (or Membrane) as in Feeling, &c. There∣fore if there be no Impression of Light, Sound, (or tremulous Motion) Odours, Relishing Particles, &c. there can be no Perception; or if the Inpressions thereof be weak and faint, the Perception, or Sen∣sation, must be accordingly; or if it be so incon∣siderable, that it cannot at all affect the sensi∣tive Soul, then is there no Perception thereof. For, 1. Sensitive Perception is not infinite, because there are Degrees of Light, Sound, &c. that cannot be perceiv'd, tho' they must be very small, and in∣considerable: Thus the Light of a Candle at so great a distance that it can hardly be perceived, is some Degree of Light, and makes its Reflection proportionably from a Wall, Tree, &c. yet cannot that reflected Light from the Wall, or Tree, be perceived; so the smallest Things cannot be per∣ceived. Yet GOD has in His Wisdom and Good∣ness so ordered it, that, 2. Sensitive Perception is of excessively small Things: Thus the Sound of a Pin's Head, falling into a Brass Caldron, is heard at some distance; the hundreth part of a Grain of very hot and biting Things, are sensibly tasted; the thousandth part of a Grain of Ambergrise, Musk, &c. very sensibly smelt; the Light of an exceeding small Spark, struck out between Steel and Flint, is perceived at a great distance: And Light in general consists of such tenuios Particles, (if material) that none ever could take any estimate of their Bulk. So the Feeling at Stomach takes very eminent and remark∣able
notice of (as was said) the Vomitery Particles of Crocus Metallorum, or Regulus of Antimony, which are so small, that a thousand Vomits thereof does not sensibly diminish the Crocus, or Regulus, either in weight or bulk. Therefore it is no Wonder if a Grain of Opium should affect the Feeling so sen∣sibly as it does, especially at Stomach, tho' it can∣not make any considerable Alteration of the Bloud. 3. That whatever affects, or makes impression, up∣on the Organs of Sensation, is in the same moment perceived by the sensitive Soul▪ So that it is no Won∣der, that a Grain of Opium operates in so short a time, that is, as soon as a Tincture thereof insi∣nuates it self through the Crusta Carnosa to the sensile Coat of the Stomach; whereas it must take a very long time, if it operated as an Alterative of the Bloud. Now Note, 1. That there is no way for any thing to operate upon the sensitive Soul, in so small a Quanty, as Opium operates, or in so short a Time, as by affecting the most exquisitely dis∣posed Membrane at Stomach. 2. That the speedy Way that God has contrived for our Refreshment, Comfort, raising of our depressed Spirits upon any sudden Occasion, as in Delīquiums, Faintings, Syn∣copes, Leipothymies, &c. is by the Senses; especi∣ally that most exquisite Sensation at Stomach, be∣cause Refreshment by Nourishment and Alteration, cannot be perform'd but in a long time, where∣in we might in many Cases perish before we could be relieved thereby: Thus a pleasing, and there∣fore comfortable Odour, excites the Spirits in a moment; the sight of a beloved Mistress, or dear Friend, raises us immediately, when we are most cast down; as does also sweet Melody, and an aggreeable or pleasant Sensation at Stomach, as
of Wine, Cordials, hot Spirits, &c. I hope none will say, That Musick, the sight of a Bag of Mo∣ney, &c. send Effuvia's for that end, yet are great Comforters. II. The Part, Office, or Business, of the External Medium, in the Oeconomy of , being to re∣ceive and convey Imprssions, as Sound (or tremulous Mtion) from a Bell to the Ear, &c. it must be duly qualified for that purpose. It is true, that we are not concerned as to this external Medium (or Air) in our Case, because Opium affects only our Feeling internally, and im∣mediately at Stomach, where it touches the very Organ, (or Mmbrane:) However, because this External Medium (or Air) is to receive and con∣vey  after the same manner, from the Oject to the Organ, as the Internal Medium (or Animal Spirits) is to receive them from the Or∣gans, and convey them to the  Soul, and therefore bear exact Analogy to each other; and because the External Medium (or Air) is more obvious than the Internal, (or Animal Spirits) I think it very convenient to consider its Dispsi∣tions and Requisies, as a Medium, that we may the more clearly perceive those of the Animal Spi∣rits, as such. 1. It is requisie that the Air, as a Medium, (be∣ing a fluid Body) should be springy, (or elastick) be∣cause nothing but what is so is capable of tremlous Mtion, (which is material Sound) nor of Compres∣sion, without which, a loose, , yielding Fluid, as the Air is, cannot be fit to convey Im∣pressions; for the more solid any thing is, the fit∣ter it is for that end; therefore Compression must render it firm, tight, and close, that one Part may briskly communicate its Motion, or Impression, to
the next to it, and that to the next to it, and so ndefinitely; yet can it never arrive at the Per∣fecion of a Solid in carrying of Impulses: Henco it is that Sound decays by degrees. However, it has many great Advantages over a Solid, as a Medium for the purpose of Sensation: First, Because it receives Impressions better. Secondly, Because a Solid having weight, could not be so easily moved, in order to convey the . Thirdly, Because there would be no living or being in a Solid, as there is in the Air. Fourthly, Because if moved, &c. it would deal very rudely, grate and tear the very Organs, and not gently touch them, as the yielding Air does; besides many other Inconveniencies, which to mention is to little or no purpose. So being fluid, tenuious, yielding, &c. . It is (as was intimated) requisite, that it should be compressed, for the better conveyance of Impres∣sions, the more the better; for then (like a Gut blown very tightly) a small Impression cannot be made upon one part thereof, but it is communi∣cated a good way to other Parts: But if not com∣pressed, you may compare it to a Gut half full of Air, or a loose soft Lock of Wooll, that yields, and will not convey Impressions at all, or very faintly; whereas if the Air be tightly compressed in a Gut, &c. you cannot make a little Impression (or Dent thereby) at one end of it, but the whole contain'd Air, having less room by so much, becomes more compressed, and consequently thrusts so much the harder against all the sides, and the father end there∣of, especially if the Gut has no vent, or that it be not too wide; for, in the first Case, the Air, that should be kept in for the communication of the Impression,
having Liberty at the Vent, takes its course that way, and so disappoints the continuation of the Impulse, (or Impression) either wholly, or in great measure; n he Second Case, the Impulse bearing but a small Proportion to the whole, and also de∣caying in Proportion to the Liberty it has to widen, becomes much more insensible, or less remark∣able. Thus if you make a Dent, or Impression, of the bigness of half a small Pea, at one end of a Gut so filled with Air, that is of the bigness of one's Thigh, and two Yards long, it will bear a very small Proportion to the whole, and consequently very insensibly affect it; for 'tis like a Drop (as the Saying is) added to an Ocean; but if an Im∣pression (or Dent) of that bigness be made upon a Gut no bigger than a Pea in diameter, the Thrust, or Impression, will be very considerable at the other end, for the Reasons aforesaid. So that you plain∣ly see, 1. That the more Air is compressed, the better it conveys Impressions: Hence it is that we hear Sounds better, and farther, when the Air is most compressed, and the Quicksilver high in the Barometer, (or Weather-glass) and upon low Grounds, tho▪ flat, and without any hollowness, than on the tops of high Hills that are flat also; because the Pressure of the Air is less on high Hills. I mention the Flatness in both Cases, let any should attribute it wholly to the more free Ex∣pansion of the tremulous Motion on the tops of Hills, which indeed is a Reason where the Flatness is not alike, as far as the Sound goes. 2. That the nar∣rower the Gut, Duct, or Pipe, the Air is in, the smarter and more sensible will be the Impression at the farther end thereof, which may be confirmed and illustrated by many Demonstrations, Instances, and Experiments.
Hence it is, That if one speaks at one end of a Pipe, that is but an Inch in diameter, you'll hear it much better at the other end than in a close Gallery of the same length, tho' this will advan∣tage it much more than the open Air: That if one speaks ever so slowly at one end of a long Piece of Timber, it is manifestly and distinctly heard at the other end, through the narrow Vessels, and be∣tween the Fibres of the Wood: That all Sounds are sharper in narrow Pipes, &c. How easie is it then to contrive invisible Whispering-Places, which the World so much admire, and some Religions make such great Use of to deceive the People by preten∣ded Divine and Oracular Responses, of which the Reader may hereafter be aware. It is for like Reasons that Guns, Bells, &c. are better and farther heard along hollow Valleys, than upon Plains; that Sounds are heard so well the ways that Rivers run; for it is a vulgar Error that the Water does advantage the Sound upon Rivers; if it did, you'd hear farther at Sea than upon Land; which is so false, that the quite contrary is true, Sounds being much farther heard by Land than at Sea. It is a common Observation in Sea-Fights, that the Sund is heard at a much greater distance upon the Land than at Sea. There is indeed another Advantage in Valleys, (and therefore upon Rivers) viz. the several Re∣verberations, or Eccho's, from the Hills and high Banks, Rocks, &c. on the sides thereof; but this not much concerning our Purpose, I must (for the present) pass them and several Observations upon Sounds. For the aforesaid, and other ends, it is notorious that the Air is springy, and always under the com∣pression of the Atmosphere, or else it would be of little use as a Medium.
I know but one thing more to our Purpose that is worth the mentioning, in reference to the Ana∣logy between the Air and Animal Spirits, as Me∣diums of Sensation, viz. 3. It is requisite, or convenient at least, that the Air have an homogeneous Continuity, which much more advances it in conveying Impulses, (or Impressions) than when it is discontinued, divided, or sever'd, by other heterogeneous Particles, especially if these be in motion between the Parts of the Air; for then they very much disappoint and disgregate the Impressions made thereon. Therefore it is, that we hear so much better after Sun-set, or in the Nights, especially the Summer∣time, than in the Day, when the Particles of Heat, and others thereby raised, do too much divide, discontinue, and disgregate the Impressions, and the Parts of the Air▪ Where you may observe how Good and Wise Providence orders Hearing to be more useful in the Night, when Seeing fails. It is a vulgar Errour, (tho' little thought so to be) That the Cause of the Difference of hearing Sounds before and after Sun-set, is the Noise that is made in the Day-time, and the Silence of the Evenings and Nights; which one single Instance (tho' thousands may be given) will fully demonstrate, viz. In the Famous and Well-governed University and City of Oxford, there is scarce any Noise made at the Times of Divine Service on the Lord's Day, all People being either silent at Church, or shut up quietly and silently in their respective Houses or Colleges, (the Heat of the Days in Summer∣time, but mostly the good Order of the Place, causing it:) But after Sun-set, most People are out, walking and discoursing, or talking at their Doors, Arbours, or Gardens; and all Chil∣dren
(that noisie Part of Mankind) are now per∣mitted to go out, who act their Parts in Playing, Running, Calling, Yawling, and Crying out one to another; insomuch that (all things consider'd) I cannot imagine but there must be in general an hundred times more Noise made then, than in the the time of Divine Service in the Heat of the Day; yet may you, notwithstanding all the Noise, hea, in the Twilight, any thing twice as far as in the time of Divine Service in the Heat of the Day, (I believe I might have said four or six times as far.) The same may be observ'd in any Town or City that is kept in good Order at the time of Divine Service, or in Camps, &c. upon several Oc∣casions. It is not only consonant to Reason that the Air should be so discontinued by the Particles of Heat, &c. but obvious to the Sight that it is so; for in a great Heat, the Summer-time, and clearest Day, you may see the very Air in a wavering tremulous Motion, which could not be seen of it self, without the mixture of other Parts; for disgregation of Parts, (as you see even in pel∣lucid homogeneous Things powder'd) causes Opacity. III. The Business, or Office, of the Organs of Sen∣sation, in the Oeconomy thereof, being to receive and communicate the Impressions to the Animal Spirits with all the smartness they can, it is manifest, that in the Membranes, (or Organs) Tension is their main Requi∣site. Hence it is that when the Tympan of the Ear is tense, the Cornea, and other Tunicles of the Eye sufficiently so, we hear and see acutely and accurately; to that end God has given us a Power to render the Tympan more tense when we listen; to contract the Pupilla of the Eye when we look very intently, &c. And we see, that when the
Cornea is relaxed, (as it is always when the Eye looks deadish, as in Sleep, Drunkenness, fainting Fits, &c.) yet then we either not seet at all, or much worse: So it is when the Tympan is relaxed. We also always put the Tongue in a tense condi∣tion, when we would taste a Thing exactly. So when any Part is relax'd by Warmth, &c. we do not feel so well and nicely, as when the Part is cold, or more tense, or rigid; nor in Sleep, as when awake, because all Parts are relaxed in Sleep, and contracted when we are awake, which ma∣nifestly appears, 1. Because we perspire less when we are awake, than when asleep, which happens because the Pores are closed by the Contraction, or▪ Constriction, when we are awake, and opened, or loosened, by Relaxation when asleep. In all Relaxations, as that which happens by Pleasure, Warmth, Leipo∣thymies, Sleep, &c. we perspire more; and less in Contradictions, by Cold, Fear, Grief, Pain, or any grievous Sensation, or Passion. 2. Because all Parts are firmer when we are awake, and more loose and flaccid when we are asleep; none can doubt but Firmness is from Ten∣sion, or Contraction: But in this matter you may expect farther Satisfaction by and by. Obj. Some may needlesly say, How came Ten∣sion and Contraction to be Concomitants, or Effects one of the other, seeing we make Things more tense, as a Drum's Head, &c. by Extension, not Contraction? Answ. I purposely started this Objection to clear the Case. Therefore, 1. Observe, That Violin-Strings will grow so tense (as will any thing else of like Nature) by Contraction in moist Weather,
that tears them to pieces sometimes upon that account, and always puts them upon a greater stress; for when a thing is fixed at both ends, it is the same thing to shorten, or contract, the String, to render it tense, as to take something from its length between those two fix'd Points; both the Contraction and the Winding do only take something of the Length away, that is between those two Points, where the Ends are fastned; which causes a great stress of the shortned String, to reach those two Points that it is fastned to: As, suppose you have a String of 11 Inches long, fast∣ned at both ends at the distance of 10 Inches, it will be very loose; then shorten it one Inch, by winding up so much, or by some means contract the String to 10 Inches, or any way shorten it an Inch; then it will just reach the Points, and be tense, if fastned at them. So there is Contraction necessarily causing Tension, which was to be de∣monstrated. It will be the same in effect, if a String put round any thing is shortned by Moisture, or otherwise, it must grow more tense; and so must 500 Strings, if so shortned, or an entire Membrane that covers or includes the whole. Thus Membranes (as a Gut contracted upon included Air) must, when they contract, grow more tense upon the inclu∣ded Animal Spirits in the Nerves, or otherwise; for it is the same as forcing much Air into a nar∣row, or contracted Gut, or Bladder, which must make them tense, while the elastick Body must thrust out the harder, the more it is compressed. And that the Membranes, and all sensile Parts, are more contracted when we are awake, doth farther most plainly appear: Because,
3. The Cornea of the Eyes (which is a visible and certain sign of the Relaxation of all the sensile Parts of the Body) is relax'd in Sleep, as any one may see; for that is the cause of the deadness of the Eye in Sleep, which upon awaking is imme∣diately gone, by the Cornea contracting into a tense condition upon its Contents, by which means it becomes tense, rotund, hard, smooth, shining, and reflects a brisk Speck of Light, (as round Things do) which makes it look lively; whereas when 'tis lax, as in Sleep, Syncopes, Faintings, &c. it is uneven, soft, and reflects an uneven, dull, inde∣finite Light, all which causes the deadness of Looks. Therefore (as was intimated) there is no better sign of Relaxation than deadish Looks. 4. The Pupilla (which is another sign of Relaxa∣tion) is relaxed, or dilated, in Sleep, and contra∣cted when we are awake. 5. All Motions of the Body are better perform∣ed when we are awake; which argues the grea∣ter contraction of Parts; for Relaxation (as in Sleep, Deliquiums, Drunkenness, &c.) weakens all Motion. 6. That Efflorescence of the Skin which People have when asleep, (which is caused by the Re∣laxation of the Skin admitting the Bloud more into it; as Paleness is by the Contraction of the Skin in Cold, Fear, &c. repelling the Boud) dis∣appears upon awaking, by reason that the vigila∣tive Contraction (so I call it) does send the Bloud out of the Skin by squeezing it back, or repelling it. 7. Measure the Body ingeniously and accurate∣ly, and you'll find it contracted and narower, after awaking, than in Sleep. 8. Hence it is that you find, when the Body is pretty full of Moisture, and the Weather hot, a udden Sweat upon awaking; because the whole
Body contracting, does, like the contortion of wet Linnen, cause an exudation of its Moisture, by a mechanical expression, or squeezing. 9. Hence also it is that we are subject to take Cold, even in a warm Room, if we watch long; because the Pores being closed by that vigitative Contraction, hinder Perspiration too long, and too much: Therefore it is that all Colds are worse to∣wards the Evenings, because that Contraction closes the Pores all day; and not only Colds, but many other Distempers, especially such as Perspiration is good for; as indeed it is for most Diseases, as be∣ing the most natural and considerable Evacuation: Most natural, because it requires no voluntary Mo∣tion, or Irritation of the sensile Parts, as that of Siege, Urine, &c. which either require the Will, or Irritation by Quantity or Quality, or both, or all three; but Perspiration (like Fumes in a Chimney) requires only that its little Funnels (the Pores) should be open, because our Fumes pass (as the other do) by their own natural Levity: And it is most con∣siderable, because universal, and that much more is evacuated that way, than by all Means and Ways whatsoever. Hence it is that all Membranes gaining a Tension, by the vigilative Contraction in manner aforesaid, are more rightly disposed to receive and commu∣nicate smart Impressions to the Animal Spirits, while we are awake, which was the Thing aim'd at, and will be much more illustrated by the Consideration of the Animal Spirits, and the Sensitive Soul. Note, That the Membranes, Vessels, and Roads of the Animal Spirits, being much narrowed and compressed by this vigilative Contraction, Two other main Requisites for exact Sensation do of
course follow, (so consentaneously do the Works of God conspire to their Ends) viz. First, That an Impression made upon the Ani∣mal Spirits in Pipes so narrowed, is better, more exactly and smartly convey'd to the sensitive Soul, as has been shewn, by the Analogy of the External Medium in slender Pipes. It is by such narrowing of the Nerves, Pipes, Roads, &c. of the Animal Spirits, that cold Wea∣ther, which contracts the Parts, makes our Feeling more nice and smart than warm Weather, which relaxes the Vessels, and gives the springy Animal Spirits (for such they are, as shall, by His Assi∣stance that made them, appear) leave to expand, by which means, and the Vessels widening, the Feeling grows duller, for want of compression of the Spirits. By what has been said, you may see why Per∣sons of a fine and delicate Texture (that is, of smaller and slenderer Vessels) have a more exquisite Feeling; that little Animals, as Spiders, Flea's, and many such, have most nice and accurate Feeling, because their Nerves, Vessels, Pipes, &c. are pro∣portionably small, and the smaller they are, the more accute is their Feeling, for the Reasons afore∣said; which was absolutely necessary, because they deal with small Things proportionably, as their Food, Treading, &c. and that small Things may harm them, unless they take distinct notice there∣of to defend themselves; whereas Elephants, Ca∣mels, Horses, &c. can, because of their large Vessels, scarce feel such Impressions, as would crush those little Animals to pieces. Lord, how manifold are Thy Works! In Wisdom Thou hast made them all!
It is from this Fineness and delicate Smallness of the Nerves, Fibres, and Membranes, &c. that one Part has a more exquisite Sensation than another, and that the extream Parts have (generally speak∣ing) better Feeling. Secondly, It follows, that by reason of the vigi∣lative Contraction of the sensile Parts, the Animal Spirits must gain a considerable compressure, whereby (as the External Medium is rendred fitter to con∣vey Impressions by the help of Compression) they are better disposed to convey Impressions to the sensi∣tive Soul; for the Internal and External Medium ha∣ving like Office in the Oeconomy of Sensation, and (as you'll find) like Qualifications, must be affect∣ed alike by Compression; but whether they are the same thing, or no, I shall not need the Discussion of that Point here; therefore I leave it to my Tract of Animal Mechanism. IV. The Office, or Businss of the Animal Spirits (or Internal Medium) being to receive Impressions from the Organs, and convey them to the sensitive Soul, as that of the External Medium (or Air) was to re∣ceive them from the Object, and convey them to the Organ; the requisite Dispesitions for its purpose, are manifest from the Analogy of the External Me∣dium, viz. First, That they should be springy, (or elastick;) and that they are so, appears, 1. From their very Office, which being tenuicus and fluid, they could never perform (as the Air cannot) without being springy. 2. If they were not elastick, and thereby com∣pressible, their Vessels could never be so contracted (as has been shewn) without squeezing them quite
out of them, which is a Disorder not to be sup∣posed in the Works of God. 3. If they were not elastick (or springy) they would not fill their Vessels upon Relaxation thereof, which would leave a Vacuity, and thereby cause a discontinuance of Motion, or (at least) a great disorder of it▪ which would cause dismal Convul∣sions, if not Death it self; which is most likely. 4. They could not be so active, nor indeed at all active, without springiness; for they cannot act up and down, and all manner of ways, (as they do) by either Levity or Gravity, or by any other known or imaginable Qualification, but Elasticity (or Springiness) 5. It cannot be conceived why they should be more active one time than another without Elasti∣city; but they are more active at one time than another, as appears by several Places or Passages of the Premises, and in the waking more than in such as are asleep. 6. It is manifest, that they are elastick, by their springing into a Limb held up or down; and, that with such Force as to cause a great Pain, after they have been excluded from it by some Acci∣dent, as leaning, or pressing too hard upon a Nerve, &c. for neither Levity nor Gravity can do so, especially both up and down (as was said;) nor is there any Propulsory Engine for them, as is for the Blond, therefore it must be from their springiness. 7. They could not cause brisk and smart tre∣mulous motions in the Body, if they were not ela∣stick, for such cannot be conceived by any means without it▪ but there are several brisk and smart tremulous motions, caused by the Animal Spirits, as in the Shiverings of Ague Fits, Frights, Cold, Sur∣prizes, sudden or exquisite Pain, Tremors of the Hands, Head, &c. in Old Age, in some Conv,
&c. Therefore the Animal Spirits that cause them are elastick. 8. Muscles have no springiness of themselves, when the Animal Spirits are excluded from them▪ as in Palsies, &c. but all Muscles in their Exertion are very springy, insomuch that if you hold any of them back, or restrain them from their mo∣tion, and again suddenly leave them at liberty during the Exertion, they, or any Part moved by them, will spring out very violently, as in Flip∣ping, an Arm held back, &c. But nothing proves this Matter better than the Tongue, in forming the Sound of the Letter R, for in that Case the Tongue, after it is put in Ten∣sion and Exertion, being suddenly hit against the Inside, or Gums of the Upper Teeth, does there∣upon (as Springy Bodies used to do) fall into a tremulous motion, or jarring, that causes the snar∣ling sound of R, which nothing but springy Mat∣ter can do. 9. Were they not springy, they could never convey the tremulous motion of sound to the sensi∣tive Soul, and indeed over all the Systeme of the Nerves, by which is caused (as may be proved) that Motion of Consent call'd Dancing, and the Fingers, &c. to move and keep Time with the Musick, even when it, or the Finger, are not as much as thought of, because the Animal Spirits have the same Capacity with the Air, to receive and convey it, by Reason of their springiness, and greater by Reason of their more forcible Com∣pression by the Vigilative Contraction, super added to the Compression of the Air, under which they are, as well as the Air it self, as plain Reason tells us; for that which Compresses the whole Body, must needs Compress the Animal Spirits: The
Experiments of the Air-Pump do confirm the same. 10. There can be no doubt but the Animal Spirits are nourish'd, or sustain'd by the Air, if they be not Air; therefore they are elastick. What needs any more Arguments, when several of the former are Demonstrative? And, that, 11. All Physicians and Phylosophers (that I know of) do allow, that the Animal Spirits are ela∣stick. Secondly, It is requisite, (as was said of the Ex∣ternal Medium) that they should be compressed, to render them fit to convey Impressions; and that they are compressed is evident (as was before in∣timated.) 1. By the Atmosphere. 2. By the Vigilative Contraction; which makes them much more dis∣posed to convey Impressions than the External Me∣dium; besides, that very often Two other Contra∣dictions (that are shewn in the remaining Part of this Chapter) are added thereto; and, that the Animal Spirits are wholly contained in Pipes, (to prevent their Expansion) and that of the nar∣rowest sizes that can well be imagined; but the Air, or External Medium, is at large in the At∣mosphere; so that all the Impressions made upon the Animal Spirits are very tightly, closely, and smart∣ly convey'd, nor have they but a little Way to pass, that is, the length of the Animal at most, which also may be some Advantage to small Crea∣tures. But in Sleep the Vigilative Contraction being lost, and the Animal Spirits thereupon expanded, all Impulses must needs be carried very faintly, both because the Organs (or Membranes) are in∣disposed by Relaxation, and the Animal Spirits by Expansion upon that Relaxation, for want of due Compression to fit them.
Thus have you (after many vain Enquiries) the true Mechanical Cause of the Difference of Sensation, Sleeping, and Waking, and the plain Reason, why our Motions are so feeble in Sleep, viz. Because the Animal Spirits have lost much of their Force, Sprin∣giness, &c. for want of due Compression, by Reason of the Relaxation of all the Vessels that include the Spirits. Thirdly, It is (in some Measure) requisite, that the Animal Spirits should have an Homogeneous Con∣tinuity, as was shewn by the Analogy of the Ex∣ternal Medium, which does not convey Impressions as well in the Heat of the Day, as in the Night, or after Sunset; because its Parts are more discon∣tinued and disgregated by the Particles of Heat, Fumes, &c. in the Day Time; nay, if Things be discontinued, they never carry Impressions so well, tho' placed contiguously afterward; Thus a long Tree that conveys sounds so exactly from one end to the other, while all is continued, and in one Piece, will not convey the sound so well if it be cut into many Pieces, tho' they are afterward put close one to the other. As to this Matter of Continuity in the Animal Spirits, seeing it does not much concern us, and that People in a State of Health are supposed to have it, and that it is not our Business here to en∣ter upon the Consideration of Nervous Distem∣pers, I need not use any more Words about it; but that if it any Way happens to be discontinued, as either by the Penury thereof, that they do not quite fill all Parts of their Vessels, or any Matter intercepting their Parts, or that the Vessels should be so relaxed, or widen'd, that the Animal Spirits cannot so well fill them up, &c. such Causes must
destroy or lessen Sensation, tho' the bare mixing of Fumes with them would not (considering the shortness of the Way that Impressions are carried in Animals) much alter the Case, as you find Fumes in the Air do not much hinder sound at the distance of a Yard or Two, wherein it is insensible (to common Observers at least;) so that if some Fumes from a Grain or Two of Opium, did mingle with the Animal Spirits, it would not cause a sensible difference of Feeling in the short space of the length of an Animal: But I have proved, That no such Fume from the Opium mixes with them, therefore need say no more of this Matter. V. The Office or Business of the sensitive Soul in the Oeconomy of Sensation, being to perceive the Impres∣sions conveyed to him by the Animal Spirits, that he may, if he finds them disagreeable, bestir himself in Defence of the Animal. First, It is requisite he should attend to all Impres∣sions offer'd him by the Animal Spirits, otherwise Impressions of great Concernment may escape his notice, and consequently want his Assistance by Way of Defence. For It is manifest, That when his Attention is di∣verted by any Object, more especially by such as mightily pleases him, as in the Act of Venery, and other Pleasures, especially if intense, that he does not perceive other Objects at the Time that he is so diverted; and if the pleasant Diversion be in∣tense, and permanent, as in the Case of Opium and Wine drank in a considerable Quantity, he is so taken up, diverted, or charm'd therewith, that he does not attend to the Business of Sensation. This is one Reason why such as are far gone in
Drink, have none of their Senses aright; but as to the Illustration of this Matter you may expect more hereafter. Note, That the sensitive Soul is the only Thing i an Animal that has Perception, and therefore the only Thing that is sensible of any Grievance, Weariness, Hunger, Pleasure, Comfort, &c. Secondly, It is requisite, that it should use all Means that is in its Power, that the Impressions should be brought to it very entirely, exactly, smartly, &c. so as to have due notice of all Objects, and the smallest Impressions that may be. For which good Ends and Purposes God has en∣dued the sensitive Soul (as will be fully proved) with a Power of contracting all the sensile, small, and slender Pipes, Vessels, or Passages of the Animal Spirits, for the more express, distinct, and accurate Conveyance of all Impressions by the Help of Compression; Therefore the sensitive Soul taking the Advantage thereof, for better In∣formation, in order to Self-Preservation, does (by the Appointment of the Preserver of all Things) execute his Power by the aforementioned Vigila∣tive Contraction of those Parts, to cause their Ten∣sion and greater Compression of the Animal Spirits, to improve the Impressions that are to be convey'd to him, and render them more observable; This God, who has made nothing to be idle, and par∣ticularly ordered the sensitive Soul in Adam for Labour, especeally in Reference to their own Safety and Preservation, has made to be the ordinary Employ or Day-Work of the sensitive Soul, that by the said Vigilative Contraction, the Organs, Membranes, Vessels, &c. may be render'd more tense and firm, and the Animal Spirits more compressed,
springy, prompt, flippant, and forcible, for the Benefit of Sense and Motion, upon all Occasions of Defence, Flights, Struggles, &c. which is our State of Vigilancy (as has been intimated.) But the keeping of the said Parts, Membranes, &c. in continual Contraction, even against the Renitency of the elastick Spirits, (which resist, and thrust the harder against their Vessels, by how much the more they Compress them by the Vigilative Contraction) being a continual tedious Labour and Fatigue, of which the sensitive Soul being sensible, (as the only Perceiver of Lassitude, or indeed of any Thing besides, in an Animal) and in his Nature but material, changeable, fatigable, frail, subject to be worn out, and capable of Decay, (which makes the Certainty of Death in all Animals, and in us since the Fall into an Animal Nature) does, upon that Account, and lest the continual Contraction and tensive Stress of Parts, by that Means, should spoil their Tone, and to recruit the wasted Sprits by Rest, (after tuggingall Day at the Vigilative Contraction) grow willing to give over the Drudgery, however convenient for the Uses aforesaid; Therefore being allow'd convenient Rest by his Maker, he, for the great Benefit of Refection, without which he cannot continue his Being, and for the sweetness of Ease, loosens the Reins of Vigilative Contraction; where∣upon Sensation and Promptitude to Motion (which were maintain'd by that Contraction, causing the Tension of Organs, and Compression of the Animal Spirits, as has been Mechanically demonstrated) fail by the Relaxation of those Organs, Membranes, and Vessels of the Spirits, and the consequent Expansion of the Animal Spirits; so that now only the Compression of the Atmosphere remains, which (as you see in a Gut half full of Air un∣der that Pressure) is not sufficient to convey the
Impressions with any Smartness, or cause the Ani∣mal Spirits to spring vigorously into Motion; which Decay or Failure of Sense and Motion by Relaxa∣tion, and the consequent Expansion of the Animal Spirits, is the State of Natural Sleep. Note, That Relaxation is a necessary Conse∣quence of the Privation of Contraction, and re∣quires no Labour, but a bare Remission of that Contraction. Note, That the Watching Part of our Lives is upheld by Force, and that Nullum violentum est diuturnum, and consequently a necessity of Sleep, and at last of Death it self. Thus have you the true Reason of Sleeping and Watching, which will naturally, plainly, and easily solve all the Phenomena's thereof; for it is most evident from the Premises: 1. Why Watching and Sleeping observe a Pro∣portion between them; the being tired with one being the cause of the other. 2. Why Sense and Motion do fail so much in Sleep, viz. by the Relaxation of all Parts, and Expansion of the Animal Spirits. 3. Why they always fail together, and in like Proportion. 4. Why they do not wholly fail in Sleep; be∣cause the Compressure of the Atmosphere, &c. re∣mains. 5. Why in Sleep the Limbs are (like a Gut half full of Air) lax, limber, flaccid, and yielding all manner of Ways; because all the innumerable small Vessels that contain the Elastick Animal Spirits, are (as that half fill'd Gut I mentioned) not tightly fill'd, which if they were, would be firm and
tense, as such a Gut, blown up very full and for∣cibly, is; which Vessels being all over the Body, con∣firm the whole Tone when we are awake, and the Vigilative Contraction compresses the Animal Spirits into a Steadiness, and (as it were) a kind of Solidity. 6. Why (as appears by Statick Demonstrations, and Experiments) we perspire more when asleep than awake; because the Pores are closed by the Vigilative Contraction, and open'd in Sleep by the contrary Relaxation, which therefore always causes free Perspiration where ever it happens, as in faint∣ing Fits, Syncopes, Leipothymies, and by Warmth, especially if moist and emollient, as in Baths, Fo∣mentations, Feet Washes, Head Washes, &c. as also when Pleasure relaxes, as in the Act of Venery, great Joy, after good Meals, or some Glasses of Wine, &c. all which cause plentiful Perspiration, because they relax, and thereby open the Pores, (as more fully appears in the following Discourse) by Reason of the Pleasure that they cause, which diverts the sensitive Soul from his Employ of Con∣traction. 7. Why, the Pores being open by the Relaxation, we sweat in our Sleep, if we are fill'd with Mat∣ter for it, viz. , That is, Much Sweat in Sleep argues, that much Food (or Nutriment) was taken; of which Drink is the greatest Part in Bulk, even in Sober Per∣sons. I mention this to shew the Difference in the Case of Perspiration and Sweating, for that always happens in Sleep, but not Sweat, unless the Body be well fill'd with Moisture; To shew the Cause of which Difference, will be the Business of my Tract of Animal Mechanism, if I have not hereafter an Occasion to do it in this Tract, as (I sup∣pose) I may.
8. Why Sleep cures Colds (by opening the Pores.) 9. Why the Skin is more florid in Sleep; be∣cause (as has been said) it being relax'd admits the Bloud into it, which Vigilative Contraction does in good measure repel, and thereby cause the Skin to appear more white and pale, as it is, and any one may observe upon awaking. 10. Why the Eyes look deadish in Sleep, viz. because (as has been shewn) the Humors do not fill up the relaxed Cornea to a due Tension and Ro∣undity, which (as was said) makes the Cornea shine, sparkle, and particularly to reflect a brisk Speck of Light, (as shining round Things must do) which Speck if Painters omit, the Eye looks deadish, therefore they should, when they have a mind to express the Deadness of the Eyes, as in Fainting Fits, Syncopes, Sleep, Death, Wanton loose Oglings of Lovers, Drunkenness, &c. omit that Speck, or rather draw it duller, wider, and discomposed in Figure, with the Pupil very large, and the Upper Eyelid falling down loosely, which would exactly express the Deadness of the Eye in all those Cases of Relaxation, in which alone it so appears. Note, That the Reason why some in such Cases see divers Colours before their Eyes, is, because the uneven Cornea variously retracts and reflects the Light, which I mention because none (that I know of) have observed the Cause. 11. Why People are more sleepy in warm moist Weather, viz. because the Parts are more relaxed, and the Pressure of the Atmosphere less to assist the Vigilative Contraction, to keep us in a waking State by the Compressure of the Animal Spirits: How much better therefore is a cool and dry Air, that raises the Mercury high in the Barometer, (or Weather Glass) both for Heath and Action? be∣cause it renders the Animal Spirits more power∣ful,
prompt, and flippant by the Compression. This should be observ'd by such as are to run Races alone, lift Weights, or perform any Thing that requires Strength, Vigour, or Speed; nor can I doubt, but if we had an Artificial Means to com∣press Men's Bodies in a high manner, (as by put∣ting them into convenient Cavities, and forcing Air upon them) but they would be much stronger for the Time, and thereby enabled to do Ex∣ploits beyond their ordinary Strength; which puts me in mind of several Things that confirm it very much, as Mens lifting of greater Weights in low Places, than on the top of very high Hills, where the Pressure of the Air is less to compress the Animal Spirits; The Contraction of all Parts in lifting of great Weights; The prodigious Leaps, and Swiftness of some Persons in great Frights, Terrors, &c. which mightily contract the sensile Parts, and Vessels of the Animal Spirits, by which Means they are render'd more springy and power∣ful. Note, That the true Cause of Strength is the Compression of the Animal Spirits, and that (probably) the Force of Muscles may some way or other depend upon't, which is not my Business to explain at present. Note, That it is the Membranes are primarily contracted, and the Medullary Part of the Nerves, Spirits, &c. compressed thereby by Conse∣quence. 12. Why the soft fleshed, and moist, are more sleepy, as Children, &c. viz. because the Compression of their Animal Spirits is not so great by Reason of the laxity of their Parts, so are they weaker for the same Reason, which tells you why little
Men, whose Flesh is firmer, that are no bigger than Boys, are much stronger than Boys or Women of the same bigness. 13. Why warm and emollient Baths, Fomen∣tations, Feet or Head Washes, &c. do (as moist and warm Weather) cause Sleepiness; and indeed all Things that cause Relaxation, or incline the sensi∣tive Soul to leave off contracting, as Weari∣ness, &c. do cause Sleep. Note, That in dry Bodies, as old People, &c. such Emollient Baths, Fomentations, &c. with the Use of Emollient Moistners inwardly, will cause Sleep very finely, when Opium it self will not; and that Opium in such Cases should be used with such Things both internally and externally; but (which is not observ'd) the Baths, Fomentati∣ons, &c. should not be above the Warmth of Bloud, because the Heat may otherwise cause too much motion of the Bloud and Spirits, which is a great Enemy to Sleep, that consists in their Rest, and the aforesaid Relaxation of Parts, by both which co-operating, you may, and cannot fail to cause any Man to Sleep, if you can make them concur. 14. The same Relaxation causes the Pulse to be larger and slower in Sleep, Nocturnal Pollutions, want of due Contraction and Sensation at Sto∣mach, by which Means the Meat stays longer there in our Sleep, than when we are awake; So, 15. Frets, Commotions, and Perturbations of the Spirits, &c. are composed by Sleep, because the sensitive Soul (who is the Original of all motion) is at Rest, and that the Animal Spirits being ex∣panded, are nearer their absolute Rest, which consists in a full and perfect Expansion, so that there is no farther Endeavour towards Motion.
16. Sensation being much lessened by the Ex∣pansion of the Animal Spirits upon the said Relaxa∣tion, the Sense of the Irritation of Humours is there∣by lessened, or quite taken away, whereupon all Fluxes occasioned by the Irritation of Humours, as Diarrhea's, Disenteries, Catarrhs, &c. are stopt or moderated (at least) by Sleep; Besides, that Relaxation being quite contrary to Contraction, by which those Humours are squeesed out, lets the Humours stay quietly where they are, Relaxation being more for receiving, containing, detaining, and suspending Humours in the Parts, than send∣ing them forward, as you see in a Spunge first contracted, and afterward suffered to dilate, or expand it self in a Dish that has some Water in it, which it takes into it self, and suspends till some∣thing squeeses it out by contracting it. 17. Therefore it is that the Spittle does not come into the Mouth in Sleep, or very little, and that People are apt to awake thirsty, tho' it is soon taken off in some measure by the Vigilative Contraction squeezing out the Spittle into the Mouth, unless there is some special Cause to the con∣trary. 18. For the same Reason the Menstruum of the Stomach comes but very slowly into the Stomach in Sleep, which is one Cause that Digestion goes on but slowly in Sleep. Note, That Digestion, and sending the Chyle out of the Stomach, depending both upon Con∣traction, they are hastned and retarded in exact Proportion, so that the Extrusion keeps equal Pace with the Digestion. How equal and duely pro∣portioned are the Works of Nature! 19. It is plain also from what has been Stated concerning Sleep, why Ague Fits seldom (if
ever) take People in the time of their first sound Sleep, because the Shivering is caused by a grievous Sensation of the sensile Parts, which cannot well happen in that sound Sleep, wherein there is so little Feeling by Reason of the said Relaxation; and because Relaxation opposes Contraction, by which that Shivering is promoted. Such a Re∣laxation, and Failure of Feeling thereupon, is the true Cause why Opium puts off Ague Fits, &c. So, 20. The Relaxation in Sleep stops Vomiting, by taking away the sense of the irritating Cause, and quieting (as I have intimated) all Motions in general; so Sleep stops Hiccoughs, Hemorrhages, Diary Fevers, &c. 21. Why Watching, Labour, or what impairs the Spirits, and tires the sensitive Soul, inclines us to Sleep, that is, disposes the sensitive Soul (the only Feeler of Lassitude) to give over Contract∣ing the Sensile Parts, which (as will plainly ap∣pear by and by) spends the Spirits, as Sleep by relaxing them causes a Recruit thereof. To be short, (tho' one can hardly be too long in solving Phenomena's, which is the Proof of the Truth of a Man's Assertion) the Mechanical De∣monstration that I have made of the State of Sleep∣ing and Waking, does so evidently explicate all the Phenomena's of both, that I am even asham'd to run any farther upon such plain Matters, (so obvious are Things when the Truth is known,) and therefore (having mention'd those Circum∣stances and Effects of Sleep, that mainly concern us) I must give over, lest the World should think, that I take all my Readers to be Idiots, by using too many Words in so obvious a Thing; or, that I am no better for using them without Cause; for the Truth of this Matter seems to me to out∣shine
all the Arguments I can make for it, such Splendour does Truth shew upon the first Glimps thereof, as I take the Account I gave of Sleep and Watching to be; for the Opinions I have met concerning them were quite contrary to, or very remote from what I have stated. 1. They went quite contrary to it that said, That the Animal Spirits were expanded, and the Pores of the Brain, &c. more open (and conse∣quently more lax) in Watching, as Willis, and se∣veral others; who therefore say that Coffee, Volatile Salts, &c. are Antihypnoticks, (or good against too much Sleepiness) because they cause an Expansion of the Spirits, and open the Pores of the Brain, supposing (forsooth) that they marched up and down, and so kept the greater stir upon the false Imagination of their Roads being more open, which (as was proved) are really more close. Coffee keeps us from Sleep by drying, binding, and both Ways constringing the Vessels, as also by a wide grating Quality, which therefore does irri∣tate them to contract, besides that the Saline Par∣ticles causing an Agitation, may contribute there∣to, so that by constringing and agitating, it directly opposes Sleep, which proceeds from Relaxation and Quietness. 2. They were very remote from the Mark, that said (as Wedelis asserts all do) that Vapours were the cause of Natural Sleep, which bear no manner of Proportion thereto (as was shewn;) As they were also who mdly talk'd, That the Animal Spirits, which have neither Life, Sense, Motion, or Election, did of themselves retire very knowingly to the Brain in Seep, and left the Limbs, &c. de∣stitute of them, whereas (as has been Mechani∣cally proved) they have more Room than that at other times in  Limbs, and all the sensile Parts.
But I will not argue against such senseless and precarious Absurdities; it is not worth the while, especially since the Truth is manifestly discovered: It would not have been so silly to have affirm'd the quite contrary, viz. That the Animal Spirits are forced into the soft and yielding Brain, in Watching, by the Vigilative Contraction of all the sen∣file Parts repelling them, as when Cold repels them by a strong Contraction of the Parts, and causes a Stupor or Sleep thereof (as they call it.) But what have we to do with such insufferable Trash? Therefore bidding it adieu, let us pursue our Bu∣siness. That it is the Sensitive Soul, and nothing but it, has that Contracting Power, is evident; 1. Because it is the Original of all Motion in the Animal as such; and that nothing besides it has any Life, Perception, Motion, or Power, and therefore must rest till they are moved. 2. Because, That when the Sensitive Soul is di∣verted by intense Pleasure, from attending his Bu∣siness, immediately Relaxation follows; as in the Pleasure of the Act of Venery, by Wine, Ioy, &c. in which you have all the Effects of Relaxation, as Deadness of the Eyes, Dilatation of the Pupilla, plentiful Perspiration, Floridity of the Skin, a large Pulse, and sometimes a considerable Failure of Sense and Motion, as in the most pleasant time of the Venereal Act, Deliquiums, Drunkenness, Syncopes, or Ecstasies upon intense Pleasure, (which are very properly called Ecstasies) Leipothymies, Leipopsychies, &c. which signifie the Soul's leaving us without his Help by Contractions, which he then does not ex∣ercise, as being charm'd, and wholly taken up with Pleasure. This is the true Cause of all Deli∣quiums, &c. upon Pleasure, Ioy, &c. all which cause great Relaxations, and thereby Loss of Sense and Motion, as being its necessary Consequences.
3. Because grievous Sensation, which belongs only to the Sensitive Soul, puts us immediately out of Sleep into a Vigilative Contraction. 4. Because the Sensitive Soul can, when we are Sleepy, oppose it, by continuing the Vigilative Contraction; which proves Vigilative Contraction to be in his Power. Note, That there is also other sorts of Leipothy∣mies, Deliquiums, &c. upon the Sensitive Soul's being over-tired, (whereof Natural Sleep is but a common and ordinary Degree, that happens of Course for our Relief) or over-born with some Fatigue, &c. as when somewhat grieves at Sto∣mach, and that it has laid about it all manner of Ways, by Vomiting, Convulsive Motions, &c. to be rid of it, till it can work no longer; whereupon it lays down the Cudgels, desists from all further En∣deavour by Contractions, yielding it self to Ease, seeing all Striving is to no Effect: So, that tho' this Deliquium, and the former, differ in their first Causes, yet do they agree in the last and immediate, viz. the Sensitive Soul's not attending his Business of Contraction, whereupon follows a mighty Re∣laxation, as appears by the Deadness (or Relaxation) of the Cornea, Dilatation of the Pupil, a great Laxity of all Parts, a large Pulse, or none, very plentiful Perspiration, Stops of Hemorrhages, and all Fluxes that require Contraction, &c. which happen both upon the Account of the great Relaxation it self, (as has been shewn) and the almost absolute Rest of all Things by the Sensitive Soul's withdrawing himself from Business, more than in Sleep it self. I therefore observing the Degrees of Sleep, &c. do Note, That (God and Nature using a due Proportion in all Things) the Sensitive Soul uses several Degrees of Relaxation, according as he is tired, and Refection is wanted: Hence it is, that
such as are much tired sleep more profoundly, that our first Sleeps are the soundest, and that Sleep gra∣dually declines in degrees (as we are recruited) till we awake; the nearer which we are, the more we dream, the state of Dreaming being a kind of Twilight between sound Sleep and Awaking, or between a full somniferous Relaxation and vigilative Contraction. And as the Sensitive Soul uses all degrees of Contraction below that of the Vigilative, till it comes to bare Compression of the Air; so it can exercise super-vigilative Contraction, (if I may so call it) that is, much higher degrees thereof than what was requisite ordinarily for a state of Vigilancy, as in Cases of Danger to the Animal, Frights, Ter∣rours, grievous Passions and Sensations; by which means the animal Spirits being more compressed than under the ordinary vigilative Contraction, Sensation grows more nice and smart, and Motion more prompt and vigorous (they always going together) for the Defence of the Animal, by extraordinary Flight, Repulsion, or otherwise. Hence it is, upon Fear, Terrour, grievous Pas∣sion, or Sensation, (which manifestly proves the Be∣ing of such an extraordinary Contraction upon such Occasions) That, 1. Perspiration sails in a yet higher degree than under bare or ordinary vigilative Contraction, as appears by infallible statick Experiments and Demon∣strations. 2. It is by reason of the said defensive Contraction, (for so I call it, because it is excited in an extra∣ordinary manner for the defence of the Animal in time of need, or great Exigence) That in Frights, Terrours, &c. our Hair, Dogs, &c. does stand on end, or more upright; 1. Because the Pores do, by that violent Contraction, strictly close about the Root of the Hair, that it cannot swag, incline,
or yield any way, by reason of its Weight, &c. as when the Skin is more lax and soft, and the Pores, wherein the Hair is fixed, more open. 2. Because (which is the main Reason) the said Contraction renders the oblique Pores more upright; as suppose the Pores and Hair do naturally stand obliquely, (as they do to carry off Wet, &c.) as in Fig. 1. Fig:I Fig:II And that (a) in Fig. 1. is, by the said Contraction, brought nearer to (i), as much as is from (a) to (o), then will the Pores and Hair stand upright, as in Fig. 2. and the Skin a, o, e, i, s, contracted and brought within the prick'd Perpendiculars, whereas in Fig. 1. it excur'd beyond the Perpendi∣cular n, m, as much as is from a to o. 3. For the same Reason it is, That the Face, in grievous Passions and Sensations, as acute Pain, &c. is contorted and wrung awry, as you see in Persons that cry because of Grievances, (after the same manner as when they strive to lift up a great Weight) and that at the same time Tears, and Moisture at Nose and Mouth, are squeezed out by the same Contraction; which makes People use the Saying of Casting Snot about when Men cry. It is for the same Reason that People's Mouths water
extreamly when they are trimm'd with a bad Razor that puts them to Pain, which contracts the Parts, and squeezes out the Spittle. 4. The Pulse grows sensibly narrower and har∣der by the same Contraction. 5. It is by the Contraction upon grievous Sensa∣tion, that our Mouths water very much upon a Nausea at Stomach, because of the continuity of the Membranes of the Mouth and Stomach. 6. The same Contraction is the true Reason why People, upon Hunger (which is a grievous Sensation at Stomach) have so much Moisture (or Spittle) in their Mouths, and so much the more when they see good Victuals, and cannot have it, be∣cause the Grievance which causes the Contraction that squeezes it out, is by so much the greater. This is the cause why the Mouth waters when hun∣gry People see or smell good Victuals. By the same Contraction Moisture is squeezed out into the Oesophagus, (or Gullet) and the Menstruum into the Stomach at the same time; where (observe God's Good and Wise Providence) that Hunger which calls for Meat, at the same time provides Spittle to lubricate it for swollowing, and to help Digestion, render the Gullet slippery and disten∣sible, and causes the Menstruum to flow more abundantly into the Stomach; and all this when most needed, and that exactly in proportion to the Hunger (or grievous Sensation) that causes the Contraction. It is well worth your nothing, That God's Wis∣dom does always cause the Want of what is neces∣sary in sensile Creatures, to be the solliciting and urging Cause for supply, that a due Proportion may be observed between the Supply and the Want; which may upon the telling of it appear so plain a Case, that it is scarce worth the mentioning; but (believe me) it is so little observ'd, (as plain
as it may seem to be) that People have, and do err extravagantly for want of noting it; which if they had noted, they could never have said that Vapours, or the retiring of Spirits into the Brain, &c. was the Cause, or Call of natural Sleep; nor feigned Menstruums to be the cause of Hunger; but would have duly considered what is mainly sup∣plied by Eating, or recruited by Sleeping, &c. and then had nothing to do but to conclude the Defect of that to have been the Cause that solicited for the Supply in proportion to the Defect: Which, if ob∣served, will most naturally and easily lead you to the true Knowledge of the Causes▪ of all Appetites in an Animal, upon a few Minutes Consideration; for want of which most plain and (one would think) very obvious Method, the deviating World has sadly puzzled it self about the Cause of Hun∣ger, Thirst, Sleep, and the like, to this day, and still is in Disputes about them, of which (tho' my advertent Reader may well prevent me, by using that natural Method) I shall (God willing) give an account in my Tract of Animal Mecha∣nism: Only note here, That I do not mean bare privative Defect, as such, to be the positive Cause▪ but that the Defect of what keeps or guards the Stomach, &c. from the Grievance, causes other Matter to grieve it, cause Hunger, &c. without which means, no Proportion can be observed be∣tween Hunger and what takes it away, or our Food. 7. The same defensive Contraction does, upon grie∣vous Sensation, as Pain, Cold, Terrour, &c. cause a Corrugation of the Scrotum, contract the Skin into little Tubercles like that of a Goose-Skin, &c. 8. By it, upon grievous Sensation, as by squeez∣ing the Nose very hard, pulling the Hair, Sand, or any such thing, in the Eye, or a Grievance by the Volatile Particles of Onions, Mustard, Horse-Radish-Roots,
&c. the Parts and Membranes about the Eyes contracting, squeeze out Tears, that what grieves the Eyes may thereby be washed away, or qualified, as much as the Tears can do it. 9. By this Contraction repelling the Bloud, the Skin grows Pale by Cold, Fear, Pain, &c. which also closing the Pores, stop Sweat, as in a moment. You'll have an account hereafter how Contra∣ction may cause Sweat by squeezing in some Cases, and stop it by shutting the Pores in other Cases. 10. It is by it that Contraction, that Fear, Cold, &c. closing the Pores, and repelling the Bloud, stanch Bleeding: So happens also a greater Con∣traction of the Pupil of the Eye by the same Cause. 11. It is the Violence of this Contraction upon Fear, Terrour, Pain, Cold, &c. closing the small Vessels of the Animal Spirits, and thereby repelling them, causes the Shivering in those Cases, by the Renitency of the elastick Animal Spirits springing back again, toties quoties, having gain'd more ela∣stick Force by the very Compression it self, which that Contraction causes; so that by reason of the dubious velitation (or skirmishing) between the repelling Contraction and the springing Spirits, hap∣pens a tremulous Motion, (as of quavering Springs;) which Shivering in Ague-Fits did formerly lead me to the Situation of the Cause of Agues (when I writ my Book De Febribus intermittentibus) in the Angustiae at the end of the Vessels, which termi∣nate in the Membranes; the grievous Sensation of which, causes all the Shivering that happens in any Case to Animals. 12. By the same Contraction, when very violent, and of the whole Body, cold Sweats happen in Pain, Fear, Terrour, &c. while it violently squeezes out the outmost, and therefore coldest Moisture
of our Bodies, as Laundresses do Water out of wet Linnen by Contortion. Thus if you dip one half of a wet cold Sheet in hot Water, wrapping the hot side within the cold, or let a warm Sheet that is contorted cool on the out-side of it, and then wring it as Women do Linnen, the Water that first exudates will be cold; for in this Case the closing of the Pores avails nothing to hinder it, as long as the expressing Force masters it; more especially in Animal Bodies, wherein the Parts are so contrived, that Humours design'd for Exoretion cannot well return, and therefore must, upon Contraction, run out▪ Hence it is that Alum, or Vitriol, which are very astringent, and therefore close the Pores, will notwithstanding cause the Mouth, or Nose, to run very plentifully with Moisture, by contract∣ing all the Membranes about the Mouth, or Nose, and thereby squeezing out the Moisture design'd to be excern'd, which cannot return, because the Parts▪ are contriv'd against the return or read∣mittance thereof; whereas Alum, or Vitriol, will stanch or stop Bloud by the same Contraction, be∣cause it may return (as not being design'd to be excern'd) either into the Arteries, and so pass by other Branches thereof, or (which is more ready and natural) keep its course into the Veins. So the two Riddles (that I have known some Proud Physicians amaz'd at, tho' but Trifles) of Alum and Vitriol causing the Spittle, &c. to come out, in∣stead of stopping it by their Astringency, and their stopping Bloud at Nose at the same time they cause the Snot, or other Humours, to run out, are unfolded. 13. It is by this mighty Contraction growing to an enormous degree, that the Animal Spirits being violently compressed, grow exceeding irrequiete, as upon Convulsions in great Pain, or very grievous
Sensation at Stomach, &c. while the sensitive Soul compressing them with mighty Force, and some∣what disorderly and unevenly, because of the Con∣fusion and Hurry he is in to relieve the Animal, they by their springiness fling up and down with great Vigour. This makes convulsive Motions have great Strength. 14. The Body under this Contraction is ma∣nifestly shrunk by measure, especially when the Sensation is very grievous, but most of all if they cause a general Convulsion; which I manifestly ob∣served in a little Bitch▪ that was convulsive all over for three Hours, and was just expiring, when I gave her the Sal Volat. Oleos. of Opium, which perfectly restored her by relaxing the Vessels. Some may think it strange, That Nature should contrive a more nice and smart Sensation (which the Contraction of the Vessels of the Animal Spirits must cause by compressing them, &c.) in Pain, and by it; which becomes so much the more acute; whereas one would judge, That Nature would ra∣ther contrive its Ease than improve its Smart. You are to know, That the Pain is in order to relieve the Animal, by exciting all its Powers to defend, expel, or reject the Cause; and that, without a grievous Sensation, the sensitive Soul is neither minded nor excited to do it; and the more the Pain is, the more it is stirr'd up to Self∣preservation, and (as was shewn) the more vi∣gorous do its Motions grow by the Compression of the elastick Spirits to perform that Work; so Na∣ture, not regarding the Pain (which is rather for good) as much as taking away the Cause, advan∣ces that, for this Purpose; like a wise Physician, who finding a Grievance at Stomach, not sufficient to excite effectual Vomiting, to throw away the grieving Cause, adds to the Grievance by giving a Vomit; which because (as was said) Nature is
proportionably excited to, and invigorated for Self-preservation, sufficiently sollicites and enables it, by a stronger Contraction, to reject the grieving Matter. As the greater the Relaxation is, the more is the Rest of all Parts; and the weaker the Animl Spirits (because less compressed) the gentler are all Motions, (as you see in Sleep) consequently the less is the Expence of Spirits; so that in Sleep we generate more than we spend, and are there∣by recruited: So the more the Contraction is▪ the more violent is the Motion of the Heart, In∣testines, and of all Parts, and consequently the Expence of Spirits is the greater. Therefore it can be no Wonder, That Contra∣ctions do cause great Commotions of Spirits, Diary Fevers, &c. when you consider, 1. That the sensitive Soul is, by the grievous Sen∣sations, &c. that cause them, put upon a great Fret, Concern, and Hurry, to defend the Animal, and lays about him all manner of ways for Self∣preservation. 2. That the Animal Spirits are, by means of great Compression caused by the defensive Contra∣ction, in a very forcible Springiness, which causes all the Actions that are continual, involuntary, and of course, to be perform'd with great Violence, proportionable to its compressed Elasticity. Be∣sides that, 3. The Systoles of the Heart are otener repeated. All which conspire to cause greater Commotions upon grievous Sensations, whereby Diary Fevers, &c. are caused, which are easily and naturally cured by Sleep, or Relaxation, at present compose and quiet those Perturbations. Who knows (tho' it is not my Business to discuss it at present) but that the Contractions in the cold Fits of Agues, have a great
hand in causing the hot ones? How otherwise should Opium, by only taking away the grievous Sensation of the cold Fits, take off, or prevent the hot Fits also? But of this, in my often-mentioned Tract, (though not so often as it grieves me that it is not published.). How reasonably may we now expect, That pleasant Sensation may cause quite contrary Ef∣fects to that of grievous Sensation? viz. Relaxa∣tion, and all its Effects, (which have been in some measure enumerated in the Case of Natural Sleep in this Chapter) viz. Satisfaction, Composure of Frets and Commotions; as of diary Fevers, hysterick Fits, &c. Perspiration, quieting of Vomitings, Hiccoughs, &c. lessening of Feeling, and consequently a stop and moderation of all Fluxes that depend upon Ir∣ritation of Humours, as Diarrhea's, Dysenteries, Ca∣tarrhs, Vomitings, Driness of the Mouth, (as in Sleep, for want of the Contraction to squeeze the Spittle out of the Glandules into the Mouth) Nocturnal Pollutions, &c. But of the Nature and Effects of Pleasure, you'll find more in the next Chapter. Besides the Vigilative and Defensive Contractions, (which seem to be Things of course upon Waking and Grievances) the sensitive Soul has a Contraction at Will, as that of the Pupilla, when an Animal is intent upon Seeing; of the Tympan, when intent upon Hearing; of the Musoles of the Legs, when intent upon Walking; and so of all the Muscles of the Body, which I call Intentiv Contraction, that he can perform either along with, or without the o∣ther Contractions, or without any great degree there∣of, as when one is considerably relaxed with the Pleasure of Wine, very good News, &c. nay, some∣times even in Sleep, as is manifest by the Noctam∣uli, (or such as walk in their Sleep) and such as
speak, strike, &c. while asleep: And as the De∣fensive Contraction does all it can in our Defence, without the Direction of the Will, as in Vomiting, Sneezing, Purging, &c. upon sensible Irritation; so this Intentive Contraction does all it can to the same Purpose, by the Direction and Dictates there∣of. Note, That inensile growing Things that do not move, as Trees, &c. have none of these Con∣tractions, but what happens by Cold, and Compres∣sion of the Atmosphere, which are sufficient it seems for Nutrition, but not for Sense and Motion; it follows, That in compleat Syncopes, when the sensitive Soul gives over all Contractions, that we are much in the state of a Plant. All those three Contractions, viz. the Vigilative, Defensive, and Intentive do, because they promote Motion, and cause it more or less, (as you find the Vigilative causes much more of it than Sleep, and the Defensive more than that, &c.) spend the Spirits, cause Weariness, &c. The Vigilative Contraction does of it self, with∣out any considerable Grievance or Labour, that is, without the Denfensive or Intentive Contraction, tire the sensitive Soul in about 16 Hours: Hence it is that the idlest Person, that is most free from Care, Trouble, or Pain, cannot well hold out without the Recruit of Sleep any longer. The Defensive Contraction, or that of Grievances, being added to the Vigilative Contraction, the Spirits are faster spent, and the Person tired pro∣portionably sooner, according as the Grievance is more or less; and consequently the Endeavours of the sensitive Soul to be rid thereof.
To both which Contractions, (viz. the Vigilative and Defensive) if you add the Intentive, (or La∣bour) then are you sooner and more tired than by only those two former Contractions; for this last Case is labouring in Pain, (or under a Grievance) which notoriously tires Man or Beast sooner than ordinary: The direct contrary to which, is sleep∣ing soundly and sweetly, without Trouble, Pain, or Dreams; for a dreaming Condition has too much of the vigilative Contraction in it, to be pure Relaxation and Recruit. Now according as these Contractions are, or are not added one to another, we are sooner or later before we are tired, (speaking generally, and not considering Custom and Habit, which concerns us not.) You see that all the three Contractions con∣ourring, do soon and sadly tire us, that no two of them tire us as much as the three together; that i, neither the Vigilative and Defensive, without the Intentive; nor the Vigilative and Intentive, without the Defensive; and the Vigilative alone least of all: Yet allowance must be made for the Intensness of the Defensive and Intentive; for either of these two being very intense, may tire as much as both, in a moderate degree: Thus a Man may be tired with violent Labour in four Hours, tho' not in Pain as much as one that moderately labours in some small Pain for the same time. Observe, That we recruit in eight Hours (gene∣rally speaking) as much by relaxation in Sleep, as we spend by vigilative Contraction in sixteen: I take the Reason of that to be, That Relaxation widening all the Passages of the Body, the Nutri∣ment is admitted into them more fully and freely,
as the Bloud is into the Skin in Sleep, and all Relaxa∣tions, which cause an Efflorescence thereof in those Cases. Hence it is that we are so much recruited and nourished in Sleep; that Children grow more than others proportionably; that Relaxers cause the Breasts, &c. to grow. Note, What a mighty Restaurative Relaxation is▪ By its help, for eight Hours in twenty four, we can watch all, and labour most of the other sixteen, all the days of our Life: It follows, That if we could any way half relax the vigilative Contraction while we Labour, take a Iourney, or the like, that we might perform prodigiously, without being ired. Hence it is, That because Pleasure (as has been in∣timated relaxes, as Grievances contract, (of which you may expect farther Proof in the next Chapter) that such as work, or travel, pleasantly diverted all the time, are tired very little or nothing in a long time; and that some will dance whole Night with sweet Musick, and agreeable beloved Com∣pany, without being so much tired, as they would be if they us'd the same Motions for a quar∣ter of the time without either of the pleasant Diversi∣ons. The like is to be said of any other Pleasure, as drinking a good Glass of generous Wine every half hour, or so often as to continue the sense of its Pleasure at Stomach all the time they labour or tra∣vel; for 'tis a vulgar Errour, (tho' the universal Sentiment of Mankind, both Learned and Un∣learned) That Wine, Cordials, &c. do comfort, elevate, and excite the Spirits, (as 'tis call'd) by adding their Spirits to, or joining them with ours; whereas it is only by causing a pleasant Sensation, particularly at Stomach: For which Paradox, I am obliged (tho' in great haste to come to the Ex∣plication of Opium) to give my Reasons, which are as follows, viz.
1. It cannot be imagined how a sensitive Crea∣ture, as such, can conceive any Comfort, or be sensible thereof, but by Sensation: To say he is comforted, and not sensible of the Comfort, is a Contradiction; for Comfort, as such, belongs to a perceiving Being; and an Animal, as such, per∣ceives nothing but by the Senses; and therefore there can be no Comfort but by pleasant Sensation; nay, as such it is his Comfort: So Musick, pleasant Sights, Odours, and agreeable Objects of all the Senses, are comfortable, because pleasant. I hope that none will say, That Musick, Sights, good News &c. (which highly comfort) have any Spirits to add to ours: The truth is, That God and Nature have given us our Senses for that end, and present Refection in Cases of Faintness, Depression of Spirits; And what more proper to convey Comfort to us, than what is sensible of it? 2. It is another thing to add by way of Nutri∣tion to our Spirits, (which are insensible Things, and therefore never properly comforted any more than a Plant, that is nourished as well as they:) But the sensitive Soul being pleased, must needs con∣ceive Satisfaction, Comfort, Ioy, &c. How he can be pleased when sensible of nothing, I know not; nor how he can be comforted without being first pleased, nor how pleased but by Sensation. 3. The Essence of Animal Comfort does not con∣sist in having many Spirits; for one in most grie∣vous Pain and Misery, by which he is much dis∣comforted, cast down, depressed in Spirit, &c. may have great plenty of Spirits; and one that has not half as many, highly comforted, by plea∣sing Objects of Sense, good News, &c. 4. If we staid for Comfort by a Meal of Meat, &c. till it added to our Spirits, we might stay long enough; nay, if we staid for Comfort till
we found it by that Addition, we should never find it; for we cannot in that case find what we do not feel: We possibly, after two or three days eating and drinking, may find our selves stronger; but (after all) suppose us in very great misery at the same time, Where's the Comfort of it, when the Spirits are otherwise depressed by Pain, ill News? &c. 5. Hunger is a grievous Sensation at Stomach; which is cured, and we comforted, by causing a pleasant Sensation by Meat, Wine, &c. instead thereof; and not by adding Spirits, which is a great Mistake. It is true indeed, that we are comforted, but it is most manifestly by pleasing the exquisite Sensation at Stomach, which God has placed there for that End: Hence it is that all Cordials must be pleasing to the Stomach, or else they are no Cordials; and that Wine, and all such Things as please the Stomach, are apt to take away much of the Sharpness of Hunger, for a time at least. 6. How should Wine, which has a great Aci∣dity in it, and so very good for Digestion, cure a canine Appetite, which is a grievous Sensation, but by causing a pleasant one in its room, by which means the grievous Sensation is taken off? For Plea∣sure and Grievance, (or Displeasure) which are Contraries, cannot be in the same Subject at one time. Thus it is that Opium takes off Hunger, canine Appetite, &c. But of this hereafter. 7. How should a Quart of Wine; drank in a minute or two, have all the comfortable Effects of Wine in a quarter of an hour while it is at Stomach, if it were to stay for this Comfort till it added Spirits to ours, since the matter of Effluvia, or Fumes passing into the Rloud, is disproved?
8. Why should our Comfort be so great while it is at Stomach, and none by that time it is got into the Bloud, but that the Stomach being very sensile, the Spirits of the Wine do highly please by their Agreeableness thereunto? It matters not whether it had Spirits or no, so it caused a pleasing Sensation; for a Draught of Water in a high Fever, and when we are very faint with Thirst, very much comforts us without any Spirits, as does a Venison-Pasty a hungry Person, by agreeable Sensation taking off the grievous Sensation (called Hunger) and all its consequent Faintness, &c. before it can add any Spirits by Nutrition. 9. What need we seek any farther? Do not we find a pleasing Sensation at Stomach, when we are comforted with any thing, and the Comfort to bear a Proportion to the Pleasure? 10. Are not we prompt, blithe, gay, and brave, while the Wine is at Stomach? And very often fit for nothing, dull, heavy, mopish, &c. by that time it is got into the Bloud? Therefore we may safely conclude, That the Spirits of the Wine do comfort us, by causing a pleasing Sensation, and not by adding its Spirits to ours, according to the settled Sentiment of the World, that is not yet arrived to the Learning or Knowledge why the most common Cordial com∣forts them. What Spirits has a Grain of Opium, while at Stomach, to add to ours; or can it add, if it had them? Yet no Wine comforts us as much as Opium, because it pleases us so much, (as was and will be yet much more fully shewn.) Note, That besides what was said of the Grie∣vousness of the three Contractions, to tie the animal or sensitive Soul, he is much deprest and cast down, upon the Perception of Grievances, as Hunger, Pain, &c. Because they, 1. Affect him with Grief
and Displeasure, and consequently with Discomfort, Anxiety, &c. because of the very Dolour. 2. With Care and Solicitude how to be rid of it. 3. With the Toil of Defensive Contraction to endeavour it. All which causes Melancholy, Depression of Spirits, Pusillanimity, Perturbations, Frets, Discomposure, Dis∣satisfaction, Anxiety, Solicitude, Peevishness, Discom∣posure, Discomforts, Listlesness, &c. as you see in such as are Hungry, or in Pain; to which if you add the Fatigue and Effects of the Defensive Con∣traction, and the Intentive, as far as it is exercised for Self-preservation in this Case, you may (obser∣ving what has been said) easily solve all the Pheno∣mena's of grievous Sensation, and as easily conclude what must be the Phenomena's and Effects of plea∣sant Sensation, by the Rules of Contraries, viz. Sa∣tisfaction, good Humour, Ease, Comfort, Ovation of Spirits, Relaxation, &c. of which we are going to speak.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Nature of Sensitive Pleasure, and its Effects upon the Animal, as far as it con∣cerns our present Purpose. SEnsitive Pleasure is a Complacency of the sensitive Soul, resulting from the Agreeableness of the Object to the Organ of Sensation: Thus are we pleased with what is agreeable to the Eye, Ear, Tongue, Stomach, &c. And what is agreeable to those Organs, is agreeable to the Animal in general: 1. Because God has made and appointed them (especially the sensile Membrane at Stomach) to be as it were the Touchstone of what is agreeable to the Animal. 2. Because the Membranes (or Organs) are of the same active Principles with the Animal's Body in general; otherwise they would not be fit Tasters, Triers, or Touchstones of what is good or bad for the Body in general. Now the active Principles of the Membranes, (or Organs) are Volatile Salt and oily Parts, or a Sal Volatile Oleosum, which is predominant in them, and all the Parts of the Body; therefore such Things as have a Volatile Salt join'd with some oily Parts, must be in a special manner agreeable and pleasing to the Membranes; for simile fimili gaudeat. Hence it is, That what abound in Volatile Salt, as Snails, Earthworms, and Things of that kind, are such fine Anodynes, and so pleasing to the Membranes, &c. That the Seed of Animals, which is a Sal Volatile Oleosum, and Things of that na∣ture, as Onions, Garlick, Rocket, Sives, Bears Gar∣lick,
Oysters, Cockles, Shallot, &c. do so please and tickle the Venereal Membranes, and thereby excite Venery; and that such Things are generally so very agreeable to the Stomach, (with which we are mainly concerned, as the Chief Judge of what is agreeable to the Animal) and so main Ingre∣dients of Relishes, Sauces, &c. to render them pleasing to it. Here it is obvious to note, (what is also very commonly observed) That the most pleasing Things to the Stomach, Venereal Membranes, &c. have those Principles more active, warm, and tickling, than the Membranes themselves, because the sensitive Soul is highly pleased with what fine∣ly actuates, tickles, and causes an Ovation of the Spiritus insiti of the Membranes. Hence bare Warmth is so very pleasing, as are also gentle Frictions of the Head, Back, &c. for the same Reasons. 1. The oily Parts (as all know) do please the Feeling (with which we have to do) by their smooth, gentle, and soft touch. Thus Milk, Emulsions, and other Anodynes, as the Root and Flower of Water Lily, White Lily, &c. become agreeable to the Membranes, and theresore relax and ease Pain. Hence it is that all Aliments have an agreeable Sweetness, the Pleasure whereof takes off the grievous Sensation called Hunger. But the Pleasure of oily Parts, because they do not so actuate, stir, and titillate the Spiritus insiti, is but flat, slow, and dull, without they are joined with some other Particles that are pleasing to the Membranes, that actuate and finely titillate the Membranes, and Spiritus insiti; therefore to make them highly and charmingly pleasing, they should have join'd therewith,
2. Volatile Salt being a more active agreeable Principle, which may finely and pleasingly excite, actuate, titillate, and cause an Ovation in the Spiritus insiti, as Onions, &c. at Stomach, Sem. Ani∣mal. upon the Venereal Membranes, &c. But, as was said of the Oily Parts, That they cannot cause so exalted a Pleasure without the Volatile Salt, so the Volatile Salt alone, or too little qualified, and smooth'd over with Oily Parts, is too rude, pungent, or acrimonious, as in Cantharides, Bees, Pismire, Asarabacca, Spear∣wort, Crowsfoot, and other Vomitory Volatiles, which becomes so by over-stinging the Membranes, and stirring the Spiritus insiti overmuch into a sort of Fury, instead of an agreeable Ovation. It follows therefore, That it is neither Oily Parts alone, which if too much, often nauseates the Stomach, nor Volatile Salt alone, no nor every Mixture thereof, but a certain due Proportion of both, so as to have the Volatile Salt somewhat more predominant than in our Membranes, that it may comfortably actuate, titillate, and excite our Spirits, as Warmth, Frications, &c. do, must cause the most charming and exalted Pleasure; For Things exactly of the same degree of Oil and Volatile Salt, with our Membranes, can cause but a slow Sensation, because they make little or no Alte∣ration therein, which is one of the great Requisites of Sensation; for that which makes no Alteration, as the Saliva in the Mouth, the same degree of Light that is in the Eye, of Sound as in the Ear already, &c. cannot be perceiv'd, because where no Difference is made, nothing can be perceiv'd, for the Organ is affected but as it was before the Object was of∣fer'd, and consequently we cannot perceive that any new thing was objected, and therefore can∣not be at all sensible thereof; so if it makes but
a small Difference, the Sensation can be but slow, and slight Proportionably, as of a little degree of Light more than is in the Eye, &c. for it is only that little that is perceived; for (as is notorious to all who understand any Thing of these Mat∣ters of Sensation) it is only the Excess of Impression to what was upon the Organ before, that is per∣ceived; for that is all that is nw above what was thereon before, and therefore all that is to be, or can be perceived more than was before (as was said.) Hence it is, that Flesh or other Things, that have the Sal-Volatile Oleosum, or the same Prin∣ciples, that the Membranes of the Stomach, Vene∣real Parts, &c. have, in much the same degree, affect them but with a gentle Pleasure. There∣fore we must have such a mixture wherein the Volatile Salt, as in Semine Animali, Onions, &c. is sensibly more active than in our Membranes, to actuate the Spiritus insui of the Membranes, and cause an Ovation therein, which is (as was said of Comfortable Warmth, Frications, &c.) very agreeable, and pleasant to the Sensitive Soul, who looks upon such as friendly and active Auxiliaries to our Spirits, whereas the other are as lazy Friends, wherein he takes not the like Compla∣cency; You may perceive much of the Difference in this Case in Mustums, (or new unfermented Wines) which indeed do lazily please by their acceptable sweetness, but do not so actuate the Spi∣ritus insiti as the same Oily Parts when rendered active, spirituous, and nearer the Nature of actual Heat after Fermentation; which then being very readily actuated by the Heat of the Stomach, do briskly and chearfully return the Kindness by actu∣ating our Spirits, and putting them into a pleasing Ovation, of which I could give you a very pat and pregnant Instance in a Thing actuated into a very high degree of pleasing by Frication and
Agitation, which was otherwise almost insensible; but Modesty forbids me. Note, How the sluggish Oily Parts in Mustums do, by being spiritualized by Fermentation, as it were, supply the place of Volatile Salt in actuat∣ing, and in some measure titillating, tho' not to that high degree as the more poinant Volatile salt in Semine Virili, and the like, because the Sulphu∣reous Oily Particles, however separated, disgre∣gated, and set at at liberty by Fermentation, re∣tain much of their smoothness, and never can arrive at the titillating Power of Volatile Salts, as is evident in Amphrodistacks upon the Account of Volatile Salts, as Cantharides, Bees, Pismire, &c. which Wine in 100 times the quantity cannot e∣qual in Titillation. Nor is it enough to have the Sal Volatile Oleo∣sum duely qualified, as to the Quantity and Quality of both the Oily and Saline Parts, and these pre∣dominant, and of a fine brisk and gently tickling Activity; But the Oleous and Salino Volatile Parts should (to make a compleat and permanent Pleaser of the Membranes) be very intimately combined, so as not easily to separate one from the other, o∣therwise they will not duely conspire and co-ope∣rate to cause the Pleasure, but the Volatile Salt will act separately as such, that is irritating, and not finely and pleasantly Tickling, as Semen Huma∣num, &c. wherein the Oil and Volatile Salt are firmly join'd together. I therefore conclude, That the most excellent Thing to please the Membranes, must be such as Semen Humanum, that is, not too Oily, (for then
it would not sufficiently please by a fine Titilla∣tion, and actuating of our Spirits) nor too full of Volatile Salt, as Mustard, Asarabacca, &c. nor have too accrimonious a Volatile salt with too little Oleous Parts to correct it, for in both these last Cases the Irritation would be grievous; nor have the Oleous and Volatile loosely combined. But, That it should be a Sal Volatile Oleosum, where∣in the Volatile Parts are brisker, and somewhat more active than ours, yet so corrected by Oleous Parts intimately combined therewith, as to render it of a most agreeable and pleasant Titillation, such as would please all Membranes, but especially those that have most accute Sensation, as the Stomach, and Vene∣real Membranes, (both which Opium most sen∣sibly pleases) which are ordered so to be for Pre∣servation of the Individuum, and Species, the one to invite us to Eat, and the other to Procreate; But to satisfie you yet farther, as to the Stomach, which concerns us mostly, Note 1. That the more exalted and intense the Pleasure is, the higher are its Effects upon the Sen∣sitive Soul in pleasing, comforting, and elevating it; and upon the Body, in relaxing all the Sensile Parts thereof, as that of Wine is higher than that of Mustum, &c. Note 2. That the better the Organ is disposed for Sensation, the higher the Pleasure or Displeasure is; for he that has his Nose, Tongue, Ear, Mem∣branes, &c. ill disposed for Smelling, Tasting, Hear∣ing, Feeling, &c. has not so much Pleasure in sweet Odours, good Tastes, Musick, Pleasers of the Feel∣ing, &c. nor so much Displeasure in bad Scents, &c. It follows,
Note 3. That cujus est Dolor ejusdem est Voluptas, that is, the Part or Membrane that is capable of intense Pleasure, is so of intense Pain or Displeasure. For Instance, If the Stomach be capable of great Grievances, it is so of great Pleasure, God having distributed them also equally. Note 4. That, since the great Use, End, and Business of Sensation, is to give notice, and inform the Animal of what is, or is not good and a∣greeable to it, it follows, that the Wisdom that made us would place the most exquisitely and critically disposed Organ (or Membrane) of Sen∣sation, where such notice is most requisite and use∣ful; and consequently there must be more Pleasure or Displeasure conceiv'd at Things agreeable or disagreeable, that the descending and relieving Motions and Comfort, may be proportionable. Note 5. That such exquisite, exact, and nice Notice is most requisite at Stomach. First, Because all our Nutriment, good and bad, is to pass that Way to be Judged of. Secondly, Because it is the last Part that it ar∣rives at before it receives a considerable change; for when it is changed, no such true and sincere Iudgment can be given thereof, as could be be∣fore. Thirdly, Because the Faults, Defects, or Negli∣gences of the Taste, and the External Senses, are to be remedied and corrected there, or no where, therefore the Stomach is as the last Judge of Ap∣peal, and should be most exact and infallible in Iudging; or as the last inner, or Main Guard in a Fort, Town, or Castle, which if the Enemy pass, the whole is endanger'd, if not lost. Fourthly, Because the Concern being so great, Sensation should be the more exquisite there, to excite the Animal Powers to make Defence, by
repelling, rejecting, or detruding the Enemy, which Powers (as has been intimated) are excited according to the degree of Sensation, especially seeing there is no voluntary Power, or Contraction of the Stomach, but only the Natural, which is always excited by Sensation in such Cases, or not at all. Fifthly, Sensation should be critical and accurate at Stomach, to inform us precisely when we should Eat or Drink. Sixthly, To inform us exactly when we have Eaten or Drank enough; for all this is done by Sensation. Therefore God has placed a most Sensile Mem∣brane at the Stomach, as most manifestly ap∣pears; First, By its taking, and giving notice of such Minute Things, that no Sense, Part, Organ, or Membrane can; for it takes notice of, and informs the Sensitive Soul (as has been said) of the Vomi∣tory Particles of the Crocus and Regulus of Anti∣mony, which are so indefinitely small, that no o∣ther Membrane or Organ of Sensation, but that at Stomach, can take notice thereof, because the Crocus and Regulus, after they have afforded 1000 Vomits from their Bodies, are not sensibly dimi∣nished either in Weight or Bulk; nor doth the Stomach take and give a slight, but very remark∣able notice thereof, that is sufficiently powerful to excite not only all the Natural Powers of the Part, and of all the Auxiliary Muscles that usually assist to Vomit, but to cause a Contraction (and that very often strongly Convulsive) of all, or most of the Muscles, and Membranes of the whole Body, so great is the Sway, or Regimen of the Stomach, by vertue of its exquisite sensility.
Secondly, By its giving notice of inimicous Par∣ticles, and very tenuious Effluvias, that fly in the Air, which no Organ of Sensation, or Membrane, but that at Stomach, can observe. For Instance, Some that hate Cats very much, will know, that there is a Cat in the same Room with them, tho' silent, and shut up in a Trunk or Cupboard, where neither the Eye, Ear, Nose, Taste, or immediate Feeling, can be at all concerned or affected. That it is the Stomach that is affected, is apparent, (tho' a Thing not thought of;) 1. Because the first notice they have is plainly at Stomach by a kind of faint Distress, not unlike a beginning Nausea; If the Curious will enquire, they will find it to be as I say. 2. Because all Perception of Material Things is by Sensation, and that it is evident no other Organ of Sensation, or Membrane, is concerned. 3. Because, if the Cat continues in the Room, and is not removed, they fall a Vomiting, or into Anxieties or great Distresses at Stomach, or Faintings and Syncopes, which are the common and known Effects of a grieved or op∣pressed Stomach. Just so does it (tho' these Things are not, or not duely observed) take, and give notice of Pe∣stilential Effluvias, which cause the like Faintings, or a kind of Nausea at Stomach; Thus People discern that they are (as they call it) Plague struck, and often fall (as in the Case of the Effluvias of the Cat) into dangerous Deliquiums and Syncopes, of which many in Plague Times suddenly dye, as Cat Haters would (for ought I know) if they continue long in the same Room with a Cat, as they do with Pestilential Effluvias; Therefore it were good presently to remove them from the Place wherein they were struck, because the Air (as the Room wherein the Cat is) is fill'd with the
pernicious Particles; for you see in the Case of the Cat, that removing the Man or the Cat gives Relief, and it were better removing the Man, but that he is more Cumbersom, because the Room is already tainted with the Effluvias, and in the Case of the Plague it is only the Person that can be well removed. This proves how useful Re∣movals may be, and how convenient in Plague Time it would be to remove to the Wind-side of a Town or City that is tainted, according as the Wind changes, and how convenient Winds are to convey away the Effluviams, and good Sto∣machick Cordials, that are warm, and pleasant, to fortifie the Stomach, and open the Pores, which all Things that cause a sense of Pleasure do, as Wine, Spirits, &c. to which if some good Prepa∣ration of Opium were added, it would be most convenient. How many Stories have we of Per∣sons well fill'd with Wine, who wonderfully escaped Infection; I pray God this Hint may be improv'd to the Preservation of Mankind; There∣fore I add, that much may be in a good Quantity of Wine in this Case; 1. Because, Quod intus est prohibet alienum, that is, What is within hinders in∣gress of another Thing. 2. Because the Perspira∣tion will be the greater, both upon the Account of the greater opening of the Pores by the Plea∣sure of the Wine, and the greater Quantity of Matter to be perspired carry off the venemous Particles. 3. Because the Sensitive Soul is thereby much comforted, refreshed, and invigorated; but I would have the Wine so used, as to keep a continual Warmth, Pleasure, and Comfort at Sto∣mach, which is the main Cause of all the good; I think a Glass every Hour, after taking 2 or 3 at first, may hit the Mark best, the Reason of which will appear hereafter.
Thirdly, The Stomach's exquisite Disposition to Sensation, above all other Organs and Membranes, appears by this, viz. That the Offences of the other Organs of Sensation (even by their proper Objects) do often affect the Stomach more than those very Senses or Organs themselves. For In∣stance, If we smell a great Stench, the Stomach is often more offended thereat than the Nose, as is manifest from the Vomitings, Faintings, and Deli∣quiums that are caused by the Stomach upon that Account; so the bare Seeing, Feeling, and Tasting of a nasty Thing, do cause Nauseas, &c. at Sto∣mach, yea, the very naming of such Things has much offended it, and caused such Effects, which may be thought very strange, considering that there pass no Effluvias from the sound of Words, but the Reason will appear in the following Para∣graph. Fourthly, All Passions, Commotions, and Pertur∣bations, that happen in the Body, do often affect the Stomach, and sometimes so grievously, as to cause Nauseas, Vomitings, great Anxieties at Sto∣mach, Faintings, &c. Thus Fear, Terrour, Surprizes, Anger, Grief, Pain in other Parts, &c. causing some Motion in the Animal more than ordi∣nary, (of which the Stomach being sensible) do cause the aforesaid Disturbances; Therefore it is no Wonder, if the Hearing one mention a Nasty Thing, which causes an Abhorrence, and the Mo∣tions consequent thereunto, should (as was said in the precedent Paragraph) cause the nice Stomach to be offended. It is most manifest from the Premises, that no Organ or Membrane, can compare with the Sto∣mach, as to its exquisite Disposition for Sensation; it follows then,
That Grievances or Pleasure at Stomach must have the greater Effects; 1. Because the Intenseness of either will be proportionable to the Sensation. 2. Because the Powers of the Animal that are to defend it (which are Contractions) are affected according to the Sensation, and that it is there most requisite sensibly to affect them. 3. Because what affects the Stomach influences the whole Animal, more than the Sensation of any other Part. 4. Because of the considerable Stay that Things make at Stomach to cause Grievance or Pleasure, whereas that of Pleasure is generally very momen∣tary in other Cases. 5. Because, being within the Body, we carry our Pleasure or Grievance with us, (as a Vade Me∣cum) wherever we go, and therefore, 6. It is a Pleasure, &c. that cannot so well be taken away from us, as that of the Tongue, Ear, Nose, Eye, &c. may, by removing the Objects; and therefore it remains with us in our very Sleep, as far as we are capable of Sensation at that Time, causing pleasant Dreams, &c. and so agreeably entertaining us Sleeping or Waking, when the Plea∣sure of all the other Senses fails us. Which will appear farther hereafter. The Pleasure at Stomach excells even that of Venery, if not in Intenseness, yet in several other Re∣spects, viz. 1. Because of its duration, that of Venus being momentary, but that of Wine at Stomach lasts a good while, and that of Opium many hours, 'tis therefore that the Effects of these Two are more remarkable and taken notice of.
2. Because, that at Stomach may be continued as long as we please, by a new supply of Wine, Opium, Cordials, &c. 3. Because it may be excited, when, and as often as we please, if we have those Cordials at Hand. 4. Because it is not attended with any Expence of Strength, Depression of Spirits, &c. as that of Venery, but the quite contrary, viz. with more Vigour, Elevation of the Spirits, &c. one being by Emission, and the other upon Admission of what is agreeable. It is for the several Reasons contain'd in the Pre∣mises, that the Effects of Grievance, as Hunger, &c. or Pleasure, are more considerable and remarkable at Stomach, and that Things agreeable thereto have, by way of Eminence, gain'd the Name of Cordials; That Wine, Spirits, Opium, &c. do cause a more permanent and notable Gaity, Plea∣santness, Good Humour, Serenity, Promptitude, O∣vation of the Spirits, (or Sensitive Soul) Bravery, Courage, Magnanimity, Euphory, or easie under∣going of Business, Relaxation, with all its Effects, as Deadness of the Eye, Dilatation of the Papilla, Perspiration, &c. which are hardly noted in other short Pleasures, unless it be in that eminent (tho' short) one of Venus, which is a Pleasure of the same sense of Feeling, as that of Opium and Wine are. Therefore pleasing the Stomach is one of the greatest Things to be regarded in the Practice of Physick, to Comfort, Satisfie, or Compose the Spirits; by which Means I have often performed such Cures, that neither I, nor (I suppose) any other, could otherwise perform, namely, Dejecti∣ons of Appetite, Untowardness at Stomach, &c.
when all the ordinary and usual Means have failed, by asking them what they mostly desired or long'd for, and letting them have it; or if they could not tell of any Thing that they long'd for, I have mentioned to them all the Relishing Things that I could think of, and such as were grateful to the Stomach, till they fasten'd upon somewhat that they liked or fancied, and then being given them, it generally had the desired Success. The Stomach is grieved (for it will concern us to know how, because Opium causes Vomiting, &c.) generally speaking; 1. By Things hard of Digestion, as heavy Bread, Mushroms, Rosins, and such like. 2. By Things acrimonious or pungent; as Vomi∣tories of Asarabacca, Groundsil, Squills, &c. which abound with Volatile salt. 3. By Things that stick to the Stomach, which often cause most dismal and tedious Vomitings, and (when they fall to relieve, by rejecting the grieving Matter) Hiccoughs, Anxieties, Distresses, Syncopes, and sometimes fatal Succumbencies, Na∣ture and all Endeavour failing to work any farther for the Animal's Relief; These Things happen most commonly when indigeslible Rosin sticks to the Stomach, especially if they be join'd with any Pungent, Volatile, or Acrimonious Particles. Hence it is, that Resinous Vomits are quite banish'd out of the Practice of Physick, and it were well if Resinous Purgers were so also, especially such as have considerable Acrimony, unless given with the Yolk of an Egg; Lixivials, or in Tinctures, with Spirituous Things to keep the Resinous Particles from Coalescence, and adhering to the Stomach, &c.
1. Note, (for we shall have some Occasion for it) That Resinous Things, join'd with Volatile ir∣ritating Particles, have all the ill Qualities afore∣mentioned, viz. Hardness of Digestion, Aptitude to stick to the Stomach, and Volatile Particles to irritate and tear its Coats all the time they so stick to it; and therefore such Things have dismal Effects, especially in weak Stomachs that cannot Digest them. 2. Note, That the Distresses at Stomach, caused by a grievous Sensation, are of Two sorts; 1. Such as are the Endeavours of Nature, or the Sensitive Soul, in Defence of the Animal, as all Vomitings, Purgings, Convulsions, Hiccoughs, Throws, Strug∣glings, Agitations, Contractions, Watchings, &c. which are accompanied with Melancholy, Fretful∣ness, ill Humour, &c. because of the Grievance. 2. Such as follow the Yielding and Succumbency of Nature, or the Sensitive Soul, after being tired and over-born by the Fatigue of Defensive Con∣traction; as Faintings, Distresses, Agonies, Syncopes, and Leipothymies. 3. Note, That Syncopes, or Leipothymies, are caused by the Sensitive Soul's being over-born, (as was said) tired, and spent, and giving over his fruit∣less Contractions, Defensive, and Vigilative, upon a sudden, as being to no Purpose, as he does gently and gradually give over Vigilative Contraction to cause Sleep; so that Syncopes are only greater, suddener, and more absolute Derelictions of the whole Concern of Contractions: Hence it is, that Perspiration is greater in Syncopes or Leipothymies than in Sleep, the Laxity of the Cornea and the whole Body greater, the Feeling less, or quite gone, that all Motions become much slower, or none, by the want of Compression of the Animal Spirits, and dismal Derelictions of all Contractions by the Sensitive Soul. Hence it is, that all the Effects of Sleep are yet greater in Syncopes.
4. Note, That therefore it seems, all the Diffe∣rence between Sleep, and a Leipothymy, is, that in this the Sensitive Soul quite throws the Reins of Contractions away, and in Sleep keeps hold thereof, and only lets them loose, and as Refection is made, straightens them more and more, till they come to the Degree of Vigilative Contraction, which per∣fectly awakes them; Therefore Sleep grows slighter toward Morning, because Contraction gra∣dually comes on. Here you may see (but I must stop lest I run too far) why every Thing that causes Contraction of the Sensile Parts, as Pain, and all Grievances, are apt to awake People, and keep them so, as Relaxers cause Sleep, and continue it. 5. Note, That tho' I have particularly spoken of the Somach, as being most concern'd, and the best Example of any Membrane, yet do not I ex∣clude any Membrane from being capable of Plea∣sure by the like Things. As for the Effects of Pleasure upon the Sensitive Soul, I have upon several Occasions said, or in∣timated enough concerning them; and even the Vulgar know, that Pleasure, or being pleased, makes People good, and gay humour'd; That it elevates the Spirits, raising Courage, (as Wine does) and enables every Animal to Labour, or Travel the better, as Horses by the Sound of Bells, especially if tunable, and in Company with another Horse that they have a kindness for; How Soldiers March more easily with Merry Comrades, that are full of Iests, and pleasant Stories, or with Drums, Trumpets, Kettle Drums, , and other Musick that please the Ear; How much more brik and blith are we in a fair Sunshine, which pleases the Eye, than at other times? Some ink, (according to the Vulgar Errour) that i
is the Goodness of the Air does it; but it is plainly otherwise, for you find the change most remark∣able in your self just upon going out of Doors into the Sun-shine, whereas you had the same Air in your Chamber; nor is that fine Lightness of Hu∣mour to be found, if it be Cloudy, tho' the Air be better, as may be observ'd by the Barometer, and other Weather-Glasses; nor in the Night Time, nor where the Sun does not come, nor are blind People so affected, therefore it is the Pleasure of the bright Sunshine that causes it. If Mean, Slight, Transient, and External Plea∣sures, cause such Effects; how much more then will an intense, internal, and continued Pleasure, upon the most exquisitely disposed Part for Sen∣sation of all the whole Body, which is mainly de∣sign'd for those Purposes of Pleasing and Comfort∣ing, to invite us to nourish our selves, and to sa∣tisfie the grievous Sensations of Hunger and Thirst by the Pleasure of Meat and Drink, such Pleasant Effects? Thus the Fretfulness, Peevishness, ill Hu∣mour, Melancholy, Pusillanimity, Inaptitude, and List∣nesness, that attend the grievous Sensation of Hun∣ger, are taken off, and cured, by the pleasant Sen∣sation that a good Meal, or some Glasses of Wine, do cause; Hence it is that we cannot Sleep when Hungry, because grievous Sensation contracts the Sensile Parts, and are apt to it after Meals (the Pleasure of which relaxes us) if we sit, or lie quietly, and silently; but if we do not, we are more lively, and fit for Business. Instances of this Kind are so numerous and notorious, that I need say no more of the Effects of Pleasure, in causing a good Humour, Elevation of the Spirits, Satisfacti∣on, Content, Composure, &c.
Is it possible that one should be highly pleased, and not take Comfort therein; take Comfort, and not be elevated in Spirit, well satisfied, and con∣tented? Therefore it is strange, and very strange, that People should leave Wine, Cordials, Meats, Spi∣rits, &c. actually, and sensibly pleasing, satisfying, and comforting us at Stomach, (where there is a Membrane most exquisitely disposed for Sensation) and run after Fumes and Effluvias, (that were never in our Case in being) to the Brain, or Bloud, that have no sense to entertain them, and consequently can receive no sensible Comfort by them; If this be not seeking a Needle in a Bottle of Hay, where it never was, when it sticks most sensibly in their Fingers, nothing is. We should think it a strange ridiculous ▪Action in a Child or Natural Fool; but great is the Privilege and Au∣thority of the Learned! So much may suffice▪ as to the Effects of Pleasure upon the Sensitive Soul. As for the Effects of Pleasure upon the Body, it is Relaxation of all the Sensile Parts thereof, as appears; 1. Because it's contrary, viz. Displeasure, or sensitive Grievance, causes Contraction, (as has been manifestly shewn.) 2. Because it causes a liberal Perspiration, which is a certain Effect of Relaxation, (as the Want of it is of Constriction) and that it causes Perspiration is most certain by Statick Experiments, and Demon∣strations. Sanctorius, Sect. 7. Aph. 19. &c. 3. Because the Pleasure of Wine, and the Vene∣real Act, manifestly loosens all the Limbs, as Sleep does.
4. Because, that in those Pleasures, as also upon the sight of a Beloved Mistress, &c. the Eyes look deadish, by reason of the Laxity of the Cor∣nea, and that the Pupilla is dilated. 5. The Skin (as has been intimated) looks Florid, which made the Ancients say, That the Bloud and Spirits came outward to meet the good and agreeable Things. 6. Because all Pleasure that is consistent with lying or sitting still in a silent quiet manner, in∣clines us to sleep, as Musick▪ pleasant Frication of the Head, Back, or any itching Part, sweet and acceptable O lours, a Thing of very acceptable taste held in the Mouth, Wine, Meats, Venus, the pleasant sound of the fall of Waters, Whistling Winds, Rocking, Undulating in Hammocks, &c. 7. Because in Coition it relaxes the Neck of the Womb to admit the Animal Elixir Vitae; of which we have most evident Proof, and some eminent Instances, that I forbear the Relation of out of Modesty. 8. Pleasure causes a large and wide Pulse, as Relaxation always does. 9. A Loss or great Diminution of Sensation, as in the Venereal Act. (which if it were of con∣tinuance, would exactly imitate Opium in its Ef∣fects) upon Drinking Wine, &c. the Effects of which being of greater duration, and by taking somewhat into the Stomach, (as Opium is) are very like that of Opium. 10. Intense Pleasure, Ioy, &c. do frequently cause Ecstasies, Syncopes, Leipothymies, which are only great Relaxations (as has been shewn.) 11. You see that the Pleasure of Wine causes Faltring of the Tongue, which is the Effect of Re∣laxation, as in Sleep, Palsies, &c. and relaxes the whole Body.
12. Wine also prevents Lassitude, (as all plea∣sant Diversions do) and causes all the Effcts of Relaxation, as taking away Pain, causing a Dead∣ness of the Eyes, Dilatation of the Pupilla, Flori∣dity of the Skin, Perspiration, Diminution of Sen∣sation, Mirth, good Humour, Sleep, &c. Nte, That Pleasure being generally from Ex∣ternal Objects, and also short, slight, and transi∣tory, is the true Reason of the great Penury of Things that bear any compleat Analogy to Opium in its great Effects, which made it seem more amaz∣ing, and confound People; whereas all the Diffe∣rence is nothing but its causing an internal, in∣tense, and permanent Pleasure▪ All Pleasures have the same Effects, but that they are short, slight, fading, external, inconsiderable, intermitting, in∣terrupted by some grievous Objects, Thoughts, Pas∣sions, as Fear, Care, Solicitude, Melancholy, &c. but the Pleasure of Opium we carry within us con∣tinually, whether we will or no, waking and sleeping, without any intermission or interruption, and that in a high degree for many hours. Doubtless that of Venus, if i were half as last∣ing, would be as dangerous as that of a great Dose of Opium, or Wine drank in a vast Quan∣tity, which is in a manner as dangerous as O∣pium, and for the same Reason, viz. by over∣dosing, a great Relaxer by the Pleasure it causes. The Causes why the Pleasure of the Venereal Act, as a large Dose of Wine, Opium, &c. take away Pain, are; 1. Because the Sensitive Soul cannot attend to Two Things at once; therefore when a Sense of Pleasure is introduced, there cannot be at the same time a Sense of Pain, which tho' not noted in short, transient, and desultory Pleasures, (as al∣most all are besides that of Wine and Opium) yet the more permanent do exact our Notice and At∣tention,
because they exclude Pain for so consider∣able a time that they amaze us. 2. Because the Sensitive Soul attends more wil∣lingly to Pleasure than to Pain, so that Pleasure engrosses his Attention (as was intimated.) 3. Because Pleasure and Pain (or Displeasure) are Contraries, and cannot co-exist in the same Subject (or Sensitive Soul;) therefore when Plea∣sure affects it, Pain cannot. 4. Because Relaxation (which is the Mechanical and main Reason) gives such Liberty to the Ani∣mal Spirits to expand, that they become unfit for want of Compressure, to convey any Impressions smartly, which is requisite to cause a sense of Pain, that is caused by a smart Impression. To which you may add, That 5. Pleasure and Relaxation, where they conti∣nue, (as in the Case of Wine and Opium) do highly improve one another, because they mu∣tually cause one another; for Pleasure causes Relaxation, and Relaxation, as you sind in a sweet Slmber, &c. Pleasure; so that permanent Pleasure must highly advance Relaxation, which takes away Pain by preventing all smartness of Impression by the now yielding Nature of the expanded Animal Spirits, which are, as Air in a Gut half full, or a Rowl of Carded Cotten or Wooll, fit only to carry a gentle. or no Impression to the farther End thereof. So that upon the giving of Opium when the Pin does once begin to diminish, it is not long afterward before it goes quite off; for if the Plea∣sure does but take off one in ten of the Pain, it is a sign, that it will be an easie matter for it (that is, upon the Improvement for the Reasons aforesaid) to overcome one in nine, and yet much easier to over∣come one in eight, and so on; Therefore it is a certain sign, that you have given enough to take
away the Pain, if it once sensibly decreases; and consequently all Physicians should then not give any more Opium, tho' the Pain is not yet quite off: For if the Relaxation, caused by Pleasant Sensation, was of force enough to overcome the greater Contraction by the greater Pain, which opposed it more strongly, it will suffice to overcome the less. This intimates, (and 'tis Experienc'd) that Doses must be proportioned to the Pain; for tho' a few Glasses of Wine may take off the sense of a small Pain, more must be drank to take off a greater; and so of Opium, because the Contraction by Pain resists the Relaxation by Pleasure. Having shewn how Sleep and Pleasure take a∣way Pain by Relaxation, permitting the Animal Spirits to expand, and grow unsit to carry Im∣pressions smartly, and that therefore Sleep stops or moderates all Fluxes that depend upon Irritation of the sensile Parts to cause them to Contract and squeese out the Humours that cause the Flux, while the same Relaxation opens the Pores, and so lets out the Fumes of the Body, which only (like Smoak in a Chimney) require an open Passage by reason of their Levity which carries them off; it plainly appears how Pleasure, that takes away the sense of Pain or Irritations by the like Relaxa∣tion, must stop the first sort of Fluxes, that require the Irritations to contract the Parts, and promote that of Perspiration, (as in Sleep) which requires only the opening of the Pores; so that I need add no more Words about it, for the fame Cause must have the same Effect, therefore an intense and per∣manent Pleasure must have all, or much of the Effects of Sleep in general (as has been shewn:) It cannot therefore be any Wonder that Opium causes Sleep. Yet is there Difference between Sleep and Pleasure upon other Accounts, tho▪
not upon the Account of Relaxation, viz. be∣cause; 1. That Sleep requires also a rest of Spirits, (or the sensitive Soul) whereas Relaxation by Pleasure is consistent with motion of the Spirits, either by outward Action, or internal motion thereof, by some inward Causes. Hence it is; First, That we can Labour, Travel, Dance, &c. and enjoy Pleasure and its Relaxation: Volantary motion, which requires only a particular Contracti∣on of some Parts by the Dictates of the Will or Appetite, being consistent with the general Relaxa∣tion by Reason of the Prerogative of the Will. Thus do we move, tho' more relaxed, or when most Merry and pleased with Wine; nay, some will walk in their Sleep, (when extreamly intt upon a Thing) as when awake; which shews the ruling Power of intentive Contraction, that may be exercised with Relaxations and other Contracti∣ons as the Will it self may, or intentive Appetite. Secondly, That Pain is often taken away by O∣pium by the Diversion and Relaxation caused by Pleasure, and its Inconsistence with Pain, without Sleep, which requires the aforesaid Rest; That bare Relaxation, as such, does not include, tho' Relaxation suffices to take away Pain. Thirdly, That Opium does by its Heat, active Particles, &c. hinder some Persons to Sleep, yet have you in both these last Cases all other Effect of Opium, as Pleasure, Indolence, Relaxations, &c. which shews how far Sleep is from being a con∣stant, and the most genuine Effect of Opium, as is generally imagined; however we must allow it (as has been shewn) to be a mighty Disposer of us towards Sleep, because of the Relaxation that it causes, which is the main Requisite of Sleep.
II. That Pleasure does, without Nutritive Re∣fection, by the Complacency it causes in the sen∣sitive Soul, produce Comfort, Satisfaction, Compo∣sure, Elevation of the Spirits, Euphory, &c. of which Sleep is either not at all capable, or but in a low degree, proportionable to the sensation that it has, which is but little; however a Plea∣sure that remains within us, even in our Sleep, as that of Opium, may well cause Pleasant Dreams, &c. The Reader may observe, that in all Places, where I mention, that Relaxation causes the open∣ing of the Pores, that I speak only of Perspiration, as the Effect thereof, without mentioning Sweat. 1. Because Perspiration is the only constant and infallible Effect thereof, by reason that the Levity of the Fumes causes them as certainly to pass at the Pores when open, as Smoak passes up at an open Chimney. 2. Because Sweat is an uncertain Effect thereof, for it requires that the Body be well fill'd with moisture, tho' there is a Relaxation or Opening of the Pores; as Hippocrates very rightly intimates in that Aphorism of his that I cited in the last Chapter. 1. Because Sweat has not that Levity that the Fumes have, to cause it readily to move as soon as the Pores are open. 2. Because Re∣laxation is more apt to receive, detain, and suspend Humours. 3. Because the protrusive Motion of the Heart is weaker in all Relaxations; and all see how much its Vigorous Protrusion contributes to Sweat upon Action. 4. Because a Heartfull of Bloud does not make such a Push forward when the Arteries are widen'd by Relaxation. 5. Sweat having more of Continuity, Consistence, and Vis∣cidity, cannot flow out so readily at the Pores, as
a meer Vapour. However, if the Body be full of Moisture, and the Pores open, there being a Natural Course that Way, and the Heart conti∣nually protruding it farther and farther, a Sweat follows, and that whether they Sleep or not. 3. Because Sweat (as was in some sort intima∣ted) is sometimes caused by the strong Protrusion of the Heart, as in Motion, &c. and upon that Account comes more under the Title of Fluxes caused by Contraction, than Relaxation, of which Perspiration is a constant Effect. 4. Because Sweat is sometimes caused by ano∣ther sort of Contraction, viz. the Compression of the whole Body by a violent Defensive Contraction, as in great Terrour, Agonies, and the like; causing thereby (as was shewn) by the Comparison of a wet Sheet wrung, (whose out side is cold) a cold Sweat, which that of Alum or Vitriol, caus∣ing an Exudation of the Spittle into the Mouth by constringing the Parts, does illustrate very plainly. Therefore you see I had just Cause not to mention Sweat as a certain and proper Effect of Relaxation, without good Distinctions first made; tho' unwary Authors that talk any Thing one after another, not knowing what they say, make it their common saying, That Sleep and Opium stops all Fluxes but Sweat, whereas they should have rather said, but Perspiration; for Opium and Sleep also will sometimes hinder Sweat, viz. that from Pain, Terrour, &c. and that as happens just upon awaking by the stronger Systole of the Heart, and Contraction of the whole Body, and that also upon motion, unless the Body be (as was said) full of Humours, or Moisture. Therefore it is a Vulgar Errour to say Sweat instead of Perspiration in the Case aforesaid.
You may remember, that in the Beginning of this Chapter I concluded, that a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, such as Semen Humanum, wherein the Oily and Volatile Parts are strictly combined, and the Vo∣latile somewhat more active (or acrimonious) than that in our Membranes in general, must be most pleasing to the Membranes by a fine Titillation, &c. therefore if Opium should prove to be such, we need not wonder at its titillating to Venery, nor indeed its causing a high sense of Pleasure upon any Membrane, (they being all of the same Nature) but especially upon the most exquisitely disposed Membrane▪ of the Stomach, and the Ve∣nereal Parts, nor consequently its causing all the aforementioned Effects of intense Pleasure, as Com∣fort, Satisfaction, Ovation, &c. of the sensitive Soul, (or Spirits) and Relaxation of all the sensile Parts; which will easily solve all the Phenomenas of Opium, however numerous, mysterious, and seemingly contradictory, as you'll find. Let us therefore now see, whether Opium be such a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, wherein the Volatile Particles are somewhat more active or acrimonious than ours; and the Oily and Volatile Parts strictly combined? If so, the Business is done, the Nail is hit on the Head, and I may say
CHAP. XV. Shews what are the Principles of Opium, and which cause the good and bad Effects thereof. HAving tried (if not tired) your Patience, and premised what I thought necessary in the foregoing Chapters, I now reassume the Thread of my Discourse. As for the passive Principles of Opium, which do or signifie little or nothing, we need not be soli∣citous, only tell you that it has much of Earth and Water in it, and more or less of that according to its Foulness, and of this according to its Moistness or Driness; and that it always has more Water in it in moist Weather, for I never knew any Thing so apt to take in moisture, and to alter accord∣ingly in its substance, (tho' not in vertue) inso∣much, that I have used it as an Indicator of the Weather, and it never sails to shew the degree of moisture in the Air, if it be kept in a convenient Place, where Accidents, as the Sun, Fire, &c. may not alter the Case, and always in the same Place. Our Business therefore being to enquire after the active Principles of Opium, I shall proceed in this Plain and Natural Method, v. z. I shall En∣quire; 1. Which are the predominant active Principles of Opium? And how combined, &c.
2. Which of them produce the good and laudable Effects of Opium? And why? 3. Which of them produce its ill Effects? And why? 1. As to its active Principles which are predomi∣nant. First, It manifestly appears, That Opium is highly impregnated with Volatile Salt. 1. By its biting, and pungent Taste, which is the certain Effect of Volatile Salt; as in Mustard, Horse-Radish, Cresses, Arum, (or Wake Robin) Scurvigrass, Rochet, Spearwort, Crowsfoot, Squills, Radish, Arsmart, Onions, Garlick, and very many Plants of the same Kind, which have their biting and pungent Taste (as all know and allow) from their Volatile Salt; and so have all Plants of the like Taste, which are therefore commonly esteem'd to be Antiscorbuticks. 2. By its rank and vehement Smell, being such, as is by the common Consent of the Learned always attributed to Volatile Salt alone, or join'd with some Oily Parts, as the smell of Semen Virile, (to which I take that of Opium to be most like) of burnt Hoofs, Horns, Skins, Membranes, &c. Garlick, Onions, Rocket, Pismire, Soot, &c. 3. By its ready Dissolution in Water, moist Air, &c. which must be from its Volatile Salt, because it has very little Fixed Salt, and because Volatile Salt is the most dissolvable Salt that is in Vege∣tables before they have passed the Fire. 4. By its Dissolution in Spirit of Wine, which Volatile Salts are more apt to do than Fixed Salts; and this is one Reason why it is so apt to dissolve in all Menstruums, especially the Three main
ones, viz. The Wry, the Salino-Volatile, (as Spirit of Salt Ammoniac, Spirit of Harts-Horn, &c.) and the Spirituo-Sulphureous, as Spirit of Wine, Brandy, &c. in which last Things its Sulphur that is join'd with the Volatile Salt, doth much help it to dissolve. 5. By its inciding and discussing Quality, when externally applied; which Qualities must be attri∣buted to its Volatile Salt, it having no other Prin∣ciple that can cause those Qualities, especially in that eminent degree as Opium has them, and see∣ing it is not a Thing that has undergone Fermen∣tation, as Vinous Spirits, and that it has but one in 32 of the Fixed Salt in its Mass, as the most Excellent Dr. Crew proves. 6. By its resolving Quality, being externally ap∣plied; for Resolution is caused by such Parts as easily penetrate and mix with our Skin, Flesh, &c. and such as do so must be of like active Principles with our Parts; for all know, that easiness of mix∣ture is by likeness of Parts, and the active Prin∣ciples of our Skin, Flesh, &c. are Volatile Salt, join'd with some Oily Particles, (as has been said;) Therefore Opium must have such Principles to be so great a Resolver. Hence it is, That Gum Am∣moniacum, Hemlock, and several Gums, Plants, &c. that are saturated with Volatile Salts, are such good Resolvers; but it is worth a very particular Re∣mark, That all Narcotick Plants are very eminent, yea, the very best Resolvers of hard Tumors, and the like, as Solanum lethale, (or deadly Night∣shade) Hemlock, Henbane, Mandrake; and the more Narcotick they are, the more Resolving. 7. By its exulcerating or blistring Quality, (which is but a stronger ort of Resolution of Parts;) which the best and strongest Opium that is ga∣thered by Drops out of the Incisions of the Poppies Heads, (as Authors testifie) and the best
we have (as some say) will do, upon very tender Skins, or at least rubisy, as Mustard, &c. will; which most evidently proves its Volatile Salt; for all Blisterers, as Cantharides, Pismire, Crowsfoot, Spearwort, Garlick, &c. do it upon the Account of their Volatile Salt, unless it be Lexivals which have passed the Fire, which Opium has not. 8. Its offending the Eyes, as Onions, Mustard, &c. do, when it is applied thereto, argues its Volatile Salt. Note, That the very best Opium, as the Turks, Mastach, &c. does cause this Effect most of all, which manifestly proves, that the Vertue of Opium does mainly depend upon Volatile Salt, which is most certainly the Cause of that Effect of exulce∣rating, (or blistering) as all do allow in Things that have not passed the Fire. 9. Its Psilothrick Quality proves the same, for it causes the Hair to fall by the same Principles. 10. Its eminent Titillation to Venery, as Cantha∣rides, Bees, Pismire, Sem. Virile, Garlick, Onions, Leeks, Horse Radish, Mustard, Rochet, Basil, Oisters, Bears Garlick, Crows Garlick, &c. do most infal∣libly argue the Abundance of its Volatile Salt, by which those Things, and all other Plants that have much Volatile Salt, excite to Venery. 11. Its Aptitude to evaporate and flie away, argues its Volatility. 12. Its causing a Tickling, and Itching in the Skin, does most directly prove the same; nor does any Thing that is taken inwardly cause it more: It must have a very Titillating Volatile Salt, that will, in so small a Quantity as Opium is usually taken, cause such violent Itchings (as it does) in the Skin, after it has passed all Digestions and Concoctions.
13. Its Bitterness proves the same: For the Cu∣rious and most Perspicacious Dr. Grew says, That Bitterness proceeds from Sulphur well impreg∣nated with alcaline or acid Salt shackled with Earth; but it is certain, that it is not an acid in Opium, for the many Reasons given, and to be added. He also says, That when Sulphur and the Alcaline are more equal, they produce a tawny colour; and Opium rudely torn is tawny, till the Air alters it. All which Sylvius confirms, where he says, Pran. Med. L. II. Cap. XXVI. 80. Omnia amara volatili sale abundant, ad quod constituendum oleum quoque concurrit, sive Sulphur. That is, All bitter Things abound with Volatile Salt, to constitute which Oil (or Sulphur) concurs. I cannot chuse (tho' I do not much depend upon Authority in the general) but value the Assertions of such Men, by way of Concurrence at least. 14. The Acrimonious Sweats that it causes, proves the same. 15. It is also Diuretick, as, and after the same manner with Cantharides, Bees, Pismire, Millepedes, Scurvygrass, Horse Radish, &c. that is, by Titilla∣tion upon the Account of the Volatile Salt, which appears by its exciting to Venery at the same time, as all those Volatiles do. 16. Its causing Vomitings (as it often does) is an undoubted sign of its Volatile Salt; for all Ve∣getable Vomits are such upon that Account, unless it be such as may move Vomiting meerly by their being loathed, or nauseated, which only cause some particular Persons to Vomit; but such as are constant Vomitories are so upon the Account of their Volatile salt, as Asaerabocea, Groundsil, Fox∣loves, Squills, &c. given in a sufficient Quantity. 17. Its lively Effects, as Courage, &c. prove the same.
18. All Authors that have been Curious, do agree, that Opium abounds with Volatile Salt, as Helmont, Lemery, Le Febure, Wedelius, and in∣deed every one that ever I read, tho' most of them attribute its Effects to a Sulphur, which makes their Testimony of its Volatile Salt the stronger, as being forced to confess it against their Hypothe∣sises. 19. After its Fermentation with Leaven in a Sand Heat for 14 days, it affords a Volatile Salt in good Quantity, but mixt with Oil, which is separated from it by Dissolution in Water, Filtring, &c. 20. Its Spirit ferments with Acids, therefore is Volatile. Lastly, (to Pin up all) if you either Chymically Analyse it by Fire, or set it to Crystalize, after it is evaporated to a due Condition so to do, it af∣fords a great Quantity of Volatile Salt. Therefore it is past all manner of doubt, (for which End I have the longer, and more parti∣cularly insisted upon this Point) that it is highly impregnated with Volatile Salt: But, as I said in the last Chapter, it is not enough for it to have Volatile Salt, but it must be such as exceeds our own, or other Animals in Activity, Briskness, &c. by Reason of Quantity or Quality, or both, that it may tickle up, excite, and cause a fine and agreeable Ovation, or glowing in our Spirits, which (as was shewn) is very pleasant, (as in the Case of Sem. Viril.) especially when agitated by Warmth, Frications, or such Actuating Causes. Secondly, It manifestly appears, That the Volatile Salt of Opium exceeds ours in Activity, Briskness, &c.
1. By its exulcerating (or blistering) Quality, especially if it be very good Opium. 2. By its Psilothrick Quality, to cause the Hair to shed. 3. By its irritating to Venery in so eminent a De∣gree, as Cantharides, Bees, Pismire, &c. do, and even beyond the ordinary Course of Sem. Virile, which is most saturated with Volatile Salt of any Part of the Animal, as appears by its Dissolution (like Opium) in Watery Menstruums; its rank smell, its titillating to Venery, its Weight, &c. which is much the same with that of Opium, both sinking in Wa∣ter, &c. 4. By its great Irritations to make Water, like Cantharides, Bees, Pismire, Millepedes, &c. when it is taken in a good Quantity, or often. 5. By its causing Vomitings in a very severe manner, which it would not do without a very poinant Volatile Salt. 6. By its causing such violent Itchings in the Skin (especially if taken in any Quantity) after it has past all Digestions and Concoctions. And, 7. By its causing acrimonious Sweats, after it has past those Digestions and Concoctions. 8. By its causing a very pleasant Sensation at Sto∣mach, far above any Flesh, Iellies, or any Animal Nutriment. 9. By its offending the Eyes so much by its Acri∣mony, as Mustard, Onions, Horse Radish, &c. do. 10. By its very pungent and acrimonious Taste above all Flesh or Fish. 11. By its very rank and vehement Scent, equal to, if not exceeding that of Semen Virile. 12. By its Chymical Analysis, whereby it affords a very acrimonious Volatile Salt in great plenty, which Helmont, Wedelius, and others, do con∣firm.
Therefore it is also past doubt, That the Volatile Salt of Opium is more active, acrimonious, and ti∣tillating, than those in our Membranes, or in Sem. Virile it self. But seeing it is not Volatile Salt alone, (as was shewn) which agrees only with one of the active Principles of our Membranes, (and may be, and is of it self too acrimonious and rude for the Membranes, without its being sweetned up, and smooth'd into a more gentle and pleasing Agree∣ableness by Oily Parts) we must see, whether it is not also Oily, (or Sulphureous) and consequently a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, agreeing in both the active Principles of our Membranes, that it may thereby be the more delectable, gentle, and agreeable. Thirdly, It is very obvious and evident, That Opium is Sulphureous. 1. Because the Juice of the Poppy, whereof it is made, is of it self, when it drops▪out of the Incisions, Milk-white, which colour in Liquids (especially the Juice of Plants) proceeds from Sulphureous Particles mixt with Water (or Phlegm) as Milk, Emulsions, Chyle, Cinnamon Water, and the Tinctures of all Sulphureous Things dropt into Water, do evince. 2. Because it is inflammable; for nothing is so but what is Sulphureous. 3. Because Opium will soften with a dry Warmth, which all, and only, Sulphureous Things will do; as all Rosins, Tallows, Pitches, Turpentines, Oils, and such Sulphureous Things. 4. Because it is very bitter, and that Oleose Particles are always (as Dr. Grew and Sylvius truely say) one Ingredient of a bitter Taste. 5. Its tawny colour does also (as was said accord∣ing to Dr. Grew) argue much Sulphur.
6. Its hot Taste proves the same; for a proper hot Taste is from Sulphur, as the biting or pungent is from Volatile Salt. 7. Because of its pungent and strong Smell, which denotes Sulphur. 8. Its being so dissolvable as it is in Spirit of Wine, Brandy, and other Sulphureous Menstruums, proves the same. 9. Its dissolving Quality argues, that it has the same Principles with our Skin and Flesh, which are Oleose as well as Salino-volatile, and that nothing is a compleat Dissolver, but such as have both; because Agreeableness in Principles being the Basis of Dissolution, (as you see in Menstruums, and the Things therein dissolv'd) there is no good, kind, or compleat Dissolvent of our Flesh, &c. but what participates of both; because otherwise there would be a Disagreement in one Respect. 10. It appears by Autopsie upon the Chymical Analysis of Opium, &c. that it has a very conside∣rable Quantity of Sulphur. 11. So if you only dissolve it in Water, you'll find much Sulphureous Substance undissolved at the bottom. 12. All (or most) of the Modern Authors at∣tribute its Operation to Sulphur, agreeing, that it is well impregnated therewith. Therefore Opium consists very much, as to its active Principles, of a Sal-Volatile-Sulphureum; but still this does not compleat a most agreeable Sal-Volatile-Oleosum; 1. Because it may be a Sal-Volatile-Resinosum, and yet be a Sal-Volatile-Sul∣phureum. 2. If it be a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, the Oil and the Volatile Salt may be so disjoin'd, as not to conspire and co-operate to please the Membranes, but act separately, as Oil and Volatile Salt given out of divers Spoons, and cause no more
Effect than Oil of Olives and Spirit of Sal Am∣enoniack taken inwardly, one acting too softly, lazily, and greasily, to cause any brisk and agree∣able Ovation of the Spirits, and the other too rudely stinging the Membranes; therefore we must proceed in our Enquiry. Fourthly, Opium has a sort of Resinous Sul∣phur, that is loose, and not united with▪ the Volatile Salt; which plainly appears; 1. Because, if you dissolve Opium in Water, cold or hot, or any Watery Menstruum, you'll find a good quantity of Rosin undissolved at bot∣tom, while the Volatile Salt is all or most dissolved in the Water, (especially if the Water be often repeated) and quite separated from the Resinous Part which subsides, without any more trouble; which shews, that the Volatile Salt and it are not combined, but in a very loose and distinct man∣ner. 2. Because, if you first dissolve Opium in Spi∣rit of Wine, which imbibes the Rosin, it is easily again precipitated by plain Water, leaving behind it all or most of the Volatile Salt in the Form of a red Tincture in the Menstruum, as it does also in the former Case. Note, That the Resinous Part of Opium has no Effect as an Opiate, for if it be well washed with Water (as was said) it has no Operation of that kind, or so little, that it is not worth the minding, but all the Vertue, Specifick Taste, Smell, &c. is car∣ried away in that red Tincture, which has all the good Effects of Opium, as Experience assures us.
3. Because, if Opium be very much torrefied, most of the Volatile Salt is evaporated, and with it most, if not all, the Vertue of Opium; but the Rosin remains as a deadish Stuff in Respect of the good Effects of Opium, tho' it is (as shall be proved) the Producer of the ill Effects thereof. Therefore this Rosin must be wholly rejected. Fifthly, The Red Tincture aforesaid has all, or most of the Volatile Salt in it. 1. Because Water is the Proper Menstruum for Saline Things, and that the Tincture reduced to an Extract gives very much in moist Weather; which Quality it must have from the Volatile Salt, because it has very little Fixed Salt. 2. Because the Specifick Bitterness which pro∣ceeds from Volatile salt, and Oily Parts, is wholly in that Red Tincture. 3. Because that Tincture has also the Specifick Rank∣ness of Smell that the Volatile Salt (as was shewn) gives the Opium, by the Help of some Oily Parts. 4. Because that Tincture, reduced to an Extract, has the biting Taste of Opium, which (as was shewn) proceeds from its Volatile Salt. 5. Because that Extract incides, discusses, resolves, is Psilothrick, titillates to Venery, causes Itchings in the Skin, acrimonious Sweats, &c. all which are (as was shewn) the Effects of Volatile Salt. But what need I insist so much upon its Effects to prove it? When, 6. It appears by Crystalization of the said Tincture, after it has been evaporated to a due de∣gree, that it contains the Volatile Salt in it, which in a cool Place shoots to elegant Crystals; and that,
7. It is found therein by Chymical Operation by Fire. Sixthly, The said Tincture is Oleose. 1. Because the Redness of the Tincture must be from Oily Parts; for pure sincere Volatile Salt gives no such Tincture. 2. Because it is bitter, one Ingredient of which Taste is ever Oily Parts (as was said.) 3. Because of its rank smell like Sem. Viril. which proves it to be Sulphureous; for the Volatile Salt alone has only a quick smell, or Urinous at farthest. 4. Because it is of a Hot Taste when reduced to an Extract, which Heat of Taste considered di∣stinctly from its pungent, or biting Taste, must be from Sulphureous or Oily Parts. 5. Because Spirit of Wine, and other Spirituo∣sulphureous Menstruums, do readily dissolve it when reduced to an Extract. 6. Because the Extract softens with dry warmth, as Sulphureous or Oily Things do. 7. Because a true Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, wherein the Volatile Salt and Oily Parts are intimately com∣bined, (as you find in all Blouds, Tinctures of se∣veral Plants that have such a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum) is red. 8. Because it could not otherwise so finely please the Membranes, cause Sleep, compose the Spi∣rits, &c. if it were all Volatile Salt, which is wholly pungent and acrimonious, mightily opposes Sleep, and causes a great stir in the Bloud and Spirits. But, (as I said as to its Volatile salt) what need I insist upon its Effects? When,
10. Its Inflammability (after it is reduced to an Extract and dried) puts it out of all Question; And that, 11. An Oil may be separated from the Volatile Salt, tho' not without Trouble, because that, (as is requisite to compleat it in the highest degree) Seventhly, The Oily Parts, and Volatile Salt, are very intimately, and strictly combin'd, as fairly appears, 1. By the Difficulty to separate them. 2. By the Redness of the Tincture, (as in Bloud, &c.) for when Oily (or Sulphureous) Particles are loose therein, they make either a white Colour, as the Rosin does in the Drops that fall out of the Incisions in the Heads of the Poppies, which are Milk white; or leave the Volatile Spirit perspicu∣ous, as in a sort of artificial Sal. Volatile-Oleosum that is sold at the Apothecaries Shops in London. 3. Because it imparts its Tincture, which depends upon both, to all Menstruums. 4. Because it imparts its Vertue, which depends upon both, to all Menstruums. 5. Because it imparts its Specifick Smell, which depends upon both, to all Menstruumt. 6. Because it imparts its Specifick, hot, and bit∣ing Taste, which depend upon both the Oily and Volatile Particles, to all Menstruums. 7. Because it will hold its Vertue many years, which it could not, if the Volatile Salt and Oily Parts were not very strictly combined. 8. Because, that notwithstanding the Digestion at Stomach, it has held its Specifick Vertue, Smell and Taste, after it has been in it 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 18, or more Hours, as appear'd by its Operating so long, and afteward its being Vomited up with the same Taste and Smell that it
had at first▪ than which there cannot be a greater Argument. 9. Because it has been carried off by Stools, which had its Specifick Smell after many Hours re∣maining in the Stomach. 10. Because its Operation in general lasts long. Charas mentions one that it Operated with for about 30 Hours; and Wedelius another, whom Opium caused to Vomit constantly about 18 Hours after it was taken. 11. Because it has its Effects upon the Venereal Membranes after it has passed the Digestion at Sto∣mach, the Effects of the Choler, and Succus Pan∣creatus in the Duodenum, been strained through the Coats of the Intestines into the Lacteals, and through the Glandules of the Mesentery, mixed and circulated with the Bloud, &c. 12. Because, after all that, it has its Effect upon the Skin, by causing an Itching therein. 13. Because it not only causes Acrimonious Sweats, but such as evidently smell thereof, which argues, That the Specifick Combination of the Oily and Volatile Parts baffles all Coctions, Digestions, Circulations, and Percolations, that have happened in the Body. Dioscorides and Aeginela, speaking of Opium, say, , that is, The smell of the Medicament is expanded over the whole Body. Which Things of its Nature do, as Garlick, Onions, Semen Animale, which causes Rankness all over Male Creatures, as Rams, Boars, Bulls, &c. 14. Le Febure, in his Chymistry, Part 2. p. 33: says, That Opium has a Volatile Salt inseperably mixt with Sulphur (or Oily Parts.) 15. Wedelius, in his Opiologia, Lib. 2. Sect. 1. Cap. 4. P. 91. speaking of Opium, says, Sal ejus cum sulphure intime combinatum sudores efficit, that is, Its salt being intimately combined with sulphur, (or
Oil) causes Sweat. And, Lib. 2. P. 143.  obtinuit non facile dissipabilem, that is, It has a con∣texture not easily dissipable. 18. All know how apt Volatile Salt and Oily Parts are to combine; Therefore Opium acts and produces its usual good Effects by a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, somewhat more active than that in our Membranes, whose Principles are most intimately and strictly combined, and so that it is qualified in the highest degree for our Purpose; Because, 1. It agrees in Principles with our Mem∣branes. 2. That its Sal-Volatile-Oleosum is more active and vigorous than that of the Membranes, to actu∣ate and excite the Spiritus insiti, and finely to tickle and gratifie the Membranes. 3. That the Volatile Salt and Oily Parts being so intimately combined, do deliciously qualifie one the other for that Purpose; While the Oily smooths and lenifies the Volatile Salt, and the Vo∣latile Salt actuates and quickens the Oily; And that being so combined, 4. Both conspire to a permanent and exalted Pleasure of the Membranes, especially at Stomach, and the Venereal Parts, where they are so exqui∣sitely disposed for Sensation. Therefore the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, separated from its Rosin, is most consummate, and best qualified, that possibly can be imagined, to please, gratifie, and finely to titillate our Membranes, or Organs of Sensation; which was the Thing re∣quired.
I cannot better illustrate its Nature, than by the most exalted Thing in an Animal, viz. its Semen: Therefore for Confirmation of its Principles, and Excellency therein, I will consider its Likeness and Agreement therewith; 1. In being both a Sal Volatile-Oleosum. 2. In having a more active, vigorous, and ex∣alted Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, than any Part of the Animal. 3. In having the Volatile Salt and Oleous Par∣ticles intimately combined, for Semen Animale will (as Opium) keep very long uncorrupted, as appears by its long stay in the Vesiculae seminales of some Animals, that do not excern it in many years. 4. In that both are apt to mix with all forts of Menstruums, and both Mole minima, Virtute maxi∣ma. 5. In having much the same Smell, viz. a rank and vehement one. 6. In tainting the Body therewith (as has been shewn.) 7. In being much of the same Weight, as ap∣pears by both sinking in Water, &c. 8. The Taste must (in all Probability) have a Rankness in it like that of Opium, because it gives a rank Taste to the whole Body of Male Creatures. 9. Both excite Venery, cause Erections, Vene∣real Fury, and Nocturnal Pollutions, &c. 10. Both cause Boldness, Courage, and Magna∣nimity, which are reckon'd among the Effects of Opium, and are the common Effects of Plenitude of Seed in▪ Animals (that are otherwise pusillanimous) in Times of Copulation; so Modest and Sheepish Boys grow much more assured, old, and (as they commonly call it) Manlike, upon Puberty; and Girls grow more Womanlike in their Dispositions▪
and 'tis my Observation, That the Men who breed most of the Sem. Virile, are generally, if not al∣ways, the most Valiant. 11. Both do cause a great Relaxation upon the Pleasure thereof, as appears after a good Dose of Opium, and upon Emission of the other; by the Deadness of the Eyes, (or Laxity of the Cornea) in both Cases, Dilatation of the Pupill, Floridity of the Skin, large Perspiration, laxity of the Limbs, Sleepiness, loss of Memory and Sense, alienation of the Mind, a wide Pulse, Indolence, loss of Feeling in both Cases, and other Signs of Relaxation. 12. Both Opium and Puberty cause a growth of the Penis, Breasts, and increase Milk, by Reason of the Relaxation that they cause, which (as in Sleep,) causes the greater Nutrition; but of the manner how it happens upon Relaxation, more hereafter, if there be occasion. Hence it is, 13. That both Opium and Puberty are apt to bring down the Menses, and open the Viae, by the Relaxation; and that Marriage (or the Pleasure of Venereal Acts) do by the like Relaxation promote the Menses; That both Opium and such Acts are apt to cause Miscarriages by relaxing the Neck of the Womb, &c. 14. Both cause Sadness and Dejection when the Operation is over, as indeed Pleasure generally does, especially if intense. 15. Both Opium and Sem. Animale prevent Las∣situde, and cause Euphory, or easier Undergoing of Labour; Hence it is, that Stone Horses will not be so soon tired when full thereof, and quickly re∣cover if tired; which might doubtless be observed in other Animals, but that they are not used to Labour, and so not obvious to be observed.
16. Authors do say, That Sem. Virile takes of Venereal Impotence, procures Love, &c. which doubtless must be by exciting to Venery, as Opium does. Thus the Genitals of Bucks, Boars, Bucks of Hares, Cocks, &c. do (as Opium) excite Ve∣nery; and the Seed of Animals, as of a Camel, and the aforesaid Creatures, come to be esteemed Hypnoticks; and (doubtless) all Animal Seed, es∣pecially of the more Salaceous Creatures, is an Opiate in some degree. To be short, The main (if not all) the Difference in their Effects arises only, 1. From the Different Parts that they affect; because Opium affects the Stomach, the Venereal, and all the Membranes in general; and Sem. Ani∣male only the Venereal Parts immediately, tho' an intense Pleasure of one Part does affect the whole. 2. That Opium does affect with a Sense of Pleasure more permanent, viz. for many Hours, (as has been said) and that the Pleasure of the other is Momentary. Therefore Opium acts by causing an intense, per∣manent, and charming Pleasure of the Membranes in general, but more particularly of the Stomach and Venereal Parts, as being more exquisitely dis∣posed for Sensation for the Preservation of the Indi∣viduum and Species. It cannot be much wondred at, considering our Active Principles are a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, and that Opium is such, and that we naturally carry an Opiate within us, that in some Cases our ordinary Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, or that of the Choler, Semen, &c. being by some accident ex∣alted
towards the Nature of Opium, may have the Effect of an Opiate upon us, by causing So∣pors, and Lethargick Distempers, Fuor uterinus by Titillation, &c. Thus the Spume of some Male Animals, Mum∣my, &c. are reputed Opiates. Borellus speaks of a Soporiferous Aura, that proceeded from ones Thumb, cured by a Caustick. I have read of a Cataphora from Worms, a Soporiferous Fume from the Womb, and very many such sorts of Instances, which Things are now easily conceived; for 'tis but supposing a Fume of the Nature of Sem. Ani∣male, or its Aura, (for I can no longer doubt but it is an Opiate) and it would have much the same Effects with Opium, if it were fit to use it after the same manner. Having shewn, 1. Which are the predominant active Principles in Opium, and how combined, &c. 2. Which of them produces the usual and laudable Effects of Opium; And why in general; I come now to the Third Particular, viz. to shew, III. Which of them produces its ill Effects; And why. Its ill Effects are these, viz. Nauseas, Vomitings, which are generally very dismal, with great di∣stress, and sometimes dangerous; Swimming in the Head, Hiccoughs, Distresses, Anxieties, Convulsions, Faintings, Leipothymies, Syncopes, &c. 1. Note, That its grievous Effects are at, or a∣bout the Region of the Stomach, or particularly the Mouth (or Pit) thereof, or thence arising by Consent.
2. Note, That (seeing there is nothing so good, but may cause evil Effects in an excessive Quan∣tity) this Enquiry is more properly, What Prin∣ciple, or Principles of Opium, do cause those ill Effects in an ordinary Dose? for what will in a mo∣derate Dose, will (be sure) cause them in an ex∣cessive Dose. 3. Note, That all the constant Effects of Opium (as you may observe in the Enumeration thereof in the Fourth Chapter) are good and laudable Ef∣fects; it follows therefore, that the bad are acci∣dental. 1. It is not the Earthy or Phlegmatick Part of Opium that causes those ill Effects, because they are Passive Principles, and consequently have not such a Power, besides that they are known to be innocent. 2. Opium has all those ill Effects, when both the Earthy and Phlegmatick Parts are separated from it, as when an Extract of well torrefied Opium is made in Spirit of Wine, for by that means the Phlegmatick Part is dried up, and the Earthy Parts subside, and are separated; yea, such Extracts made by Spirit of Wine, do cause those evil Effects rather more than crude Opium with its Earth and Phlegm in it, as Experience as∣sures us, and Reason will plainly confirm by and by, however fond the World is of such Prepa∣rations. 3. It is evident from the Premises, that the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium cannot cause those Vo∣mitings, Hiccoughs, &c. for they are the Effects of grievous Sensation at Stomach; but the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum causes a most agreeable and pleasing Sensa∣tion at Stomach.
4. Nothing quiets Vomitings, Convulsions, ∣coughs, &c. more than that Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium. 5. Experience informs us, That the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, separated from all other Parts and Principles thereof, never causes such evil Ef∣fects, as I, and another Physician in London, can testifie; as does also Le Mort, in the most Learned Dr. Love's Collectanea, where he says of such a Preparation thereof, as contains only the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, That Nunquam Anxietates circa Praecordia, aut Phantasias conciliat; That is, It ne∣ver causes Anxieties about the Mouth of the Sto∣mach, &c. for that is most properly to be under∣stood by (Praecordia;) Wedelius testifies the like of such another Preparation, and so do several Authors, tho' they did not (in the least) know why, but only by Experience. 6. Its Fixt Salt is innocent in its Nature, and but the 32d Part of Opium, which is too inconside∣rable in an ordinary moderate Dose to cause any sensible Effect. It follows therefore, That is must be the Resinous Part of Opium, which it has in a considerable Quantity, that must cause those ill Effects. This manifestly appears; 1. Because a Tincture of Opiam in Water, which takes up none of the Rosin, but lets it fall into the Bottom, never causes any such ill Effects; which it does not also, if reduced to an Extract by Eva∣poration, yet have they all the usual good Effects of Opium. 2. Wedelius in his Opiolog. assures the same of the like Preparation in Phlegm of distilled Vinegar. L. 2. Sect. 1. C. 5. P. 92.
3. An Extract of Opium in Spirit of Wine does often cause those ill Effects, and no other Prepara∣tion causes them as often. Wedelius ibid. A Lau∣dano opiato cum Spiritu Vini correcto solum fer observavimus ortos Vomitus; a nostro vero, quod cum Phlegmate Aceti distillati fieri diximus, nun∣quam Vomitum, vel Nauseam saltem, contigisse meminimus. That is, We have observed Vomitings almost only from Laudanum prepared with Spirit of Wine, but never any Vomiting or Nausea from that prepared in Phlegm of distill'd Vinegar. Which he confirms, L. 1. sect. 2. c. 4. p. 62. say∣ing (in Latine) That a curious Observation is to be noted, by which it appears, that an Extract of Opium, with Spirit of Wine, shews more Nar∣cotick Force, by which he means, That it causes more ill Effects than prepared in distilled Vinegar; Whereas that in Spirit of Wine has nothing more in it than that in Vinegar, besides the Rsinous Parts: Therefore these do cause all the Mischief. Note also, That an Extract in Spirit of Wine has in it (Quantity for Quantity) more of the Rsinous Parts than Crude Oplum, both because the Earthy Parts, that help'd to make up the Bulk, are taken away in that Preparation, and because the  of Wine imbibes the Rosin more greedily than other Principles of the Opium; so that every Dose must in Proportion have much more Rosin in it than Crude Opium. Therefore it is no wonder that it causes those ill Effects more frequently, since the Rosin is most certainly the Cause thereof, as has been, and shall be more fully, and beyond all contradiction, proved. Yet is this the Preparation boasted of by the blind and inadvertent World; it would amaze, nay terrifie a Man to see what great Care is taken
to be sure to render Opium mischievous, by soli∣citously using Spirit of Wine in extracting Lau∣danums; and then, and not till then, they boast of the Preparation, as Charas and very many others do, calling it, not without great Ostentation, (and desperate Folly) their Laudanum: May it be theirs, and none others; a Turk would be a Mad∣man to use it for Crude Opium, because it has much more of the pernicious Principle in it; It is the common, and much esteemed way, first to extract it out of Water, (and then it is very good, laudable and innocent) but thought no∣thing worth till they extract the Rosin (that is all left behind by the Water) in Spirit of Wine, and add it to the other; then do they with great Authority praise it, that is, when they have wisely added the Poison to the Panacea; It is as if they added Ratbane to a Cordial, and not think the Cordial worthy Commendation till they have done so. 4. It appears, That the Rosin is the Cause of those Ill Effects, in that they happen at Stomach, or from it by consent, since Opium has nothing in it that can offend the Stomach but the Rosin; of which it was shewn in Chap. 14. how very offen∣sive it is to the Stomach by its Indigestibleness and sticking to it, but even intolerable if also arm'd with pungent Particles, such as Volatile Salts have, with which Opium abounds. 5. It has been never observed, that any Pre∣paration of Opium, that was separated from the Rsinous Parts, did ever cause any such ill Effects. But, 6. It has been often observed, That if Crude Opium, or a Resinous Preparation thereof, was given alone in the Form of Pills, or any solid Form, that it was very apt to cause those Effects: Wede∣, That he never observed those Mischiefs
but after Preparations thereof in the Form of Pills; and it follows from what he has said before, that it was either Crude Opium, or that horrid Extract out of Spirit of Wine, both which are Resinous. Note, That since the very Form that it is given in doth so much alter the Case, it follows, that it is not poisonous in it self as such. 7. It is observed, That Crude Opium, Extracts in Spirit of Wine, and such Resinous Preparations, stay very long at Stomach, viz. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, nay, sometimes 18 or 20 Hours, as Charas himself intimates in reference to a Gentleman that took half a Drachm of his Extract 2 or 3 times a Week, That he Vomited if he took a Clyster before 20 Hours were expired after the taking of it; That certainly argues, that it, or a great part thereof, was still at Stomach, which stay is a most grievous Thing to the Stomach when it is beyond the usual time that Things are di∣gested in it. Now such a stay can be attributed to nothing but the Rosin sticking to the Coat of the Stomach, for that Preparation of Charas had nothing in it but what was dissolved in Water, (which is therefore always dissolvable at Stomach) and the Rosin extracted out of the Spirit of Wine; therefore it was indissolvable and viscid Rosin that caused so long a stay, tho' that Gentleman did, by strength of Digestion, conquer it at last, and that without Vomiting, unless he (as was said) took a Clyster within the 20 Hours: Its long stay at Stomach is manifest also, in that after 20 Hours it purged him, and not before; which Purging (as shall be shewn hereafter, and has been in some measure hinted) happens by the Dissolution of the Rosin by a strong Digestion; and therefore it happens only when Resinous Preparations are given
in good Quantity to Men that have such a Dige∣stion, or a Canine Appetite, as an Experienced Person in the Matter of Opium informed me, and I since observed to be very true. 8. It must be somewhat in Opium that is indi∣gestible and sticking to the Stomach, or else it could not cause Vomiting so long as it does, that is, 12, 14, 16, or more Hours, whereas other Vomits do generally operate but for 2 or 3 Hours at sarthest, and Opium has nothing in it indige∣stible and sticking but its Rosin. 9. It is to be noted, That when Opium is pre∣pared, join'd, or given, with such Things as destroy or prevent the sticking of its Rosin to the Stomach, and help its Dissolution, Digestion, or slipping out of the Stomach, it causes no such ill Effects, tho' Crude Opium, or a Resinous Prepa∣ration, be given. Thus if you prepare it by Lixi∣vials, which alter the nature of the Rosin by (as it were) Soapifying it, and thereby take away its sticking Quality, and rendring it (as Soap is) dis∣solvable, slippery, and passable at Stomach, it causes no such Disturbances. Hence it is that Lixi∣vials are found to be such true Correctors of Opium, (tho' the Reason has not been considered, as will appear hereafter) and that the Sapo Tartare makes Matthew's (or Starkey's) Pill, and the Pilulae pa∣cific, so safe, and free from ill Effects; as also Salt of Tartar does Libavius' and Langelott's fa∣mous Preparations: Of which expect more when I come to speak of the Preparation of Opium in Chap. 26. So, 10. If you subdue Opium, as you do Rosins and Turpontines, with the Yolk of an Egg, before you give it, it becomes safe, because you, by that means, dissolve its Rosin, and prevent its adher∣ing to the Coat of the Stomach, and render it digestible and passable, which is a most certain sign that its Rosin causes those ill Effects.
11. It is for the same Reason, that Opium finely powdered, and mixed with other Things that keep its Resinous Parts from a Coalescence, as in Ve∣nice Treacle, &c. that it is not so apt to cause those evil Effects; This (I doubt not) made the Ancients, who had no better Way, give it in E∣lectuaries finely divided among other Things, which they did so frequently, that all Electuaries came to be call'd Opiates; This (upon Experience I suppose) made Galen say, That Opium was not safe alone, but mix'd with other Things it became a good Medionment. 12. Wedelius says, That it seldom causes ill Ef∣fects when given in a fine Powder with other Things; yet is it the same in Substance, and to all Intents, but that the Resinous Parts being segre∣gated and scattered, become more subduable, and less liable to Coalescence; whereas if it be given alone in the Form of a Pill, all the Rosin falls to∣gether upon one Part of the Somach, and there sticks. Therefore Crude or Resinous Opium should never be given alone in the Form of a Pill. 13. The Blundering Ancients giving Wine to correct (as they thought) the cold Quality of Opium, found by Experience, that old generous Wine taken pretty freely after Opium, did very much prevent those ill Effects; but it could not be by correcting the cold Quality of Opium, which it has not, nor indeed for any imaginable Reason, but that being a Sulphureous Menstruum it helped the Dissolution and Digestion of the Rosin, and the more for being old (as all know) because more spiritu∣ous, defecated, and vigorous; whereas had it not been for that Reason, Wine must have rather in∣creased its Effects than otherwise, as being an Opiate.
14. It is for the same Reason▪ that a Tincture of Opium in Spirit of Wine is found to be much safer than the Extract made out of it, tho' the Substance is the same, because that in the Tincture the Particles of the Rosin are finely divided and scattered, and so subduable, and not like to stick to the Coat of the Stomach. 15. Opium in Clysters has kill'd People by slick∣ing to the Intestinum rectum, whereas it has no∣thing in it, as is apparent from the Premises, that can hurt, by sticking to them, but its Resinous Parts; much more then may it grieve the more exquisitely sensile Stomach by the same means. From what is said it will be obvious how duely to prepare and correct Opium, tho' there has been no true Conception thereof hitherto, but meet groundless and phantastick Imaginations. Objection. Some may say (for the Folly of the World is great) Why should not an Extract out of Spirit of Wine be good? For since Wine cor∣rects it, much more should Spirit of Wine do it by its more active Sulphureous Spirit? Answer. So it will, if you pour it upon it in the Stomach, or a Digesting Pot, for then it will much contribute to its Division, Digestion, and taking off its Viscidity, as Spirit of Wine▪ does in any Vessel wherein you pour it upon Rosin▪ but it is quite another Matter when reduced and ro∣united into the Form of an Extract again, and all the Spirit of Wine evaporated (or otherwise se∣parated) from it, for then the Resinous Parts are in Statu quo of Coalescence, and want to be sepa∣rated by Wine or Spirit of Wine, Lixivials, Yolk of an Egg, &c. as much as ever.
Obj. It may be said, That the Rosin of Opium is but as other Rosins, therefore why should it of∣fend so much in the Case of Opium. Ans. For Three very manifest Reasons; 1. That it is a Rosin of a peculiar Clamminess and Viscidity. 2. That it has Acrimony in't, as ap∣pears by its Purging Quality if it be given in any Quantity, and that the Stomach dissolves it (as was shewn.) 3. That it is join'd with the pun∣gent Particles of the Volatile Salt of the Opium, which, when it sticks to the Stomach, it holds to it, tearing it too long and continually with those Points upon the same Part, which must cause Di∣stress and Vomitings in Weak Stomachs that cannot digest it, and that sometimes to no Purpose, where∣upon follows Convulsions, Hiccoughs, &c. and all Endeavours falling, an Yielding or Succumbency, fol∣lowed by Faintings, Syncopes, Leipothymies, &c. and sometimes Death it self, for it must be a most grievous Thing to be so continually stung in the same Part of the most sensile Membrane of the Stomach without Remedy or Redress. If some have died of a little Gum Ammoniacum, or Saga∣penum, sticking to the Intestinum Rectum or Colon, which are the Sink of the Body, and fitted for and used to bear all Faeces and Trash, much more must the nice and exquisitely disposed Membrane at Stomach be grieved by such pointed Rosin, as that of Opium, sticking to some Part thereof; besides, that the Stomach does peculiarly hate and loath, that any Thing, how gentle soever, should stay too long in it, which creates frequent and sad Disturbances in such whose Stomachs are relaxed, (as 'tis also in the Case of Opium) and cannot in due time discharge themselves of the grieving Matter: Therefore such as are mostly troubled with those dismal Symptoms after Resinous
Opium, are People that have fine Textures, and ill Digestions, with whom it must, and does deal for a good while, as a Pleaser of the Stomach, till the indigestible Rosin that is stuck to it, does there∣fore, and because it holds the Points of the Vola∣tile Salt so tediously and importunately to one Par, grievously teaz and urge the Stomach to Vo∣mit, &c. which it does in some sooner, in others later, according to their respective Disposition of Stomach. Hence it is that it operates pleasingly in some for several Hours before it excites a Nau∣sea, &c. viz. 3, 4, 5▪ 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, and more Hours, and in such as have a sturdy Texture, and strong Digestion, operates only pleasingly all the time, because their Senstion is not so nice, and that they gradually digest the Rosin, which, if the Opium was given in a large Dose, does (as Rosins dissolved are apt to do, especially if they have any Acrimony as this has) turn into a Purger, which brings down Ordure that smells of the Opium, and so the Danger is over: How com∣mon is it, that Vomitories, being much subdued in some Stomach, turn to be Purgers? Thus it happens with Dogs, that have a robust Texture, and strong Digestion; but such Resinous Opium deals severely with Cats, and commonly kills them. You may see from the Premises, why it causes ill Symptoms oftner in Women, and Chil∣dren, than in Men, and in fine textur'd Men, than the robust, and in such as have weak Digestions, rather than in them that have strong; why it causes all the Symptoms of pleasing Sensation at first, and the ill Effects afterward; why some have no ill Effect after it, even in a large Quantity, unless you'll call Purging an ill Effect; why such as Purge after a great Dose escape the Dan∣ger,
as Dogs, &c. why their Vomits, especially the first, smell, &c. of the Opium, tho' the Vo∣miting happens after many Hours; why the Vomit∣ings are so very tedious and severe, viz. because of the stubborn Adherence of the Rosin to the Sto∣mach; why it operates so long a time in some, in comparison of others, viz. by staying so long at Stomach. 1. All which seem to me a good Argument, That such as dye with Opium, dye while it is at Stomach, and consequently, because of the Rosin which must needs be fatal in great Doses, seeing it is sometimes so very grievous in Doses of a Grain or Two, that bring People even to Death's Door with Vomitings, Distresses, Syncopes, &c. yea, and has kill'd some, even in that small Quantity, as I am inform'd. 2. Some evidently dye while it is at Stomach, because they dye soon after they Vomited up somewhat that smelled of it, tho' possibly the Rosin still stuck to it. 3. Because others evidently dye of the Vomiting and its plain Effects at Stomach. 4. Because they commonly dye with a Hi∣eough. 5. Men dye of it within the usual time that it stays at Stomach, which is sometimes 20 Hours for certain; whatever more it may be when large Doses are taken; and to me it seems an Argu∣ment of its killing at Stomach, when they dye after 20 Hours, because if it did not stick at Stomach all that time, the Operation must have been over, or, at least, much declined, and con∣sequently the Height of the Danger past. 6. I cannot find that any have died of Opium when the Rosin was separated from it, tho' I do not dny but that it may kill then, as an immo∣derate
Quantity of Wine has done. But this I can tell, that one did, at Mr. Banks's the Chymist in Walbrook in the City of London, drink (as Mr. Banks inform'd me) a Pint and a Half of such a Liquid Preparation of Opium, that had the Rosin separated from it, that had the Power of 3 Ounces of Opium in it, and it never harmed nor discomposed him, but that he Vomited about an Hour after it was taken; whether he did so by Reason of the Opium, or because the Person was Crop-sick, (as they call it) by Reason he had drank much Wine before, or both, I cannot de∣termine. Now (I hope) that my inquisitive Reader is fully satisfied, 1. That Opium does not act by a Cold Quality, nor by the Means of Fumes, nor any how by diminishing or disabling the Spirits, (except it be that the pernicious Rosin may do something of that kind by its aforesaid ill Effects) but by pleasantly affecting the Membranes at Stomach, Venereal Parts, &c. 2. That Sleep is caused by Relaxation, and quieting the Spirits. 3. That Pleasure, especially if intense and last∣ing, as that by Opium, comforts, enlivens, encou∣rages, and causes an Ovation of the sensitive Soul and Spirits; and Displeasure causes Sadness, De∣jection, &c. 4. How Pleasure must cause Complacency, Sa∣tisfaction, Content, Acquiescence, and Composure of the sensitive Soul and Spirits, as Grievances cause the contrary. 5. How Pleasure, elevating and keeping up the Spirits, and causing an entire Relaxation of the Defensive, and a great Relaxation of the Vigilative
Contraction, which tire the sensitive Soul, must cause Euphory, or easie undergoing of Labour, Iour∣neys, &c. without Lassitude, as Experience shews. 6. How Pleasure causes Relaxation of all the sensile Parts. 7. How the said Relaxation (as in Sleep) does, by suffering the Animal Spirits to expand, and thereby making them unfit to carry Impressions smartly, which is necessary to convey a sense of Pain, (for a smart Impression is the very cause of it) take away Pain: To which you may add, That the sensitive Soul's attending willingly to the Sense of Pleasure, is diverted from Pain, and that a Sense of Pain cannot be in the same Subject with Pleasure, which being therefore once excited, Pain must disappear; but that of taking away all smartness of Impression by Relaxation, is a plain Mechanical Cause. 8. How therefore all Fluxes that are caused by, or require a grievous Sensation, or Irritation by Quantity or Quality, to maintain and continue them, by causing a Contraction of the Parts to squeese out the Humours, must be moderated for want of Sensation (upon such Relaxation) to irri∣tate the Parts, as it happens in Sleep, or in any Case where Relaxation, and thereby Expansion of the Animal Spirits, incapacitates them to carry Impressions smartly, which is of the Essence of Pain, (as has been shewn.) 9. How Perspiration must be promoted by Re∣laxation, which opens the Pores. 10. How, that by the same Means, Sweat also must be promoted, if the Body be full of moisture. 11. How Opium (or Semen Animale) being of the same Principles, and of like Principles with Cantharides, Pismire, Bees, Garlick, &c. must ex∣cite to Venery, cause Itchings of the Skin, &c.
12. How Opium may, by too high an Ovation of the Spirits, cause Watching, while Pleasure causing Relaxation, &c. may take away Pain▪ for Relaxation, as in Sleep, Syncopes, &c. is enough to take away Pain; but to Sleep, Quietness of the Spi∣rits is also required, as well as their Expansion by Relaxation; so that Pain may very well be taken off without Sleep, as it often is by Opium that al∣ways relaxes. 13. How the Pleasure that Opium causes, is (as was said) by the same Principles, and therefore of the same Nature with that which Animal Seed causes upon the Membranes, but that Animal Seed causes it only upon one Part, and Opium upon the Membranes of the Stomach, Venereal Parts, and all other in general, and that only for a Moment, but this of Opium for many Hours, by which Means the Effects of Relaxtion by Pleasure come to be more remarkable; as after much Wine, whose Effects is somewhat lasting and internal, as that of Opium is. 14. How the Rosin of Opium causes its ill Ef∣fects by its Indigestibleness, adhering Quality, and tedious stinging of the exquisitely nice Coat of the Stomach, by continually teazing and urging it by its Actimony and acute Volatile Points or Spicul. Therefore having, 1. A most perfect and compleat Sol-Volatile-Oleosum in Opium, of the same pleasing Principles as to all Membranes, (as Animal Seed is to the Membranes of Venus) whereby they must be pleased, tickled, and relaxed; 2. A pernicios Rosin indigestible, sticking, and arm'd with acri∣monious and stinging Points, which must highly offend the most sensile Coat at the Stomach; I am now ready (by God's Assistance) to explain every Phenomenon, or Effect of Opium, however Amaz∣ing and Mysterious, hoping they will not remain long so.
CHAP. XVI. The Explication of the Effects of Opium used Externally. ITS Effects Externally used are of Two sorts, either, I. As an Opiate, or pleasing Tickler of the Mem∣branes; Or, II. As an Alterative of the Parts that it is ap∣plied to. First, As an Opiate or Pleaser of the Membranes, it has the same Effects as Opium used internally, and for the same Reason; therefore the Cause of its Operation, in this Case, will be better seen by the Explication of its Internal Effects, which are far more perfect, compleat, and certain. Secondly, As an Alterative of the Parts that it is applied to, which are the following, viz. 1. It incides, resolves, and discusses by its point∣ed, penetrating, and volatile Salt, insinuating it self into the Parts and Humours of the Animal, because its Particles are fine, minute, and agree∣able thereto, (as Menstruums to the Things to be dissolved:) Then by its Volatility it discusses what it has so incided and resolved. 2. It mollefies and relaxes by its Sal-Volatile-Oleo∣sum so resolving the Parts and Humours, and thereby kindly loosening them; Thus Opiates, as
Solanum Lethale, (or deadly Night Shade) Hem∣lock, Mandrake, &c. come to be of excellent Use in hard Tumours of the Spleen, Tophousness, &c. 3. It Maturates and Suppurates for the aforesaid Reasons, for nothing can better dispose towards Maturation and Suppuration than relaxing, molle∣fying, and resolving. 4. It exulcerates or causes Blisters, or at least rubifies tender Skins, if it be very strong, because of its Volatile Salt, as Cantharides, Spearwort, and other Things do upon the same Account. But this Effect belongs mainly to the true Mastack, or , that drops from the Incisions made in the Heads of the Poppies, more especially the Theban, which affords a most powerful Iuice, for Exulce∣rating or Blistering is but a stronger, fuller, and therefore painful Resolution, as you see by the Cuticle upon Blisters resolved into a kind of Jelly. 5. It is Psilothrick for the same Reasons, for while it so resolves the Parts, it loosens the Roots of the Hair, and so causes its shedding. 6. It hurts the Eyes, because of its Acrimony, by Reason of the Volatile Salt. 7. It causes Itching in the Skin by the Titillation of the same Volatile Salt, as you find by the Ap∣plication of Squills, and the like. 8. It excites Venery, by the same Titillation, on the Veneral Membranes.
CHAP. XVII. The Explication of the Effects of Opium used internally in a moderate Dose. NOte, That because Opium has been generally hitherto used either Crude, or with its Rosin in it, the Effects of Opium are accordingly consi∣dered as common Experience thereupon has given Opportunity of Observing them; but as I proceed I shall shew you where the Resinous Part of Opium is concern'd in the Effect. 1. It is manifest why Opium may well ope∣rate in a very small Quantity, as it usually does, because the least Matter imaginable affects the Senses, (as has been shewn;) for the Thousandth Part of a grain of Ambergrise, Musk, &c. affects the Smelling, the Hundredth Part of a Grain of very acrimonious Things the Taste, which causes very sensible Pleasure, or Displeasure, according as it is agreeable, or not; much easier may the exqui∣sitely disposed Membrane at Stomach, which is af∣fected with Things so indefinitely small, that no other Sense, or Membrane, can take notice of, as the Particles of Crocus Metallorum in Vomits, Ef∣fluvias from a Cats Body, pestiferous Effluvias, and the like; of all which the Stomach is so sensible, that they thereby cause most violent Symptoms, which are (as was shewn) proportioned to the Sensation. Therefore it can be no wonder, that a Grain, or less, of Opium, should affect the sensile Coat of the Stomach, and thereby cause a Sense of Pleasure; for that which is nice to discern grieving Particles, is so to discern pleasing ones,
(as has been said.) Cujus est Dolor ejusdem est Vo∣luptus, that is, Pleasure, and Displeasure, belong to the same Part, and (as was shewn) in equal Degree. This proves, That it must Operate by plea∣singly affecting the Stomach, for it were otherwise impossible, that so little a Quantity should cause such remarkable Effects, and that before the Opium is out of the Stomach; but it is ordinary for the Stomach to cause mighty Effects by its Sensation of very small Things, otherwise insensible and incon∣siderable as to the Production of any observable Effects; and therefore it would be a Miracle, if it did any other Way cause such great and nume∣rous Effects. Helmont observed, That Pro Remedio restaurativo Archaei (sive Animae sensitivae) non re∣quiritur Unciarum & Drachmarum Quantitas, sed pauca Grana; That is, Very little serves to comfort the Archaeus (or Sensitive Soul;) because it is done by Sensation, (as I have proved.) 2. It is as evident how a hot, brisk, and Sa∣lino-volatile Thing, as Opium is, must affect the sensile Coat of the Stomach in a short Time, as Vo∣mits, Purgers, &c. do; which it does much in the same Time with those Things, that is, as soon as they insinuate themselves through the Crusta Carnosa of the Stomach, and reach its sensile Coat, which is the Reason that Opium, Vomits, Pur∣gers, &c. make some, and like Delay, before they Operate; which is also a Proof, that all of them Operate by affecting the sensile Coat of the Sto∣mach, all the Difference being, that one affects pleasantly, as Wine, Meat, and Cordials, and the other by a grievous Sensation.
The Explication of the Constant Effects of Opium used internally, &c. 1. The first and leading Effect of Opium is, causing a most agreeable, pleasant, and charming Sensation about the Region of the Stomach. This is a Property that belongs to it omni & semper, and indeed soli to Opiates, if the Degree, Duration▪ and Fineness of the Pleasure be considered. How manifest is it, from what has been said of the most Compleat and Consummate Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, which exactly agrees in Prin∣ciples, &c. with Semen Animale, that so highly pleases and titillates the Membranes, with which it not only agrees in Principles, (as was shewn) but has them more active, actuating, and titillating, than any Membrane, that▪ it must of necessity highly please all Membranes, more especially such as are most exquisitely disposed for Sensation, as the most sensile Membrane at Stomach is, not only by its Agreeableness, but by a most Charming and Captivating Titillation, that actuates and causes a fine Ovation, and serene glowing of the Spiritus insiti of the Stomach, which makes it pleasing in the highest manner, having all the Re∣quisites to cause a Sense of Pleasure! and that is not all, but it being taken into the Body, it causes a long, continued, and permanent sense of Pleasure, which we must necessarily carry along with us as a Vade Mecum, even Sleeping or Waking, Resting or Moving, or whatever we do, or wherever we are; by which Means, it far excells all other Pleasures, and consequently produces such mighty Effects; all other Pleasures being momentary, transitory, de∣sultory, or interrupted, except that of Wine, and
Cordials at Stomach, which therefore have the likest Effects to that of Opium, tho' they do not equal it in the Intenseness or Duration of the Pleasure, unless they are repeated, (as indeed they may be) which made me to intimate, That drinking a good Glass of Wine every Hour, and by that Means keeping the fresh Pleasure thereof conti∣nually at the Stomach, (like that of Opium) is the best Way to cause a long Euphory of Labour, Iourneys, &c. which may come near the Perfor∣mance of our Divine Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, tho' never equal it for Reasons already sufficiently hinted, viz. because Wine wants its most agree∣able Composition, and fine Titillation of the Vo∣latile Salt that Opium and Animal Seed have. Note, That the Pleasure of Opium may, to some inadvertent Persons, seem very indefinite, tho' it is at Stomach, (as it must be) because the Pleasure immediately relaxing all Parts, and gratifying the Sensitive Soul, which informs the whole, seems to be general, tho' Originally only at Stomach. 2. Our Consummate Sal-Volatile-Oleosum must cause a blith, gay, and good Humour; for being pleased with any Thing (as is the Vulgar Obser∣vation) causes a good Humour, how much more must such an intense, agreeable, and continual Plea∣sure, that we always, and every where carry a∣long with us, so do! How common a Saying is it, He was pleased with somewhat, for I found him in a good Humour! 3. The like is to be said of its causing Prompti∣tude, Serenity, Alacrity, and Expediteness in Dis∣patching and Managing of Business; for these are but natural and necessary Consequences of a blith, gay, and good Humour, and therefore al∣ways go together; for the sensitive Soul being put
in a fine Ovation, by the continual Pleasure, is more active; and having thereupon (as was shewn) wholly excused himself from the Care, and soli∣citude of the Defensive Contraction, and, in great Measure, of the Vigilative Contraction also, is more at leisure to attend the Managery of other Affairs without Distraction; besides, that he is actuated and enliven'd by the aforesaid Ovation of the Spirits, and pleasing Titillation into an Alacrity and Promptitude for any Business; with which also he is less tired, because he has (as was said) rid himself of the Fatigue of the Contractions, that (as was manifestly proved) do cause Lassitude, which otherwise can hardly touch or affect him at all in the State of Relaxation. 4. It must cause Assurance, Ovation of the Spirits, Courage, Magnanimity, (as Wine does) by elevating the sensitive Soul by Pleasure, and a high Titillation of the Spiritus insiti, by its Volatile Parts actuating them, as the Animal Semen does all Creatures in Times of Copulation, tho' it immediately affects only the Venereal Membranes, but ours does actuate them not only in those Membranes, but also in the more exquisitely disposed Membranes for Sensation at Stomach, and soon after, all over the Body. 5. It prevents and takes away Grief, Fear, Anxie∣ties, Peevishness, Fretfulness, &c. for the aforesaid Reasons, which cause a blith, gay, and good Hu∣mour, Promptitude, Courage, &c. for it is impos∣sible to be gay, and good Humour'd, Serene, Chear∣ful, Courageous, and Magnanimous, and at the same Time Sorrowful, Fearful, Peevish, Fretful, &c. If the bare Sense of an ordinary Meal of Meat at Stomach, which causes but a slow Pleasure in com∣parison with Opium, takes off the Peevishness, Fretfulness, &c. that the grievous Sensation of Hun∣ger causes, how much more must the intense and charming Pleasure caused by Opium, that is so agree∣able,
even far beyond Wine it self, (as has been set forth) take away all ill Humours, Fretfulness, Peevishness, &c. Obj. But it may be said, That Sleepiness, which depends also upon Relaxation, as the Effects of Pleasure do, causes a Peevish, Fretful Humour, as is commonly, observed. Ans. It is so far otherwise in the Case of O∣pium, that it is quite contrary; for, 1. The Sleepy are not Peevish, unless you put them by some Means out of the Pleasure of enjoying Sleep or Relaxation, for if you let them alone they will not trouble you with Peevishness, nor any ill Hu∣mour; but it is the calling them from their relaxed Condition, to the grievous Task of Contractions, that vexes them; so that it is the Want of conti∣nuing under the Relaxation that frets them, and the more, because the Fatigue and Tedium of Con∣traction did put them upon the Relief of Sleep, of which if disappointed, they are much vexed. But in the Case of Opium, you cannot so easily rob them of their Pleasure, which they carry con∣tinually within them in an uninterrupted manner, unless some very grievous Thing happens, which causes more defensive Contraction than the Opium causes Relaxation; tho' even this also is generally soon overcome by the Pleasure continually inviting the Relaxation, and promoting it, whereas the Interruptions thereof are transitory; but at the worst it is but taking more Opium, and the Work is done▪ for, I observe, that the Dose of Opium must be sufficient to introduce such a Sense of Pleasure as causes a Relaxation of the Contraction caused by the Grievance: Hence it is certain, that a greater Pain requires a larger Dose of Opium, (as has been intimated.)
6. All know, that Pleasant Diversions, as Musick, Pleasant Iests and Stories, fine Sights, &c. do cause Euphory, and an easie undergoing of Iourneys, Labour, &c. Therefore, if such interrupted, tran∣sient, and slight Pleasures, do it so much, it will be easily granted me, that a continual, and more intense Pleasure, that is always present without any Interruption or Intermission, (as that of▪ Opium) must cause a more eminent and permanent Euphory, proportioned to the Pleasure, which causing Re∣laxation, prevents the Fatigue (or Lassitude) that is caused only by Contractions, either Vigilative, Dfensive, or Intentive, (as I have proved.) So that I do not conceive, how the Noctambuli (or such as Walk in their Sleep) can ever be tired, if they Travelled ever so far, (if they could Eat and Drink) because the Relaxation▪ of the Sleep recruits them as much as they spend of Spirits, &c. so Persons that cause such Relaxation by Opium, and so repeat it as to maintain the Relaxation, can hardly be weary; which is the true, plain, and Mechanical Reason, why the Turks, and other Eastern People, do, by the Help of Opium, per∣form prodigious Iourneys without being tired▪ which may therefore (in Allusion to the Noctam∣buli) be call'd Opiambuli, (or Opambuli) as being a kind of Artificial Noctambuli, because they are much relax'd by the Pleasure that Opium causes, as the other are by Sleep. Qui Laetitiâ aiciuntur (says Sanctorius) nulam in Itinere Defatigationem sentiunt; That is, The Merry are not Weary, (as the Saying is) because Mirth, being pleasant, causes Relaxation, as Opium does, in some mea∣sure.
Note, That as to all the foregoing serene and brisk Effects, a full and liberal Perspiration, which it also causes, (as will be shewn) contributes much thereto a posteriori; for, as Fire burns slowly and dully, if the Smoak does by any means return upon it, and very serene if not, so it is with the Flame of Life, if clouded with, or clear'd from Vapours by Perspiration. Sanctor. Sect. 7. Aph. 17. Mlancholia superatur liberâ Perspiratione, & Aph. 30. 31. Edulia aperientia Gaudium movent; That is, Such as open the Pores, and cause Perspiration, cause Ioy or Mirth. 7. It lulls, sooths, and, as it were, charms the Mind with Consent and Acquiescence, for the se∣veral Reasons couched in the Premises, and be∣cause the fine, continual, and charming Pleasure of Opium, (such as some Glasses of generous Wine causes) must needs have such an Effect. 8. It quiets, allays, and composes all Perturbations and Commotions of the sensitive Soul, Spirits, &c. 1. Because it so lulls, sooths, and charms the sensi∣tive Soul, (as is aforesaid) who is the Original of all Motions in the Animal. 2. Because all Motions are, by the Relaxation, proportionably abated (as was demonstrated.) Thus Opium takes off Hyste∣rick Fits, Fevers from Commotions of the Spirits, convulsions, Stops Hemerrhages, (or Bleeding) &c. 9. It causes a Relaxation of all the sensile Parts of the Body, by Reason of the great and continual Pleasure that it causes; and how Pleasure causes Relaxation, I have shewn in Chap. 14. 10. It causes Indolence, or Exemption from Pain, by causing so high and lasting a Pleasure; 1. Be∣cause that Pleasure takes up the Attention of the sensitive Soul, who delights in't. 2. Because a sense of Pleasure and Pain cannot be at the same Time in the same Subject, being they are Contraries.
3. Because the Membranes being relaxed, and the Animal Spirits expanded, the Impressions of Pain cannot be carried to the sensitive Soul, because they cannot convey Impressions smartly being thus relaxed and expanded, (as has been demonstrated by the Comparison of a Gut half full of Air, &c.) and all Impressions of Pain must be smart, or else they are not Impressions of Pain; for gentle Im∣pressions are such as belong to Oils, smooth, and soft Things, or when the Animal Spirits can hardly carry any Impressions, but gently, as in Sleep, and other Relaxations, as that upon Pleasure, &c. which is our Case. Note, That it will cause Indolence without causing Sleep, because Sleep requires Relaxation and Quiet of the Spirits, but Indolence requires only Relaxation, (as was shewn) which always follows the charm∣ing Pleasure of Opium. 11. It stops, moderates, or palliates most Fluxes, and promotes Perspiration; because the Relaxation takes away the sense of the Irritation of Humours, which causes a Contraction to squeese them out, and that the same Relaxation opens the Pores, to let the Fmes out, which pass by their own Levity upon the opening of the Pores. Nihil magis (says Sanctorius, Sect. 7. Aph. 6.) reddit liberam Perspi∣rationem quam Animi Consolatio, (aut voluptas) & Aph. 19. Animi Consolatio, quacunque de causâ, ape∣rit meatus, & largam Perspirationem facit. Now you may perceive why Opium, and good Cordials, do moderate Fluxes by Stool, even be∣fore they are out of the Stomach, because the Pleasure there caused relaxes all Parts, and thereby causing an Expansion of the Animal Spirits, the sense of the Irritation is lost, because the Expanded
Spirits cannot carry the Impressions smartly to the sensitive Soul, which must be, to cause a sense of Irritation, or grievous Sensation: By the same Rea∣son, only warm Trenchers applied to the Belly, or sitting upon a warm Stool, &c. moderates a Loose∣ness, because the Pleasure of the Warmth relaxes, and so takes away a sense of the Irritation by the aforesaid Expansion of the Spirits. 12. I have just now shewn how it promotes insen∣sible Perspiration, viz. by the Relaxation opening the Pores, and letting out the Fumes; which I need not have mentioned again but for Order sake, that all may thereby see, that I evade the Explication of no Effect, nor, indeed, need I, for they are now obvious enough, even without my Explication, to any Sagacious Person; so that the Plainness may give greater cause to pass over some untouched, than the Difficulty; but it is not sit that either should cause any Omission in such a mighty Concern, that was never Explicated, and scarce ever thought possible. 13. Opium prevents Shiverings in Ague Fits, be∣cause that (for the Reasons aforesaid) it takes away the sense of the Irritating Humours that causes them. 14. It prevents and cures Colds, by the Relaxa∣tion that its Pleasure causes, whereby the Pores are kept very open, and Perspiration (as was shewn) promoted. Besides, that it preventing the Sen∣sation of, hinders it to constringe the Pores, by causing a grievous Sensation. 15. It causes a larger and slower Pulse, because of the Relaxation that the intense and continual Pleasure causes, by which the Arteries are widened, and the Motion made slower; 1. Because the Animal Spirits are weakened by the Relaxation of their Vessels, and their Expansion thereupon. 2. Because the sense of Irritation, by which the Heart is solicited to move faster, is lost.
16. It causes Driness in the Mouth, (as Sleep doth;) 1. Because the Dilatation of the Glan∣dules, by the Relaxation, detains and suspends the Humours; and 2. Because the Sensation being lessen'd, the Membranes that include the Salival Glandules are not irritated to Contraction to squeeze out the Saliva (or Spittle.) 3. Because the Pulse is slower to cause an Extrusion of the Humours. 17. It has most Effect in warm and moist Weather, because both Warmth and Moisture promote Re∣laxation, by which Opium does (upon the Account of the Pleasure it causes) perform its Effects. 18. It has more Effect upon fine and lax Textures, for the same Reason, and because their Sensation is more nice, and affected more with Pleasing or Grieving Things: Therefore it affects Children and Women, especially the Nice, and Delicate, more than Men; which may be the Reason why Women do not use Opium, in the Eastern Countreys, as much as Men. 19. It causes an Efflorescence (or Redness) of the Skin, (as Sleep or Wine do) because the Skin be∣ing relaxed, admits the Bloud to come into it very freely, as Cold, Fear, &c. contracting the Parts of the Skin, repel it, or squeese it out, or back again; Thus Persons that drink much, get Red Noses, by frequent Relaxations of the Skin, which widen the Roads of the Bloud more and more; Hence it is that the Bags at a Turky-Cock's Neck are red when he is pleased, and soon pale again when displeased. 20. It affects the Genus Nervosum, or Animal Spirits, (which is a common Observation) more than the Bloud, because it Operates by affecting Sensation, wherein the Nerves and Membranes are most concerned, and not by altering the Bloud, to which it bears no Proportion, to cause any remark∣able Effects.
Note, How plainly this Concession of all Authors confirms what I said, viz. That it does not ope∣rate as an Alterative of the Bloud, &c. but by af∣fecting Sensation, as I have proved. 21. It increases Seed in some Measure, because it administers a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of the same Na∣ture with it, and by its Titillation solicites and in∣vites the sending of its Matter that way, as is observable in such as use much Titillation; but to speak plainly and mechanically, I think that this mainly happens, because of the Relaxation of the Parts admitting (as was said of the Efflorescence of the Skin by Relaxation) the Bloud, or Mate∣rials of Seed, more freely into the Testicles, and all the Seminary Vessels, especially, being that the Titillation causes an ostener emptying of the same, in order to receive those Materials with less Oppo∣sition, for Quod intus est prohibet alienum, that is, What is within hinders the entrance of other Matter; Nothing can receive more than what it can con∣tain, but what is often emptied can successively receive much. 22. It causes a great Promptitude to Venery, E∣rections, &c. (especially if the Dose be larger then ordinary) because being of the same Principles with Animal Seed, and (in all probability) some∣what more titillating, and of like Principles (tho' more gentle) than Cantharides, it must highly titillate those Parts, and consequently cause a great Promptitude to Venery.
CHAP. XVIII. The Explication of the frequent (tho' not constant) Effects of Opium, in a Mode∣rate Dose. 1. IT causes Sleep, because it highly disposes thereto by the Relaxation that its Pleasure causes. Thus Musick, agreeable Frications, and many other Pleasures, nay, all that are consistent with lying, or sitting still, and silent, incline us to Sleep; but none can compare with the sweet, continual, and transcendent Pleasure of Opium, that we carry along with us for many Hours; whereas other Pleasures are either remiss, or in∣terrupted, or transient in their Nature; for conti∣nuance in gentle Pleasure, as the fall of Waters, Whistling of Winds, effects much towards Sleep, so Intenseness does also, tho' momentary, as that of Venus; how much then must a continual and in∣tense Pleasure cause it, especially when Rest, Si∣lence, &c. is added thereto. Note, That Sleep is so far from being a Property of Opium, that it does not belong to it omni, soli, or semper; yet People have generally look'd upon Sleep as such, which caused many Errours. 2. It causes pleasant Dreams, because the very Sleep is caused and continued by Pleasure, when it is by Opium; which Pleasure being all the time we Sleep within us, must needs suggest pleasant Dreams, or none, for how can sad and melancholy Dreams seise one that is in a gay and pleasant Condi∣tion, as far as one in Sleep is capable thereof.
3. It stops Vomiting; 1. As it doth other Fluxes, by taking away the sense of Irritation. 2. By highly pleasing, and thereby quieting and composing the Commotion of the Stomach. 3. By relaxing it, which oppose the Contraction, by which Vomiting is perform'd. 4. It stills Hiccoughs for the same Reasons. 5. It causes Convulsions and Contractions to cease. 1. Because it induces a Relaxation, which takes them off. 2. By taking off the sense which the Irritating causes. 3. By composing the Spirits. 6. It causes the Meat to stay long at Stomach, (as Sleep does;) 1. By relaxing the Stomach, so that it is not subject to contract to send it out. 2. By stilling all Motions, whereby the Stomach grows proportionably unactive. 3. Because the Relaxa∣tion opposes the Contraction, by which the Men∣struum is sent into the Stomach, or the Saliva into the Mouth; both which are therefore much want∣ed in Sleep for the like Reason (as has been shewn.) 7. It moderates and prevents Hunger; 1. Because (as was said) the Menstruum is not so plentifully sent or squeesed into the relaxed Stomach. 2. Be∣cause it takes away the sense of Hunger. 3. Be∣cause it leaves the Meat to stay too long at Sto∣mach, by Reason that it is relaxed, more insensible and proportionably languid in motion (as in Sleep.) 8. It causes Sweat, when the Body is full of moi∣sture, (as Sleep doth) by relaxing, and thereby opening the Pores; and not (as People com∣monly talk) by attenuating, and the like, for a Grain of Opium bears no Proportion to the Bloud and Humours: That it causes it meerly as Sleep does, is manifest, not only because it bears not a due Proportion to the Work, as an Alterative, but because Men do not Sweat in that Case (as in Sleep) without much moisture in the Body, where∣as
much would not be attenuated as soon as less: Therefore it is only an Exudation of the Humours upon a Plenty thereof, and opening of the Pores. Sanctorius, Sect. 1. Aph. 22. Invisibilis Perspiratio fit visibilis, quando Nutrimentum est nimium; That is, Invisible Perspiration becomes visible (Sweat) when nourishment (or moisture) is too much, which exactly agrees with that of Hippocrates cited in Chap. 13. , &c. 9. It causes the Menses to flow, when nothing is wanting but the opening or relaxing of the Viae or Pores they issue out at, as when they are natu∣rally too narrow and close; as upon the first Ten∣dency to them in young Girls, or when stopt by Reason of any undue Contraction thereof, as by Pain, Cold, Sorrow, or other grievous Passions, all which do close the Pores. Besides, it does irritate those very sensile Venereal Parts to Erection; and I have reason to think, that it does by a general Relaxation, cause an Increase of Bloud, as it does of the Breasts, Milk, &c. causing, as it were, an Artificial Puberty, or (at least) much promoting the Natural, and therefore is of excellent Use in this Case in Judicious Hands, tho' little thought of in Practice. Obj. Here I may be sure of an Objection, That it stops all Fluxes, but Sweat or Perspiration. Ans. It is as false as it is a common saying, if they do not mean only such Fluxes as proceed from grievous Sensation, and Contraction thereupon; for how can that which relaxes all Parts, stop any Flux that depends upon Relaxation? as Stillicidium Urinae by Relaxation of the Sphincter of the lad∣der, involuntary Flux per Anum by the  of its Sphincter, and such like; so do I speak of a Flux that may often depend upon Relaxation, (as I have shewn.)
Obj. But it may be objected, That it particularly stanches Bloud, how then should it promote the Menses? Ans. Experience tells me it does, and Reason confirms it: It stanches Bloud, by composing the Fury of its Motion, but that does not hinder, but it may relax the Pores for Sweat, Menses, Lo∣chia, &c. to pass; and, why not for the Menses and Lochia, as well as Sweat, by opening the Pores, I would fain know? considering also the Titilla∣tion that it causes upon those Venereal Parts, which may very much solicite their motion. 10. It causes the Lochia to flow for the same Reasons that it does the Menses: This I have great Experience in. Note, That the Menses, Lochia, and Perspiration, are Natural Evacuations that have Pores designed for them by Nature, the opening of which by Re∣laxation must make way for them: Suppose, when the Bloud flows so much into the Skin as to cause an Efflorescence, by the Relaxation thereof, after Opium is taken, that there were Pores to carry out Bloud, as there is for Sweat, why should not one flow as well as the other? But there are such Pores for the Menses and Lochia, and large ones too, and therefore it must promote them; and why should not Relaxation do it, as well as Contraction, by Cold, Terrour, Grief, &c. stop them? for the Effects of Contraries are contrary. 11. It causes the Stone to pass; 1. Because it re∣, and so widens the Passage. 2. Because it  move with little or no Pain, which contracts the Parts, and so hinders its Passage, therefore the Use of Opium, with some other Helps, is the
greatest Means that can be, or ever will be, for the Stone, till the Dissolution of it is found out, not only to give Ease in the Case of the Stone, but to cause it to pass; for both which Purposes it excells all Things, and doth both at once. 12. It causes the Delivery of Women, by relaxing the Neck of the Womb, as it does that of the Bladder to deliver Persons of the Stone, but in the Delivery of Women it is not to be used but in par∣ticular Cases, and by a very Skilful Hand; 1. Be∣cause it is apt to take off all the Womens Pains; and Throws, and so quite disappoint the Delivery for a day, 2, 3, 4, or more sometimes. 2. Be∣cause it causing a great Relaxation, the Parts after Delivery will be very unapt to close and contract duely as they should in such Cases, otherwise se∣veral Inconveniences may ensue. 3. It may be pernicious upon the Account of the Evacuation of Bloud that then happens. But these Things belong more properly to the Use of Opium in Cure. 13. It causes Deadness of the Eyes, (as in Drun∣keness, &c.) because the Cornea is relaxed, so that the Humours do not fill it up to a tense Rotundity, as when 'tis more contracted. 14. It causes the Pupilla to dilate, because of the same Relaxation. 15. It causes a Growth of the Breast, Penis, and Increase of Milk, by Reason of the same Relaxa∣tion, as the Pleasure of the Semen upon Puberty does, or as Emollients and Relaxers applied to the Breasts, increase Milk, &c. by making more Room for it, &c. 16. It causes Venereal Dreams, because of the Titillation of the Venereal Membranes that it causes. 17. It causes Nocturnal Pollutions for the same Reason, and because it relaxes the Parts.
18. It causes Itchings in the Skin, because of its Titillation by its Volatile Salt. 19. It causes much Urine, as Cantbarides, Bees; Pismire, Millepedes; &c. do, by its Volatile Salt, which titillates and irritates those Parts, by its re∣laxing the Pores of the Kidneys, and rendring the Humours more penetrating, in some measure, by the Volatile Salt. 20. It causes a Nausea, by its Rosin sticking to, and teazing the sensile Coat of the Stomach. The Reason why it is generally so long before it causes a Nausea or Vomiting, is, that its Pleasure does at first prevent it, till at last the sticking Rosin urges it by its long Stay, and vexatious Adherence. 21. It causes Swimmings in the Head by Consent, when the Stomach is grieved by that Rosin, as you find upon Nauseas before Vomiting, or when any Thing does much offend the Stomach, as much Drink or Wine, which when they have Vomited, those Swimmings cease. 22. It causes Watching in some Persons, who are of very moveable Spirits, by actuating and stir∣ring their Spirits by its active Volatile Salt, tho' it does at the same time please the Membranes, and consequently relax the sensile Parts, and thereby cause Indolence, the Effect of Relaxation; which it also does, when People keep themselves from Sleep by voluntary Motion, and therefore takes away Pain, even when Men Travel, &c. Besides, there are some sort of Persons, that upon Ioy, good News, Pleasure, or the like, are too much elevated, or have a restless Ovation of the Spirits, which will not suffer them to Sleep, tho' they are in a Pleasant Condition all the time; This may be the Case of some that cannot Sleep after Opium, tho' they are all the Time (as they call it) in a Heavenly Condition, for (as I have said) a
Quietness of the Spirits is requisite to cause Sleep, as well as Relaxation, but Relaxation alone, and thereby Expansion of the Spirits, so that they can∣not carry Impressions smartly, is sufficient to cause Indolence; and the Pleasure to cause a Heavenly (or very pleasant) Condition. Sanctor. Stat. Med. Sect. 7. Aph. 28. says, That Laetitia perseverans per mul∣tos dies somnum impedit; Persevering Pleasure may do the same, by like Reason, that is, too much  or Ovation of the Spirits. Sometimes too large a Dose causes Watching, by over-actuating and exciting the Spirits: Me∣dicum vini generosi, & Allium (says Sanctorius) conciliant somnum, & Perspirationem, si vero plus justo sumantur, utrumque prohibent, perspirabile tamen in Sudorem convertunt, that is, A little generous Wine and Garlick will cause Sleep and Perspiration, but too much hinder both, yet they convert the perspi∣rable Matter to a Sweat; which Wine and Garlick have the Nature of Opiates, and the Reason why they Sweat, is, the Quantity of the Wine affording more Moisture, Hippocrates says. 23. A dubious State between Sleeping and Waking, is caused, when the Relaxation, upon the Pleasure of Opium, inclines to Sleep, but the irreuiete Ovation of the Spirits, by the Pleasure and Titilla∣tion, will hardly suffer it, yet highly pleases, and puts them in a sweet agreeable Condition.
CHAP. XIX. The Explication of the rare Effects of Opium in a Moderate Dose. 1. IT causes temporary Pulses of the , and sometimes of other Parts, by its over relaxing the Parts, and causing thereby an Expansion of the Elastick Spirits, which (as was demonstrated) weakens their Motion. 2. Faltring of the Tongue does (as in Relaxation by Drunkenness) proceed from the same Cause. 3. Looseness of the Lower Iaw, as you see in the Drowsy and Drunken People, is from the same Relaxation. 4. It sometimes prevents Sweat, by causing a very Liberal Perspiration (as was shewn;) for (as Sanctorius says, who should know it) much insen∣sible Perspiration and Sweat cannot consist, espe∣cially in a Temperate Person, who Eats and Drinks moderately; Therefore, if you keep a Person, that Sweats much at Night, in a free Perspiration all Day, by the Help of an Opiate, you'll much lessen or totally prevent the Sweat at Night, as in Consumptive Persons, &c. 5. It causes Abortion, by relaxing the Neck of the Womb, which also the Pleasure of Coition sometimes does for the like Reason, and would be much more apt to cause it if it continued long, as that of Opium does. Note the Inconvenience of Coition after Impregnation; This is the great Cause that Whores are not apt to bear Children, because Frequency of Pleasure does over-relax the Collum .
6. It prevents Abortion, when Fear, Terrour, or any contracting Cause, as Grief, grievous Passions, or Sensations, do threaten it, by its taking off the Contraction and Grievance that causes it. 7 Intumescence of the Lips is from their Relaxa∣tion, admitting the Bloud and Humours into them in a plentiful manner; besides, that their Laxity, and the Inadvertency occasioned by the Diverting Pleasure or Drowsiness that follows, letting the Lower Lip hang down carelesly (as is usual in such Cases) may by exposing much more of that Lip (which is most concern'd in this Effect) make it seem larger, as a hanging Lip does. 8. It may cure a Dropsy, (as Dr. Wllis doth in∣stance;) 1. By causing a free Perspiration, which is much wanted in those Cases. 2. By relaxing the Pores, and making way for the Humours to . 3. By causing much Urine, as Cantharides, Mille∣pedes, &c do, upon the Account of their Volatile-Salt, with which Opium abounds. 9. It cures Stupors that proceed from Contracti∣on, as by Cold, &c. by relaxing all Parts. 10. It causes Anxieties and Distresses, by the Rosin sticking and teazing the Stomach. 11. Vomitings and Hiccoughs proceed from the same Cause. 12. Convulsions are caused by the same Rosin, while it continually urges the Stomach to grievous Vomitings, which at last draw other Parts (as the Stomach usually does when under great Grivances) into violent Contractions or Convulsions by consent to endeavour its Assistance, because the defensive Contraction growing very high by the almost in∣tolerable and tedious Grievance at Stomach, causes a mighty compression of the springy Animal Spirits, by which Means they grow very forcible, irre∣quiete, and violently springy, under the urgency of an enormous Compressure, which causes such Convulsive Motions.
Note, That such a violent Compression of the Animal Spirits into a great springiness, is the cause of the Strength of Convulsive Motions, so that sometimes a strong Man can hardly hold a Child's Limb in such Cases. 13. Syncopes, Leipothymies, and Faintings, fol∣low, when the sensitive Soul being quite tired, and overborn by the Fatigue of such Distresses, Vo∣mitings, and Defensive Contractions, to reject and excuss the said adhering and teazing Rosin, yields it self to Rest, and lets go the Reigns of Contracti∣on as being fruitless, and no longer endurable; whereupon all the sensile Parts being relaxed in the highest degree, they thereby grow unfit for Sensation, and the Animal Spirits expand as far as the Atmospherical Compressure permits them, so that they grow incapable to convey Impressions, by which means Sense fails, and Motion also for the same Reason, because the Animal Spirits loose their springy Endeavours for want of a sufficient Compression to render them flippant for the Pur∣pose; which is the Cause (as in Sleep) that Sense and Motion fail together; of the great Perspira∣tion, and all other Effects of Relaxation in such Syncopes or Leipothymies, in a yet higher degree than in Sleep, wherein the sensitive Soul does not quite let go the Reigns of Contraction, as appears by the Motions that remain, as of the Heart, In∣testines, &c. tho' far more remiss in Sleep than in a Waking State. Note, That such Leipothymies are (as was hinted) of the same Nature as Sleep is, but that they are suddain, more profound, and not so usual, natural, and of course, as Sleep is, which makes them more amazing and surprizing; therefore it follows, that they are (as Sleep is) a Means of Recruit,
when all working and tugging by Defensive Con∣tractions fail, and so the last Refuge of the sensitive Soul, when over-tired, in order to recover Strength for a fresh Engagement with the Enemy; (as be∣ing tired at Night, the sensitive Soul loosens the Rigns of Contraction to enable him the better to fall to his Work the next Day:) This you'll find by all Reason and Experience to be the true State of Leipothymies upon Grievances and Fatigues; tho' not hitherto minded (that I know of.) Many true and useful Consequences do hence fol∣low; as, That we are not always to disturb them, or put them out of these recruiting Leipothymies by grievous Means, as Prickings, Pinchings, &c. but only by Cordials and Refreshing Things, as you would Treat a Person much tired; or by letting them take their Nap (if I may so call it) if there be not very eminent Danger. But 'tis endless, and besides my Purpose, to make a particular Discourse of this Matter, which will belong more properly to my Tract of Animal Mechanism. 14. Death happens sometimes, tho' very rarely, and that in very weak People that take little or no Sustenance, because either when fallen into such Syncopes, they never come out of them, by Reason that they have not within them wherewith to re∣cruit their Spirits, or, that Opium taking them much spent and tired with Distempers, causes, as in weak and wearied People, a most profound So∣por, which not recruiting them, who take or di∣gest no Sustenance, they must rather grow weaker and weaker, (for somewhat is spent while we live) and consequently the Sleep or Sopor more and more profound, till they Sleep their last, for want of some Recruit, which is the very Thing that natu∣rally lessens Sleep and awakes us, when there is no
other apparent Cause; for as the being tired, and want of Recruit, causes Sleep, so the having it causes Waking, or (which is the same in Effect) no farther need of Relaxation for Recruit's sake, so that the sensitive Soul fall to his useful Work of Vigilative Contraction for Sense and Motion's sake. 15. It sometimes causes Purging, which happens (as far as I have observed, or can learn) only when it is given in a good Quantity to Persons of a strong Digestion or canine Appetite. The Case is thus; When Persons, that are of a strong Digestion, take a Resinous Opiate in good Quantity, they do in great measure by their fixed Salts at Stomach, and strong Digestion, subdue the Volatility of the Opium, and dissolve its Rosin, which then (as acrimonious Rosins, or Vomits sub∣dued by fixt Salt, use to do) causes Purging; Hence it is, that it generally (if not always) Purges Dogs, and People of a high canine Appe∣tite, and that sometimes meeting such fixed Salts, it Purges the Consumptive. Bartholine says, That Mandrake Iuice purges when it meets with acrimo∣nious fixed Salt. Erastus and Quercelan do agree, That it has a Purgative Quality, but that it does not always exert it; 1. Because it takes away the Sense of Irritation. 2. Because it is given in too small a Quantity. The Reasons are Just and Right, and not only consistent with, but confirm what I say. Note, That this is not intended of the Purging that happens after the declination of its Operation, which is (as you'll find) from another Cause, therefore this does not smell of the Opium as the other does, because it is past and gone before that in the Declination happens; Of which more in its proper Place.
16. It raises and revives some Persons that are al∣most expiring, in Two Cases; One is, when such as have been used to take it are even expiring for want of it (of which more hereafter.) The other Case is, when violent Contraction, as from Pain, Cold, Vomitings, and Grievous Passions, as Terrour, &c. are the Cause, that People are almost expiring, for it takes off the Contractions by re∣laxing, &c. 17. It stays very long at Stomach, when the Rosin thereof sticks to the Stomach, and is there de∣tain'd; Besides, that the Stomach being relaxed, and having little sense or motion, (as in Sleep) does not soon digest it or discharge it: It is fine in this Case, and all other, to observe how Sensation and Motion go Hand in Hand, keeping equal Pace and equal Proportion, as it plainly must be by the Principles of Relaxation and Contraction, which I have stated and proved. 18. It causes stoppage of Urine sometimes (espe∣cially in old People) by over relaxing, and causing a kind of a temporary Palsie of the Bladder, (as was shewn) and taking away the sense of the Irritation of the Urine, which should contract the Bladder to squeese it out; by which Means it happens sometimes, that the Bladder comes to be so over extended beyond its due Tone, that they cannot contract it to make Water; in all which Cases strong Contracters, as Cold, Terrours, &c. immediately cures them; the very putting the Scrotum to the Edge of a cold Chamberpot has effected it several times by my Advice; tho' (if need be) you must come to Dashing of cold Wa∣ter upon the Region of the Bladder, or Pumping on it, or Dipping in it, &c. so Terrour, and causing a very smart Pain, especially near those Parts, will do much, but Cold is the readiest and best Remedy.
19. It sometimes proves dangerous after great He∣morrbages or Evacuations, as Tapping in Drop∣sies, &c. because the Relaxation hinders the Parts duely to contract upon what remains, which may cause great Mischiefs, as Discontinuation of Moti∣on, &c. Thus have you all the constant, frequent, and rare Effects of Opium, taken internally in a moderate Dose, so naturally, easily, plainly, and mechani∣cally explicated, that People may (in my Judg∣ment) more admire, how all fail'd of discovering the manner of their Production, than that I found it; as Men are apt to think of the Circulation of the Bloud, which now (as I hope the Effects of Opium do) seems very obvious; both which Cases are to me very strong Arguments of a Being that rules and disposes, darkens and illuminates, &c. as he pleases, when I consider, that both the Circula∣tion of the Bloud, and the Cause of the Operation of Opium, (viz. Pleasure at Stomach, &c.) fell under the Senses of many Millions, who in one Case saw the Bloud move, and in the other felt the Pleasure, yet was neither discovered for many Thousands of years; especially considering also, that in the Case of Opium Thousands of Ingenious Men have diligently enquired after the Cause of its Operation, who made no farther step in't than to state Things that have not as much as Existence, (viz. a Cold Quality, and  flying from the Stomach to the Head) to be the Cause thereof. Therefore it is plain, That neither is he that Planteth any Thing, neither he that Watereth, but GOD, that giveth the Increase, of Knowledge, and of other Things: To whom be all Glory.
CHAP. XX. The Explication of the Effects of the Decli∣nation of the Operation of Opium in a Moderate Dose. 1. A General Return of all Diseases and Disasters, when the Operation of Opium is over, be∣cause it does not (as was shewn) operate as an Alterative, but a pleasing Diverter of the sensitive Soul for some Time, during which it causes a ge∣neral Relaxation of all the sensile Parts, whereby the Animal Spirits being expanded, grow unsit to convey Impressions smartly, which is requisite to cause a sense of Pain, &c. (as has been often said.) But it cures several Distempers, viz. such as pleasing and comforting the sensitive Soul, compo∣sing the Spirits, Relaxation, Perspiration, Sweat, &c. can quite take away; Of which more particu∣larly when we come to speak of the Use of Opium in Cure. 2. Sweat happens in the Declination of its Ope∣ration, as Sir Theodore Mayern, my self, and others, have observed, because that now all the Pars contracting, which by their Relaxation suspended all Humours during its Operation, do Mechanically squeese out the congested Humours, there being less Room in the Body, as was said of Sweat upon awaking, by the Return of the Vigilative Contraction after Relaxation during the Sleep, which is to be compared to the Relaxation during the Operation of Opium, and the Return of the Con∣traction,
when 'tis ended; besides, that both upon the Going off of the Operation, and Awaking, the Motion of the Heart growing more vigorous, (as it does upon Motion by the Intentive Contracti∣on) does more powerfully propell the Humours out at the Pores (as happens in Sweat upon Mo∣tion.) 3. Frequent making of Water happens, partly by the Titillation of the Volatile Salt (as by Cantha∣rides, &c.) that is now separated from the Bloud; partly by the Contraction of the whole Body squees∣ing it out at the Kidneys, as when People are Cold, they make more Water for that Reason. 4. A Looseness may, and does happen some∣times from the like Contraction squeesing out the Humours that were suspended during the Relaxation by the Opium, which is common for such Con∣tractions to cause, as by Cold, Terrour, &c. and because Sensation grows more nice and irritable by the Humours, by Reason of the Contraction, which is the more for the Grievance of failing of the Pleasure of Opium. Therefore, 5. Diseases, Pains, &c. seem worse upon the Return of the Grievances, because of the great Ease they had during the Operation of the Opium, Contraria inter se magis elucescunt; and it is parti∣cularly observed of Pleasure, That it leaves Men worse then it found them. Thus a Man is worse, more sad, &c. Post Coitum, more Melancholy after all sorts of Pleasure, insomuch that it is grown to a Proverb, viz. After Merry comes Sorry, (or, After Mirth comes Sorrow;) as also Minus gaudebis, minus dolebis. Therefore, 6. Melaneholy does often (if not always) hap∣pen in some degree, after its Operation is ended; 1. Because of the Return of the Contractions (or Toil) of the sensitive Soul. 2. Because (as was said) the Sense of Pleasure, newly lost, aggra∣vates
the Sorrow, as has been shewn after Coiti∣on, &c. 7. The Pulse is narrow, because the Contraction returns with Melancholy, and Return of Disasters improve when that so happens, as it generally does. 8. Itching of the Skin happens about this time, because that now the Volatile Salt, which causes Tuillation, is arrived as far as the Skin upon its march out of the Body.
CHAP. XXI. The Explication of the Effects of Opium in an Excessive Dose. THE Cause of most of these Effects will be evident from the Explication of the former, because the Difference is only in the Quantity of the Opium, therefore I am often necessitated to speak much the same as I have done before. You cannot expect any good Effects from its Excess, any more than you have from Wine, (tho the best of Cordials, next to the Sal. Volatile. Oleo∣sum of Opium) but rather less, because Opium is join'd to a pernicious Rosin, which you may be sure will be very grievous to the Stomach in great Quantities, if it was so in little. The Evil Effects in this Case, do mainly pro∣ceed, either from too much Relaxation, as in Drunken∣ness, or, from the Rosin at Stomach. 1. A Heat at Stomach is caused by the intense Heat of the Opium in a great Quantity, it being sensibly a very hot Thing. 2. The Sense of Weight at Stomach is caused by the great Relaxation that it causes, which renders the Stomach proportionably weak, and unable to endeavour its own Relief, so that the Rosin, &c. lie heavy upon't; Thus we find a great Heaviness at Stomach, when any Thing grieves it, that it cannot reject or discharge.
3. Gaity of Humour is caused at first (as by the Pleasure of a great Quantity of Wine) by its plea∣sing Agreeableness to the Membrane at Stomach, till the Relaxation grows enormous, as by a great Dose of Wine suddenly drank, to which it is very like in all its Effects, except such as proceed from the Rosin sticking at Stomach, which Wine has not. 4. Sardonick Laughter is caused (as you see in Drunken People) when they are disabled by the great Relaxation, that they cannot well Express themselves by the failing Tongue, they endeavour it by a silly kind of fained or made Laughter, (as they call it) while the pleasing Titillation at Sto∣mach much inclines them to Mirth, if they knew how to manage and carry it on. 5. Laxity, and consequently Debility of all Parts, is caused by the extraordinary Relaxation of them by a continual and permanent sense of Pleasure, which happens considerably in the Momentary Pleasure of Venus, much more in this continual and lasting Pleasure, when a great Dose makes it in∣tense, as in Drunkenness. 6. Alienation of the Mind is caused (as in Drun∣kenness) by an over-Relaxation of the Brain and its Membranes. 7. Loss of Memory happens by the same Means, (as in Drunkenness.) So, 8. Darkness of Eyes is caused by a Relaxation of the Coats and Membranes of the Eyes, but mainly by the Expansion of the Animal Spirits by that Re∣laxation, which (as in Sleep) renders them unfit to convey the Impressions of Light, &c. 9. Laxity of the Cornea is from the same Relaxa∣tion. 10. Appearance of various Colours happens by (as was said) the unevenness of the Cornea, &c. when so relaxed, whereas when 'tis duely con∣tracted it is round, even, polite, and truely re∣presents Things.
11. Deadness of the Eyes to the View, is (as has been shewn) from the Laxity of the Cornea, which makes it flag, lie loose, look dully, and not duely reflect a smart and brisk speck of Light, as it does when tense, round, and polite, by its Contraction on the contain'd Humours, which then duely fill it. 12. Faltring of the Tongue is from the same Re∣laxation, as in Drunken Persons. 13. A Sopor is from the same Relaxation over all the sensile Parts of the Body, by which Means Sense and Motion are diminished or lost by the Ex∣pansion of the Animal Spirits, which (as has been said) being not duely compressed, become unfit for both at the same time. 14. A slow and wide Pulse is from the same Cause, because the said Relaxation permits the Ar∣teries to widen, and the Animal Spirits to expand, and consequently renders the motion of the Heart slow, which is the cause of the Pulse. 15. A high Colour or Efflorescence of the Skin, has been explain'd. 16. Looseness of the Iaw and Lips is from the same Relaxation, (as was shewn;) and so is, 17. Intumescence of the Lips, (as has been shewn) 18. Difficulty of Breathing may be from Two different Causes; either by the Relaxation weaken∣ing the requisite Motions for want of Compressure of the Animal Spirits, and by the Flaccity of the Parts themselves; Or, by a great Grievance at Stomach upon the Account of the Rosin sticking to it, and causing a Convulsion of those Parts; both which may happen. 19. Fury and Madness may also happen, either by the exalted Pleasure of its Titillation, as in Drunkards, who therefore scarce know what they do, the Mind being (as was said) alienated; Or it may happen (as I have often known a kind of Madness to be produc'd) by a great Grievance at
Stomach; which may well be from the Rosin grieving and teazing the nicely sensile Stomach; They may be easily distinguished, one (viz. that from the Rosin at Stomach) being with great Di∣stresses, Anxieties, Convulsions, &c. and the other without any. 20. Venereal Fury proceeds from the high Titil∣lation of the Venereal Membranes by the Volatile Salt of so much Opium, as if Cantharides, Bees, &c▪ were taken internally; but that these cannot so agreeably titillate those Parts as Opium does, whose Volatile Particles are render'd more pleasing by oily ones, and therefore much of the Nature of Semen Virile. 21. Priapisms are caused by the same continual Titillation. 22. Violent Itchings of the Skin are caused by the same tickling Volatile Particles in great Abun∣dance, proportionable to the excessive Dose. 23. Nauseas are caused by the Rosin sticking at, and soliciting the Stomach to Vomit. 24. Swimmings in the Head are by conseit, be∣cause the Stomach is grieved by that Rosin, as is observed in many Cases from a grieved Stomach upon a Tendency to Vomit, as when it is over∣loaden with Wine, or indigestible Victuals, or when Persons are Sea, or Coach-sick, &c. for it is not in these last Cases, because the Brain is offended (as People imagine) that they are Sick, or Vomit, but the Swimming in the Head, and Offence of the Brain happens, because the Stomach is offended by the Motion of the Coach or Ship, by Reason of its most exquisite Sensation, which the Effluvias of a Cat, pestiferous Particles, and Commotions caused by mear Passion, can, and do offend, (as was said) so as to cause Vomitings, Anxieties, &c. much more then may the Motion of a Ship or Coach do it. I shall not here enter into Contro∣versie
with those that assert, That it is the Head is first offended in a Coach or Ship; it is sufficient for my Purpose, that Grievances at Stomach do commonly cause Swimmings in the Head, for taking off those Grievances cures them, as Eating when it is from the Grievance of Hunger or Wind at Stomach, and discharging the Stomach of a great Load of Wine, Ale, or indigestible Matters, when such Things cause it, do cure such Swim∣mings in the Head. The Way how Grievances at Stomach do cause those Swimmings, is by causing a Contraction (as all Grievances do, but especially those at Stomach) of the Membranes of the Brain, as it does of all other, but mainly of these, because very sensile; by which means the Animal Spirits being com∣pressed, grow more irrequiete and skipping up and down, and the Compression not being conti∣nually alike in general, or the Arteries affording an uneven and forcible supply of them (or Fumes) from the Bloud by the Compression, nor affecting all Parts of the Brain with equal Force, because the Pleasure endeavour to relax, &c. there must thence arise Eddies, Vortices, or Whirls there∣of, which cause Swimmings, Vertigo's, &c. accord∣ing as they happen to be moved. That they happen from such Contraction is ma∣nifest; 1. Because the Grievance at Stomach can add nothing else to the Brain, or its Membranes. 2. Because they are taken off by pleasing the Stomach, and consequently by Relaxation, as by a Glass of Wine, Victuals, an Opiate that is not resi∣nous, &c.
It is here well worth your notice, That all con∣sent of Parts (a Thing much admir'd) is only by Contraction or Relaxation, which suddenly af∣fect the whole Systeme of the Nerves and Mem∣branes. 25. Vertigo's are from the same Cause. 26. Vomitings are caused (as was said) by the great Grievance of the acrimonious Rosin sticking to the Coat of the Stomach. 27. Hicconghs are from the same Cause, which happen upon the decay of Power vigorously to Vomit, dwindling into those fruitless Convulsive subsultory Ier, or Half Endeavours. 28. Distresses and Anxieties must necessarily at∣tend such a grievous Sensation and Desection of Natur Endeavour, as being overborn and dis∣abled to work for it self. 29. A turbulent Pulse must be an Effect of the foregoing Tumults. 30. Convulsions happen (as was shewn) by the enormous Compression of the Animal Spirits, by Reason of the violent Contraction upon the great Grievance by the Rosin at Stomach, which causes them to skip and fling up and down very forcibly under the squeese of the Compression, and possibly skirmishing under the Vicissitudes of it and Re∣laxation. 31. Faintings and Leipothymies are caused (as has been explain'd) by the sensitive Soul's being over-tired by the Fatigue of Defensive Contracti∣on, and yielding himself to Rest from all Con∣traction, as the last Relief, &c. whereupon Sense and Motion do fail for want of Compression to ren∣der the Spirits springy, active, and fit for the Purpose. 32. Cold Breath is but a necessary Consequence of the Loss of Motion, and therefore of Heat, by such Leipothymies and Faintings.
33. Death is caused Two manner of Ways, that is, either by an utter Expense of Spirits, and thereupon a Dereliction (or Extinction) of the sensitive Soul by reason of those Distresses and Fa∣tigues upon the Account of the invincible Rosin; Or by too much Relaxation disabling all the mo∣tions of the Body, as in such as dye being dead Drunk, which looking not unlike an Apoplexy, makes Authors say, that Opium causes Apoplexies. Such as escape Death, do so generally by 34. Plentiful Purging, which is occasioned by a great Quantity of the Rosin of Opium meeting a strong Digestion and fixed Salts (as has bee said) 35. Sweats that smell of the Opium are caused, 1. By the Openness of the Pores by Relaxation. 2. By Plenty, or at least sufficiency of Moisture for that End; for otherwise (as was shewn) it would be only insensible Perspiration. 3. By the great Quantity of Volatile Salt attenuating the Humours. 4. By the strict, intimate, and even indissoluble specifick Union or Combination of the Volatile Salt and Oily Parts, which makes it hold its specifick Smell to the last. 36. Violent Itchings in the Skin must of necessity follow a great Quantity of Opium, since it causes such Itchings (as was shewn) in a small Quantity by the Titillation of its Volatile Salt. Note, That these Effects do not all happen to all Men that take it in an excessive Dose, but some to one, and some to others, (as was inti∣mated in Chap. 5.) according as they are more or less troubled with the Rosin, Quantity, Relaxa∣tion, &c.
CHAP. XXII. The Explication of the Effects of a long and lavish Use of Opium. AS an Excessive Dose of Opium is Intemperance for one time, so a long and lavish Use of it is an habitual Intemperance for a long time; therefore if you could not rationally expect good Effs in that Case, any more than from the best Wine taken suddenly in a vast Quantity, it follows, that you cannot expect good Effects from an habitual Intem∣perate Taking of it, any more than from a long and lavish Drinking of Wine, tho' both are excel∣lently good in their Kind, (but that the Opium has the pernicious resinous Part join'd with it;) There is nothing so good, whereof an intemperate Use is not mischievous, God having so ordered it to deter from, and punish Intemperance, and the Abuse of his Creatures; Therefore ill Effects are not always to be imputed to the viciousness of the Things used, but frequently of the Person that im∣prudently uses them. 1. Relaxation and Debility of all Parts is con∣tracted by the habitual over-relaxing thereof by the lavish Use of Opium. 2. An Inhability of doing any Thing without it is contracted by the habitual Pleasure, Comfort, Promptitude, and Euphory it causes when taken, without which the sensitive Soul becomes lazy, listless, and averse to all Actions; it is as i a Man, used to Dance to Excellent Musick, were re∣quired to do it without any Musick at all, nor as much as Thoughts of it, or mumbling it within
himself; Or that one who Drinks nothing but Wine, and Eats the best, should be suddenly de∣nied both, and forced to live upon Bread and Water; Or, that such as always take Tobacco at their Studies, should be suddenly debarr'd thereof, and required to Study without it; How very list∣less would a Man be in such Cases? Tho' hardly any of the Comparisons come up to that of Opium, because of the charming Pleasure, mighty Euphory and Promptitude that it causes; it is as if one were supported, and wholly depended upon Cordials, and suddenly denied them, &c. 3. An Inhability of getting up in the morning till it is taken, and begins to operate, proceeds from the same Cause. A Mechanical Reason may be ex∣pected here also as to these Matters, but it will hardly bear it, any more than how the Will or Appetite causes the first Impulse toward voluntary Moti n; all that can be said is, that without the Opium the sensitive Soul is, when he does any Thing, to act under the Toil and Difficulties of a full vigilative Contraction, (as being awake) in∣tentive Contraction, (as acting) and defensive Con∣traction, (as being grieved) when the Operation of Opium is over, (as after Veneral Pleasure, &c.) so that now he labours under the great Disadvantages and Drudgery of all the Three Contractions, where∣as by the Pleasure, fine Titillation of Opium, and Relaxation consequential thereunto, he was eased of all the Defensive Contraction, which is the most grievous, and in great measure of the Vigilative, (as has been shewn) which makes Working, Iour∣neying, &c. very easie to him; Therefore it is as if one that delights in Musick, Danced to Charm∣ing Melody in beloved Company, with pleasing Refections of Wine, &c. and in the other Case, as if one laboured in Grief or Pain. Now suppose that one, used never to Act or Work without such
mighty Pleasant Advantages, and Causes of Eu∣phory, were required to act under the Pressure of the Three Contractions, (or in Grief or Pain) how listless would he be to Act, Work, get up, &c. 4. A dull, moapish, and heavy Disposition, must be the Effect, unless it be while they please, com∣fort, and enliven themselves by the Opium, because their Brain is habitually over relaxed; which is the very Case of old Drunkards, who have (as 'tis said) drank away their Parts by such an habi∣tual Relaxation of the Brain, (which over-much Sleeping causes also upon the Account of the like Relaxation) therefore they must be moapish till the pleasing Titillation of Opium enlivens them. 5. Diminution of Appetite is caused by an habi∣tual Relaxation of the Stomach, taking away its Sensation, and suspending the Menstruum from flowing to it as freely as it should, and would, if there were a due Contraction to squeese it out. 6. Weakness of Digestion happens from the same Causes. 7. Dropsies are caused by the Relaxation weak∣ning the Parts, and making them thereby suscep∣tible of Humours; as also by Diminution of Appe∣tite and Digestion, (as in old Drunkards.) 8. Decay of Parts (or Wit) happens from ha∣bitual Relaxation of the Brain, and its Membranes, (as in old Drunkards.) 9. Weakness of Memory proceeds from the same Cause (as in old Drunkards.) 10. Stooping in the Back is caused by the habitual Relaxation of the Parts, which weakens and causes them to comply with our Tendency and Use of bending forward, and yield to the greater Weight, that is (generally speaking) on the fore∣side of the Back-bone (or Perpendicular;) so that Stooping must gradually follow those conspiring Causes, as it does in habitual Drunkards, whose Parts are relax'd.
11. Early Decrepiteness must proceed from the aforesaid Relaxation spoiling the Tone of Parts, and causing Want of Appetite, Digestion, &c. (in the manner before shewn.) 12. Shortness of Life must be the Effect of the same Causes. 13. Acrimony of Blood proceeds from the Abun∣dance of Acrimonious Volatile Salts taken in the Opium, wherein it is much more acrimonious than our natural Volatile Salt, and in greater Quantity proportionably; Therefore it can be no Wonder, that, 14. It excites Inclination to Venery by that acri∣monious Salt, which is analogous to that of Can∣tharides, Ants, Bees, &c. 15. Frequent Inclinations to make Water is also a known and common effect of such a Salt, by its irritating and soliciting the Bladder, &c. 16. Priapisms and frequent Erections are, and must be from the same Cause. 17. Nocturnal Pollutions are necessary Conse∣quences of the Relaxation and the Titillation caused by those Volatile Salts, (as was said.)
CHAP. XXIII. The Explication of the Effects of Leaving off Opium, after a long and lavish Use there∣of. I. GReat, and even intolerable Distresses, Anxie∣ties, and Depressions of Spirits, do happen; 1. Because the sensitive Soul, who is so much com∣forted, diverted, and supported by the habitual and dearly beloved Pleasure that Opium causes, being suddenly deprived thereof, (by which it was mainly sustain'd) is exceedingly disappointed and cast down. 2. Because he now labours under the sore Burthen of the Three Contractions, so that every Thing seems, and is really more grievous o him▪ for now it acts as one in Pain or Grief, and every Thing affects him more smartly proportionable to the Compression caused thereby of the Animal Spi∣rits, unless he returns to the Pleasure of Opium, which elevates it again; Or uses generous Wine, as its substitute, tho' it does not equal it, either in the Intenseness or Duration of the Pleasure, unless repeated (as I have some where directed) once in Half an Hour, or an Hour, in a moderate manner, which causes a continuance of the Plea∣sure, tho' it cannot equal the Intenseness of that of Opium, which therefore has the greater Effects. II. A Return of all Diseases, Pains, and Disasters, must happen generally, because the Opium takes them off by a bare Diversion of the Sense thereof by Pleasure. III. Dangerous Loosenesses happen sometimes, be∣cause the Sensation grows more grievous; for, as the pleasant Sensation caused by Opium, takes a∣way
the Perception of the Irritation of Humours, so the Grievance of Losing that Pleasure causing Contraction, makes all Sensation smarter, and con∣sequently more irritating, so that the Humours have thereby more of the Effect of Purgers, which operate (as all agree) by Irritation; Besides, that the Humours before detain'd and suspended by Relaxation, (as in Sleep) are now therefore pour'd down in greater Quantity by the advanced Con∣traction squeesing them out, as the Return of the Vigilative Contraction after Sleep, causes Men to be more apt to go to Stool upon awaking, or get∣ting up in the morning; which may be well com∣pared (in some measure) to Purging, after Lea∣ving off the Use of Opium, since it relaxes as Sleep does, and that for a much longer Time by a continued Use thereof. IV. Death commonly follows, for all the Reasons aforesaid, especially the great and intolerable Di∣stresses of Soul that they are under, unless Opium be used, which soon sets them right, or Wine (its Substitute) so frequently used, as to continue its Cordial Pleasure at Stomach. Nothing now remains but to take a short Re∣view, to see whether I have explain'd all the a∣mazing Contradictions that seem to be in the Effects of Opium; for tho' it is really done, yet may it not so well appear as when set one against the other. It would be Tautology to repeat all the Reasons, therefore I shall only mention them in the close Order I at first enumerated them, that you may see that they are all explicated in the former Discourse. You may well remember, that I have shewn; 1. How it causes Sleeping and Watching (in di∣vers Persons.)
2. How it causes and prevents Sweat. 3. How it relaxes and stops Loosenesses (even by relaxing.) 4. How it stops Fluxes, and promotes Sweat and Perspiration. 5. How it stupifies the Sense of Feeling, yet irri∣tates it. 6. How it causes Stupidity, (if you sit or lie still) otherwise Promptitude in Business. 7. How it causes Cloudiness and Serenity; That, if one lies still and dozes; This, if he keeps in Action; That, by an excessive and lavish Use there∣of, which causes Moapishness; This, by a temperate occasional taking thereof, especially in the Morn∣ing, upon Iourneys, &c. 8. How it excites the Spirits, yet quiets and com∣poses them in Hysterick Fits, Diary Fevers, from Pain, Commotions, &c. 9. How that it is very hot, and takes of Fe∣vers. 10. How tho' it is hot and bitter, yet it lessens Appetite and Hunger, which is a grievous Sensation, by causing a pleasant one. 11. How it sometimes stops Urine, by relaxing the Bladder, suspending Humours, &c. and pro∣motes it by its tickling Volatile Salt, as Cantharides, Bees, Ants, &c. do. 12. How it relaxes, and thereby weakens, as in Sleep, &c. yet enables to perform Labour, Iourneys, &c. with great Euphory, by divertive Pleasure. 13. How it causes and prevents Abortion; That, by over-relaxing; This, by allaying Pains, Terrours, &c. that might cause it. 14. How it stops Vomiting by taking off Irrita∣tions, &c. and causes it by the Adherence of its in∣digestible and viscid Rosin. 15. How it stops Purging, and sometimes causes it by the Dissolution of its Rosin by a strong Di∣gestion,
fixed Salts, &c. when its Quantity is con∣siderable; which makes it happen but rarely. 16. How tho' acrimonious, it takes away the sense of Acrimony. 17. How it causes Madness, and cures it by com∣posing the Spirits, &c. 18. How it causes Palsies by relaxing the Parts, and making them susceptible of Humours, causing ill Digestion, &c. And may cure them (as Dr. Willis gives an Instance) by opening the Pores. 19. How it causes Palsies, and cures Stupors, &c. that proceed from Cold and Contracting Causes. 20. How it causes Driness in the Mouth, yet (by taking off Fevers) often cures it. 21. How it takes off Hiccoughs, and causes them, as it does Vomiting, and for the same Causes. 22. How it stanches Bloud by quieting its mo∣tion, yet promotes the Menses and Lochia by re∣laxing, opening, and widening the Vessels and Pores. 23. How it stops critical motions, that depend upon Irritation and Contraction, and promotes such as depend upon opening the Pores. 24. How it revives People that are at the Point of Death for want of Opium, or by violent Contracti∣ons and Convulsions, and is fatal to other weak Per∣sons. 25. How it causes Convulsions by its grieving Ro∣sin, and cures them by quieting and composing the Spirits by pleasing them. 26. How it causes Contraction by the grievous Sensation that its Rosin causes, and Relaxation by the pleasant Sensation that its Sal-Volatile. Oleosum causes; by That it causes many ill Effects, not here named, and by This it cures them; for how can such contrary Causes (according as one or the other prevails) not cause contrary, and seemingly contra∣dictory Effects at divers Times, and in divers Persons.
27. How it relaxes, yet causes the Tension, Rigi∣dity, and Erection of the Penis, Priapisms, &c. by its Titillation. Thus have you all, even the most mysterious and seemingly Contradictory Effects of Opium, ex∣plain'd and reconcil'd, and that so easily, that if there were no other Proof of the Truth of my Foundation, it is sufficient to convince any Man of its Validity, considering the Vastness of the Num∣ber, and Perplexity of the Nature of those Effects, that are all with such Facility explain'd, is able even to disparage the Performance as mean and obvious, (like that of the Circulation of the Bloud, or America when found out) did not the newness of the Thing, the baffled Endeavours of all Man∣kind, and the seeming Impossibility of ever find∣ing it out, (which was almost agreed upon) speak in its behalf. Consider, that nothing can be plain and easie, but what is true, and consequently no∣thing valuable but what is so; what's true Know∣ledge, but the Knowledge of Things as they really are? And when a Thing is known as really as it is, it must be plain, and never so till then; for to take a Thing to be what it is not, is all Dark∣ness, Errour, Puzzle, Confusion, and Vanity, as all Discourses of Opium have hitherto been. It is no Wonder then, that the Cause of the Ope∣ration of Opium grew more and more obscure, while they stated the Cold Quality of very hot Opium, the Belching up of Vulcano's of Fumes from the Sto∣mach to the Head, (which have no Existence) their acting as a Poison of the Animal Spirits, their fixing and coagulating them, their clogging them by Adhe∣rence, or clouding them, their wedging themselves a∣mong the Animal Spirits, (none knows how) and thereby disabling them, their stuffing the Pores of the
Brain, or compressing it, and thereby hindering the Generation of Animal Spirits, to be the Causes of the Noble and Pleasant Operation of Opium, without any Foundation in Nature, or the least Evidence of Sense or Reason, but vain Phantastical Imaginations form'd in the Chimera-Forges of their Wanton Brains, while they endeavour'd (Right or Wrong) to ap∣pear considerable Folks, by doing nothing to the Purpose in a kind of pretty, plausible, and im∣posing manner, thereby stuffing the unwary World with wrong and vain Conceptions and imperti∣nent Prejudices, which are the greatest Obstacles of Knowledge. I would fain know, which of those Hypothesises can tollerably solve 1 in 10 of the Phenomena's that I have enumerated, or, indeed, any one Phenomenon truly, mechanically, and demonstra∣tively; yet are those Whims the glorious Producti∣ons of Thousands of years Studies, and solicitous Disquisitions; tho' every one that took Opium, actu∣ally felt the true Cause of its Operation, viz. The pleasing Delight that it occasioned, by affecting the Membranes and Animal Spirits, after the man∣ner that I have at large set forth. Good God! what blund'ring Groper is Mankind? Who daily felt the Cause it ne're could find! Tho' Thousands sought it with an eager Mind.
CHAP. XXIV. Of Opium separated from its noxious Part, (or Rosin) and whether it is a Panacea, &c. THus far have I spoken of Crude Opium jointly with its Rosin or noxious Part, now I will consider it separated from it, and shew how to do it. Galen says, That it is very difficult to find an excellent Remedy without a noxious Quality. And it is as difficult to find any Thing so noxi∣ous, as not to afford a good Medicament; which you see in Vipers, Scorpions, Mercury, &c. All, or most Physicians, unanimously agree, That Opium has such a noxious Quality, that causes Vomitings, Hiccoughs, Distresses, Anxieties, Convul∣sions, chiefly at or about the Region of the Sto∣mach; and that if it were freed from it, it would be the noblest of Medicaments: Who can otherwise imagine? seeing it is so excellent and universal a Remedy, as it is now used in the World, without such an excellent Preparation thereof, wherein the noxious Principle is separated from it. Of which Paracelsus says, That whoever shall enjoy it, will be a Professor of no less Knowledge than Apollo, Machaon, or Podalyrius, tho' he was the greatest Master of Arcanas, Panaceas, &c. yet does he confess, That a Preparation of Opium stood him in stead, and perform'd his Business, when all his great Medicaments fail'd him; and that it will dissolve Diseases, as Fire doe Snow; or uses Words to the same Effect.
Helmont, being in a kind of Rapture, upon Con∣sideration of its Excellency, bursts out into this Exclamation; Happy is the Sick Man whose Physician knows how to separate the deadly (or noxious) Part from Opium! Platerus afirm'd, That he could with a Prepara∣tion of Opium preserve the broken Wheel of Life. Etmuller says, That Opium may  be esteem'd a general Remedy; and the main End of his Tract, De parvis Morborum Initiis, is to shew how Volatiles, more especially Salia-Volatilia-Oleosa, (as that of Opium) may in small Quantities alter us, and cure our Diseases. It were endless to tell you the Eulogies of the Learned concerning such a Preparation of Opium, which they generall conclude to be a most noble Panacea; therefore many, and very solicitous have been the Disquisitions of the Ingenious and Indu∣strious, to find out this heroick, generous, and most glorious Medicament. I am fully satisfied, that the pure Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, duely separated from its noxious Rosin, Dross, &c. is the very Thing; some of the Reasons that convince me are as fol∣loweth, viz. 1. Because Opium has no other Principle in it, that signifies any Thing as to its laudable and noble Effects, but its Sal Volatile Oleosum (as has been shewn.) 2. Because the Sal▪Volatile-Oleosum of Opium produces all its good Effects. 3. Because the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum duely sepa∣rated from its Rosin, and other Principles, pro∣duces no ill Effect in a moderate Dose.
This added to what has been Discoursed at large of the Principles of Opium, is (I think) suf∣ficient to satisfie any Man, that the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium (so separated) is the great Pa∣nacea that is sought for. However, because we are upon the greatest Thing in Physick, (as may be well inferr'd from what has been already said) and that the World has been under great Fears, Iealousies, and Blind∣ness, concerning this Matter, and the Use of Opium; it will be well worth our While to give all imaginable Satisfaction in this Case, therefore I will, First, Lay down all the requisite Qualifications of a Compleat Panacea, as far as I can collect out of the most Eminent Authors, and my own Con∣sideration thereof. Secondly, I will particularly enquire as to each of the Qualifications, whether the Sal▪Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, duely separated from every o∣ther Principle of Opium, is furnished therewith? Thirdly, I will shew you how duely to separate its Dross, Rosin, &c. so as to leave a pure, sincere Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium for Use. The requisite Qualifications of a Panacea are these, viz. 1. That it should highly please our Sensation at Stomach; because the Stomach is contrived and appointed by God and Nature, as the Touchstone to try, a Sentinel truely to inform, and a Critical Iudge to determine, what is, or is not agreeable to our Nature in general, and therefore (as has been shewn) endued with a wonderful sagacity and nicety of Sensation for that End. It follows
then, that a Panacea should be very pleasing and agreeable to the Stomach, and therefore very cordial. 2. That it should be highly pleasing to the sensitive Soul, which is the Principle of all Motion, Action, and Alteration in an Animal; This Helmont couches under the Name of pleasing the Archaeus. 3. That it should take away all Grievances of the sensitive Soul (or Archaeus) because its Grievance is the Essential Form of Diseases, for even Morbid Matter, unless it causes a Grievance, causes no more Disease than it does in a dead Carcass, as Helmont and common Reason assures us; therefore Disease and Grievance are only Two Words sig∣nifying the same Thing, and nothing is capable of Grievance in an Animal, as such, but the sensi∣tive Soul. 4. It should compose▪ comfort, enliven, encourage, and invigorate our sensitive Soul and Spirits, as be∣ing the Principles of Motion in our Animal Nature, in order to self Preservation; for Nature (or those active Principles within us) is the Curer of Diseases, and we Physicians only its Ministers to offer it good Means, &c. 5. The Principles of a Panacea should be agreeable to the best, noblest, most active, and predominant Principles of our Bodies. 6. Those Principles in the Panacea should be more vigorous than ours, to reduce them, when deficient, and exalt them, when depressed, clog'd, &c. 7. It should be a general Resolver of Humours, for which Cause the Liquor Alcahest is so much ex∣tolled for a Panacea. Hear what the great Phy∣sician Claudius de la Courvee says, Uni morbosae, & semper preter Naturam humorum coagulationi, unique eorundem colliquationi, oui perpetuo intendit natura, di∣ligenter studeas; hujus adjuvandae, illius corrigendae modum si assecutus furis, habebis in Praxi secretum
onmi auro potabili, omnique Antidoto prestantius; de∣nique plus poteris in Praxi, quam si cursus Astrorum, Metallorum vires, aut totam callueris panaceam. 8. It should, after such Resolution of Humours, compose, concentrate, combine, and unite the good Principles. 9. It should discuss the bad and useless Parts. 10. It should open the Pores to give them their Exit, by that most universal, natural, plentiful, kindly, and easie Evacuation. 11. That (after all) it should (like the Liquor Al∣cahest) remain very much unaltered in it self. Now whatsoever is endued with these Eleven most noble Qualifications, must be in the Estima∣tion of any Rational Physician or Phylosopher, a glorious Panacea, that is fitted to take off the Matter and Form of all Diseases, (or Grievances) as far as it is in the Power of a Natural Medicament (or Alterative) so to do; Therefore, let us see, how the pure Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium is furnished therewith? 1. It is so highly agreeable and pleasing to our most nice Sensation at Stomach, which is given us for a Touchstone, Watch, and Iudge of what is agreeable and beneficial to our Bodies, that nothing in the whole World is so agreeable and pleasing to it, and therefore nothing is more agreeable and be∣neficial to our Animal Nature; it would imply a Contradiction, that the Stomach, which is given us (and accordingly qualfied) to make a true Report of what is, or is not agreeable and beneficial to us, should always (tho' it may by Accident pos∣sibly) give us a false Report of the Agreeableness of Things; It would be more than Prophaneness to attribute such deceitful, unkind, and unwise Con∣trivances to the infinitely Good and Wise; therefore
the Stomach does infallibly testify, and assure us, that it is most agreeable to our Nature, seeing it is always so to it; Agreeableness and Disagreeableness with which, is appointed and ordain'd by God and Nature to be the Test and Touchstone of what is agreeable or otherwise to our Animal Nature. Obj. Why then, being so agreeable to the Sto∣mach, should it not create an Appetite, but rather lessen it? Ans. Tho' some may be so weak as to make such an Objection, because Things agreeable to the Stomach are commonly reputed to cause an Appetite, yet (the Matter duely considered) the Case is quite contrary; for Appetite (or Hunger) is a grievous Sensation at Stomach, which cannot be expected from Things that gratifie and please the Stomach, which are the adequate Cure of a grievous Sensation (or Hunger;) Thus Meat and Drink (as has been shewn) cure an Appetite, grievous Sensation, or Hunger; Thus Wine and Opium do (by pleasing the Stomach) cure a ca∣nine Appetite, &c. Therefore you may Note by the by, that all Meat and Drink that please the Stomach, and gratifie its Sense, are really Opiates in some degree, causing good Humour, Sleepi∣ness, &c. Appetite or Hunger, tho' it is a convenient Call or Intimation of Want of Supply and Recruit, is, as such, a consequent of defect, and so unnatural, tho' call'd Natural, because it is a Thing that hap∣pens of course, to direct us how to proportion Things to the Exigence of Nature; of which there would be no need, if we could otherwise proportion good and agreeable Refection to our Wants thereof: In short, it is a Disease which
Things agreeable and pleasing to the Stomach, as our Panacea, must cure, or else it would not be a Panacea; and (as was shewn) nothing can be a more proper Cure of Grievance (or Displeasure) than Pleasure; Therefore what is agreeable to our Stomach, and consequently to our Body, must cure not cause Appetite, as Meat and Drink, &c. Obj. But it may be said, That Appetite argues a good Digestion, which is good for the Body. Ans. It does indeed argue a quick Digestion, and great Expence of the Recruits taken in, but still it is all bottom'd upon Deficiency; and Dige∣stion may be, and is very often too quick, as in the Boulimia, (or canine Appetite) Nature delights in a gentle, kind, and gradual Dissolution of the Meat at Stomach; to which you'll find, by and by, that Opium very much conduces by its resolving Qua∣lity. 2. Nothing in Nature is more pleasing to the sensi∣tive Soul, as appears by the whole Series of our Discourse, and the explaining all the Phenomena or good Effects of Opium by that very Pleasure of the sensitive Soul. Therefore, 3. It (as was manifestly shewn) does thereby take off all Grievances, which are the essential Forms of Diseases; and the essential Forms of Diseases be∣ing taken away, (which give them being, and make them to be what they are, according to the Definition of an essential Form) the very being of Diseases must be taken away: Therefore our Sal-Volatile-Oleosum is a compleat Panacea, that takes away the Essence or Being of Diseases, in taking away the Grievance thereof.
Here it may be said, that the Matter of the Distemper remains, and consequently a Disposition to a Relapse as soon as the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum has ended its Operation. But what need it end at all, if you please? It may be renewed without Danger (for this is not as resinous Opium) till the Matter is subdued there∣by, which it will also do, as appears more mani∣festly by the following Qualifications. For (as has been shewn) 4. It composes, comforts, enlivens, encourages, in∣vigorates, and causes a great Euphory of the sensitive Soul and Spirits, which are our Natural active Principles of Motion, by which all ill Matter is effectively subdued when they act with Alacrity and Vigour, they being the Principal Agents, and we Physicians but (as was said) Ministers, or as Handmaids, to offer or hand good Matter, Medi∣caments, or Instruments, to those Principal Agents of Nature; and that this Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium is the most proper Matter or Medicament we can put into Nature's Hands so invigorated, appears manifestly in that, 5. Its Principles are the most agreeable to the best, noblest, most active, and predominant Principles of our Bodies, as has been proved most evidently plene & plane, nor is it only agreeable, but, 6. More vigorous and powerful to actuate, reduce, alter, or exalt our Principles, according to the Di∣rection of our invigorated Nature, (or sensitive Soul and Spirits) which having so convenient an Instrument, and highly qualified a Matter, will soon alter the perverse, renew the decaid, acuate the dull, and elevate the depressed, effete, and pall'd Humours of our Bodies, especially seeing,
7. That the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium being so agreeable and powerful, must be the greatest Resolver of Humours that can be imagined; for all Resolution is by an Agreement of Particles, which makes them easily miscible, insinuate into, and penetrate each other, especially if one be some∣what more vigorous and penetrating than the other, as the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum has been plainly proved to be; Thus it is, that all Menstruums do so resolve things of their own Nature, and so pu∣rifie and cleanse them, by taking to themselves what is meerly and purely of the same Nature, and rejecting or letting go their Hold of what is otherwise: Where it is worth noting, how upon the Account of the intimate Combination and Union of the Volatile Salt and Oily Parts in our Panacea, it is dissolvable in all Menstruums, and consequently an universal Resolvent of all the Hu∣mours of our Bodies, which its external resolving of all Humours and Tumours does also prove. Now if it be such a Resolver, of which there is no Place to doubt, then as Claudius de la Courvee says, it must excell all Things in altering and reducing all the Humours of our Bodies to a good and agreeable Condition. Nor does it only thus re∣solve them, and thereby separate (as was said) the good from the bad, but, 8. (When it has so done) it, by the amicable Agreeableness of its Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, composing Faculty, strict Combination of its Principles, joins to, concentrates, congregates, and (as it were) cements the best and most agreeable into a close Union and firm Texture, by (as was said) the Direction of invi∣gorated Nature, which is of it self (the good be∣ing once separated from the bad) highly sufficient (without any other Help) to unite Parts so agree∣able, and of themselves inclined to unite and com∣bne, tho' all tho▪ Parts of Opium (like those of
the great Dissolvent) were gone; and when that is done, 9. The high discussive Quality of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum must be very effectual for the Difflation and Discussion of the sever'd effete Particles, which must be highly assisted and improved by the brisk and chearful Motions of Nature, (viz. the sensitive Soul and Spirits) so (as is aforesaid) invigorated; Nor is this all, but to compleat and perfect the Operation, 10. It lays open all the Pores of the Body (as has been Demonstrated)  them out, and give the ill Particles their inal Exit, by the most na∣tural and plentiful Way of Evacuation, leaving the Body free from all Miasms and Impurities. 11. I have sufficiently shewn how unalterable it is in it self, Chap. 15. so that like the Liquor Alca∣hest it is not made to be subdued, but to subdue and resolve Humours. Now, what can be required more in a Medi∣cament, and how can the sensitive Soul and Spirits, (or Nature) so invigorated, and endued with all Euphory and Chearfulness by this glorious Medica∣ment, whose Principles are not only agreeable to our noblest ones, but more powerful and inti∣mately combin'd, so resolving of Humours, ready to unite the good, and to discuss the bad, and carry them off by the Pores, ever fail (being duely administer'd) of good Effect in altering all the Humours of our Bodies? Hippocrates, in his Book De Natur Hominis, states the Cause of Diseases to be a Disgregation of Humours, by which he seems to imply, that the Power of congregating and concentrating of Humours, were sufficient to accomplish a Panacea; which is but one single Qualification in eleven of
our Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, tho' this alone (as is ex∣perienced even in common Preparations of O∣pium) suffices very often to cure Diseases by com∣posing Commotions, as in Diary Fevers from Per∣turbations, &c. Thus the bitter and firm textured Cortex (as I have shewn in my Book De Febribus intermittenti∣bus) takes off Ague Fits, by re-combining the segregated Humours with the Bloud, which it sud∣denly doing, leaves a Disposition in the Bloud, when ever it meets with a segregating Cause, (as Purging, violent Motion, Insolation, intemperate Drinking, &c.) to a Relapse, by a second Separa∣tion of the Morbid Matter from it, as you have it more at large in my said Book, p. 166, 167, &c. 242, 243, &c. where you may see how Opiates conduce very much to a speedy Cure by the Cor∣tex, by composing, &c. Martianus says▪ Com. de locis in Homine, p. 76. Opium sist it & prohibet hu∣morum Disgregationem; That is, Opium hinders Disgregation of Humours. Now you may perceive the true Qualifications of a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, so much sought for by the Learned as a Panacea; and how far the com∣mon ones, that are sold in the Apothecaries Shops, are from being such. Sylvius (indeed) had an excellent one, with which he did many, and great Cures, which be∣ing considered, (had he not confessed his Igno∣rance of the Cause of the Effects of Opium) and the Narrative he makes of its Vertue and Per∣formance in his Preface to the first Book of his Praxis, and that he delighted so much in the Use of Opium, even when he was young, that he was call'd by the Name of Doctor Opiatus, and that he declares no Oil was added in its Prepa∣ration,
and that it is intimated that the Oil and Volatile Parts were strictly combined, would have made me suspect, that it was the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium that he used, which if it was not, I dare be confident, that (notwithstanding all its Excellency) it was not as good. I am very well satisfied, that a true and con∣summate Sal-Volatile-Oleosum is not to be made barely by Art; Enquirers might have better suc∣cess if they sought it among the Natural Tribe of bitter Plants that are agreeable to the Sto∣mach, which have all in them a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, but how to pick and cull is (I think) best seen by the requisite Qualifications of a Pana∣cea that I have stated. There have been many in whose Hands bitter Things have been as a Pa∣nacea. One in Germany cured most Diseases with Wild Sage. Some have done great Things with Agrimony, others with Bean Trefoil, some with Centaury, others with Gentian, &c. and the famous Dr. Lower's Practice ran almost altoge∣ther upon bitter Things, which did him great Service in his Tincture of Steel, (as he call'd it) that he often made in Destill'd Waters, that could take little or nothing to Purpose of the Tincture of Steel, (whether out of Ignorance or Design, I will not, tho' I may determine) which shews, that it was the bitter Things that did the good, and made it as a Panacea, and not the Steel. However, certain it is, that promoting the Dissolution of Meat at Stomach, which the bitter Salia-Volatalia-Oleosa do, is a great Foundation for Cure; and (no doubt) our Sal-Volatile-Oleosum does, by its inciding, dividing, and resolving Qua∣lity, contribute very much to a due solution there∣of at Stomach by Connaturalness, as all Menstruums
do, (especially if it be Flesh, which we use mostly, and requires most help to be resolv'd) which may very well be, tho' it lessens Appetite by pleasing Sensation; for (as was shewn) it is quite another Thing to cause Appetite, (or a grievous Sensation) and Resolution (or Digestion) of the Meat at Stomach; for Wine helps Digestion, yet, by the pleasing Sensation that it causes at Stomach, it cures a canine Appetite, and at any time (if you'll observe it) takes off the Eagerness of Appetise for the present; you can better stay without Meat after a Whet before Dinner, than you could with∣out it; so that the Wine answers that of a Whet as to Digestion, tho' not to Appetite or Hunger, which is a grievous Sensation that Wine must rather Cure than Cause. It is true, that Wine or Opium may, by causing a sense of Pleasure at Stomach, cause some stay of the Meat at Stomach, but it does not thence fol∣low but the Digestion may be the truer, because more gentle and gradual, as it may, and does happen in Sleep, when Things that are not very hard of Digestion are eaten, which are not good at any Time. You may remember how Blisters (to which Opium is near of Kind, as has been shewn) do quickly by their resolving Nature, turn the Cuticle (as if digested) into a sort of Gelly; what a mighty Help would such a Degree of Resolution be to the Digestion at Stomach, when it is, by that Means, like the Skin of a well boil'd Cow-heel, half turn'd to a Gelly, and from a Thing that is very hard of Digestion, to be very easie, as is also a Boar's Skin in Brawn by reason of the prior Reso∣lution in the Boiling.
If (as Sanctorius says) insensible Perspiration hin∣der'd is the Cause of most Diseases, what is more proper to Prevent or Cure them than this Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, which causes Perspiration above all Things? I have been lately inform'd, That in some Parts of the most Eastern Countries, they Use Opium as a general Medicament or Panacea. Dr. Willis and Sylvius say, it hinders the Coa∣gulation of the Bloud; how many Chronical Diseases may it then Prevent or Cure? That is the great Effect of the Alcahest, and that is it that mainly qualifies a Medicament for a Panacea, as Courvee asserts, and all Ingenious Men allow. Wedelius says, That it happily restores the Tone of the Bloud; What is then wanting to the Pre∣servation of Health? Paracelsus says, That Tam homini quam Morbo somnum conciliat▪ That is, That it puts the Disease asleep, as well as the Man. ☞ Platerius cured the Gout with it safely, quickly, and pleasantly, and I know one that can do it, especially if it be at the first coming of the Fit. Willis gives an Instance of one perfectly cured of a Dropsie and Pocky Pains by the Use of Lau∣danum. ☞ Horstius perfectly cured an Hypochondriacal Person, that was troubled with Stupidity, Watchings, Loss of Appetite, Trembling, and direful Epileptical Convulsions, and past all Hopes, by the Use of Opiates.
I my self have often seen Defluxions and Ca∣tarrhs cured by the use of Opiates, and one of an inveterate ill Habit of Body of many years standing. Wedelius says, That it resolves the Grumescence of the Bloud, alters and dissipates the tenuious Parts of it, tempers the acrimonious, &c. The Ancients used it against Agues with great success. You may (to confirm this Matter farther) ob∣serve, that among the constant and frequent Ef∣fects of Opium, there is no bad ones, unless there be 2 or 3 purely upon the Account of its Rosin, (as has been shewn) therefore when it is sepa∣rated from it there is no Cause to fear the Use of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, unless it be (as in the Case of Wine) when 'tis taken in an excessive Dose, or used too long in a lavish intemperate manner; so that when I have shewn how duely to prepare it, and the moderate and safe Doses thereof, it may be used altogether as safely as Wine in a pro∣portionable Dose; for what Harm can there be in moderately pleasing the Membranes, particularly at Stomach? which all the best Things we use, as Wine, Cordials, Meat, and Drink, do, (which are therefore all Opiates in some degree) thereby as∣suring us of their Goodness and Agreeableness to our Bodies tho' they do it not in so high a dgree as our Sal-Volatile-Oleosum does, which is the more Authentick Certificate of its Excellency; tho' it is to be still confessed, that Excess of the best Things, as Ioy, Comfort, Pleasure, Wine, Cordials, &c. have, and may do mischief; but what need Excess therein, any more than in Wine, Meat, Cordials, &c. which then (like it) are all inconvenient and injurious to the Body.
All this I have said to administer Cause to im∣prove the Practice of Physick by the Use of this Panacea, (now that it is known) by introducing its noble Use as an Alterative to Cure, as well as formerly to palliate Diseases, it being a far more beneficial Thing to Cure than palliate. Remember how the Cortex, Mercury, Antimony, and other the most effectual and glorious Medica∣ments have been traduced, and scandalized by the ignorant Imaginations of the Unlearned, who ha∣ving no true Knowledge of the Vertue of Things, wholly depend upon Fears and Iealousies to guard them from their imagined ill Effects, which (ge∣nerally speaking) only the same Ignorance, Fears, and Iealousies, gave a Phantastical Being to. It remains, that I in the next Place shew you; 1. The true Preparation of this Panacea or Sal-Volatile-Oleosum. 2. Other Preparations of Opium that are next it in Safety and good Effect, and why they are so. 3. The moderate and truly safe Dosing of them all, there being no Danger in well prepared Opium, but from Excess in the Use thereof.
CHAP. XXV. Of the Preparation of the Panacea, or true Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium. SEeing that the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium must be such an effectual, generous, and ge∣neral Medicament, that is both cordial and alte∣rative in so transcendent a manner, it well de∣serves a careful and curious Preparation; there∣fore I will be very particular therein. To that end, 1. It must be separated from all the noxious Rosin, and all Filth and Dross of the Opium. 2. It must be kept entire without weakening, or any way altering it, or adding a new Quality thereto. Therefore, 1. Opium must not be torrefied, according to the Common Practice; 1. Because the finest and most volatile Part (which is the very best) is thereby lost. 2. Because the resinous and earthy Parts (which are not spent that way) grow more in Pro∣portion to the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum; so that torre∣fying cannot be allow'd, unless preserving the Bad, and destroying the Good, be allowable. The vain and ostentatious Pretence of destroying (I know not what) narcotick Sulphur, (which is a Nick∣name given by Ignorance to the best Parts of Opium) is most insufferable stuff. 3. Because all Empyreùm (which renders it very nauseous) can hardly be avoided in torresying it; but suppose it were, What need is there otherwise so to damni∣fie it? (as is aforesaid.)
Obj. It is found to be more innocent, after such Torrefaction. Ans. I grant that it happens so sometimes; but it must be meerly by Accident; either, 1. Because it meets with a strong Digestion at Stomach; Or, 2. By the Custom of poudering it, which is al∣ways directed, and done after the Torrefaction; by which means the resinous Parts being divided and severed, become less liable to a Coalescence at Stomach, and consequently less offensive and more subduable: Especially, 3. When it is mixed (as generally it is) with other things that keep the Parts of the Rosin from Coalescence, and leave them more conquerable by the Digestion, as the Ancients found by Experience; who therefore did general∣ly, if not always, mix it in a small quantity, with many other things in great quantity, in the form of Electuaries, as in Venice-Treacle, Mithridate, &c. though nothing in them corrected the Opium otherwise than by dividing and segregating its Parts. This indeed is like that of divide & impera, or interlining suspected Soldiers with trusty, or friendly ones, to prevent a mischievous Conspira∣cy: But how much better is it to have no Enemy to contest with, by a due and compleat separa∣tion of the Rosin from the Opium! Otherwise you must be obliged to good Accidents, if ever torrefied Opium becomes safe, because all the no∣xious Rosin is left in it. Therefore if after Torrefaction you will give it in a Mass, without poudering it, and mixing it with other things, you'll find its ill Effects to be as bad, if not worse, than ever; as you will also, if you afterward extract it out of Spirit of Wine, reducing it into the Form of Pills, by which means
the severed Parts of the poudered Rosin do again co∣alesce into a lumpish Condition, which renders it worse than crude Opium, as Wedelius, my self, and others do testifie; because the Opium being some∣what weakened, and all the Rosin remaining, the Dose of the Opium, and consequently of its Rosin, must be increased. As, suppose 8 Grains of crude Opium has 2 of Rosin, 2 of other Dross, 2 of Phlegm, and 2 of Sal-Volatile-Oleosum; and that 2 Grains of the crude Opium containing half a Grain of the Sal-Volotile-Oleosum, was the Dose; then if in torrefying it, one Grain of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum be lost, and another of the Phlegm, there will remain only 6 Grains of the Opium, with the Virtue of one Grain of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum in it; therefore 3 Grains of it must be now used, to have half a Grain of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, which 3 Grains will contain half the Rosin of the whole Mass, that is, one Grain; whereas there was but half a Grain thereof in the 2 Grains of crude Opium: There∣fore torrefied Opium is in it self much worse than crude Opium. And it is yet worse, if after Torrefication you make an Extract of it in Spirit of Wine; for then the Doss and Phlegm being separated from the 6 Grains, nothing will remain in the Extract but the resinous Part, with less of the Virtue of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, which is not taken up so greedily, as the Rosin is, by the Spirit of Wine; besides that, some of this Volatile Part may be lost, and that the Rosin is now more compacted, as not having as much as the drossie, earthy, or watry Parts to sever and keep its noxious Particles at a distance, to render them (as was shewn) more subduable and digestible at Stomach. See what Pains the in∣considerate World does take (and exceedingly hoast of) to render Opium by Torrefaction, Ex∣traction
in Spirit of Wine, &c. at least twice as no∣zious as crude Opium, without accounting how far the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum that remains is impair'd by the Fire and Spirit of Wine! It is therefore no Wonder that Wedelius declares, That he found more Mischief by such Extracts out of Spirit of Wine, than any other Preparation of Opium. It is plain then, II. That we must not extract it out of Spirit of Wine, or any such sulphureous Menstruum; 1. Be∣cause more apt to extract the Rosin than the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum. 2. Because the Rosin will be more compacted. 3. Because the Spirit of Wine may in some measure alter it. III. We must not extract Opium first out of Water, and afterward out of Spirit of Wine, and then mix them together, and evaporate them to an Extract: For this is (as was said) wisely taking care to add the Poison to the Panacea, or Rosin extracted by the Spirit of Wine, to the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum ex∣tracted by the Water; besides the Impair and Loss made of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum by the Spirit of Wine, and the Evaporation, how gentle soever it be. Here it will be seasonable to note, That there is a general great Fault committed by Preparers of Medicaments, especially such as pretend to most Curiosity therein, in endeavouring (right or wrong) to have all the Principles of the Plant, &c. join'd together in their Medicaments, however noxious or contrary to the Purpose, (as you see in the Instance just now mentioned) whereas they had much bet∣ter do as the great Helmont says, Pharm. & Dispens. Modern. 12. Saguinem a cruore, & Parenhymale Plantarum distinguere, & separare discant Tyrones,
si quicquam laude dignum per simplicia egisse mediten∣tur. That is, Let Beginners learn to distinguish and separate the true Bloud of Plants from their Cruor (or dead Gore) and Parenchyma, if they think to do any thing Praise-worthy by Simples. You'll find this to be very pat in the true Prepa∣ration of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, whose Ruby-colour makes it look like Bloud, while the Rosin, Earth, and Dross, make the Appearance of a dull and dead Cruor, (or Gore.) If they took a Tincture of Opium in Spirit of Wine, and used it so, it would not be so bad; for then the resinous Particles are disseminated, and not so liable to Coalescence at Stomach; but so great is the Stupidity, that they take care, by re∣ducing it into the Form of an Extract, to combine them and make them as noxious as is possible; and then they think them worthy to be boasted of as their Nostrums, proclaiming their Ignorance, and glorying in their greatest Shame and Disgrace of Mankind, that Humane Species should have any such unthinking Brutes in it. IV. We must not use Acids in the Preparation there∣of; 1. Because being in their Nature opposite to Volatile Salts, it cannot be done without Injury to the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium. 2. Because they cannot so well agree with the oily Parts of it. Yet are they not so much to be blamed as Extracts made in Spirit of Wine, or sulphureous Menstruums; because acid Menstruums leave the Rosin behind them untouched, or not extracted. V. A Salino-Volatile Menstruum, as Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, of Urine, &c. is not so proper: 1. It may render the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium too acrimonious. 2. Because by its Volatility, Acri∣mony,
&c. it may cause too great a stir in the Bloud, &c. and so oppose or hinder Sleep, which is one of the most happy and useful Effects of Opium, (or its Sal-Volatile-Oleosum.) 3. Because it may have undue Effects by altering its general Disposition: Nay, VI. We are not to use a lixivial Menstruum, (tho' so much cried up) 1. Because it extracts the resinous Parts, which (experto crede Roberto) I have found to be pernicious upon that account, like Extracts in Spirit of Wine, unless great care be taken to separate those Parts (which is not easily done) by Filtrations, &c. 2. Because being very apt to join with the oily Parts, and quite to destroy their Nature, by converting it into a kind of Sapo; it may deal so with some of the oily Parts of the Sal-Volatile-Oleo∣sum of Opium. 3. Because there is no need to run any of these Hazards, since the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum may be (as I shall shew) easily extracted in its Purity, without those Troubles and Dangers. 4. Be∣cause any Tincture made thus is apt to let go the Rosin at Stomach, if it be diluted with aqueous Moi∣sture taken before, with it, or after it; which so being let go, coalesces, and does mischief. VII. The use of Fire any way (besides that of its Torrefaction) is much to be suspected: 1. Be∣cause the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum may be in some mea∣sure thereby evaporated: Or, 2. An Empyreum contracted: And, 3. The Rosin (as was said of its Torrefaction) grows the more in Proportion, if any of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, or but the Phlegm be (by that means) evaporated, and the Remainder kept for use. And particularly, VIII. The Distillation thereof may cause migh∣ty Alterations in its Properties, Strength, &c.
We must therefore avoid all these Ways of pre∣paring it, and yet must we, 1. Separate the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium from all its Rosin, Earth, Filth, and Dross. 2. No way weaken it, alter it, or add new Qua∣lities thereto, but preserve this most Noble and In∣estimable Medicament in its Purity and Sincerity. To this end Rain water distill'd, used cold, an∣swers all Intents: For, 1. It readily imbibes the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, without Fire, Heat, lixivial Salts, as Salt of Tartar, &c. 2. It imbibes none of the Rosin of the Opium, but lets it all subside together with the earthy and drossie Parts, separating the lighter Filth (if there be any) to the surface. 3. It no way weakens, alters, or adds any new Quality to the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum. 4. Whatever cold Water dissolves, which is the General Drink, or Menstruum, appointed by the All-wise Creater for the Dissolution of all Things taken into the Stomach of Animals, is easily dissolved at Stomach by its more power∣ful and agreeable Menstruum. And not only so, but, 5. Water it self is a mighty Stomachick, and Causer of Digestion, as Hippocrates positively de∣clares, L. 6. Epidem. Sect. 4. But there's no need of quoting Hippocrates in so notorious a thing, daily Experience tells us the same: Do not all Animals, by its Help, digest their Food? Do not all Mineral Waters (scarce any excepted) create an Appetite, and cause Digestion even when no such Effect can be attributed to the Mineral they contain? Than which they do also (as
may be very easily proved) more good (gene∣rally speaking) ; for which, and many more Reasons, it is great Neglect and Folly, that it is not more used for Extracts, &c. for then they readily dissolve at Stomach, and thereby  and speedly take Effect, giving it the least  and Disturbance that may be, as is expe∣rimentally found in that of Aloes, Sammony, Bri∣ony, , Agari, , Coloquintida, Sena, and what not? unless the Vertue lies in the resi∣nous Pars; for then sulphureous or lixivial Men∣struums are convenient. How inconvenient are they then, when the Evil or Mischief lies therein, as in our case! 6. It is not to be doubted, but Water gene∣rally imbibes what is best and most agreeable to our Bodies, it being the general Menstruum appoint∣ed by Wisdom it self for that Use, and to be the Vehicle of what is best in all our Food, &c. to the Bloud: However, there can be no doubt of (what mainly concerns us at present) its most ready dissolving our Panacea in the Stomach, that does it out of it, when cold, without the conve∣nient digestive Heat and powerful Menstruum that it finds there. Therefore, Take of distilled Rain-water 24 Ounces, of choice Opium sliced thin 8 Ounces; put them together in a strong Glass Vessel of Bottle-metal, that contains about 3 Pits; let it be of a tall Figure, with a Mouth that conveniently receives a Cork, (a large Glass Bottle may serve the turn;) cork it so as the Cork may be easily taken out, shaking it 3 or 4 times a day for 6 days▪ and keeping it in a place free from Frosts, or any very sensible degree of Heat: Which being per∣formed, lay the Vessel side-long for 24 hours longer, and afterward decant and filtre your Tincture, (which will be of a Ruby colour) and put it into a Glass
Bottle of such a Bigness as that it may fill it within a small matter of the Cork; and so let it stand for 3 or 4 days; then por off some of the surface of it, and in∣stead thereof, put sweet Oil thereon: Let the Vessel have a convenient Duct, or Pipe, in the side thereof, to empty it out upon occasion. This I call the Liquid Panacea of Opium. To the Faeces add a Pint of cold distill'd Water, shaking the Vessel (as before) 3 or 4 times in the day; let it stand on it 24 hours, and in the morn∣ing decant it into another Vessel; repeat the same quantity of distill'd Rain-water, till the Opium no longer tinges it, or very inconsiderably in 24 hours: At last you may use Water kept hot by a Fire, &c▪ the better to extract the remaining Sal-Volatile-Oleo∣sum. Evaporate all these last Waters in Balneo to the consistence of an Extract. This I call the Solid Panacea of Opium. GOD and Nature act by simple Means; and nothing (in imitation of Them) is more com∣mendable in a Medicament than Simplicity; there∣fore I shall add nothing to the Panacea's, but wholly leave that to other Physicians to please themselves or Patients, by adding Ambergrise, Musk, Saffron, Oil of Cinnamon, or other chymical Oils, Sugar, or the like, according to their Intent. I have observed, That (as Reason tells us) its Smell is best palliated by other rank Smells, as that of Onions, Garlick, Asa-foetida, &c. and its bitter Taste with bitter things, as Gentian, Centaury, &c. Therefore when Persons that know its Smell and Taste are avers to take it, (if the other more ac∣ceptable Things will not suffice for that purpose) use some of these; You may, when you are in haste, infuse half a dozen slices of Gentian-root,
and one slice of an Onion, or a bruised Clove of Garlick, or both, in a Glass of Wine, for one hour for a Vehicle in that case: 'Twere better to in∣fuse them longer, if you have time; but you'll find, that the liquid Panacea has not such a migh∣ty rank Taste, or Smell, but that it is easily pal∣liated by such means, if the Opium had no Em∣pyreum. The solid Panacea may be also palliated by the same Things, conveniently mixed there∣with. I know there are other Ways and Means to separate the Rosin, &c. as extracting a Tin∣cture of Opium in Spirit of Wine, and afterward precipitating the Rosin with distilled Rain-water; but this is attended with more Trouble and many Inconveniences, that are avoided by the cold distilled Rain-water: For, 1. You know not how the Spirit of Wine may (as was said) alter it. 2. This is going round the Bush, and com∣pounding two Menstruums together, whereas the simple Water used alone is much better. 3. You cannot thus separate the resinous Particles so perfectly, by reason that the Spirit of Wine must retain some of them; and if you add more and more Water in the Precipitation, the Tincture becomes too much diluted, and very weak: How much better is it to use a Menstruum that never takes up any Rosin, and consequently needs no such Separation and Labour of Precipitation! It is better not to admit an Enemy to one's Country, than afterward to endeavour his Ex∣pulsion; for he will at best leave some Marks of his Hostility behind him, as the Rosin will in the Spirit of Wine.
The like Inconveniencies there will be in se∣parating it by the way of Distillation; as, 1. The altering of it by the Tyranny of Fire. 2. The loss of it by Evaporation. 3. The addition of the Particles of Fire thereto. 4. The never se∣parating it so well that way. 5. The disuni∣ting of the Oil and Volatile Salt in some mea∣sure. But what Experience may hereafter teach Men, I will not determine, neither can I. But this I can, That as it was even miracu∣lous, that People should never mind the Cause they daily felt, and solicitously sought for; so it is as strange that they could not hit upon the plain Use of Water (so very common in all Hands) for a Menstruum, either by Chance or Consideration, in all the Eastern Parts of the World, where it is so universally taken, or in the inquisitive Western Parts of the World, where it has been studied and considered by great Num∣bers with the utmost Diligence: But they passing over Water as despicable, because common, (for Familiarity breeds Contempt) tho' its being made the Drink of all living Creatures by the Omniscient should commend it above all things, did like those, that regardlesly pass over a Iewel, or Treasure, and having once left it behind them, proceed farther and farther from it, the greater progress they make, concluding that it was not to be found the way they pass'd; not because it was not there, but because they could not see it. As for the keeping of the liquid Panacea uncor∣rupted, I do not find it apt to change; however, because made so easily by bare throwing it into Water, it need not be kept long, but may be made upon all occasions, or at least one under the
other, as the Apothecaries spend it, who (it is not improbable) may by their great Ingenuity and Ex∣perience in those Matters, find other convenient Means to preserve it for their purpose.
CHAP. XXVI. Of other Preparations of Opium, that are ab∣solutely or tolerably safe in a moderate Dose. I. ALL Preparations are very safe in a moderate Dose, wherein the resinous Part of the Opium is wholly separated from it. Such are all Extracts made in aqueous Menstruums, or any other that imbibes none of the resinous Parts of Opium: As the Preparation that Wedlius has in his Opio∣logia, L. 1. Sect. 2. Cap. 5. p. 65. which is extra∣cted out of Phlegm of Vinegar that remains after the Preparation of Arcanum Tartari. So Lauda∣num liquidum Cydoniatum, and Langelott's Lauda∣num, if the resinous Part be duly separated, are very safe and commendable for the like Reason; as is also Le Mort's Extract out of Rain-water, Dia∣codium, &c. II. All Preparations wherein the resinous Parts of Opium, tho' not separated from it, are so alter'd, or∣der'd, divided, &c. as not to stick to the Stomach, and render'd digestible and passable out of it without Offence, may be safely used. Of this kind there are, or may be two Sorts: First, Such wherein the Nature of the Rosin is altered (in some degree at least.) Secondly, Such wherein, tho' the Nature of the Rosin is not destroy'd, yet is it so ordered, divi∣ded, &c. as not to stick to the Stomach, but ren∣der'd digestible and passable without Offence.
Of the First Sort are, 1. Such Preparations, wherein the resinous Part of Opium is quite altered in its Form and Nature by Chimistry, or artificial Tortures of Fire; which be∣cause hardly to be done without much impairing the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, will be neither commenda∣ble, nor worth while, considering how easily, without that Trouble, Pains, and Labour, even the Rosin it self may be separated wholly from the Opium by aqueous Menstruums. 2. Such Preparations wherein the resinous Parts of Opium are altered, and (as it were) soapified by li∣xivial Salts or Soaps, which readily engage and in∣timately join with the small resinous Particles of the Opium, by long and strong pounding them together in a Mortar, or otherwise (as in Mat∣thew's (or Starkey's) Pill, Bates's Pacifick Pill, &c.) by which means those resinous Particles become (in a great degree at least, if not wholly) miscible with, and so dissolvable, and digestible in the Li∣quors we drink, and easily subduable by the Men∣struum at Stomach, out of which it also easily passes, by reason of the great slipperiness it acquires (which also prevents its sticking) by that intimate mix∣ture with the Soap (or Lixivials:) Therefore I take those Pills of Matthews's, and Dr. Bates's, to be safe Preparations, tho' not to be compar'd to the Panacea, wherein all Danger and its Cause is quite taken away by wholly separating the resinous Parts, Earth and Filth, of the Opium from its Sal-Volatile-Oleosum: And (doubtless) had Math∣thews, Starkey, and Bates known, that the Rosin of Opium had been the Cause of its ill Effects, they would never have spent Months in preparing the Sapo tartareus to correct Opium, when they might, with the hundredth part of the Trouble, and for∣tieth
part of the Time, wholly have taken away the pernicious Part by aqueous Menstruums, which they only pretend to correct by the Sapo tartareus; tho' I allow it (for the Reasons aforesaid) to be a good Corrector, yet cannot it equal the total sepa∣ration of the pernicious Parts. I am of Opinion, (upon my best Thoughts and some Experience) That intimately mixing and sub∣duing Opium with good white Soap, may (for the Reasons aforesaid) prove a good and ready Corre∣ctor, or Preventer, of the Adhesion of the resinous Parts of Opium to the Stomach, much conduce to its Dissolution, or Digestion therein, and nimble slip∣ping out of it, and thereby prevent all the ill Ef∣fects of Opium, which it causes by the Adhesion and Indigestibleness of its Rosin. Of the Second Sort of Preparations of Opium, wherein its Rosin remains wholly unaltered in its Nature, yet becomes safe by dividing it, &c. This is mainly, (if not altogether) done by a fine and through Division of the resinous Parts of Opium, and keeping them afterwards from a Coa∣lescence in, and Adhesion to the Stomach, by which means they become digestible, or at least passable without Offence. This may be done, 1. By Torrefaction, till the Opium is very friable, and then finely poudering it, and mixing it with such things as are of good Consistence, &c. to keep the Parts of Opium from a Coalescence, as in Venice Treacle, Mithridate, Diascordium, the Philoniums, &c. This was the Way and Method that the An∣cients used; which caused Galen to say, That Opium alone (that is, undivided and unmix'd with other things to prevent its Coalescence, &c.) was dangerous; but mixt with other things was salutiferous,
(which they found by Experience, not knowing the Cause, but attributing the Safety thereof to something among the many Ingredients as a Cor∣rector of the Opium.) Hence it was that they put small Quantities thereof into Electuaries made of many and much other things, that kept the Par∣ticles asunder; which they did so commonly, that (at last) all Electuaries were call'd Opiates. Thus we had those Compositions above named, which are safely used for the Reasons aforesaid; not that any thing therein corrects I know not what poisonous or narcotick Quality in Opium, but that the other Ingredients divide its Rosin, and afterward keep its Particles from Coalescence and Adhesion. 2. Dissolution of Opium in Spirit of Wine, or such sulphureous Spirits which finely divide the Rosin, and using the bare Tincture before the resinous Par∣ticles are again compacted (as in Extracts, &c.) may be of use, if duly administred. But here a Caution is to be used, That you take it not in, or drink any aqueous or phlegmatick Li∣quid with it, or before, or after it, in two or three hours; which if you do, the resinous Particles will be precipitated thereby, and so stick to the bottom tom of the Stomach, causing thereby the usual ill Effects of Vomiting, Anxieties, &c. Therefore it should be given only in a spirituous Liquid. Note also, That if you give a Solution thereof in any Lixivium, you take Care not to dilate it by any Means by aqueous Liquids in Two Hours before or after you take it; for then there being but little Lixivial Salt in proportion to the Liquid, the resinous Parts are let go, and precipitated to the Bottom of the Stomach; as in the Case of the Spirit of Wine so dilated: Of which I have seen a very convincing Instance; for one that had an Esteem of Lixivials in this Case, not only (ac∣cording to Helmont, and the Common Cry) to cor∣rect
Opium, but also to extract its Vertue the more effectually, made a Tincture of Opium in Water, lixiviated with Salt of Wormwood, whereof he took the Quantity that he had seen me give of my Liquid Panacea, in a Coffee-Dish full of Water, which precipitating the Rosin in the Stomach, caused him to Vomit in about an Hour after, and continued so to do for about 15 Hours. By which you plainly see, that the great Secret of Lixivials to correct Opium, lies meerly in its Division of the Rosin thereof, (as in the Case of Spirit of Wine and poudering it) and afterward keeping its Particles asunder during its Stay at Stomach; which the Sapo tartareus does (and probably other Soap may do) very well, for the several Reasons afore∣said. 3. Dissolution of Opium in the Yolk of a rear new laid Egg, by pounding the Dose that you intend to take, with a little Quantity of the Yolk▪ till both be thoroughly mixed, and then taking it in the remaining Part of the Yolk: By which Means you not only finely divide the resinous Parts of the Opium, while the Yolk of the Egg intimately mixes with them, (as it does with other Rosins and Turpentines) but send along with it into the Stomach what is digestible in it self, and more and more divides and separates the resinous Parts, and highly contributes to their final Dissolution and Digestion; so that (I doubt not) but you'll find this▪ new, ready, and agreeable Means, as good (if not better, all Things considered) than the former, and even equal to the Sapo tartareus. By what is said, tho' short, you may (because it is the clear Truth of Things) Judge of the Goodness of all Preparations of Opium. And,
1. That resinous Things should not be added to Opium; because such (like its own Rosin) renders it more indigestible, and apt to stick at Stomach: Hence it is, that the Styrax Pill, having resinous Things in it, and crude Opium, does so often cause dismal Effects, tho, (forsooth) much esteem'd for the Lungs, Coughs, Defluxions, &c. for having such Balsamick resinous Things, as Styrax, and Oli∣banum in it, whereas the Benefit is from the O∣pium. Had Dr. Bates known the Cause of the Mischiefs of Opium, he would never have put Ben∣jamin in his Pacifick Pill. 2. That all Preparations made of Extracts in Spi∣rit of Wine, are to be rejected, such Extracts being much worse than Crude Opium, and Experimen∣tally found to be so; therefore our common Lon∣don Laudanum, being made of Opium prepared in Spirit of Wine, is no commendable Preparation, tho' so much used, and cried up; which also Ex∣perience proves, in that it sometimes causes the ill Effects of Opium, when given alone in a good Dose. You'll find more of these Matters when you come to Chap. 29. which consists of general Rules and Cautions concerning the Use of Opium, therefore (tho' I may add some Useful Observa∣tions) I put an end to this Matter at present for that Reason; and because what is to be truly done in the Preparation of Opium is very evident from what is said, since the Cause of the ill Effects of Opium is now certainly known to be its Rosin; to the Separation or due Alteration of which, so as to cause it to pass the Stomach without Adhesion or Offence by its Stay or Indigestibleness, all regard must be had in the Preparation thereof, as is in the following Preparations, which are therefore safe.
CHAP. XXVII. Shews the best Preparations of Opium, where to find them, and what is their respective Dose, &c. YOU may infer out of the Premises, which are the best Preparations of Opium, viz. 1. Such as have the resinous parts of Opium sepa∣rated from them; as, 1. The liquid Panacea of Opium. Described in C. 25. of this Book. 2. The solid Panacea of Opium Described in C. 25. of this Book. 3. Diacodium (or syr. e mecon.)—In the Lon∣don Dispensatory. 4. Laudanum liquidum Cydoniatum—In expe∣rienced Mr. Wilson's Chymistry, and in curious Mr. Staphurst's Officina chymica Londinensis. Note, That there are several needless Proceed∣ings in this Preparation, as that of putting Yeast to it &c. Let your Aim in making it be to separate the resinous Parts; therefore instead of two Expres∣sions directed, use only a careful Decantation, be∣cause the Rosin may pass by Expressing it. 5. Wedelius's Laudanum, which is his Opilogia, L. 1. Sect. 2. Cap. 2. P. 65. Note, That the spumous part on the Surface is to be taken off, and the clear Tincture to be decanted from the Faeces, and afterward evaporated in Balneo, to the Consistence of an Extract. 6. Le Mort's Extract out of Rain-water, which you have in the most Learned Dr. Love's Collecta∣nea Chymica. P. 304.
II. Such Preparations, wherein the resinous Parts of Opium are altered, and as it were soapified by i∣xivial Salts, or Soaps; viz. 1. Dr. Starkey's, or Matthews Pil, which you have in Mr. Wilson's Chymistry, p. 271, 272. In ingenious Mr. Shipton's Pharmacopia Bateana, a∣mong the Pills; and in Mr. Staphurst's Officina Chy∣mica Londinensis, among the Laudanums p 51. Note, That the main Things to be regarded in  making up of this Pill, are 1. To spare no La∣bour in pounding, subduing, and intimately mix∣ing the Sapo tartareus and the Opium. 2. That the Sapo should be twice as much as the Opium; that it may the better subdue the resinous part of the Opium. Note, That as to the other Things contain'd in the aid Pill, they may, or other things be added, or omitted, according to the Intention of the Phy∣sician; only this I say, that it is very convenient other things should be added to the Sapo and Opi∣um, the better to separate and disgregate the parts of the Opium, (as has been intimated.) Note, That if the Mass be too dry, you may (as Mr. Wilson directs) use some of the Oil that separates from the Soap, or rectified Oil of Turpen∣tine, q. s. to moisten it. 2. Dr. Bates pacifick Pill; which you have a∣mong the Pills, in Mr. Shipton's Pharmacopia Ba∣teana. Note, That the same Things are to be observ'd, as to this and Starkey's Pill, in all Particulars. Note, That the Benjamin should be omitted, as being resinous.
III. Such Preparations of Opium, wherein its resinous Parts remain unalter'd in themselves, yet so divided, separated, &c. as to be render'd innocent▪ such are, All which you have in the London Dispensatory. 1. Venice Treacle. 2. Philoneum Persicum. 3. Philoneum Romanum. 4. Diascordiu. 5. Mithridate. Note, That in all these Preparations, the Opium should be carefully mixed with the other Ingredi∣ents; and to that end, either torrified and finely pouder'd, or dissolved in Water, which divides all its Parts, and then throughly mixed with the other Ingredients while 'tis off, or after 'tis redu∣ced by Evaporation to the Consistence of a Syrup, or somewhat thinner. 6. Sydenbam's Laudanum, which you'll find in Mr. Wilson's Chymistry. Note, That the main Care in this Preparation, is to let the Liquor have a sufficient time to clear from the Fces, and to separate from it; that you may by that means have less of the Rosin. Note, That this is best given in a spirituous Li∣quid, lest its Rosin (tho' it cannot have much in it, if well decanted) be precipitated at Stomach. Note, That the Henbane-seed in the Philoniums should be left out, 1. Because it makes the Dose more uncertain. 2. Because it is not to be esteem'd so much as Opium; at least you multiply things without necessity in putting it in.
Note, That Pil. e Cynoglosso (as was said in the last Chapter of Pil. e Styrace) is a very ill Composi∣tion, both upon the Account of the resinous Things that it contains, as also the resinous Preparation of Opium that it is made of; and therefore does (as that e Styrace) often cause grievous Effects: Nor do I think the London Laudanum (whose Name does probably recommend it more than any Thing else) worthy a Place among the best and safest Pre∣parations, because the Opium is render'd worse, or more resinous, than the crude, by being extra∣cted out of Spirit of Wine; and because it has too few other Ingredients to divide, segregate, and keep its resinous Parts from Coalescence; so that it may, and sometimes does cause ill Symptoms; so Philonium magistrale is to be rejected for the like Reasons, besides that it is otherwise a foolish Pre∣paration, because Opium, Benjamin, Myrrh, and Mummy, are ordered to be made an Opiate, or Electuary with Spirit of Wine, which is ridiculous. So Troch de Carabe, and de Terra Lemnia, are not without their Faults, because one has Frankincense, and the other Olibanum in it, (which are resinous) tho but in a small Quantity. Seif de Thure, having a great Quantity of the Frankincense, is not com∣mendable, since the Opium is also crude. Now having shown you, which are the best and worst Preparations, and why; it remains, that I show you the just Doses of the best and sofest; whose Number is very sufficient to answer all Intents, without medling with such as may not be so sae, or neat.
An Explanation of the Table of Doses. I Had once added an Explicatory Table of the Marks I use; but afterward considered, that all Physicians and good Practitioners in Physick do know them, and that it was not fit to intrust others therewith. Therefore I shall only add some∣thing for the better and readier Use, of the premi∣sed Table of Doses. 1. Note, That the sort of Persons, that you have to deal with, are placed in the uppermost Space of the said Table, and the Doses fit for such and such Persons, put directly under them in the same Column. 2. Note, That there are three sorts of Doses of every particular Preparation, that is the least, mid∣dle, and highest Dose, under every sort of Men or Women, which are also of three sorts, the strong, midling, and weak, as you see in the upper Space. 3. Note, (therefore) That when yon are about to give an Opiate to any Man or Woman, that you first look in that upper Space for the sort of Per∣son you are to give it to, as weak, strong, or mid∣ling Men or Women: Then carry your Eye down in that Column, till you come over against the Preparation that you intend to give; and there you'll find in the said Column three sorts of Doses; the lowest on the left Hand; the highest on the right Hand; and the moderate Dose between them. As suppose you are about to give a middle Dose of the Liquid Panacea to a strong Man; see for (strong Men) in the upper Space, and for liquid Pa∣nacea in the first Column on the left Hand; under the Word (Opiates) and where the Column that belongs to strong Men, and the Space that belongs
to Liquid Panacea do meet, there you'll find, qt. 20—30—40 for the least, middle, and high∣est Dose; give which you think fit, according to your Intention. So if you are about to give the highest Dose of the (solid Panacea) to a strong Woman, you'll find under the Words (strong Women) over against (solid Panacea) gr. i—gr. i¼—gr. iss) which shews you, that gr. iss is the highest Dose for a strong Woman, and so of all the rest. 4. Note, That I have been so cautious in dosing all the Opiates, that you may very safely give the highest Doses to all, but very weak Persons; to whom it is hardly fit to give any Thing, by rea∣son of extream Weakness. 5. Note, That if you give any to young Persons, under the Age of 20. you should proportion the Doses not so much (as idle Custom directs) accor∣ding to their Years, as Bulk and Strength. For Instance, allowing strong Men to be 200 pound Weight, you must give a strong Youth of 100 Pound Weight, Half the Dose of the strong Man, and so of all other, only allowing somewhat less the young∣er they are, because of the Softness, Fineness or Laxity of their Texture; especially if they be very young, to whom Opiates must be cautiously given; or only Diacodium (which is best in that Case) and that in a small Proportion also; for young Children cannot bear Opiates, as well as grown Persons, no not in Proportion to their Bulk or Weight.
Place this between p. 294, and p. 295. A Table of the DOSES of the Best and Safest OPIATES. OPIATES. Dose. Dose. Dose. Dose. Liquid. To strong Men, To midling Men, & strong Women, To weak Men, & midling Women. To weak Women. The liquid Panacea gt. 20——30——40 16——23—30 12—18——24 10——15—20 Laudanum liquidum Cydoniatum gt. 20——30——40 16——23—30 12—18—24 10—15—20 Sydenham's Lauda∣num gt. 20——30——40 16——23—30 12——18——24 10——15—20 Diacodium (or Syr. e mecon.) ☞i—ʒx—☞ss ☞ss——ʒvi—☞i ☞ss—ʒv——ʒvi ʒiii—☞ss—ʒv Solid.         The solid Panacea gr. i—iss——ii gr. i—i¼——iss gr. ss——i——i¼ gr. ss—¾—i Wedelius's Laudanum gr. i—iss—ii gr. i—i¼——iss gr. ss—i——i¼ gr. ss—¾—i Le Mort's Extract gr. i—iss——ii gr. i—i¼—iss gr. ss——i——i¼ gr. ss—¾—i Dr. Bate's pacifick Pill gr. ii—iiss—iii gr. i—iss—ii gr. i——i¼———iss gr. ss—¾—i Starkey, or Mat∣thew's Pill gr. vi—ix—xii gr. v—vii—ix gr. iv——vi——viii gr. iii—iv—v
Philonium Romanum ʒss—℈ii——ʒi ℈i—ʒss—℈ii gr. xviii-xxiv——ʒss gr. xvi—xx—xxiv Philonium Persicum ʒss—℈ii——ʒi ℈i——ʒss—℈ii gr. xviii-xxiv——ʒss gr. xvi—xx—xxiv Venice Treacle ʒi——ʒii—ʒiii ʒi——ʒiss—ʒii ℈ii——ʒi—℈iiii ʒss—℈ii—ʒi Mithridate ☞ss—ʒvi——☞i ʒiii—ʒv—ʒvii ʒii——☞ss—ʒvi ʒii—ʒiii—☞ss Diascordium ☞ss—ʒvi——☞i ʒiii—ʒv—ʒvii ʒii——☞ss—ʒvi ʒii—ʒii—☞ss The Doses of London Laudanum (which I mention rather for its general Use than Lauda∣bleness) may be the same with that of the Pacifick Pill. A Table of Marks very necessary, for the better understanding of the Table of Doses. gt.—signifies a Drop. —signifies a Grain. —signifies a Scruple, which is 20 Grain. or ☜ signifies a Dram, which is 3 Scruples. —signifies an Ounce▪ which is 8 Dram (or Drachms) /——signifie a Quarter Of any Toing /, /, ss, or ss signifie Half Of any Toing /——signifie 3 Quarters Of any Toing
CHAP. XXVIII. The Cure of the ill Effects of Opium. HAving shewn how to prepare Opium, so as to render it safe and innocent in a Mode∣rate Dose, and how much that Moderate Dose is, one may be apt to think that this Chapter is need∣less; but when you consider how many there are that may be negligent, wilful, want Time, Skill, &c. to prepare it, or take too much, or too long of it, and that the Physician must be able to An∣swer and Remedy all ill Accidents that may hap∣pen, you'll find it very requisite that I should shew how to cure the ill Effects of Opium, which proceed either, 1. From its Rosin at Stomach; Or, 2. From too much Relaxation by an Excessive Dose; Or, 3. From a long and lavish Use of it; Or, 4. From a sudden leaving it off, after a long and lavish Use thereof. I. To Cure the ill Effects of the Rosin at Stomach▪ you are, First, To know whether that be the Cause; which you may learn, 1. By considering whether Crude Opium, or some resinous Preparation thereof, was taken, espe∣cially by it self, in the Form of a Pill or Pills, as an Extract thereof out of Spirit of Wine, or Pile Styrace, or London Laudanum, or the like, not duly prepared, as has been directed.
2. By the Symptoms, which are these, viz. a Nausea, Puking, Vomiting, Hiccough, Convulsions, Distresses, and Anxieties about the Stomach, parti∣cularly the Part call'd the Pit of the Stomach, Swimmings in the Head, Vertigo's, Palpitations and Tremblings of the Heart, Agitations, Uneasiness, a Turbulent Pulse, and (after a Struggle of Nature under those Symptoms) Faintings, Leipothymies, Syncopes, &c. which last you must not take for certain Signs and Symptoms, unless the former have preceded them, because it is not impossible but they may happen from the Quantity of the Opium, Condition, or Constitution of the Per∣son, &c. but this (when all Things are compared together) will be easily Judged of, especially if you observe; 1. Whether those Faintings or Leipothymies be not more like the Failures and Stupors of Drun∣kards, than bare Faintings; if they be of the first sort, then do they proceed from an over-Relaxa∣tion occasioned by the Opium, and not from its Rosin, the Cure of which belongs to the second particular. 2. Whether they are more attended with the Signs of Relaxation, as Deadness of the Eyes, Falt∣ring of the Tongue, Darkness before the Eyes, Di∣latation of the Pupilla, Efflorescence of the Skin, Laxity of the Limbs, Want of Feeling, Stupidity, Sleepiness, Failure of the Senses, or of making Wa∣ter, loss of Memory or Understanding, a dry Mouth, a slow and wide Pulse, and other Things much like the State of a deadish Drunkenness; for then those Failures are the Effect of Relaxation by the pleasant Sensation that the Opium causes. But after all, it is the sort of Opium that was taken, and the first Symptoms of a Nausea, Vomit∣ing,
&c. are most to be depended upon, for it may happen sometimes (as after a great Dose) that the Rosin may stick, &c. and the Relaxation be excessive also. Secondly, When you are satisfied, that it is the Rosin at Stomach that causes the Mischief, and not bare Relaxation, you are not to promote or stop the Vomitings, lest in the first Case you tor∣ment and endanger the Person to no Purpose, for the Rosin does generally (if not always) stick too fast, and too little in Bulk to be shaken off by Vomiting, or the Contraction of the Stomach, as appears by the tidious Vomitings that happen there∣upon, and the Nature of the Thing; so that (I believe) it is seldom or never carried off that way, and that when People are at last relieved, it is by a gradual Waste, Dissolution, or Digestion of the Rosin, as in great measure appears also by its Purging some Persons after Vomiting, and a long time after it is taken in a considerable Quantity. Nor are you to stop the Vomiting, as not knowing what Nature may Advantage her self thereby, but indeed it is more than you can do, generally speak∣ing, (if not always) while the Rosin teazes, urges, and stings the Stomach. It evidently follows, that the Cure must consist in the Dissolution of the Rosin. For this Purpose you have Four Effectual Dis∣solvers of the Rosin, (as you may observe from the Chapter of the Preperations of Opium) that may be used with safety in a Moderate Dose; 1. Lixi∣vial Salts, whereof the best is Salt of Tartar. 2. Sulphureous Spirits, whereof the best is high rectified Spirit of Wine. 3. The Yolks of Eggs, whereof the best is the Yolk of a rear new laid Egg.
4. White Soap, or rather the Sapo Tartareus. With these judiciously used, you may (by Gods Bles∣sing) Relieve and Cure the Person grieved with the Rosin (or noxious Part) of Opium. 1. Give with all possible speed One scruple of Salt of Tartar, in a Spoonful or two of Brandy, or some other hot Cordial Spirit, (if Spirit of Wine be too hot) placing the Person in the very same Posture that he was in when he took the Opiate, that it may fall directly upon its Rosin, which most probably sticks where the Opiate first fell upon the Coat of the Stomach; then stay for a Minute or two, and give a Spoonful or two of the Brandy or Cordial, with (if need be) the Salt of Tartar in it. If you find Cause, either because the first Doses were Vomited, or that the Quantity of the Rosin was great, or that the Person grows worse, you may often repeat it, for we must not be sparing in safe Things in dangerous Cases, I think it may well be repeated after every Vomiting toties quo∣ties. I have a great Opinion of the Yolk of an Egg in these Cases, not only because it does (as the other Things) mix with the Rosin, but because being of a good Consistence, it sticks to it, and fastens upon't the better, and is not so clearly shaken from it by every Vomit, as Liquids are; there∣fore I think it very Useful to be given now and then immediately after Vomiting; however, let no other Food be given but it, and be sure to use it when you have not the aforesaid Things, I believe it will be found by Experience (which is yet much wanted, because it has not been used) to be the very best Help in these Cases, for the
aforesaid Reasons, and because its fine Oiliness will correct the Volatile Salt of Opium. I cannot ima∣gine but White Soap, or rather the Sapo tartareus, (if you have it by you) may be of very good use to dissolve and carry off the Rosin. 2. When the Vomiting begins to cease, you must distinguish well whether it be because the Person is better, and the Stomach discharged of the Rosin, or because tired Nature yields it self to Rest, by a sort of Succumbency to the Fatigue or Leipothymy. You may easily distinguish these Cases; for in the first Case every Thing seems better, and in the last worse, saving that the Vomiting ceases, which was an endeavour of more vigorous Nature, and therefore its failing is now an ill Sign. In this Case good Old Wine, and Spirituo Cordials, which may rowse and invigorate Nature, and also engage with the Rosin by their Sulphureous Spirit, must be of excellent Use. Note, That if you want Salt of Tartar, other Lixivial Salts may serve, as those of Wormwood, Broom, &c. only you must give at least One Third more; and in Case of great Haste and Urgency, you may give the very Ashes of Wormwood, Broom, or any Vegetable, in 2 or 3 times the Quantity as the Salts are to be given, in 2 or 3 Spoonfulls of Brandy, or a Glass of Old Wine, or both mixed together, for the very roughness of the Ashes will, in some measure, contribute to wear off the Rosin, and thereby assist the Lixivial Salt that is in them.
3. If the Quantity of the Resinous Opium was great, it will be convenient, when you perceive the Vomiting begin to abate, to give as much of Daffee's Elixir, or Tinctura Sacra made in some Spirituous Liquor, as does usually give Six Stools; it is best Purging with a Liquid, because speedier in Operation, and that it should be Spirituous, to help the Dissolution of the Rosin. 1. Note, That you also take Care not to be too busie with Spirituous Liquors when they are much relaxed, and have such Symptoms as Drunken People have, especially if they appear in a high degree, for too much of them may promote the Relaxation. 2. Note, That in Faintings or Leipothymies after such Vomitings and Struggle of Nature, you must not so much excite them by grievous Sensation, as pinching, pricking, &c. (for those Leipothymies are (as was said) a sort of Recruit as Sleep is, and therefore the last Refuge of Nature for that End) but with Spirituous and Comfortable Things, as knowing that there is an awaking by Recruit, (which is Natural) as well as by grievous Sensa∣tion, which is forced and unnatural (as has been shewn.) II. To Cure the Effects of too much Relaxation by an excessive Dose, &c. First, You must be satisfied, that the ill Effects thereof are from too much Relaxation. 1. By considering the Preparation of Opium that was taken, for if you find that it was such as had the Rosin duly separated from it, you may be
sure, that the ill Effects are only from Relaxation, because the Dose was too great; or if it was a Preparation that had the Rosin so subdued or al∣tered, as you find directed to render it safe, you may presume the ill Effects are from over-Relaxa∣tion; for such Preparations are otherwise safe and innocent, except when the largeness of the Dose (as that of good Wine) causes too much Relaxa∣tion. 2. By the Symptoms, which are these, viz. Alienation of the Mind, Loss of Memory, Stupidity, Sleepiness, Sopors, Failures of the Senses, as Dark∣ness of the Eyes, seeing Things double, various Co∣lours before the Eyes, Loss of Feeling, Ease from Pain, &c. Deadness of the Eyes to the View, Di∣latation of the Pupilla, Efflorescence of the Skin, Laxity of the Lower Iaw, Intumescence, and Laxity of the Lips, Faltring of the Tongue, Sardonick Laughter, Laxity and Weakness of all Parts, a gene∣ral Ineptitude to Motion, Failure in making Water, going to Stool, and in all Things that require Strength, Contraction, Motion, &c. Difficulty of Breathing, a wide and slow Pulse, a Condition in general very like that of Drunkenness, which also proceeds from Relaxation. Secondly, When you are satisfied that Relaxation is the Cause, use all Means to procure a due Contraction of all Parts; which is to be done, 1. By removing the Cause of the Relaxation. 2. By using all good Means for Contraction. First, therefore, give a brisk, quick, and strong Vomit, both to discharge the Opiate, and cause Contraction of Parts by a grievous Sensation.
Proportion it to the Deadness, Stpidity, or Sleepi∣ness of the Person, so as to give it of twice the ordinary Strength of Vomits in Case there is great Danger from those Symptoms, and that they are of a high Nature. After the Person has Vomited 3 or 4 Times, or so often as that you may judge the Stomach well cleared of the Opiate, give Half an Ounce of Cream of Tartar finely poudered in thin Broth, Whey, Water, Small Beer, or any convenient Liquid, which will correct the Opiate if any remains at Stomach, turn the Vomit to a Purger to clear the Intestines also, and contribute much to the Con∣traction of Parts, which you must always have in your Thoughts, as the ruling Intention in this Case. Therefore, Secondly, You must use Contracters all the Time, the chief of which are Cold, grievous Sensation, (or Pain) Terrour, Fear, Voluntary Motion, and Acids, which last cannot be so well used during the Vomiting, lest they stop it. Therefore (especially if the Person be very Stupid) keep him very Cold, for he will hardly feel it, nor take Cold, because the Relaxation, and the Insensibleness of Grievance by Cold, &c. keeps the Pores open; let him be (if possible) in some Motion, as Walking, Hewing, Sawing, Knock∣ing, Tugging, &c. the more violent it is the bet∣ter, because it causes more Contraction and Agita∣tion to prevent Sopors; To force him to Motion, (if need be) Pricking, Pinching, or Whipping him about the Legs, &c. will be of good Use, because grievous Sensation adds defensive Contraction (which is the greatest sort) to that of the intentive Con∣traction by voluntary Motion.
These Means failing, he should be exposed stark naked to the coldest Air, and in desperate Cases thrown suddenly at unawares into cold Wa∣ter; by which Means you cause Terrour, Surprise, and Cold, (which are the highest and most forcible Contracters) to conspire to the Contraction of Parts; Hence it is that Drunken People, who are so from Relaxation, become Sober, as in a moment, by that Means. All the time, but during the Vomiting, let him use cold Acids in great Plenty, and very mani∣festly acid, for they will not only contribute to Contraction, but very much correct the Opiate; To this End Iuice of Oranges or Lemmons, Ver∣juice, or Water acidulated to a good degree by Verjuice, Vinegar, Iuice of Lemmons, Spirit of Vitriol, Sulphur, or the like, will be very proper. Where you have not the Convenience to plunge them into cold Water, (as is directed) dashing or pumping very cold Water, or Water with a Fourth Part of Vinegar upon their naked Bodies, will be of great Use, especially if sur∣prisingly done, to cause the more Terrour and Concern. These Things may be done more or lss, as Cause may require, which must be left to the Dis∣cretion of the present Physician, or Friends and Standers by (in Case there be no Physici∣an:) I only Caution, that Contracters should not be used too sparingly, and that you should never cease to advance in the Use of them till you per∣ceive their good Effect, and then to continue them as occasion requires.
Note, That the Case may well happen, that the Rosin may stick at Stomach, and yet no Signs or Symptoms appear but those of Relaxation, by Reason that the Feeling at Stomach may thereby be disabled to take any notice of it. To be sure of this, you have no other Means, because the Symptoms and Effects of grievous Sen∣sation cannot appear, where it is not (for the aforesaid Reason) but to examine whether the Opiate was a resinous one, as crude Opium, Extract out of Spirit of Wine, or the like, for then you may conclude, especially if they were given in a massy solid Form, as that of Pills, &c. without se∣vering the Particles of the Rosin by other Things, as the Yolk of an Egg, &c. that the Rosin may in all Probability▪stick at Stomach, tho' its Symptoms do not appear for the aforesaid Reason. In such a Case the best Advice that I can give is, externally to use all Contracting Means, as is directed, and internally the Means prescribed for Dissolution of the Rosin, for you'll thereby an∣swer both Intentions. Failure of making Water often happens in these Cases, which you may generally help by only clapping the Scrotum to the cold Chamber Pot, or into cold Water, and if that will not do, put some Vinegar into the Water, and that failing, he must be stript, and cold Water pumpt or dashed upon the Region of the Bladder. III. To Cure the ill Effects of a long and lavish Use of Opium. These Effects (as you may easily observe, if you take a View of them where they are enumerated in Chap. 6.) are either,
1. From an over-much and habitual Relaxation of Parts, as Weakness, a Moapish Disposition, Diminu∣tion of Appetite, Weakness of Digestion, Dropsies, Weakness of Memory, &c. Or, 2. From Acrimony, as frequent Irritations to make Water, Priapisms, Erections of the Penis, fruitle Inclinations to Venery, &c. In this Case (as in that of old Drunkards, which is much the same) there is no good to be done till the habitual Cause is removed, viz. the Taking of Opium, which suddenly to leave off is (as was shewn) very dangerous. Therefore, in order to leave it off safely; 1. You must stop your Hands, and not in∣crease the Dose that is taken, by which Means it will come gradually to have little or no Effect. 2. When you find that it is come to that pass, your Work is half done; then only lessen it 100th Part every Day till you come to take none at all. 3. If during this retrograde Course you find any Faintness, drink a Glass of good Stomach-Wine toties quoties, as Gentian, or Centary Wine, or the like, made by Infusion in Claret; or, if you want such, a Glass of the Claret it self; which Things will excite the Spirits, and help Digestion. 4. When you have quite ended the Taking of Opium, continue to Use such Wines when you are faint, and every Morning take in a Glass of Gen∣tian Wine Two Drams of the Chalybeate Wine de∣scribed in the London Dispensatory, increasing a∣bout a Scruple every Day till you come to Half an Ounce, which take for Two Months at least, afterward decreasing, as you encreased, till you come to One Drachm, and so give over.
But if you find Oosion, you may continue that Course longer, or as long as your Physician thinks fit. After all, you may use a Glass of Claret when faint, but be sure to be moderate, and not run from one Excess to another. As for the Acrimony of Bloud, that is more during the Taking of Opium, and will soon after gradually wear off, especially by the Course di∣rected; if not, Camphire is the adequate Remedy, of which with equal Parts of White Rosin, and q. s. of Muclage of Gum. Tragac. you may make Pills of  Grains weight, taking 4 of them every Night at Bed-time in a rear Yolk of an Egg, as long as it is necessary; for Camphire, by its fine Sulphur, corrects the volatile Acrimony of Cantha∣rides, Opium, &c. and so allays Titillation to Venery, &c. as is observ'd. IV. The ill Effects of a sudden leaving off of Opium, as Anxieties, Distresses, Depressions of Spirits, which (as was said) are very dangerous, are re∣medied no other way, but either, 1. By returning to the Use of Opium, which is a most certain Cure, and afterward (if you please) give over the Use of it after the manner that I di∣rected, which you'll find to be safe; nor can I advise you to trust any other Method of leaving it off, unless it be, 2. By substituting Wine instead of Opium, which is not quite so safe or certain; your best Method of using it, is to drink a good Glass of it so often as to keep the Comfort thereof at Stomach conti∣nually, that so it may answer the more permanent Effect of Opium, and keep you from a faint Con∣dition;
but seeing also that this Course is not con∣venient to be continued long, you must gradually lessen the Dose of this, as you are directed to do that of Opium, till you come to take none, or (at least) a moderate and wholesom Quantity. Note, That if such as used to take Opium are even almost expiring for want of it, you must, to prevent imminent Death, give a Liquid Prepa∣ration thereof to the value of what the Person was used to take, in a Cordial Vehicle, as Spirit▪ of Wine, Brandy, or the like, because such hot Spi∣rituous Vehicles do (as has been shewn) immediate∣ly give some Comfort by actuating and warming our Spirits, till the Opium comes to Operate, which will not be long, because it is in a Liquid Form; if you find the Person sink notwithstanding, he may be kept up by repeating the Brandy or Cor∣dial without any Opium in it, till the Opiate ope∣rates, which will certainly (by God's Help) set him right, in case it does but begin to operate before he is dead. See The Philos. Transact. for Iune, Iuly, August, 1696. Note, That it is a very false Imagination that Authors have of the Turks Capacity (by Nature, Climate, or the like) to take more Opium, or in greater Quantity than we may, but that they make more Use of it, and by that means come to take 2 or 3 Drams a day; for they begin with such small Quantities as we commonly givē, till by a long Custom of taking it they come to take the said Quantities, which is but small in Comparison of what several English People that have been used to it do, or have taken, as I could Name several to you, if I had not Reasons to the contrary; however, I am at Liberty to tell you the Quantities, tho' I must forbear naming the Per∣sons;
some have daily taken 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 Drams, nay, I have heard of some that have taken an Ounce a Day, and of One that took Two Ounces, whereas the Learned and Curious Dr. Edward Smith, could find none about Smyrna who took above 3 Drams a Day. All this is most agreeable to Reason, and the whole Current of my Discourse, viz. That it can be better born in cold than hot Weather, and consequently in cold than hot Climates; by firm Fleshed Persons, than such as have soft and flaccid Flesh, as the Southern People have in Comparison of the Northern, and such as inhabit cold Countreys. Therefore you may be sure that such as Enquire into the Cause, why the Turks and other Eastern People can take greater Quantities than we can, seek for the Reasons of Things before they know the Fact, nay, when the Fact is quite contrary to what they build upon; We may as well expect Edifying Discourses from them that Enquire why Fire is cold? Water dry? and the like, as from such as suppose Things contrary to true and sen∣sible Experience.
CHAP. XXIX. Some general Rules, Cautions, &c concerning the Use of Opium. THo' there is hardly any Rule, Caution, or Thing worthy of Observation, concerning the Use of Opium, but what is implied, or easily in∣ferable from what has been said; nor, (now that the true Nature of Opium is discovered) can there be such Fears and Iealoufies (which multi∣ply Cautions) concerning the Administration there∣of; (for every one may now easily see wherein its Danger and Benefit lies) yet because a Chapter of Rules and Cautions may be expected, as being usu∣al, and to have a single View of such as lie more scatter'd, and not so readily found in the Body of the Book, I will, to introduce the Use of Opium with more Clearness and perfect Security, give you a Collection of general Rules and Cautions con∣cerning its Use; whereof some are mentioned, and most inferable from the Premises. I. As to its Substance. 1. It should be always given, freed from its Re∣sinous Parts, if you can get such a Preparation. 2. It is also neat and convenient, that it should be freed from all its Earth and Dress. 3. Never give Opium, but either so prepared, or with its Rosin so subdued, segregated, or altered, as I have shown in the safe Preparations thereof. I follows that, 4. Crude Opium, and Extracts made in sulphure∣ous Spirits, are utterly to be rejected.
5. Never give it mix'd, or join'd with resinous Things. (as has been intimated.) 6. Never mix, or join it with other Opiates; 1. Because none of them are so good. 2. Be∣cause they are not so well known. 3. Because it makes the Dose more uncertain. 4. Because those other Opiates are used unprepared. 7. Pil. e Styrace, because made of resinous Opium, join'd with resinous Things, as Styrax calam. and Olibanum, is an insufferable Preparation, (tho' com∣mended) and therefore has frequent ill Effects, to my Knowledge. 8. Pil.  Cynoglossâ is such another, having two Opiates in it besides Opium, extracted out of Spirit of Wine, (which is far worse than crude Opium, tho' by the way of Eminence call'd Opium prepared, in our Dispensatory) Styrax calam. and Olibanum, which are resinous. 9. Laudan. Lond. is also an ill Preparation, as having the Opium extracted out of Spirit of Wine to make it worse than when Crude; therefore has sometimes ill Effects, especially when used alone in the Form of a Pill, in a large Dose, (as was said.) 10. Philonium magistrale is also to be rejected, because the Opium is prepared in Spirit of Wine, and Benjamin added, which is resinous. 11. Philon. Rom. & Persic. are tolerable, because the Opium is disgregated, and mix'd (as Galen would have it) among much, and several other Things, which keeps it's resinous Parts from Coalescence. II. As to its Form. 1. A Pilular Form of crude Opium, or any resi∣nous Preparation thereof, wherein the Rosin is not duly subdued, segregated, altered or corrected, is (as has been shown) the most pernicious.
2. The Form of an Electuary is commendable; 'tis in small Quantity, mix'd therein with many or much other Things, that prevent the Coalescence of the rsin us Particles▪ 3. A liquid Form is generally good, because the Parts, as in a Tincture of Opium in Spirit of Wine, are severed, and segiegated; yet it is not so very safe, where the Rsin is not separated; because if Care be not taken (as has been directed) the resinous Particles may be precipitated at Stomach, and so calesce and stick to it. 4. The Operation of Opium is quicker in a li∣quid Form, but more lasting in a solid Form, espe∣cially if the Opium be resinous; which, tho' noxious in general, yet has the Advantage of Duration, where it may be born, as in Persons of a robust Texture and good Digestion, or where Custom has taken off it's Grievounsess, as you find in habitual Tobaco-taking, &c. 5. The liquid Panacea of Opium, is better for Alteration; because it is the first Fruits of the Opi∣um, and more sincere and unaltered by Fire than the solid. But, 6. The solid Panacea is better, where a stay at Stomach and the Intestines is convenient, as in stopping of Vomiting, Loosenesses, &c. To be brief, 7. Liquid Forms should be always given in foul Stomachs, where the Digestion is weak, in Feavers, and when a nimble Operation is requisite. III. As to its Dose. 1. The mean or middle Dose is generally to be used; and where there is no Direction to the con∣trary. 2. The mean Dose may serve, except in violent Pain; or where much of the Opiate is lost; (as it happens very often in Vomiting or Looseness) or to
excite Venery; because those Parts are remote, and require a very sensible Titillation. But as to these matters, you'll have particular Directions in the re∣spective Cases in the following Chapters, that treat thereof in a special manner. 3. The Dose must be proportionably less in the fine and lax-textured Children, Women, warm and moist Weather, weak Stomachs, Persons much debili∣tated, or over-tired with Work, Labour, Disease, &c. IV. As to its Vehicle. 1. It should generally, (unless there be particu∣lar Cause to the contrary) be pleasant and agree∣able to the Taste and Stomach, that it may rather conspire with the Opiate to please the Membranes, &c. than contradict the Sensitive Pleasure, that it causes. 2. It should not be an Acid, because it infrin∣ges the volatile Nature of Opium, except some par∣ticular Case requires it; which will be seen here∣after. 3. It should not be a Volatilo-saline, especially to cause Sleep, or because that may render it too a∣crimonious or pungent, and so hinder Sleep, Com∣posure, &c. 4. It should not be lixivial, because its fixed Nature opposes the volatile; except it be, where the Opiate is resinous, to help it's Dissolution. There∣fore, 5. Wine, or fermented Liquors, Cordials, Waters, or smooth and pleasant Liquids, as Emulsions, Milk and Water, Water and Sugar, &c. will be the most proper (generally speaking.) 6. The resinous Opiate should be always given in sulphureous Spirits, Wne, or strong Liquors, or in a lixivial Vehicle, or rather in both mixed; or in a rear Yolk of an Egg, or finely poudered and well mixed with Electuaries, Bolus's, Conserves, thick Sy∣rups,
Pulps, or any Thing that is innocent, and of a good Consistence, to keep the resinous Particles a∣sunder, and to prevent their Coalescence; for which End, I judge, that good white Sp must be (be∣cause of the Alkali, its Slipp'riness, and Aptitude to join with the Rosin) a good Vehicle, the Opium and scrapings of the Soap being mixed with a little Rose-Water, (and what else you think fit, to render them more acceptable) by pounding them in a Mortar for a good while, to an intimate mixture. V. As to Time. 1. Give the Liquid Forms half an Hour at least, or an Hour, before the Time you would have them operate. 2. Give the solid Forms an Hour, or an Hour and a half, before you would have them operate. It is very silly, not to give them till the very Time that they should operate, as 'tis usual at Bed∣time, when they should be then operating, and causing Sleepiness, that the Rest and Ease of lying down may concur with it; whereas if People are unapt to sleep, (as generally they are who take Opium) they, not taking it till Bed-time, lie tossing and tumbling, grow uneasie, and restless, and the Bed hard, and (in a great part of the Year) too Hot, before the Opium operates, so that the Opium cannot take Effect, by Reason of Disquietudes, so the Persons lie all or most Part of the Night with∣out any Sleep; whereas if it be so given as to cause a great Sleepiness by the Time they go to Bed, their lying still a very little Time (which they are then apt to) and the Bed being soft, easie, cool, and pleasant, they immediately sleep, and their Spirits being composed, continue their Sleep all, or most Part of the Night. Therefore I have often come where People had not slept, tho' they took an Opi∣ate at Bed-time, and given them the very same a convenient Time before, and they have sweet∣ly
slept, to their Heart's Desire and Refreshment. 4. Give Opiates, as to Meals, at least 3 Hours before and after them, or about the middle Time between them, if it be in the Day-time, or when the Stomach is near empty, or but little or light matter in it; which if gentle and agreeable, will help Men to sleep: But great Repletion and perfect Emptiness or Hunger (which is a grievous Sensation) do disturb or hinder Sleep. 5. Opiates may, and have proved inconveni∣ent before or after Letting of Blood, and Hemorrha∣ges, especially if the Evacuation was large, and sud∣den; the Reason is, because tho Persons being very dispirited, and so much inclined to Sleep of them∣selves, may sleep too much and dangerously; and because Opium relaxing hinders the Vessels duly to contract upon the remaining Blood, which may cause a Discontinuance of its Streams, by Reason that the diminished Blood may not suffice to fill up the relaxed Vessels; tho' this may seldom happen, be∣cause the Compressure of the Air is appointed by most wise Providence to close all our Vessels in such Cases; but it must be better done, when the Parts themselves do also duly contract, which Opi∣um hinders. 6. You have much the same Reason not to give them soon after other large Evacuations, where a due Contraction of the Parts is requisite; as after Tapping. (or Paracentesis) in Dropsies; Child∣birth, &c. 7. Opiates are best given in the Morning, to cause Euphory or brisk Effects, because the Re∣freshment gain'd by the Night's Sleep does not on∣ly concur towards Euphory and Briskness, but also much oppose Sleepiness and Drowsiness, which are not consistent with brisk Effects.
VI. As to Persons. 1. It is not convenient to give Opiates to Per∣sons very young or very old. 2. They agree better with Men than Women or Children; With Men of a robust and hard, rather than of a weak, fine, tender, and soft Texture; with such as have a strong Digestion, than a weak; and in general with the strong, rather than the weak. Therefore, 3. Never give them to Persons that are very weak, especially if they take, or digest no suste∣nance, or extreamly little, for Reasons already gi∣ven; nor to such as are near their End, or almost expiring; ☞ Except it be for want of Opium, or by Extremity of Contraction by Terrour, Pain, Cold, Convulsions, &c. for then it will do Wonders in preserving People, that are otherwise past all Hopes, by relaxing, taking away Pain, Contracti∣ons, &c. 4. It is not so agreeable to the very fat or moist, because they may be over-relaxed; nor to the ve∣ry lean, and dry, &c. (especially to cause sleep) because it is apt to irritate and actuate their Spirits too much, by which means Sleep is much hin∣der'd. VII. As to Maladies, and Diseases, &c. I. Opiates are not convenient in Relaxations, as such; as general Palsies, Hemiphlegia's, Palsies of the Eyes, Deadness of them, Dilatation of the Pupil, Re∣laxation of the Tympan of the Ear, of one side of the Face, which makes the other side contract, and and so draw the Face awry; for 'tis not a Spasm or Convulsion (as Men imagine) of the contract∣ing side, but a Resolution of the other, which per∣mits
the Antagonist Muscles of that side to contract without Opposition, and draw the Face toward the strong or sound Side: Relaxation of the Uvula, or the annex'd Valu, (which last is known by Snuffling without any other evident Cause, or by observing that it does not shut in sounding u, (in but, cut,) &c. by it self; Relaxation of the Larynx, and Windpipe, (which is known by a hoarse kind of Whisper without a Cold, or any evi∣dent Cause;) Of the Pharynx, or Gullet, (which is known by a Depravation of swallowing without Pain, or Tumor, or any evident Cause;) A Para∣lytical Asthma, or difficulty of Breathing, wherein Men heave the Shoulders without any apparent Cause; Relaxation of the Stomach, as when Meat stays too long at Stomach, &c. A. Palsie of the In∣testines, or Guts, as when one is bound, and can∣not refer it to any other Cause; Of the Bladder (when one cannot make Water without any other Cause to refer it to;) Relaxations of the Sphincters of the Bladder, and An, (that is, when Urine, or Ordure fall from one involuntarily;) nor are they convenient in Baths, unless great Relaxation, as for Passage of the Stone, &c. is intended. Nor in Ruptures as Bronchocele, (of the Windpipe;) Exomphalos (of the Navel) Bubonocele (of the Groin;) or the Fall of Humours, Guts, Fat, &c. in∣to the Scrotum, or of the Fundament, Womb, or the Vagina, &c. except it be to reduce them. Nor in Lunations, Sprains, Laxity and Weakness of Ioints, Limbs, Back, &c. Extensions of Nerves, Tendons, Ligaments, &c. Nor where Relaxation does or may improve the Distemper, or do harm, as in Apoplectical and soporose Cases, as Coma, Caros, Le∣thargy, &c. Weakness of Memory, Stupidity, Mo∣rosi, Nightmare, Drunkenness, &c. Syncopes, and Faintings from Relaxation, as the original Cause; as from Excess of Ioy, Pleasure: Large Evacuations
when the Parts cannot well, and duly contract upon what remains, as after Child-Birth; profuse Hemorrhages, Tapping, (or Paracentesis,) or any large Evacuation of Humours in Dropsies of the Belly, Breast, or Head; nor (as has been hinted) in Drop∣sies, tho' without any such Evacuation, unless it be upon some special Consideration of the learned; nor in Tremblings, or Shakings of the Head, or Hands, &c. from Weakness, as in old Age: Nor in Fluxes from Relaxation, as too much Sweat, Gonor∣rhaea Simplex, Diabetes, nocturnal Pollutions, Chylou Flux, Lientery, involuntary Flux of Urine, or Ordure, and some sorts of immoderate Fluxes of the Menses, or Lochia, which owe their Cause to Relaxation; or Aptitude to Abortion from that Cause, and in∣deed generally in Women with Child, lest it should cause Abortion by relaxing the Neck of the Womb. Or where Contraction is beneficial, as to empty a foul or replete Stomach, Choler, &c. by Vomiting or Stool, or an ill Humour any way. Therefore II. Opiates are not convenient when grievous Sensati∣ons are useful, as to excite Expectoration when Matter threatens Suffocation, in Vomicas, Pleurisies, Peri∣pneumonias, Consumptions, Spitting of Blood, &c. When Hunger calls for Food, and Restauratives; that of stuffing at Stomach excites Vomiting; that of Urine solicites us to a due Excretion thereof, that of ill Matter at Guts causes an Evacuation there∣of; so that when a Crisis is to be by the Help of grievous Sensation, or Irritation, Opiates are not con∣venient, for it takes off the Sense of Irritation; but when a Crisis is to be by Relaxation, as by ope∣ning the Pores to cause Sweat, Perspiration, &c. then is it of excellent Use: So, that great Question, (that has very much puzzled the learned) whe∣ther Opium is convenient before a Crisis &c? is plain∣ly, and mechanically answer'd.
III. Opiates are not convenient where Titillation by the Acrimony of volatile Salts is the Cause of the Disease, as in troublesom Erections, Priapisms, No∣cturnal Pollutions, Venereal Furies, too much Salaci∣ty, and Titillation, Itchings of the Uterus, Scrotum, Penis, Skin in general, &c. IV. I scarce need tell any, that Opiates are in∣convenient when the Meconium of Children should be evacuated; or when one is bound in Body, or apt to be so; but there may be a Time, when the learned Physician may think fit, to give them even to the Costive in urgent Cases, for he can order somewhat along with them, or soon after, to open the Body; who may also see Cause sometimes to vary from these general Rules, when Necessity and good Reason direct him so to do, tho' they are ne∣vertheless general in their Nature, and not to be transgressed without special Cause, and mature De∣liberation. V. Opiates are not so convenient where there is much slimy, moist, and phlegmatick Humours, by Rea∣son that the Parts are subject in such Cases to be too much relaxed. I have been the fuller (especially upon the Head of Diseases) that I may hereafter have no∣thing to do, but to shew the beneficial Use of Opi∣ates duly prepared, more particularly of the Pana∣cea's of Opium, of which I am going to speak.
CHAP. XXX. The Method contriv'd to shew the Use of well∣prepared Opiates (more especially the Panacea of Opium.) HAving shewn the Nature and Principles of Opium, which produces the good, which the bad Effects; how and why they do so; how to separate, subdue, and correct the bad Principles; the due Doses of good Preparations; how to cure all the ill Effects of Opium, and general Rules and Cautions concerning it, and in what Cases it may not be convenient; I have now nothing to do but to shw the beneficial Use of the Panacea, (or well prepared Opiates.) To make it more agreeable to rational Minds, and fix its Uses better in Memory, I will so proceed by its Effects, that the very Title of every Chapter may imply the Reason of its Use, which is either internal or external, and both of them either, I. As it is a Pleaser of Sensation, (or an Opiate specially so call'd) by which means it produces all the good Effects that are notoriously observed, which are mention'd in Chap. 4, 5, 6. Or, II. As it is an Alterative of the Bloud, &c. which is all Improvement, because almost wholly dis∣regarded, and never brought into any Method to this day, tho' it is the far nobler Use, by how much Curing excels bare Pleasing, or Palliating, tho' these last Uses have already rendred it the most general Medicament that is in being, insomuch that Syl∣vius said, having only respect to this Use, That he had rather not be a Physician, than not know the Use of Opium.
III. As an Evacuative by relaxing and opening the Pores. Its Effects and Uses, as a Pleaser of Sensation, are fairly reducible to these general Heads, viz. 1. Its comforting, gratifying, encouraging, and in∣vigorating of the sensitive Soul and Spirits. 2. Its composing the sensitive Soul, Spirits, &c. 3. Its relaxing all the senfile Parts of the Body. 4. Its causing Sleep. 5. Its causing Indolence, or taking away Pain. 6. Its stopping Fluxes, that depend upon Irritation, grievous Sensation, Contraction, &c. 7. Its promoting Fluxes, that depend upon Rela∣xation. 8. Its causing Titillation. 9. Its causing Vigilancy (or Watching) in some Persons. Its Effects and Uses, as an Alterative, are, 1. To invigorate Nature, or the sensitive Soul, and Spirits, which are the Principles of all Motion and Alteration for the Preservation of the Animal. 2. To give Nature, or the sensitive Soul, an Eu∣phory in that Work of Preservation, Alteration, &c. 3. To administer fresh and most agreeable Prin∣ciples for that end. 4. To administer such as are more vigorous and powerful than our own, in order, 5. To resolve all ill Humours, as vigorous and agreeable Menstrunms do. 6. To compose, combine, concentrate, or unite the good and agreeable Parts of those Humours, and by its Agreeableness to join with them, and cause a strict combination of Parts, to intercede and (as it were) cement them.
7. To discuss the separated and effete Parts of those Humours by its brisk Volatile Salt. And, Its Effects and Uses, as an Evacuative, are, 1. To cause a liberal Perspiration, to give those effete Parts their Exit in the most natural, plen∣tiful, kind, and universal manner. 2. To cause Sweat, when there is sufficient Mat∣ter for that end. 3. To relax and open the Pores for the Menses and Lochia, &c.
CHAP. XXXI. Of the Use of the Panacea, or well-prepared Opiates, to comfort and invigorate the sen∣sitive Soul and Spirits. I Have shewn how and why it causes a blithe, gay, and good Humour, Serenity, Ovation of the sensitive Soul and Spirits, Alacrity, Promptitude, As∣surance, Courage, Magnanimity, Euphory, or easie Undergoing of Labour, Iourneys, &c. It therefore follows, 1. That it must prevent or take off Sadness, Me∣lancholy, Cloudiness, Slowness, Dulness, Listlesness, Laziness, Bashfulness, Cowardise, Fear, Pusillani∣mity, Lassitude, Distresses, Anxieties, Solicitude, and all such grievous Passions, as Wine ad Hilaritatem does. 2. That by fortifying the sensitive Soul and Spi∣rits, it must prevent contagious Infections, and migh∣tily enable and invigorate Nature to subdue and conquer what is inimicous to it in all Respects. 3. That it prevents and takes off Faintings and Leipothymies that happen from the aforesaid Cau∣ses, as those upon Fear, Trour, hard Labour, being Plague-struck, and the like. I. The Form that it is to be given in is indiffe∣rent, unless a very sudden Effect is required, as may happen in Fainting Fits, &c. for then (as was said) a liquid Form in Wine, or hot Cordials, is best.
II. The Dose in these Cases must be moderate, and sometimes, in great Cases, the highest; for great Grievances cause proportionable defensive Con∣traction, which opposes the good Effect of the Panacea, &c. III. The Vehicle should be a Glass of generous Wine, cordial fermented Liquors, comfortable Spi∣rits, or such-like; to which you may add (if you please) pleasant and comfortable Things; as, Tincture of Saffron, or its Spirits; Chymical Oils, as of Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Sassaphras, Cloves, &c. (dropp'd into Sugar) Ambergrise, Musk, &c. IV. The Time of giving it, is at such a conve∣nient distance before the Time that you would have it operate, that it may produce its Effects at the Time desired. See the General Rules as to Time. When it is requisite to continue its Effects, as in long Iourneys, or the like, repeat it as soon as you find the Effects of the former Dose begin sensibly to decay; because it takes some Time to operate. V. The Regimen, when Action or Business is intended, is to keep in Motion, Discourse, or the like, lest you sleep or grow drowsie. But when you intend Sleep, observe the Re∣gimen directed in the Chapter of its Use to cause Sleep. Tho' less Sustenance will serve when you use it, yet must it not be omitted in a moderate manner. The Kind must be such as is easie of Digestion, and apt to promote Perspiration, as light Bread, Mutton, Lamb, Neat's-Tongue, Sweet-breads, and Lamb-stones, with agreeable Sauces that may help
Digestion and Perspiration; which is a great Cause of Serenity and Alacrity, (as Sanctorius observes) because that thereby Fumes and Vapours, which cloud and clog the Spirits, are evaporated, and the Spirits become serene and expedite. It is to be observed, That Parsly, Selery, Onions, Horse-Radish, Garlick, and such warm and volatile Plants, promote Perspiration. Your Drink should be good Stomach-Wine, or Wine and Water, or fine clear Drinks, not too new. 1. Note, That (as has been intimated) drink∣ing good, acceptable, and generous Wine, so of∣ten (yet moderately) as to keep a continual Sense of its Pleasure at Stomach, is the best Substitute to it that can be used; for it will thereby answer much of the permanent Effect of well-prepared Opium, tho' not quite so convenient in many Respects; as, 1. Because it must be so often re∣peated. 2. Because its Effect is not so fine and charming. 3. Because the Wine heats more. 4. Be∣cause it washes the Stomach too often, and the like. 2. Note, That when People are in an untoward Condition, or (as they call it) out of Sods, the next day after Drinking, Men often advise taking the Hair of the same Dog, (that is, drinking some of the same Wine or Liquor) it is best for them to use it as I just now directed; for their Case (upon the good Effect of the Wine ceasing) is much like that upon the going off of the Operation of Opium; which may also (in this Case) be used instead of Wine, to procure a better and blither Condition for that day, that uses to be very troublesome to Drinkers.
3. Note, That good Preparations of Opium may be conveniently used to Horses, to prevent their being tired, or take off their Weariness, and cause them to go on; but I would not advise any Pre∣paration in this Case but the liquid Panacea in good Ale or Beer, and that only in the same Quantity as is used to Men, till farther Experience emboldens the Practice: By such means, (I cannot doubt it) any Iade may be made to appear lively, go well, &c.
CHAP. XXXII. Of the Use of the Panacea, &c. to compose the Sensitive Soul, Spirits, &c. I Have shown how and why it composes and quiets the sensitive Soul, Spirits, Bloud, Sto∣mach, &c. and by that means allays all the Fury, Commotions, Perturbations, and turbulent Ex∣orbitances thereof, and that often without Sleep, but much better with it. It follows therefore, 1. That it prevents and takes off all Frets and turbulent Passions of the sensitive Soul; as, Anger, uneasie Agitations, and Tosses of the Mind, Pee∣vishness, Fretfulness, Discontents, Disquietudes, Dis∣satisfactions, Murmurs, turmoilings and vexatious Thoughts, Anxieties, Solicitudes, &c. and all the evil Effects thereof; as, Watchings, Waste of Spi∣rits or Strength, Lossitudes, Hypochondriacal Melan∣choly, Cachexies, Scurvies, &c. But these last be∣long most properly to its Alterative Faculty or Vertue. 2. All involuntary furious Agitations of the sen∣sitive Soul and Spirits; as, Madness, more espe∣cially Melancholy Madnesses, or such as proceed from grievous Thoughts or Apprehensions, Losses, Crosses, Despair, Fears, Terrours, or the like; but they are not so good in Merry Madnesses, as those from Ioy, Venereal Fury, and such-like, which answers the great Disputes about Opiates in Madnesses, Deliriums, Epileptical Fits, Convul∣sions general and particular, as those of the Head, Rising of the Lights, Vomitings, Hiccoughs, Sab∣bings,
Keckings, Convulsive Asthma's, Palpitations, and Tremblings of the Heart, Shakings and Shiverings upon Fear, Terror, Cold, Pain, Ague-Fits, Convulsive Colicks, Hysterick Fits, Iliack Passions, &c. 3. All Fevers and Frets of Humours that happen from any of the aforesaid Causes; Or from any vio∣lent Motion, voluntary or involuntary, as Labour, Running, Hewing, Fighting, or any vehement Ex∣ercise, Ratlings, Tossings, Concussions in Coaches, Waggons, Boats in stormy Weather, violent Riding, &c. Or from Heat of Fire, Sun, Baths, Hot-Houses, Bagnio's, Crowds, lying too many in one Bed, or with too much Clothes; Or from grievous Sensa∣tion, Irritation, or Pain, as Fevers upon Inflamma∣tions, Abscesses, Buboes, Stone, Colick, Cardialgia, Wounds, Fractures, Dislocations, Confusions, Ampu∣tations, Lithotomy, Paracentesis, or any painful Ope∣ration of the Noble Art of Chirurgery; Agony, or Pain of the Small-Pox, as its second Fever, and the like: Or from Fluxes, as tedious and turbulent Vomitings, Diarrheas, Dysenteries, Cholera's, Iliack Passions, artificial Purging, and all symptomatick or immaterial Fevers whatsoever, which either never had any Matter, but proceed from such agitating Causes as I mentioned, or remain (as some do) after the grieving Matter is carry'd off by Vomiting, Purging, &c. I forbore mentioning Pleurisies and Peripneumo∣nia's among the Fevers, that it prevents or takes off, because there are great Disputes whether Opi∣ates are convenient in those Cases, which I hope to determine. Unless it be when the said Distempers are come to that pass, that it is dangerous to cause Sleep, or take away any of the Sense of the Irri∣tation of the Matter to be expectorated, lest it
should be too much amass'd in the Bronchias, or Wind-pipe, and so choak the Person, I see no cause to forbid them any more than Sleep, or Opiates, in other Inflammations, wherein they are highly beneficial, to give Ease, cause Sleep, com∣pose the Spirits, and take off, or at least moderate the Fever. But I see many good Reasons to use them: 1. Because, as a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, they reserate and resolve clammy Humours, and are so agreeable in Principles (as Menstraums should be) to the thing to be resolved; I cannot doubt but Red Poppy is, upon Experience, stated a Specifick in those Cases for that reason. 2. Because these Di∣stempers (as Hippocrates speaks) are from a segrega∣tion of Humours by Agitation, &c. and Opiates ex∣cellent Composers thereof. 3. Because they are such great Discussers; and, 4. Open the Pores to let the discussed Matter quite out of the Body. 5. Because it may be that by its Relaxation upon such Resolution, the lodged Matter may be caused to flow off, and circulate again, and so be gra∣dued, discussed, and carried off by the open Pores. 6. Because it envigorates Nature to per∣form those Things: And, 7. Gives Ease and Re∣cruit of the Spirits by Sleep. So that all Things considered, I think (as Experience assures us) that Red Poppy, or Opiates in due Quantity, are the very best Remedies that can be used. Hence it is that Wedelius calls Opium an Antipleuritick Specifick, he having observed, (as I and others have done) That the whole Course of the Disease and Expecto∣ration will succeed much better by their Use. He adds also, That he has very often cured them by its help, without letting of Bloud; which is
an infallible sign of their good Effect, since the Pleurisie can hardly be cured without Bleeding. I cannot see how an Effect that bears such Ana∣logy to Sleep can do any more Harm than Sleep. Etmuller also advises the giving of Opiates not only in the Beginning, but also during the In∣crease of the Pleurisie or Peripneumoniae: So that I conclude, That they are of excellent Use in those Diseases, unless it be when Sleep or them may cause too much Insensibleness of the Bronchias, and so retard Expectoration, when the Case is such that the Want thereof may endanger the Person's be∣ing choak'd. We have also many Histories of Persons cured in other Fevers by large Doses of Opiates. I sup∣pose that resinous Opiates causing Vomiting and great Disturbances, by reason of ill Digestion in those Cases, might be one great Cause of Peo∣ple's Fears and Ieolousies in giving Opiates, which is easily prevented by giving liquid Opiates void of any resinous Particles, as the liquid Panacea, &c. 4. It does, by composing, quieting, and appea∣sing the Motion and Perturbation of the Bloud, conduce much to the stop of its Efflux in Hemor∣rhages (or Bleedings) that are unnatural; as at Nose, in spitting and vomiting of Bloud, bleeding at the Hemorrhoids, in Dysenteries, pissing of Bloud, &c. and sometime in profuse Menses, when they hap∣pen from a Fever, or too much Motion of the Bloud and Spirits, and not an over-Relaxation or Dilatation of the Pores, which must be well di∣stinguished. I. The Form must be liquid in all Fevers, and is also most convenient, generally speaking
II. The Dose may be the moderate, or mid∣ling, except it be where the Pains are great, or where much of the Opiate is lost, as in Vomiting, Loosness, &c. for which see the General Rules. III. The Vehicle should be (generally speaking) cooling, composing, and incrassating Liquids, as Emulsions, Milk and Water, or the like; but in settling the Stomach use agreeable warm and com∣fortable Cordials, or Wine burnt with Aromaticks, or the like. IV. The Time is, when 'tis convenient accor∣ding to the General Rules, and your Intention of its Operation; therefore where there are periodi∣cal Paroxysms, or Exacerbations, as in the Small-Pox and many Diseases, in the Afternoons, or towards the Evenings, give it the due Time before, that it may have its full Effect by the Time the Paroxysms, or Exacerbations, are expected to begin; and be not so mad as to be regulated by Night, or Day, or Bed-time, &c. (as is usual) which are no Sym∣ptoms, Signs, or Effects, of the Distemper, but of the Motion or Position of the Sun, Stars, &c: which are not the Subjects of your Cure, nor can be: The Want of which most obvious and rational Pra∣ctice, has sadly disappointed inconsiderate Physi∣cians, and often hazarded, if not destroyed the Patients. V. The Regimen is the same as that to cause Sleep which you have in Chap. 35. and should be by all means used in this Case. 1. Note, That Opiates are not to be used (as has been intimated) where the Commotion, Flux, &c. is for apparent and speedy Benefit of Nature, as in Vomiting upon Repletion, or to discharge the Stomach of somewhat that offends it, or a Loosness to clear the Intestines, or the like.
2. Note, That when any Evacuation is to be made by Vomit or Stool, the best way in these Ca∣ses is to use large Dilutions of some contemperating Liquid, instead of Vomitories and Purgers; there∣fore use only lukewarm Water, or (which is best) boil'd with a little Carduus in't, or Carduus-Posset, or the like, to cause Vomiting; and more agree∣able Dilutions for the Intestines to wash off ill Humours, as a Gallon of Water, with half an Ounce of Cream of Tartar, or rather the purging Salt of the Waters dissolved in it, or some part thereof, using all cold, or but very little warm'd, giving the Opiate or Panacea immediately after the Person has done Vomiting or Purging, in a small Glass of Wine, or agreeable Cordial, to warm and comfort the Stomach and Intestines, which, because of the smallness of the Quantity, the Moisture and Coolness of the diluting Liquids and the Opiate, can cause no Inconvenience by its inconsiderable Heat.
CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Use of the Panacea of Opium, &c. to relax. HAving shown, that Opiates relax all the sensile Parts of the Body, and bow, and why; it fol∣lows that they are of excellent Use, 1. To prevent and take away all Contractions that happen from grievous Passion, or Sensation, (or Pain) as Convulsions, Siverings, Shakings, Cramps, Ten∣sions, Palpitations and Tremors of the Heart from Fear, Terrour, Grief, Melancholy, Anxiety, Solici∣tude, Anger, Fretfulness, Concern, Surpize, &c. Or from Cold, Pain, Acids, &c. as Contraction of the Sphincter of the Bladder from those Causes, by which the Urine is often stopt, as also by the Pain from the Haemorrhoids, Inflammations, Small Pox, Co∣licks, Acrimony, Excoriation, &c. (which often hin∣der the making of Water, as they also do some∣times going to Stool, swallowing, &c.) Shivering in Ague-Fits; Stupors from Cold, or Pain which (as was shown) proceed from a violent Contraction; in all which it will scarce ever fail of due Effect: by this Means you may (as I have often done) cure those Disasters safely, speedily, and pleasant∣ly even to a Wonder and Amazement, (as if charm'd by a Spell) when others know not what Hand to put to them, and are quite baffled thereby. By the same Means (tho' little, or not at all minded) you may prevent great Tumours upon Pain; as when by a Thorn, or any grievous Pain the Arm, Legs, Thighs, &c. begin to swell; for
the Swelling, which often grows prodigiously, and seizes the whole Limb, if not a great Part of the Body, threatning and often causing Mortifica∣tions and Death it self, is caused by the Pain con∣tracting, and so girding the Parts, that the Bloud, Lympha, &c. cannot pass, by which Means the Humours being stagnated, and crowded in by the Force of the Arteries, and dam'd up by the Con∣traction, most dreadful Tumours happen; whereas the Pain being taken away by the Opiate, and all the Parts relaxed, they are, and must be prevent∣ed by plain Mechanism, if used timely. For Pain can cause Tumours by no other Means besides Contraction, which Opium must prevent by taking away the very Pain it self. 2. To help the Cure of all other Contractions; as Tensions, Rigidities of Nerves, Membranes, Tendons, Ligamnts, Muscles, &c. 3. To relax, or make way for Things to pass, as Sweat, , Small Pox, Measles, pestilential, or venemous Esslvias, Mnses, Lochia, and the like, to pass through the Skin or Pores: A Child, dead, or alive, After∣birth, Mole, clodded Bloud, &c. to pass through the Neck of the Womb, when too narrow by Nature, or contracted by Pain, Cold, Terrour, &c. A Stone to pass the Ureters, or Neck of the Bladder, by ta∣king away the Pain that contracts them and hin∣ders the Passage of the Stone; so that (in the Hand of an ingenious Physician) there is not a bet∣ter, nor as good a Remedy to cause a Stone of any passable Bigness to come away, for it passes through the relaxed or widened Passages without Pain; to help which, other Relaxers, as Warmth,  Bath, Fomentations, Clysters, together with slippery and emollient Things inwardly taken, and at last a great Stream of Urine well contri∣ved and timed when the Parts are most relaxed, suppled and lubricated, do much conduce. I
would have all who are troubled with the Stone Note this. Note also, That to hold and dam up the Urine a long Time, is of excellent Use well managed, when the Stone is in the Ureters, because when the Urine has fill'd up the Bladder very tightly, that it will receive no more, it must distend the Ureter, which is the Cause that very many are eased, either by the removal or discharge of the Stone after a set Time, which gives Occasion to call them Fits of the Stone, because they last for much about the same length of Time; however, the large and sudden Evacuation of Urine must, by leaving the Part loose, &c. conduce very much to the Pas∣sage of the Stone, Clods of Bloud, Phlegm, Mat∣ter, &c. that steps the Urine. 4. To relax, or make Way for Things to be put in∣to the Body, when there is Occasion, as in Reductions of Hernias (or Ruptures) of a fallen Fundament, Womb, or Vagina, in which Cases it is of neat Use, both by relaxing, and taking away Pain during the Operation. It may be also of Use when the strict∣ness of the Collum Uteri hinders the Admission of Sem. viril. both as a general Relaxer, and as cau∣sing greater Pleasure of those Parts, and a propor∣tionable Relaxation thereof; for it is by the Plea∣sure in Coition, that the Collum Uteri is opened, or relaxed, (as is observed) which immediately closes again, when the sense of Pleasure is ended; yea and so much the stricter, because the Loss of Pleasure is (as was shown) a Kind of Grievance; hence it is, that omne Animal post coitum est triste; and not be∣cause of loss of Spirits (as is vulgarly imagined) for we can lose little or no Spirits by that which is so separated for Excretion before hand, as the Semen is.
5. To enlarge any Part for the due Reception of what is convenient, or necessary, as the Breasts to re∣ceive Milk, (by which Means it comes to be such great Increaser of Milk) The seminal Vessels, as Sem. virile does upon Puberty) to receive the Semen: Thus it causes the Penis to grow, as the Semen up∣on Puberty causes it, and Cocks Combs, Turkey-Cocks red Bags at the Neck, Proboscis, &c. to grow as the Time they are fit for, or begin to tread; for the Relaxation caused by the Pleasure of the Semen makes the Party more capable of the Nutriment. Thus it is, that Sleep causes the Growth, Fatning, and Thriving of Animals, and red Noses to grow so large by frequent Relaxation upon the Pleasure of Wine, Ale, &c. (as was said) to which Quanti∣ty distending the Parts, may in the last mentioned Case contribute I. The Form of Opiates in this Case may be ei∣ther solid, or liquid, as you think it. II. The Dose must be proportioned to the Re∣laxation that you desire; for more relaxes more; and less, less; so must it be also proportioned to the Contractions, that it is to take away; therefore very grievous Passions, or Sensations, which cause pro∣portionable Contractions, require greater Doses, be∣cause their Grievance and Contraction do strongly oppose the Pleasure and Relaxation that Opiates cause; therefore great Pain (as you'll find in its due place) requires an extraordinary Dose. III. The Vehicle in Contractions from grievous Passions should be VVine, or some comfortable Cor∣dial; except they be the more turbulent Passions, as Anger, Fury, &c. where Composers, as Emulsions, Milk, and VVater, &c. are best.
In all other Cases, emollient and suppling Vehi∣cles are most proper, as soft, smooth, and slipper , Broths, &c. IV. The Time to give them is, at the due Di∣stance before Bed Time, when the Intentions are consistent with Sleep, which it self is a great Relax∣er; otherwise any Time will serve, as Occasion or the Intention of the Physician requires it. V. The Regimen. 1. As to Meat and Drink, is using moist, emol∣lient and lbricating Things, as smooth Broth, somewhat at; butter'd Roots, Herbs, Sawces, , Milk-Meats, young Flesh, as of roasting Pigs▪ , Lamb, &c. Smooth Drinks as Alc, , &c. 2. As to sleeping and waking; that relaxes, and this contracts; therefore, that conduces, this hin∣ders. 3. As to Rest and Motion; that relaxes, and this conracts. 4. As to the Passions of the Mind; the Pleasant as , Ioy, Pleasure, Comfort, and all such, do relax; and the Grievous as Terrour, Fear, Grief, Melancholy, &c. contract, as Pain does. 5. As to Air, the warm and moist, or that when the Quicksilver is low in the Barometer (or VVea∣ther-glass) does relax, as do warm Baths Fomenta∣tions, &c. especially if emollient: Dry and cold Air and that when the Quicksilver is high, do cause Con∣traction. 6. As to Excretion, and Retention; generally Ex∣cretion does make Room and Way for things to pass through, or into the relaxed Parts, (as Clystering for Passage of the Stone, Child, Reduction of Her∣nias, &c.) But be sure not to make the Excretions grievous, because all grievous Sensation causes Con∣traction.
CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Use of the Panacea of Opium, &c. to take away Pain or grievous Sensation. THIS it does (as was shown) by diverting the sensitive Soul, and introducing a Sense of Pleasure, which, (being contrary to grievous Sen∣sation or Pain) cannot be in the same Subject with Pain; but chiefly, and mechanically by relaxing all Parts, and permitting the springy Animal Spirits to expand, and so become unfit to carry Impressi∣ons smartly; which is requisite to cause a sense of Pain. (as has been proved.) Therefore it is of most happy and glorious Use in all Pains, but especially to be used 1. In such as are not for any Benefit to the Person pain'd, in Order to alter, or evacuate the grieving Cause, as in Pocky, scorbutical, or hypochondriacal Pains, or such as proceed from any ill Habit of Body, &c. 2. Where Pain hinders the taking away of its Cause or some Benefit; as when the Pain of the Stone does by contracting the Parts hinder its own Passage; that of a Tenesmus hinders going to stool; that of the Sphincter of the Bladder hinders its opening to let out Urine, clodded Bloud, Phlegm, Matter, or any such Thing; when that of the Neck of the VVmb hinders Delivery of a Child, After-Birth, Mole, clodded Bloud, &c. that of the Mouth of the Sto∣mach hinders Vomiting, when requisite; or that of the Pylorus hinders the Detrusion of Chyle; or that of the Intestines, as by an Inflammation, &c. stops
the Passage of the Ordure, and causes an Iliack Pas∣sion; or that of the Guilet hinders swollowing; of the Larynx Breathing; or that of any Part hinders Perspiration or desired Sweat; or that of the Vene∣real Parts stops the Menses, or Lochia, &c. In all which Cases it is, and must in all Reason be of ex∣cellent, and (if duly managed) of almost (if not altogether) infallible Effect, by taking away the Pain which causes the Part to contract, and make the Stop, &c. 3. Where the Cause of the Pain cannot be remoued but by Perspiration, Sweat, Menses, Lochia, or Urine; s in Pains in the Habit of the Body, Limbs, &c. From Cold, Wind, or Vapours, Gout, Rheumatisms, Stitches, Pleurisies, Inflammations, and many of the Cases aforementioned, it is excellent: As it is 4. Where the Pain, Irritation, or grievous Sensati∣on, causes Nature to work irregularly, as in Iliack Pas∣sins, hysterick Fits, Fruitless Convulsions, canine Ap∣, &c. In which Cases it excells all other Means for many Reasons. 5. Where the Pain is not likely to have a timely Ef∣fect for good, till People may be too much worn out. 6. In all Pains that have not any matrial Cause from the Humurs, &c. of the Body, as such as happen from Passions, Wounds, Pricks of Nerves, Tendons, Fractures, Dislocations, Amputations, severe Chirur∣gical Operations, &c. 7. In all Pain from Inflammations, Suppurations, Ab∣seesses, Tumors where Repulsion is not convenient or possible. 8. In all Pains that are more likely to cause Fevers than any Benfit, as in many of the former. To be short, it is good and useful in all Pain and grievous Sensations. 1. Eecept all such as tend to the speedy and timely Benefit of Persons, as those in Womens La∣bour;
Grievances at Stomach, that cause Vomiting upon over-Repletion, or by Reason of somewhat that grieves, and is not convenient to stay at Stomach; or Irritations to expectorate, when much wanted, as happens sometimes in Vomicas, Pleurisies, Peripneumonias, &c. Or such as irritate, and solicite to make Water, go to Stool, &c. When Evacuation of Urine, Ordure, ill Humours, &c. is requisite. 2. Except when grievous Sensations are necessary Calls or Intimations for Supply, Refreshment, &c. as Hunger, Thirst, &c. which should be taken off only by the Pleasure of good Meat, and Drink; lest Nature be defrauded: Where you may ob∣serve an Inconvenience, that may happen by the frequent Use of Opium taking away Appetite with∣out Nutriment. Tho' this is much compensated by the Relaxation, and Recruit, that Opiates give, and their moderating the Expence of Spirits by taking of Contractions; and may more (if not wholly) by a regular and constant way of Eat∣ing and Drinking temperately at usual Times, tho' the Hunger may not, by Reason of the Opiates, be so great as at other Times. I. The Form is indifferent, and to be ordered only according to the general Rules, remembring that the Liquid is best for Speed. II. The Dose must be proportioned to the Pain, or grievous Sensation, and always rather more than when there is no Pain, because its Contraction oppo∣ses the Relaxation to be induced by the Opiate. Observe this Method. First give a good Dose, then stay about 2 or 3 Hours, and if the Pain be not at all lessen'd, you may safely then give half the Quantity again, and afterward about a third Part of
the Dose every 2 or 3 Hours till it begins to abate; but upon the least sensible Abatement, you must for∣bear to give any more, because that which did in some Measure abate the Pain, does in the same Pro∣portion abate the Contraction, and consequently it has less to contest with, therefore will be sure to conquer it; for the same Power, that could subdue ten in some Measure, will subdue nine in a greater Measure, and eight more easily than nine, &c. till the Pain quite ceases; whereas if you add more Power to the Opiate, it may be too much, especial∣ly when the Pain is thereby conquered, and that it has no Contraction to contest with; for then it will be as if a great Dose were given to one that had no Pain; but if the Pain increases again, you may safely repeat the Half Dose, &c. every 2 or 3 Hours, till it again begins to abate, and no longer; which you had better observe to do as soon as ever the Pain begins to return, because it takes some Time to operate; it sollows then, that the liquid Form is most convenient in this Case for Expedition. My particular and effectual manner of using it in the Gout, will be somewhat too redious to be set down: Therefore since it may be obvious enough to the sagacious, that consider what has been said, and the Nature of the Distemper, I will pass that by at this Time. III. The Vehicle in cold Stomachs, and Constituti∣ons, may be a Glass of Wine, or some temperate Cordial; but in hot Cases, or where a Fever is feared, Emulsions, Milk and Water, or Water alone, or other acceptable cooling Things, or such as are directed in the Case of procuring Relaxation in the last Chapter; because it is Relaxation that takes a∣way Pain, as has been mechanically demonstrated: But hee there is no need of being scrupulous as to the Vehicle, unless it be in respect of Heat and Cold, as the Case happens.
IV. The Time may be any Hour, as the Case requires; only remember, that Sleep conduces much to Relaxation, and therefore to the taking away of Pain. V. The Regimen to be used in the Case of Re∣laxing in the last Chapter will suffice, but 'tis con∣venient (as was said) to regard the Stomach, and hot and cold Constitutions; especially where there is any Fear of Fevers; by giving cooling Liquids, as Emulsions, &c. and avoiding hot or solid Things, especially such as are hard of Digestion, as Flsh, Fish, Eggs, &c. 1. Note, That it is very advisable, not to defer the Use of Opiates too long, till People are very weak, tho' it may seem that they would hinder some due Evacuation; for▪ I cannot see what Harm a Refreshment by them may do, any more than by Sleep, both depending upon the same Cause, viz. Relaxation: It is true, that by Reason of Sleep, or an Opiate, the Evacuation may be a little defer'd. What then? would any Man deny Sleep for that Reason? Why then should a Physician deny an Opi∣ate to cause it, respite Nature, and enable it to bear its Burthen, or engage with Difficulties the better? 2. Remember always that Sleep is a great Help to take away Pain, and so are all Things that con∣duce to Relaxation, or pleasant Diversion. 3. Use Means in Pain of the Hemorrhoids, Fur∣dament, or Intestinum rectum, and indeed in any Pain within the Guts (unless it proceeds from a Looseness) that Opiates may not bind Men too much; as Leitives internally, or emllient , or which of them may be most easily and conve∣niently done, and most to the Purpose.
CHAP. XXXV. Of the Use of the Panacea of Opium, &c. to cause Sleep. IT primarily causes Sleep by relaxing and com∣posing, quieting, soothing, pleasing, and lul∣ling the sensitive Soul and Spirits; it always re∣laxes, but does not always sufficiently compose or quiet the Spirits to cause Sleep, to which both are requisite: Secundarily, by taking away grievous Passion or Sensation, when they happen to hinder it. 1. As Soporiserous, it is of incomparable Use in all troublesom Watchings, whether they be from grie∣vous Passion or Sensation, or irrequiete Motion of the Spirits, tho' not so certain in this last Case as in the former; and therefore proves sometimes unsuccessful in some Persons, and in some sort of Madnesses, as the Merry or Furicus, tho' it is ef∣fectual in Melancholy and slow Manias, (as has been intimated) for bare Relaxation suffices in the Two first Cases, where Sleep is hinder'd by Con∣traction, which it never fails to take off, if given in a due Quantity, as has been directed. 2. To recruit the Spirits, as when People are tired with Labour, Iourneys, Diseases, Conflicts of Nature, as by Convulsions, Vomitings, Purgings, Hysteric Fits, and the like. 3. To relax, compose, take away Pain, moderate Fluxes that depend upon grievous Sensation, (or Irri∣tation) and its consequent Contraction; or from Motion or Segregation of Humours.
4. To promote Fluxes that depend upon Relxation, as Perspiration, Sweat; as also the Menses and Lochia in some Cases; of all which you have particular Chapters, which see. I. The Form may be indifferently, either solid or liquid, as 'tis best liked, and most suitable to People's Minds, Palate, &c. II. The Dose moderate, except it be, 1. Where some by Accident require otherwise, as Pain, Loosenesses, Vomitings, and to titillate the Venereal Membranes because remote; which see in the re∣spective Chapters of the Use of Opiates in those Cases. 2. Where the general Rules direct other∣wise, as in the soft fleshed People, Children, Wo∣men, &c. where the Dose must be less. III. The Vehicle must be the same as is directed to Compose; but in old People 'tis observed, that smooth Spirituous Things, as good Ale, &c. con∣duce very much to cause Sleep, because Sulphurs do qualifie-the Volatile Salt of the Opium (as was shewn.) IV. The Time in general is at the due distance before Bed-time, that is directed in the general Rules; but Opiates may be given at any Time when the Case requires, as in the Small-Pox about 12, 1, or 2 in the Afternoon, according as the ∣tions (which happen in the Afternoon, or towards the Evenings) do seise them; and in Agues, at the due distance before the Paroxysm invades them;  that the Operation thereof may be fall and com∣pleat before the Time that the Fits are to begin; and so in all other Cses of the like ind. V. The Regimen in this    Twosold Aspect; 1. To promote  2. To compose and quiet Motions  ∣tions of the Spirits, , &c.   Quiet being the Two
As to the first, the Regimen must be the same as is directed in the Chapter of the Use of the Panacea, &c. to relax; but as to composing and quieting the Spirits, I shall add somewhat, tho' Re∣laxers are generally good for this Purpose, unless join'd with some agitating Accidents, as Heat, or the like. 1. As to Diet, it should consist of cooling, in∣crassating, inviscating Things, that are not aroma∣tick, acid, or saline; such are Milk-Meats, Emul∣sions, Almond Milks, Chicken Broth, with cooling Herbs, Water-gruel, fresh and young soft Flesh, Let∣tuce, Purstane, Spinage, Herb Mercury, Mallows, and such like; Mucilages, as of Quince, Fleabane, &c. The Drink may be Milk and Water, Whey, or such unfermented Liquors, or smooth Small Beer not too old, for all stale Drink is naught; Water where it agrees, &c. 2. Rest of Body and Spirits must be contrived by all means, as by leaning, lying, or sitting still without any motion after it is taken, till Bed∣time, and therefore let the Person (if the Season permits) be as much undressed as may be, in a loose Garment, or Morning-Gown, all that Time, and be help'd off with his Cloaths, that he may not agitate his Body; when sleepy, (and not be∣fore) let him go into a cold Bed in Summer, and but a little warm'd in Winter, and only have what Bed-cloaths suffices, and pleases him best, and then lie absolutely still without Noise, Light, or Fire in the Room. 3. Rest and Tranquility of Mind is very neces∣sary, which should be not only free from grievous Passions, but from all Excess of Joyous ones, which too much agitate the Spirits. 4. The Air should be moist and moderate, and if not such by the Weather, render'd so by Art, especially in Fevers.
5. All Evacuations should be made, that may any way disturb his Sleep, before he betakes him∣self to it; nor should the Stomach be overfull or empty, lest any Grievance may be thereby created. 6. Emollient tepid Baths, Fomentations, Feet∣washes, &c. do finely dispose People to Sleep, but take care they be not too hot, for heat causes a stir of Bloud and Spirits, which is an Enemy to Sleep. 1. Note, That long Sleeps after great Fatigues, or long Watching, ought not to be very frightful, if the Dose was moderate, and that the Person takes Sustenance. 2. Note, That old or dry Persons, or such as are very unapt to Sleep after Opiates, are often caused to Sleep by smooth Wine, Ale, Cowslip Wine, or the like, because the gentle Oiliness of such Li∣quors do correct the Acrimony of their Volatile Salts, and at the same time cause a Sense of Pleasure, which relaxes and causes Sleep. It has been ob∣served, that even Ambergrise and Musk (which exagitate the Bloud and Spirits) cause old Men to Sleep, which happens by their fine Sulphur readily fastening upon the acrimonious Volatile Salts, as Spirit of Wine does upon Sal Ammoniac, which being mixed do soon coagulate: Therefore I am apt to think, that Camphire would be of excellent Use to correct the Opium, and the volatile Salts of the Body in such Cases, because it is Experimen∣tally certain, that it corrects the Acrimony of Urine, of Semen Virile, Cantharides, &c. 3. Note, That the drier the Body is, the more unapt are Opiates to cause Sleep; therefore dry Bodies, as of old Men, Hectical Persons, &c. should be well moistened by incrassative Moisteners, as Emulsions, and such Things as are above mention∣ed and ordered in the Chapter of the relaxing Use of Opiates.
From what is said, I do conclude, that Opiates do cause Sleep very readily where the Oily Parts abound; and that Things, that have a fine Oleous Sulphur, are very good Correctors of it, where acrimonious Volatile Salts abound, in order to cause Sleep; and that hence it is, that some ancient People will often Sleep better by the Use of the aforementioned smooth fermented sulphureous Li∣quors, than by the Use of Opium; from all which it appears, that Sleep is not such a Property of Opium as People make it to be, because, that be∣sides relaxing, Sleep also requires a great Rest of the Spirits, and the sensitive Soul. It seems very probable from the Premises, that Anodyne Sulphur of Vitriol would be excellent to cause old Men to Sleep; for it doubtless causes Sleep only by obtunding and qualifying our Vola∣tile Salts, as White , and other Balsamicks, will often do.
CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Use of the Panacea of Opium, &c. to stop Fluxes. IT palliates, moderates, and stops Fluxes; 1. By taking away the sense of the Irritation of Humours, which cause Contraction to squeese them out, and promote their motion. 2. Because it composes and stills the motion of Humours by the Relaxation and the Sleep that it causes, which quiets motions. 3. Because thereby, and by its combining Agreeableness and Texture, it congregates the disgregated Humours. 4. Because the Relaxa∣tion suspends the Humours. 5. Because it discusses ill Humours. 6. Because the Pores being opened by the Relaxation, the Humours that caused the Fluxes are gradually perspired by that most na∣tural and universal sort of Evacuation; for 'tis plain Reason and common Observation, that a plentiful Evacuation at Pores stops Fluxes per Anum, &c. and if it continues, perfectly cures them. ☞ Hence it is, that the Use of Opiates continued, does happily not only palliate, but perfectly cure Diarrheas, Dysenteries, Defluxions, Catarrhs, &c. It therefore follows, that it is of great Use, 1. To palliate, moderate, or cure all Fluxes that proceed from Irritation of Humours, as Vomitings, Loosenesses, caused by the Humours of the Body, or Things given, as Diarrhes, Dysenteries, Arti∣ficial Purging, Iliack Passions, Cholera Morbus, (after the Humour is somewhat spent) Defluxions, Ca∣tarrhs, immoderate Spitting, Gonorrhea Notha, (that
is, of slimy Humours by Reason of Acrimony) Fluor albus from the like Cause, or any other Flux of that Kind. 2. To moderate or cure Fluxs that proceed from too much motion of the Bloud, Humours, &c. as He∣morrhages at Nose, Lungs, Stomach, by the He∣morrhoids, Pissing of Bloud, immoderate Flux of Bloud by the Menses, Lochia, Stool, &c. when they proceed from that Cause, as may also some Defluxions. 3. To stop Fluxes that proceed (as Hippocrates says) from Segregation of Humours, by composing and combining them; from which Cause many such Fluxes, as I have mentioned, do happen. But it is not advisable to use them in Fluxes, that are apparently, or very probably, for speedy and ready Benefit; otherwise (as was said of Pain) use them to respite Nature, which they do as Sleep does, nay, in many Cases, the Conti∣nuance of their Use may quite Cure them, for the several Reasons given in the beginning of this Chapter; What a pleasant Cure then do some re∣fuse that reject them? leaving their Patients to be worn out with dismal Pains, tedious and profuse Evacuations, want of Appetite and Digestion, the common Consequences of Diarrheas, Disente∣ries, &c. I. The Form of Opiates in this Case should ge∣nerally be solid, because it sticks better to its Work; whereas the fluid is more subject to be evacuated in Diarrheas, Dysenteries, and Vomitings, tho' sometimes the Liquid may be convenient in Vomitings, as when that Form is more agreeable to the Stomach, or that you would have a more speedy Effct, &c. In other Fluxes, where the Opiate is not liable to be evacuated too soon, it is indifferent what Form you use.
II. The Dose in Fluxes, where 'tis probable some Part of the Opiate may be carried off with∣out Effect, as in Vomitings, Diarrheas, Dysenteries, Choleras, &c. the Dose must be (generally speak∣ing) pretty large, otherwise a moderate Dose may serve; In such Cases due Consideration is to be had of what is lost by the Evacuation, at which you may easily guess in Vomiting, by what comes up, if its Colour, Smell, Taste, be observed, as also by the Frequency and Violence of the Vomiting, and noting how the Stomach clears it self of what is ingested by the Quantity; and lastly, by the Effect; of which, if what was given fails, more of the Opiate must be given by degrees, till it stops the Vomiting in some measure. In Loosenesses give Half the first Dose every Four Hours till the Flux begins to be moderated, then be more wary in giving it, for what is afterward given may have its full Effect; therefore be very cautious, by giving but small Quantities both in this Case and in Vomiting, when they are mode∣rated in some degree, because Opiates then have their full Effect without any Diminution or Opposi∣tion thereof. In other Fluxes a moderate Dose may serve, as in Desluxions, Catarrhs, &c. however let the Dose rather incline to the highest than the lowest, and suffice (if possible) to cause Sleep, which is a great Effect in these Cases. III. The Vehicle in Vomiting should be small in Quantity, pleasant, comfortable, and warming, lest you should by either Quantity or Quality give any offence to the Stomach; pleasing it answers the same Intent with the Opiate it self, and has often good Effect without Opium; for, indeed,
every Pleaser is proportionably an Opiate, and Opim is only such in an intense and permanent manner; therefore the Vehicle must be agreeable, as Wine, Hippocras, or Wine burnt with Spices, Rosemary, &c. or the best Cordials, or Wine with some , Cviare, or Anchovis, or a little old Chese dissolved in it upon the Fire, accord∣ing as the Person likes one or the other; which last (tho' not used in common Practice) are of very great Benefit, where they are pleasing and well liked of. In Loosenesses, such Wines and Cordials as are sbastringent should be afforded (after the peccant Matter is evacuated) to comfort the Bowels; but the mentioned Salt Things are not convenient in this Case. In Defluxions, incrassative Composers are the best Vehicles, as Emulsions, &c. See the Vehicles for Composing, for they are all proper in this Case also. IV. The Time is at any Hour when there is Occasion; but Sleep conducing, the proper Time will be (unless Need otherwise requires) at the due and directed distance before Bed-time. V. The Regimen. 1. As to Diet in Vomitings, offer nothing to the Stomach but such Things, and in such Quan∣tities, as was directed for Vehicles; only in Vo∣miting, before the grieving Matter is discharged, it will be often convenient, before the Opiate is given, to give good Quantities of innocent Di∣luters, as luke-warm Water, plain or Carduus-Posset, between the Vomits, to dilate and render
the Vomiting more easie; but when you would stop the Vomiting, use but small Quantities of such Things as are above directed for Vehicles. Diluters in great Quantity do also succeed very well in Loosenesses, to wash off the ill Humours before the Opiate is given, and it is the best Practice that can be; but the Chalybeate Waters are the very best for that Purpose, (tho' Posset, or very thin Chicken, or Mutton Broth, are useful) for it answers all good Intentions, it dilutes and qulifies the peccant Humours, strengthens the Bowels, leaves a binding Quality after the Dilu∣tion is made, restores Appetite and Digestion, which are both much amiss in such Cases, and adds moisture to the Bloud, which is under a Frt or Febricula for want thereof, because all Liquids are carried off by Stool; but much of this goes to the Bloud, where it also washes off ill saline Particles; so that (believe me) it is of it self a most compleat and adequate Remedy in such Cases, if taken to 3 or 4 Quarts for 1, 2, or 3 Days. 1. Solid Meats, or Things hard of Digestion, must be avoided, because the Digestion is infirm, but Milks thicken'd with Rice or Flower, Rice Grus, a light Bread or Rice Pudding, Gellies, Marmalet, a Tst out of Claret with Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and some Loaf Sugar, Emulsions, Al∣mond Milk, Cheese-Cakes, Custards, and all sub∣astringent Incrassatives are best, as also in all De∣fluxions. 2. As to Sleeping, and Waking; that's good, and this bad. 3. As to Rest, and Motion; that is convenient, this not.
4. As to Passions, the joyous are convenient, the grievous not▪ 5. As to Air, the dry and temperate is best. 6. As to Excretion and Retention, what is said above is sufficient, saving that Vomits are very often convenient (especially if the Looseness is oc∣casioned by the Stomach) to moderate it before the Opiate is given.
CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Use of the Panacea of Opium, &c. to cause Fluxes or Evacuations, as Perspi∣ration, Sweat, &c. IT (as was shewn) promotes some Fluxes, or Evacuations, by relaxing and opening the Pores. Therefore, 1. It is of excellent Use to carry away noxious Va∣pours, or Effluvia's, by the Pores of the Skin, to prevent Putrefactions, and cure them; to carry off venomous Particles in the Plague, infectious Di∣stempers, Bitings of Serpents, mad Dogs, &c. ill Fumes, Wind in the Bloud, or Habit of the Body, that causes Stitches, Tumors, &c. 2. To carry off noxious Humours the same way▪ especially such as stagnate or offend in the Ha∣bit of the Body; as in Colds, intercutaneous Water, Lecophlegmatia, and sometimes in Dropsies, (as Dr. Willis observes) in Declinations of Diseases, to carry off the concocted morbid Matter in Rheu∣matisms and Gouts, particularly that which is call'd the Wind▪Gout. 3. When Perspiration is any way hindred, as by grievous Passions, Sensations, (or Pain) acid, au∣stere, or cold Humour, by which many Diseases are caused. Thus 'tis very useful in Grief, Sor∣row, Anxieties, Solicitude, Melancholy, Panick Fears, Gachexies, Scurvies, Hypochondriacal Cases, where∣in it performs wonderfully when all things fail, as you find in Chap. 24.
4. To promote the Menses or Lochia, when stopp'd by reason of the constriction of the Pores by such grie∣vous Passions or Sensations, or by acid, austere▪ or cold Humours, external Cold, &c. by its relaxing and opening the Pores and Ways, and soliciting the Parts by a gentle agreeable Titillation: Hence some justly call it ; that is, An Opener of the Mouth of the Veins, (or Bloud-Ves∣sels) by which means (as has been shewn) Puberty, Coition, &c. do kindly and naturally cause the Menses to flow, while the same Relaxation causes an Increase of Bloud, as it does of Milk, by wide∣ning the Vessels. This is all Mechanical Truth, that will answer, upon Experience, as the most Inge∣nious Dr. Edw. Brown can witness, who is the only Man (as far as I know) that seems to have this Practice. 5. It promotes Urine, by the like opening or re∣laxing of the Pores of the Kidneys by its titillating Volatile Salt, as Cantharides, Bees, Pismires, Mille∣pedes, &c. do. 6. It may probably be of great use in cutaneous Di∣stempers, either by taking large Quantities of pro∣per Liquids, and sweating them out again by its help, to wash of ill Particles, or to open the Pores for the admission of external Medicaments. Note, That they are natural Fluxes it promotes, and unnatural ones that it stops; which proves its operating as an entire Friend to Nature both ways. I. The Form may be which you please, or is most agreeable to the Patient. II. The Dose moderate, except it be when ex∣traordinary Relaxation or opening of the Pores is de∣sired. III. The Vehicle should be such as is proper to prepare the Humours to pass by Sweat, or insen∣sible
Perspiration, or the Bloud by the Menses and Lochia; therefore should (generally speaking) con∣sist of attenuating Things, as Volatile Spirits; and in the Plague, venemous and contagious Cases, of Ale∣xipharmacks; of Diureticks to promote Urine; and so in all Cases of what is proper in the respe∣ctive Humours for their Exit or Passage. IV. The Time (because Sleep conduces to open the Pores) may be at the due distance before Bed∣time; but that hinders not but it may be given, when there is occasion, at any other time. In the Plague it should be so often given as to keep the Pores always open. Mayern glves an In∣stance of a Physician that had all Signs of Death, Pe∣techiae, a Carbuncle, &c. who recovered by taking Laudanum 6 times a day, (I suppose 24 Hours, or the natural Day is meant thereby.) V. The Regimen must be such as is proper, con∣venient, and usual in the respective Cases; for 'tis endless to mention all; it requires a Volume. To cause Sweat, much temperate Liquids must be always given, especially in Fevers or dry Bodies, as the Hypochondriacal, &c. Most part of the Li∣quids should be given before the Opiate, that they may have time to get into the Bloud by that time the Opiate operates▪ which does so (as was shewn) while 'tis at Stomach. To move the Menses, proper means should be used for a due time before the Use thereof, because the Effect expected in this Case from Opiates, is only to open the Ways or Pores: So Humours in Leucophlegmatia's, &c. should be duly prepared for the like Reason▪ To cause Perspiration, it is convenient in cold Constitutions, and old People, gently to warm the
Bloud with 2 or 3 Glasses of generous Wine, a little Garlick, Onions, Selery, or the like, to attenuate and cause Evaporation, which Heat promotes; but if you over-heat the Bloud, it hinders Perspiration by its growing grievous; for what is▪ so, causes Con∣traction and closing of the Pores. Note, That nothing can be so good to cause Perspiration or Sweat, because it not only opens the Pores, but takes away any grievous Passion or Sen∣sation that may close them, and atenuates, re∣solves, &c. by its Volatile Salt.
CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Use of the Panacea, &c. as a Ti∣tillative. THis it does (as was shewn) by its Volatile Salt, as Cantharides, Bees, Pismire, Sem. Viril▪ &c. Therefore, 1. It is of great use to excite to Venery, cause Ere∣ctions, to actuate a dull Semen for the sake of law∣ful Propagation. 2. To increase the Semen; 1. By the Titillation of the Venereal Parts, which invites it thither by the Agi∣tation thereof, as Frication of the Breasts, and those Parts, cause Increase of Milk and the Semen. 2. By the Pleasure thereof relaxing the Parts, which causes a greater Flux of it, (as of Milk to the Breasts, and Nourishment to any Part.) It is observable how desirous Rachel, being Bar∣ren, was of the Opiate call'd Mandrake, so that she parted with her Beloved Husband to her Sister Leah for a Night to purchase it: Whether it was any means to cause her to Conceive, which she did afterwards, is not to be determined, tho' it seems not altogether unlikely. 3. Its Use to increase Milk is spoken of in the Chapter of its Use to Relax, only it does it here as Titillating, and there as Relaxing. 4. It conduces to move the Menses by its Titil∣lation.
5. The Titillation of its Volatile Salt, (as Cantha∣rides, &c. do) moves us to Urine. I. The Form is wholly indifferent. II. The Dose must be large, and generally grea∣ter than any I have mentioned, and possibly re∣quires a Repetition thereof to excite to Venery; tho' I shall not prescribe any more than I have in the Table of Doses, but leave it to Iudi∣cious Physicians to do as they think it, where there is a just Cause for its Use, which I will not expose to every lustful Goat. It is not unlikely but one great Cause of the Ignorance of its Use to excite Venery in these We∣stern Parts of the World, may be the smallness of the Doses that we use, besides the Reasons men∣tioned in Chap. 8. and that such Circumstances might occasion the Disputes and Contradictions that have been about the Effect of Opium; whereas there is nothing more sure than that it has such an Effect, (if the Dose be large enough) and that most of the Eastern Nations use it for that end with infallible Effect. III. The Time should be 5 or 6 hours before the Effect is expected, or at Bed-time, to cause its Effects towards the Morning, particularly in the Case of exciting to Venery. IV. The Regimen. As to Diet, it must be Nourishing, Warm∣ing, Comforting, and Titillating, with realish∣ing and high Sauces, Oisters, Anchovy, Caviare, Cockles, Ketchup, Mango's, Garlick, Onions, Leeks, Bears Garlick, Rocket, Sives, Shelot, Ginger, Aro∣maticks, Rots of Satyrion, Feaverfew, Goats-beard, Silver-weed, Skirrets, Parsnips, and Artichoaks.
The Use of Ambergrise, Musk, and Civet, is commended; but good Stomach-Wines, and th like, are certainly of Use; Sine Baccho friget Ve∣nus: But it is certain, That Camphire and sulphureous Things unfermented, as Oils, Rosins, and fat Things, oppose Titillation, as do also slimy, mucilaginous, and cooling Things.
CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Use of the Panacea of Opium, &c. to cause Watching. I Have shewn how Opiates cause Watching in some Persons, by reason of the over-agitating and actuating the Spirits, and Titillating by its Vo∣latile Salt; yet do they, by causing Pleasure and Relaxation, support the Spirits, while the extraordi∣nary Ovation of them hinders Sleep. Therefore it is of Use to such as it causes Watch∣ing to, when 'tis requisite for them to watch about any Business, Labour, Iourneys, &c. I. The Form may be either Solid or Liquid. II. The Dose moderate. III. The Vehicle should be Acids, or other Li∣quids with Volatile Salts. IV. The Time may be at any Hour when wanted. V. The Regimen, quite contrary to that of Sleep and Relaxation, viz. to use voluntary Mo∣tion, &c.
CHAP. XL. Of the Alterative Use of the Panacea of Opium. YOU see the mighty Extent and general Use of the Panacea of Opium as a Pleaser of Sensation, which takes up the Nine last Chapters, to mention the Heads of its Performances without descending in∣to all particulars, because their Number is inde∣finite. How universal then must its Use be, when we add thereto its Effects as a consummate Alterative which, 1. Invigorates Nature by comfoting the sub∣limest Principles thereof, viz. the sensitive Soul and Spirits, that are the Original of all Motion and Action. 2. Furnishes them with an indefatigable Eu∣phory in the great Business of our Preservation. 3. Puts the best Means into the Hands of invigorated Nature for that End, that is, most agreeable Princi∣ples, even more powerful, and of a greater Energy than our own; which must (as agreeable and exalted Menstruums do) resolve all Humours, congregating the good, and homogeneous, and se∣parating the effete and heterogeneous Parts, which it, 4. Discusses and dissipates, by its brisk and active, Volatile Salt, and at last, 5. conveys out of the Body by a liberal Perspiration, the most natural, universal, and copious Way of Evacuation. All which being considered, it is (I think) ma∣nifest, that it must excel all other Panaceas.
1. Because it takes away the Grievance or Form of Diseases upon the very first Administration thereof, whereas other Medicaments do that but gradually as they alter or subdue the Matter. 2. Because it highly comforts Nature (or the sen∣sitive Soul, and Spirits) from the very Commence∣ment of the Cure, and through the whole Process thereof, if duly repeated; which other Medica∣ments do only by insensible Degrees, as they gain upon the Diseases. 3. Because it procures Sleep, the sweet and chief Refreshment of, and first Cure in Nature, so that I cannot see what can be desired in a Medicament that it is not accomplished with; whereas other Panaceas are deficient, or at least come very short of ours in these extraordinary Qualifications, which seem to make it absolutely compleat and consum∣mate. 4. Because it from the very first composes all Per∣turbations and enormous Motions of the sensitive Soul or Spiris; which Helmont attributes to the Archae∣us, placing all Diseases therein, and therefore says Ort. Imag. Mrb. Sect. 12. Universale quoddam ar∣canum consopotivum, & sedativum Archaei est adhi∣bendum, that is, An universal Remedy, that appeases the Archaeus, should be used. And what appeases or composes it more than, or as much as Opiates? There∣fore I cannot wonder that paracelsus should declare that it served his Purpose when all his Arcanas sail'd; or that Helmont should be in a Rapture upon the Ap∣prehension of the Excellency of Opium if the noxi∣ous Quality were separated from it, tho' he had a very wrong Notion of its Operation as appears, Potest. Medicam. Sect. 4. where he says, that Opium Archaeum abigit, & fugat, that is, Opium chases and puts the Archaeus to flight, which on the contrary it highly pleases, and comforts.
It is endless, and a Kind of Impertinence, to de∣scend into Particulars in the Use of a Panacea. Therefore having shown how it operates by ivi∣gorating Nature, causing Euphory, Ease, Sleep, re∣solving all Humours, (as a general Menstruum, or Alkahest) congregating the good, separating, discussing, and carrying off the bad Particles, &c. it remains only, that I show you how to use it, as to Form, Dose, &c. leaving the Administration thereof in particular Cases to Physicians, therein concern'd. I. The Form, that I mainly approve of to alter, is the Liquid, because the solid is in some Measure (tho' not much) impair'd by the Evaporation to the due Consistence, and does not consist of the finest Parts, as the liquid does. II. The Dose may be at first about 20 Drops, ad∣ding a Drop to every Dose, till the Distemper is in good measure abated; then let the same Number of Drops be continued till the Person is well, and afterward abated by a Drop every Day till you come to ten, or less, or to such an inconsiderable Dose, that you can find no Effect at all. Note, That tho' I am cautious in the Dosing till trusty Experience gives more Assurance, yet do I believe that no Inconvenience will be found by far greater Doses, if by any, unless very excessive, as 1 or 2 Gallons of Wine is in respéct of a Pint, which in such Doses may be, and is injurious. Such as have Pain to be taken off, must use it as is directed in the Chapter of its Use to take away Pain, gradually encreasing so as to keep it off, and when the Cure is in great Measure perform'd, must continue and decrease as is aforesaid; the like is to be said as to Fluxes, &c.
III. The Vehicle may be in general plain Water, or rather altered, and made bitter by an Infusion of the Ingredients of the bitter Decoction, or Agrimo∣ny, Wood-sage, Bean Trefoil, or the like good bitter Things, that are known by Experience to cause a good Digestion. In particular Cases the Vehicle may be appropria∣ted to the Disease; yet always so ordering it, that it may be stomachial. IV. The Time should generally be in the Mor∣ning, unless Sleep at Nights is to be procured there∣by; if so, you must order Things as in the Chap∣ter of its Use to cause Sleep. V. The Regimen must be exact Temperance and Moderation in all Things▪ and, 1. As to Diet, let it be appropriated to the Di∣seases, and always of such Things as the Stomach digests without any Difficulty or Disturbance. 2, As to Sleep, it should be moderate, yet so much as fully recruits and refreshes. 3. As to Rest and Motion, the like Moderation must be used; for Motion must not be violent, or over-wasting of the Spirits in any Respect; yet must gentle Motion and Exercise be used; Riding on Horseback (to such as can do it) is a very whol∣som Exercise. 4. As to Excretion and Retension, you should ne∣ver Purge, or Vomit, during its Use, unless there be a very special Cause; and then I would have the Vomit to be only carduated Water, and for Stools, only so much of the Scots Pill, or Stomach Pill, as will serve to open the Body, to be taken at Bed-Time, or at such Time of the Night as to cause no Disturbance before you are up in the Morning; but (generally speaking) causing no Evacuation is best, but what is the Consequence of the Panacea it self, which causes the best, most natural, universal, and considerable Evacuation by the Pores
5. As to the Air the dry, and temperate as to Heat and Cold, but rather inclining to Coldness, is the best; for you cannot so well err on this Hand, because the Pores will be kept open, and Colds prevented in a high manner by the Use of the Panacea, besides that Coolness is most agreeable to Digestion. 6. As to Passions of the Mind, all the grievous ones should be avoided, and a fine even Chearful∣ness maintain'd as mch as may be; it will be ve∣ry easily continued by the Help of the Panacea, which causes it above all Things. 1. Note, That these Directions do generally concern its Use in Chronical Cases; for as to acute Diseases, and particular Gases; it must be left to the Management of the present Physician. 2. Note, That its Use as an Evacuative has been sufficiently treated of in the Chapter of its Use to cause Fluxes and Evacuations. 3. Note. That notwithstanding all I have said of the most excellent Qualifications of the Panacea of Opium, I submit all to farther Experience, at the In∣troduction of which I mainly aim, by endeavou∣ring to take off People's Fears and Iealousies▪ which have ever been the greatest Hinderers of Improvement in Cure, more especially in Refe∣rence to the Use of Opiates, (which without Doubt) will cure many Diseases more than ever they were used for, (at least as Alteratives) which if my Discourse does Occasion, I shall thank and praise the Author of all Good, for making me instrumen∣tal thereto.
CHAP. XLI. Of the External Use of Opium. ITS External Use is (as the Internal) ei∣ther, I. As a Pleaser of Sensation (or an Opiate spe▪cially so call'd▪) or; II. As an Alterative. First, as a Pleaser of Sensation, (or an Opiate, properly and specially so called) it is scarce worth While to treat of it (because of the Uncer∣tainty, Ineffectualness, and sometimes Danger there∣of) unless it be to caution Men concerning it; for my part, I seldom or never used it externally, un∣less it was in Venice-Treacle, Diascordium, or Mi∣hridate, which have but little Quantities thereof; nor can I see why it should be at all used external∣ly as an Opiate, except it be when Opiates cannot be used internally, where they have more even, cer∣tain, and better Effect; or in very ew Cases which will be mentioned: The main therefore that I can do in this Case, is to acquaint you what others have sound by Experience concerning its external Use. 1. It has been found dangerous to apply Opiates to the Sutures of the Head; it has kill'd some, and Galen is against it L. 2. de Comp. Med. I have somewhere read of a Man who, after a certain Contest for Victory, being very hot, took off his Helmet to refresh himself after the Victory he had obtain'd; which Helmet his Emulators smear'd on the inside with Opium: He afterward put it on, and soon died.
2. It is applied more safely to the Forehead or Temples, but the Quantity of half a Scruple should not be exceeded in this Case; Fernelius commends the Application of it to the Forehead in Head-Aches, Phrensies, &c mixed with Ointments; We∣delius did also use Venice Treacle and Extract of Opium to the Temples with good Success in Pain of the Head; he also found the like Success in apply∣ing it behind the Ears. Note, That the Continuance and Constancy of its Operation, where it takes Effect applied exter∣nally, may be very beneficial in some Cases; but even that may be answered by internal Use, if it be repeated. 3. All, or most, do agree that it is too acrimo∣nious to be applied to the Eyes. 4. Geigrus, Fernelius, Heurnius, &c. do com∣mend its Use to smell to, being made into a Ball &c. with odoriferous Things; and I have an Opinion that this Way of using it may be excellent, conditio∣ned, that not above Half a Scruple of Opium be used. 1. Because but a small Quantity, and that of its finest Parts, is thus received into the Body. 2. Because it may be removed at Pleasure, and then, (as some say) the Effect immediately cea∣ses. This is very well worth the experimenting; for it would be very neat to be able to cause Sleep, and its other Effects with Safety, as long, or as short a Time, as we please, and no longer; for this cannot be done, when it▪ is internally given, but its Operation will have its Course, without extraor∣dinary Means and Trouble; but when externally used, the very Cause of the Danger (if any should hppen) can be immediately removed, by ta∣king of the Opiates from the Nose. 5. That of Geigerus, and Langius, using only one  of Opium to the Puncture, or little Wound
made by a Leec behind the Ear to cause Sleep, and that with Effect, seems to me to he attributed more to the Bleeding, which always inclines Men to sleep, than to the Opium. 6. Crude Opium has kill'd People by putting it in hollow Teeth, as some Observers aver. 7. Applied to the Ears, it relaxes, and (as it were) resolves the Tympan and other delicate Membranes concern'd, and thereby offends the Hearing. 9. Galen seems to be against the Application of it to the Nape of the Neck, because so near the Original of the Nerves. Note, That it is not convenient to use it, where Resolution, and Relaxation, may do any Harm, as was said of the Tympan of the Ear, &c. 10. Venice Treacle, Mithridate, and Diascordium, are safely applied externally to the Region of the Stomach, to appease Vomiting and Hiccoughs, mo∣derate Loosenesses, &c. 11. Savanarola and Octavius Horatianus used it to the Navel to cause Sleep; and with Rue, Myrrh, Frankincense, and Wax, to move to Stool; which it perform'd (as the last mentioned Author says.) 12. Sylvius uses it in his carminative Plaister to discuss Wind, which is rational. 13. Some of the Ancients applied it to the Peri∣num, Kidneys, Region of the Pubis, &c. to chill Venus by the cold Quality they attributed to it, which is all Stuff grounded upon that most absurd Hypo∣thesis. 14. They also attributed its Psilothrick Quality to Cold; than which nothing does more fasten, and cause the Hair to grow; as you see in Winter-Time, when all Furrs are longer, and fastned bet∣ter to the Skin. Into what Fooleries a false Opinion will lead People.
15. It has been used by Hieron Mercurialis in Ul∣cers of the Womb with Success, and without danger, as he says, L. 4. de Morb. Mul. c. 7. p. 281. 16. It has kill'd People in Clysters by sicking to the Intestinum rectum, which was doubtless by Reason of its Rosin, for it has nothing in it besides the Rosin that can stick to do any manner of Harm; which is a most demonstrative Reason of the Perniciousness of its Rosin, for if it can ill there, much more where there is such exquisite Sensation, as is at Stomach. However, 'tis known by Experience that Venice Treacle and Diascordium are, because of the Dis∣semination of the Opium, and smallness of the Quantity, safe in Clysters, and very useful in Dy∣senteries and Diarrhaeas, as our Panacea must be, that has no Rosin in it, and dissolvable in Water, or any Humours of the Body. 17. It may be used in Suppositories when the Rosin is separated from it, but I would not advise the Use of above 4 Grains in this Case; or if 8 or ten be used, the Suppository should not remain long in the Body. This I say for Caution's sake. 18. It has been used reduced to an Oointment or Balsam with Oil of Roses, &c. to the Soals of the eet, to cause Sleep, with good Success.  Polidamus, L. de Doloribus Capitis. p. 78. 19. D. Francisc. Hildeshem asserts, that it takes away Pain in Cauteries, ut says it is apt to cause Grangrens. 20. Crollius in his Basil. Chym. p. 235. says▪ That 2 Pills of Opium, each containing 8 Grains, being put up into the Nostril, stopt a desperate Haemor∣rhage at Nose; but I should hardly rust it in this Case. Possibly the Bloud might stop by some other Cause, a small Deliquium not observed, or the like; for Deliquiums still all Motion by a sud∣den Relaxation which (as has been said) suspends
all Humours, and weakens the Motion of the Heart, (if it does not sometimes quite take it off) for the Time. Secondly, as an Alterative Emplostick, &c▪ it (as was shown) incides, resolves, discusses, molleies, ma∣turates, suppurates, and is psilothrick and titilative▪ Therefore is of Use, 1. In Phlegmatick and Oedematous Tumours. 2 In windy Tumours, Pains, Stitches, &c. 3. To ripen Boils, Buboes, Abscesses, and the like. 4. In all hard Tumours of the Spleen, Breasts, Can∣cers, Tophousness, &c. in which Cases it is (as other Opiates are) of excellent Use, by their powerful resolving and relaxing Faculties. 5. To cause Nourishment of Parts, Increase of Milk, &c. by Relaxation; as Sleep, Puberty, Plea∣sure, &c. do (as has been shown.) 6. To cause the shedding of Hair by Resolution of the Parts, as by a Caustick, Vesicatory, &c. with which it agrees in its exucerating Faculty, when it is very strong, as the true Maslach (or ▪) which we have not. 7. To excite to Venery by its titillating Volatil Sal, if apply'd to the Perinaeum. YE blessed Minds! who in an instant know What in five Thousand Years none here below Could learn! How mean are we? how great are you? O, for your happy State! while dull Mankind Oft▪ see and fel the Things they cannot find▪
Who did not see the Bloud move to and fro? Yet could none its Circulation know, Till God enlighten'd Harvey; then did he Perceive what others seeing could not see. So till God was to my Enquiries kind, Millions sought and felt what they ne're could find. What is vain Man, without th' all knowing Mind? To whom all Glory be, all Thanks, and Prais, As was, is now, and fit to be always. Amen. Amen. Amen. FINIS.
