L2263 99828442 32869
LILY, Improved, Corrected, and Explained; WITH THE Etymological Part OF THE Common Accidence. By W. T. Master of a Boarding-School at Fulham, near London, for above Two and Twenty Years. Tota domus nititur fundamento. Sic in Grammaticae fundamenta fideliter jeceris, quicquid superstruxe∣ris, facilè corruet: Sed multarum lues est Scho∣larum quòd Latinarum vocum Declinationes & Conjugationes vel omnino negligant vel festinantius & percurrant. Carpere sed noli nostra, sed ede tua. Quis gremio Enceladi docti{que} Palaemonis adfert Quantum Grammaticus meruit labor? ——res nulla minoris Constabit patri quam filius. ———sed culpa docentis Scilicet arguitur si in laevâ parte mamillae Nil salit Arcadico juveni. Juven. LONDON: Printed for B. Bentley, in Russel∣street, in Covent-garden. MDCXCVI.
Honoratissimis ac Dilectissimis Suis Discipulis optimae spei & indolis juvenibus, Dno. Georgio Treby, Dni. Georgii Trebi, Equitis Aurati Communis Banci Pri∣marii Justitiarii unico Filio; Dno. Thomae Powis, Dni. Thomae Powis, Equitis Aurati maximo natu Filio: Ceteris{que} ex suis Charissimis Dis∣cipulis gratitudinis & amoris ergo haec Collectanea & opusculum, qualia qualia sint; Dicat, Dedicat Consecratque, W. T.
THE INTRODUCTION OF The Eight Parts of Latin Speech, and a perfect succinct Explanation of the Royal and Authoriz'd, commonly call'd Lilly's Grammar, with several Amend∣ments, Supplements, and Animadversions. I. THE Eight Parts of Speech, with their Accidents, explained and examined out of the Common Accidence, with a supply of many Defects, and an Addition and Resolution of many things necessary for Youth to know. II. The Four Parts of Grammar discuss'd by Questions and Answers, the first being Or∣thographia, or rather Orthoepeia, careful∣ly to be observ'd by those that learn the La∣tin and English Tongue, with an account of the Points or Pauses which are to be minded in Writing and Reading. The Second Part being Etymologia, (to which all Words or Parts of Speech belong) under which Propria quae Maribus, Quae genus, and As in Pre∣senti are fully examin'd, the Defects sup∣plied with many Additions, and the Mistakes amended. The Third Part of Grammar, be∣ing
Syntaxis, is epitomiz'd and made shorter by two Thirds, with very small Alterations to the same Rules, and yet many things added; to which is subjoin'd an Examination thereof by Questions and Answers, with a short account of the Figures of Grammar, and with some hints to a School-Boy how he should be examin'd his Lesson in Latin. And last of all, the Fourth Part of Grammar, viz. Prosodia, is fully explain'd after the same manner, with a supply of many Defects. The whole comprising wha∣ever Brinsley, Dugard, Hool, Leech, or Walker, in his tedious Explanations and Quo∣tations, &c. have attempted upon Grammar after this manner of Questions and Answers, which certainly (as it is asserted by the greatest Judgments and Men of Learning) must be the best Method of instructing Youth in all sort of Knowledge. What is contain'd under different Characters, may be omitted by Tyrocinians, till they come to be something more knowing. III. Observations concerning the Govern∣ment of Words by Signs. IV. Rules to turn Latin into English, or English into Latin; with Directions to place Latin Words: Lastly, short Instructions to Tyrocinians, for composing of Themes, Verses, Epistles, Orations and Declamations.
THE Eight Parts of Speech Examin'd out of the Common Accidence BY Questions and Answers. Q. WHAT is the Accidence, and why is it so called? A. It is a Book that teacheth the first Grounds of the Latin Tongue, so called because it chiefly teaches the Accidents (i. e.) the things belonging to the Eight Parts of Speech. Q. Into how many Parts is the Accidence divided? A. Into two; first, an Introduction of the Eight Parts of the Latin Tongue or Speech; secondly, the Costruction or joyning together of the Right Parts of Speech. Q. What do you mean by Construction? A. A framing or setting together of the Eight Parts of Speech to make a Discourse, the examination of which part we omit in the common Accidence, because it is exa∣min'd fully in the Latin Syntaxis. Q. How many Parts, or how many sorts of Words are there in the Latin Tongue or Speech? A. Eight, and no more or less, viz. a Noun, a Pro∣noun, a Verb, a Participle, an Adverb, Conjunction,
Preposition, Interjection; for, every word whereof Speech is made is one of these Eight Parts, tho' there be many thousand words, yet each of them is one of these. Q. What things belong to all the Eight Parts of Speech? A. Species and Figura, (i. e.) Form and Figure. For any of the Parts of Speech may be first Primitive or Derivative; secondly, Simple or Compound. Q. How are these Eight Parts of Speech divided? A. They are divided into Declined and Unde∣clined. Q. How many are declined? A. The four first, viz. a Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Par∣ticiple. Q. How many are undeclined? A. The four last, viz. an Adverb, Conjunction, Pre∣position, and Interjection. Q. Why are the four first declined, and the four last undeclined? A. Because the first four may change their ending or termination into divers other endings; as, ma∣gister, magstri; ego, mei; amo, amas; amatus, ama∣ta, amatum. The four last never change their ending; as, Cras, at que, ad, heus. Q. How many of the Parts of Speech are declined with case, and how many without case? A. Three with case, Noun, Pronoun, Participle, and one without case, viz. a Verb. Q. Are there not many Nouns and Verbs undecli∣ned? A. There are, but it is in regard of Use that they are not declined, not in regard of the Nature of Words. Q. What is Speech, of which you tell me there are eight parts? A. Speech is properly the uttering or declaring of our Minds by Words. Q. Which and what is the first part of Speech?
A. It is a Noun, which signifies the name of any thing that may be seen, fl, heard, or understood, as the name of my Hand in Latin is manus, &c. Q. Is a Hand a Noun? A. A Hand itself is not a Noun, but the word signify∣ing a Hand is a Noun. Q. How comes nihil to be a Noun when it signifies nothing? A. Tho' nihil signifies nothing, yet it is a Noun, be∣cause it is not meant properly nothing, but a thing of no value, having the name of hilum, the black in the top of a Bean; as, nihil or nihium, not so much as the black in a Bean. In Grammar therefore we are to consider Words, not Things. Q. How many sorts of Nouns are there? A. Two, a Noun Substantive and a Noun Adje∣ctive. Q. What is a Noun Substantive? A. It is a Noun that standeth by it self, and requi∣reth not another word to be joined with it to shew its signification; and it may have the Signs A or The before it, and cannot have the word Man, or Thing, af∣ter it, as an Adjective hath. Q. With how many Articles is a Noun Substantive declin'd? A. With one Article; as, hic magister a Master; or with two at the most, as, hic & haec Parens a Father or Mother. Q. How many fold is a Noun Substantive, according to its signification? A. It is two-fold, either Proper, which is the pro∣per name of a thing, as, Edvardus; or Common, which is common to all of the same kind, as homo is a common Name to all Men. Q. What is a Noun Adjective? A. A Noun Adjective is that cannot stand by it self in Reason or Signification, but requires to be join'd with another word, as Man or Thing; as, bonus good, felix happy.
Q. How many fold is a Noun Adjective from its man∣ner of signifying? A. It is two-fold, Proper, signifying an Affection peculiar to one, as Gradivus to Mars, Quirinus to Romulus; and Common, which signifies an Affection common to many, as bonus, malus, solers, satur. Q. How many-fold is an Adjective, according to its declining? A. It is two-fold, for it is declined either with three terminations, like bonus, or with three Articles, like felix and tristis. Q. How many things belong to a Noun? A. Seven in all, Number, Case, Gender, Declen∣sion, Comparison, Form, and Figure; but Compari∣son properly belongs to a Noun Adjective, and Form and Figure to all the Parts of Speech. Q. Why doth not Comparison belong to a Noun Sub∣stantive? A. Because the signification of it cannot be encreased or diminished. Q. What is Number, being the first Accident belong∣ing to a Noun? A. Number is a separation or distinction of One from Many. Q. How many Numbers are there? A. Two; the Singular, that speaks but of one, as lapis a Stone; and the Plural, that speaks of more than one, as lapides Stones. Q. Do all Nouns of the Singular Number speak but of One? A. All Nouns speak but of One in the Singular Num∣ber, except the Nouns Collectives, such as populus, grex, turba, &c. which signifie many, or a multitude in the sin∣gular Number; as, on the contrary, there are Nouns of the Plural Number that signifie but one thing, as Nuptiae, Gabii, Thebae, Athenae, &c. Q. Doth Number only belong to a Noun? A. No, but it belongs to all the declined Parts of Speech.
Q. What is Case, the next Accident of a Noun? A. It is the diverse ending of a Noun, Pronoun, or Par∣ticiple, in the declining of them. Q. How many Cases are there? A. Six; the Nominative, the Genitive, the Dative, the Accusative, the Vocative, and the Ablative. Q. How may the Cases be known one from the other? A. Thus; the Nominative and Accusative by their Places, the other by their Signs. Q. Which is the place of the Nominative? A. Thus; the Nominative is placed before the Verb in due order of Speech, and Answers to the Que∣stion Who or What; as, magister docet, the Master teacheth; and it is known by the Signs A or The. Q. Why is it call'd the Nominative? A. Because we give Names to all things in this Case from nomino. Q. How know you the Genitive Case? A. The Genitive is known by these Signs, Off or 'S, answering to the Question Whose or Whereof; as, Do∣ctrina magistri, the Learning of the Master; and it is a Case governed. Q. Why is it called the Genitive Case? A. From gigno, because it begets or produces all the following Cases; for when I know the Genitive Case of any word, I may easily know all the following Cases of that Declension. Q. How know you the Dative Case? A. By the Sign To, and sometimes by the Sign For, and it answers to the Question To whom, or To what; as, Do librum magistro, I give a Book to the Master; and it is likewise a Case govern'd. Q. Why is it called the Dative Case? A. From Do, to give; for if I speak, Deliver or Give to one any thing, I use this Case. Q. How know you the Accusative Case? A. The Accusative followeth the Verb, and answereth to the Question Whom or What; as, amo
magistrum, I love the Master; and it hath the same Signs as the Nominative, viz. A or The, which are common Signs to all the Cases, but more proper to the Nominative and Accusative. Q. Why is it called the Accusative Case? A. From the Verb or Law-term Accuso, for this is the Case by which Judges do use to pronounce their Sen∣tence. Q. How know you the Vocative Case? and, why is it called so? A. The Vocative Case is known by calling or speak∣ing to; as, O magister, O Master, and it is so called from the Verb Voco, to call or speak to any body. Q. How know you the Ablative Case? and, why is it called so? A. The Ablative Case is known either by Preposi∣tions serving to it, or else by these Signs, In, with, through, for, from, by, and then, after the comparative degree. And it is called the Ablative Case from au∣fero to take away. Q. How are the Signs of the Cases delivered in short? A. Thus; A, The, Of or 'S; To, and sometimes For; A, The, O: From, &c. Q. What Case is that which is called Octavus Casus? A. It is the Dative put instead of an Accusative with a Preposition; as, it lamor coelo for ad coelum. Q. What Case, or where then is the Seventh Case? A. The Seventh is the Ablative, uttered or used with∣out a Preposition, as some will have it: tho' indeed there are but six Cases, according to the Declension to which every word belongs: so that the Septimus and Octavus Casus are Cases by Licentiâ Poeticâ. Q. What Case is that which is called the Rectus Casus? A. It is the Nominative and Vocative that's like to it, the other Cases being called oblique Cases. Q. Why is the Ablative called Latinus Casus? A. Because it is prper to the Latines, for the Greeks have no Ablative.
Q. What follows next after the Cases in the Acci∣dence? A. Articles, which are marks to know the Genders by in declining. Q. How many Articles are there, and whence are they borrowed? A. There are three, viz. Hic, haec, hc; and they are borrowed of the Pronouns. Q. What do hic, haec, hoc signifie? A. When hic, haec, hoc is a Pronoun it signifies this; but when it is dclined with a Noun it signifies nothing, only it points out the Gender. Q. How do you decline Articles together and seve∣rally with a Noun? A. Thus:   Singul. Plur.   M. F. N. M. F. N. Nom. Hic, haec, hoc. Hi, hae, haec. Gen. Hujus, hujus, hujus. Hrum, harum, horum. Dat. Huic, huic, huic. His, his, his. Acc. Hunc, hanc, hoc. Hs, has, hae. Voc. O, O, O. O, O, O. Abl. Hoc, hac, hc. His, his, his. Q. Why are they set before the Genders and Declen∣sions? A. Because they serv to note out the Genders, and al∣so decline Nouns in every Gender. Q. What is a Gender? A. It is the difference of Sex by Nature, as they are Male and Female; but by Institution and Art Words may be of the Male and Female Gender, and yet have no rela∣tion to Sex; as Musa, or Lapis, &c. Q. How many Genders are there? A. We reckon Seven, tho' there are properly but Three, Masculine, Feminine, and Neuter; the other four, viz. the Common of two, the Common of three▪ the Doubtful, and the Epicene, are compounded of all or some of those three.
Q. Which is the Article of the M. G. and what doth it belong to? A. It is hic, and it belongs to Males or Hees, and such words as are used under the Names of Hees, ei∣ther by Art or Institution. Q. What is the Article of the F. G. and what doth it belong to? A. It is haec, and it belongs to Females or Shees, or things going under the name of Shees. Q. Which is the Article of the N. G. and what doth it belong to? A. It is hoc, and it belongs to words which signi∣fie aeither He or She. Q. What Articles hath the Common of two, and what belongs it to? A. It hath hic and haec, and it belongs properly to words signifying both Male and Female, that is, both He and She. Q. What Articles hath the Common of three, and what doth it belong to? A. It hath hic, haec, and hoc, and it belongs only to Nouns Adjectives. Q. What Article hath the Doubtful Gender, and what belongs it to? A. It hath hic or haec, which of them you please, and it belongs to Creatures in which the kind is unknown, whether they be he or she; as, a Snail, a Snake, also to lifeless things; as, a Day, a Channel, &c. Q. What Article hath the Epicene Gender? A. It hath only one Article, but under that Arti∣cle both kinds, that is, both He and She are signified; as hic Passer, the Cock or Hen Sparrow; haec Aquila, the He or She Eagle. Q. How may the Genders of Nouns be known? A. Either by their signification, termination, or more especially by the Rules to know the Genders of Nouns in Propria quae maribus. Q. Which is the fourth Accident belonging to a Noun?
A. It is Declension, which is the varying of the first ending of a word into diverse other endings called Cases. Q. How many Declensions of Nouns are there? A. There are five Declensions of Nouns. Q. What Terminations hath the first Declension, what's the Example, and whence proceeds it? A. The first hath but one Latin Termination in A, the Example is Musa; but it hath three Greek Ter∣minations in As, Es, and E; as, Thomas, Anchises, Phaebe, and it proceeds from the first Declension of the Greeks. Q. What Terminations hath the second Declensi∣on, what are the Examples, and whence proceeds it? A. It hath five proper to the Latines, Er, ir, ur, us, um; as, Aper, vir, satur, Dominus, Templum; and three of the Greeks in os, on, eus; as, Delos, Ilim, Orpheus: the Examples of it are Magister and Regman, and it comes from the third Declension of the Greeks. Q. What Terminations hath the third Declension, what are the Examples, and whence comes it? A. It hath all Terminations besides Ʋm and Ʋ; the Examples are lapis and parens, and it comes from the fifth of the Greeks. Q. What Terminations hath the fourth Declensi∣on, which are the Examples of it, and whence pro∣ceeds it? A. It hath two, Ʋs and Ʋ, and the Examples are Manus and Genu; but those that end in U are' , or invariable in the Singular Number, and in the Plural they are commonly declined after the third Declension, to which third Declension may be reduc'd the fourth and fifth. Q. What is the Example, and how many Termina∣tions hath the fifth Declension? A. It hath only one Termination in es; the Exam∣ple is meridies. Q. What Exceptions are there belonging to the first Declension?
A. Filia and Nata, which make the Dative and Ablative Cases plural in is or in abus, and anima, Dea, Mula, Equa, Famula, Liberta, which make the Dative and Ablative Cises plural in abus only. Q. What Exceptions are there under the second Declension? A. The first is of Nouns that end in Ʋs, which make the Vocative in E; as, Nominativo hic Dominus, Vecativo O Domine: 2. Proper Names of Men that end in ius, make their Vocative to end in i; as, Nom. Hic Gegius, Voc. O Georgi: 3. These Common Names, viz. Agnus, Lucus, vulgus, populus, chorus, sluvius, which make their Vocative in E or in Ʋs. Q. What say you of Nouns of the Neuter Gender of the second declension? A. They have three Cases alike, viz. the Nomina∣tive, Accusaive, and Vocative, which three Cases do end in the plural Number, always in (a), except Am∣b and Duo, that make the Neuter Gender in (o). Q. How is Duo declin'd? A. Like Ambo, thus: Plu. Duo, duae, duo, &c. Q. But how are the Declensions distinguish'd, and how may it be known of what Declension a Noun is of, besides by these Termiatins of the Declensions? for hardly any of these Terminations are peculiar to any Declension; for ma∣ny words that end in A, As, Es, E, are of the third, as well as of the first Declension; and so words that end in Us may be of the second, third, or fourth Declension, &c? A. The Declensions are distinguish'd by the termination and ending of the Genitive Case singular of each Declen∣sion, which Genitive Case shews what Declension every Noun is of. Q. How then doth the Genitive Case of each De∣clension end, and how do all the rest of the Cases end that proceed from those Genitives? A. They end thus, according to the following Ta∣ble.
  Singular.         Plural.         Gen. Dat. Acc. Vocat. Ab N Gen. Dat. Ac Abl Declensions 1 ae ae am Like the Nominative every where, except in the 2d Declension. a ae arum is as is 2 i o um o i orum is os is       em e   um       3 is i &   es   ibus es ibus       im i   ium       4 us ui um u us uum ibus us ibus 5 ei ei em e es erum ebus es ebus Q. Of what Gender are all Nouns of the fifth De∣clension? A. They are of the Feminine, except meridies, of the M. G. and Dies, of the D. G. in the singular, and of the M. G. only in the plural. Q. How many Declensions may Adjectives be said to have? A. Three. Q. Which is the first? A. The first is of Adjectives in us, er, ur, with three terminations or endings; the first ending or termina∣tion being of the M. G. as, Bonus, pulcher, satur; the second being of the F. G. as, Bona, pulchra, satura; the third ending being of the N. G. as, Bonum, pul∣chrum, saturum. Q. Which is the second Declension of Adjectives? A. The second is of Adjectives ending in X or ns, and all others having one ending in the Nom. Case, which are of all the three Genders; as, hic, haec, & hoc audax, -acis: hic, haec, & hoc vetus, eris, &c. Q Which is the third Declension of Adjectives? A. It is of Adjectives that end in is, or the positive, and of those that end in or, of the comparative de∣gree with two endings, the first ending being of the M. and F. G. the second ending being of the N. G.
as, hic & haec Tristis & hoc Triste; hic & haec durior & hoc durius, &c. Q. How is a Noun Adjective of three terminations declined? A. After the first and second declension of Sub∣stantives; as, Bonas after Dominus, Bona after Musa, Bonum after Regnum Q. What Adjectives are there besides of three ter∣minations that are otherwise declin'd? A. These, with their Compounds, unus, totus, solus, ullus, alius, alter, uter, newer, which make the Genitive Case in ius, and the Dative in i. Q. Can unus, signifying but one, have the Plural Number? A. Ʋnus never hath the Plural Number, but when it is joined with a word that lacketh the Singular Number; as, unae, literae, una maenia, where literae sig∣nisying an Epistle or Letter, cannot be of the Singular Number, nor Maenia. Q. What Case do ullus, alius, alter, uter, and neuter lack or want; and how are they declined? A. They want the Vocative, and are declined in all other cases like unus. Q. How are Adjectives of one ending, and Partici∣ples of the Present tense declined? A. They are declined after the third Declension of Substantives, like felix. Q. How are Adjectives of two endings declined? A. They are likewise declined after the third de∣clension of Substantives, like tristls. Q. What is the next Accident of a Noun after Declen∣sion? A. It is Comparison. Q. What is Comparison? A. It is the altering the signification of a word into more or less by degrees. Q. Des Comparison belong to all Nouns? A. No, it belongs properly to Adjectives, tho' Substan∣tives are compared , only by abuse, not pro∣perly;
a also some Pronouns: but Adverbs coming of Adjectives, may be compared, and Participles, when they are changed into Nouns Adjectives, and some Prepositions when changed into Adverbs. Q. May all Adverbs be compared? A. No, none but whose Signification may be increased or diminished. Q. What is it to have the Signification increased or di∣minished? A. It is to be made more or less; a, hard, harder, hardest: and so back again; as, hardest, harder, hard. Q. What mean you by a Degree of Comparison? A. I mean, that every word that alters its signification by more or less, is a Degree. Q. How many Degrees of Comparison are there? A. Three, the Positive, Comparative, and Superla∣tive. Q. What is the Positive Degree? A. It is a Degree that signifies a thing absolutely without Excess (that is, without more or less, or with∣out having respect to any other word); as, Durus hard, without being compared. Q. What is the Comparative Degree? A. It is a Degree which somewhat exceeds his Po∣sitive in Signification, (i. e.) when the signification of the Positive is somewhat encreased or made more. Q. What is the Sign of the Comparative Degree? A. The Syllable (more) being set before, or the Sylla∣ble (er) being added to it; as, more bard, or harder. Q. Of what is the Comparative Degree formed? A. Of the first Case of its Positive that endeth in I, by putting to it (or) for the M. and F. G. and (us) for the N. G. Q. What is the Superlative Degree? A. It is a Degree that exceeds is Positive in the highest, in signifying, so that one thing being compa∣red with many, is said to be most of all this thing or that thing. Q. Whence is it formed, and what is the Sign thereof?
A. It is formed of the first Case of its Positive that endeth in I, by putting to it the Letter S, and Simus; as, Duri Durissimus, the Sign of it is (most) put before its English; as, most hard: or (est) added to its English; as, hardest. Q. How do you compare the said three Degrees of Com∣parison? A. By declining altogether in eah Cafe and Gender; as, Nom. Durius, durior, durissimus; dura, durior, du∣rissima; durum, durius, durissimum: Gen. Duri, du∣rioris, durissimi: Dat. Duro, duriori, durissimo, &c. Q. How many Exceptions are there from these re∣gular and general Rules of Comparison? A. There are four, which make an irregular Com∣parison. Q. Which is the first irregular Comparison or Ex∣ception? A. It is of these five Nouns, Bonus, melior, optimus; Majus, pejor, pessimus; Magnus, major, maximus; arvus, minor, minimus; Multus plurimus, multa plurima, mul∣tum plus plurimum; with many more in the Latin Grammar. Q. Which is the second irregular Comparison or Exception? A. It is of Positives that end in (r) which form their Superlatives of the Nominative Case, by putting to it rimus; as, Pulcher, pulcherrimus; Niger, nigerri∣mu, &c. except Dexter, dexterrimus; maturus, maturi∣mus, or maturissimus. Q. Which is the third irregular Comparison or Exception? A. It is of these six Nouns ending in lis, which make the Superlative by changing lis into limus; as, Humilis, humillimus; Similis, simillimus; Facilis, fa∣cllimus; Gracilis, gracillimus; Docilis, docillimus; agi∣lis, agillimus. Q. How do all other Nouns in () form their Su∣perlative Degree? A. They follow the general and regular Rule of Comparison.
Q. Which is the fourth irregular Comparison or Exception? A. It is of Adjectives having a Vowel before Ʋs, which then are compared by the two Advebs, magis before the Comparative, and maximè before the Su∣perlative; as, Pius, magis pius, maximè pius; assiduus, magis assiduus, maximè assiduus. Q. Why are not Adjectives compared when a Vowel comes before Us? A. Because the Cmparative ought to exceed the Posi∣tive by a Syllable; as, doctus, doctior; which cannot be in those Adjectives that have a Vowel before Us; fr I, between two Vowels becomes a Consonant: Or if it re∣main a Vowel, whereby it may exceed the Positive, from that cocourse of Vowels would arise a Cacophaton or un∣pleasant sound. Q. What is the second Part of Speech, viz. a Pro∣noun? A. It is a Part of Speech much like to a Noun, or put instead of a Noun; and therefore called a Pro∣noun; but not having the Sign A or The before it. Q. How many manner of ways is a Pronoun us'd? A. Two manner of ways, in shewing or rehear∣sing. Q. How doth it dffer from a Noun? A. Thus: a Pronoun first hath reference to a Noun, and after that signifies the thing; but a Noun signifies the thing immediately. Q. Why was a Pronoun invented? A. That it might be join'd to the first and second Person of a Verb, which a Noun wants. Q. How many Pronouns are there? A. There are fisteen, Ego, tu, sui, ille, ipse, iste, hic, is, meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, nostras, vestras. Q. What Case do Pronouns want? A. They all want the Vocative Case, except tu, meus, noster, and nostras, and sui wants the Nom. and Vocative. Q. What Pronouns may be added to the fifteen?
A. , tute, idem, and also qui, quae, quod. Q. How many fold is a Pronoun? A. Two-fold, either Substantive or Adjective. Q. How many Pronoun Substantives are there? A. Three, Ego, tu, sui, with their Compounds. Q. How many Pronoun Adjectives? A. Twelve; Ille, ipse, iste, hic, is, meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, nostras, vestras, and qui, that's added to them. Q. How are Pronouns divided according to their Species? A. They are divided into Primitives and Derivatives. Q. How many Pronoun-Primitives are there? A. Eight; Eg, tu, sui, ille, ipse, iste, hic and is. Q. Why are they called Primitives, and what are they called besides? A. They are called Primitives from Prima first and chiefest, and therefore they cannot be derived of others; they are called also Demonstratives, because they commonly shew a thing not spoken of before. Q. How many of thse Primitives may also be called Relatives? A. Four, Hic, ille, iste, and is. Q. How many Pronoun Relatives are there? A. Six, Hic, iile, iste, is, idem, and qui, which is the most special Relative. Q. But how can hic, ille, iste, and is be Demonstratives and Relatives too? A. Because they serve both to shew and rehearse. Q. How many Pronoun Derivatives are there, and why are they so called? A. There are Seven; meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, nstras, vestras; so called, because they are derived of mei, tui, sui, nostri, and vestri, being the Genitive Cases singular or plural of ego, u, sui; for of mei and nostri, the genitive, singular and plural of ego, comes meus, noster, and nostras; of tui and vesti the gen. . and plur. of tu, comes tuus, vester, and ve∣stras, and of sui comes suus.
Q. How many sorts of Derivatives are there? A. Two, Possessives; as, meus, tuus, suus, noster, and vester, and Gentiles, as, nostras, vestras. Q. But what say you of the number of Pronouns, viz. Fifteen, for there are Eight Primitives, Six Relatives, and Seven Derivatives, which make them to be Twenty One, and withal quis, uter, qualis, and many others are accounted Pronouns by good Grammaians, for they may signifie instead of a Noun? A. As for the number Twenty One. I have shewed al∣ready that some of the Pronouns were both Primitives and Relatives: as for other words that are reckn'd Pronouns by some Grammarians, they signifie no certain or determi∣nate thing, as the fifteen Pronouns do, and therefore they are not Pronouns, but Nouns Adjectives. Q. How many things belong to a Pronoun? A. Five, according to the Accidence, Number, Case, and Gender, (which belong also to a Noun) Declen∣sion and Person, which it hath of its own; it hath also the Accidents common to all the Parts of Speech, zz. Form and Figure. Q. How may one know the Gendr in Pronoun Substan∣tives? A. Thus: Pronoun Substantives are of the same Gender with the thing whereof they are properly spoken. The Gen∣der of Pronouns-Adjectives is known like as in Nouns-Ad∣jectives. Q. How many Declensions of Pronouns are there? A. There are four declensions of Pronouns. Q. How may one know of what declension a Pro∣noun is? A. By the ending of the Genitive Case singular, like as in Nouns. Q. How doth the Genitive Case singular of each of the declensions end? A. They end thus:
The First Second Third Fourth   i is i ae i atis   jus Q. What Pronouns be of the first Declension? A. These three, ego, tu, sui, declined as in the Book, &c. Q. What Pronouns be of the second Declension? A. These six, ille, ipse, iste, which three make the Genitive Case in ius, like unus; and hic, is, and qui, which make the Genitive in jus. Q. How is iste declined? A. Thus▪ Sing. Iste, ista, istud; as in the Book, &c. Q. How are ille and ipse declined? A. Like iste, saving that ipse maketh ipsum in the N. G. of the Nom. and Acc. Case singular, and not ipsud. Q. How is hic declined? A. Thus: Sing. Nom. Hic, haec hc, Gen. Hujus, Dat. Hc, &c. Q. How are is and qui declined? A. Thus, as in the Book: Sing Nom. Is, ea, id, &c. Qui, quae, quod, &c. Q. Why do they say Quî in the Ablative Case? A.  Qui in the Ablative Case is of all Genders, and may be put for Quo, quà, or quo. Q. How are quis and quid declined? A. Like qui. Q. How is Quisquis declined? A. Thus: Sing. Nom. Quisquis Acc. Quicquid Abl. Quoqu,   Quaqu, Quiqui Ququo.
Q. What is the difference between Quid and Quod? A. Quid is always a Substantive of the N. G. Qud requireth for the most part a Substantive or an Ante∣cedent. Q. Which Pronouns are of the third Declension? A. These five Possessives; mes, tus, sus, nster, and vester. Q. How are they declined? A. Like Nouns Adjectives of three terminations, except that meus makes mi in the M. G. of the Vocat. Case singular. Q. How is meus then declined? A. Thus; meus, mea, mn, &c. Q. How are noster, and tuus, suus, vester decli∣ned? A. Like meus, saving that tuus, suus, vester want the Voc. Case. Q. What Pronouns are of the fourth Declension? A. Nostros, vestras, and this Noun cujas. Q. How are they declined? A. They, and many more such, as Londinos, Arpiu, Ravennas, Pelia, are declined thus, and not as the Book directs: Sing. Nom. Hic, haec & h nostas. Gen. Hujus nostratis. Dat.  nostrati. Acc. Hunc & hanc nostratem, & hoc nostras, &c. Q. What are these of the fourth Declension called, and why so called? A. They are called Gentiles, because they properly betoken pertaining to Countries or Nations, to Sects, Sides, or Factions. Q. What Authrity have you contrary to the Bok, that these Adjectives Gentiles in (As) should be of all the three Genders, and nt have the  Gender in (Ate)? A. I have the greatest Authors; as, In quo lexus est ad iter Arpinas: Cicero. Capenas bellum liv. l. 5. & l. 8. Bellum Privernas initum est. Thse Adjectives first of all had their Nminative in (atis), and were decli∣ned like Tristis; but since the Termination Atis hath been
contracted in As, they are of all the three Genders, and they may all of them be declined as Felix. Q. What is the fifth thing belonging to a Pro∣noun? A. It is Person, or any thing which speaketh of it self, or is spoken to, or spoken of. Q. How many Persons hath a Pronoun? A. It hath Three. Q. What is the first Person? A. The first Person speaketh of himself alone; as, Ego, I; or with others, as, Nos, We: and these two are properly all the words of this first Person. Q. What is the second Person? A. It is the Person or Thing spoken to, either alone or with others; as, Tu, Thou; Vos, Ye: and these two are properly also all the words of this second Person. Q. What Case is of the second Person? A. Every Vocative Case. Q. What is the third Person? A. It is the Person or Thing that is spoken of; as, Ille, He; Illi, They: and of this Person are all Nouns, Pronouns and Participles, except the four words of the first and second Person, viz. Ego, Nos, Tu, and Vos. Q. Which are the more worthy Persons? A. The first is more worthy than the second, and the second more worthy than the third. Q. Which is the Third Part of Speech? A. It is a Verb. Q. What is a Verb? A. It is a Part of Speech declined with Mood and Tense, and betokens or signifies doing; as, Amo, I love: or suffering; as, Amor, I am loved: or being; as, Sum, I am. Q. What is the difference between a Noun and a Verb? A. A Noun signifies the Name of a Thing; a Verb sig∣nifies the manner of doing, suffering, or being of that Thing.
Q. How many-fold is a Verb? A. It is two-fold, Personal and Impersonal. Q. What is a Verb Personal? A. A Verb Personal is that which is declined with three Persons in both Numbers, and such as hath a Nom. Case. Q. What is a Verb Impersonal? A. A Verb Impersonal, according to the Book, is that which hath no Persons, or rather it is a Verb which is declined in the third Person singular only, and hath no Nom. Case. Q. How many kinds of Verbs Personals are there? A. Five, according to the Book, Active, Passive, Neuter, Deponent, and Common, which is now grown out of use. Q. How do these five sorts of Verbs differ one from another? A. They differ three ways; 1. In Termination, for some end in O, as, Actives and Neuters; some in Or, as Passives, Deponents, and Commons, and a few Neuters ending in M▪ as sum, forem, inquam, possum. 2. They differ in signification. 3. In declining or forming. Q. How is a Verb Active known? A. By its ending in O, and betokening or signifying to do; as, Amo, I love. Q. What may a Verb Active be made? A. It may be made a Verb Passive, by putting to it r; as, Amo, Amor. Q. How is a Verb Passive known? A. A Verb Passive endeth in (or) and betokeneth or signifieth to suffer; as Amor, I am loved. Q. What may a Verb Passive be made? A. It may be made an Active, by putting away r; a, Amor, Amo. Q. How doth a Verb Neuter end? A. In O or M; as, Curro, I run; Sum, I am. Q. Cannot a Verb Neuter, seeing it ends in (O) as well as a Verb Active, take (R) to make it a Passive?
A. No; for tho' I say, Curro, I run, yet I cannot say, Curror, I am run. Q. How doth a Verb Neuter signifie? A. It signifies sometimes actively; that is, like a Verb Active; as, Curro, I run, and sometimes pas∣sively, or like a Verb Passive; as, Aegroto, I am sick; and sometimes it signifies being, as, Sum, I am. Q. How doth a Verb Deponent end? A. It ends in (R) like a Passive. Q. How doth it signifie? A. It signifies either like a Verb Active, as, Loquor Verbum, I speak a word; or like a Verb Neuter, sig∣nifying actively; as, Glorior, I boast. Q. How is a Verb Deponent declined? A. Like a Verb Passive, but with Gerunds and Su∣pines, especially the first Supine, and with Active Participles. Q. How doth a Verb Common end, which you say is out of use? A. It ends in (R) like a Verb Passive. Q. How doth it signifie? A. It signifies both as a Verb Active, and as a Verb Passive, and therefore it is called a Verb Common; as Osculor, I kiss or am kissed. Q. May I take away (R) from a Verb Deponent or Common, whereby they may be made Actives, for they both end like a Verb Passive, and the one of them (viz.) a Verb Common, signifies also like a Verb Passive? A. No, you cannot take away (R), for Loquor cannot be made Loquo, nor Osculor Osculo. Q. Some Verbs are said to be Transitive, others Intran∣sitive, how may I know which is which? A. Thus: those are Transitive whose Action or Doing passeth into another thing, and have not a perfect sence in themselves; as, when I say, Amo, I love, I must say I love something; as, Amo Magistrum, I love the Master. Q. How may I know which are Intransitive Verbs? A. Intransitives are those which have an absolute and perfect sence in their own Signification, without asking
the Question whom or what; (which may be asked in Transitives) as, Curro, I run; agroto, I am sick; af∣ter which I need not add or put any thing. Q. How many things belong to a Verb? A. There belong to it properly these fur, viz. Kind, Mood, Time, and Conjugation, with rm, Figure, Num∣ber, and Person, which are Accidents cmmn to the other declined parts of Speech as well as to a Verb. Q. What is Mood, for we ave spke already of the kinds of Verbs? A. Mood is an Accident that addth to the signification of a Verb the manner of signifying. Q. How many Moods are there? A. Four properly, and indeed; tho' the Book saith six. Q. What is the Indicative Mood? A. It is a Mood that shews a Reason true or false; as Ego amo, I love; or else asks a Question and doubt∣eth, as, Amas tu, Dost thou love? Q. What is the Imperative Mood? A. It is a Mood that biddeth or commandeth, ex∣horteth or intreateth, and it hath often before it (ex∣cept in the second Person sing, and pl.) this sign Let; as, Amato, Let him love. Q. Why doth the Imperative Mood want the first Person singular? A. Because the first Person, being the Person that speak∣eth, cannot be said to commnd himself. Q. But how can it be, that Passives have an Imperative Mood, seeing that a Passion cannot be commanded? A. Because a disposition to do, belgs to the Doer or Agent, and therefore he is justly commanded; as, Ama∣tor ab hero, (i. e.) So order or behave your self that you may be beloved of your Master: So Docetor, Be thou taught, (i. e.) Reject not your Teacher, but mark well what he saith. Q. How know you the Subjunctive Mood? A. The Subjunctive Mood dependeth on another Verb in the same Sentence, and hath evermore some
Conjunction (or an Adverb having the nature of a Conjunction) joyned with it; as, Ede ut vias: Cum¦atarem: or else it hath some Indefinite coming be∣tween; as, Qui, quid, qualis, quo, &c. as, vide quid agas. Q. Why do you leave out the Optative and Potential Mood? A. Because they dffer not from the Subjunctive, except in the manner of signifying; so that the same Mood implying wishing, is called the Optative; signifying a power, duty or desire the Potential; with a Conjunction, or an Adverb having the nature of a Conjunction, it is called the Sub∣junctive. Q. But why do you chuse to call this Mood the Subjun∣ctive, rather than either the Optative or Potential? A. Because the Subjunctive is far more used; and it is usual for things to have their denomination from the chief and principal. Q. Is not the Subjunctive used sometimes instead of the Impative? A. It is s; as, Tuâ quod nihil resert percontari desinas, for desine, Ter. Nihil incommodo valetudi∣nis tuae fris, for fac, Cicero. So in these Expressions, Ut vidiam, Let me see; Cures, Have a care; Fiat, Let it bdne; and in our Obligations, Noverint universi, fr noscant. Q. How are the third Persons of the Imperative Mood Active and assive, ending in to, and tor, called by Gram∣marians? A. They are called Modus Legitimus, The Lawyers Mood, according to Vossius; because it is used by Lawyers most commonly▪ Q. How know you the Infinitive Mood? A. The Infinitive Mood signifies, to do, to suffer, or to be, and it hath neither Number, nor Person, to limit its signification, and therefore it is called In∣finitive, and it hath o Nom. Case before him; being no real Mood of it self, but as it may be resolved by Qud or ut, an, quin or ne non, &c. Q. What are peculiarly belonging to the Infinitive Mood?
A. Three Gerunds and two Supines. Q. Why do the Gerunds and Supines belong to the Infi∣nitive Mood? A. Because their signification (like that of the Infini∣tive Mood) is infinite, not making difference of Number or Person. Q. How do the three Gerunds end? A. In di, do and dum. Q. What significations have Gerunds? A. They have both the Active and Passive significa∣tion; as, amandi, of loving or of being loved; aman∣do, in loving or in being loved; amandum, to love or to be loved. Q. How do you decline Gerunds, and what are they, are they Verbs or Participles? A. They are declined in the Verb, yet they are not Verbs, because they want Tenses, which a Verb must have; nor are they Participles, (tho' they are like those in dus) for they denote no time, as a Participle doth, and withal, they have an Active and Passive signification, which a Participle hath not; therefore, with Vossius and others, I leave thm to be Nouns Verbal Substantives Pentaptots of the second Declension. Q. Why may they not be Verbs, seeing they retain their Construction? A. That matters not, for that is common to Nouns; as, Quod si est obtemperatio legibus scriptis, Cicero. So Plautus, Quid tibi hanc curatio est rem. Q. How do the two Supines end? A. The first ends in um, and the latter in u. Q. Why is that which ends in um, called the first Supine? A. Because it hath the signification of the Verb Active; as, Eo amaum, I go to love. Q. Why is that which ends in u, called the latter Supine? A. Because it hath for the most part the significa∣tion Passive; as, Difficilis amatu, Hard to be loved. Q. What are Supines?
A. They are Nouns Verbal Substantives (as the Ge∣runds are) Diptos of the fourth Declnsion. Q. Do they change their Gender? A. No, for if they did, they could not be said to be Sub∣stamives; for we say, Vitam ire perditum, not perdi∣tam. Q. What is the third Accident of a Verb, viz. Tense? A. It is the difference of a Verb, according to the times past, present or to come. Q. How many Tenses or Times are there? A. Five; the Present Tense, the Preterimperfect Tense, the Preterperfect Tense, the Preterpluperfect Tense, and the Future Tense. Q. What Time doth the Present Tense speak of? A. It speaks of the Time that is now present, known by the Signs, Do or Am; as, Amo, I do love; Amt, I am loved. Q. What Time doth the Preterimperfect Tense speak of? A. It speaks of the Time not perfectly past, but as it were still present, known by the Signs, Did or Was; as, Amabam, I loved or did love; Amabar, I was lo∣ved. Q. What Time doth the Preterperfect Tense speak of? A. It speaks of the Time perfectly past, tho' late∣ly; with this Sign, Have or have been; as, Amavi, I have loved; Amatus sum vel fui, I have been loved. Q. What Time doth the Preterpluperfect Tense speak of? A. It speaks of the Time more than perfectly past, or past a long while since, with this Sign, Had or had been; as, Amaveram, I had loved; Amatus eram vel fueram, I hd been loved. Q. What Time doth the Future Tense speak of? A. Of the Time to come, with this Sign, Shall or will, or shall or will be; as, Amabo, I shall or will love; A∣mabor, I shall or will be loved.
Q. Which are the Root or Principal Tenses in Conjuga∣ting of a Verb Active or Neuter? A. They are the Present Tense and Preterperfect Tense, from which all the other Tenses, called Cognat Tempora, allied Tenses, are formed. Q. How may one come to know every kind of Verb, and what Tense it is of? A. B their Signs; for every Verb that signifies Active∣ly, is either a Verb Active or Neuter, signifying Actively, or else it is a Verb Dponent: and every Verb, tha signi∣fies Passively, is either a Verb Passive or a Verb Neuter, signifying Passivel: The Signs of which Verbs and their Tenses, this Table will make plain. The Signs of the Verbs and thei Tenses are of the   Actives Neuters, signifing A∣ctively and De∣pnents. Passives and Nuters, sig∣nifying Pas∣sively. Present Tense. Do, dost, doth. Am, is, are, art, and sometimes be was, were, wert. Preterimp. Did, didst. Preterpef. Have, hast, hath. Have been. Preterplup. Had, hadst. Had been. Future Tense, Shall or will and hereafter. Shall or will be. Q. What is Person in a Verb? A. Every several word, in every  and Tense, ex∣cept the Infinitive, which hath no Person. Q. Why are these called Persons in a Verb? A. Because one of the three Pesons of the Prnun is understood in every one of them; as, Amo, I lve, is as muh as Ego amo, I love; Amas, thou lovest, is as much as Tu amas, thou lovest. Q. How many Persons are there in Verbs? A. In Verbs Personals thre are three Persons in both Numbers, like as in the Pronouns; as, Sing. Ego , I love, tu amas, thou lovest, ie amat, he lo∣veth,
Pl. Nos amamus, we love, vs amatis, ye love, illi amant, they love. Q. Hatb every Mood and Tense three Persons in both Numbers? A. Ye in perfect Verbs, except that the Imperative Mood wants the first Person Singular, and the Infinitive hath no Persons at all. Q. How differ your Persons in Verbs from Persons in Nouns and Pnouns? A. The Persons in Nouns and Prnouns, signifie who or what Person it is that doth or suffereth any thing. The Persons in Verbs, signifie what it is that such a Person doth or suffereth; as, Magister docet, the Master teacheth; Magister is the Person of the Noun doing something, Do∣cet the Person of the Verb signifing what he doth. Q. What is the next Accident of a Verb, viz. Conjuga∣tion? A. It is the varying of a Verb by its final Terminations in both Numbers in every Person in each Mood and Tense. Q. How many Conjugations have Verbs? A. They have four Conjugations. Q. How may the four Conjugations be known asun∣der? A. By their several Vowels, which are the Marks or Characteristicks to know them by. Q. What Vowel is that by which we know the first Conjugation? A. It is (a) long before, re, and, ris; as, Amāre, amaris. Q. What Vowel is that by which we know the se∣cond Conjugation? A. It is (c) long before, re, and, ris; as, Docēre, decēis. Q. What Vowel is that by which we know the third Conjugation? A. It is (e) short before, re, and, ris; as, Legĕre, legĕris. Q. What Vowel is that by which we know the fourth Conjugation?
A. It is (i) long before, re, and, ris; as, Audīre, au∣dīris. Q. Where shall one find this (re) and (ris) to know the Conjugation by? A. You will find (re) in the Infinitive Active, and (ris) in the second Person Sing. Passive. Q. What is the Forming or Conjugating of a Verb? A. It is the breaking or varying the first  of the Verb into sundry other words coming of it by Persons, Tenses and Moods. Q. In declining and conjugating of Verbs, what am I chiefly to mind? A. You are to mind in every Voice the first and second Person of the Present Tense, and the first Person of the Pre∣terperfect Tense of the Indicative Mood, the Presen Tense of the Infinitive Mood; the Gerunds, Supines and Parti∣ciples, if the Verb be Active, Neuter or Deponent; if Pas∣sive, you must omit the Gerunds and Supines, which Pas∣sives have not. Q. How many Examples have you to decline and conjugate all perfect Verbs by? A. I have four, according to the number of the Con∣jugations. Q. What are the four Examples of the four Con∣jugations? A. They are, Amo, Dcco, Lego, and Audio. Q. How do you decline them? A. Thus; as in the Book, Amo, as, vi, re, &c. Do∣co, es, ui, cre, &c. Lego, is, gi, ĕre, &c. Audio, is, ivi, ie, &c. Q. Into how many Voices are these Examples formed? A. Into wo, Active and Passive: for all regular Verbs in (o) are formed or declined like Amo, Docco, Lego, and Audio: And all regular Verbs in (or) like Amor, Doceor, Legor, and Audior. Q. What Method ought a Tyrinan to observe for the perfect understanding and learning of Verbs, for I find that therein, and in the declining of Nouns, consists the chiefest
business of a Master, and the greatest task of a young Stho∣lar? A. For the Verbs, I would have him always use this Method: First to learn them perfectly, as in the Book, with the Latin before the English; after that with the English before the Latin, naming each Person Singular and Plural, that he may know which is the first, second or third: after this, let him say them backward with the Latin first before the English, and then the English before the Latin. This being done, he may joyn both the Active and Passive Voice together, and put first the Latine before the English, and then the English before the Latin. And lastly, Let him say both Voices backward, with the La∣tin before the English, and the English before the Latin, observing the Signs of the Verbs and Tenses in each Voice, according to the foregoing Table. I would have him also learn to form and run over the first Person Singular throughout each Mood and Tense, and to get perfectly the Terminations of the Tenses in every Person in each Voice, first in the Active, after that in the Passive; last of all, let him get the Terminations Active and Passive both to∣gether. Q. Which are the Terminations Active and Pas∣sive in each Conjugation, Mood, Tense, Number, and Person. A. The Active and Passive are as followeth.
Indicative Mood Active and Passive. Present Tense. Conjugations.   Pers. Sing. Persons Plural. Persons Singular. Persons Plural.   1. 2. 3. 1. 2. 3. 1. 2. 3. 1. 2. 3. 1. o, as, at, amus, atis, ant. or, aris vel are, atur, amur, amini, antur. 2. eo, es, et, emus, etis, ent. eor, eris vel ere, etur, emur, emini, entur. 3. o, is, it, imus, itis, unt. or, eris vel ere, itur, imur, imini, untur. 4. io, is, it, imus, itis, iunt. ior, iris vel ire, itur, imur, imini, iuntur. Preter∣imper∣fect Tense. Conjugat. 1. abam,                       2. ebam, bas, bat, bamus, batis, bant, bar, baris vel bare, batur, bamur, bamini, bantur. 3. ebam, 4. iebam,                       Preter∣perfect Tense. Conjugat. 1.                         2. i, isti, it, imus, istis, erunt vel ere. us sum, us es, us est, ti sumus, ti estis, ti sunt. 3. 4.                        
Preter∣pluper∣fect Tense. Conjugat. 1. eram, ra, rt, amus, ratis, rant. us eram, us era, us erat, ti eramus, ti eatis, ti erant. 2. 3. 4. Future Tense. Conjugat. 1. abo, bis, bit, bimus, bitis, bunt. bor, beris vel bere, bitur, bimur, bimini, bunur. 2 bo, 3. am, es, et, emus, etis, ent. a, eris vel ere, etur, emur, emini, entur.     4. iam,           iar, ieris vel iere, ietur, iemur, iemini, ientur. Imperative Mood Active and Passive. Present Tense. 1. a, et, emus, ate, ent. are, etur, emur, amini, etur. ato, ato, atote, anto. ator, ator, aminr, antur. 2. e, eat, eamus, ete, eant. ere, eator, eamur, emini, eantur. eto, eto, etote, ento. etor, etor, eminor, entur. 3. e, at, amus, ite, anto. ere, atur, amur, imini, antur. ito, ito, itote, unto. itor, itor, iminor, untor. 4. i, iat, iamus, ite, iant. ire, iatur, iamur, imini, iantur. ito, ito, itote, iunto. itor, itor, iminor, iuntor.
Subjunctive Mood. Present Tense. Conjugat. 1. em, es, et, emus, etis, ent. er, eris vel ere, etur, emur, emini, entur. 2. eam, as, at, amus, atis, ant. ar, aris vel are, atur, amur, amini, antur. 3. am, 4. iam, Preter∣imper∣fect Tense. Conjugations 1. arem, res, ret, remus, retis, rent. arer, reris vel rere, retur, remur, remini, rentur. 2. erem, erer,       3. erem, erer, 4. ierem, ierer, Preter∣perfect Tense. Conjugat. 1. erim, ris, rit, rimus, ritis, rint. us sim, us sis, us sit, ti simus, ti sitis, ti sint. 2. 3. 4.
Preter∣pluper∣fect Tense. Conjugat. 1. issem, isses, isset, issemus, issetis, issent. us essem, us esses, us esset, ti essmus, ti essetis. 2. ti essent. 3. 4. Future Tense. Conjugat. 1. ero, ris, rit, rimus, ritis, rint. us ero, us eris, us erit, ti erimus, ti eritis, ti erint. 2. 3. 4. Infinitive Mood. Present and Preterimperfect Tense. Conjugations   Active. Conjugations   Passive. 1. are. 1. ari. 2. ere. 2. eri. 3. ere. 3. i. 4. ire. 4. iri. Preterperfect and Preterpluperfect Tense. Conjugations   Active. Conjugations   Passive. 1. isse. 1. um esse vel fusse. 2. 2. 3. 3. 4. 4.
Future Tenses. Conjugat. 1. Active. Conjugat. 1. Passive. 2. urum esse. 2. um iri vel ndum esse. 3. 3. 4. 4. Gerunds. Conjugat. 1. andi, ando, andum. 2. endi, endo, endum. 3. endi, endo, endum. 4. iendi, iendo, iendum. Supines. Conjugat. 1. um, u. 2. 3. 4. Participles of the Present Tense. Conjugat. 1. ans. 2. ens. 3. ens. . iens. Participle of the Preter Tense. Conjugat. 1. us. 2. 3. 4. Participle of the Future in rus. Conjugat. 1. urus. 2. 3. 4. Participle in dus. Conjugat. 1. ands. 2. endus. 3. endus. 4. iundus.
Q. Do the two Future Tenses of the Infinitive Mood Active and Passive vary and change their Gender and Number according to the Substantives they are joyned to? A. The Future Passive is not changed either in Gender or Number; s, Repudiatum iri legem intelligebat, Ci∣cero. And, Rumor venit non datum iri uxorem fi∣lio, Ter. The Infinitive Active was not varied amongst the Ancients; as, Per omnes Deos & Deas dejeravit occisurum eum hàc nocte quicum cbaret, for occisu∣ram; for he means the Maid Cosnina, Pl. Quo te occi∣surum minatur, speaking of a Woman. But this is an Archaismus and grown obsolete; as, Cicero, lib. 2. De Divin. An credis hanc anum tam deliram futuram esse? Q. What must we do in thse Verbs that want the Fu∣ture in rus? A. We must use in its stead fore or futurum; as, Spe∣ro fore ut contingatid nobis. Q. Do the Periphrastical Tenses of the Passive Voice vary their Gender according to their Nminative and Substan∣tive? A. They do; as, Cicero, Pub. Clodium meo consilio interfectum esse dixisti. Q. How are Verbs Deponents declined? A. Like Passives, but with Gerunds and Supines, (espe∣cially the first Supine, because they want Actives) and with Active Participles as wel as Passive. Q. What signification have their Participles? A. Their Participles of the Present Tese, and Future in rus, sigifie and gvern the same Cases as their Verbs; their Participles of the Pret. Tense have both Active and Passive Signification, because their Verbs were formerly common: Their Participles in dus signifie always passvel. Q. How and from whence do we form their Preterperfect Tense? A. To form their Preterperfect Tense, we must fancy or feign a regular Active.
Q. What kind of Verbs are sum, possum, volo, nolo, malo, edo, fio, fero, feror, for they are not declined as Regular Verbs? A. They are Verbs Irregular, or Verbs ging out of Rule, which are declined and formed by themselves. Q. What say you of E and Que, what do they make in the Preterimperect Tense, and Future of the Indicative Mood, and how do they make their Ge∣runds? A. They make Ibam and Quibam in the Preterim∣perfect Tense, and Ib and Quibo in the Future Tense, and eundi, eundo, eundum, in their Gerunds. Q. What Tenses are formed of the Preterperfect Tense of the Indicative Mood? A. The Preterpluperfect of the same Mood, and the three last Tenses of the Subjunctive, and the Pre∣terperfect and Preterpluperfect of the Infinitive Mood. Q. How are these formed of the Preterperfect Tense of the Indicative Mood? A. Those which end in ram, rim, ro, are formed of it, by changing I into E short. Those which end  sem or se, are formed of it, by putting to s, with sem or se. Q. What is a Verb Impersonal: and how known in English? A. It is a Verb deficient in Person, for it is declined only in the third Person Singular, in all Moods and Tenses, and it is known by the Sign, It, before its English, and sometimes by the Sign, There; but Vs∣sius saith, that a Verb Imperonal wants the Impera∣tive Mood, for which is used the Present Tense of the Subjunctive. Q. Why is it called Ipsonal, is it because it wants the Persons? A. Not so, but because i wants the first and second Person, as being the mt worhy, fr the third Person be∣ing Indefinite cannot be called a Person. Q. What is a Participle?
A. It is part of Speech derived of a Verb having Declension, Case, and Gender, like a Noun, and Ten∣ses like a Verb, and Number and Figure like both. Q. Why is it called a Participle? A. It is so called from taking part of a Noun and part of a Verb. Q. How many kind of Participles are there? A. Four; two Active and two Passive; of which, two may signifie the time present, and two the time future, for the Preter Tense Passive may be also pre∣sent. Q. How do you know the kinds of Participles? A. Partly by their ending, partly by their signification. Q. How know you a Participle of the Present Tense? A. By its Latin in Ans or Ens, and its English in Ing. Q. Is every wrd ending in Ing, a Participle of the Present Tense? A. N, unless the Latin end in Ans or Ens, and have e other properties of a Participle; for a word ending in Ing, having A or The before it, is a Noun Substantive. Q. Whence is a Participle of the Present Tense formed? A. From the Preterimperfect Tense of the Indica∣tive Mood, by changing the last syllable into us. Q. How know you a Participle of the Future in Rus, and whence is it formed? A. I know it by its Latin ending in Rus, and by its signifying, to do, like the Infinitive Mood Active, and it is formed from the latter Supine, by putting to it rus. Q. How know you a Participle of the Present or Preter Tense Passive, and whence is it formed? A. I know it by its English ending in d, t, or n, and its Latin in tus, sus, xus, and it is formed from the lat∣ter Supine, by putting to s, except Mortuns; this kind of Participle is englished sometimes by the Sign ha∣ving; as, lcutus, having spoken.
Q. How know you a Participle of the Future in dus, and whence is it formed? A. This Participle signifies, to , like the Infini∣tive Mood Passive, and it is formed of the Genitive Case of the Participle of the Present Tense, by chan∣ging tis into dus; as, Amantis, Amandus. Q. What if Actives want the Supines? A. Then the Fuure in rus is wanting, and the Parti∣ciple of the Preter Passive, for both are formed from the latter Supine Active; so if the Preterperfect Tense Active b wanting, the Supines, the Future in rus, and Preterper∣fect Tense Passive must be wanting. Q. What, or how many Participles can a Verb De∣ponent have? A. Three at the least, the Present Tense, the Fu∣ture in rus, and Preter Tense, and if it govern an Ac∣cusative Case, it forms also a Participle in dus. Q. How are these four kinds of Participles deci∣ned? A. Those of the Present like Adjectives of three Articles, the rest like Adjectives of three endings. Q. Why was a Participle invented? A. That is might supply what ws wanting to a Verb, (to wit) Case and Gendr. So that a Participle is no∣thing else but a Casual Verb. Q. What is an Adverb? A. It is a Part of Speech underlined, joyned to a Verb, Noun, or Participle, to express and signifie some circumstance or qualiy thereof. Q. How many  of Adverbs are thre? A. There ae several  of Adverbs, but all of them may be reduced to those of Quality or Quanity. Q. Which are the first  in the Aidence? A. They a Adverbs of ; as, hodie, to day; cras, to morrow; heri, esterday; perinde, the next day after to morrow; olim, in time past, or in time to come, or once; aliquand, sometimes; nupr, lately, or of late; cum quando, ; nun, jam, now; tunc, tum, then; quoad, us{que}, dum, don, until; quamdi, as long as.
Q. What are the next sort of Adverbs? A. They are Aderbs of place; ubi, where; ibi, istie, illie, there; hi, ; intus, within; foras, without, or abrad; fois, from abrad; unde, from whence; pro∣cu, a far ff; ubicunque, ubi ubi, where soever; ubi vis, quovis, whee you will; quoquo versum, which way so∣ever; squm, any where; nusquam, no where; undique, utroque, utroique, on both sides; ultro citroque, to and agin; quà, which way; quo, whither, to what place, &c. Q. What Adverbs  there of Number? A. Tes: smel, once; , twice; ter, thrice; qua∣ter, four times; viies, twenty times; iterum, again. Q. What are the Adverbs of Order? A. They are, inde, thence; deinde, afterwards; de∣nique, lastly, to eclude; postremo, last of all. Q. What are the Adverbs of Asking and Doubting? A. They are, cur, quare, quamobrem, wherefore; unde, from whence; quosum, to what end; num, nun∣quid, whether, &c. Q. What are those of Calling? A.  are, eus, h, O ; ehodum, come hithr a litle; ho, , &c. Q. What are thse of Affirming? A. They are, crt, certainly; nae, profectò, truly; sauè, ye indd; scilicet, yes forsor; licèt, esto, let it b s. Q. What are the Adverbs of Dnying? A. They are, non, minimè, no; neutiquam, at no hand, in no wise; nequaquam, in no wise. Q. What are the Adverbs of Exhorting? A. Ea, go to, well; age, go to; agite, go ye to; age∣dum; go to a little. Q. What are thse of Flatteing? A. They are, sods, if thou durst, in good fellowship, I pray the; amabo, of all love. Q. What is the forbidding Adverb? A. N, n, not. Q. What are the Adverbs of Wshing?
A. They are, utinam, I wish, oh that, or I would to God; si, if it might; ofi,  that. Q. What are the Adverbs of gathering together? A. They are, simul, together; unà, in me tgether; pariter, together, likewise; non modo, non solm,  only. Q. What are those of Pating? A. They are, scorsim, asunder; sigillaim, ; vicatim, street by street, r village by village; vtim, man by man. Q. What are the Adverbs of Chusig? A. They are, potiùs, rather; inò, yea rather. Q. What are thse  a thing not finshed? A. They are, penè, ferè, modo non, almost; propè, nigh, near, or almost, vix. scarecly. Q. What are those of Shwing? A. They are, en and ecce, lo, bold. Q. What are the Adverbs of ? A. They are, forsan, fortan, radventur; forta∣sis, it may be; fortae, it may fall out. Q. What are thse of Chance? A. They are, fortè, as hap was, by chance; rtuit, by chance, or at adventure. Q. What are those of Likeness? A. They are, sic, s; su, sicut, vlut, quem mo∣dum, ut, tanquam, as; quasi, aci, as if; qum quom∣modo, how. Q. What are the Adverbs of Qulity? A. They are, benè, well; malè, id; doct, lared∣ly; fortiter, valiantly. Q. What are thse of Quantiy? A. They are, multm, ; parùm, ; mini∣mùm, the least of ad; paululùm,  sme∣what; plurimùm, the mot f a, . Q. What are the Adverbs of Cmparisn? A. They are, tam, s; quam, as; mags, mre; mi∣nus, ls; maximè, mst of all; tum tum, cum tum, as well as. Q. Are nt some Adverbs compared?
A. Yes; as, doctè, learnedly; doctiùs, more learned∣l; doctissimè, mst learnedly, frm doctus. Fortitèr, valiantly; fortiùs, more valiantly; fortissimè, most va∣liantly, from fortis. Propè, near; propriùs, nearer; proximè, the nearest of all, from prope. But Adverbs borrow these Degrees of Nouns Adjectives of the Compara∣tive and Superlative Degree, for they have none of their own, neither do they frm any Comparison. Q. What are Prepositions when they are set alone, with∣out any Case serving to them? A. They are turned into Adverbs; as, Qui antè non cavet post dolebit, He that doth not beware aforehand, shall be sorry afterward. Coram laudare & clam vitu∣perare inhonestum est, In presence to commend, &c. Q. How may  know Adverbs? A. Our English Adverbs commonly end in ly; the La∣tin eres in , ter, o, um, im; as, certè, libentèr, crebrò, tantùm, viritim, statim, &c. Q. What is a Conjunction? A. It is an undeclined part of Speech, that joyn∣eth Words and Sentences together. Q. How many sorts of Conjunctions are there? A. There are twelve sorts of Conjunctions, Copu∣latives, Disjunctives, (to which all the rest may be re∣duced) Discretives, Causals, Conditionals, Exceptives, Interrogatives, Illatives, Adversatives, Redditives, E∣lectives, Diminitives. Q. Which are the Copulatives, (viz.) those that couple both Sence and Words? A. They are, Et, que, c, atque, and; quque, also; nee, neque, neither. Q. Which are the Disjunctives, (viz.) those which part the Sence and not the Words? A. They are, au, e, su, el, either; sive, whe∣ther. Q. Which are the Discretives, (viz.) those that imply a Difference? A. They are, sed, autm, vero, at, ast, but; quidem, truly.
Q. Which are the Causals, (viz.) those which imply a Reason? A. They are, nam, namque, enim, etenim, for; quia, qud, quoniam and quando set for quoniam, ; ut, that; quum, seeing that. Q. Which are the Conditionals, (viz.) those that imply a Condition? A. They are, si, if; sin, but if; modo, dum, dum∣mode, so that. Q. Which are the Exceptives, (viz.) those that imply an Exception? A. They are, ni, unless; nisi, exept; quin, but; alio∣quin, otherwise; prerquam, save that. Q. Which are the Interrogatives, (viz.) those which ask a Question? A. They are, an, ne, utrum, whether; nene, anne, whether or no; nonne▪ is it not so? Q. Which are the Illatis, (viz.) such as make Infe∣renees? A. They are, ergo, ideo, igitur, itaque, proin, there∣fore; quare, wherefore. Q. Which are Adversatives, (viz.) such as grant some∣what to be said against? A. They are, etsi, quamquam, quamvis, altho; licet, altho, albeit; esto, suppose  be so. Q. Which are Redditives, (viz.) such as give an an∣swer to the Adversatives? A. They are, tamen, yet; attamen, yet, notwithstand∣ing. Q. Which are Electives, (viz) such as imply a choice? A. They are, quam, a atque, as. Q. Which are Diminitves, (viz.) such as lessen the meaning? A. They are, saltem, at the least; vel, even. Q. What of the foregoing Paticles use to begin, and what use to follow? A. Those that use to begin are, Et, vel, nam, sed; thse that folow ae, que, ve, enim, autem, vero, qui∣dem.
Q. What is a Preposition? A. It is an undeclined part of Speech most com∣monly set before other parts, either in Apposition, that is, when it is set before another word, and is no part of it, as, ad Patre; or else in Composition, that is, when it is made a part of the word which it is set before, as, Indectus. Q. Why say you most commonly? A. because some Prepositions are set after their Case; as, Versus, pns, tenus, cum and uspe; others may be set also after their casual words by the Figure Anastrape; as, . Q. What use do Prepositions chiefly serve to? A. They serve to govern Cases or to make Com∣pound Word. Q. What Cases do Prepositions serve to? A. Some serve to an Accusative and some to an Abltive, some both to an Accusative and Ablative. Q. How many serve to an Accusative? A. Thirty two, viz. Ad, to; apxd, at; aute, be∣fore, &c. Q. How many serve to an Ablative? A. Fifteen, viz. A, ab, abs, &c. Q. Do none of the Prepositions serve to a Geni∣tive? A. Yes, Tenus doth, when the casual word joyned with it is the Plural Number, for then the casual word is put in the Genitive Case and set before Tenus. Q. What Prepositions serve to an Accusative and Ablative? A. In, super, sub, subter, and clam, as some will have it. Q. When doth in govern an Accusative Case? A. When it hath the Sign in, or when it is put for erga, cota, ad, otherwise it serves to an Abla∣tive. Q. When doth sub govern an Accusative? A. When it is put for per, ad, or ante; that is, when it signifies, unto, by, about or before, otherwise an Abla∣tive.
Q. When doth super govern an Accusative Case? A. When it is put for ultra, beyond, else an Abla∣tive; subter we use as we please with either Case. Q. Have you no more Prepositions but those that serve to the aforesaid Cases? A. Yes, these six, am, di, dis, re, se, con, which serve to no Case, for they are only found in Composition. Q. What is an Interjection? A. It is an undeclined part of Speech which sig∣nifies some sudden Affection or Passion of the Mind in an imperfect Voice. Q. Are all Interjections imperfect Vices? A. All which are prperly Interjections, but masùm, with a mischief; infandum, a thing not to be spoken of  amabo, of all fellwship! perii, alas! with several other perfect words of any part of Speech are not properly In∣terjections, tho' they may be so used to express a sudden Passion. Q. Which are the Interjections of Mirth? A. They are, Evax, be brave; vah, hey day. Q. Which are those of Sorrow? A. They are, Heu, alas; hei, alas, well-a-day. Q. Which are those of dread? A. Atat, o, out, alas, aha. Q. Which are the rest of thm? A. Some are of Marvelling; as, Papae, O marvelous, O strange! Some of Didaining; as, Hem, ob what; vah, ab, a∣way! Some of Shunning; as, Apage, get thee gone, Avant! Some of Prasing; as, Euge, well done! Some of Scning; as, hui, whoo! Some of Exclamation; as, Proh Deum at{que} hominum fidem, O the Faith of Gods and Men! O strange! Some of Cursing; as, Vae, ; malùm, with a mischief. Some of Laughing; as, Ha, ha, he; ha, ha. Some of Calling; as, Eho, oh; o, ho Sirrah, avoy. Some of Silence; as, Au, whist.
Brief Examinations on the Four Parts of Grammar. Q. WHat is Grammar? A. Grammar is an art of speaking well. Q. How many Parts of Grammar are there? A. There are Four, Orthographia, Etymolegia, Syn∣taxis, , which last part most Grammarians make to be the Second. Q. What is Orthographia? A. Orthographia is that part of Grammar which teacheth us the way to Write and Spell truly; as, Lectio with , and not Lexio with an x. Q. How doth it differ from Orthoepia? A. Orthographia, is a true writing of Letters; Or∣thoepia, is a right pronunciation of them. Q. Seeing Orthographia teacheth us with what Let∣ters every Syllable and Word are to be writ, what is a Letter? A. It is the least part of a Word or an articulate Sound which cannot be divided. Q. How many Letters are there in the Latin Tongue? A. There are twenty two, but K, Y, and Z, (tho' they are in the number) are not eckoned Latin Let∣ters, and H is only a Note of Aspiration; in the En∣glish there are tweny four Letters. Q. How many fold is a Letter as to its found? A. It is two fold, Vowel and Consonant. Q. What is a Vowel? A. It is a Letter that makes a perfect sound of it self; as, A, E, I, O, Ʋ, and Y spelt like I, of which I and Ʋ become Consonants, when they are put
either before other Vowels, or before themselves. Q. What if two Vowels joyned together make but one sound and are spelt at once? A. They make a Dipthong. Q. How many Dipthongs are there? A. The most usual in the Latin Tongue are five, ae, oe, au, ei, eu; the less usual are, ai, oi, ui, and the Greek yi. In the English there are eight proper Vowels, ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ou, oo, ee, and six improper ones, to answer the first six proper ones, ay, ey, oy, aw, ew, ow. Q. What is a Consonant? A. It is a letter that makes no sound of it self, but as it is joyned with a Vowel. Q. How many sold is a Consonant in Latin? A. It is two sold, Mute and half Vowel. Q. What is a Mute? A. It is a Letter which hath a very obscure sound, or rather none at all, unless what the Vowels do com∣municate. Q. How many Mutes are there? A. Nine, according to the received Grammar, b, c, d, f, g, k, p, q, t, in all which the sound of the Vowel follows; as, in be, ce, de, ge, pe, qu, te, except in f, where it goes before; as, ef. Q. How many half Vowels are there, and what is a half Vowel? A. It is a Letter which hath or makes some sound, and as it were half a sound of it self, of which there are seven, l, m, n, r, s, x, z, in which the sound goes before in the first six; as, el, em, en, er, es, ex, but in z the sound follows. Q. How many fold are these half Vowels? A. Two fold, either Liquids or Doubles, called Du∣plices in Latine. Q. What is a Liquid, and how many Liquids are there? A. A Liquid is a Letter which being put after a Mute in the same syllable, melts away, (i. e.) loseth
its force, of which there are four, l, m, n, r; l and  among the Latins only; and m and n among the Greeks become Liquids, (i. e.) liquescunt. Q. May not s and u be added to Liquids? A. Amongst the Ancients s in the end of a word became a Liquid; as, Ennius in three places, Nunc se∣ni confectu' quiescit pro confectus. Fait cur vlito vivu' per ora virûm, for vivus: Virgines nam sibi quis{que} domi Romanus habet sas, for suas. And so u, if g, q, or s, go before; as, 1. Lingua, anguis. 2. Aequs, linquo. 3. Suadeo, suesco. Q. What is a Double, called in Latin Duplex, and how many of them? A. A Duplex is that which is put for two Conso∣nants, of which there are two, x and z, and some∣times i between two Vowels; x is put for cs or gs; as, dux, for dacs; rex, for regs: z is put for ds; as, Zephyrus, for Dsephyrus; but the Latins use in the mid∣dle of a word to turn z into a double s; as, patrish, for patrizo. Q. What do you mean when you say, S, est suae po∣testatis litera? A. I mean, that s is neither a Liquid nor a Du∣plex. Q. What sort of Letters are r and y said to be? A. R is said to be the canina litera, the doggish Let∣ter, by reason of its snarlish or harsh sound: Y is cal∣led the Pythagorean Letter, because Pythagoras resem∣bled Vertue to this Letter, spreading up its branches. Q. How many fold are Letters as to their shapes or as they are written. A. They are two fold, the Great and Capital Let∣ters, and the Small Letters. Q. Where do we make use of great Letters? A. 1. In the beginning of Periods. 2. In Proper Names. 3. In the Names of Arts, Dignities or Ho∣nours, Offices, Feasts, in the beginning of every Verse, Titles, and in words that have a great Empha∣sis, and also in the English Pronoun, I.
Q. What do the Great or Capital Letters signifie, when they are writ alone? A. They signifie, first, either a Praenomen, the first Name, (or, as we term it, the Christian Name) as, A. for Aulus; C. for Caius; D. for Decius; or a Title; as, L. for Lord; LL. for Lords; B. for Bishop; BB. for Bi∣shops: Or, secondly, the Great Letters signifie a Num∣ber; as, I, for One; V, for Five; IX, for Nine; X, for Ten; XL, for Forty; L, for Fifty; XC, for Ninety; C, for a Hundred; D, for five Hundred; M, for a Thousand. Q. Now we have done with single Letters, I pray, what must he do that will Spell right, and Write true Orthography? A. He must readily learn to distinguish, or to part, and to joyn Syllables. Q. What is a Syllable? A. It is a perfect sound, and distinct part of a word, being made up of as many Letters as we spell together: where note, that a Latin Syllable cannot exceed six Letters, and that an English Syllable may arise from one Letter to eight and no more; and an English Word from one Syllable to seven and not above. Q. How many fold is a Syllable? A. It is two fold; Proper, consisting of one or more Consonants, with a Vowel or Dipthong; or Improper, consisting of one only Vowel or Dip∣thong. Q. What Rule am I to observe concerning the right parting and joyning of Syllables? A. A Consonant between two Vowels belongs to the latter; as, in a-mor. 2. If a Consonant be doubled, the former belongs to the former Syllable, and the latter to the latter Syllable; as, in an-nus. 3. Conso∣nants which cannot be joyned in the beginning, are not to be joyned in the middle; as, ar-duus. 4. Con∣sonants which may be joyned in the beginning of a word, are joyned also in the middle; as, no-ster,
vo-lu-ptas. So bd, ct, ps, s, tu, gm, gn, xi, do be∣long to the following Vowel; as, in A-bdo-men, do-ctus, scri-psi, Ae-a, A-gmen, i-gnis, di-xi, &c. 5. In com∣pound words, every part of syllable is to be separated from the other; as, in-ers, abs-condo, juris-con-sultus. But observe, that in words compounded with a Pre∣position we must please the Ear, and a good and plea∣sing Sound; as, ourro, rather than obcurro; officio, ra∣ther than obsicio; aufero, rather than abfero, &c. Be∣tween m and n we do not insert p; no do we com∣monly write s after x. Q. How is c pronounced or spelt before a, e, ae, oe i, y, o, u? A. Before a, o, and u, like a k; before the e, ae, oe, i, and y, like an s, with a hissing. Q. How is g spelt or pronounced before an e, or i, and how before a, o, and u? A. Before e, and i, it sounds or is spelt softly, like gh, or like the Hebrew Jod, (age egi) before a, o, and u, hardly, like the Grek Gamma; as, gaudium, gloria, gula. Q. What observation do you make of {que} and u, in spelling? A. That q will have u after it, and u will have c be∣fore it and not k. Q. What observe you of the sound of ti? A. I observe, that ti, when a Vowel follows, sounds or is spelt like si; as, Orati, patientia, &c. unless in Greek words; as, Politia; or in the beginning of a word; as, Tara; or in the Infinitive Mood Parago∣gick; as, mittier, for mitti: or if s, or x, goes before; as, Quaestio, mixtio: or, lastly, in the Genitive Case Plu∣ral of viium from vitis, to distinguish it from the No∣minative vitium. Observe, That the syllable of any Latin or English word in the end of a line, is not to be disjoyned, but the word is to be continued by a Hyphen, called a Note of Continuation. Q. But have we not many English words in which several Letters are quiescent, or not pronounced?
A. Yes, for a is quiescent after the first a in Aa∣ron, Canaan, Isaac; after e in the same syllable; as, conceal, bstead; and after o in the same syllable; as, eneroach, hoary; e is not sounded in George, heart, earken, Mneth, Tuesday, Atheism; nor is  sounded in the end of any English word, yet it alters the sound, and also it makes the syllable long in many words; as, hau, have; lou, love; cau, cave; sau, save; mad, made; tam, tame; except that it is sounded in me, ye, be, he, we, and in certain words derived of other Languages; as, Jesse, Penelpe, Cngè, Epitomè. Q. Are there any more of the Letters quiescent? A. Yes, both Vowels and Consonants; as, i and y, o and u, in Carriage, Attorney, People, buy, buld, &c. b, in Lamb, Deb; c, in Pack, &c. g, in Ensign, Flegm, Reign, &c. h, in Ghost, John, &c. n, in Hymn, &c. p, in Psalm, Receipt, &c. s, in Isl; t, in catch, ditch, botch: with many such to be observed by Use and Read∣ing. Q. How many are the Vices or Faults of Orthpeia, sc. of Pronunciation? A. They are tive; Iotacismus, Lamdacismus, Isch∣notes, Traulismus, Plateasmus, of which see the Gram∣mar. Q. What are the Points and Stops used in Writing and observed in Reading? A. They are these, 1. A Comma, marked thus, (,) which notes a small stay. 2. A Colon, with two pricks thus, (:) which notes a longer stay; to which be∣longs a Semi-colon, marked thus, (;). 3. A Perid, marked thus, (.) which notes a full stay, as if we had ended. 4. A Note of Interrgation, thus, (?) used when we ask a Question. 5. A Parenths, marked thus, () used when Words or a Sentence is added which might he left out, and yet the Sence whole; as, Teach , (I pray you) to read. 6. An Apostroph, which is a Comma writ over the place or top of a Vowel or Dip hong cut off; as, lov'd, for loved; , for Tantone. 7. A Daeresis, which notes a Dip∣thong
to be parted into two syllables, marked thus, (¨) as, Poeta, not Poeta. 8. A Point of Admiration or Exclamation, thus, (!) 9. An Obelisk, thus, (†) and it is referred from the Matter to the Margent. 10. An Index, marked thus, (☞) which points from the Margent what is remarkable. 11. An Asterism, when any part of the Sentence is lost, marked thus, (*). 12. A Paragraph, (§). 13. A Para∣thesis notes an Adverb marked thus, (`). 14. A Note of a long quantity thus, (¯); and of a short quantity after this manner, (˘). Q. What is the next Part of Grammar? A. It is Etymologia, which teacheth the Proprieties and Difference of Words, especially in their Termi∣nations, and it considereth and contains under it the Eight Parts of Speech, with their Accidents.
Propria quae Maribus, Explained by QUESTION and ANSWER. Q. WHAT doth Propria quae Maribus contain, and to what part of Grammar doth it belong? A. It contains General Rules for the Declining of Regular Nouns, and both it and Quae Genus belong to Etymologia, because they treat of Nouns which are the first part of Speech. Q. Into how many Parts may Propria quae Maribus be divided? A. Into three; viz. 1. Into Rules for the decli∣ning of Nouns Substanives Proper. 2. Into Rules for the declining of Nouns Substantives Common. 3. Into Rules for the declining of Nouns Adje∣ctives. Q. How many General Rules are there for the de∣clining of Nouns Substantives Proper? A. Two; Propria quae Maribus, that is, Proper Names of Males or He's; and Propia Faeineum, Pro∣per Names of Females or She's. Q. How many sorts of Proper Names are there of the Masculine Gender? A. Five; 1. Of Gods; as, Mars, tis; Bacchus, chi; Apollo, inis. 2. Of Men; as, Cato, onis; Virgilius, lii.
3. Of Rivers; as, Tybris, bris; Acc. im; Abl. i; O∣rontes, tis. 4. Of Moneths; as, October, bris; Abl. i. 5. Of Winds; as, Lybs, bis; Notus, i; Auster, i. Q. What Objections can you make against the foregoing Rule? A. That the Names of Rivers are of that Gender which the Termination requires, for if they be Feminine or Neu∣ters according to their Termination, and that nevertheless they be used in the Masculine Gender that happens by a Syllepsis, because the common Name Fluvius or Amnis is understood. 2. The Names of Moneths are Adjectives, used substantively, and Mensis is understood, which some∣times also is expressed. 3. In the Names of Winds there is a regard to the common word Ventus. Q. Grammarians averr, that Proper and Common Names, that signifie the Male-kind or He's, are of the Masculine Gender; how comes it to pass, that these Nouns of the Feminine Gender signifie Males or He's, viz. Operae, Custodiae, Copiae, Vigiliae, Excubiae, Curae? A. Because, first of all, and properly, they signifie Acti∣on, and by a Metonymia of the effect, they are spoken of Men, keeping the Gender of their proper signification: for the same reason, scortum, mancipium, and prostibulum, are Neuters. Q. How many sorts of Proper Names are there of the Feminine Gender? A. Five; 1. Of Heathenish Goddesses; as, Juno, ōnis; Venus, ris. 2. Of Women; as, Anna, ae; Phi∣lotis, otdis. 3. Of Cities; as Elis, īdis; Opus, un∣tis. 4. Of Countries; as, Graecia, ae; Persis, īdis. 5. Of Islands; as, Creta, ae; Britannia, ae; Cprus, i. Q. What Words are there excepted from this Ge∣neral Rule? A. These Proper Names of Cities, viz. Sulmo, ōnis; Agragas, gantis, are of the Masculine Gender; Argos, gi; Tibur, būris; Praeneste, is, of the Neuter Gender; and Anxur, uis, of the Masculine and Neuter Gen∣der.
Q. What may be objected against the said Rule, that is, Propria Foeminum? A. That the Names of Cities, Countries, and Islands, do rather follow the Gender of their termination, and if they have an Adjective contrary to their termination, that's by a Syllepsis; and there is a regard to be had to the word Regio, Urbs, Terra, and the like. Q. Where doth the Second Part of Propria quae Ma∣ribus, that is, Rules for the declining of Substantives Common, begin? A. It begins at Apellativa arborum. Q. How many things do you observe in this Second Part of Propria quae Maribus? A. Three▪ first, that those Substantives which are the Common Names of Trees have a General Rule by themselves for their declining, and are commonly ac∣cording to their kind and nature of the Feminine Gen∣der; as Alnus, ni; Cupressus, i; Cedrus, i. Q. Are there any Exceptions to this Rule? A. Yes, Pinaster, tri; Oleaster, tri, of the Mascu∣line Gender, and siler, eris; suber, eris; thus, uris; ro∣ur, oris; cer, eris, of the Neuter Gender. Q. What is the Second Observation? A. It is of Epicenes, that is, of Nouns which com∣monly and of their own nature under one Termination and one Gender signifie both kinds, (i. e.) the He and She; yet not always; as, in Gallus and Gallina; Leo and Lena. Q. How many kinds of Epicenes are there? A. Three: 1. Of Birds; as, Passer, ĕris, M. G. Hi∣rando, inis, F. G. 2. Of easts; as, Tygris, dis, F. Vulpes, is, F. 3 Of Fishes; as, Ostrea, ae, F. Cetus; ti, M. To Epicenes may be added Mancipium, scrtum, umentum, &c. Q. Of what Gender is every Noun that ndeth in um? A. Of the Neuter; as, Londinum, Latium, Brund sium, except Proper Names of Men and Women, ac∣cording to the common exception, Omne quod exit in m, si ominum tu propria tollas, &c.
Q. Of what Gender is every wor that dth not alter its Termination? A. Of the N. G. if it be a Substantive; as Nom. Nil, n. Nil, Dat. Nil, &c. and whatever stands in∣stad of a Noun or Nom. Case: But Adjectives inva∣riable, are of any Gender, according to the Substan∣tive▪ they agree wih; as,  homo, a good Husband; Frgi , a good Housewife. So tot, quot, are of all Geders. Q. How may the Genders of all other Nouns Substan∣tives Common be known, which is the third thing ob∣serva in this Scod Part of Propria quae Maribus? A. Partly by ther Signification, partly by their Termination, but principally by the Gnitive Case of ach  according to the Special Rules with their xceptions. Q. How many Special Rules have you to know the Gender by the encreang or not encreasing of the Gniive Case? A. Three; 1. Nmen nn crescens genitivo, &c. 2. No∣mn  is pnultima si genitivi syllaba acuta sonat. 3. Nomn crescent is penultima si genitivi sit gravis, &c. Q. What is the meaning of the first Special Rule, Nomen non crsens? A. That every Noun Sustantive Common, that doth not encrease in the Genitive Case, (i. e.) that hth no more syllables in the Genitive Case thn in the Nominative, is of the Feminine Gender; as, Caro, canis; Capra, ae; Nubes, is. Q. How many Exceptions are there under this Rule? A. Four; Masculine, Neuter, Doubtful, and the Common of Two. Q. How many Rules of Masculine Exceptions not encreasing are there? A. Four; 1. Nouns ending in a, signifying the Of∣fices of Men; as, Scriba, assecla, scurra, rabula, Lixa, Lanista, | ae. 2. Mascula Graecorum, (i.e.) Greek words that end in as and es, of the first Declension of the
Greeks, and end in a, in the Latin, are of the M. G. as, satrapes, satrapa, athles, athleta, | ae; ex ep char∣ta, margarita, cataracta, catapulta, &c. which are of the F. G. 3. These Mascusines, Veres, vatales, aua∣les, | is. 4. Nouns compounded of as, assis; as, en∣tussis, is. 5. These Nouns, Linis, bis, callis, , follis, colli, mensis, ensi, fustis, funis, panis, pens, cri∣nis, ignis, caseis, fascis, , seti, pisis, , ver∣mis, vectis, pstis, axis, | is. 6. All Nouns tha end in er; as, Venter, tris: in os; as, , gi: in us; as, Anmes, ni. Q. What kind of Rule is this, to wit, Faeminei ge∣neris sunt matr, humus, &c? A. It is a Feminine Exception on the foregoing Rule, viz. on Mascula in er, &c. and no on the first Special Rule; for a Feminine Rule cannot have a Fe∣minine Exception; or Mter, tis, is an Exception of Nouns that end in er: And thse Nouns, Humut, mi; domus, mi, or ùs; alvus, t; colu, i; ficus▪ ct, and cùs; acus, porticus, | cùs; tribus, bùs; , s; nu∣rus, ùs; manùs, ùs: Pl. Idus, uum; anu, ùs; vannus, ni. Likewise these Greek words that change o ino us; as, Paprrus, ri; antidous, i; costus, ti; dipthongu, gi; byssus, abyssus, si; crystalus, si; sndus, di; sapphyrus, ri; eremus, mi; arctus, ti, are an Exception of Nouns that end in us. Q. What is the Neuter Exception of Nouns not increasing? A. It is first of Nouns ending in e in the Nom. Case, and make is in the Gen. as, Mare, rete, is. 2. Of all Nouns in on and um; as, , ti; ovum, vi. 3. Of these Nouns, Hippomanes, ▪ is, Vi∣rus invariabile; Pelags, i. And, lasty, this word Vulgus, i, is both of the M. and N. G. Q. What words of the Doubtful Gender are ex∣cepted under the first Special Rule? A. They are, Talpa, dama, ae; canalis, halcyonis, F. finis, clunis, restis, is; penua, , or us; amnis, is; pam∣pinus, ni; corbis, is; linter, tris; torquis, is; specus,
ci, or ûs; anguis, is; Ficus, ci, F. phaselus, li; lecy∣thus, thi, F. atomus, mi; grossus, si; pharus, i, . pa∣radisus, si. M. G. Q. What is the Common of two Exception under the first Spcial Rule? A. It is of Nouns compounded of a Verb and end in a; as, gragena, ae. rom graius and gigno; agri∣cola, ae, from ager ad colo; and advena, ae, from ad and venio: Likewise these, Senex, is; auriga, ae; vernae, ae; sodalis, is; vates, is; patiuelis, perduellis, affinis, ju∣eni, testis, civis, canis, hostis, | is. Q. Which is the second Special Rule for the Gen∣der and declining of Nouns Substatives common? A. Every Noun Substantive common which encrea∣seth long, and the last syllable save one is lifted up in the Gen. Case, is of the F. G. but every word that thus encreaseth is not of a long quantity; as, in vir, vĭri; mas, măris. Q. How many Exceptions are there under this se∣cond Special Rule? A. Four: 1. Masculine Exceptions. 2. Neuter. 3. Doubtful. 4. Common of two. Q. How many Masculine Exceptions hath it? A. 1. It hath these Monosyllables, or Nouns of one Syllable; Sal, salis; ren, splen, car, ser, | is; vir, ri; vas, dis; as, assis; mas, ris; bes, bessis; cres, tis; praes, dis; pes, pedis; glis, gliris; mos, moris; flos, floris; ras, roris; tros, trois; mus, muris; dens, dentis; mont, tis; pons, tis; sons, tis; seps, sepis; gryphs, phis; thrax, cis; rex, regis; grex, gregis; phryx, gis. 2. These Pollysyllables, or Nouns of more than one Syllable ending in n; as, 1. Acarnan, ānis; lichen, ēnis; del∣phin, inis. 2. Pollysyllables which end in o, signifying a body; as, Le, curculio, | onis; with these, Senio, ternio, sermo, | onis. 3. Nouns ending in er; as, Cra∣ter, ēris: in or; as, Conditer, ōris: in os; as, Heros, cis▪ 4. These Nouns ending in ens; as, Torrens, n∣frens, oriens, bidens, tis. 5. These Nouns ending in as; as, Gigas, elephat, adamas, garamas, | antis. And
these in es; as, Tapes, lebes, cures, magnes, | etis; meri∣dies, i. 6. Nouns compounded of as, assis; as, Do∣drans, antis; semis, semissis. Likewise these Nouns; Samnis, itis; hydrops, ōpis: With these ending in x; as, Nycticorax, acis; thorax, acis; vervex, ēcis; Phx∣nix, īcis; hombyx, bycis. And Spadix, volvox; and esox, | cis: But Syren, ēnis; sorr, ōris; and uxor, ōris; cos, tis; ds, tis; cos, eois; and glos, tis, are of the F. G. contrary to the fregoing Exceptions; and mulier, iĕris, blongs raher to the Feminine Excep∣tion under the third Special Rule, because it increa∣seth short. Q. What Neutrs are there excepted from the se∣cond Special Rule? A. 1. Words of one syllable, Mel, mellis; fel, fel∣lis; vas, vasis prim; vasorum vasa secundo; os, ossis, and oris; rus, thus, jus, crus, pu, | ris. 2. Nouns of many syllables in al; as, Capital, lis; and in ar; as, laquear, āris, except sala of the M. G. likewie halec, ēcis, of the N. and F. G. in the Sing. and of the F. only in the Plural. Q. What is the Doubtful Exception from this Spe∣cial Rule? A. Doubtfuls excepted are, Python, onis, M. scrobs, obis; serpens, tis; bubo, onis; rudens, tis; grus, gruis; perdix, dīis; lynx, cis; limax, ācis; stirps, pis; calx, cis; dies, ei, which is only Masculine in the Plural. Q. What words of the Common of two are excepted under this Special Rule? A. They are, Parens, ntis; author, oris; infans, tis; adolescens, tis; dux, cis; illx, gis; haeres, ēdis; exlx, lēgis: Also the Compounds of Frons; as, bi∣frons, tis. Likewise these Nouns, Castos, odis; bos, bovis; fur, furis; sus, suis; sacerdos, dotis. Q. What is the meaning of the third Special Rule? A. That every Noun Substantive common encrea∣sing short in the Genitive Case, (i. e.) having the last syllable save one pressed down, is o the Masculine Gender.
Q. How many Exceptions are there under this third Special Rule? A. Four: 1. Of Feminines. 2. Of Neuters. 3. Of Doubtsuls. And, 4. of the Common of two encrea∣sing short. Q. What are the Feminines excepted? A. They are, first, all Noun of more than two syl∣lables that end in do or go, making dinis and ginis in the Genitive Case; as, Dulcedo, dinis; compago, gīnis. 2 Virgo, gīnis; grand, dinis; fides, ei; compes, pēdis; tegs, gētis; seges, gētis; arbr, ōis; hyems, ēmis; bac∣char, chāris; syndon, sndōnis; gorgon, gōnis; icon, ōnis; |, ōnis. 3. Grek words which end either in as; as, Lamps, pdis, or in is; as, jaspis, īdis, with the Latin words Cassis, īdis; cuspis, īdis; pecus, dis, when it signifies small Cattel. Forfx, īcis; pellex, īcis; carex, īcis; coxendix, īcis; filix, cis, to which add to∣mex and forex; and mulier, ēris, to be added accord∣ing to this Verse: Hùc add is Mulier propriâ si classe locabis. Q. What Neuters of Nouns encreasing short are ex∣cepted under the third Specal Rule? A. They are all Nouns that signifie a thing without life, ending either in a, as, Problema, atis. en, Omen, inis. ar, Jabar, aris. ur, Jeur, oris. us, Onus, eris. put, Occiput, itis. Except Pecten, īnis, and furfur, ūris, which are of the M. G. tho' they end in en and ur. 2. Cadaver, ēris; iter, tineris; suber, tuber, uber, gingiber, laser, ci∣cer, piper, papaver, siser, siler, | ēris. Aequor, marmor, ador, | oris, (and pecus, pecoris, for great Cattel) are of the N. G.
Q. What words of the Doubtful Gender are ex∣cepted from the third Special Rule? A. They are these, Card, inis, M. margo, inis, D. G. cinis, eris; obex, icis; pulvis, eris; adeps, dipis; sorceps, cipis, F. pumex▪ icis; ramex, icis, M. anas, atis, F. imbrex, icis; culex, icis, M. natrix, icis, M. onyx, ycis; sardonyx, yeis; silex, icis: To these doubtsuls add, Cortex, icis; varix, icis, and ales, itis. Q. What words are there of the Common of two excepted from the third Special Rule? A. These, Vigil, pugil, | ilis, M. exul, praesul, | ūlis, M. Homo, īnis; nemo Gen. caret, Dat. nemni; martyr, yris; ligur, ūris, M. areas, ādis, M. antistes, ītis; mi∣les, ītis; pedes, ītis; interpres, ītis; comes, hospes, | ītis; praeses, īdis, M. princeps, cīpis, M. uceps, cūpis, M. eques, ītis; obses, īdis, with many other Nouns derived of Verbs; as, Conjux, jūgis; judex, opifex, aruspex, | īcis, M. to which add municeps, cipis. Q. How many Rules are there for the declining of Nouns Adjectives? A. Three. Q. Which is the first? A. The first is, That Adjectives, having one only Termination, are of the Common of three Genders; as, Hic, haec, & hoc faelix, īcis; hic, haec, & hoc audax, ācis; hic, haec, & hoc quadrupes, pēdis: to which Rule belong these undeclinable Adjectives, viz. Nequam, tot, quot, miile, &c. Q. Which is the second Rule for the declining of Adjectives? A. The second is, That if an Adjective have two endings, the first ending must be of the M. and F. G. and the second of the N. as, Hic & haec omnis, & hoc omne, is. Q. Which is the third Rule for the declining of Adjectives? A. The third Rule is, That if an Adjective have three endings, the first ending is of the M. G. the second of the F. and the third of the N. as, Sacer, sa∣cra, sacrum.
Q. What is the meaning of this Rule, At sunt quae flexu, &c? A. The meaning, according to the Book, is, That there are some Adjectives declined with two Articles (i. e, with hic & hae) like Substantives, yet in very deed are Adjectives, and are so used; as, Pauper, puber, de∣gener, uber, | ēris. Yet most of them are found in the Neuter Gerder; as, Hor. l. 1. Epist. 10. Sub paupere tecto. ikewise Ovid. Trist. l. 2. El. 1. Divitis in∣genii est ingentia Caesaris acta scribere.—So Juven. Sat. 13. Depositum tibi sospes erit.—Ovid Amor. l. 3. El. 14. Post mea mansurum fata superstes opus. Tacit. Rari imbres; puber solum: Comes in the Rule seems rather a Substantive of the C. G. Victrix and ul∣trix are of the Feminine Gender in the Singular Num∣ber, and of the Feminine and Neuter Gender in the Plural, being Adjectives defectives. Q. What is the meaning of this Rule, Haec proprium quendam sibi fleum, &c? A. The meaning is, That these Adjectives have a peculiar manner of declining, differing from the com∣mon form, viz. that they have three Endings, and three Articles; as, Hic campester, haec campestris, hoc campestr, or hic & haec campestris & hoc campestre, is. Hic volucer, haec volucris & hoc volucre, or hic & haec volucris & hoc volucre, is. Celeber, bris, bre. Celer, ris, re. Saluber, bris, bre. Pedester, tris, tre. Equester, tris, tre. Acer, cris, cre. Palster, stris, stre. Alacer, cris, re. Sylvester, tris, tre.
Of Nouns Heteroclites. Q. WHat doth Quae genus contain? A. It contains Rules for the declining of Heteroclites or Irregular Nouns, as Propria quae ma∣ribus doth of Regular; so that Quae genus is no more than an Exception on Propria quae maribus. Q. How many sorts of Heteroclites or Irregular Nouns are there? A. Three: 1. Variantia genus aut slexum; that is, such as vary or change their Gender or Declension. 2. Defectiva; such as want some Case or Number. 3. Redundantia; (i. e.) such as abound or have over∣much in declining. All which three sorts are men∣tioned in the first Dstick thus: 1. Quae genus aut flexum variant. 2. Quaecunque novato ritu deficiunt. 3. Su∣perántve Heteroclita, suno. Q. How many sorts of Nouns Heteroclites are there that change their Gender and Declension? A. There are six sorts. Q. What are the first sort of them, and which is the Rule? A. They are these of the F. G. in the Sing. and N. in the Pl. as, Pergamus,. mi; a, orum; supellex, ctilis; ilia, ium. The Rule is, Singula Foemines, neutris Plu∣ralia gaudent. To this Rule may be added, Hierosoly∣ma and Carbasus, being of the F. G. in the Sing. and of the N. in the Plural. Q. What are the second sort of Nouns that do change their Gender and Declension, and which is their Rule?
A. They are those of this Rule, Dat prior, &c. which are of the N. G. in the Sing. and of the M. and N. in the Plur. Rastrum, tri; tri, tra, rorum. Fraenum, ni; ni, na, nrum. Filum, li; li, la, lorum, N. Capistrum, tri; tri, stra, strorum, N. Q. What words are of the third sort, and which is their Rule? A They are these of the N. G. in the Sing. and only of the M. G. in the Plur. as, Coelum, li; li, lo∣rum. Argos, gi; gi, orum. The Rule is, Moscula dun∣taxat, &c. Q. What words are of the sourth sort, and what is their Rule? A. They are these of the N. G. in the Sing. and of the F. G. in the Plur. as, Nundinum, ni; nae, arum. Balneum, ei; ae, arum. Their Rule is, Neutra quidem primo, &c. Q. What words are of the fifth sort, and what is their Rule? A. They are these of the M. G. in the Sing. and of the N. G. in the Plur. as, Maenalus, li; la, lorum. Dyndimus, imi; ma, morum. Ismarus, i; a, orum. Tar∣tarus, ri; a, rorum. Taygetus, i; a, orum. Taenarus, i; a, orum. Massicus, i; a, orum. Gargarus, i; a, orum. The Rule is, Haec maribus dantur, &c. Q. What are the sixth and last sort of Variants, and which is their Rule? A. They are these of the M. G. in the Sing. and of the M. and N. G. in the Plur. as, Sibilus, li; li, la, orum. Jocus, ci; ci, ca, corum, Locus, ci; ci, ca, corum. Avernus, ni; ni, na, orum. The Rule is, At numerus genus his dabit alter utrumque. Q. How many sorts are there of Deficient Hetero∣clites? A. There may be said to be three sorts of these, tho' the Book speaks but of two; the first sort are such as are deficient in declension or not at all de∣clined, called Aptota in the Grammar, tho' more pro∣perly Aclita, viz. such as have no different Case, but
are alike in all Cases; for Aptoa (as Priscian saith) are those which are found in no other Case, besides the Nominative; as, Expes, satias. 2. Such as are deficient in one of the Numbers. 3. Such as are de∣ficient in some Case or Cases in either or both the Numbers. Q. Where doth the first sort of Nouns, called De∣fectives, begin, and what are they? A. They begin at, Quae nullum variant caum, and they are such as vary not in any Case from their Nom. Q. What words are defective of the first, sc. of the undeclined sort? A. They are these: 1. Nom. Gen. Da. &c. Fas, nil, nihil, instar invariabile. 2. Wods that end in u, and i; as, Cornu, genu; Gummi, frugi; and haec tempe, and cete in the Plur. with hi, hae & haec tot, quot, in∣variabile. Likewise all Nouns from three, to a hun∣dred; as, Hi, hae & haec, quatuor, quinque, dcem, vi∣ginti, triginta, and mille the Adjective, invariabile: Mille the Substantive is Hoc mille, invariabile in the Sing. as, Mille hominum occiditur, and, Mille hominum occiso. Cic. 6. Phil. In the Pl. N. Haec millia. Mille the Adjective takes to it self an Adverb; as, Te mille virorum: But Mille the Substantive requires an Adje∣ctive; as, Hominum eo die caesa plus duo millia. To this Rule add, Nequam, volupe; necesse, necessum: Also, Pondo and caepe, or cepe in the Singular and Plural. Likewise Hebrew Names in m; as, Adam, Ahm, Che∣rum, &c. Also the Nmes of Letters; as, Alpha, Beta, &c. And, laly, the Names of Towns, that end in i and y; as, Aixi, Illeurgi, Aepy, Dri. Q. Of what Number are these, viz. Fa, nil, nihil, instar, cornu, genu, gummi, frugi? A. The four first, with gummi, are of the Singular Number, undeclined; cornu and genu, with others that end in u, except gelu, are commonly declined in the Plural, only veru makes verua, verubus, and not ve∣ruum: But frugi is of the Singular and Plural undecli∣ned, and of all Genders.
Q. What are the first sort of those that are defici∣ent in Case called? A. Monoptots; being so called because they are found in one oblique Case only; as, Abl. Hàc noctu. (Ut, redo ego hâc noctu obdormivisse ebrium, Plant. Amph.) Abl. Hoc natu, jussu, injussu, promptu, permissu, astu. Pl. Acc. Hos astus. Acc. Has inficias. Q. How are the second sort of Defectives in Case called? A. Diptots. Q. Why are they so called? A. Because they are said to have commonly but two Cases, yet we decline Frs thus: Nom. Fors, Gen. Fortis, Dat. Forti, Acc. wtem. Voc. O Fors, Abl. Forte. Gen. Spontis, Abl. Sponte. Nom. Acc. Plus, Gen. Pluris, Gen. Repetundarum, Abl. Repetundis. Gen. Jugeris. Abl. Jugere. Gen. Verberis. Abl. Verbere. Nom. Suppetiae, Acc. Suppetias. Nom. Tantundem, Gen. Tantidem. Gen. Impetis, Abl. Impete. Acc. Vicm, Abl. Vice. Of which Verberis, Vicem, Plus, and Jugeris, have the whole Plural Number, except that Vicium is not read in the Genitive Plural. The Cases here are to be understood of Cases of Termination, not of Cases of Signification. To this Rule, add, Dica, di∣cam; Chaos, chao; Melos, melo; Tabi, tabo. Q. How are the third sort of Defectives in Case called? A. Triptots; tho' some of them may be called Te∣traptots. Q Why so? A. Because they have only three or four Cases; as, Gen. Precis, Dat. Preci, Acc. precem, Abl. prece▪ Opis, opem, ope. To which are added the Tetraptots Frugis, and ditionis, which only want the Nominative and the Vocative Case form'd from it. Also Vis that wants the Dative; and likewise those Nouns that want the Voca∣tive Case are Pentaptots. Q. What and how many are those Nouns Pentap∣tots that want the Vocative Case?
A. They are, 1. Relatives; as, Qui, quae, quod, &c. 2. Interrogatives; as, Ecquis, ecqua, ecquid. So Quis, numquis, uter, qualis, quantus, quotus, cujus, and cujas, are Interrogatives. 3. Distributives; as, Nullus, a, um. Neuter, tra, trum. Omnis, ne. Likewise Ʋllus, solus, u∣ter, alter, nemo, alius, aliquis, quidam, quispiam, quilibet, quisque, unusquisque, quotusquisque. 4. Indefinites; as, Quilibet, quaelibet, quodlibt. Alter, tera, terum, which is hardly an Indefinite. 5. All Pronouns, except these four, Noster, tra, trum. Nostras, tis. C. 3. Meus, a, um, and Tu, whereof some of them sometimes have a Vo∣cative Case; as, Aperite aliquis ostium, &c. Q. What are the next sort of Defectives? A. They are those that are deficient in Number. Q. What is the first Rule of Deficients in Num∣ber? A. It is Propria cuncta notes, &c. In which Rule there are six sorts of words that want the Plural Num∣ber. 1. All Proper Names, signifying one thing, whether of Gods; as, Mars, tis. Of Men; as, Cato, onis. Of Countries, Cities, Hills, Rivers, Dogs, Horses; as, Gallia, ae, F. Roma, ae, F. Ida, ae, F. Tagus, gi, M. Laelaps, pis, M. Parnassies, si, M. Bucephalus, li, M. 2. The Names of Corn or Grain; as, Triticum, ci, N. Siligo, ginis, F. Ador, oris, M. 3. Things that are weighed; as, Piper, ēris. Saccharum, ri. Butyrum, ri. Resina, ae. 4. The Names of Herbs; as, Ruta, ae. Salvia, ae. 5. Of moist or liquid things; as, Lae, tis. Oleum, i. 6. Of Metals and Minerals; as, Aurum, i, N. Argentum, i, N. Sulphur, ūris, N. Nitrum, i, N. Q. But may not some of them sometimes have the Plu∣ral Number? A. Yes, as may apprear by the clause or ending of the Rule, Est ubi pluralem retinent haec, est ubi sper∣nunt. For Proper Names, when they are taken for Sub∣stantives Common, or when there are more of the same Name, have the Plural Number; as, when Catones are taken for Wise Men, as Cato was; and Maeccnates,
for Noble Men, as Maecenas was; according to the Verse, Sint Maecenates, non decrunt, Flace, Marones. Q. What sort of Rule is this, viz. Hordea, farra, orum, &c? A. The words of this Rule are a particular Excep∣tion on Propria cuncta notes; and they have three like Cases in the Plural Number, viz. the Nominative, Accusative, and Vocative; as, Hordeum, ei; Far, far∣ris; Forum, ri; Mel, mellis; Mulsum, si; Desrutum, ti; Thus, thuris: To which you may add, Jus, mare, rus, vinum, aes; s, oris, dans Gnitivo; yet aeribus and ori∣bus are read, tho' aerum and rum are not. Q. What are the second sort of those that are defi∣cient in Number? A. They are these Masculines that want the Plural Number: Hesperus, ri; Vesper, eris; Pontus, ti; Li∣mus▪ i; Fimus, i; Penus, ni & ùs; Sanguis, īnis; Ae∣ther, ēris; and Nemo, ini, which commonly, they say, wants the Genitive, and Vocative Cases, and Plural Number, according to the usual Verse: Nemo caret genito, quinto numero{que} secundo. To this Rule may be added, Pudor, sopor, muscus, &c. Q. What are the third sort of those that are defi∣cient in Number? A. They are these Feminines that want the Plural Number, viz. Pubes, is; Salus, ūtis; Talio, ōis; In∣deles, is; Tussis, is, Acc. tussim; Pix, iis; Humu, m; Lues, is; Sitis, is, Acc. sitim; Fuga, ae; Quies, etis; Cholera, ae; Fames, is; Bilis, is; Senecta, ae; Juven∣tus, ūtis; Soboles, is; Labes, is. Q. What Cases will all Nouns of the fisth Declen∣sion have in the Plural Number, and what is the Rule? A. They will have three like Cases in the Plural
Number; to wit, the Nominative, Accusative, and Vocative. The Rule is, Ʋt & omnia quintae tres simi∣les casue, &c. Q. But what Nouns of the fifth Declension are ex∣cepted? A. These: viz. Res, ei; Species, ei; Facies, ei; Dies, ei, which have the whole Plural Number, by this Rule, Quas voces numero totas, &c. Q. Are there no other Feminines that want the Plural Number? A. Yes these: Stultitia, ae; invidia, ae; sapientia, ae; desidia, ae; with many others which are to be found in reading Authors; as, Castitas, elegantia, fides, ei, ju∣stitia, pietas, requies, ira, spes, fama, sanies, supellex, tabes, cum multis aliis. Q. What are the fourth sort of Defectives in Num∣ber? A. They are these Neuters that want the Plural Number, viz. Delicum, cii; senium, nii; lthum, thi; caenum, ni; salum, li; barathrm, thri; virus invaria∣bile; vitrum, tri; viscum, sci; penum, ni; justitium, tii; nihilum, li; ver, veris; lac, ctis; gluten, nis; ha∣le, ēcis; gelu invariabile; solium, ii; jubar, āris. Q. Which is the fifth Rule, or fifth sort of Defi∣cients in Number? A. The fifth Rule, and the two next Rules follow∣ing it, are of words that want the Singular Number, the four first being of words that wanted the Plu∣ral. Q. What is the fifth Rule of Deficients in Number, and what are the words? A. The fifth Rule is of these Masculines that want the Singular Number; as, Manes, ium; majores, um; cancelli, orum; liberi, orum; antes, ium; menses, ium; lemures, rum; fasti, orum; minores, um; natales, ium; penates, ium; gabii, orum; locri, orum; to which add, caelites, codicilli, annales, fasces, carceres, indigetes, pugil∣lares, quirites, primores, opimates, gaamantes, no∣mades, &c.
Q. What words are of the sixth sort of Deficients in Number? A. They are these of the Feminine Gender that want the Singular Number, viz. Exuviae, phalerae, | arum; grates in the Nom▪ Acc. and Voc. manubiae, arum; idus, m; antiae, indiae, insidiae, minae, excu∣biae, nonae, nugae, fricae, calendae, quisquiliae, thermae, cunae, dirae, exequiae, feriae, inferiae, primitiae, plagae, valvae, di∣vitiae, uptiae, | arum; lactes, ctium; Thebae, Athenae, | arum; to which may be added, dapes, Dryades, Eumeni∣des, fauces, minutiae, parcae, reliquiae, alpes, Symplegades, ambages, &c. Q. What is the last Rule of Desectives in Num∣ber? A. The last is of these Neuters, that want the Sin∣gular Number; as, Maenia, tesqua, praecordia, lustra, arma, mapalia, bellaria, munia, castra, justa, sponsalia, rostra, crepundia, cunabula, exta, effata, | orum; bacchana∣lia, ium, etorum: but mapalia makes orum and ibus; so doth sponsalia, orum, ibus; bacchanalia, orum, ium, ibus. Q. Where doth the Third Part of Quae genus begin, viz. of Nouns Irregular, called Redundants, or that have overmuch? A. It begins at Haec quasi luxuriant, &c. Q. How many sorts o Redundants are there? A. There be two sorts of Redundant Nouns, viz. some Substantives and some Adjectives. Q. How many sorts of Redundant Substantives are there? A. Two; Redundants in the Nominative as well as in other Cases; and Redundants only in the Oblique Cases. Q. How many sorts are redundant in the Nomina∣tive Case? A. Two; some according to different Termina∣tions are of different Genders; others under different Terminations are of the same Gender.
Q. How many are of the first sort, that according to different Terminations are of different Genders? A. There are two of these, for some under dif∣ferent Terminations are still Latin words; others in which one differing Termination is Greek, from whose Accusative Case in a, is found a new Nominative in a, of a Latin Termination. Q. Which is the Rule for those Redundants, that, under divers Terminations, are of divers Genders, yet both the Terminations Latin, and what words are they? A. The Rule is, Haec quasi luxuriant, &c. viz. of these Nouns agreeing in their signisication, tho' dif∣fering in their Gender, according to their divers Ter∣minations; and they are, Tonitrus, ùs, M. Tonitru in∣variabile, N. Clypeus, ei, M. Clpeum, ei, N. Baculus, i, M. Baculum, i, N. Sensus, ùs, M. Sensum, i, N. Tygnus, ni, M. Tygnum, i, N. Tapetum, ti, N. Tapete, is, N. Ta∣pes, ētis, M. Punctus, i, M. Punctum, ti, N. Sinapi inva∣riabile, N. Sinapis, is, F. Sinus, ùs, M. Sinum, ni, N. Menda, ae, F. Mendum, di, N. Viscus, ci, M. Viscum, ci, N. Cornu indeclinabile, N. Cornum, ni, N. Cornus, ùs, M. Eventus, ùs, M. Eventum, ti, N. with many more that you may meet with in reading Authors. Q. Which is the Rule and the Words of the second sort of Redundant Substantives, which in their Nomi∣native Cases have two Terminations, one originally Greek, the other atin, which comes from an Accu∣sative Case in a of that Greek word. A. The Rule is, Sed tibi preterea, &c. as, Panther, ēris, M. Acc. Panthēra. Nom. Panthēra, ae, F. Crater, ēris, M. Acc. Cratera. Nom. Cratēra, ae, F. Cassis, idis, F. Acc. Cassida. Nom. Cassida, ae, F. Aether, eris, M. Acc. Aethera. Nom. Aethera, ae, F. Q. What are the third sort of Redundants, that, under different Terminations, are of the same Gender and Signification? A. They are these, viz. Gibbus, bi, M. Gibber, ēris, M. Cucumis, is, M. Cucumer, ēris, M. Stipis, is, F. Stips,
stipis, F. Cinis & ciner, ris, D. G. Vomer, ĕris, M. Vo∣mis, ris, M. Scobis, is, F. Scobs, bis, F. Pulvis, ĕris, D. G. Pulver, ris, D. G. Pubes, is, F. Puber, ĕris. C. 2. Like∣wise word that end in or and os in the Nom. as, Honor, & honos, ōris, M. Labor, labos, ōris, M. Odor, odos, ōris, M. To which add Apes, apis, is, F. Plebs, is, F. Plbes, ei, F. with many Nouns borrowed from the Greeks, which admit of a double manner of declining; as, Delphin, inis. Delphinus, ni, M. Elephas, antis. Elephantus, ti, M. Congrus, i. Conger, gri, M. Meleagrus, gri. Meleager, gri, M. Teurus, cri. Teucer, cri, M. Q. What are the next sort of Redundants, and the Rule for declining of them? A. They are these, that are redundant in the Ob∣lique Cases, being of the 2d and 4th Declension; as, Laurus, ri & us, F. Quercus, i & ùs, F. Pinus, ni & ûs, F. Ficus, ci & ùs, F. Colus, li & lùs, F. Penus, ni & nûs, D. G. Cornus, ni & ùs, F. G. Lacus, ci & ùs, M. Domus mi & ûs, F. (Sed Tolle me, mu, à Singulari, & mi at{que} mis à Plurali, si declinare domus vis) The Rule of them is, Haec simul & quarti flexus sunt at{que} secundi. Q. Are there no Redundants of other Declensions, besides those of the second and fourth Declension? A. Yes, for some are of the first and third; as, Ore∣stes, ae, is. Orontes, ae, is. Labes, ae, tis. Thales, ae, tis. Calchas, ae, antis. Pascha, ae, ais. And some are of the second and third; as, Mulciber, beri, beris. Polypus, pi, podis. Glomus, mi, eris. Vesper, ri ris. Aedipus, i, podis. Sequester, tri, tris. Q. What is the Rule for Redundant Adjectives? A. The Rule is this, Et quae luxuriant sunt, &c. that is there are many Redundant Adjectives, especially those derived of these Substatives, viz. Of Arma, jugum, nervus, somnus, clivus, animus, limus, cera, fraenum, bacil∣lum; which Adjectives may be either of three Termi∣nations, or three Articles; as, Of Arma, cometh iner∣mus, a, um, and inermis, me; but Hilarus is very sel∣dom read, tho' Hilaris is very common.
As in Praesenti, Explained by QUESTION and ANSWER. Q. WHat doth As in Praesenti contain? A. It contains Rules for the Preterper∣fect Tenses and Supines of Simple and Compound Verbs. Q. Into how many Parts may it be divided? A. Into Ten; viz. 1. The Preterperfect Tenses of Sim∣ple Verbs in o. 2. The Preterperfect Tenses of Com∣pound Verbs. 3. Supines of Simple Verbs. 4. Supines of Compound Verbs. 5. Preterperfect Tenses of Verbs in or. 6. Verbs having two Preterperfect Tenses. 7. Verbs Neuters Passive (i. e.) which end in o, and yet have a Passive Signification. 8. Verbs borrowing the Preterper∣fect Tense. 9. Verbs wanting the Preterperfect Tense. And, lastly, Verbs wanting the Supines, whereof the five first concern Rgular Verbs, the five last Irregular Verbs, which are either Redundant, Variant, or Defective. Q. What doth the first Part teach? A. It teacheth to know the Preterfect Tense of Verbs in o, in all the four Conjugations. Q. What is to be observed in the forming of the Preter∣perfect Tense of Verbs in each Conjugation? A. That the first, second and fourth have peculiar Ter∣minations in their Preterperfect Tenses; viz. the first in
avi, the second in ui, the fourth in ivi; but the third Con∣jugation forms its Preterperfect Tense variously, according to the Trmination of Verbs in the Present Tense; as, bo makes bi, co makes ci, &c. Q. What is the Rule for the Preterperfect Tense of all Simple Verbs in o, of the first Conjugation, de∣clined like Amo? A. The Rule is, As in Praesenti. Q. What is the meaning of the Rule? A. That Verbs of the first Conjugation, having as in the second Person of the Present Tene will have avi in the first Person of the Preterperfect Tense; as, No, nas, navi: Vocito, tus, tai. Q. What Verbs are excepted from this Rule? A. These: Lavo, as, lavi, lotum, lautum, lavatum. Juvo, as, uvi, utum only in composition, nexo, as, xui, xum. Seco, as, cui, ctum. Neco, as, ui. Mico, as, ui. Plico, as, avi & cui. Frico, as, ui, ctum. Dom, as, ui, itum. Tono, as, ui, itum. Sono, as, ui, itum. Crepo, as, ui, itum. Veto, as, ui, itum. Cubo, as, ui, itum. Do, das, dedi, datum. Sto, stas, steti, statum. Q. What is the Rule for the Preterperfect Tense of all Simple Verbs in eo, of the second Conjugation, declined like Doceo? A. It is this, Es in praesenti perfectum format ui dans. Q. What is the meaning of this Rule? A. That Verbs of the second Conjugation, having es in the second Person of the Present Tense, will have or make ui in the first Person of the Preterperfect Tense; as, Nigreo, es, ui, &c. Q. How many Exceptions are there from this Rule? A. There are six. Q. What is the first Exception? A. The first is of these Verbs, viz. Jubeo, es, ssi, ssum. Sobeo, es, ui, & psi pum. Mulceo, es, si, sum. Luceo, es, xi—. Sedeo, es, di, ssum. Video, es, si, sum. Prandeo, es, si, sum. Strideo, es, di—. Suadeo, es, si, sum. Rideo, e, si, sum. Ardeo, es, si, sum. Q. What is the second Exception?
A. Quatuor his infra, &c. viz. That the first syllable of the Preterperfect Tense is doubled in these four Verbs, Pendeo, es, pependi, sum. Mordeo, es, momor∣di, sum. Spndeo, es, spondi, sum. Tondeo, es, totondi, sum. Q. What is the third Exception? A. The third is, If l or r come before ge, in the Present Tense, the Preterperfect Tense shall end in si; as, Ʋrgea, es, si, sum. Mulgeo, es, si & xi, ctum: And these ending in geo make xi; as, Frigeo, es, xi—, Lugeo, es, xi, ctum. Augeo, es, xi, ctum. Q. What is the fourth Exception? A. It is of these Verbs, Fleo, es, vi. Leo, es, vi. De∣leo, es, vi. Pleo, es, vi. Neo, es, vi, | tum. Q. What is the fifth Exception? A. It is of these three Verbs that make si in the Pre∣terperfect Tense, Maneo, es, si, sum. Torqueo, es, si, tum, & sum. Haereo, es, si, sum. Q. What is the last Exception? A. It is, Veo fit vi, viz. Of Verbs in veo, which make vi in the Preterperfect Tense; a, rveo, es, vi—: Except Niveo, es, xi—. Conniveo, es, xi—. Cieo, es, vi, tum. Vieo, es, ēvi, tum. Q. Are all Verbs in o of the second Conjugation? A. No, for beo, creo, screo, meo, calceo, laqeo, nauseo, enuleo, and the Compounds of any of them are of the first: and e and queo, with their Compounds, are of the fourth Conjugation: and therefore es, in the se∣cond Person of the Present Tene, proves a Verb to be of the second Conjugation, and as proves a Verb to be of the first. Q. What is the Rule for the Preterperfect Tense of all Simple Verbs in o, of the third Conjugation, de∣clied like Lego? A. It is, Tertia praeteritum formabit, &c. Q. What is the meaning of the Rule? A. That Verbs of the thrd Conjugation, having no common ending in  Preterperfect Tense, as Verbs of the first and second Conjugation have, form their
Preterperfect Tense according to the several Termi∣nations of the first Person of the Present Tense. Q. What if the first Person of the Present Tense end in bo, in Verbs of the third Conjugation? A. Then the Preterperfect Tense shall end in bi; as, Lambo, is, bi—: Except Scribo, is, psi, ptum. Nubo, is, psi, ptum. Cuinbo, is, ui, itum. Q. What if the Present Tense end in co? A. The Preterperfect Tense shall end in ci; as, Vin∣co, is, vici, ctum: Except Parco, is, peperci, & parsi—. Dico, is, xi, ctum. Duco, is, xi, ctum. Q. What if the Present Tense end in do? A. The Preterperfect Tense shall end in di; as, Mando, is, di, sum: Yet these lose n out of the middle; as, Scindo, is, scidi, ssum; findo, is, fidi, ssum; fundo, is, fudi, sum: And these admit a reduplication in the beginning; as, Tundo, is, tutudi, tunsum; pendo, is, pe∣pendi, pensum; tendo, is, tetendi, tensum; pedo, is, pe∣pedi, peditum; cado, is, cecidi, casum; caedo, is, cecidi, cae∣sum. Q. But how do Cedo, vado, rado, &c. make their Pre∣terperfect Tense? A. They make it in si, and their Supines in sum; as, Cedo, is, ssi, ssum; vado, is, si, sum; laedo, is, si, sum; ludo, is, si, sum; divido, is, si sum; trudo, is, si, sum; claudo, is, si, sum; plaudo, is, si—rodo, is, si, sum. Q. What if the Present Tense end in go? A. The Preterperfect Tense shall end in xi; as, Jungo, is, xi, ctum: But if there be an r before go, that Verb will make si; as, Spargo, is, si, sum, &c. And these Verbs ending in go, make gi; as, Lego, is, gi, ctum; ago, is, egi, actum; tango, is, tetigi, tactum; pun∣go, is, xi, & pupugi, ctum; frango, is, fregi, fractum; pan∣go, is, pepigi, pegi, & panxi, pactum. Q. What if the Present Tense end in ho? A. The Preterperfect shall end in xi; as, Traho, is, xi, ctum; veho, is, xi, ctum. Q. What doth lo make in the Preterperfect Tense?
A. It makes ui; as, Colo, is, ui, cultum: But Psallo & sallo, is, li, sum; vello, is, li & vulsi, vulsum; failo, is, fefelli, falsum; cello, is, ceculi, & cellai, culsum, & celsum; (but percello, is, culi, culsum; excell, is, lui, cel∣sum:) pello, is, pepuli, pulsum. Q. What doth mo make in the Preterperfect Tense? A. It makes ui; as, Vomo, is, ui, itum: But Emo, is, mi, ptum; como, is, compsi, ptum; promo, is, prompsi, ptum; demo, i, dempsi, ptum; sumo, is, sumpsi, ptum; premo, is, pressi, ssum. Q. What doth no in the Present Tense, make in the Preterperfect Tense? A. It makes vi; as, Sino, is, vi, tum: But Temno, is, psi, ptum; sterno, is, stravi, tum; sperno, is, sprevi, tum; lino, is, levi & lini, litum; cerno, is, crevi, tum; gigno, is, genui, genitum; pono, is, posui, positum; cano, is, cecini, cantum. Q. If the Present Tense end in po, how must the Preterperfect Tense end? A. In psi; as, Scalp, is, psi, ptum: Except Rumpo, is, rupi, ruptum; strepo, is, ui, itum; crepo, is, ui, i∣tum. Q. If the Present Tense end in quo, how doth the Preterperfect Tense end? A. In qui; as, Linquo, is, liqui: But Coquo, is, xi, ctum. Q. What if the Present Tense end in ro, how doth the Preterpersect end? A. In vi; as, Sero, is, vi, satum; signifying, to plant or sow: But in another signification, Sero, is, ui, ser∣tum: So Verro, is, ri, sum; gero, is, ssi, stum; quaero, is, sivi, itum; tero, is, trivi, tum▪ curro, is, cucurri, cursum; uro, is, ssi, stum. Q. What if the Present Tense ends in so? A. The Preterperfect Tense shall end in sivi; as, Accerso, is, sivi, itum; arcesso, is, sivi, itum; incess, is, si & sivi, situm; lacesso, is, sivi, itum; capesso, is, si & sivi, sum & situm; facesso, is, si & sivi, sum & situm; viso, is, si, sum; pinso, is, ui, stum.
Q. What if the Present Tense end in sco? A. Then the Preterperfect Tense ends in vi; as, Pasco, is, pavi, pastum: Except Poco, is, poposci—; di∣sco, is, didici—; quinisco, is, quexi—. Q. What if the Present Tense ends in to? A. The Preterperfect shall end in ti; as, Verto, is, ti, versum: Yet Sisto, is, stiti, statum; mitto, is, si, ssum; peto, is, petu, or petivi, itum; sterto, is, ui—; meto, is, ssui, ssum. Q What if the Present Tense ends in ecto? A. The Preterperfect shall end in exi; as, Flecto, is, xi, xm: But Pecto, is, makes xi & xui; and necto, is, xui & xi. Q. What if the Present Tense ends in vo? A. The Preterperfect shall end in vi; as, Volvo, is, vi, volutum: Except Vivo, is, xi, ctum. Q. What if the Present Tense ends in xo? A. The Preterperfect shall end in ui; as, Nexo, is, ui, ctum; texo, is, ui, xtum. Q. What if the Present Tense ends in cio? A. The Preterperfect shall end in ci; as, Facio, is, feci, factum, jacio, is, jeci, jactum: Except the Old Verb Lacio, is, lexi, ctum; specio, is, spexi, ctum. Q. What doth dio make in the Preterperfect? A. It makes di; as, Fodio, is, di, ssum. Q. What doth gio make in the Preterperfect? A. It makes gi; as, Fugio, is, gi, &c. Q. What doth pio make in the Preterperfect? A. It makes pi; as, Capio, is, cepi, captum: Except Cupio, is, pivi, itum; rapio, is, ui, rapum; sapio, is, ui & ivi, itum. Q. What doth rio make in the Preterperfect? A. It makes ri; as, Pario, is, peperi, partum. Q. What doth tio make in the Preterperfect? A. It makes ssi, with a double ss; as, Quatio, is, ssi, ssum. Q What doth üo make in the Preterperfect? A. It makes ui; as, Statuo, is, ui, utum: But pluo, is, vi & ui, itum; struo, is, xi, ctum; fluo, is, xi, xum.
Q. What is the Rule for the Preterperfect Tense of Simple Verbs in io, of the fourth Conjugation, declined like Audio? A. It is, Quarta dat is, ivi, &c. Q. What is the meaning of the Rule? A. That all Verbs of the fourth Conjugation, make their Preterperfect Tense in ivi; as, Scio, is, seivi, tum: Except Venio, is, veni, tum; cambio, is, psi, psum; raucio, is, si, sum; farcio, is, si, tum; sarcio, is, si, tum; sepio, is, psi, ptum; sentio, is, si, sum; fulcio, is, si, tum; haurio, is, si, stum; sancio, is, xi & ivi, ctum & citum; vincio, is, xi, ctum; salio, is, ui, tum; amicio, is, ui,  & amixi, ctum. Q. Do none of these that are excepted, ever make their Preterperfect Tense in ivi, according to the Rule of the fourth Conjugation? A. Yes, Cambivi, haurivi, sepivi, sanxivi, sarcivi & salivi, are sometimes tho' seldom read. Q. Are there not many Verbs in io, which are not of the fourth Conjugation? A. Yes, for these are of the first, tho' they end in io, viz. Glacio, emacio, socio, crucio, saucio, calcio, nuncio, fascio, catamidio, radio, hio, retalio, spolio, amplio, lani, somnio, pio, strio, vario, decurio, centurio, succenturio, furio, basio, satio, vitio: But some that end in io, are of the third Conjugation, viz. Facio, jacio, lacio, specio, fdio, fugio, cupio, rapio, sapio, pario, quatio. Q. What is the Rule for the Preterperfect Tense of Compound Verbs, being the Second Part of As in Praesenti? A. It is, Praeeritum dat idem Simplex & Composii∣vum. Q. What is the meaning thereof? A. The meaning is, that the Compound Verb hath the same Preterperfect Tense as the Simple Verb; for as deceo makes docui, so edoceo makes edocui. Q. Hath this Rule no Exceptions? A. Yes, it hath several Exceptions, whereof the first is, Sed syllaba semper quam simplex geminat composto
non geminatur; that is, the syllable which is doubled in the Preterperfect of the Simple Verb is not doubled in the Preterperfect Tense of the same Verb being compounded; for tho' tendo makes tetendi, yet extendo makes exendi: except in these three, praecurro, excurro, repungo, nd in the Compounds of do, disco, sto, posco, which double the syllable when they are compounded. Q. What is the second Exception on Praeteritum dat idem? A. When plico is compounded with sub or a Noun, it will have avi in the Preterperfect Tense; as, suppli∣co, as, avi; multiplico, as, avi: but applico, as; compli∣co, as; replico, as; explico, as, make ui or avi. Q. What is the third Exception? A. That tho' the Simple Verb oleo makes olui in the Preterperfect Tense, yet its Compounds rather make olevi; as, exoleo, es, levi: only redoleo, es, ui; suboleo, es, ui. Q. What is the fourth Exception? A. It is, that the Compounds of pungo make punxi, except repungo, is, repunxi, & repupugi. Q. What is the fifth Exception? A. The fifth is, that the Compounds of do, being of the third Conjugation do make didi, and not dedi; as, addo, is, didi; credo, is, didi; edo, is, didi; dedo, is, didi; reddo, is, didi; perdo, is, didi; abdo, is, didi; obdo, is, didi; condo, is, didi; indo, is, didi; trado, is, didi; prodo, is, didi; vendo, is, didi, itum; except ab∣scendo, is, di & didi, sum & itum: To which Rule is added the Compounds of sto, that make stiti. Q. What and how many other Exceptions are there wherein the Compound Verbs do differ from the Simple? A. There are three general Exceptions, (viz.) 1. Verba haec simplicia, &c. 2. Haec habeo, lateo, &c. 3. Haec si componas, &c. Q. What is the meaning of the first Exception, (viz.) Verba haec simpliia?
A. That these Verbs following, (viz.) Damno, la∣cto, sacro, fallo, arceo, tracto, satiscor, partio, carpo, patro, scando, spargo, and pario, when they are compounded, change their first Vowel in all Tenses into e; as, dam∣no, condemno, lacto, oblecto, sacro, consecro: but two of the Compounds of pario, (viz.) Comperio, is, rii, and reperio, is, ri, make their Preterperfect Tense in ri, the rest of its Compounds make ui; as, aperio, is, ui, aper∣tum; operio, is, ui, opertum: but all of them in general, except in the Preterperfect Tense, are declined like Verbs of the fourth Cunjugation, tho' the Simple Verb pario be of the third. Q. What say you of the Compounds of Pasco, be∣longing to this Rule, Verba haec simplicia? A. That two of its Compounds change the first Vowel into e, and make their Preterperfect Tense in ui, viz. Compesco, is, ui; dispesco, is, ui; but all the rest of the Compounds of Paco do keep the Vowel and Preterperfect Tense of the Simple Verb; as, Epas∣co, is, vi, stum. Q. What is the meaning of the second general Ex∣ception, (viz.) Haec habeo, lateo, &c. wherein Com∣pound Verbs differ from the Simple? A. That these Verbs, viz. Habeo, lateo, salio, statuo, cado, laedo, pango, pegi, cano, quaero, caedo, tango, egeo, te∣neo, taceo, sapio, rapio; being compounded, change the first Vowel in all Tenses into i; as, Habeo, cohibeo, ra∣pio, eripio. Q. What is to be observed of the Compounds of Cano? A. That they make their Preterperfect Tense in ui, (tho' it self makes cecini) as, Concinno, is, ui, tum. Q. What say you of the Compounds of Placeo? A. They change the first Vowel into i; as, displiceo, es, ui, itum: except complaceo and perplaceo, declined like the Simple Verb placeo. Q. What say you of the Compounds of Pango?
A. That these four, depango, oppango, circumpango, and repango do keep a like the Simple Verb: but all the rest of its Compounds change a into i; as, impin∣go, is, pegi. Q. What say you of the Compounds of Maneo? A. That these four Compounds of Maneo, viz. Prae∣mineo, es, ui; emineo, es, ui; promineo, es, ui, and im∣mineo, es, ui, do change the first Vowel of the Simple Verb into i, and do make their Preterperfect Tense in ui; but all the rest of its Compounds keep the Vowel a, and are declined like Maneo. Q. What say you of the Compounds of scalpo, cal∣co, salto? A. They change a into u; as, scalpo, exculpo; calco, inculo; salto, resulto. Q. What say you of the Compounds of claudo, qua∣tio, lavo? A. They cast away a; as, claudo, occludo, excludo, quatio, percutio, excutio; lavo, proluo, diluo. Q. What is the meaning of, Haec si componas, &c. the third general Exception of Verbs Compounds that differ from their Simple? A. That these Verbs, Ago, emo, sedeo, rego, frango, capio, jacio, lacio, specio, premo, when they are compound∣ed, change the first Vowel of the Present Tense, and the Tenses form'd thereof into i; but not of the Pre∣terperfect Tense, nor of the Tenses form'd of it; as, frango, refringo, is, fregi; capio, incipio, is, cepi. Q. Are there no Exceptions from this Rule? A. Yes, for perago and satago are declined like the Simple Verb ago: and these two Compounds of it, dego, cogo, with pergo, do cast away the middle syllable of the Present Tense; for instead of deago, we say dego; cogo instead of coago; and pergo for perago; so surgo for surrego. Q. What is the meaning of this Rule, Nil variat facio? A. That the Compounds of facio, do not change the first Vowel into i; as, olfacio, calfacio; unless
when facio is compounded with a Preposition; as, in∣ficio. Q. What is the meaning of, A lego nata, &c? A. That lego being compounded with re, se, per, prae, sub, or trans, doth keep e, and not change it into i; but when it is not compounded with re, se, &c. it doth change the Vowel into i; as, intelligo, diligo, negligo, which three make the Preterperfect Tense lexi, all the rest of its Compounds legi. Q. How is the Supne of a Simple Verb known, be∣ing the Third Part of As in praesenti? A. It is known by the ending of the Preterperfect Tense. Q. What if the Preterperfect end in bi, how shall the Supine end? A. It shall end in tum; as, bibo, bibi, tum. Q. What is ci in the Preterperfect Tense made in the Supine? A. It is made ctum; as, vinco, vici; ico, ci, ctum; fa∣cio, feci, factum; jacio, jeci, jactum. Q. What is di made in the Supine? A. Sum; as, video, vidi, sum: but these Verbs do double ss; as, pando, pandi, passum; sedeo, sedi, ssum; scindo, scidi, ssum; findo, sidi, ssum; fodio, fodi, ssum: Ob∣serve that the syllable which is doubled in the Pre∣terperfect Tense, is never doubled in the Supine; as, tondeo, totondi, tonsum, and not totonsum; cedo, cecīdi, caesum; cado, cecĭdi, casum; tendo, tetendi, tensum, & tentum; tundo, tutudi, tunsum; pedo, pepidi, peditum; do, dedi, datum. Q. What is gi made in the Supine? A. It makes ctum; as, lgo, legi, lectum; pango, pe∣gi & pepigi, pactum; frango, fregi, fractum; tango, teti∣gi, tactum; ago, egi, actum; pungo, pupugi, punctum: but fugio, fugi, fugitum. Q. What is li made in the Supine? A. Sum; as, sallo, salli, salsum; pello, pepuli, pul∣sum; cello, ceculi, culsum; fallo, feflli, falsum; vel∣lo, velli & vulsi, vulsum: but fero, tuli, latum.
Q. What are these Terminations of the Preterper∣fect Tense, mi, ni, pi, qui, made in the Supine? A. Tum; as, 1. Emo, emi, emptum. 2. Venio, ve∣ni, ventum; cano, cecini, cantum. 3. Capio, cepi, cap∣tum; caepio, caepi, caeptum; rumpo, rupi, ruptum; linquo, liqui, dant pignora lictum. Q. What doth ri make in the Supine? A. Sum; as, verro, verri, versum: except pario, pe∣peri, partum. Q. What doth si make in the Supine? A. Sum; as, viso, visi, visum: but mitto, misi, mis∣sum, with a double s. And these make tum, fulcto, fulsi, fultum; haurio, hausi, haustum; sarcio, sarci, sar∣tum; farcio, farsi, fartum; uro, ussi, ustum; gero, gessi, gestum; torqueo, torsi, tortum & torsum; indulgeo, indul∣si, indulsum & indultum. Q. What doth psi make in the Supine? A. It makes tum; as, scribo, scripsi, scriptum: but campsi makes campsum. Q. What doth ti make in the Supine? A. Tum; as, sto, steti, and sisto, stiti, statum: but verto, verti, makes versum. Q. What doth vi make in the Supine? A. It makes tum; as, flo, flavi, flatum: except pasco, pavi, pastum; lavo, lavi, lotum, lautum & lavatum; po∣to, potavi, poum & potatum; caveo, cavi, cautum; sero, sevi, satum; lino, livi & lini, litum; solvo, solvi, solu∣tum; volvo, volvi, volutum; singultio, singultivi, singul∣tum; veneo, is, venivi & ii, venum; sepelio, is, sepelivi, sepultum. Q. What doth ui make in the Supine? A. It makes itum; as, domo, as, ui, itum: but ui, of a Verb in uo, makes utum; as, exuo, exui, exutum: ex∣cept ruo, is, rui, ruitum; seco, as, ui, sectum; neco, as, necui, nectum; frico, as, ui, frictum; misceo, es, miscui, mi∣sium; amicio, is, amicui, amictum; torreo, es, torrui, to∣stum; doceo, es, docui, doctum; teneo, es, tenui, tentum; consulo, is, consului, consultum; alo, alui, altum & alitum; salio, is, salui, saltum; colo, is, colui, cultum; pinso, is,
pinsui, pistum, pinsitum and pinsum; rapio, is, rapui, rap∣tum; sero, is, serui, sertum; texo, is▪ texui, textum. Q. But what is the meaning of this Rule, Haec sed ui mutant in sum? A. That these Verbs turn the Preterperfect Tense ui, in sum; as, Censeo, censui, censum; cello, cellui, cel∣sum; meto, messui, messum: (but nexo, nexui, nxum; pecto, pexui, pexum) pateo, patui, passum; careo, carui, cassum & caritum. Q. What doth xi in the Preterperfect Tense make in the Supine? A. It makes ctum; as, vincio, vinxi, vinctum: but these five Verbs in xi cast away n; as, fingo, finxi, fi∣ctum; mingo, minxi, mictum; pingo, pinxi, pictum; stringo, strinxi, strictum; ringo, rinxi, rictum: and these four Verbs in xi make xum, not ctum; as, flecto, flexi, flexum; plecto, plexi, plexum; figo, fixi, fixum; fluo, fluxi, fluxum. Q. What is the Fourth Part of As in Praesenti? A. It is, Compositum ut simplex formatur quodque supi∣num, viz. The Supines of the Compound Verbs are the same as the Supines of the Simple Verbs; for as doceo makes doctum, so edoceo makes edoctum. Q. Is there no Exception on this Rule? A. Yes, for sometimes the Compound Supine hath not the same syllable as the Supine of the Simple, for tho' tundo makes tunsum, pertundo makes pertusum, ruo makes ruitum; yet corruo, corrutum; salio, saltum; resilio, resultum; sero, satum; insero, insitum: Also these Supines, Captum, factum, jactum, raptum, cantum, par∣tum, sparsum, carptum, fartum, change a into e when they are compounded. Q. What will edo make when it is compounded? A. It will make esum, and not estum; as, exedo makes exesum; only comedo make comestum and con∣sum. Q. What do the Compounds of nosco make in the Supines?
A. They make notum; as, dignosco, dignotum: ex∣cept cognosco, cognitum, and agnosco, agnitum. Q. What is the meaning of the Fifth Part of As in Praesenti, (viz.) Verba in or admittunt ex posteriore su∣pino, &c. A. The meaning is, that all Passives do borrow their Preterperfect Tense of the latter Supine of the Active Voice, by changing the Termination u into us, and adding sum or fui; as, of lectu is made lectus sum or fui: Which sum or fui differ thus: Amissus est qui ad∣huc desideratur: Amissus fuit qui jam inventus est. Q. What is the meaning of this Insertion, At horum nunc est Deponens? A. The meaning is, that in Verbs deponent (be∣cause they are not read in the Active Voice to have a latter Supine), we do feign a latter Supine whereby their Preterperfect Tense may be formed. Q. What Verbs of this sort are most to be obser∣ved? A. They are those of the Book which seem to differ from the common way of declining; as, Labor, eris, lapsus sum vel fui; patior, eris, passus sum; compatior, eris, compassus sum; perpetior, eris, sus sum; fateor, ēris, sus sum; confiteor, ēris, ssus sum; diffiteor, ēris, essus sum; gradior, eris, gressus sum; digredior, eris, essus sum; sa∣tiscor, eris, fessus sum; metior, īris, mensus sum; utor, e∣ris, usus sum; ordior, īris, orsus & orditus sum; nitor, eris, nixus, & nisus sum; ulciscor, eris, ultus; irascor, eris, atus sum; reor, ēris, ratus sum; obliviscor, eris, li∣tus sum; fuor, eris, ctus & itus sum; misereor, ēris, er∣tus sum; tuor, eris, tuitus sum; tueor, ēris, tuitus sum; loquor, eris, locutus vel loquutus sum; sequor, eris, ūtus sum; experior, īris, ertus sum; paciscor, eris, pactus sum; nanciscor, eris, nactus sum; apiscor, eris, aptus sum; adi∣piscor, eris, adeptus sum; queror, eris, stus, sum; profi∣ciscor, eris, ctus sum; expergiscor, eris, rectus sum; com∣miniscr, eris, entus sum; nascor, eris, natus sum; morior, eris, mortuus sum; orior, eris, ortus sum.
Q. Which is the Sixth Part of As in Praesenti, and what doth it treat of? A. The Sixth Part is, Praeteritum Activae & Passivae vocis habent haec; and it treats of Verbs Irregular re∣dundant. Q. What's the meaning of the Rule it self? A. The meaning is, that these Verbs Neuters re∣dound and have a Preterperfect Tense of the Active and Passive Voice, viz. Coeno, as, coenavi & coenatus sum; juro, as, juravi & juratus sum; poto, as, potavi & potus; titubo, as, titubavi, titubatus; careo, es, carui & cassus sum; prandeo, es, prandi & pransus; pateo, es, pa∣tui & passus; placeo, es, placui & placitus; suesco, is, suevi & suetus; veneo, is, venivi & venditus sum; nubo, is, nupsi & nupta sum; mereor, ēris, merui & meritus sum; liet, 2. libuit, libitum est; licet, 2. licuit, licitum est; taedet, 2. taeduit, pertaesum est; pudet, 2. puduit, puditum est; piget, 2. piguit, pigitum est: Yet few of these, except placeo, nubo, and the five last, have a Preterper∣fect Passive. Q. Which is the Seventh Part of As in Praesenti, and what doth it treat of? A. It is this, Neutro-passivum sic Praeteritum tibi for∣mat, and this Part and the next Part treats of Irregu∣lar Variants. Q. What is the meaning of the first Rule of Variants? A. That these Verbs Neuters, tho' they end like Verbs Actives, have an irregular Preterperfect Tense, (i. e.) are declined with a Preterperfect Tense of the Vassive Voice; as, Gaudeo, es, gavisus sum; fido, is, fisus sum; audeo, es, ausus sum; solco, es, solitus sum; fio, fis, factus sum; maereo, es, maestus sum. Q. What is the difference between Neutro-passiva, and Neutralia-passiva? A. Neutro-passiva have a Preterperfect Tense after the manner of Passives, and commonly also a Passive Significa∣tion; as, Audeo, aufus sum; but Neutralia-passiva have only a Passive Signification, without any ending like a Pas∣sive; as, Vapulo, veneo, exulo, &c.
Q. Which is the Eighth Part of As in Praesenti, be∣ing the second Rule of Verbs Irregular Variant? A. The Eighth Part is, Quaedam praeteritum verba accipiunt aliunde: (i. e.) These Verbs are declined with a Preterperfect Tense borrowed of the Primitives whereof they are derived, having none of their own; as, 1. Verbs Inceptives in Sco, (i. e.) signifying, to begin to do a thing, or to wax more; as, Tepesco, is, tepui, to begin to be warm, or to wax more warm; from tepeo, to be warm; and so fervesco, is, fervi, from ferveo. Q. What other Verbs of this Rule do borrow or va∣ry their Preterperfect Tense? A. These, Cerno, is, vidi, from video; quatio, is, con∣cussi, of concutio; ferio, is, percussi, of percutio; meio, is, ininxi, of mingo; sido, is, sedi, of sedeo; tollo, is, sustu∣li, of suffero; sum, es, fui, of fuo; fero, fers, tuli, of tu∣lo; sisto, is, stiri, of sto; furo, is, insanivi, of insanio; vescor, ēris, pastus sum, of pascor; medeor, ēris, medi∣catus sum, of medicor; liquor, ēris, liquefactus sum, of liquefio; reminiscor, ēris, recordatus sum, of recor∣dor. Q. Which is the Ninth Part of As in Praesenti, and what doth it treat of? A. It is, Praeteritum fugiunt, &c. and its treats of these four sort of Verbs, which are desective in their Preterpersect Tense; as, 1. Vergo, i, ambigo, is; glisco, is; fatisco, is; polleo, es; nideo, es. 2. Verbs Inceptives ending in sco, signifying a beginning, (which are neither put for nor have any Primitive Verbs) want the Preterperfect; as, Puerasco, is. 3. Such Passives whose Actives want the Supines, from which the Preterperfect Tense Passive is formed; as, Me∣tuor, ēris; timeor, ēris. 4. All Meditatives, (viz.) such as signifie a meditation, or a desire to do, or to be about to do a thing; as, Micturio, I have a desire to make Water; scripturio, I am about to Write; except parturio, is, ivi; esurio, is, ivi.
Q. What is the Last Part of As in Praesenti, and what doth it treat of? A. It is, Haec rarò aut nunquam retinebunt Verba Su∣pinum; and it treats of these Verbs that commonly are defective in their Supines; as, Lambo, is; mico, as; rado, is; scabo, is; parco, is; dispesco, is; posco, is; disco, is; compesco, is; quinisco, is; dego, is; ango, is; sugo, is; lingo, is; mingo, is; satago, is; psallo, is; volo, vis; nolo, nonvis; malo, mavis; tremo, is; stri∣deo, es; strido, is; annuo, is; flaveo, es; liveo, es; a∣veo, es; paveo, es; conniveo, es; ferveo, es; with the Compounds of nuo, is; and cado, is; except occido, is, occasum; and reido, is, recasum: Also these Verbs want the Supine, respuo, is; linquo, is; luo, is; me∣tuo, is; cluo, is; frigeo, es; calvo, is; sterto, is; ti∣meo, es; luceo, es; arceo, es; but the Compounds of arceo do make ercitum: The Compounds of gruo want the Supines; as, ingruo, is. Lastly, All Verbs Neuters of the second Conjugation, which have ui in the Preterperfect Tense, do want the Supines; except oleo, es; doleo, es; placeo, es; taceo, es; pa∣reo, es; careo, es; noceo, es; pateo, es; lateo, es; va∣leo, es; caleo, es, | tum.
SYntaxis Liliana in Compendium redacta: Nam tantam Regularum molem, quae à Lilio multipli∣catae sunt, neutiquam necessariam esse sentio: Sed si∣quis quaerat quare tam pauca exempla ea{que} taris in lo∣cis hinc illinc sparsa in Syntacticas hasce Regulas cita∣vi, sciat me consultò & ad imitationem doctissimarum Scholarum hoc fecisse. Insuper Specimina & Exem∣pla in Lilianam Syntaxin à multis edita non desunt; necnon Anglica argmenta quotidiè meis tyronibus La∣tinè vertenda dictare soleo: Et denique in Syntacticâ Verborum examinatione eorum constructionem, & quos casus plerumque regunt, non omnino perfuncto∣riè tractavi. Siquid novisti, siquid excogitsti (Qui∣cunque es) rectius aut melius istis, candidus imper∣ti, si non, his utere mecum. GRammatica est rectè scribendi atque loquendi Ars. Grammaticae partes sunt quatuor: 1. Otho∣graphia, quae circa veram literarwn scriptu∣ram. 2. Etymologia, quae circa singulas partes orationis. 3. Syntaxis quae circa vces vel partes orationis conjun∣ctas. 4. Prosiodia quae circa syllabas rectè pronuntiandas versatur. Syntaxis est congrita octo partium orationis inter se di∣sp sitio. Syntaxis est duplex Perfecta seu Analoga, quae est re∣gularis & Figurata seu Anomala quae non est regularis, sed redit à communibus regulis, & tamen bonorum scripto∣rum authoitate nititur. Perfecta seu Analoga item est duplex, Concordantia quae est dictionum inter se convenientia, & Regimen quod est de∣pendentia unius dictionis ab aliâ.
Concordantia vocum declinabitium est duplex, vulgà tri∣plex; prima Verbi cum Nominativo, secunda Adjectivi cum Substantivo ad quam tertia (quae est Relativi cum Ante∣cedente▪) referri potest. De tribus Concordantiis & casu Relativi: de Interrogativo & Redditivo, & Sub∣stantivorum convenientia. VErbum personale cohaeret cum nominaivo, numero & perfoâ. Adjectiva ut &. participia & pronomina cum substanti∣vis, genere, numero, & casu consentiunt, etiam cum Verbum intercesserit. Relativum Qui, cum Antecedente, genere, numero, & personâ, interdum etiam & casu concordat. Relativum aut erit Verbo nominativus, aut à Verbo aut ab aliâ dictione regitur. Interrogativa & Indefinita Relativorum regulam se∣quuntur. Interrogativum & ejus Redditivum ejûdem casus & temporis erunt, nisi Interrogatio fiat per dictionem variae Syntaxeos, vel per Cujus, ja, jum, aut Responsio per haec possessiva, Meus, tuus, suus, &c. Substantivum cum substantivo ejus rei aut personae con∣venient casu. Figurata Syntaxis. VErba Insiniti Medi pro Nominativo Accusativum ante se statuunt. Hic modus resolvi potest per, quòd & ut, aliquando per an, ne & quin, praecedente non; post videor non resol∣vitur. Nomen multitudinis singulre quandoque Verbo plurali jungitur.
Nominativus primae vel secundae personae (nisi discretio∣nis & emphasis causâ) & nominativus tertiae personae quando ejus significatio ad homines tantùm pertinet, rarò exprimitur. Discretio vocatur cum diversa studia significamus; ut, tu nidum servas, ego ludo ruris amaeni—ri∣vos▪ Hor. Emphasis est cum plùs significamus quàm expressè dicimus; ut, tu audes ista loqui, cantando tu illum? subaudi vicisti. Virg. Aliquando Verbum infinitum, aliquando oratio, aut mem∣brum aliquando orationis, aliquando adverbium cum geni∣tivo, aut dictio aliqua materialitèr sumpta, supplet locum nominativi, substantivi aut anteedentis. Duo nominativi singulares, duo substantiva, & duo an∣tecedentia singularia, intercedente conjunctione copulativâ, verbum, adjectivum, & relativum plurale requirunt, Quod quidem verbum, adjectivum & relativum, um nominati∣vo, substantivo, & antecedente, dignioris personae & dignio∣ris generis consentit, nisi quod in inanimatis neutrum genus dignius est. Verbum substantivum inter duos nominativs diversorum numerorum, & relativum inter duo antecedentia diversorum generum ollocatum cum alterutro convenire potest. Mobile fit fixum, si fixum mente subadis, (i. e.) Ad∣jectiva substantivè usurpata, ejus sunt generis cujus est sub∣stantivum intellectum. Aliquando relativum, aliquando & nomen adjectivum respondet primitivo, quod in possessivo subintelligitur. De Regimine. REgimen est dependentia unius dictionis ab ali: & est duplex, Casus & Modi. Omnes partes orationis regunt casus, exceptâ con∣junctione.
Substantivorum regimen seu Constru∣ctio. Posterius duorum substantivorum diversas res significan∣tium, in genitivo plerum{que} ponitur, sed saepè in Adje∣ctivum possessivum mutatur, & aliquando in dativum ver∣titur. Adjectivum aut pronomen adjectivum in neutro gener absolutè positum, genitivum regit, & substantivum fit, ut è contrario substantivum praecipuè apud Graecos quando{que} fit Adjectivum. Secundum hanc regulam, haec dictio (Res) cum sit juncta adjectivo potest omitti. Prius substantivum aliquando sub auditur. Laus & vituperium rei quae significatur alteri inesse aut adesse in ablativo vel genitivo post verbum aut nomen sub∣stantivum effertur. Opus & usus ablativum exigunt. Verbalia in io antiquè regebant casum verbi unde deri∣vata erant; ut, Quid tibi hanc curatio est rem? Quid tibi nos mendice homo tactio est? Plaut. Justitia est obtem peratio legibus scriptis. Traditio alteri. Cicero. Domum reditionis spe sublatâ. Caesar. de Eell. Gal. Sic adjectiva praesertim verbalia in, bundus; ut, po∣pulabundus agros. Vitabundus castra hostium. Imagina∣bundus carnificem. Gratulabundus patriae. Studiosus a∣dulterio sc. studere adulterio Plaut. Cum{que} sit ignis aquae pugnax. Adjectivorum regimen seu Constructio. GENITIVUS. ADjectiva desiderium, notitiam, memoriam, curam, metum significantia, atque iis contraria, &c. Item verbalia in ax; item partitiva, comparativa, superlati∣va, distributiva, interrogativa & certa numeralia geniti∣vum adsciscunt.
Sed partitiva & quae partitivè significant, aliquando usurpantur cum his praepositionibus, Ab, de, e, ex, inter, ante. Compos, impos, consors, exors, particeps, ptens, impo∣tens, cum ingenti adjectivorum turbâ, nullis regulis obstri∣cta casum patrium postulant. Reus, certior, & sollicitus, genitivo adhaerent aut abla∣tivo cum de, sed conscius genitivo rei, interdum & dativo ungitur, at semper dativo personae. DATIVUS. Adjectiva quibus commodum, incommodum, amititiam, odium, aptitudo, ineptitudo, facilitas, difficultas, (item plurimùm similitudo, dissimilitudo, & propinquitas) vo∣luptas, dolor, submissio, aut relatio, ad aliquid signiicatu. Item nomina ex con praepositione composita: Denique ver∣balia in bilis & participialia in dus, in dativum tran∣transeunt. Sed natus, commodus, incommodus, utilis, inutilis, ve∣hemens, aptus, par, aequalis, interdum etiam Accusativo cum praepositicne adjunguntur. Communis, alienus, immunis, variis casibus inser∣viunt. ACCUSATIVUS. Magnitudinis mensura subjicitur adjectivis in accusativo, interdum & in ablativo vel genitivo. ABLATIVUS. Adjectiva quae ad copiam, egestatemve pertinent in ablativo vel genitivo rei gaudent. Comparativa cum exponuntur per quàm; item dignus, indignus, praeditus, captus, contentus, extorris, fretus, vilis, carus, venalis. Deni{que} nomina significantia causam, instru∣mentum, formam, aut modum rei, vel aliquid simile, uti adjunctum vel circumstantiam regunt ablativum.
Nomina diversitatis Ablativum sibi cum praepositione sub∣jiciunt, non unquam etiam Dativum. Tantò, quantò, multò, longè, eò, quò, paulò, nimiò, aetate, natu, & comparativis, & superlativis appnuntur. Comparativum magnâ ex parte ad duo, superlativum ad plura refertur. Pronominum Constructio. CƲm passio significatur primitiva, cum actio vel posses∣sio possessiva usurpantur (i. e.) substantiva affectu∣um significant passionem, cum regunt hosce genitivos prono∣minum, mei, tui, sui, nostri, vestri, sed haec possessiva, meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, activè explicantur. Ex pronominibus, ipse & idem, omnibus personis jungi possunt. Idem habet post se, qui, &, ac, atque. Hic proximitatem, Ille excellentiam, Iste contemptum, significant. Sui & suus reciproca sunt: hoc est, cum tertia persona redit vel transit in seipsam; ut, Caesar recordatur sui, in∣dulget sibi, amat se; parcit erroribus suis, &c. sed in pri∣mâ & secundâ personâ, non fit reciprocatio, nam non dici∣mus, dixi sibi, sed ei: nec nosti suum fratrem, sed illius. Constructio seu Regimen Verborum. Nominativus post Verbum. VErba Substantiva; ut, sum, forem, fio, exisio. 2. Passiva vocandi iis{que} similia; ut, dicor, vocor, salutor, habeor, existimor, videor, &c. Et 3. Verba Neu∣tra gestûs; ut, eo, incedo, curro, sedeo, bibo, cubo, studeo, dormio, somnio, &c. utrin{que} nominativum aut cesdem casus expetunt.
Genitivus post Verbum. SƲm signisicans possessionem, proprietatem, aut officium Genitivum pstulat. Excipiuntur hi Nominativi, Meum, tuum, suum, nostrum, vestrum, humanum, belluinum, & similia. Verba aestimandi cum Accusativ admittunt hosce aesti∣mationis genitivos, tanti, quanti, cum compositis, magni, maximi, pluris, plurimi, parvi, minoris, minimi, nihili, slocci, nauci, pili, assis, hujus, teruncii. Aestimo vel Genitivum vel Ablativum adsciscit, sed hos Ablativos, magno, permagno, parvo, nihilo, saepe re∣cipit. Item Verba accusandi, damnandi, monendi, absolvendi & consimilia praeter Accusativum personae Genitivum postulant criminis & interdum paenae. Sed Genitivus horum Verborum vertitur aliquando in Ablativum cum vel abs{que} praepositione; praecipuè, si, uterque, nullus, alter, neuter, alius, ambo, & superlativus gradus sequantur id genus Verba. Satago, misereor, miseresco, Genitivum admittunt. Reminiscor, oblivscor, recordor, & memini Genitivum aut Accusativum desiderant. Potior aut Genitivo aut Ablativo jungitur. Dativus post Verborum. OMnia Verba acquisitivè posita adsiscunt Dativum ejus ri aut personae cui aliquid acquiritur, & cui aliquid usitatius admitur. Haec regula omnia Verborum genera in se compre∣hendit, Activa, Passiva, Neutra & Deponentia, tam tran∣sitiva, quam intransitiva, & quoslibet Dativos tam rei¦quam prsonae. Hui regulae appendent imprimis Verba significantia com∣modum, incommodum. 2. Verba comparandi. 3. Dandi & reddendi. 4. Promittendi, solvendi & debendi. 5. Imperandi & nunciandi. 6. Fidendi & iis contraria.
7. Obsequendi & repugnandi. 8. Minandi & irascendi. 9. Sum cum compositis. 10. Verba neutra & passiva composita cum his praepositionibus, prae, ad, con, sub, ante, post, ob, in, inter. 11. Verba composita cum his Adver∣hiis, satis, benè & malè. 12. Est & suppetit pro habeo. 13. Sum cum quibusdam aliis geminum adsciscit Dativum. Aliquando apponitur Verbis Dativus pro Accusativo cum praepositione; ut, it clamor coelo pro ad coelum: Belloque animos accendit agrestes, pro ad bellum; Me mea paupertas vitae tradueit inerti, pro ad inertm vitam. Est aliquando Pleonasmus, (sc. Redundantia voca∣buli horum Dativoram) mihi, tibi, sibi. Quaedam Verba variè construuntur; ut, ausculto tibi & te. Sic dono, aspergo, impertio, interdico; Tempero, mode∣ror tibi & te; refero tibi & ad te, & refero ad senatum; do tibi & ad te. Item mitto & scribo tibi & ad te lite∣ras; consulo tibi te & in te; aequi boni consulo & facio, caveo tibi; cavere periculum; aemulor tibi, sc. invideo; aemulor te sc. imtor; deficiunt mihi vel me vires; condu∣cit tuae laudi & in tuam laudem, &c. Accusativus post Verbum. VErba Transitiva seu potiùs Activa, & plera{que} alia uti Deponentia, & Neutra actionem transeuntem significantia Accusativum regunt. Quaedam Intransitiva cognatae significationis Accusa∣tivum regunt (ut, vivo vitam vel aetatem; curro cur∣sum; longam eo viam; duram servio servitutem, &c. alioqui non, nam secus est in neutris & deponentibus quae actionem habent absolutam, qualia sunt existo, sto, sedeo, venio, surgo, orior, morior, &c. Verba rogandi, vestiendi, celandi. Item doceo & moneo cum compositis, at{que} etiam hortor duplicem regunt Accusati∣vum: Sed rogo, exoro, psco, doceo, edoceo, moneo, & admo∣neo, Accusativum rei retinent etiam in Passivo.
Ablativus post Verbum. QƲodvis Verbum admittit Ablativum significantem instrumentum, causam, Modum actionis aut par∣tem, sed aliquando additur praepositio ablativo causae, Modi actionis & partis. Quibuslibet Verbis subjicitur nomen pretii in Ablativo casu. Excipiuntur hi Genitivi sine Substantivis positi, tanti, quanti, pluris, minoris, tantidem, quantivis, quantilibet, quanticunque, sin addantur Substantiva, hi Genitivi in Ablativo efferuntur. Sed vili, paulo, minimo, magno, nimio, plurimo, dimidio, duplo, adjiciuntur saepe sine Substantivis. Instrumentum quaestioni factae per quocum, causa per quare, modus actionis per quomodo, & pretium rei per quanti respondet. Valeo tum Accusativo tum Ablativo junctum reperitur. Verba abundandi, implendi, onerandi, & illis diversae Ablativo gaudent, interdum sed rarius Genitivo. Fungor, fruor, utor, vescor, epulor, dignor, gaudeo, laetor, glorior, sto, consto, creor, nascor, muto, numero, communico, afficio, prosequor, impertio, impertior, laboro, pro malè ha∣beo, nitor, supersedeo, & vivo pro victito, & similia Ablati∣vo junguntur. Mereor cum Adverbiis, benè, malè, meliùs, pejùs, opti∣mè, pessimè Ablativo adhaerent cum praepositione De. Quaedam accipiendi, distandi, & auferendi Verba Abla∣tivum cum praepositione optant, sed hic casus vertitur ali∣quando in Dativum. Verbis, quae vim comparationis obtinent, adjicitur Abla∣tivus significans mensuram excessus. Aliquando additur Ablativus absolutè sumptus cum par∣ticipio adjecto vel intellecto; qui resolvi potest per hasce particulas, dum, cum quando, siquàm, postquam. Eidem Vero diversi casus diversae orationis apponi pos∣sunt.
Passivorum Constructio. PAssiva habent Ablativum agentis cum Praepositione, a, ab vel abs, & ierdum Dativum. Caeteri casus, excepto Accusativo, manent in Passivis qui fuerint Activorum. Passivorum constructionem sequuntur Neutro-passiva, va∣pulo, vaeneo, liceo, exulo, fio. Verba Infiniti Modi vel aliis Verbis, vel Participiis, aut Adjectivis subjiciuntur. Verba Infiniti Modi interdum figuratè & absolutè ponuntur. Quatuor sunt Verborum genera quae solùm post se In∣finitivum habere perhibentur. 1. Quae significant sen∣sum; ut, audio, sentio, intelligo, docco, disco. 2. Quae significant voluntatem; ut, cupio, posco, libet, placet. 3. Quae potentiam; ut, possum, queo, valeo: Et 4. Quae squuntur, Licet, liberum est, par est, aequum est, contin∣git, &c. De Gerundiis. GErundia & Supina activè significantia regunt casum suorum Verborum. Gerundia in di, pendent, a quibusdam tum Substantivis tum Adjectivis Genitivum regentibus. Sed Poeticè Infini∣tivus Modus hujus Gerundii loco ponitur; ut, studium qui∣bus arva tueri, &c. Gerundia in di, pro casu sui verbi quem debent regere habent aliquando genitivum pluralem, (i. e.) Accusativus pluralis vetitur aliq. in genitivum pluralem; ut, novarum qui spectandi copiam faciunt; causa est quia Gerunda sunt substantiva utrius{que} numeri, uti pleri{que} vosunt. Gerundia in do, pendent ab his Praepositionibus, a, ab, abs, de, e, ex, cum, in, pr, aut ponuntur abs{que} Praepositione cum gnificatur causa vel modus; ut, nihil est quin malé narrando pssit depravariēr, Ter. Omnia conando docilis solertia vincit, Mart. Alitur vitium crescit{que} tegendo, &c.
Gerundia in dum, pendent ab his Praepositionibus, inter, ante, ad, ob, propter, aut ponuntur absolutè cum Dativo ex∣presso vel inrellecto quando significatur necessitas. Quando{que} Gerundia significant passivè; ut, Athenas eru∣diendi grati missus. Gerundia vertuntur eleganter in Adjectiva & cum Sub∣stantivis, genere, numero, & casu conveniunt; ut, ad discen∣das literas. De Supinis. PRius Supinum sequitur verba aut participia significan∣tia motum ad locum. Posterius Supinum sequitur no∣mina adjectiva au verba significantia motum de loco; ut, obsonatu redeo, Plaut. Primus cubitu surgat. Postremus cubitum eat, Cat. de re rust. Constructio Temporis & Loci. TErminus temporis respondens ad quaestionem factam per Quando, quid sit factum? in Ablativo effertur. Spatium temporis respondens ad quaestionem factam per Quamdiu? & spatium loci respondens ad quaestionem fa∣ctam per Quantum? in Accusativo frequentiùs, interdum & in Ablativo efferuntur. Locorum Constructio. NOmina majorum locorum, nempè regionum, insularum & provinciarum, ut & appellativa locorum addun∣tur plerum{que} cum Praepositione.
Propria Urbium & Oppidorum. PRopria urbium & oppidorum quae in loco significant, & respondent ad quaestionem, Ʋbi? Si sint numeri singularis, & primae vel secundae declinationis in Geni∣tivo efferuntur, sin pluralis, tantùm numeri aut ter∣tiae declinationis fuerint in Dativo aut Ablativo efferun∣tur. Humi, domi, militiae, belli, ruri vel rure, propriorum se∣quuntur formam. Propria urbium & oppidorum ubi motus ad locum significatur, & ad quaestionem Quo? respondetur, in Ac∣cusativo citra Praepositionem efferuntur. Sic Domum & Rus usurpamus. Propria urbium & ppidorum à loco aut per locum significantia & ad quaestionem, unde aut Quâ? respon∣dentia, in Ablativo sine Praepositione efferuntur. Sic Domo & rure utimur. Domi non alios Genitivos adjectivorum patitur quam Meae, tuae, suae, nostrae, vestrae, alienae. Si alia addas Ad∣jectiva in Ablativo cum domo efferuntur. Impersonalium Constructio. GENITIVUS. HAeC Impersonalia interest & refert Genitivum sibi personae plurimùm subjiciunt, nisi quòd pro genitivis pronominum primitivorum regunt hos ablativos foemininos, Meâ, tuâ, suâ, nostrâ, vestrâ & cujâ. Re∣gunt & hos genitivos quantitatis, tanti, quanti, magni, parvi, pluris.
DATIVUS. In Dativum feruntur haec Impersonalia, accidit, certum est, contingit, constat, confert, competit, conducit, convenit, placet, displicet, dolet, expedit, evenit, liquet, libet, licet, nocet, obest, prodest, praestat, patet, stat, restat, benefit, lefit, satisfit, superest, sufficit, vacat pro otium est. ACCUSATIVUS. Haec Impersonalia Accusandi casum exigunt, juvat, decet, cum compositis, item delectat & oportet. His vero attinet, pertinet, spectat, propriè additur Prae∣positio Ad. His Impersonalibus subjicitur Accusativus cum Genitivo, poenitet, taedet, miseret, miserescit, pudet, piget. Impersonalia praecedentem Nominativum non habent. Nonnulla Impersonalia aliquando remigrant in persona∣lia. Impersonalia vel ponuntur absolutè, vel post se verborum personalium asum regunt. Verbum Impersonale passivae vois pro singulis personis u∣trius{que} numeri indifferenter accipi potest. Participiorum Constructio. PArticipia regunt casus suorum Verborum, cum facta sint nomina genitivum regunt. Praeter haec, Natus, prognatus, satus, cretus, creatus, ortus, editus, oriundus, Ablativum regentia. Participia passiva plurimùm Dativis, Participia activè significantia magnâ ex parte Accusativis gaudent. Exosus, perosus, pertaesus, activè significantia Accusati∣vum, exosus & perosus passivè significantia Dativum re∣gunt.
Adverbii Constructio. EN & Ecce demonstrandi Adverbia Nominativo frequen∣tiùs, sed exprobrandi Accusativo nectuntur. Quaedam Adverbia loci, temporis & quantitatis ut & ergô & instar Genitivum post se vecipiunt. Sed instar ali∣quando usurpatur cum praepositione ad. Quaedam Adverbia Dativum admittunt nominum undè deducta sunt. Hi Dativi sunt Adverbiales, Tempori, Luci, Vesperi. Quaedam etiam Accusandi casum admittunt praepositionis unde sunt profecta. Accusativos Adjectivorum in neutro genere utrius{que} numeri absolutè ponunt Poètae pro Adverbiis; ut, Tor∣vùm{que} repentè clamat, Virg. Aen. 7. Horrendum stri∣dent, Aen. 6. Immane spirans, Aen. 7. Turbidum lae∣tatur: Perfidum ridens. Hor. Acerba sonans, 3. Georg. Transversa tuentibus hireis, Virg. 3. Ecl. Adverbia Comparativi & Superlativi gradùs eandem cum nominibus constructionem habent. Plùs, ampliùs, minùs, Nominativo, Accusativo, Abla∣tivo junguntur, subauditâ conjunctione quàm; ut, Mi∣nùs quindecim dies sunt. Plùs quingentos colaphos in∣fregit, horâ ampliùs, minùs nihilo. Abhinc etiam jungitur Accusativo vel Ablativo; ut, Abhinc sexaginta annos & annis. Constructio Conjunctionum. COnjunctiones copulativae & disjunctivae, cum his sex, quàm, nisi, praeterquam, an, cum & tum geminatum similes casus nectunt, nisi casualis dictionis ratio aliqua pri∣vata repugnet. Aliquoties similes modos & tempora nectunt & aliquoties similes modos sed diversa tempora.
Quae Particulae modis inserviant. Subjunctivum regunt, 1. Voces Indesinieae, quis, qualis, quantus. 2. Causales, quin, qui, ut, uti, quo, dummodi, & dum pro dummodo & frequentiùs quomvis, etsi, taets, eiamsi, & licet. 3. Dubitativae, an, ne, num. 4. Opra∣tivae, utinam, Osi. 5. Dissimulativae seu simulationis, per∣inde, aesi, quasi, ceuvero, pro quasi vero, tanquam, sed cum sunt semilitudinis Adverbia, Indicativum amant: quippe∣qui, utpote qui, ubi, cum, ni, nisi, si, quòd, quia, postquam, &c. utrum{que}; modum amant: at si, pro quamvis subjunctivo tantùm. Ne prohibendi vel Imperativis vel Subjunctivis praepo∣nitur. Sed ne, an, num, Interrogandi particulae, quando, quando∣quidem, quoniam, quippe, dum & donec, pro quamdiu; ut, pro postquam, quolnodo, sicut, Indicativo gaudent. Quòd & ut, ne consundantur, sic distingui possunt. Quòd idem valet ac quia, & plurimùm de re gestâ sive praeteitâ usurpatur: Ut valet, eo, fine, & potissi∣mùm in Fuuris hoc utimur; velut, gaudeo quòd ve∣neris: scripsi ut venires. Post has voces, adeò, ideò, ita, sic, tam, talis, tantus, tot, tantùm abest, &c. nunquam ponitur, quòd, sed ut, cum subjunctivo; ut, non sum ita hebes ut ista dicam: Ut habet quo{que}; locum post verba petendi, jubendi, ti∣mendi, &c. Item post verba quae voluntatem ac studi∣um significant: velut, volo, curo, laboro, &c. & post haec verba quae indicant eventum, fit, evenit, accidit, contingir. Caetera de particulis Authorum sedula le∣ctio curiósos doceat. Praepositionum Constructio. PRaepositio aliquando subauditur. Aliquando Verbum Compositum regit casum v Prae∣positionis, aliquando repetit candem Praepositionem cum suo casu erra compositionem.
Quaedam Praepositiones Accusativis, quaedam Ablativis inserviunt: de quibus in Rudimentis. Tenus gaudet Ablativo tum Singulari tum Plurali & Genitivo tantùm Plurali. Quaedam utique casui inservi¦unt; ut, In, super, sub, subter, casum subnectito utrumque. Quartum cum motùs sextum cum voce quiet is. His quoque clam jungas quod casu gadet utroque. In, pro, erga, contra, & ad, Accusativum haer. Am, di, dis, re, se, con, sunt Praepositiones quae nunquàm extra compositionem inveniuntur. Praepositiones cum casus amiti ant, migrant in Adverbia. Interjectionum Constructio. OExclamantis Nominativo, Accusativo & Vocativo jungitur, cum vocandi est particula Vocativo tan∣tùm; ut, huc ades O Galataea. Heu Nominativo, Dativo & Accusativo; ut, Heu pie∣ta. Heu misero mihi. Heu stirpem invisam. Hei & Vae Dativo solùm; ut, Hei mihi qualis erat. Vae tibi causidice. Proh, ah, & vah, regunt Accusativum & Vocativum; Ah me miserum. Ah virgo in feli. Ah inconstantiam. Heus & Ohe tantum Vocativo! Heus Syve! Ohe li∣bette! Ter. & Mrt. Apage & hem Accusativo▪ ut, Hem astutias! Apage istiusmodi salutem quae cum cruciatu advenit. Plaut. in Merc.
The foregoing SYNTAXIS Examin'd and Explain'd by QUESTION and ANSWER. Q. WHat Part of Grammar is that which teach∣eth us to make and speak Latin? A. It is the Third Part of Grammar, called Syn∣taxis in Greek, in Latin Constructio. Q. What is Syntaxis? A. It is a right and due joyning of the Parts of Speech together in speaking or writing Latin accord∣ing to the Natural Manner and Rules of Grammar, and this is the plain, simple and analogous Syntaxis; as, Magna pars vulnerata. But the Syntaxis which dif∣fers from the same is called the Figurative Syntaxis; as, Magna pars vulnerati: Whence Syntaxis is two-fold, 1. Perfecta, called Analoga, viz. the Regular Syntaxis. 2. Figurata, called also Anomala, viz. Ir∣regular. Q. How many fold is the plain or analogous Syn∣taxis? A. In general, this plain analogous, perfect or sim∣ple Syntaxis is twofold, 1. Concord of Words. 2. Go∣vernment of Words, (i. e.) Construction in the A∣greement of Words, and Construction in the Govern∣ment of Words.
Q. Under how many Heads may Syntaxis thus di∣vided he considered? A. Syntaxis, for the greater ease of Tyrocinians in making and parsing of Latin, may be considered and reduced into Twelve Heads or Parts. Q. Which are those Twelve Parts or Heads? A. They are first the Concords. 2. The Case of the Relative. 3. The Construction of Nouns Sub∣stantives. 4. The Construction of Adjectives. 5. The Construction of Pronouns. 6. The Construction of Verbs Actives, Neuters, or Deponents. 7. The Con∣struction of Verbs Passives. 8. The Construction of Gerunds and Supines. 9. Of Time and Place. 10. Of Impersonals. 11. Of the Participles. 12. Of the un∣declined Parts of Speech. Q. What ease and benefit doth the considering and reducing of Syntaxis under these particulars pro∣duce? A. The ease and benefit is this: Consider first, that every word is governed most commonly of that which goes before it in Construction; for in the Constru∣ction of that foregoing word you shall find the Rule for the government of that word you last construed: for if you have a word in the Genitive Case coming next after a Verb in construction, I conclude that the Rule for that word is to be found in the Construction of Verbs with a Genitive Case. Q. What is Concord, the first of the twelve Parts? A. It is the agreement of words together in some special Accidents or Qualities; as, in one Number, Person, Case, or Gender. Q. How many Concords or Agreements are there? A. There are really but two, though commonly reckon'd three: the first between the Nominative Case and the Verb; the second between the Substantive and Adjective; the third between the Antecedent and Relative, which may be referred to the second. Q. Why must these six so agree together?
A. It is because the three latter, viz. the Verb, Adjective, and Relative, are weak and cannot be pla∣ced orderly in Speech, except they be guided and holden up by the three stronger, (i. e.) by the No∣minative Case, Substantive and Antecedent. Q. Now, before I proceed farther in Syntaxis, which teacheth me to make Latin, let me know when an English is given to be made in Latin what I must do. A. You must look out for the Principal Verb. Q. What Verb is that you call the Principal Verb? A. It is the first Verb, or ought to be the first Verb, in a Sentence. Q. Is the first Verb always the Principal Verb? A. No: For, 1. if there comes an Infinitive Mood before it; or, 2. if it hath before it a Relative; as, that, whom, which; or, 3. a Conjunction; as, ut, that; cum, when; si, is, and such others, then the first Verb is not the Principal Verb. Q. Why cannot the Infinitive Mood, or the Verb that follows the Relative or Conjunction, be the Prin∣cipal Verb? A. Because they do most commonly depend upon some other Verb going before them in natural or due order of Speech. Q. Must not the same Way and Method be used when a Latin is to be construed or turned into Eng∣lish, as when an English is given to be made into La∣tin? A. Yes, the very same; for then the Principal Verb must be sought and mark'd carefully, because that will point out the right Nominative Case that a∣grees with that Verb in Number and Person. Q. After one hath found out the Principal Verb, what must he then do? A. He must seek out its Nominative Case, by asking the Question, who or what in the Verb; for the word that answers to the Question will be the Nominative Case.
Q. Must one always thus seek out the Nominative Case? A. Yes, in Verbs Personals; for a Verb Impersonal will have no Nominative Case. Q. How shall the Nominative Case be set in Making or Construing Latin? A. It shall be set before the Verb. Q. Is it always set before the Verb? A. No: For, 1. if a Question be asked; as, Ams¦tu? Dost thou love? 2. If the Verb be of the Impe∣rative Mood; as, Amatu, Love thou. 3. If this Sign, It or There, comes before the English of the Verb; as, Est liber meus, It is my Book. Venit ad me quidam, There came one to me; for them it is placed most commonly after the Verb, or after the Sign of the Verb. Q. What Case shall the casual word be, which comes next after the Verb, and answers to the Question, Whom or What, made by the Verb? A. It shall commonly be the Accusative Case. Q. Why do you say commonly, Is there any ex∣ception? A. Yes; for sometimes, and that pretty often, a Verb may properly govern another Case after it to be construed withal; as, Si cupis placere Magistro utere diligentiâ, nec sis tantus cessator ut calcaribus indigens. If you cover to please thy Master, use disigence, and be not so great a Truant, or so slack, that thou shall need Spurrs; where placere goverus properly a Dative, and utere and indigeas Ablatives. Q. Before you examine the following Parts of the Syntaxis, be pleased to tell me, to how many Heads the examination of any declined word may be redu∣ced? A. It may be reduced to these our: 1. The Know∣ledge of it. 2. The Declining of  3. The Acci∣dents of it. And, 4. The Government of it. The three first belong to Emologia, and the last to Syn∣taxis.
Q. That we may return to the Examination of the twelve Heads of Syntaxs, let me know how the first Concord, viz. a Verb Personal agrees with its Nomi∣native Case? A. It agrees with it in Number and Person. Q. What mean you by this? A. That the same Number and Person that the No∣minative Case is, the same the Verb must be of. Q. What say you of the second Concord, wherein is the Agreement? A. That Nouns Adjectives and also Participles and Pronouns agree with their Substantives, in Case, Gen∣der and Number, yea, tho' a Verb comes between. Q. What say you of the third Concord, which may be referred to the second? A. That the Relative, Qui, agrees with its antece∣dent in Gender, Number and Person, and sometimes in Case. Q. What say you of the Case or Rule of the Rela∣tive? A. The Relative is either the Nominative Case to the Verb, or it is governed of the Verb, (i. e.) it will be of such a Case as the Verb will have after it; or if it is not governed of the Verb, it must be go∣verned of another word; but observe, that it is con∣strued alway before the Verb. Q. What sort of Nouns are those that follow the Rule of Relatives in Construing and Covernment? A. Nouns Interrogatives and Indefinites; as, Quis, ecquis, quisnam, &c. Q. What say you of the Question and Answer to it? A. I say, that when a Question is asked, the An∣swer in Latin must be made by the same Case of a Noun, Pronoun or Participle, and by the same Tense of a Verb, that the Question is asked by; as, Whose Ground is this? My Neighbours, What do Boys do in the School? They ply their Books. Q. How many Exceptions have you from this Rule?
A. Three; 1. When a Question is asked by a word that may govern divers cases; as, For how much have you bought this Book? For little. Do you accuse me of Theft, or Murther, or both? Of neither, &c. 2. If a Question be asked by Cujus, a, jum; as, Whose Say∣ing is this? Cicero's. 3. When an Answer is made by one of these Possessives, Meus, tuus, suus noster, vester▪ as, Whose House is that? Not yours, but Ours. Whose Book is this? It is my Book. Q. How comes it to pass that one Substantive often∣times agrees with another Substantive in the same Case? A. It is because it signifies or belongs to the same thing or person; as, I have protected a Thousand Sail with my Courage, the hope of your return. My Fa∣ther a Man, loveth me a Child. Q. Which is the first Rule of the Figurative Syn∣taxis, and what's the meaning thereof? A. It is Verba Infiniti Modi, (i. e.) Verbs of the In∣finitive Mood set an Accusative Case before them, in∣stead of a Nominative; as, I am glad that you are re∣turned safe. I will have you act a Comedy. I bid yo be gone. Q. How may this Mood, or Figurative Way of Speak∣ing be resolved? A. Sometime by Quòd, which commonly renders a Reason, and is for the most part spoken of the thing gone or past; as, I am glad that you returned safe. And sometimes by Ʋt, which is spoken of the final cause or thing to come; as, I bid you be gone: Also sometimes it is resolved by an, ne, and quin, non going before; as, I doubt whether your Father bid you. I fear that the Stranger will not abide it, &c. After vi∣deor it cannot be resolved; for we do not say, Videor quod terram video, tho' I may say, Videor terram vi∣dere. Q. Which is the second Rule of the Figurative Syntaxi?
A. It is Nomen multitudinis singulare, &c. viz. A Noun of Multitude, being singular, will have a Verb Plural; as, Part are gone. Somebody open the Door. Both are mocked with deceit. We the People are overcome by one. Q. Which is the third Rule of the Figurative Syn∣taxis? A. It is Nominativus primae vel secundae personae, &c. (i. e.) the Nominative of the first or second person, (unless it be for difference sake, or the better expres∣sing the thing to be spoken) and the Nominative Case of the third Person when its signification only belongs to Men is seldom expressed. Q. Which is the fourth Rule or thing to be obser∣ved in the Figurative Syntaxis? A. That sometimes an Infinitive Mood, sometimes a Sentence, or some part of a Sentence, sometimes an Adverb with a Genitive Case or a word taken , or materaliter, (i. e.) for it self, may sup∣ply the place of a Nominative Case, Substantive, or Antecedent; as, To lye is not our property. To rise betimes in the Morning is the most wholesome thing in the World. Add, That to have learnt the Liberal Sciences faithfully, makes Men to be of a better de∣portment, and suffers them not be Clowns and Brutes. To love one's Parents is just. Part of the Men were slain. Homo is a word of two syllables, and Fur is a word of three letters, &c. Q. Which is the fifth Rule observable in the Figu∣rative Syntaxis? A. Two Nominative Cases, two Substantives, and two Antecedents Singular, with a Conjunction Copu∣lative coming between them, will have a Verb, Adje∣ctive, and Relative Plural, which Verb, Adjective, and Relative agrees with the Nominative Case, Substan∣tive, and Antecedent of the more worthy Person and more worthy Gender: except that in things without life the Neuter Gender is more worthy. I and you, who live in the Fields here, are contented. You and
your Daughter, who live at London, do see fine Shews. Both Mars and Venus were taken by Vulan's Wiles. Mulciberis capti Mars{que} Venus{que} dolis. The Rule and Dignity which thou hast required. You sleep much and drink often, both which things are nought for the Body. The Bow and Arrows which thou hast broken. Q. Which is the sixth Observation or Rule in the Figurative Syntaxis? A. A Verb Substantive placed between two Nomi∣native Cases of divers Numbers, and a Relative be∣tween two Antecedents of divers Genders, may agree with either of them. The falling out of Lovers is the renewing of Love. A living Creature full of Reason, (animal plen. rationis) which we call a Man, quem or quod vocamus hominem. There is a place in Prison cal∣led the Dungeon. There was one shape of Nature in the World called Chaos. Q. What is the meaning of this Verse in the Figu∣rative Syntaxis, Mobile fit fixum si fixum menie subau∣dis? A. That Adjectives taken substantively, are of the same Gender as the Substantive understood is; as, Few are good. Q. What is the meaning of this Rule, Aliquando Re∣lativum, aliquando & nomen Adjectivum? A. That sometimes a Relative, and sometimes a Noun Adjective or Participle answers to, or agreeth with its▪ Primitive understood in the Possessive; as, I have seen your Hand-writing. All Men spoke well, or did say all good things, and did praise my good hap, who had a Son endued with so good a Nature. You have seen the Eyes of me weeping. Seeing that no body readeth the Writing of me, fearing to recite them to the Common People. Q. What Parts of Syntaxis are we next to examine? A. We are to examine those Parts of Syntaxie con∣cerning the Government of Words. Q. What is Government in Syntaxis?
A. It is the depending of one word upon another and most commonly every word depends or is go∣verned of that word which goes before it in con∣ction, except in the Relative Qui: In Nouns Inter∣rogatives and Indefinites, which with their Substan∣tives joyned with them, are governed of the word fol∣lowing; as, Coelestis ira quos premit miseros facit, hu∣mana nullos, &c. Q. How many fold is Government? A. It is twofold, the Government of Cases, and the Government of Moods. Q. What Parts of Speech govern Cases? A. All Parts of Speech except a Conjunction. Q. What is the first Part in the government of Ca∣ses? A. It is the government of Nouns Substantives. Q. What Cases do Substantives govern? A. They govern commonly a Genitive, some a Da∣tive, or an Ablative, and some of old did govern an Accusative. Q. What is the Rule for those that govern a Ge∣nitive? A. It is, Posterius orum Substantivorum, &c. That is the latter of two Substantives, signifying divers things, shall be the Genitive Case; as, The Love of Money increaseth as much as the Money it self. Which Genitive is often changed into an Adjective Possessive, and put to agree with the former Substantive in Case, Gender and Number; as, The House of my Father. My Father's House. Sometimes this Genitive also is turned into a Dative, He is a Father to me, or my Father. Q. What is the second Rule in the Construction of Substantives? A. It is this, A Noun or a Pronoun Adjective be∣ing put absolutely in the Neuter Gender, becomes a Substantive and governs a Genitive Case; s, on the contrary, a Substantive sometimes, especially amongst the Greeks, becomes an Adjective. By this Rule also
the English of the word Res, being joyned to an Ad∣jective, may be omitted, for an Adjective in the Neu∣ter Gender may signifie for Res and it self too. Q. Which is die third Rule in the Construction of Substantives? A. It is, Prius Substantivum aliquando subauditur, (i. e.) The former Substantive is sometimes understood. Q. Which is the fourth Rule in the Construction of Substantives? A. La & vituperium, &c. Words that denote any quality or property inhering or adhering to the praise or dispraise of a thing, are commonly used in the Geni∣tive or Ablative Case, after a Noun or Verb Substantive. Q. What follows next? A. Opus and usus require an Ablative Case; but opus governs also a Dative of the Person, and sometimes it hath a Nominative. Q. What say you of Nouns derived of Verbs, or Verbals in i? A. Of old they were wont to govern the same Case as the Verb whence they were derived; as, Quid tibi hanc curatio est rem? Plant. Quid tibi nos mendice homo tactio est? Plant. Justitia est obtemperaetio legibus scri∣ptis, Cicero. Traditio alteri, Idem. Domum reditioni spe sublatâ, Caesar. l. 1. de Bello Gallico. So Adjectives, especially Verbalia in bundus; ut,  agros, vitabundus castra hostium. Imaginabundus Carnisicem. Ga∣tulabundus Patriae. Studiosus adulcerio s. studere adulterio, Plant.  sit ignis aquae pugnax. Q. What comes next, or what is the second Part of Syntaxis in the Gorvernment of Words? A. It is the Government or Construction of Nouns Adjectives with a Genitive, Dative, Accusative, or Ablative Case. Q. What sort of Adjectives govern a Genitive Case? A. Adjectives signifying desire, knowledge, remem∣brance, care, fear, and Adjectives contrary to them; likewise Verbals in ax; also Partitives, Comparatives, Superlatives, Distributives, Interrogatives, and certain Nouns of Number.
Q. Do all these always govern a Genitive Case? A. Not always, for Nouns Partitives, and those that are put partitively, are sometimes used with these Prepositions, Ab, de, è, ex, inter, ante. Q. What say you of Compos, impos, consors, exors, particeps, potens, impotens, &c? A. They govern a Genitive Case. Q. What say you of Reus, certior, sollicitus, and con∣scius? A. The three first govern a Genitive or an Ablative with de, but conscius is joyned to a Genitive of the thing, and sometimes to a Dative, but always to a Dative of the Person. Q. What sort of Adjectives govern a Dative Case? A. Adjectives that signifie, Profit, disprofit, friend∣ship, hatred, aptitude, ineptitude, &c. Likewise Ad∣jectives compounded with the Preposition con; and lastly, Verbals in hilis, and Participials in dus. Q. But what say you of Natus, commodus, incommo∣dus, utilis, inutilis, vehemens, par, aequalis? A. They are sometimes joyned to an Acsative with a Preposition Q. What say you of Communis, alienus, immunis? A. They serve to divers Cases, but most commonly to a Genitive or Dative; but immunis and alienus are used sometimes with a Preposition. Q. What Adjectives govern an Accusative and some∣times a Genitive or Ablative? A. Adjectives of Quantity; as, Longus, long; la∣tus, broad; altus, deep or high; crassus, thick: for the word signifying the measure of length, breadth, or thickness of any thing, is put after Adjectives in the Accusative Case, and sometimes in the Ablative, and sometimes, tho' seldom, in the Genitive. Q. What Adjectives govern an Ablative Case, or a Genitive of the thing? A. Adjective which signifie Plenty or Want. Q. What other Adjectives govern an Ablative Case?
A. Adjectives of the Comparative Degree havin By or Then after them; likewise, Dignus, indignus, praeditus, captus, contentus, extorris, fretus, vilis, charus, venalis. Lastly, Nouns signifying the cause, instru∣ment, form or manner, or some such thing; as, the Adjunct or Circumstance. Q. What Case will Nouns of Diversity govern? A. An Ablative with a Preposition, and sometimes a Dative. Q. What sort of Words are used to be added to Comparatives and Superlatives? A. Tantò, quantò, mult, longè, eô, quò, paulò, nimiô, ae∣tate, natu. Q. What say you of the Construction of Pronouns? A. When Passion or Suffering is signified, these Primitives, Mei, tui, sui, nostri and vestri are used; but when Possession is signified, Meus, tuus, suus, noster and vester are used, signifying actively, as the other signi∣fie passively. Q. What Pronouns are they that may be of any Per∣son? A. Ipse and idem, which idem hath after it, qui, &, c, or atque. Q. What say you of Hic, ille and iste, how are they distinguished? A. Hic shews proximity, ille shews excellency, and iste contempt. Iste also shews him who is next unto you, and ille one remote from both. Hic also is refer∣red to the latter and nearer of two Antecedents. Ille to the farther off, or that which is first spoken of, &c. Yet it happens sometimes otherwise. Q. Which is the next Part of Construction or Syn∣taxis? A. The next is the Construction of Verbs with a Nominative Case after them; with a Genitive and Dative governed of them; with an Accusative follow∣ing Verbs, signifying actively, and with an Ablative governed of them.
Q. What Verbs ae  that will have a Nomina∣tive or the ame Case  them, as they have before them▪ A. They are, 1. Verbs Substantives, Sam, forem, , xista, (so called because they signifie a Substance or Being.) 2. Certain Verbs Passives of Callig; as, Dicor, vocor, , apllor, haboor, existimr, videor. 3. Verbs Neuers of Gesture, (so called because they signifie some Gesture or Posture of Body;) as, Sodeo, , bo, eo, incedo, cro. Q. What if Verbs Substantive and Passives have an Accsative or Dutive Case before them? A. Then they have an Accusative or Dative Case after them, as Infinitive Moods commonly have. Q. But will they always have a Nominative after them when they have it before them? A. Yes, because they must have such after them, as they have before them. Q. Which is your Rule for Verbs governing a Geni∣tive, and what sorts of Verbs are they? A. The Rule is, Sum significans Possessionem, &c. That is, when Sum signifies Possession, Owing, Pro∣perty or Duty; or when you say, It is one's Part or Duty to do such a thing, it governs a Genitive Case. Q. Is there no exception? A. Yes; for Meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, must be the Nominative Case agreeing with the Substantive going before, expressed, or understood, because they are Pronouns Adjectives. Q. What  Verbs govern a Genitive Case? A. Verbs that beoken, to esteem; viz. signifying the value, require a Genitive Case with an Accusative, signifying the thing valued. Q. What Genitives are those? A. They are these, Tai, qunti, with their Com∣pounds; likewise Magni, maximi, pluris, plurimi, par∣vi, mioris, miimi, nihili, ooci, nanci, pili, asss, hujus, teruntii.
Q. Which are the common Verbs of Esteeming? A. They are, Aestimo, pendo, facio, habo, duco, puto, to which add consulo, &c. Q. What Cases else may aestimo govern? A. These Ablatives, Magno, permagno, parvo, nihilo. Q. What other Verbs require a Genitive Case? A. Verbs of Accusing, Condemning, Warning, Pur∣ging, Quitting, or Assoiling, will govern (besides an Accusative of the Person) a Genitive of the Crime, and sometimes of the Punishment. Q. Which are those Verbs that signifie, 1. To Ac∣cuse. 2. Condemn. 3. Warn. 4. Purge, Quit, or Assoil? A. Of the first sort are, Accuso, incuso, adstringo, &c. Of the second, Datnno, condemno, judico, noto. Of the third, Admoneo, commoneo, commonefacio. Of the fourth, Absolv, libero, purgo, solvo, &c. Q. May these Verbs have no other Case of the Crime? A. Yes, an Ablative, with, and most commonly without, a Preposition, especially if Ʋterque, nullus, alter, neuter, alius, ambe, or a Superlative Degree fol∣low. Q. What other Verbs require a Genitive Case? A. Satago, misereor, miseresco. Q. What Case do Reminiscor, obliviscor, recordor, and memini govern? A. A Genitive, and sometimes an Accusative; but memini signifying, I make mention, may have an Abla∣tive with a Preposition; as, Memini de te. Q. What Case doth Potir govern? A. A Genitive or Ablative; as, Potior urbis, potior voto. Q. What Verbs govern a Dative Case? A. All sort of Verbs put acquisitively, (i. e.) ha∣ving To or For after them, govern a Dative Case of the Thing or Person, to whom any thing is gotten, and commonly from whom any thing is taken.
Q. What sort of Verbs belong to this Rule? A. All sort of Verbs, Actives, Passives, Neuers, and Deponents, as well Transitives, as Intransitives. Q. What are the first sort of Verbs that belong to this Rule? A. They are Verbs signifying Profit or Disprofit. Q. What Verbs are there of this sort? A They are, Plaoeo, displiceo, commodo, incommd, proficio, noceo, officio, (except juvo, laedo, offende, and d∣leo, of the thing; as, Tu tua damna dole? Doleo vicem tuam.) Also, Auxilor, opitulor, opem fero, subvenio, pa∣trocinor, medeor, faeveo, grator, gratulor, gratificor, paco, indulgeo, consulo, prospicio, studeo. Q. What are the second sort of Verbs that belong to this Rule? A. They are Verbs of Comparing; as, Comparo, com∣pono, consero, aequo, adaequo, aequiparo, contendo, and certo pro comparo, which sometimes are governed of Prepo∣sitions with their Cases. Q. What are the third sort of Verbs governing a Dative? A. Verbs of Giving and Restoring; as, Dono, conce∣do, trado, reddo, confero, tribuo, attribuo, largior, elarglor, ministro, restituo, suppedito, repono, &c. Q. Which are the fourth sort of Verbs that govern a Dative Case? A. They are Verbs of Promising, Paying, and Ow∣ing; as, Promitto, polliceor, spŏn̄deo, debeo, solvo, appendo, numero, &c. Q. Which are the fifth sort of Verbs governing a Dative Case? A. They are Verbs that signifie, to command, shew, or declare; as, Impero, praecipio, dominor, mando, (and sometimes jubeo) nuncio, renuncio, dico, declaro, aperio, expone, explico, monstro, indico, significo, narro, patefacio, stendo, &c. Q. Which are the sixth sort of Verbs that govern a Dative Case?
A. They are Verbs of trusting, and Verbs contrary to them; as, Credo, sido, sidem habeo, dissido, &c. Q. What are the seventh sort of Verbs, that govern a Dative Case? A. They are Verbs of complying with, or obeying, and Verbs of resisting or thwarting; as, Obedio, pa∣reo, obsequer, obtempero, moremgero, cedo, morigeror, servio, famulor, ancillor, velisicor, blandior, adulor, assentior, pal∣po, pgno, repugno, resisto, adversor, luctor, reluctor, re∣clao, certo; but adulor, assentior, adversor, and palp, are read also with an Accusative Case. Q. Which are the ninth sort of them? A. They are Verbs of threatning, or being angry with; as, Minor, indignor, iraescor, succenseo, minitor, in∣termino, offendor. Q. Which are the tenth sort of Verbs, that govern a Dative Case? A. They are Verbs of meeting with; as, Occurr, obvenio, obviant eo, obviam fis, or habeo. Q. Which are the eleventh sort? A. They are Sum and his Compounds; as, Adsum, praesum, prosum, intersum, supersum, desum, &c. except possum, and also absum; as, absint inani sunere neniae. Q. Which is the twelfth sort of them? A. They are Verbs Neuters and Passives, compound∣ed with these Prepositions, Prae, ad, con, sub, ante, post, b, in, inter; but , anteeo, anteoede, anteste, ante∣verto, praevenio, praevinco, praecedo, praecurro, praeverto, prvertor, are joyned to an Accusative; so are invideo, insulto, occumbo, subeo, sufficio, illudo, attendo. Q. Which are the thirteenth sort of these Verbs, that govern a Dative Case? A. They are Verbs compounded with these Ad∣verbs, Satis, benè, & malè; as, satisfacio, benefacio, ma∣lesacio, benedico, maledico. Q. What other Verbs place will govern a Dative Case? A. The Verb Est and Suppetit, when they signifie for habeo, to have.
Q. What observe you of Sum; and some other Verbs? A. That it and some others govern a double Dative Case. Q. What more have you to say of this Rule, Omnia Verba acqulsitivè? A. That the Poets put a Dative Case sometimes to Verbs, instead of an Accusative, with a Proposition, and also sometimes there is added a Dative Case over∣much, not for necessity sake, but rather for pleasure. There are also certain Verbs that govern divers Cases in different respects; as, Ausculto tibi & te. Consulo tibi, te, & in te, &c. Q. What Verbs govern an Accusative Case? A. Verbs Transitives, or rather Actives, and most others; as, Deponents and Neuters having a transient action (i. e.) passing their significatio into another word making no perfect sense without it. Q. What other sort of Verbs may govern an Accu∣sative Case? A. Verbs Neuters Intransitives, (i. e.) which do not transfer or pass over their signification to another word, may and do often govern an Accusative of their own or a near signification; as, vivo vitam, &c. other∣wise they do not; for it is otherwise in Neuters and Deponents, which have an absolute action or signifi∣cation in them, such as are sto, , sedeo, venio, surgo, orior, morior, &c. Q. What Verbs are those that will govern two Accusative Cases after them? A. They are Verbs of asking, teaching, arraying, concealing; as, Doceo, edoceo, moneo, rogo, exoro, posco, hortor, induo, exuo, celo. Of which rogo, exoro, posco, do∣ceo, edoceo, moneo, & admoneo, do retain or govern an Accusative of the thing even in the Passive Voice. Q. What Verbs govern an Ablative Case? A. All manner of Verbs signifying the instrument, (put with this sign with before it) or of the cause, manner of doing, or part; but sometimes a Preposi∣tion
is added to the Ablative of the cause, manner of doing, and of the part. Q. What other Verbs govern an Ablative Case? A. Verbs wherein the word of Price (i. e. buying or selling, letting or hiring) is mentioned. Q. Are there no Exceptions from this Rule? A. Yes, these Genitives being put alone without Substantives, Tanti, quanti, pluris, minoris, tantidem, quantidem, quantivis, quantilibet, quanticunque, are ex∣cepted: but if Substantives be added to these, they and their Substantives are put in the Ablative Case; yet vili, paulo, minimo, magno, nimio, plurimo, dimidio, duplo, are often added (tho' they be Ablatives) with∣out Substantives. Q. What words are those by which the Question of the instrument, cause, or manner of doing, are an∣swered by? A. The instrument answers to the Question made, by Quocum, With what? The cause, by Quare, Where∣fore, for what cause or reason? The manner of do∣ing, by Quomodo, How or by what means? The price of the thing answers to Quanti, For how much, or how great a price? Q. Doth Valeo always govern an Ablative Case of the price? A. No; for it governs sometimes an Accusative? Q. What other Verbs govern an Ablative Case? A. Verbs of abounding, (i. e. of plenty) filling, loading, and those that signifie contrary to them, sc. Verbs of scarceness and want, emptying and un∣loading, some of which sometimes, tho' seldom, go∣vern a Genitive Case. Q. What other Verbs govern an Ablative Case? A. Fungor; fruor, utor, vesor, epulor, dignor, gaude, glorior, laetor, muto, numero, communico, afficio, prosequor, impertio, impertior, consto, creor, nascor, laboro for mal habeo, to be ill. Nitor, supersedeo, & vivo pro victito, to live upon. Q. What say you of Mereor?
A. Mereor, with the Adverbs benè, malè, meliùs, pejs, optimè, pessimè, governs an Ablative Case with the Pre∣position De. Q. Are there any other Verbs that govern an Abla∣tive? A. Yes▪ some Verbs of receiving, of being distant, and of taking away, will have an Ablative with a Pre∣position, which Ablative is turned sometimes into a Dative. Q. What say you of Verbs which have the force of comparison, or signifie exceeding? A. They govern an Ablative Case of the word that signifies the measure of exceeding. Q. Is there no other Rule for an Ablative Case? A. Yes, an Ablative Case absolute, with a Participle expressed or understood, being put in a Comma by it self; which Ablative may be resolved by any of these words, Dum, cum, quando, siquam, postquam; as, Impe∣rante Augusto (i. e.) cum or quando imperabat. Q. May there not divers cases be put to the same Verb? A. Yes, there may divers Cases of divers Reasons; as, Dedit mihi vestem pignri, te praesente, propriâ . Q. What part of government follows next? A. The Construction or Government of Verbs Pas∣sives. Q. What Case do they govern? A. An Ablative of the Doer, with the Prepositions, A, ab, or abs, and sometimes a Dative. Q. What say you of the other Cases of Verbs Pas∣sives? A. As for other Cases they are the same that their Actives govern, except an Accusative, which ought never to follow a Verb or Participle Passive, except in those afore-mentioned, sc. Rgo, exro, poso, doceo, edo∣ceo, moneo, admoneo, which retain an Accusative of a thing in the Passive Voice. Q. What say you of these Neuter Passives, sc. Va∣pulo, vaeneo, liceo, exulo, fio?
A. They have a Passive Construction, or govern Ca∣ses as Passives do, according to our Grammar, tho' controverted by some. Q. What is the Rule of Verbs of the Infinitive Mood, and of what are they governed? A. Verbs of the Infinitive Mood are governed, or depend, either on Verbs, Participles, or Adjectives. Q. Can all Verbs govern an Infinitive Mood after them? A. No; for we cannot say, curro ludere, o viva dere, &c. There are only four sorts of Verbs which govern an Infinitive Mood, viz. 1. Those that signifie sense; as, Audio, sentio, intelligo, doceo, disco. 2. Those that signifie will or desire; as, Cupio, posco, libet, placet. 3. Which signifie power, or ability; as, Possum, queo, valeo, &c. And, 4. these, viz. Lict, liberum est, ae∣quum est, par est, contingit, &c. Q. Are not Verbs of the Infinitive sometimes put absolutely and figuratively? A. Yes; as, Haeccine fieri flagitia? Criminibus ter∣rer novis. Q. What part of Government comes next? A. The Construction of Gerunds and Supines. Q. What Case do Gerunds and Supines govern? A. Gerunds and Supines, signifying actively, govern the Case of their Verbs. Q. What do Gerunds in di depend upon? A. They depend upon certain Substantives and Adjectives governing a Genitive Case. Q. What Case have Gerunds in di sometimes, in∣stead of the Case of their Verbs? A. A Genitive Plural, (i. e.) an Accusative Case is sometimes turned into a Genitive; Novarum qui spe∣ctandi copiam faciunt, pro novas. Ratio scribendi litera∣rum pro literas. Q. Of what are Gerunds in do governed? A. Of the Prepositions, A, ab, abs, de, è, ex, cum, in, pro, or else they are put without a Preposition, when the cause or manner is signified; as, Nihil est quin ma∣lè narrando, &c.
Q. Of what are Gerunds in dum governed? A. Of these Prepositions, Inter, ante, ad, ob, propter, or else they are put absolutely with a Dative, expressed or understood when necessity (i. e. when must or ought) is signified. Q. May not Gerunds elegantly be turned into Nouns Adjectives? A. Yes, and then they must agree with their Sub∣stantives in Case, Gender, and Number. Q. What is the first Supine governed of? A. The first Supine follows Verbs▪ or Participles, signifying moving to a place. Q. What part of Government falls under the ninth place? A. The Construction of Time and Place. Q. In what Case is the Term or Word of Time put, answering to the Question When? A. In the Ablative. Q. In what Case is it put answering to the Question, How long? And in what Case is the space of a place put answering to Quantum, How much or how far? A. In the Accusative commonly, and sometimes in the Ablative. Q. How are the Proper Names of great Places used, to wit, of Countries, Islands, and Provinces? And how are the Common Names of Places (i. e▪ Nouns Sub∣stantives common, denoting place) uttered? A. They are commonly uttered or used with Pre∣positions. Q. In what Case are the Proper Names of Towns and Cities put, when they signifie, in, or at, a City or Ton, and answer to the Question, Ʋi, Where? A. If they be of the first or second Declension and Singular Number, they are put in the Genitive Case; but if they be of the Plural Number or third Declen∣sion, they are commonly put in the Ablative, and, as some say, in the Dative. Q. What Words follow the Rule of Proper Names? A. , domi, militiae, belli, ri vel rure.
Q. In what Case are the Proper Names of Cities and Towns put in, when they signifie moving to a place, and answer to the Question Quo, Whither? A. They are put in the Accusative Case without a Preposition, and so are Domum and Rus used. Q. In what Case are the Proper Names of Cities and Towns put in, when they signifie From or By a place, and answering to the Question Ʋnde or Quâ, from whence or which way? A. They are put in the Ablative Case without a Preposition, so are Domo and Rure. Q. What Genitives of Nouns Adjectives will Domus only admit of? A. None but these, Meae, tuae, suae, nostrae, vestrae, alie∣nae, for if other Adjectives be used with Domi, they must be put with it in the Ablative Case. Q. What part of Government comes next? A. The Construction of Verbs Impersonals. Q. What Impersonals govern a Genitive Case? A. Interest and Refert most commonly govern a Ge∣nitive of the Person, save that instead of the Genitive Cases of the Pronoun Primitives, they govern these Ablatives Feminines of the Pronouns Possessives, Meâ, tuâ, suâ, nostrâ, vestrâ, cuj. Interest and Refert govern also these Genitives of the thing, viz. Tanti, quanti, magni, parvi, pluris, and sometimes other Cases; as, Interest ad laudem meam, It makes to my praise. Q. What Impersonals govern a Dative Case? A. Accidit, certum est, contingit, constat, confert, com∣petit, conducit, convenit, placet, displicet, dolet, expedit, evenit, liquet, libet, licet, nocet, obest, prodest, praestat, patet, stat, restat, benefit, malefit, satisfit, superest, sufficit, vocat forotium est, &c. Q. What Impersonals govern an Accusative Case? A. Juvat, decet, with their Compounds; likewise delectat and oportet. Q. To what Impersonals is the Preposition ad pro∣perly added? A. To these, Attinet, pertinet, spectat.
Q. What Cases will Paenitet, taedet, miseret, miserescit, pudet, piget, govern? A. An Accusatve with a Genitive. Q. But may not some Impersonals become Perso∣nals? A. Yes; as, Nam{que} decent animos mollia regna tuos. Q. Have Impersonals a Nominative Case before them? A. No; for they are called Impersonals, because they have no Person, nor Number, nor Nominative Case: And Vossius saith they want also the Imperative Mood, instead of which we use the Present Tense of the Subiunctive. Q. How are Impersonals put? A. Either absolutely (i. e.) by themselves, or they govern after them the Case of Verbs Personals; as, Non nocebitur ei nocturnis roribus, The Dew shall not hurt it by night. Q. How may a Verb Impersonal of the Passive Voice signifie? A. It may signifie indifferently, for every Person of both Numbers with the Preposition, a or ab, under∣stood, and the Ablative Cases Singular or Plural of ego, tu, ille; as, statur, I stand, thou standest, he stand∣eth; we stand, ye stand, they stand. Q. What Part of Government doth next follow? A. The Construction of Participles. Q. What Case will Participles govern? A. They govern the Cases of their Verbs. Q. What Case do Participles of Verbs Passives com∣monly govern? A. They govern for the most part a Dative, and Participles, signifying actively, for the most part go∣vern an Accusative Case. Q. What Case do Participles govern when they are changed into Nouns? A. They govern a Genitive. Q. But how many ways are Participles changed into Nouns?
A. Four; 1. When a Participle is construed with a different Case, then the Verb that it comes of is construed with it. 2. When it is compounded with a Preposition, with which the Verb it comes from, cannot be compounded. 3. When it forms all the Degrees of Comparison. 4. When it hath no respect or express difference of Time. Q. How are such Participles as are changed into Nouns called? A. Nouns Participials. Q. Do all other Nouns Participials require a Geni∣tive Case? A. No; Exosus, pertaesus, perosus, are excepted; for when perosus and exosus signifie passively, they govern a Dative Case, and when they signifie actively, all the three govern an Accusative: And natus, prognatus, satus, cretus, creatus, ortus, editus, oriundus, govern an Ablative. Q. What part of Construction comes in the twelfth and last place? A. The Construction of the Undeclined Parts of Speech. Q. Which of them comes first? A. An Adverb, according to order. Q. What Case do Adverbs govern? A. Some a Nominative and an Accusative; as, En and Ecce, when they are Adverbs of shewing, govern most commonly a Nominative Case, seldom an Ac∣cusative; but when they signifie upbraiding, re∣proaching, or disgracing, they have only an Accusa∣tive. Q. What Adverbs require a Genitive Case? A. Adverbs of Quantity, Time and Place, and the Adverbs Instar and Ergo; but Instar, with the Prepo∣sition Ad before it, is a Noun invariable. Q. What Adverbs govern a Dative Case? A. Certain Adverbs derived of Nouns Adjectives which govern a Dative Case; as, obvim derived of obvius, and similiter of similis.
Q. Are there not some Datives of Nouns Substan∣tives used adverbially? A. Yes, Tempori, luci, vesperi. Q. What Adverbs derived an Accusative Case? A. Certain Adverbs derived of Prepositions, ser∣ving to an Accusative; as, propriùs and proximè, of the Preposition prope, and clanculùm of clam; as Clanculùm Patres, Plaut. Q. How many ways may Prepositions be changed into Adverbs? A. Two; 1. When they are set alone without their Case. 2. When they do form all the Degrees of Comparison. Q. What Case will Adverbs of the Comparative and Superlative Degree have? A. The same as the Nouns Adjectives of those De∣grees of which they come. Q. What Case are plùs, ampliùs, and minùs, joyned to? A. To a Nominative, Accusative, and Ablative, the Conjunction quàm being understood. Q. What is the Adverb abhinc joyned to? A. To an Accusative or Ablative. Q. But do not Poets often use the Accusative Cases of Nouns Adjectives of the Neuter Gender in both Numbers for Adverbs? A. Yes; as, Torvùmque repentè clamat. Horren∣dùm stridens. Immanè spirans. Turbidùm laetatur. Per∣fidùm ridens, Hor. Transversà tuentibus hircis. Acer∣bà sonans. Crebrà fremit; multà gemens, Virg. The manner of these Expressions are in imitation of the Greeks. Q. What Cases do Conjunctions govern, being the next in order? A. They govern none; but they couple like Cases, and sometimes like Moods, and Tenses, and sometimes like Moods, but divers Tenses. Q. What Conjunctions do couple like Cases?
A. All Conjunctions Copulatives, and Disjunctives, with these six, quam, nifi, praeterquam, an, cum, tum & tum doubled. Q. But may they not couple sometimes divers Ca∣ses? A. Yes, in regard of some private reason, as in words that are of divers Constructions. Q. What Particles are there that govern Moods? A. These following govern a Subjunctive Mood: 1. Indefinite words, (i. e.) words used in a general, not in a particular sense; as, Quis, qualis, quantiss. 2. Causals, (i. e. that give a reason or shew a cause;) as, Quin, quippe, qui, ut, uti, quo, dummodo, and dum for dummodo, and most an end quamvis, ersi, tametsi, etiam∣si, and licet. 3. Dubitatives, (i. e. when a Doubt is made;) as, An, ne, num. 4. Optatives, (i. e. Par∣ticles or Words of Wishing;) as, Ʋinam, si, osi, ô. 5. These of Simulation, Perinde, asi, quasi, selt vero, for quasi vero, tanquam; but when they are Adverbs of Similitude, they govern an Indicative. Q. What Particles govern both Moods, sc. an Indi∣cative and a Subjunctive? A. Quippe qui, and utpote qui, ubi, cum, ni, nisi, si, quòd, quià, postquam; but si for quamvis, governs a Sub∣junctive only. Q. What say you of the Adverb ne, of forbid∣ding? A. It governs an Imperative or Subjunctive. Q. What Participles govern an Indicative Mood? A. Ne, an, num, being Particles of Interrogation, likewise quando, quandoqidem, quoniam, quippe, dum and donec, put for quamdiu; ut put for postquam, quomodo, sicut. Q. How are quòd and ut distinguished in making La∣tin, for both signifie that? A. Quòd most commonly signifies the same as Quià, be∣cause, or it signifies, that, noting the efficient cause; as, Quòd tu rediisti, Because you have returned; and for the most part it is used concerning a thing done and past. Ut
signifies to the end that, noting the final cause or effect; as, Ut tu fabulam agas Volo; and we use it chiefly for the future, and in things to come; of both thus; Gaudeo quod veneris scripsi ut venīres. Q. Which do you put, Quòd or Ut, after these words, viz. Adeò, ideò, ità, sic, tam, talis, tantus, tot, tantum abest, &c? A. We never put Quòd after them, but Ut, with a Sub∣junctive Mod. Q. After what Verbs may Ut be also used? A. After Verbs of seeking, bidding, fearing, and after Verbs that signifie a will, or study, or endeavour; as, after volo, curo, laboro, and Verbs that signifie an event; as, fit, evenit, accidit, contingit, &c. He that would know more concerning Particles, and the Government of Moods, let him read and consult Authors. Q. What say you of the Government of Preposi∣tions? A. That the Preposition In is often understood and sometimes others. Q. What comes next concerning the Government of Prepositions? A. That a Verb compound sometimes governs a Case by the sorce of the Preposition it is compounded with. And sometimes the same Preposition is com∣pounded or joyned with the Verb, and put before the casual word also; as, Amicos ad vocabo ad hanc rem, where ad is put to vocabo, and put before hanc rem besides. Q. What Cases do Prepositions govern? A. Either an Accusative or Ablative, some govern both, only Tenus governs an Ablative both Singular and Plural, and a Genitive Case Plural, but not Sin∣gular. Q. Which are those Prepositions that serve to both the Accusative and Ablative? A. They are, In, super, sub, subter and clam; in used for erga, contra, and ad serves to an Accusative. Offi∣cers are elegantly express'd in Latin by the Preposition A,
with the Verb Est, and a Dative of the Possessor, or Ma∣ster; as, Est Regi à consiliis, He is one of the King's Counsel, or Privy Counsel. A pedibus, A Foot-man. A manibus, a Secretary or Manuensis. Q. But are there not some Prepositions, that are never found but when they are compounded with Verbs? A. Yes these, Am, di, dis, re, se, con Q. What become of Prepositions when they govern no Case? A. They are turned into Adverbs. Q. The Construction of which, of the undeclined Parts of Speech, doth now remain? A. The Construction of Interjections. Q. What Cases do Interjections govern? A. O, a Particle of Exclaiming, governs a Nomina∣tive and Vocative; but when it is a Particle of Calling, only a Vocative; as, O Melibaee Deus nobis haec otia fe∣cit. Hue ades O Galatea, Virg. Eclog. 9. Heu governs a Nominative, Dative, or Accusative; as, Heu Pie∣tas; Heu mifero mihi; Heu stirpem invisam. Hei and Vae only a Dative; as, Hei mihi; Vae tibi Causidice. Q. What Cases do Proh, ah and vah govern? A. They govern an Accusative and Vocative; as, Proh Sancte Jupiter! Proh Deûm at{que} hominum fidem! Ah Virgo inselix! Virg. Eclog. 6. Ah me miserum! Ter. Vah mea Antiphila! Vah inconstantiam! Ter. Q. What Case do Heus and Ohe govern? A. Only a Vocative; as, Heus Syre! Ohe Libelle! Ter. and Mart. Q. What Case do Hem and Apage govern? A. An Accusative; as, Hem astutias! Ter. Apage istiusmodi salutem quae cum cruciatu venit, Plaut.
Observations for the Government of Words by Signs. A Sign is a word which of it self-signifieth nothing, but sheweth how another word signifies. A, An, The, be signs of a Nominative Case which goes before the Verb. These are also the signs of a Noun Substantive, to which you cannot put the word Man or Ying, as you can to an Adjective. The Accusacive hath the same signs, and it follows the Verb. O is the sign of the Vocative, and it is known by calling or speaking to any body O, is the sign of a Genitive when a Noun goes be∣fore it. Except, 1. Of after Adjectives, signifying fulness or emptiness, and before a word signifying the praise or dispraise of a thing, then it is a sign of a Genitive or Ablative. Except, 2. Of after dignus, indignus, natus, progna∣tus, sutus, cretus, creatus, ortus, editus, and most com∣monly after opus and usus, signifying need, notes an Ablative. But of after a Verb is made by one of these Preposi∣tions, A, ab, e, ex, except after Verbs of accusing, con∣demning, warning and acquitting, a Genitive or an Ablative, with or without a Preposition. Also of after paenitet, pudet, taedet, piget, miseret, miserescit, and after the Verb Sum, signifying a Property or Duty, notes a Genitive. Of after Verbs of filling, easing, emptying, depri∣ving, ridding, spoiling, unburthening, notes an Abla∣tive without any Preposition. Of signifying concerning, is made by De. Of after Verbals in bilis, Participles of the Preterper∣fect
Tense and Futures in dus, is a sign of a Dative; yet sometimes it is made by a Preposition. To before a Noun is a sign of the Dative Case: but after aptus, paatas, tardur, and after a Substantive not governing a Genitive Case, which signisies the matter of a thing or person, it's made by the Gerund in dum, or Participle in dus, with ad. But To, after a Substantive or Adjective, governing a Genitive Case, is made by a Gerund in di. To before a Verb is a sign of an Infinitive Mood; but after attinet, pertinet, spectat, loquor, hro, invito, provoco, addo, voco, and Verbs of motion is made by ad. To also after Verbs and Participles, signifying moving to a place, is usually made by the first Supine or Gerund in dum with ad, or by the Participle in rus. About to, to intend, or to purpose, is also made by the Fuure in rus. To be is a sign of the Infinitive Mood Passive; but to be after the Verb sum, or a Substantive, is made by the Participle in dus. To be after these Adjectives, facilis, difficilis, dignus, indignus, is mde by the latter Supine. For is sometimes the sign of a Dative Case; but some∣times it's made by a Preposition: But for the cause is al∣ways the Ablative; and for the price, except after tanti, quanti, pluris, minoris, standing without Substantives, then it notes a Genitive. With, the cause or manner, is a sign of an Ablative. Except when it signifies Society, it is made by cum. Except also after Verbs of comparing, being angry with, or at; to meet with, it is a sign of a Datie Case. From is an Ablative, except after Verbs of taking away, then it's a Dative commonly. By, and then, after an Adjective of the Comparative Degree, be signs of an Ablative Case. That, when it is joined with man or thing, is made by is, ille, or iste; otherwise (if it cannot be turned into which) it's a Conjunctio to be made by qud or ut. How, before an Adjective is to be made by quàm; be∣fore a Verb by qumedo.
More, most, and very, before an Adjective, are signs of the Comparative and Superlative Degree. It, or there, before a Verb, are signs of a Verb Imper∣sonl, or of a Nominative Case set after a Verb. A Pariciple of the Present Tense having a sign of the Geniiv Cse, is made by a Gerund in di; having the sign of an Ablative, is made by a Gerund in do: but the Priciple in ing, having a or the before it, is a Substantive. About, concerning, is made by de; afore a Noun of ime, or Number, with ad, circier, or circa; other∣wise with cira, circum. Afore, or before with a Noun or alone, is made by ane; afr that, before that, afore, before, with a Verb antequam. After, with a Noun is post, after that, after, with a Verb postquam; afterwards, postea; with the wods mannr, or fshion, ad. All, viz. whole, is made by totus; otherwise by omnis. Along, before a Substantive is per; along with, nd cum. At, ut; As, being repeated, or so-as, when a com∣parisn, is made by tam-quam, tum-tum, cum-tum, aeue, perindea, tam-ac, adco ut; as much as, as great as, tan∣tus, quanius; as many as, so many as, tot-quot; as like as, such as, taelis qualis; as far, as to, as concerning, as much as belongs to, quantum ad, quod ad, quo ad. But, sed; on, tantùm; unless, nisi, praeterquam; after cannot, non; after nothing else, quam; after I doubt not, quin. Over, abve, is made by supra, beyond by ulra, through by per or trans. That, for this; the, is made by ille; for which, by qui. The, being thus repeated, the more the more; the first is to be made by quo, quanto; the latter by tanto, eo, boe. Till, asoe a Verb is made by dum, or don̄c; afore a Noun, by ad, usque, ad. Very, afore a Substantive is made by ipse, otherwise by valde. Ʋnder, above, over, after a Noun of Number are made by minus, plus; otherwise by subter, supta.
Worth, before a Verb is made by valeo, being a Noun by dignitas; but worth the pains, operae pretium; other∣wise it is a sign, &c. Too he be never so learned or rich, is not to be made by quamvis nunquam sit tam Doctus or Dives, but tus, Doctissimus vel ditissimus, licet sit, &c. The signs, on, at, before a Nown of Time, Age; also on after nitor to lean, and vescor to eat, notes an Abla∣tive: Likewise at in such words, at table, at first sight, at first coming. &c. Also at School, at Church, by i, with an Ablative and not by ad or apud. Of the rest of the Particles, cosult Walker. Observe what follows for making elegant Latine. When this English That, may be formed into this English Which, it is a Relative; otherwise it is a Con∣junction, which is called in Latine quod or ut; and in making Latine it may elegantly be put awy, by turn∣ing the Nominative into the Accusative, and the Verb into the Infinitive Mood. The English must or ought, that seems to be made by oportet or deeo, may be put in the Gerund in dum, with the Verb est set impersonaily turning the Nominative into the Dative. The Verb have may be made by est in Latine, if you turn the Nominative into the Dative, and the Accusa∣tive into the Nominative. A Verb Neuter may be changed into the third Per∣son Passive with an Ablative, and a Preposition ex∣press'd or understood. If a Verb Active be changed into a Passive you must turn the Nominative into the Dative or Ablative with a Preposition, and the Accusative into the Nominative. A Substantive with a Participle standing within a Comma by it self, and that is neither the Nominative Case to the Verb, nor governed of any other word, is put in the Ablative Case absolute, which Ablative may be resolved by one of these words, dum, cum, quando, si, quanquam, postquàm.
Rules to turn English into Latin, or La∣tin into English. BEfore you construe, read the Sentence to a pe∣riod, observing the Proper Names, (that begin with great Letters) and the Hard Words, with the meaning of what you are to construe. After that, 1. Take the Vocative Case (if there be any) with its Interjection, and whatsoever depends upon it. 2. Take the Nominative, or whatsoever is put in∣stead of it, and joyn with it whatsoever depends upon it. 3. Take the Principal Verb, and whatsoever de∣pends on it. 4. Take the Case following the Verb, by asking whom, or what? and after it all the other Cases in or∣der: first the Genitive, then the Dative and Ablative, known by their signs; but Relatives and Nouns that follow the Rule of the Relative, together with their Substantives, (if they have any express'd) are com∣monly taken before the Verb, or any other word whereof they are governed; and so are Conjunctions and Adverbs of likeness; as, quemadmodum, ut, sicut, having sic or ita to answer them, in the second part of the Sentence. 5. Take the Substantive and Adjective together, unless the Adjective pass over its signification unto some other word which it governs. 6. Observe the Indeclinables, and the Case (if they require it) that follows them. 7. The Substantive (with its Participle, &c.) which neither agrees with the Verb, nor is govern'd of any word, (i. e.) the Ablative Case absolute, which is put in a Comma by it self. Lastly, All the Circumstances comprehended in this following Verse are to be well weighed:
Quis, cui, causa, locus, quo tempore, prima sequela. That is, 1. Who speaks in that place; what he speaks. 2. To whom he speaks. 3. Upon what oc∣casion he speaks, or to what end. 4. Where he speaks. 5. At what time it was. 6. What went before in the Sentence next. 7. What follows next after. If any thing be against Sence or Grammar, cast it off till you have sound out the right. Short Rules for the placing of Latine, Words. 1. THe Oblique Cases, (that is, all besides the Nominative and Vocative) are to be placed in the beginning, unless they be Negatives, then they may elegantly be put in the end; so may Ad∣jectives or Pariciples, that contain the chief point of the sence. 2. The Nominative Case is to be placed in the middle before the Verb, except a Question be asked, and then the Nominative is set after the Verb, or after the sign of the Verb, as Amas tu? 2. When the Verb is of the Imperative Mood, as Ama tu. Or, 3. when this sign it or there cometh before the English of the Verb, as Est liber mens, Venit ad me quidam. 4. The Adjective may be placed before the Substan∣tive, and between them may be fitly placed the Geni∣tive of the latter of two Substantives: Also between the Adjective and the Substantive of the Genitive Case, the word governing the Genitive Case may be ele∣gantly put. Adverbs and Participles may be placed where they seem most to please the ear: But the word governed is most commonly placed before the word governing, contrary to Grammatical order.
De Figuris. Q. QƲid est Figura? R. Est novâ vel novatâ are aliquâ dicondi form. Q. Quot plices sunt Figurae Grammaticae? R. Sunt quadruplices, Orthogràphiae, Etymologiae, Syn∣taxis, Prsdiae. Q. Quot sunt Figurae Orthographi? R. Sunt novent; 1. Prothesis. 2. Amphaeresis. 3. Epen∣thesis. 4. Syncope. 5. Paragoge. 6. Apocope. 7. Antistoicon, se Aithsis, 8. Metathesis. 9. Tesis. Sed haec omnes{que} Figurae Grammaticales ad Pleonasmum, Ellipsin, & Enal∣lagen reduci possunt, Q. Quid est Prothesis? R. Est appositio literae vel syllabae ad principium dictio∣nis; ut, Gnatus pro Natus: tetuli pro tuli. Q. Quid est Aphaeresis? R. Est ablatio literae vel syllabae à principio dictionis; ut, uit pro eruit: teninere pro conteere. Q. Quid est Epenthesis? R. Est interpositio literae vel syllabae in medio dictionis; ut, relliquias, relligio, additâ L: Induperatorem pro Impe∣rarorem. Q. Quid est Snoope? R. Est ablatio literae el syllabae è medio dictionis; ut,  pro abivit: dixti pro dix sti: repostum pro repositum. Q. Quid est Paragge? R. Est appositio literae vel syllabae ad finem dictionis; ut, dicier pro dici: mittier pro mitti. Q. Quid est Apocope? R. Est ablatio literae vel syllabae à sine dictionis; ut, Pe∣uli pro peculii: dixtin' pro dixtine: ingeni pro ingenii.
Q. Quid est Antistolcon, s Antthesis? R. Est literae pro literâ positio; ut, Oli, servos, pro illi & servus. Q. Quid est Metathesis? R. Est literae alicujus ex propriâ sede in aliam transpo∣sitio; ut, Thymbre pro Thymber: I prae pro praei. Q. Quid est esis? R. Est vcis compotae intersectio per uam pluresve di∣ctiones interpositas; ut, Quae meo cun{que} animo libitum est sucere. Per mihi, inquam, gratum seceris. Q. Quo unt Figurae Etymslogiae? R. Sunt tres, 1. Enallage. 2. Hellenisinus: Et, 3. Ar∣chaismas. Q. Quid est Enallage in Etymologiâ? R. Est quando vel ipsae pattes raronis vel earum acci∣dentia, ita inter se permutantur, ut nihil in leges constru∣ctionis five Syntaeos peccetur; ut, Sic vita erat, pro talis. Hostis habet muros, pro hostes habent Q. Quid est Hellensinus in Etmologiâ? R. Est cum dictiones Latinae Graecorum sequantur flexio∣nem, non propriam; ut, Nec aurâs nec sonitus memor, pro aurae, Virg. E mullos illic Hectoras ess puto; pro Hectores, Ovid. Q. Quid est Archaismus in Etymologiâ? R. Est dictio prseis sitara, sed praesenti saeulo olsolea; ut, Magnai relpublicai gratiâ, pro magnae republicae. Q. Quot upces sunt Figurae Syntaxeos? R. Sunt duces, quae fiunt vel spectantur. 1. Ratione Convenientiae: Et, 2. ratione Regiminis. Q. Quomodo spectatur Figura Syntaxeos ratione Conve∣nientiae? R. Spectatur vel in partibus declinabilibus vel indecli∣nabilis. Q. Quen Figurae  vel spectantur ratione Con∣nientiae in partibus declinabilibus? R. Syllepsis, Prolepsis, Zegm, Synthesis. Q. Quid est Syllepsis seu Conceptio Laetine dicta? R. Est cum Verbum aut Adjectium pluribus supposis additum cum digniore convenit non cum vicinie; ▪ Si  exercitus{que} valetis. Pater & Mater mtu.
Q. Quotuplex est Conceptio seu Syllepsis? R. Est duplex, directa quae fit per Conjunctionem Copu∣lativam; ut, Quid tu & soror facitis; vel indirecta quae fit per praepositionem Copulativam; ut, Ipse cum fratre ad∣esse jussi sumus. Q. Quotuplex est directa Conceptio? R. Est duplex, 1. Personarum; ut, Ne{que} ego ne{que} tu fecimus, Ter. 2. Generum; ut, Rex & Regina beati. Q. Quid est Prolepsis seu Praesumptio? R. Est pronunciatio quaedam rerum summaria, vel est cum praecessit vox aliqua totum significans, quae in partibus max non explicatur, sed intelligitur: sive vel cum toti sub∣jciuntur partes, numeris aut personis diversae; ut, Duae vo∣labant aquilae, una ab ortu, altera ab occasu, &c. Q. Quid est Zeugma? R. Est unius Verbi vel Adjectivi vicinicri respondentis ad diversa supposita reductio; ad utum expressè, ad alterum per supplementum, est{que} 1. Vel Generis; ut, Ʋtinam aut hic surdus aut haec muta facta sit, Ter. Vel, 2. Numeri; ut, Hic illius arma, hic curris fuit. Vel, 3. Personae, ut, ille timore, ego risu corrui. Q. Quid est Synthesis? R. Est structura seu praetio sensu, non voce congruens; ut, Pars in srustra secant. Gens armati. Est{que} triplex, 1. Ge∣neris tantùm; ut, Centauro inebitur magnâ, se. Navi, Virg. Scelus postquam iudificatus est virginem pro scele∣stus, Ter. Samnitum caesi duo millia, Liv. 2. Numeri tantùm; ut, Pars volucres factae, Ovid. Turba ruunt, Virg. 3. Generis & Numeri simul; ut, Pars iersi te∣nuere rate, Virg. Q. Quomodo & quibus Figuris figuratur Syntaxis ra∣tione Convenientiae in partibus indeclimibilibus? R. Figuratur vel additione; ut, In Polysindeto, vel de∣tractione; ut, In Andeto: vel trajectione; ut, In And∣strophe & Synchysi sive Hyperbato. Q. Quid est Polysindeton? R. Est Conjunctionum in oratione redundantia; ut, Hunc & Tarentini & Rhegini & Neopolitani, civitate, praemiis; donarunt.
Q. Quid est Asyndeton? R. Est Conjunctionis in oratione defectus; ut, Aequi bo∣ni consulo. Debelitant vires balnea, Bacchus, amor. Velis nolis fiet, pro velis seu nolis fiet. Q. Quid est Anastrophe? R. Est cum Praepositio suo casui postponitur; ut, His accensa super, Virg. Q. Quid est Synchisis seu Hyperbaton? R. Est confusus ordo dictionum, quae ita miscentur in oratione, ut tota oratio inde fiat obscura & confusa; ut, Nam{que} pilâ lippis inimicum & ludere crudis: sc. Ludere pilâ est inimicum lippis & crudis, Hor. Q. Quaenam sunt Syntaxeos Figurae quae in Regimine in∣veniuntu? R. Sunt, Qu, 1. Vel in additione fiunt; ut, Pleonasinus▪ Vel, 2. detractione; ut, Ellipsis. Vel, 3. immutatione; ut, Enallage. Q. Quid est Pleonasmus? R. Est cum una pluresve dictiones supra necessiatem in oratione redundant; ut, Sic ore locuta est, Ter. Hisce ou∣lis egomet vidi, Virg. Vocem{que} his auribus hausi, Idem. Q. Quid est Ellypsis quae dicitur Figura Syntaxeos in de∣tractione? R. Est dictionis ad legitimam Constructionem necessariae in sensu defectus; ut, Aberat bidui, sc. vi. Decies sester∣tium (i. e.) decies centena millia. Proh Deûm immortaliùm, sc. fidem: Non est oneri solvendo (i. e.) aptus. Ego con∣tinuò mecum, supple cogitabam. Omnes ad unum occidit pro us{que} ad unum. Tertio nonas, pro ante nonas. Invenitur haec figura in omnibus orationis partibus. Q. Quid est Enallage, quae est Figura Syntaxeos in im∣mutatione? R. Est quâ voces, dut earum accidentia contra usitatae Constructionis leges permutantur. Q. Quomodo vocis immutatio dicitur? R. Dicitur Antimeria; ut, Scire tuum, Pers. Sole re∣tens orto, Virg. Q. Quomodo Accident is immutatio dici solet?
R. Heterosis aut Alloiosis, ac fit in omnibus partibus de∣clinabilibus: In iis quae per casus variantur, fit, 1. In ge∣nere; ut, Et mammae putres, aequina quales ubera, pro qua∣lia, Hor. 2. Numero; ut, Et flesti & nostros vidisti flen∣tis ocellos, pro meos flentis. 3. Casu, quae species Aenallages vocatur propriè Antiptosis, quae est positio casùs pro casu; ut, Adsis laetitiae Bacchus dator, pro Bacche. Haeret pede pes, dens us{que} viro vir, pro pedi, Virg. Occurrunt animae, quales ne{que} candidiores terra tulit, pro qualibus, Hor. Hanc pius Aeneas eripuisse ferunt, pro pium Aeneam, Ovid. Ʋr∣bem quam statuo vestra est. Q. Quid est Synecdoche quae ad Hypallagen referri potest? R. Est, cum Ablativus partis vel Adjuncti mutatur in Accusativum: Partis; ut, Explerimentem nequit. Dei∣phobum vidi laceratum crudeliter ora: Adjuncti; ut, Omnia mercurio similis vocemque coloremque. Flores in∣scripti nomina regum, Virg. Q: Quid est Hypallage quae est altera species Aenallages? R. Est mutua Casuum permutatio; ut, In nova fert a∣nimus mutatas dicere formas; pro in novas formas, Ovid. Dare classibus Austros, pro classes austris seu ventis. Q. Quid est Hendiadis? R. Est cum unum pr duo exprimitur; ut, Pateris bi∣bamus & auro, pro aureis pateris. Q. Quid est Hysteron Proteron sive Hysterologia? R. Est, cum id quod secundo loco poni debet, ponitur prio∣re; ut, Moriamur, & in media arma ruamus; pro in me∣dia arma ruamus & moriamur, Virg. Q. Quid est Hellenismus seu Graecismus in Syntaxi? R. Est, cum à Latinâ consuetudine recedentes, imitamur Graecos; ut, Desine mollium tandem querelarum, Hor. Os humeros{que} Deo similis, Virg. Abstinet irarum. Q. Quid est Archaimus? R. Est structurae ratio veteribus in usu, quae jam exole∣vit; ut, Quid tibi hanc rem curatio est. Q. Quaenam dicuntur vitia vocis & orationis & quo∣modo distinguuntu? R. Dicuntur, Barbarismus & Solaecismus, & distin∣guuntur ut in ho disticho.
Barbarismus erit si vox corrumpitur una; Esto Solaecismus vitiosa oratio quaevis. Est etiam sermo quem vocant, , sc. Inconsequens, cum sequentia prioribus non cohaerent. De Prosodiae Figuris in ipsa tractabimus Prosodiâ. Modus examinandi Lectionem. Q. PRopositâ voce quid faciendum est? R. Dicendum est, quae & qualis sit pars orationis, an sit declinabilis vel indeclinabilis. Q. Si sit nomen vel Verbum, (nam hae sunt principales partes orationis) quid faciendum est? R. Inflectendum est nomen per casus, & genera; & Verbum per Tempora & Modos. Q. Si sit nomen quale nomen est? R. Est Substantivum vel Adjectivum; Proprium vel Apellativum, quod dicitur Commune. Q. Quid est Substantivum? R. Est quod nihil addi postulat ad suam significationem exprimendam. Q. Quid est Substantivum Proprium. R. Est quod rem uni individuo propriam significat, & est triplex, Praenomen, Nomen, Cognomen. Q. Quid est Substantivum Communes seu Apellativum? R. Est quòd rem multis communem significat. Q. Quot accidunt nomini? R. Septem, declinatio, genus, numerus, casus; compara∣tio quae propriè est Adjectivi: Species & Figura quae duo omnibus orationis partibus sunt communia. Q. Quale Nomen est quoad Speciem & Figuram? R. Est Primitivum vel Derivativum, Simplex vel Com∣positum. Q. Cujus vel quotae declinationis? R. Primae, secundae, &c. Q. Ʋnde dignoscitur declinatio? R. Ex Genitivo Singulari. Q. Quomodo inflectis?
R. Inflecto sic, &c. Q. Ad quam regulam specialem pertinet? R. Ad primam, secundam, tertiam, &c. Q. Quomodo sis? R. Quia non crescit, acutè crescit, vel gravitèr crescit in Genitivo. Q. Cujus Generis est? R. st M. F. N. C. D. G. Q. Si sit Substantivum Proprium, Quale est Proprium? R. Est Proprium Nomen. M. G. sc. Dei, Viri, Fluvii, Mensis, Venti: vel F. G. sc. Deae, Feminae, Ʋrbis, Regio∣nis, Insulae. Q. Cujus Casûs, Numeri & Personae est haec dictio? R. Nominativi, Gen. &c. Singularis vel Pl. Numeri, & primae, secundae, tertiae Personae. Q. Quare est talis Casûs? R. Praecedit Verbum (si sit Nom.) sequitur Verbum (si sit Acc.) Vocativus est quoniam alloquitur. Regitur Verbo, Adjectivo, &c. Est posterius duorum Substantivorum, diversae, ejusdem significationis. Significat laudem, vel vitu∣perium rei. Significat instrumentum, causam, modum rei. Significat spatium lci: Ponitur absolutè in Ablativo. Significat speciem temporis. Est Nomen pretii. spatium Loci in quo.     ad quem.     à quo, per quem.     Per quam regulam? Recita regulam. Q. Quale Adjectivum est hoc quoad significationem? R. Est proprium, quod affectionem uni individuo peculia∣rem significat. Est Commune quod affectionem multis com∣munem significat. Q. Quale Adjectivum est quoad inflexionem? R. Est trium articulorum vel trium terminationum. Q. Cujus Casus, generis & numeri est? R. Est, &c. Q. Quare? R. Consentit cum Substantivo. Q. Cujus gradus Comparationis est?
R. Est Positivi, Comparativi, Superlativ. Q. Quomodo comparatur? R. Sic, durus, durior, durissimus. Q. Quotuplex est gradus Comparationis? R. Est duplex, Regularis & Irregularis. Q. Quid est Pronomen? R. Est pars orationis declinabilis vicem nominis supplens, quâ in demonstrandâ aut repetendâ re aliquâ utimur. Q. Quotuplex est Pronomen? R. Est duplex Substantivum & Adjectivum. Q. Quaenam & quot sunt Pronomen Substantiva & Ad∣jectiva? R. Substantiva sunt quatuor, Ego, tu, sui & quid; re∣liqua sunt Adjectiva. Q. Quot sunt species Pronominum? R. Sunt tres, 1. Primitiva, quae & alio respectu demon∣strativa vocantur. 2. Relativa, quae referuntur ad vocem antecedentem. 3. Derivativa quae Possessiva dicta sunt, excipe Nostras & Vestras, quae sunt Gentilia, & Cujas quod est nomen Gentile. Q. Quale pronomen est hoc in praelectione tuâ? R. Est Primitivum, Derivativum, vel Relativum: concordat cum Antecedente, Genere, Numero, & Personâ. Q. Cujus generis sunt omnia pronomina? R. Sunt omnis generis. Q. Quale genus Verbi est hoc? R. Est Activum, Passivum, Neutrum, Deponens. Q. Quomodo inflectis? R. Inflecto sic. Q. Cujus Modi est & Temporis? R. Indicativi, Imperativi, Subjunctivi, Infinitivi; Et Praesentis, Imperfecti, Perfecti, Plusquam perfecti, vel Fu∣turi temporis. Q. Quare est Subjunctivi Modi? R. Regitura Conjunctione: & cohaereret cum Nominati∣vo, &c. Q. Quare est Infinitivi? R. Posterius duorum Verborum ponitur in Infinitivo; uti Posterius duorum Substantivorum in Genitivo.
Q. Quaenam aliae responsiones aliquando redduntur? R. Hae sc. Imperativus deest. Imperativus caret primâ personâ, quia non imperamus nobis metipsis. Caret praeterito. Caret supinis. Caetera desunt. Q. Ʋnde formatur? Ʋnde derivatur? Ʋnde componi∣tur? Quare mutatur Consonans vel Vocalis? R. Euphoniae gratiâ. Q. Quae pars orationis est proxima sc? R. Est Participium. Q. Quid est Participium? R. Est pars orationis inflexa casu, quae à nomine genera, casus, & declinationem; à Verbo tempus & significationem, & ab utro{que} Numerum & Figuram accipit. Q. Quot accidunt Participio? R. Septem, Casus, genus, declinatio, tempus, significatio, Numerus Figura, & aliq. Comparatio. Q. Quot sunt species Participiorum? R. Quatuor, 1. Participium praesentis quod exit in, ans, ens, & iens. 2. Futuri in rus, significationem habens Infi∣nitivi Modi Activae vocis. 3. Praeteriti quod exit in, tus, sus, xus. 4. Futuri in, dus, semper significans passivè. Q. Quot sunt tempora Participiorum? R. Tria, 1 Praesens, quod formatur à Praeterito, Imper∣fecto, ultimâ syllibâ mutatâ in ns. 2. Praeteritum quod formatur à posteriore supino addito S. 3. Futurum, quod duplex est, 1. In, rus, & formatur à posteriore supino. 2. In, dus, quod à participio praesenti formatur, inserto du, antes finalm; ut, amans, amandus. Q. Quot Participia veniunt ab Activis & Neutris. R. Duo, Praesens & Futurum in rus. Q. Quot participia veniunt à Verbis Passivis? R. Duo, Praeteritum & Futurum in dus. Q. Quot participia veniunt à Verbis Deponentibus? R. Tria, Praesens, Praeteritum, Futurum in rus, & mul∣tis accedit quartum sc. Futurum in dus. Q. Quid sunt participia omnia? R. Sunt Adjectiva: ac quaedam, eorum instar compa∣rantur; ut, exspectatior, exspectaissimus: optatior, opta∣tissimus, &c.
Q. Qualis est haec dictio sc? R. Est prius vel posterius Supinum. Q. Quid est haec particula sc? R. Est Adverbium quod est pars orationis indeclinabilis, adjecta Nomini vel Verbo ad explicandam ejus significatio∣nem. Q. Quale Adverbium est? R. Est Adverbium, Temporis, Loci, Quantitatis, Quali∣tatis, Numeri, Negandi, Affirmandi, Demonstrandi, Ordi∣nis, &c. Q. Quot sunt accidentia Adverbio? R. Quatuor, significatio, Comparatio, species & Figura? Q. Quae particula est haec? R. Est Conjunctio, quae est pars orationis invariabilis di∣ctiones & sententias conjungens. Copulat similes Caus, Mo∣dos, Tempora. Accidunt ei Figura, Potestas, & Ordo. Q. Quae particula est haec quoque? R. Est Praepositio, quae est pars orationis indeclinabilis aliis partibus, vel in compositione vel appositione praeposita. Ex quo fit, ut praepositiones sunt vel seperabiles vel insepe∣rabiles. Q. Qualis est haec Praepositio? R. Est seperabilis Praepositio. Q. Quibus casibus inserviunt Praepositiones? R. Quaedam Accusativo, quaedam Ablativo, & quaedam utri{que} casui inserviunt. Q. Quid sunt Inseperabiles Praepsitiones? R. Sunt quae extra Compositionem, non sunt in . Q. Quae est haec particula? R. Est Interjectio, quae est pars orationis indeclinabili, per se sententiam perficiens, serviens vel Nom. Dat. Acc. aut Vocativo. Q. Quaenam aliae responsiones aliq. reddi solent inter exa∣minandum. R. Variae; ut, Est Figurata Syntaxis vel Constructio. Est Graecismus. Est Archaismus. Est Error Typographi.
PROSODIA Examin'd and Explain'd by QUESTION and ANSWER. Q. WHat is Prosodia? A. Prosodia is that part of Grammar which teacheth the true Pronunciation, Quantity, or Accent, of words. Q. How is Prosodia divided? A. 1. Into Tone or Tune. 2. Breathing (in Pro∣nunciation.) 3. Time (for the Pronunciation of a long or short syllable.) Q. What is an Accent properly? A. It is a way, law, mark, or manner of pronouncing, whereby a syllable is either lifted up, or pressed down. Q. How many fold is a Tone or an Accent? A. It is three-fold; 1. Acute, which acutes a syl∣lable and lifts it up, and the Acute Accent is mark'd with a little oblique, or overthwart stroke, or a little line ascending towards the right-hand thus'; as, in Dómus. 2. Grave Accent, which makes grave, and presseth down a syllable, and is mark'd with an over∣thwart or little oblique line, descending towards the right-hand thus▪; as, in Doctè. 3. A Circumflex Accent, which utters a syllable with a somewhat lon∣ger note than a Grave Accent; it is made of both the Acute and Grave after this fashion▪; as, in Amâre.
Q. What is an Apostrophus, which may be added to the Accents? A. It is a Comma, or a certain part of a Circle pt to the top of a Letter, which shews, that the last Vowel of a word is wanting; as, Tanton', for Tantone; lov'd, for loved. Q. How many Breathings or Spirits are there? A. Two; the rough or harsh Breathing, called Asper Spiritus, when a word begins with H, and the mild or smooth Breathing, called Lenis Spiritus, when a word begins with a Vowel without H. Q. What Rules am I principally to observe concerning the Accents? A. 1. That Monosyllables being either of a short or long ending by position are acuted; as, Mél, fél, párs, páx; or being by nature long are circumflected; as, Môs, spès. 2. Dissyllables having the former long by nature and the last short are circumflected; as, Mûsa; but when the last is made long, the Penultima is acuted; as, Músae: in all others there is an Acute; as, Citus, látus, solers, sá∣tur, &c. 3. Polysyllables having their Penultima long by position are acuted; as, Camillus: but having it long by nature and the last short, they are circumflected; as, Românus, amâre: except the Compounds of fit, whose Ʋltima is acuted; as, Malefit, calefit, benefit, satisfit. The Penultima being short, the Ante penultima is acuted; as, Dóminus, dicere: except the Compounds of Facio; as, Benefácis, malefácis, calefácis, frigefácit. The Ʋltima being long, the Penultima is acuted; as, Sacérdos, am∣plecti: all others are grave. Q. But may there not be same Exceptions made on these Rules of the Accents? A. Yes; For, 1. there are some for difference sake, that transpose the Accent; as, the Adverb Iná, acutes the last, lest it might be taken for a Noun. So in eó, alió, aliquó, putá for sicut, poné for post. Ergó the Conjun∣ction, and Ergô pro causâ, &c. 2. Encliticks transfer their Accent unto the precedent syllable; as, lumináque. So do the Parelca, dum, si, nam. But where there is a ma∣nifest
composition the Accent is not varied; as, Dénique, útique, itaque, úndique, húccine, quisque; for in these the que is not an Enclitick: but ubique and ubivis keep the accent. 3. Some are circumflected in the Ʋltima for difference sake; as, Ablatives, Poetâ, gloriâ, with these, nostrâs, vestrâs, cujâs, Arpinâs, Ravennâs, &c. Some in the Penultima; as, in such syncopated words, Amâsse, de∣crêsse, Deûm pro deorum. Q. What is Time or Quantity, being the third part of Prosodiâ? A. It is the measure, which is as it were the while we take in pronouncing a syllable, for a short syllable is pronounced quietly, and is but of one time, and it is marked thus : and a long syllable is pronounced more leisurely, and is of two times, that is, it takes twice as much to be pronounced as the short syllable doth, and it is marked thus. Q. Of what do Feet consist? A. Of syllables disposed or placed in a just or right order. Q. What is a Foot? A. It is the setting or placing together of two syl∣lables or more, according to the certain observation of the times, or measures of the syllables. Q. How many sorts of Feet are there? A. Two sorts, Feet of two and Feet of three syl∣lables; there are also Feet of four syllables, which may be omitted as needless. Q. Which are the Feet of two syllables? A. They are, 1. A Spondee, which consists of two long syllables. 2. Pyrrichius, which consists of two short ones. 3. A Trochce, which consists of the first long, and the last short: And, lastly, an lambus, which consists of the first short and the second long. Q. Which are the Feet of three syllables? A. They are a Tribrachus, which consists of three short syllables. 2. A Dactile, which consists of the first long and the two last short. 3. An Anapest, which consists of the first short and the last long. The rest may be omitted.
Q. Of what doth a Verse consist, or what is it made up of. A. Of Feet trimm'd or well compos'd in a just and lawful number and order. Q. What is a Verse? A. It is a Speech bound to a just and lawful number of Feet. Q. What must he first learn that is to make a Verse? A. He must learn to measure it rightly by Feet, cal∣led Scanning. Q. What is Scanning? A. It is the lawful measuring of a Verse into several Feet. Q. How many are the Figures of Prosodia or Meter that belong to Scanning. A. They are, Synalaepha, Eclipsis, Synaeresis, Diaeresis, Caesura, Systole, Diastole. Q. What is Synalaepha? A. It is a certain striking out of a Vowel or Dip∣thong in the end of a word, when the next word be∣gins with a Vowel or Dipthong: but heu, and o, ah, in, proh, vah, hei, are never cut off or taken away; as, Et bis io, Arethusa, io Arethusa vocabit, Ovid. But some∣times the Synalaepha is neglected; as, Et succus pecori & lac subducitur agnis, Virg. Post habita coluisse samo, Hic illius arma. But when Vowels and Dipthongs are not taken away, they are common; as, first, short, Victor apud rapidum Simoenta sub Ilio alto. Insulae Ionio in magno quas dira Caelaeno. Long; as, Lament is gemitu{que} & foemineo ululatu. Ante tibi Eoae Atlantides absconduntur. Long and short in this Verse: Ter sunt conati imponere Pelio ossam. Q. What is Eclipsis? A. It is a Figure when m in the end of a word with the Vowel going before it is cut off, by reason of the
Vowel following; formerly also s was cut off; as, Aboribus veteres decidere falcibu' . Q. What is Synaeresis, called also Synecphonesis and Synzesis? A. It is the contraction or drawing together of two syllables into one; as, Seu lento fuerint alvaria vimina teta. This Figure happens often in the Genitive Cases of Nouns in Eus; as, Thesei, Achillei, Ʋlyssei, for Thesei, Achllei, Ʋlyssi. And when the Vowels i and u are chaned into j and v Consonants; as, parjete and tenvis, for pariete and tenuis. So likewise in all these words that belong rather to Synaeresis than to a Syna∣aepha; as, Dii, Diis, iidem, iisdem, deinde, deinceps, pro∣inde, deell, deero, decrit, anteabulo, anteit, antehac, &c. Q. What is the Figure Diaeesis or Dialysis? A. It is when two syllables are made of one, cut nsunder or parted; as, Stamina non ulli dissoluenda Deo, Tioull. Q. What is Caesura? A. It is when a short syllable in the end of a word and in the beginning of the foot is made long. Q. What is Sytole? A. It is the maing short of a long syllable; as, Matri longa decm tulērunt sastidia Menses. Obstupui ste∣terun{que} cmae, &c. Q. What is Diastole or Ectasis? A. It is the making long of a syllable short by na∣ture; as, At{que} hic Priamidem laniatum corpore toto, Virg. Exercet Diana choros. Q. Which are the kinds of Diastole in Caesura? A. They are, 1. Triemimeris, which after one foot doth make a short syllable long; as, Pectoribus in∣hians, &c. 2. Penthemimeris, which after two feet makes a short syllable long; as, Omnia vincit amor, &c. 3. Hphemimeris, which after three feet makes a short syllable long; as, Ostentans artem pariter arcum{que} &c. 4. An Enemimeris, which after four feet makes a short syllable long; as, Ille latus niveum molli fultus
hyacintho. A Diastole happens often in a Penthemimer, and Hepthemīmer seldom in the rest. Q. What is the difference between Carmen and Versus? A. Carmen implies the whole, whither an Epigram, an Eclogue, Satyr, or Ode, &c. and Charisius inter∣prets it . Versus signifies but one; as, Versibus ex multis carmen componitur unum. But Carmen, or a Poem, may be finished in one Verse; as, Mart. in two places; Omnia Castr eis, sic siet, ut emnia vendas. Pau∣per videri , & est pauper. Q. Which are the most usual sort of Verses? A. They are, 1. An Hexameter, or Heroick, where∣in the deeds done by Noble-men, or Heroes, are let down with praise; and it consists of two sorts of feet, (i. e.) Dactiles and Spondees, and of six of these feet in number, of which the fifth place must be a Da∣ctile, and the sixth a Spendee. Q. What is the next more usual sort of Verse? A. It is a Pentameter or Elgiack, wherein lamen∣table Matters were at first used to be set forth, and it consists of five fet, being Dactiles and Spondees, of four whole ones, and two long syllables in the third and sixth place, which make up the fifth foot, but the fourth and fifth places must always be two Dactiles. Q. Which is the third usual so of Verse? A. It is an , of which  was the first Author, and this consists of a Dactile, Spon∣dee, and a long syllable and two Dactiles at last. Q. Which is the fourth usual sort of Verse? A. It is a Saphick, which consists of a Trochee, a Spondee, a Dactile, and at list of two Trochees, to which an Adonick, consisting of a  and Spon∣dee, is added after three Verses. Q. Which is the fifth usual sort of Verse? A. It is a , whereof  ws the first Author, or a Verse of eleven syllables, c∣sisting
of a Spondee, Dactile, and of three Tro∣chees. Q. Which is the sixth sort of Verse? A. It is an Iambick, consisting of six Iambicks alone. Q. Are these all the more usual sort of Verse? A. Some add a Glyconick, which consists of a Spondee, and two Dactiles; as, Sic te Diva potens Cy∣pri. And some an Achilochius Versus, which con∣sists of two Dactiles and a Syllable; but this and an Adonick are invented for the sake of Tyrocinians, that, being exercised in them, they may proceed to Ele∣giacks. Q. How is the quantity of syllables known, and by how many manner of ways? A. The quantity of syllables is known two ways, (i. e.) first, by Rules, secondly, by Authority or Examples. Q. How many fold are the Rules? A. They are two-fold, 1. General, which may be observed in every syllable. 2. Special, of, or concern∣ing the last syllables. Q. Which and how many are the General Rules? A. They are these: 1. A Vowel before two Con∣sonants, or a double Consonant in the same word, and before one Consonant in the end of one word, and before another in the beginning of another, is every∣where long by position. Q. What do you mean by double Consonants, and how many are there of them? A. I mean by a double Consonant, that which stands for two Leters or Consonants; as, X, and Z, the first standing for, Cs, or, Gs; as, in Dux, Ducs, Rex, Regs; the second, sc. Z, standing for Ds; as, Zephyrus, Dephyrus: Some also reckon J between two Vowels a double Consonant, as in Major and Pejor, &c. except in the Compounds of Jugum; as, Bijuges, Qua∣dijuges, Mulijuges, which are short.
Q. Is a Vowel before two Consonants in the same word always long? A. No; for if a Mute, and the Liquids L or R, are put in the same syllable after a short Vowel, that Vowel in a Verse becomes common; as, in Patris, Volucris, Locuples, Tenebrae, reflo, repleo, poples, &c. But the Vowel being long, it is not chang'd; as, aratrum, simulacrum. Q. What if the former word end in a short Vowel, the word following beginning with two Consonants? A. It is sometimes, tho' seldom, made long; as, Occult spolia & plures de pae triumphos. Quid gladium demens omana stringis in ora? Mart. Q. What is the third general Rule for knowing the first syllables? A. A Vowel before another in divers syllables of the same word, is every-where made short amongst the Latins; as, Deus, meus, &c. but among the Greeks it is ever now and then made long. Q. What other Exceptions have you, besides this Greek one? A. The Genitive Cases in ius of the second declen∣sion of the Pronouns; as, Ʋnius, illius, &c. where the Letter i is found common; but in alterius it is always short, and in alius always long. Q. What other Exceptions have you of a Vowel, not being short, before another in the same word? A. The Genitive and Dative Cases of the fifth de∣clension, where e between the double i is made long; as, faciēi; otherwise not; as, rēi, spēi, fidēi; except also fi in fio, which is long; as, Omnia jam fient, fieri quae posse negabam; but if e and r follow together, fi is short; as, fierem, fieri: Di in Diana is doubtful, but the syllable contracted of two is made long; as, exit for exiit, petit for petiit; so obit, abit, of obiit and a∣biit. Q. What is the fourth general Rule? A. Every Dipthong among the Latins is long; as,
aurum, neuter, musae, but prae in composition, when a Vowel follows, is often made short; as, sudibus{que} prae∣ustis̄. Q. Which is the fifth general Rule? A. Derivatives, or words derived of others, are al∣lotted or have the same quantity with their Primi∣tives; as, a in amator, amicus, amabilis, is short, be∣cause a in amo is short. Q. Are there no Exceptions on this Rule? A. Yes; for some few words, being derived of short ones, are made long; as, vox vōcis of voco; lex lēgis of lēgo, &c. and there are some, on the contrary, which being derived of long words are made short; as, Dux dŭcis of dūco, dicax of dico, fides of fīo, &c. Q. Which is the sixth general Rule? A. The quantity of compound words is known by the simple, and likewise the quantity of simple words by the compounds; as, Sōlr, consōlor, lēgo, perlēgo, &c. except Innŭba, pronūba, of nūbo, and degēro, pejēro, of jūro; persidus, persidia, of sīdus; semisopits of sō∣pio, and vidēsis of vidē, siquidem of sī. Ambītus the Participle, makes the last save one long; the Noun makes it short. Idem of the Masculine Gender is long, of the Neuter Gender short. These Compounds are also long, tho' their Simples are common, ubīque, ubī∣libet, ibīdem, quandōque, quandōcunque, except quando|quidem. Q. Which is the seventh general Rule? A. A Preposition in composition retains its quan∣tity, unless a Vowel following, or position hinder. A, de, prae, se è, are long Prepositions, and di, unless in dirimo and disertus, and also the Latin pro; unless in these, procella, prosugus, protervus, &c. and pro in pro∣curro, prosundo, &c. but in the Greek pro, it is always short. Re in rsert, for interest, from the Ablative re, of res, is long; but re, in resert, from the Preposition, is short. The rest of the Prepositions, besides d, de, prae, se, è, di, and pro, are short, if position doth not hinder.
Q. Which is the eighth general Rule? A. Every Preterperfect Tense of two syllables makes the first syllable long; as, lēgi, ēmi; except in fidi of findo, bibi, dedi, seidi, steti, tūli, and every Su∣pine of two syllables is long; as, mōtum, lātum, lō∣tum, crētum; except these, quitum, situm, litum, itum, rŭtum, rătum, dătum, sătum, & citum of cieo, es: but cītum of cio, of the fourth Conjugation, hath the first long. Q. But what say you of Verbs doubling the Preter∣perfect Tense? A. They have the first syllable short; as, pependi, tetendi. Preterperfect Tenses and Supines of many syllables, have the same quantity in the first syllable, as they had in the first of the Present Tense; as, vo|cavi, vocatum, of voco; clāmavi, clāmatum, of clamo: except posui, of pōno; solutum, of sōlvo. Q. Which is the last general Rule of knowing the first syllables? A. It is the Authority and Examples of Poets, which we are to bring when the quantity of words do not sall under none of these foregoing Rules. Q. How may one know the quantity of the middle syllables, and what syllables are reckoned to be the middle syllables? A. Every syllable, besides the first and last, is a middle syllable; as, in Fortitudine, For is the first syl∣lable, and ne the last: the rest are middle syllables. The middle syllables are known partly the same way as the first, and partly by the Analogy of the Declen∣sions and Conjugations; to wit, a, o, and e, in the last syllable save one of the Genitive Case Plural, are made long; as, musārum, dominōrum, diērum. Like∣wise the last syllable sae one in words of many syl∣lables, increasing long, is made long; and in words increasing short, is made short, according to the se∣cond and third special Rule. So a and o, in the last syllables save one, in Dative and Ablative Cases Plu∣ral,
are long, i and u short in them; as, duābus, dūo∣bus, dapibus, arcŭbus. So also a, the sign of the first; e, the sign of the second; and i, of the fourth Con∣jugation; are made long; e, of the third, short. Q. Are there no Exceptions, but that a, of the first Conjugation must be long? A. Yes; for do, and its Compounds, being of the first Conjugation, doth make a short; as, dămus, circumdămus, dăbis, &c. And rimus and ritis in the Preterperfect Tense of the Subjunctive Mood, are every-where short, but in the Future Tense they are long in Prose, in Verse common. Q. What say you of a and e, before the Tenses in bam and bo? A. They are made long; but e, before ram, rim, ro, is short; as, legeram, legerim, legero; e, in the third Person Plural of the Preterperfect Tense of the Indicative, in every Conjugation, is long; as, legērunt vel legēre, &c. Q. What say you of the Preterperfect Tenses in vi and si? A. They produce the last syllable save one; as, amā∣vi, quiēvi, quaeīvi, divīsi, audīvi. Q. What say you of the last syllable save one of Ad∣jectives in inus? A. They make it long; as, Clandestīnus, matutī∣nus, vespertīnus, &c. except diutinus, cras̄nus, pristi|nus, &c. Q. What say you of the Penultima of Adjectives in anus, arus, orus, osus, and of Adverbs in atim and itim? A. They are all long; as, Mntānus, avārus, canō∣rus, disus stitim, virītim: except affatim, perptim, and stàtim, which are short. Q. Which are the special Rules of the last sylla∣bles? A. The first is of words that end in a, which are long; as, amā, contr, ergā; except quiă, ită, eiă, po∣steă,
and the Adverb pută for videlice; but not putā from puto, putas. But Nominative, Accusative, and Vocative Cases in a, are short, except Vocatives from Greek Nominatives in as, which are long; as, Aenea: but Vocatives in a, from Nominatives in es, are short; as, Thyestă, Orestă. Q. But of what quantity are Ablatives in a, and Numerals of Nouns of Number in ginta? A. The Ablatives in a, are long; as, Musā: but the Nouns of Number in ginta, are common, and for the most part long. Q. What quantity are words that end in b, d, t? A. They are short; as, ab, ad, caput; but words in d; as, David, Bagud, and in like words of strange Lan∣guages are rather produced. Q. What quantity are words ending in c? A. They are long; as, ac, sic, and the Adverb hic: but three in c are always made short; to wit, lac, nec, donec; two are common, sac, and the Pro∣noun hic, and the Neuter hc, if it be not the Ablative Case. Q. What quantity are words ending in e? A. They are short; as, Mare, pen, legē, scribē, ex∣cept all words of the fifth Declension in e, together with Adverbs derived thereof; and also the second Persons Singular of the Imperative Mood Active of the second Conjugation; likewise words of one syl∣lable in e, are made long; except que, ve, with these syllabical additions, ce, e, pt, and ne, the Interro∣gative: but ne, the Adverb, is long. Adverbs also in e, derived of Adjectives of three Terminations, are long, except benē and male; but Adverbs deri∣ved of Adjectives of three Articles are short; as, fa∣cilē, dulcē, suavĕ. Lastly, Words that are writ in Greek with the long e, called Eta, are long in every Case, Gender, and Number; and e in Fame, being of old a word of the fifth Declension, is long; as also e in fermè, serè, and ohe.
Q. Of what quantity are words that end in i? A. They are long, except the last i in mihi, tibi, sibi, ubi, ibi, with their Compounds; as, sicubi, a ibi, veluti, which are common; i in ibīdem and ubīque, are always long; in utique short; in ubicunque doubt∣ful: but nisi and quasi are short, and all the Dative and Vocative Cases of the Greeks, whose Genitive Case Singular ends in os; as, Phillis, Phillidos, Philli∣di; Pallas, Pallados, Palladi, &c. Q. What quantity are words that end in l? A. They are short, except nil contracted of Ni∣hil, and Sol, and certain Hebrew words in l; as, Mi∣chael, &c. Q. What quantity are words that end in n? A. They are long; as, Paean, &c. except forsăn, sorsităn, ăn, tamèn, attamēn, veuntamèn; except also in, with its Compounds; as, exi, subin, dein, pron; and these words which are cut off by the Figure Apo∣cope; as, men, vidin', nostn', audin, nemon'. Also words in n, that increase short in the Gnitive Case; as, Carmen, and Greek words in on, by the little o, and some that end in in; as Alexin, and in yn, by y; as, Iyn. And, lastly, Words that end in an, of Nomi∣natives in a; as, Iphygeia, Iphygenian, &c. but words that end in an, of Nominatives in as, are made long; as, Aeneas, Aenean, &c. Q. What quantity are words that end in o? A. They are common; as, amo, virgo, &c. except Oblique Cases, (i. e.) Datives and Ablatives in o, which are always long; as, ic Domino, ab hoc tem∣plo, &c. also Adverbs derived of Adjectives are long; as, tanto, quanto▪ &c. besides sedulo, mutuo, crebro, se∣ro, which are common. Md, dummodo, postmodo, and quomodo, are always short. Cito, illico, ambo, duo, ego, nomo, scio, nescio, cedo for dic, are scarce read long: Words of one syllable in o, are long; as, do, sto, ergo, for the cause, and words writ by the Greek Omega; as, Sapph, &c.
Q. What quantity are words that end in r? A. They are short; as, Caesar, torcular, per, vir, &c. but cor is read long in Ovid. Far, lar, nar, ver, sur, cur, and also par with his Compounds are long; as, Compar, impar, dispar, and words that end in Greek in er, with eta; as, Aēr, cratēr, charactēr, &c. are long; except Pater and Mater, whose last syllable the Latins make short. Q. How know you the quantity of words that end in s? A. Words that end in s, have as many Terminations as there are Vowels, to wit, as, es, is, os, us, and ys. Q. What quantity are words that end in as? A. They are long; as, amas, musas, majesta, boni∣tas, foras, &c. except Greek Nominatives whose Ge∣nitives ends in adis vel ados; as, Ilias, Pallas, Aras, to which add Anas; and except also Accusatives Plu∣ral of Greek Nouns of the third Declension increa∣sing; as, Crateras, Heroas, Phyllidas, Cyclopas, Troas, all which are short. Q. What quantity are words that end in es? A. Long; as, Anchises, sedes, doces, patres; except Nouns in es of the third Declension increasing short; as, Milēs, segēs, divēs; but aries, abies, paries, ceres, and pes, with its Compounds; as, Bipes, tripes, qua∣drupes, are long. Es of the Verb sum, with its Com∣pounds; as, potes, ades, prodes, obes, to which joyn penes, and Greek Neuters Singular in es; as, Hippo∣manes, Cacoethes, and also Greek Nominatives Plural, whose Nominatives Singular increaseth in the Obliques, sc. in the Gen. and Dat. as, Arcades, Clyclopes, Naa∣des, Troades, Thraces, are short. Q. What quantity are words that end in is? A. They are short; as, Paris, panis, tristis, hilaris: except Dat. and Abl. Plu. which are long; as, musis, mensis, dominis, templis; as also quis for quibus, with words in is, that make long the last syllable save one of the Genitive Case increasing; as, sais, salamis,
and also Greek and Latin words that end in the Dip∣thong eis; as, Simeis, Pyroeis, Parteis, Omneis, with all words of one syllable; as, Vis, lis, except the No∣minatives Is and Quis, and Bis in Ovid. Lastly, The second Person Singular of the Present Tense of the Indicative Mood in the fourth Conjugation; as, audis, dormis; also sis and velis, with the Compounds of both; as, praesis, malis, , are long. Futures of the Subjunctive Mood in ris are common, tho' the Grammar saith they are long. Q. What quantity are words that end in os? A. They are long; as, hos, nepos, dominos, servos, except compos, impos, and os ssis, and Greek words by the little o; as, Delos, Chaos, allados, Phyllidos, which are short. Q. What quantity are words that end in us? A. They are short; as, Famulus, regius, tempus, a∣mamus; except words that end in us, making long the last syllable save one of the Genitive Case; as, sa∣lus, tellus; also all Nouns of the fourth Declension are long, except the Nominative and Vocative Cases Singular and Dative and Ablative Case Plural of that Dclension; likewise words of one syllable in us are long: and lastly, Greek words by the Dipthong ous, are long; as, Amanthus, Supphus, Clius, Panthus, ex∣cept the Compounds of pus; as, Oed pus, Plypus, which are short; but Melampus and Tripus are long, as also us in Jesus. Q. What quantity are words that end in u? A. They are all long; as, Mau, genu, amatu, diu. Q. What quntity are words that end in ys and y? A. They are short; as, Chelys, Tiphys, Capys, Libys, Tphy, Mly.
Instructions to Tyrocinians for the Com∣posing of a Theme. THemes, or the Wise Savings of Learned Men, which are used to be given to School boys, for the exercising of their Faculties, are two fold: 1. Chreiae, wherein the bare knowledge of a thing, without either injunction or perswasion to it, (yet useful) is proposed; as, Death is common to all. Life is short, but At long, if we make use of our Time. 2. Gno∣mae, wherein are enjoyned things either to be per∣formed, or omitted and avoided; as, Do all thigs with deliberation. Go not too far in any thing; or too much of one thing is good for nothing. Meddle not with Edge-tools. Halt before a Cripple. Cut your Cloak ac∣cording to your Cloth, &c. In these two parts, (to wit) Chreiae and Gnomae, four things especially are to be ob∣served: 1. The Propositio, which plainly contains in clear words the sum of that we are about to speak of. 2. The Ratio, or state of the matter in hand, where∣by we prove the Proposition to be true by some Ar∣gument. 3. The Confirmatio, whereby we further back that Reason with sufficient Arguments. In these two parts, we use these or the like Forms of Speech: Nam, Enim, Erenim, Quippe, Nimirum, quid enim? &c. In the Consirmatio we make use of Similies, Exam∣ples, and Testimonies. 4. The Epilgus or Conclu∣sion, that consists of two parts: 1. An Anacephalaeo∣sis, or brief Repetition of what was spoen. 2. A pathetick Conclusion, urging the Truth and Necessity of what we affirmed, with the praise of the Author of the Saying. The Forms of Speech used in the conclusion are, , Quare, Quamobrem, Quae cum ita
sint, &c. To these four parts some add an Exordium, or Preface, before the Preposition; also a Confuta∣tion, or Answering of Objections after the Confirma∣tion and Amplification before the Conclusion: But a due observation of the pre-mentioned will prove a Task hard enough to a School-boy, the rest are need∣less Niceties. For the Composing of Verses. IN the Composing of Verses, we are first to observe, that every kind of Verse will run better and more smooth, if the Feet (of which a Verse consists) be link'd together, as in this of Virgil: Infandum regina jubes renovare dolorem. But the Verse which altogether wants a Caesura, at least after the second or third Foot, (especially an Iambick Senarius, Asclepiadick, Saphick, and an He∣roick,) yields a very unpleasant harmony; as, Aurea carmina, Juli scribi maxime vatum. But two Monosyllables coming together, may be ac∣counted as a Dissyllable; as, Qui scit quam quis amet qui per convivia currit. Yet the last of the Monosyllables, or a word of two short syllables, must be reckon'd as part of the Poly∣syllables; as, Vinea quod primis fioret cum cana rocemis. Cursorem sext tibi Rufe remisimus horâ.
An Hexameter runs more pleasant, and carries a better sound with it, which begins with a Penthi∣mimer, and ends in a word of two or three syllables; as, In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas. Omnia vincit amor, & nos cedamus amori. But let there be as few breaches and cuttings off by the Figures, Synelepha and Eclipsis, as possible you can. A Pentamete should end with a word of two syl∣lables, and that either with a Verb, as a Key shutting or concluding the Sentence, or with an Adjective; neither is any Adjective to be placed here, unless meo, tuo, suo, but by no means an impertinent Epithet. We must also have a care that a Penthimimer ends a word; for, if otherwise, it will be a great fault, tho' we have in Catellus some of this sort; as, Nec speraret linguam esse nec auriculam. An Adonick runs smoother, and carries a greater grace with it, which consists of two words, of which if the one be a Substantive, whose Adjective is expres∣sed in the precedent Verse, it seems the better, be∣cause the whole series, as it were one body, is annex'd. Also, a single monosyllable is seldom used in the end of an Adonick, unless que, ne, ve, the enclitical Con∣junctions, besides one or two Examples in Horace; sometimes the first syllable in an Adonick is cut off with the end of the preceding Verse, sometimes it belongs to it without a Synalepha; as Hor. Labitur ripà jove non probante u∣xorius amnis. Grospe non gemmis neque purpura ve∣nale nec auro.
But thee are not to be imitated, polysyllables are com∣mendable in the end of a Phaleusick; as Horace, Vitam quae faciunt beatiorem. Versus enini are to be avoided, viz. those that have the same sound repeated in the middle and in the end, which the best Poets are branded with; as Virgil, Trajicit, i, verbis virtutem illude superis. Si rojae fatis aliquid restare putatis, Lastly, Words that are too long or too short, too often, unpeasant, or harsh Synalepha's, are not to be made use of; as in these, Cturbabantur, Constantino∣politani; Tu in me ita es, hm! in te ut ego sum, ac tu e bi ama, ut te eg  hic jam. A Brief Advice touching Epistles, Ora∣tions and Declamations. Of Epistles. AN Epistle is a Writing wherein we talk with an aent Friend as tho prsnt. All Epistles consist of thse ur Accidents or Parts: 1. Compellation. 2. A Subiption. 3. A Date. 4. A Supersiptn. All Epistles ought to be written in  Plain, Brief and Pithy Stile, without Aectation, or Perphras; and Tautologies a oded, by varying the Phrase when the same Expression is to be used. Epists are either, 1. Demonstrative, consisting of the prae or dipraise of a thing. 2. Deliberative, which end to persade or disswade. 3. Judicial, in which we accuse or defnd.
Demonstrative Epistles are either, 1. Narratary, consisting of Relations. 2. Congratultory, expressing our joy for the good befallen our Friends. 3. La∣mentory, expressing our grief for our own or Friends Calamity. 4. Euchaistical, praising the Courtesie received. 5. Officious, when we offer our service to our Friend in any business unrequested. 6. Dispu∣tatory, propounding the Question, Occason, Opinion or Judgment of ohers or our own. 7. Deprecatory, when we confess our Faults. Deliberative Epistles are, 1. Swasory, or Hortatory, when we perswade, or earnestly xhort our Friend. 2. Conslatory and Monity, which consist of Comfort and Advice to our Friend. 3. Commendatory, contain∣ing the Recommendation of some Friend and his Worth. And, 4. , when we infuate our selves into one's favour, tllng our request. Judicial Epistles are, 1. , or Objurgao∣ry, consisting of Reprhensions. 2. , when we apologize for a rime imputed. 3. , when we upbrad the ingratue of a Friend. Of Orations. An Oration is a Discourse wherein we praise or dis∣praise, perswade or disswa, prove or disprove. Ora∣tions (like Epistles) are eier Dmonstrative, Dlbe∣rative, or Judicial; for which let the Philologer con∣sult Demosthenes, Taly, or Liv's Orations. Of Declamations. There be four kind of Declamations: 1. , when we enquire, whether or by whom a Fact was committed; as, An Clodius occidei ? 2. Finitive. when we enquire whether the Crme im∣puted be such, as, if a Persn be slain, whether the Fact be Murthr, Manslaughter, Chance medley, or
Se defendeno. 3. Qualitative, when we enquire con∣cerning the quality of an Action, whether profitable or unprofitable, just or unjust. This is either, 1. Ne∣gotial, wherein we deliberate concerning Matters pub∣lick or private. 2. Judicial, wherein we, plead the lawfulness o justice of a past Action. 3. Legal, where∣in the state or case especially consists in the meaning of a Law. 4. Quantitative, wherein we enquire of the hainousness of an offence; ▪ whther of the two Crimes be the greatr. Those that will dive farther into this sort of Exercise, let them read Quintiian's Declations, and Seneca's Controversies. FINIS.
