L41 13534417 100028
THE HISTORY OF THE Late Proceedings OF THE STUDENTS OF THE COLLEDGE AT EDENBOROUGH. VVhich hath occasioned the Kings Pro∣clamation for Banishing them Fifteen miles from the said City. In three se∣veral Letters to a worthy Citizen of London. Published to prevent false Reports. LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-head Al∣ly, in Pater-Noster-Row, 1681.
THE FIRST LETTER. THE manner of it was thus, They had taken up a resolution to Celebrate this Pageant a week or a fortnight before to which all generally consented. In ordr whereto they employed a Carver who erected them a Wood∣en Holyness or a Pope in Effigy with Cloaths, Tripple Crown, Keys and other necessary habiliments, for which there was a general Collection amongst the Students. All things being in readiness on Thursday night, they ac∣quainted some others with it, by which the rumor came to the Provosts Ears, who was so enraged that he sent for the Primier and Regents, Commanding them to or∣der the Students to desist from their enterprize with menaces, that if they would not be would make it a bloody Christmas to some of them. After which he went down to the Abby, to acquaint the Duke and Chancellor with it. The former was much moved, and the latter swore a great Oath that if they undertook it he would order six hundred of Lith∣gows Regiment to be brought within the Town. (Which is an infringment of the Legal Priviledges of the City) To Cut down all Students where ever they saw above four or five assembled together. Order also was given that the Guards should be doubled. But the Students, not being at all dismayed, went on with an intire resolution to accomplish the project in pursuance of which they would live or die together. Be∣ing encouraged by Merchants and Tradesmen, who by this time were acquainted with their purpose, and came and offered their assistance, yea most of the Town, excepting the Magistrates, resolved if Lithgows men were brought in
they would Lay out the Blew Blanket Flag, seldome laid out and taken in without Blood-shed. The day being come, they all as well Students as Ap∣prentices with others convened in the Morning, and at nine a Clock (the Soldiers not being as yet brought in), the Lads took their opportunity and carried the Pageant to the High-street, (the Duke being then in the Council-house) and immediatly set fire to it, shouting no Pope, no Pope. Every old Wife thought her self happy that could get a stroke at it, and made as great a noise as any, Cur∣sing the Pope and blessing the Students, but they were not well separated till General Daliel with Lithgows men came rageing through the streets like Lions, but they being but one Company, they were not regarded. SIR, Your Servant. Christmas Day, 1680,
THE Second Letter From another Friend at Edenbrough, giv∣ing an Account of the same. Edenb. Decemb. 25. 1680. SIR, THis Night I intend you only the Diversion of our Christmas; some days since the Boyes of the Col∣ledge took a conceipt to Burn the Pope, and Anti∣christ, on this day, as most proper for it. They ordered the Pope and his Formalities, to be pre∣pared in good Fashion, with his Mitre, Crosier, Pastoral Staff, and Robes; but the thing taking Air, is brought to my Lord Chancellor's Ears, who judging rightly how necessary it was at this Time, to prevent the beginnings of such Insolencies, sent for the Magistrates, and enjoyn∣ed them very strictly, to be careful to hinder it; The Magistrates called the Principal, and Regents; and after se∣vere Intimations to the Boyes, the Principal causes a Bond to be tendred to them, whereby, considering of what dangerous consequence it might be to Burn the Pope in Essigie, they were to bind neither to do it this day, nor hereafter: Some Bearnes took it, but the rest of the Classis insolently refused it; and so the thing coming to be more apprehended, I am told, that some
of the Council met Yesterday for the Preventing of it, and the Principal Officers of the Forces were in Arms most part of the Night, that they brought the Companies from Leith, and gathered all the Forces about, to the Cannogate, without beating of Drums, that our Magistrates were up all Night; the Provost in the Court of Guard, and the Bailiffs at the Ports, and this Morning early the Gray-Coats, the Town-Guards, went to the Colledge, and some other Houses, conducted by the Town-Mayor, and seized several Scholars judged to be most active, in their Beds, and committed them to the Cannogate Tolbooth, where they still lie; two or three of them are English Boyes, but they say innocently suspected; one of them is said to be one Gray, Son to Sir Phil. Gray. A little after Day the Magistrates sent the Town-Guards again to the Colledge, to prevent any Rendezvouse there, but the Boyes in the mean time met in a place called the High-School-Yard; and having ordered the Pope, and taken the best Opportunity, they bring the Pope up Black-Fryers—to the High Street, just about the Time that a Bailiff ordered by the Magi∣strates was come that length discharging tumultuous Meetings, and commanding our Train-Bands to be in Arms; but the Boyes took the Paper from the Officer; and having read a short Accusation against His Holiness, they set Fire to him with Links, having ordered a Train with∣in him. About the same Time General Daliel getting the Alarm, for which he was in readiness, sends in a Squadron of His Majesties Horse-Guard, conducted by the Lord L—. with Kettle-Drums, the Kings Standard, and Swords drawn, by the Cowgate Port, who rid in great haste to the Grass-Market; and the General himself, with other Companies, follow them with no less haste the same way; the Com∣panies being followed with three Men carrying Ball, Match and Powder; and by the Nether-Bow-Port enters the E. of Marr, about the same Time with two Companies drawn up in one; and before he came the length, the E.
of Linlithgow passing by where the Pope was first fired, draws his Sword, and drives off the Boyes, though they were rude enough; and coming to the Burning Pope, he turned him over, and caused his Men to draw him under the weynd head; but they fearing Powder in the Pope's Belly, left him; and the Lads beat the Pope with Sticks until the Powder took fire, and blew off his head, and then they took the Head and Chair, and haled him through all the Streets to the Weigh-house: The E. of Marr marching fast after them with his two Companies; but the Chair being then broke, the Boyes scattered, only they tossed the Head a while, and the E. of Marr returned as he went up, and the General came from the Grass-Market down the High-Street, and the King's Guard in the same posture as they came in. We have also had good Guards to day, to suppress the remains of the disorder, our Train-Bands came not together, yet I must assure you, that in all this busi∣ness there were none but Boyes only. You may see how careful we are to prevent the Extravagancies that abound with you, for otherwise all the world knows what Pro∣testants we are: You need not doubt but this Shew would gather concourse enough, and the People cryed, No Pope, No Pope, and made sport enough of the whole. This Account I hope will help you to pass your Christmas the more merrily. I am Sir Your Humble Servant. FINIS.
THE THIRD LETTER. SIR, I Hope you have received my last of the 25th. of the last Month, in which I gave you an ac∣count of the conceipt the Boys of the Colledge took to burn the Pope, the Antichrist, on Christmas day last. I gave you also an account of the en∣deavours used by the Lord Chancellor the Princi∣pal and Regents, and other of the Magistrates, for the preventing of it, and of the ill effect of those endeavours, the Bearns notwithstanding carrying on their enterprize in despight of the opposition they met with from the E. of Marr. General Daliel and other Souldiers. Since when our Provosts house hath been burnt, whither occasion'd by malicious men, or done ac∣cidently I know not, tho it be said that he was threatned with the burning of his house at Priest-field, and with other injuries, it hath also been made out that fire-balls were thrown into it, and that a Barrel of Powder was found in that part of the house that was unburnt; And yesterday was published here a Proclama∣tion, That whereas the Lords of the Council were informed that several disloyal and malicious Per∣sons, frequenting Edenborough, had instigated the Students of the Colledge to enter into Bonds and Combinations, and to convocate in Tumults, there was order taken for the Securing of our Peace, and it being made appear that the Students did enter into Bonds and Combinations, in which they did oblige themselves, among other things, con∣trary
to the Laws of this Kingdom, to adhere to one another, if they were called in question of it, and in confidence of that Seditious Combination did on the 25. of December last, in a Tumultuary was, assault and affront several persons, and did associate them∣selves with Apprentices, and put up blew Ribbons as signs and cognizances to differ themselves from o∣thers, and for convocating themselves; for which be∣ing justly reproved, they did some dayes after run up and down the Streets in Tumults, disquieting the No∣bility and Gentry of both Sexes, and threatning the Provost as above, &c. Whereupon the Lords of the Council by an Act ordered the Gates of the Schools of that Colledge to be shut up, till they should be fully in∣formed of the Root and Progress of these disorders, and satisfied by the punishment and submission of the Offenders. Therefore to prevent any further Seditious Tumults, and disorders from these Students, they are all commanded to retire 15 miles at least from this City, within twenty four hours after publication of this Proclamation, and not to come within our limits without leave of the Privy Council, under the pain of being punished as Seditious Persons, and Contemners of the Kings Authority, and their Parents, Tutors, and all others are forbid to resset or entertain them with∣out giving caution to the Clerks of the Council for their good behaviour. What our thoughts hereof are I leave you to judge. The Duke is still with us, but there is a talk of his removing higher up into the Country towards Glasgow. At your leasure I shall be glad to be infor∣med what your thoughts in England are of these pro∣ceedings: As any thing else of moment occurs you may expect an account of it from, Sir, Your most devoted Servant, L. L. Edinborough, Jan. 22. 1680.
