L739F 27300321 110067
THE Lawyers Clarke TRAPPAND by the CRAFTY VVHORE OF CANTERBURY. OR, A true Relation of the whole Life of Mary Mauders the Daughter of Thomas Manders a Fidler in CANTERBURY. Wherein is discovered, 1. How she marryed a Fidler at Dover, and aShoe-maker at the City of Canterbury. 2. How she cheated a Vintner of 60. pound, and was committed to Newgate. 3. How she cheated a French Marchant of Rings, Iewels and other Rich Commodities last March. 4. How she pickt a Kentish Lords Pocket, at Graves-end, of his Watch and Mony. 5. How she made her escape, when sold and ship'd for the Barbadoes. 6. How she came to London to the Exchange Tavern, naming her self Henretta Maria de Vulva the Daughter of a great Prince inGermany, and married a Lawyers Clark on Easter-day last. 7. How she was discovered by a Shoe-maker, and carryed before a Justice, who Committed her to the Gate-house, All her rich Jewels (which were valued at three thousand pound) being broke and found Counterfeits. LONDON, Printed for John Johnson. 1663.
THE Lawyers Clark Out-witted. OR, A true Relation of the whole Life of Mary Mauders a Fidlers Daughter in the City of CANTERBURY. TO tell you all the pranks performed by this piece of impudence, were too much to be contained in one sheet; but I shall give you an epitome of her Life and actions as follows, viz. Her birth and education was in Canterbury, her parents mean people, her own Father being a Fidler, named Thomas Mauders. Her Father in Law is by name Mr. Foord, and is also of the same profession, but keeps an Inn in Canterbury. She was formerly for a cheat committed to Newgate, where she had
a homely black jade attended her as a Maid servant, the fact she then committed was thus. She coming to London with her maid waiting on her, pretended to be a Lady of a great estate, and that she had store of mony coming up by the Carrier, which her made so cunningly averr'd, that for Wine and other dainties she ran threescore pound in the Vintners debt, for which she was committed, and being at liberty she followed picking of pockets, whoreing and thieving; this was the life of this gallant Lady. She also was well provided for Husbands having one a Fidler at Dover, the other a Shoe maker living in the City of Canterbury. About two Months since, coming to London, she fell into the company of a French Marchant, to whom she declard the greatness of her Birth and Parentage, and of the great estate she should receive from the Lord ner father. This declaration of her Ladyship seconded by her waiting, maid, took so much with Mounsier that he furnished her fin∣gers with gold Rings, cloths and necessaries to a great value, and expecting the coming of her riches married her, but at last discovering he was cheated, he appointed her to go to Deale to a vessel he named (intending to sell her, and send her to the Barbadoes) she went on her journey, he promising to come after her and to go with her. In her journy coming to Graves-end, she went to an Inn, where a Ketish. Lord was drinking, who inquiring what she was, by her deportment supposed her to he some great Lady, which she sufficiently made out, so that he kndly welcomed her in his company; but afterwards repenced his bargain and would have given 5 pound to any one that should gve him notice where she was; for when she was gone he found that she had taken his Watch and mony to bear her company in her journey. From thence she came next to Canterbury and perswaded her sister Joane Mauders to attend her as he maid to the Ship, which to credit her sister she willingly performed; but when she came aboard, and understood the Vessel was bound
for the Barbadoes, she sent to Dover Castle to the Fidler her Husband, who was a Soldier there, and desired him to fetch her off. Her Husband hearing of her riches in Rings and Jewels im∣braced that opportunity, and went with a File of Soldiers to demand her (intending to get the riches and be divorced from her) but was denyed her by the owne of the Ship. Hereupon he went back, got a Note fro the Castle, and came againe to demand her; they not daing to deny the writing, stript of her rich Cloaths, and took away her rings and Jewels and turn'd her and her Sister ashore, so that the poor man her Husband was not a penny the better, but yet gave her no entertainment, so that she and Jone were forced in a poor Condition to return to Canterbury. Now to come to this last and grand cheat; after she had a little ecuted her self, and was in some handsome appa∣rel, she came to London, and took her lodging at the Ex∣change Taven near the Stocks, where she met with a Law∣yers Clark who she so sweetned on, that he soon became a suiter to her, she telling him of her Birth and Paren∣tage. First she acquainted him that her name was Henretta Mara Devulva, Daughter to a great Prince in Germany, and that wn she was two years old, she was put in a Nunnery, where she remained till now that she made her happy escape, where she had left as many Cloaths as was worth 3000 pound. Thence she came to her own Country in Germany, and some of the Princes there would have perswaded her to mar∣ry an Old Man, which she would not do, least her Estate (if she dyed without Issue) should go to the Nunnery; from whence (to prevent all danger) she came over into this Country, and had in her keeping as many Jewels as were judg'd by a Gold-Smith (whom they sent for) to be worth three thousand pound. She also told him, that she had a Coach and six Flanders Mares coming over, with store of Money, her Estate being
ten or twelve thousand pounds per annum; and the better to carry on her design, she said she had a Steward in Germany to whom she fram'd a Letter which was sent by the Post, and an answer return'd to this effect, viz Madam, The money you sent for is not yet ready, but I have gathered three thousand pound which shall come by the next Ship, and also your Coach and six Horses with it, which made the story so plain, as many wise heads (besides the fresh-water Lad) beleived it to be truth. Hereupon his freinds made up the match, and upon Easter day their Nuptial was solemnized of this young Lord and Lady; for which purpose a Gown was bought her of fifty five pound besides other Necessaries, the young Lord have∣ing his Lackey to wait on him, all things being performed in a noble manner, to the admiration of all his old acquain∣tance. The Wedding being done, they provided Coaches for their friends and went to Barnet, where they continued making merry till Tuesday following; where they spent in so high a nature as some will repent their acquaintance with this new Germany Lady, who spoke Dutch so exactly that she deceived many, and but little English and that in such a broken manner as they could hardly understand her Tuesday she came back, the young Lord would have had her go to Court because she pretended to have great friends there, but she refused that proposition till her own Coach and Horses came. Her deportment was very noble, and her heart open, for passing by New-gate (the old Castle of her safety) she gave her Lackey half a Crown to put in the Prisoners bag. Since this, one Clark a Porter (who plyes at Warwick-Lane-end) carryed her a Letter, with which she gave order he should come up to her bed-Chamber, where she askt what he would have for the Letter, he desired eight pence, she told him that was too little, and gave him a shilling, and askt him to drink her Lords health, which he accepted of, upon which she call'd for a bottle of Sack, and after he had
drank that, made him drink her health till the bottle was out, and the poor Porter went reeling home. The Nuptial being past, and all things concluded, she was designed to make up her pack and begone; but a Shooe-make comeing in, who had formerly wrought with her Hus∣band i Canteruy, seeing her, said to some of the House she was a Whore, they replyed he had best have a care what he said, for she was a person of Honour, but he still persisted and ad she was a Whore, and hee'd prove her a Whore, with which bng brought to the room, he look'd in her face and said she was the same person he took her for, and that he wrought with her Husband who was a Shooe-maker in Can∣terbury, and that she had another a Fidler, who is a Souldier in Dover Castle. Hereupon she was carried before a Iustice and examined, and her Iewels and Rings were all found Couterfet, upon which she was committed to the Gate-House, from whence (if be first Husband appear, she will be transported to her old quarters at New-Gate, and finish her course at Padding∣ton▪ if she do not Cheat Squire Dun of his Right and Title, which is a just Doom for all such Impudent pieces of Ini∣quity. FINIS.
