M1058A 99826321 30718
Drops of Myrrhe, OR, MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS, Fitted to divers of the pre∣ceding Arguments. O Lord my strength, be not silent unto me, lest if thou make as though thou hearest me not, I become like them that go down into the pit, Psal. 28. 1. My Beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of Spices, to feed in the garden, and to gather the Lillies. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine; he feedeth among the Lillies, Cantic. 6. 2, 3. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Rich. Davis in Oxon. 1653.
The Arguments. 1. A Prayer for a distracted Church and State. 2. A Prayer for the Spirit of moderation and discerning. 3. A Meditation and Prayer concerning the perfection of Gods Word. 4. The hopeful Soul's conflict between extremities. 5. The humble Soul's Agony with natural pride. 6. The mortified Christian tolling his own knell. 7. The deliver'd Soul's Iu∣bilee. 8. The Authors concluding vote for himself and the Reader.
An Advertisement to the READER. BEcause there are abundance of excellent forms of Medi∣tations and prayers for all oc∣casions already in Print, and the generality of men now, with Saul's Army, choose rather to fast and faint, then save such honey from dropping on the ground (which probably, if tasted, might illuminate the eyes,) I shall not add much of this nature (as namely particu∣lar Forms of confession & humi∣liation, of supplications & inter∣cession & thansgivings;) but only some few Portions excerpt or enlarged from my own private Devotions, which I thought most pertinent to some of the matters foregoing. God san∣ctifie them to the humble Readers use.
For a distracted CHURCH and STATE. Prayer I. OH Lord God, the great and terrible, that rulest heaven and earth, that puttest down one, and settest up another, and none may say unto thee, what dost thou? Look down from the hibitation of thy holiness, and thy glory, and be∣hold with an eye of pity this wretch∣ed Nation. O Lord, things are now at that pass, that we know not which way to look; Our eyes are up unto thee, merciful God, save or we pe∣rish! Let not the oppressions and calamities that have already befaln us seem small in the eyes of thy compassion, though we confess thou
hast punished us much less then our iniquities deserve: But for thy mercy sake, which is over all thy works, for thy sons sake, who taketh away the sins of world, let it be enough: Let there be no more such terrible shakings, and earth∣quakes among us: Let the prayers of thy small remnant more prevail with thee for pardon and mercies, then the abominations of wicked men and hypocrites for judgement, and vengeance. Sanctifie thy bit∣ter providences to such as it hath pleased thee to afflict and debase: Give them submiss patience under thy all-ruling-hand, and a joyful harvest from their sorrows, even if it be thy will in this life, if other∣wise, in the next: and however thou disposest (O thou most Just and most Wise) of particular per∣sons, and interests; yet let the interess of thy Gospel be Advanced,
the hearts of thy people established and comforted, and the patient ex∣pectation of the humbled and in∣jured satisfied. Arise Oh Lord! let not man prevail. Thou who est between the Cherubims shew thy self. Shew thy self a Defender if the innocent, One that humbleth those that exalt themselves, that taketh the crafty in his devices, and maketh the hypocrite a terror to himself. Lord God of Hoasts! Let not them have occasion to say with their mouth, or in their heart, that thou God hearest not, or seest not; or that thou God hast forsaken the Earth. Let a Book of Remembrance be written for those that fear thee, and yet speak often for thy truth; and put up into thy bottle every tear shed by those, whom it pitieth to see our Zion thus in the dust. Return Oh Lord! how long stoppest thou thy ears and wilt not hear thy
people pray? Be pleased for thy Sons sake, yet at length to make this Land a praise in the Earth, an holy Church, and a Religious prosperous State. Take away from amidst us the spirit of de∣lusion and strife, and hatred, and hypocrisie; and pour out a Spirit of love, of equity, and of truth: Remove every stumbling-block and rock of offence, every galling thorn, and pricking briar to the spirits of such as desire to fear thy name: and make the way of the Lord so plain in the Land, that the wai∣faring man, though a fool, may not err therein. And cause all of us, however at present unhappily de∣vided, yet at length with unani∣mous hearts to say; Not any of our wills, but the will of our Lord be done. Amen.
For the Spirit of moderation and discerning. OH Lord, the Father of LightsPray. 2. and fountain of Wisdom! Into how many parties and in∣terests are those that profess thy name devided? How many lay claim to thy truth, that in the same particulars contradict each other? And how many colours are found out to make each pretence seem probable? How difficult is it to determine which is right? how uncomfortable to hover between uncertainties? how dangerous to resolve at a rash adventure? Oh Lord, thy unworthy Servant hath a long time sadly considered these premises; and amidst those floods of doubts and controversies which now cover the face of thy Church, can scarce (with Noah's Dove)
finde one dry place whereon to rest his foot: Oh my God, I betake my self to the Ark, my refuge: My eys are up unto thee, Thou hast bid those who want wisdom to ask of thee, who givest liberally, and upbraidest no man: Vouch∣safe me I beseech thee for thy Sons sake a share in that thy pro∣mise, That thy Spirit shall lead me into all truth. Give me a discern∣ing spirit, that I may discern be∣tween things that differ, and a sta∣ble minde, with a settled judgment, that I may not be toss'd about with every wind of doctrine, but let my senses be so exercis'd, that I may prove all things, and firmly hold whatsoever is good: And because knowledge puffeth up, but love edifieth, joyn humility and charity with my knowledge, and effectual∣ly bow my heart to do thy will, and then thy promise is, That I shall
know it. Furthermore, O Lord, be∣cause of all thy attributes, thou com∣mendest none more to our imita∣tion then those of love & mildness, grant O Lord, that I may not de∣ceive my self, and think it a piece of Religion to be bitter against my Brethren; but make me to study and practise that wisdom which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easie to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without partiality and hypocrisie. O Lord, grant me my request for thy Sons sake. Amen. Meditation and Prayer con∣cerning the Word of God. HOw perfect is thy Law, OPray. 3. God, which converteth souls; Thy Testimonies, O Lord, which make the wise simple, how sure are they?
Thy Statutes are pure, and r∣joyce the heart; Thy Command∣ment is pure, and enlightens th eyes. Thy Word is quick and power∣ful, sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to the d∣ding asunder of soul and spirit. Let others seek for grounds to believe the Scriptures, thy inspira∣tion; This satisfyeth me, that none could so lay open the inmost secrets of the heart, but thou alone who onely knowest it. O Lord, I many times think that in reading other books, I have dis∣covered mysteries, and yet up∣on review of thine, I see the same things there; and oh how much clearer! Oftentimes, O Lord, I meet with things both within me and without, which when I seek to know, they are too painful for me:
until I flie unto this thy sanctua∣, and then I understand them. O Lord, I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy Com∣mandments are exceeding broad. To thy Law, and to thy Testi∣monies let all men have recourse; They that speak not according to this word, have no light in them. Behold all they that kindle fires, and compass themselves about with their own sparks; Though they walk never so pre∣sumptuously and pleasantly in the fire, and the sparks they have kindled; yet this shall they have at thy hand, they shall lie down in sorrow. As for me, O Lord, I am a stranger upon Earth, oh hide not thy Commandment from me. Suffer me not to choose unto my self any of those blind guides
my vain minde or subtile adver∣sary would accommodate me with. Lord whither should I go from thee? Thou hast the words of eternal life. Let thy word be a Lamp to my feet, and a light unto my path▪ Let thy Statutes be my Song in the house of my Pilgrimage. Grant that here beholding thy glory in this glass, when I awake up, I may be satisfied with thine Image. The hopeful Souls conflict be∣tween extremities. SVffer thy Servant, O Lord, whoPray. 4. is but dust and ashes, thus to expostulate with thee in the bitter∣ness of his Soul. Lord, what a riddle, and a wonder am I to my self! How
many characters read I in my heart, which I understand not; and how many see I there, which I cannot read? How oft am I in a great straight, my Soul being dejected, and my Spirit confounded within me? how oft am I at a loss, and know not what to think of my self? One while I finde my Soul some∣what confident in thee, and am ready to say, I shall never greatly be moved; Thou Lord, of thy goodness seemest to have made my ill so strong. Anon, thou but hidest thy face, and oh how am I troubled! One while my fingers seem to drop Myrrhe in following after thee; and ere I am aware, my Soul carryeth me like the Chariots of Ammi-nadab. Anon, all my Wheels are taken off, and I finde nor foot, or heart,
to draw or move toward thee. One while I can with joy and cheerfulness look into the Holy of Holies, through the vail of thy Sons flesh. Anon, with the Publican, I dare not so much as lift up my eyes unto heaven, and say, I am deservedly cast out of thy sight. One while I think the high holds of my heart levell'd to the foot of Christ, and the way of the Lord prepar'd in my Soul. A while after, I seem to descry Mountains yet unremov'd. Now I perswade my self thou hast in good measure cast my heart into the mold of Christianity; Anon, I cry out, oh in how little am I a Christian! I one while laugh at my weak∣nesses, follies and mistakes; to con∣sider how oddly, and strangely I cheat and deceive my self; soon
after I am astonish'd and confound∣ed at fouler discoveries▪ and then again, in hopes of thy pardoning and subduing my corruptions, I say return unto thy rest ô my Soul; and yet I keep not long there. Every day new wonders appear within me, and I know I am far still from seeing to the bottom of my heart. Lord, all things are naked and bare before thee; thou under∣standest my thoughts afar off: thou knowest my foolishness, and none of my sins are hid from thee▪ Lord, though I know not what I am, yet I know thou canst make me what thou wilt. Search me, O God, try my heart and my reins, suffer not any way of wickedness to remain with me, but guide me in the way everlasting. Work truth in my inward parts, and in my hidden part make
me to understand Wisdom. O let my heart be sound in thy Statutes, that I be not a∣shamed. The humble Soul's Agony with natural Pride. O Lord God of Hoasts, thePray. 5. terrible, and Omnipotent; thou settest thy self in battel-array against the proud. How shall I approach thy pre∣sence with a proud heart, when the Mediator between thee and man admits none to him, but the humble and lowly? Yet, oh meek Jesu! amongst them certainly thou invitest those that are sensible of, that are heavie laden with their pride, and desire to be humble.
Holy Father! thy poor crea∣ture hath all the causes in the world to be humble; whether I respect thee above, or hell beneath, or the weaknesses of body and mind in my self, or without me, the emi∣nent gifts thou hast bestowed upon others, of the least of which I am not as uncaple as unworthy. Yet O Lord, none of these con∣siderations will prevail on my cor∣rupt perverse treacherous heart, without thy blessing, without thou set them home upon me. Thou canst level the Moun∣tains, and bring down the high and lofty, and make the rough smooth, and the crooked straight; Thy smallest breath can rend the Cedars. My sad experience with my natural fears, make me almost despair of prevailing against this corruption; of ever performing
the least part of my duty without this taint attending it. My God, my whole trust is in thee; with thee I know all things are both possible and easie. I cast my spirit into thy hands, undertake for me. Be surety for thy servant in that which is good, that the proud do me no harm. Suffer me not to think the pride of my heart then mortified, when charm'd onely by some passionate reflection, or warm application▪ Suffer me not to think it ex∣tinct, when with▪drawn onely, or hid in some corner of my brest. Suffer me not to make terms with this enemy, or conceit I am humbled, and be proud in that. Rather, oh Lord! let the Mes∣senger of Satan buffet me, so that thy grace be sufficient for me: Rather let him foyl me, so that I
rise by my fals, and through thy grace prevail, by being overcome. Yet, oh Lord! how long shall I cry out by reason of the oppression of the enemy? I beseech thee for thy Anointed's sake (and thou wilt not turn away his face) let me not go all the day long this heavily, whilst the ene∣my magnifies himself, and tri∣umphs over me. Arise, O Lord! command de∣liverances for me: Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low; deliver me from my perse∣secutor, for he is too strong for me. Bring my Soul out of prison, that I my praise thy name; Ô compass me about with Songs of deliverance. Open my mouth wide with thanksgiving, and let my tongue sing aloud of thy righteousness.
The mortified Christian tolling his own knell. LOrd! since death is my passagePray. 6. into thy presence, why suf∣ferest thou the thought thereof to be terrible unto me? This consi∣deration affrights me more then death it self. O Lord, I cannot without some reluctance think, that suddenly I shall see man no more upon the face of the earth. Doubtless the light is pleasant to the eyes, and a joyful thing it is to behold the Sun. The Grave cannot praise thee, Death cannot celebrate thee, they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I desire to do this day.
Consider ô Lord, I desire to walk before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. O my God, take me not away in the midst of my dayes; Thy years are throughout all Generations. Hast thou so little work for me to do, that thou allottest me so short a time, and bringest upon me sor∣rows and weaknesses so fast? Lord, I came into the world on thy errand, and I live onely upon thy allowance, I am not to be my own carver. My God, my goodness extend∣eth not unto thee, thou needest neither my service, nor my being; certainly 'tis but nature in me, that thus affects to serve thee in life, when thou callest on me to glorifie thee by death. Let it abundantly content me, O Lord, that whether waking or sleeping, dead or alive, I shall be
always thine, and always live to∣gether with Christ. Lord, help me to consider what a poor derivative thing I am, what a meer dependant upon thee: And let the consideration of thy Majesty and glory swallow up all those petty interests of my own, which I create in my self, to my self. Help me in every passage and particular of my life and death, to say as is right meet, & my bounden duty; the will of my Lord be done. O Lord, let me not dare to be displeased at any thing, whatso∣ever it be, that is thy pleasure. Suffer me not, though with the softest voyce of my Soul, to interro∣gate upon thy proceedings, or to whisper to my self what's the rea∣son the Lord will thus deal with me. Though thou shouldst cut off
like a Weaver my life, and de∣prive me of the residue of my years; Though thou shouldst like a Lyon, break all my bones, and from day even till night with pi∣ning sickness and faintness make an end of me; Yet let me be dumb and not open my mouth, because it is thy doing. Nay, O Lord, open my mouth wide, to say, Behold the unprofi∣table servant of the Lord, be it un∣to me as thou pleasest: Into thy hand Lord, I resign my Body and Soul; Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Come Lord Jesus, come quick∣ly. Amen.
The Jubilee. THy Vows are upon me, O God,Pray. 7. I will sing and give thanks. Open thou my lips, that my mouth may shew forth thy praise; That I may extoll thee with the best member I have, and that my tongue may sing aloud of thy righteousness, and of thy goodness. Why is it Lord, that I am thus straightned towards thee, who art so enlarged unto me? Why is it that my thanksgivings are usually confin'd to the very enquiry onely what I shall render unto thee for all thy benefits towards me? But O Lord, what can I render unto thee, since all I have is thine? First, O Lord, I prayse thee, that thou hast put it into the▪ heart of thy servant, thus to ascribe all I have unto thee, and thus to give unto thee of thine own.
From thy goodness, O Lord, I have received my being, and e∣very thing, which maketh it not a burthen and a misery unto me. Thou openest the hand of thy li∣berality, and suppliest all my ne∣cessities. Lord, I praise thee for the ma∣ny temporal blessings thou hast here afforded me; and yet that thou hast not given me my portion in this life, or my good things in it. I prayse thee for those unutter∣able and endless joys which thou of thy grace hast prepared for me, and of which thou hast already wrought in me some participation by hope, through Christ, the foun∣tain of all my good. Praysed be thy name for that di∣scipline and method of grace which thou art pleased to take to fit me for that thy Kingdom. I prayse thee, O Lord, for bring∣ing
me into the wilderness, to humble me, to prove me, to know what was in my heart, and then to speak comfortable words to me. That thou art pleased, as a man chastneth his son so to chasten me; to cross my will, and frustrate my designs, and all to do me good in the latter end. I prayse thee for correcting me in measure; for considering how frail a creature I am, and not suf∣fering my spirit quite to fail un∣der thy hand. Oh, what great troubles and ad∣versities hast thou shewed me! and yet didst thou turn and refresh me, and broughtest me from the deep of Hell again. O Lord, thou knewest my Soulin all her adversities: When I said, I was cast out of thy presence, yet then wert thou neer unto me, and receivedst my prayer.
In the multitude of terrible and distracting thoughts within me, thy comfort, O Lord, through thy sons blood, refresh'd my Soul. I prayse thee, O Lord, for the long striving of thy Spirit with me, whereas thou mightest without me offer of grace, have left me un∣to that Death, which I have more than once chosen. Lord, thou continually bearest with my evil manners; Thou sparest when I deserve punishment, and according to thy unspeakable goodness, rewardest me good for evil. O Lord, I daily undo my self, and loose the works thou hast wrought: I daily pierce my Soul through with poysoned darts, yet thou art my continual help, and my constant health. How many times do both my flesh and my heart fail me? Yet
Lord, thou art alwayes the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. They that follow after lying vanities, for sake their own mer∣cies. But it is good for me to draw nigh unto my God; I have put my trust in thy name, oh thou most High! The Authors concluding Vote for himself and the Reader. O Lord, let the dross, and thePray. 8. hay and the stubble in this book be burn't with fire; but the Author sav'd at thy great day, through thy Sons blood. Suffer no Reader to turn that to an occasion of uncharitableness toward me, which I design'd for his good.
Suffer no Reader to think I sought my self, in that I have told him somewhat that thou hast done for my Soul. Grant also, that none may think of me beyond what with judici∣ous and charitable eyes and ears he heareth of me, or seeth in me; And Lord, thou knowest I have not the least cause to be proud of that. FINIS.
