m1330 99829335 33772
THE PRACTISES OF THE EARL of LEYCESTER Against the MINISTER of PENSHERST: Laid open in a NARRARIVE Sent to his late Highness OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR August 5. 1658. JUDG. 19.30. Consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds. LONDON, printed by T. R. for the Author, 1660.
To his Highness OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR Of the Common-wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, &c. May it please your Highness, YOur Highnes's Declaration for a Thanksgiving upon Wednesday last, July 21. hath given me occasion as a providential encouragement of God for this humble address, by the inclosed Narrative, observing what grief of heart it was to your Highness, that the last Parliament was broken up before they could begin to think of a settle∣ment
for Religion, and the civil Go∣vernment of this Nation, as your Highness intimates in the beginning of this Declaration. But I know your Highness hath learn'd of God to look higher then sublunary Instruments in all such Events; and that the most high ruleth in the kingdom of men, and bindeth up the hearts and counsels of the Nations; as at the same session he marvellously bound up your Thames within, that the Channel could not run with any freeness. My Lord, I desire to be still one of those Remembrancers that give the Lord no rest till he hath made his Jeru∣salem a praise in the earth, and to see before I die, Gods gracious presence re-establisht in our Sion in the beautie of his holiness, and this poor un∣worthy Common-wealth reformed into a more righteous Government then hi∣therto we have obtained. God hath late∣ly shewed me to my grief much iniquity in the very frame, and what God hath
shewed me, I crave the boldness to give a hint to your Highness of it in this Narrative, that you may have the glory beyond many Lawgivers of this Nation. Your Predecessors in the Throne to reform the constitutions of the Courts of Justice into a more excellent conformity with the wisedom of Gods Word where they are out of course. And what if God hath carried on this afflict∣ed cause (now at length before your Highness) for this purpose, that it might be an inducement to your High∣ness to seek of God (as Moses did in all difficult cases) a better way for your people, whom I hear in many corners of the land groaning and complaining under their great oppressions through the Corruptions of Law. This case between the Earl of Leycester and my self, fell out to be concluded but a few weeks before the session of the last Parliament, and I feared sadly for your Highness and the whole Nation, what would follow there∣upon,
upon, it being sometimes the course of God to take advantage against a Na∣tion in bringing a general Judgement upon them for some eminent Act of Cruelty and Injustice committed a∣gainst one of his little ones. The Lord who is afflicted in all our Afflictions, give my Lord Protector a compassio∣nate heart to relieve the poor, who put their trust in the Lord, against the proud and mighty that beast them∣selves against them. To draw up all in short, that I may not intrench upon the weighty affaires that are before your Highness, you have here, my Lord, the innocent con∣demned, yea a whole family to be cut off as far as the Law can reach them. A most cruel Verdict abhorred by the con∣sciences of your Judges yet unreverst; The right of the Gospel Ministry in reproof of sin discountenanced; and the Priviledge of the Peers whilest they were laid aside by Parliament un∣duly allowed against a clear Law, a∣gainst
common reason, and against all Presidents in Courts of Justice untill this present case. Whereupon it follow∣ed that the preparations made by your Highness and Parliament before their adjournment in a hopefull way for some settlement in the civil Govern∣ment, were notwithstanding at their next meeting soon unravelled upon the difference of the houses about the very point of Peers, and those Gentle∣men that had a hand in condemning this cause; the one at the Assize, the other in the upper bench, both, by a signal check of providence, repulsed in a mes∣sage to your house of Commons upon this point. Oh, my Lord, whilest the Controversie was managed in private, I could shew your Highness how ter∣ribly God pleaded with our adversary in private, laying it sorely upon himself and his family, but since he hath broke out into the publick, and managed mis∣chief by a Law; Now God hath ap∣peared in publick likewise, and yet he
knows I grieve to think what an influ∣ence it hath had upon your Highnes's Affairs, and may yet have if not pre∣vented. If therefore the Lord shall shew this afflicted cause to your Highness, and all the iniquity that hath moved him to any displeasure thereupon, be pleased to answer Gods expectation in some way of speedy redress; And let my Lord do for God and his distressed ones, as much as King Pyrrhus did for Fa∣bricius the Roman General, who while he was ingaged in a War with the Ro∣mans, his Physician sent to Fabricius, telling him, that if he pleased, he would poyson his Master, but Fabricius abhorring such a villany, sent Pyrrhus word of it, whereupon he apprehended and crucified his gratitude to Fabricius, dismissed all the Roman Prisoners without Ransome, acknowledging that he could not make sufficient compensa∣tion for such a favour.
My Lord, God hath delivered up those into your hands that lately sought your life, and hath put into your hands that inimicitious Fort of Flanders that hath so often annoyed this land,PLACE="marg" Dunkirck. and from whence the enemy had prepared now al∣so to annoy you: and what more an∣swerable return can your Highness make to your good God, that in pity hath saved us, then to restore Gods Captives that are laid up even in your chains, which is all that is humbly desired at this time by My Lord Your Highness most humble and faithfull servant, JOHN MAUDIT. Pensherst, July 22. 1658.
A NARRATIVE OF The Sufferings of the Minister of Pensherst under the Prosecution of the Earl of Leycester. May it please your Highness. WHatsoever your Highness owne troubles may be in this heavy and burthensome place, (wherein we cease not to pray for you) yet I hope you have a Christian ear and heart o∣pen
to receive the com∣plaints of Gods poor op∣pressed people from all pla∣ces, making it your chief work, as our Lord the chief Shepherd, to mind the poor of the flock above your self, to carry the Lambs compassi∣onately in your bosome, and diligently drive those that are with young: this is indeed a princes trust, comfort and security. His Comfort, as you may see in Job 16.17, 25. I was a fa∣ther to the poor, and the cause which I knew not, I searched out, and I brake the jaws of the wicked, and pluckt the spoil out of his teeth. Then I said, I shall die in my nest, and I shall multiplie my dayes as the sand. Thus Job once solaced him∣self
with the thoughts of his care and compassions over the afflicted, and he assumes this Title in the close of all to himself as his great glory, That he was one that had comforted the Mourners. His Security and Esta∣blishment, as we see in Phi∣neas, of whom the spirit tes∣tifies, Then stood up Phineas and executed Justice, and so the plague stayed: that one act of Justice establishing him in an everlasting Priest∣hood, and freeing the land from a general Judgement. The Lord make both good to your Highness, that it may be your comfort and stability to relieve the af∣flicted; for it is one of the most experienced Maximes of State, the Book of Gods
Recordes, and is filled with most Presidents of, Did not thy Father eat and drink, and do judgement and justice, and then it was well with him, saith the Lord to Josiah's son? He judgeth the cause of the poor and needy, then it was well with him, was not this to know me, saith the Lord? Jer. 22.15, 16. My Lord, my case is much one with the poor distressed men of Jabesh Gilead in King Sauls dayes, 1 Sam. 11.1. &c. Nahash the Ammo∣nite came up, and encamped against Jabesh Gilead: and all the men of Jabesh said un∣to Nahash make a Covenant with us, and we will serve thee. And Nahash the Ammo∣nite answered them on this
condition, Will I make a Co∣venant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes, and lay it for a Reproach upon all Israel. And the Elders of Jabesh said unto him, give us seven dayes respit that we may send Messengers unto all the coasts of Israel; and then if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee. Then came the Messengers to Gibeah of Saul, and told the tidings in the ears of the people, and all the people lift up their voice and wept. And behold Saul came af∣ter the herd out of the field, and Saul said, what aileth the people that they weep? and they told him the tidings of the men of Jabesh. And the Spirit of God
came upon Saul when he heard those tidings, and his anger was kindled greatly, and he took a yoke of Oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent them thoroughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of Messengers, saying, who∣soever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel: so it shall be done unto his Oxen, and the fear of the Lord fell on the people, and they came out with one consent. My Lord, I have been tru∣ly besieged many years by the Earl of Leycester, whiles I have laboured in much sin∣cerity in the work of the Gospel here to gain this lit∣tle flock to Christ, who hath for this seven years cut off the dues of Tithes which his Lordship should have
paid for maintenance of me and my afflicted family; so that for want of our own, we have been burthensome to our friends for a liveli∣hood; besides the said Earl hath for these six years de∣voured our Gleab-land by making a Warren next to our land; so that we have lost in the judgement of ju∣dicious men above half the profit of the land yeerly, whil'st my Lord (making it a Warren for profit, not for pleasure) hath inriched himself by multitudes of Rabbets sold to London, which winter and summer were fed upon our ground. Besides this also, the said Earl hath seized upon our wood, timber and trees at several times, and a parcel of the
Gleab-land which he hath railed off from us for these five years together, to distress us in the accommodations of our Gleab. And after all this and many more grie∣vous Molestations which have endangered the life of my wife thorough great frights sometimes, and cast both of us into sickness of∣ten. The word of God in Levit. 26.14, 15, 16. leading ut to reprove those that cast off Gods Ordinances, I ap∣plyed the word of God a∣gainst the Earl of Leycester by name, for withdrawing from the presence of God for five years together, and greatly discouraging the Re∣formation of Religion in this place, as also for much cruel usage of me and other
unwarrantable courses which he persevered in, notwith∣standing many private ad∣dresses made to his Lord∣ship by my self to convince him of the evil of his ways; his rage growing yet higher and higher, year after year; whereupon the Earl com∣mences a suit against me, de∣claring, that I spake these words against him, viz. That the Earl was a wicked man, a cruel Oppressor, and an ene∣my to Reformation, and got 500 li. damages at the As∣size in Kent. Some of the Iury being drawn on as they have since confessed, with a pretence, that the Earl would not take a farthing of the money, but only have a Fine for his honour: but having got the Verdict, he
prosecuted it vigorously at the upper bench to have it confirmed. The Judges be∣ing through the hand of God upon their hearts inclin'd to pity, and having a high sense of the grievous da∣mages, took the cause into mature deliberation, and arrested the Judgement for three Terms, hearing the Counsel on both sides. Mean while Applications were made to the Earl by Major General Kelsey, Sir Michael Leusey High Sheriffe, Lieute∣nant Col. Compton, Captain Brown, Dr. Thomas Goodwin, Mr. Neigh, Mr. Lockier, Mr. Griffith, and Baron Parker, that his Lordship would be pleased of his own accord to remit the damages that were given him, which would be
more for his honour then thousands in reparation. His Lordships answer to them was, that the Law should go on till I was at his Mercy, and then he would do what be should think fitting. At the length God moved the hearts of the honourable Judges of the upper bench to send two messages to his Lordship, the one by the Earls Solicitor Mr. Pew; the other by Mr. Broughton, the Clark of the Crown, order∣ing Mr. Pew to writ to his Lordship from them, that though his Lordship had the Judgement, yet he should forbear to take out any exe∣cution against the Defen∣dant for person or goods, or molest me farther to disturb me in the work of the Mini∣stry,
and withal appointed Mr. Broughton to go down in person to the Earl, and let him know the mind of the Court therein, Mr. Brough∣ton after he had delivered the Message of the Judges, was bold to press his Lordship with many arguments of re∣ligion and honour, to let fall his displeasure, and be in∣clined to a Christian Recon∣ciliation. But these being not ac∣cepted, he offered his Lord∣ship 100 li. towards his charges in the suit; that be∣ing not accepted, he offered his Lordship to have the Gleab-land, and take out his own satisfaction as he pleas∣ed thereupon: all which be∣ing rejected, he offered upon some reasonable time given,
the Minister should quit the place, and be gone. In∣deed my Lord we thought it too much after all our wrongs we had sustained, to give up a place that we had setled upon us for our life by a gracious act of your High∣ness in confirming of Seque∣strations upon the Ministers, who aforetime were greatly opposed by turbulent peo∣ple in those places for want of a settlement: especially seeing it was not for any debt that we owed the Earl, or cleer damage, but for words which were wrongful∣ly laid to my charge: but had they been spoken, my Lord chief Justice Glinn was pleas'd openly upon the case, to declare they were not so much as actionable at com∣mon
Law, and so not worth two pence. But Mr. Broughton thinking that would content him, we were willing, if the Will of God were so, (tak∣ing the advice of our bre∣thren in the Ministry in the case (with all convenient speed) to depart, and go where God should call us: But the Earl granting us no time of deliberation, but having a mind to our goods as well as our Tithes, and our land, next day after Master Broughton departed, puts the execution (which he had got by him before Mr. Broughtons Application, notwithstand∣ing the advertisment sent him from the Judges by his own solicitour) in force, and sends to the Sheriffe for a fieri facias, and so seizes up∣on
all the goods he could find of ours within doors, and without, our Kine, our Barns of corn, and wood-barns, Waggons, Hay, and hous∣hould furniture, Hangings, Tables, Chairs, Beds and bed∣ding that were under us, and our Children, and the least inconsiderable Imple∣ments that could be found. Alas! now we found by sad experience, what it was to be given up to the Earl of Leycesters mercy, which ma∣ny in City and Country were held in expectation of, but we had found ever cruell: being used thus with so much rigor and extremity, Mr. John Seyliard a Gentleman of this Parish, offered his Lord∣ship these three propositions in our behalf.
1. That my Lord be pleas∣ed to give the Minister a full release of the Judgement his Lordship hath against him, upon his resignation of this Rectory. 2. That a competent time be agreed on for removal of his family and goods coming in this summer, and seeking a settlement in some other place, which cannot well be less then a years time, or about Michaelmas come 12. months; in the mean time, that Mr. Samuel Seyliard of∣ficiate here in the Ministers absence by his Lordships per∣mission. 3. That his Lordship and the rest of the parish be pleased to pay the dues of the place unto the Minister peacably, together with the Arrears
are due, untill the time which his Lordship shall a∣gree unto for the resigning up of this place unto him. The Earl of Lycester's an∣swer was, that he did not like the Propositions in regard that the time was too long, & that he would not meddle with the Arrears of the Pa∣rish. Mr. Seyliard replyed, that less time would suffice, then a years space for the Ministers resignation, if his Lordship would not allow him so much; and for Ar∣rears of the Parish, he and others would take care to be gathered up and paid, if his Honor would ingage for his own Arrears; and if these Propositions did not like his Honour, that then he would be pleased to say what would content him.
His Lordship made an∣swer, No, he would not de∣clare himself, but when Pro∣positions were made that he liked of, he would say something to them. Whilest these things were in agitati∣on, and friends were prepa∣ring yet more acceptable terms, (as was thought) his Lordship makes hast to get what was to be had, and re∣newes his writ, and comes upon us suddenly by Bay∣liffes, who in an unlawfull way climbed up into the sta∣bles where our horses were, and brake in, and unhang∣ed the door, and took out two Mares, which were also sold off, and the monies, as the former, returned for his Lordship. After this (by the importunity of friends
being perswaded, who took exceedingly to heart out suf∣ferings under this Earl from time to time, as did all good Christians) Captain Pike went in to his Lordship with this our proposition. That his Lordship be pleased to give the Minister a release of the Judgement of 512 li. upon his resigna∣tion of this Rectory at Mi∣chaelmas next. The Answer that Captain Pike brought from his Lord∣ship, was, That he expected to have what the Country gave him, and he would be under no Contract with me for the fu∣ture; but if I brought my Resignation to him, he would do what he should think fit∣ing. This was the Answer, as
well nigh as I could take it from the Captain, that his Lordship at length is come to, expecting, for ought I can understand, that I should come forthwith with my Resignation, not allowing me half a years time to re∣move my family, and place my self other where; where∣upon it would follow, that I must loose the benefits of this year also, which is now ready to come in; and yet after all this, if I or the Cap∣tain that brought this An∣swer, understand his Lord∣ship, by refusing to be under any Contract pro future, he expect; I should deliver up my Resignation to him, and then leave him to his plea∣sure, whether he will also take the benefit of the Judg∣ment
or no, or give me any Arrears for Tithes or no; this seems to be like the old strain, that I should cast my self upon his mercy, which I trust in the Lord I shall ne∣ver ve need of. See, my Lord, a sad story in a short Map of many years suffer∣ings, we are straitly besieged with a potent enemy, whose thirst we know not what will satisfie; he hath kept our dues for seven years, and de∣voured our Land, seized up∣on our goods before the Judgement was given him, & much more since: and how low soever he hath us under his feet, it makes him so much the higher to insult o∣ver us. Is it a right eye that would content him? No, my Lord, but if we may give a
guess, our very ld would scarce satisfie him, not being contented with a surrender of this place, but endeavour∣ing farther, as I have cause to fear, the utter undoing, not only of my self, but also of my poor afflicted family, if God, prevent it not; O my Lord, I beseech your High∣ness consider it well, what is my crime, that I should suf∣fer these things, and that in your dayes when God hath raised up so Christian a Ma∣gistrate for the help of his oppressed people, and cha∣stisement of those that op∣pose the Plantation of Zion, the Reformation of the Church. Shall a Minister of the Gospel be worried thus in the conscientious dis∣charge of his office against an
There be∣ing not one Presi∣dent upon English Records, that such ministerial reproof was accounted an Act of Seditionoffendour? Shall a Christian reproof in this first President be accounted sedition, and the innocent be condemned? Shall the Priviledges of the old Peerage be raised upon the ruines of my family only, which since the act of the Common-wealth have been questioned in so many cases granted in none but this? Shall it be filed up in the Court of Heaven against the great day of Judgement, that this was the Justice of En∣gland, to make a man such an Offendor for a word which was not actionable, if it had been spoken, yea, to ruine him for it? In Qu. Maries days it was but but 100 l. fine to have spoken worse words then these of the Queen her self: AndStatute An. primo & secundo Mariae, c, 3.
shall 500 l. stand upon Re∣cord for the Earl of Leycester for saying, He is a cruel man. If my Lord of Leycester do not say, at length as that Amoniet, yet will not the Aduersaries of Reforma∣tion say: And let this be also laid for a reproach to all their Israel. Shall not the Lord visit for these things? yea, and hath he not already began to visit, if we could see his hand, for it is not unusual with God for one mans sin to visit with a general Judgement; witness the famine in Davids time, for Sauls cruelty upon the Gibeonites: the overthrow of the state of Israel for Elies son lewdness. The Marriners danger of Ship∣wrack for Jonah his of∣fence:
The Armies defeat at Ai for Achans theft; the famine over all lands for Jo∣sephs hard usage, the Judge∣ment upon Egypt for Israels cruel bondage: surely the Lord hath lookt upon our sufferings also, and hath and l with much jealousie reckon for them; yet the Lord give us patience, for we must not desire the evil day upon our Persecutors: the Lord in much mercy wipe off our blood from the Thrones of Justice, and give these men repentance that are guilty of it. But my gracious Lord, I crave hum∣bly leave to set this day be∣fore your Highness, all that hath past, which I am per∣swaded hath been hid from you; how be it the Lord
seems not to accept from Princes that excuse for pub∣lick miscarriages in the Common-wealth. Behold we knew it not, Pro. 24.11, 12. If thou, forbear to deliver them that are drawnIni{que} op∣pressos, saith Junius. unto death, and those that are rea∣dy to be slain: if thouNe putes tibi ex∣cusationem fore seg∣itiae tuae aut infir∣mitatis, quafi aut nesciveris pessime cum illis agi aut ra∣tionem juvandi illos, at{que} liberandi minime tenueris (crimen in leges transferendo). Nam Deus judex ejusmodi est qui perpendat intima corda, optime cognoscat, & justi∣fime judicaturus sit. sa, Behold we knew it not, doth not he that pondereth the heart, consider it, and he that keepethA male seu periculo quo devenit proximus tu∣us, tu autem ab e liberaris, ut oppressis opituleris. Sic Estherae 4.13, 14. Junius. thy soul, doth not he know
it, and shall not he render un∣to every man according to his works? The Lord therefore give me favour in your high∣nesse's sight, in making known to your Highness the distresses of our deeply af∣flicted hearts; for we have confidence in your Highness render compassions, and readiness to relieve all Op∣pressions. We were un∣willing hitherto (though we bore much) to create trouble to your Highness about our cause, knowing your burthen to be great enough in order∣ing the publick Affairs of the Nation: but now that our Adversary hath acted all this against us upon the publick Theater of the Courts of Justice, and that in the Pro∣tectors name, and nothing
seems to content him herein but our ruine (having exe∣cuted this Judgement to the utmost of his power for the destroying of me and my fa∣mily) we dare not hold our peace, but commending out cause to the Lord for Coun∣sel, are bold to solicit that power God hath put in your Highness hands for our re∣lief, trusting, that as Mose's ears were open to the daugh∣ters of Zelophehad's com∣plaints in their particular case, as well as to the publick Affairs, yea, and made a new Law for them, when the common Law could not re∣lieve them: So the Lord will also graciously affect your Highness heart with these our sufferings in parti∣cular, and by his spirit of wis∣dome
direct you to give speedy some check to the Earls great rage, and fierce proceedings, in a way of Righteousness and equity, according to the power God hath intrusted your Highness with. Fear not, my Lord, fear not to own this afflicted cause, and search into it, and the Lord put his spirit upon your Highness, as once he did upon Saul and Moses, to relieve your Brethren that suffer af∣fliction in your dayes. If your Highness find the sen∣tence righteous, punish me double to my offence; but if innocency be found in me, and conscience convince you that I suffer much wrong, relieve me, and let not this decree stand in Gods fight upon publick Record much longer. Be∣hold,
O Lord, I am brought low, but yet not below thy help who art the Almighty, whose methode and manner of working is such, as not to step in, till all creature helps fail, and stand as impotent Idols, and say as that King of Israel, If the Lord do not help, how can I help? Israels task is increased, and their male Children strangled by Pharaohs command, before they are brought out of E∣gypt; Jonah cast over board into the merciless waters, and buried alive in a more merci∣less Leviathan, before delive∣rance comes: Isaac bound to the wood for a sacrifice before he be released; Joseph brought to the prison before his ad∣vancement: Daniel let down into the Lyons den, before his enemies
Accusation was frustrated. The captive Jews under the Kings royal signet sentenced to be massacred, before they become favourites in the Persian Court; and the poor men of Jabesh Gilead brought to disgracefull Articles, before their insulting enemies was o∣verthrown, and put to flight: This is Gods usual manner with his people, whose faith be puts upon trial to the ut∣most; not to save, till none can save: And therefore the Lord keep up our faith that it may not fail. Here we are, if the Lord say, he hath no delight in us, let him do with us what seemeth him good; but if he please to consult his own glory in our deliverance, we will say as Mordecai, Enlargement and
Deliverance shall arise to us, though all should forsake us; but who knoweth whether my Lord Protector be come to the Kingdom for such a time as this, to relieve Christs oppressed ones, who other∣wise had been every here crushed, which is the expecta∣tion and prayer of Gods peo∣ple, and in special of Your Highness In all humble Devotion and faithful observance, JHON MAUDIT Pensherst, July 22, 1658. FINIS.
THese Papers being left at White-Hall, August 5. 1658. for the Secrerary to communi∣cate to his Highness at Hampton Court: The next morning the Lord contends in a very terri∣ble thunder, which lasted about six houres, and took off a fair bough from the chief Cedar of our Lebanus. And delayes being made from time to time by the secretary,
the Lord (who is jea∣lous for his oppressed people, and gives quick returns to prayer) pleads again in a very tempestu∣ous wind, and shortly thereupon puts a period to the life of the Lord Protector, which gave occasion of that great mourning that fell out nigh about the time that this Judgement was given, the year before 1657. as appears by the Record of the upper-Bench Court in the suit of the Earl of Leycester.
Wednesday in 15. days of St. Martin, 1657. Unless cause be shewed to the contrary upon Friday next after 15. dayes of St. Martine, let Judgement be entred for the Plantiffe upon the motion of Mr. Sergeant Twisden. By the Court. Observable also it was in the next Parliament called, January 27. 1658. how God testified against Peerage in the hot Contests between the Houses about it, and at length changed the whole Government: and in the Parliament assembled, May 7.1659 the house declared both against a single Person
and house of Peers in their first Vote. God hath many reasons doubtless of his Actions, yet it were good to make this use upon the whole matter, that it is the great interest and security of Governours, to do Ju∣stice and relieve the op∣pressed, and not turn a∣side the poor in the gate from their right, for the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them.Pro. 22.23
