M1519 31355844 110713
Vita Sana & Longa. THE Preservation of Health, AND Prolongation of Life. Proposed and proved. In the due observance of Remarkable Praecautions. And daily practicable Rules, Relating to Body and Mind, compendiously abstracted from the Institutions and Law of Nature. By E. Maynwaringe, Dr. in Physick. Non accepimus brevem vitam, sed fecimus. Senec. LONDON, Printed by J. D. Sold by the Booksellers, 1669.
EVERARDUS · MAYNWARINGE · MEDICINAE · DOCTOR. · AETATIS · SUAE · 38 · 1668.
The Preface. HAving some Years since put forth a rough draught, or indigested Notions, upon this Sub∣ject: with intentions then to revise and finish at more leasure, when opportunity was af∣forded me: yet other Subjects and busi∣ness so put me by, as I thought not at all to reassume this matter again, nor make any farther prosecution. But being in∣formed by several, that this Subject, and the managing of it, was acceptable to ma∣ny; and that no Copies was remaining with the Book-sellers, but clear sold off, and yet inquired for, but not to be had: I was sollicited and desired to reprint it, for the publick good and satisfaction of
those that desire to be regulated in the course of their lives, and to be informed the right way for preserving of Health, and prolonging of Life. Considering then that Health and long-life, are the two great desiderable enjoy∣ments, and perfection of Humane Na∣ture; coveted and aimed at by all: and that I might not be taxed as refractory and obstinate, refusing to gratifie such reasonable Desires, for the acquiring those laudable ends: I was hereby moved to set upon the Work again, for improvement and finishing what I had left imperfect and defective in the former Tract. But upon revising those sheets, much came in my mind to add and to alter; so that lit∣tle of the old stock would remain: I then thought it best to lay a new foundation or Platform of Title; that I might not be in∣gaged to the Order, Rule, or Matter of the old Structure; but have full liberty to manage the Work as my genius should lead me. Accordingly, and with this freedom, I have here proceeded, to draw forth and present to you this delectable Theam of Health and Long-life, with the most
profitable advantages the Subject imports, and ease of acquiring, your capacities will admit. Whosoever therefore desires to live long, to see their Childrens Children; to pre∣serve their youth, strength and beauty; to be free from molesting pains and loath∣some Diseases; to preserve their senses, and enjoy the perfection of mind to the extremity of Age; let them conform and be obedient to the Hygiastick Laws and Rules hereafter prescribed; and they may expect what is here proposed for their re∣ward. Nor shall I exact and require of you an irkesome strictness, or Lessian preciseness to eat and drink by weight and measure: but a reasonable observance, suteable and well agreeing with a sober ra∣tional person, not restraining convenient liberty, and the lawful pleasure of life. Nor can a regular course of life be thought troublesome, as a difficult and hard re∣straint; but most pleasant and free,Quod assu∣escenti primum difficile; non erit assueto. ex∣cept to those accustomed to the contrary; and the leaving of those ill customs is the difficulty; but the Rules injoyned be fa∣cile and easie to observe.
And having once acquired a good ha∣bit and constant use; to return to an irre∣gular intemperate living, would be a far greater burthen and irkesome, if enjoyned and imposed, then the declining and desert∣ing a destructive course, for a laudable wholesome regimen, most consonant to a rational Creature. Qui medicè vivit, sine medicis diu vivet: Qui non medicè vivit, cum medicis saepe, sed non diu erit. He that lives by Rule and wholesome Precepts; takes the best course of Pre∣venting Physick: he's a Physician to him∣self, and needs not the help of others: but they that live carelesly and irregularly, contemning Physical Rules as unnecessary Observations; shall be constrained to Phy∣sical Remedies, as necessary helps; and must often resign into the hands of Physici∣ans. E. M. LONDON, From my House in Clarkenwell-Close.
Licensed, August the 4th, 1669. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.
ERRATA. PAge 5. line 19. read illae. p. 21. l. 17. immetho∣dically. p. 27. positivè, in the Margent. p. 39. l. 13. parts. p. 36. l. 17. aromatical. p. 72. inimicum in the Margent. p. 151. l. 29. quis. In the second Part. Page 24. line 27. read eradicate. p. 30. l. 14. ra∣diant. p. 32. l. 15. deobstruct.
Long Life, AND Means to attain it. Section, I. IN the Primitive Age of the World, mans life was accounted to be about 1000 Years: but after the Flood, the Life of Man was abreviated half;Mans Age shortned. and none then attained to the tearm of the first Age, except Noah, who lived 950 Years: and after three Generations from the Flood, their lives were reduced to a fourth of the Primi∣tive
Age; and their lives ordinarily exceeded not two hundred Years. About Moses his time, the Age of Man was yet shorter, commonly not exceeding 120 Years,Mans Age 120 years. which also was his Age when he died: yet we find up∣on Record in Sacred Writ, and from Ecclesiastical Writers, that after Moses some lived 240 and 260, yet that was rare; but more frequently 120, which was then the common Age. Now the Age of Man is reduced to half that:Mans Age 60 years. 60 or 70 years we count up∣on. But although in general we find this gradual declension and abreviation of mans Life, in the several Ages of the World; yet must understand it was not equally so in all parts of the World to∣gether; but places and climates, and manner of living of a people, cause much difference in the protraction of their lives,Age of man differ in several places. that at the same time some people of peculiar places, were longer lived, by a third or fourth part, then others of another Climate or Region, as the Northern People: and in colder Countreys, they are longer lived then in the hot Climates, and this by reason of the heat that opens the Pores, and
causeth so great a transpiration, that ex∣siccates and enervates the body: but a cooler Air prohibits and restrains such immoderate transpiration and exhausti∣on; keeps the spirits vigorous and united, and preserves the alimentory Juyces of the body from too frequent and immoderate exsudation. If we examine into the Ages of other Creatures, we find little difference in their durations,Other Creatares keep their Age. to what they were in the Primitive Times, and infancy of the World; who keeping to the Rule of Nature implanted in them, do pre∣serve their Beings, and degenerate little from the integrity of their durations, al∣lotted to them from the beginning. Now why mans days should be thus abreviated and shortned from what they were and the tearm of his life reduced to so short a continuance, gradually declining in the several Ages of the World, is fit matter to inquire into. The causes of the abreviation of mans life will appear,Why mans life is shortned. if we compare the man∣ner of our living now with that of the first Age of the World; and from thence, how every generation, have worsted themselves by a degenerate condition of
life, unsutable to the institutions of Na∣ture. And since we must of necessity allow and admit of hereditary infirmi∣ties, and traductive debilities of Nature; we cannot but expect (unless by great reformation of the injurious customs and vices of these latter Ages) but that we and our posterity shall degenerate yet still into a worse & sooner fading state of life.Mans life likely to be yet shorter. For, as the principles of our Nature are more infirm, tainted, and debauched from our Parents and Progenitors, then those of former Ages, of more vigour, soundness and integrity; are likewise more propense, and liable worse to be de∣praved and degenerate, and conse∣quently of shorter duration and continu∣ance. Now if we inquire into the condition and manner of living of the Antients, comparing with the customs and fashion of this Age;Different living now to that of former times. we shall find so much dif∣ference and irregularity from the ap∣pointment and injunction of Nature, that may give full satisfaction to the quaery and matter in hand. In the infancy of the World, man pro∣vided and sought after the necessary re∣quisites for his Being, and was conten∣ted
with a competent subsistence which Nature did purely require: but in pro∣cess of time, Man was not satisfied with the bare reparations, and necessary props of Nature, most wholesome and conser∣vative of his Being; but hunted after variety and excess, to please and grati∣fie his sensitive Appetite. Thus one Age taught another to be irregular and disordered; and still dictated novel in∣ventions to the succeeding Generation, to fill up and perfect what their Prede∣cessors had prompted and begun; whose lives were not long enough to lay a com∣pleat platform of debauched Nature, but must transmit their ruining practices to the following Ages to immitate and com∣pleat. Hinc illaec lachrymae,— Thus, and after this manner, by such means, is mans life beset with many cruciating ma∣ladies, which have shortned the dayes of his abode here; and of latter Ages acts but a short part upon the stage of the World. And this is procured by the variety and excess in meat and drink:Brevity of mans life how pro∣cured. by unsea∣sonable and immoderate sleeping and watching; turning day into night, and
night into day: by sluggish & unwhole∣some ease, instead of due exercise and motion: or toyling unseasonably, and wearing out the body when it requires natural rest and refreshment: by living in unwholesome places, sucking in noy∣some destructive Air; preferring profit and by interests, before health and long life; indulging Venus too much, by im∣moderate and too frequent repeated acts, thereby enervating all the faculties, di∣spiriting and wasting the body: by wearing and fretting the mind with vari∣ous passions, changing from one excess to another, and wracking the body with several disturbing moods, and passionate humours: by exhausting the strength, in a prodigal expence of the vital stream, with frequent and unnecessary Phleboto∣mies: by infecting the body, and stamp∣ing exotick impressions, too frequently, with the common virulent purgatives, that alienate the crases or ferments of the parts; and such like injurious Drugs, not rightly corrected, and ill prepared Medicines, that bring detriment and damage to the body by their use. To these may be added the injurious man∣nagement of Infants, by careless or ig∣norant
Nurses; and fond Mothers great∣ly injuring their Children by a destru∣ctive indulgence, and erroneous affectio∣nate usage, in the ordering and educating them, who for the most part live not so long as others. Having set forth how mans Life hath declined and shortned in the several Ages of the World, and pointed at the chief procuring Causes, of such abrevia∣tion and change, (which hereafter we shall prosecute more fully) it remains to tell you how this evil may in part be remedied, and something regained that hath been lost, and is still upon the lo∣sing side, except recovered by a more di∣ligent and prudent course. And here I must premise a few things before I come to the point, prescribing the Rule to walk by, and means for attaining long life. All the Creatures have their definite times of duration allotted them by Na∣ture, some longer, others a shorter tearm:Creatures differ in their term of being. and this from the principles of their com∣position & seminality from whence they spring. In the Mineral Family, we find the longest durations, being solid, dense bodies, of more simple natures, and
homogenious, do preserve their Beings longest from ruine and dissolution. Vegetables are of a shorter duration, yet not all alike; some preserve their beings hundreds of years, as the Cedar and Oak. Others continue but a few years; some a year. Amongst the sen∣sitive Creatures, we find that serveral species have their peculiar durations, which in the common course of nature are observed to continue; some a longer Age, others a shorter. The Mi∣neral is slowest in rising to maturity and perfection, but continues longest in that state. The Vegetable (in the generali∣ty) is quickest in the ascent to the top of perfection, but keeps not its station long: some whereof fade and wither every year, but renew their verdure a∣gain at the Spring, until a few years hath spent that seminal power and fertile blooming virtue. The Sensitive Crea∣tures and perfect Animals, are slower in their rise to perfection, which having attained, stay but a while in that full strength, do gradually descend again, decline and perish. So that all living Creatures by nature have their risings and settings, and de∣finite
times fixed for their growth and duration: from their beginning they have a gradual ascent, until they have attained the vigor and exaltation of their Natures; and having gained the top of their perfection, they stay not long there, but gradually descend again, and are de∣graded of the honour and perfection of their Natures, and tend to their ruine and dissolution: nor are the Creatures limited alike to the same duration, but do extend, and are shortned variously, according to their Principles and Foun∣dation of Being, as Nature hath fur∣nished them with a provision permanent and sutable for such a duration and sub∣sistence. Now of all the Creatures, we find Man most uncertain in his being and con∣tinuance, (although the Age of Man be limited to sixty years) and is most lya∣ble to alteration and a perishing state, upon these four accounts. First, Because Man derives from his Parents by a seminal propagation, and inherits the Diseases of their vitious de∣praved Natures radicated in him: to which his own enormous acts being ad∣ded, does multiply and heighten the
corruption of his Nature; hence the suc∣ceeding Generations becomes more de∣generated, infirm, diseased, and conse∣quently of shorter duration then the for∣mer. Secondly, For that the structure of his body, is the most wonderfully con∣trived of all the Creatures; containes the greatest curiosity and variety of ma∣chination; such admirable Conduits and Contrivances; such Offices and pla∣ces of elaboration, subservient to each o∣ther, and communicable: that therefore this Machine, is most difficult to keep in order, and soonest put out of frame. Thirdly, Does require and use more variety of supports and necessary requi∣sites to preserve and supply him; and therefore more subject to errors, failings and discomposure. Fourthly, Because Man wilfully, care∣lesly, or ignorantly, does not regulate and govern himself, according to the Law of Nature dictated to him; but deviating from those rules of preserva∣tion, does discompose the regular Oecono∣my of his body, and introduce various Diseases and disorders, which precipi∣tates Nature in the current and course of
life, which otherwise more equally and evenly would glide on: and sometimes by violence offered to Nature, in some strange unnatural actions and exorbitan∣cies, the life is forced out, and death oft procured. Now other Creatures are so tyed up to the rule of Nature,Creatures conformity to Nature. which they can∣not but observe for their preservation both individual and specisick; and have not a power of electing good and evil to themselves; but naturally and spon∣taneously do prosecute that which is pro∣per and conservative, and avoid what is noxious: but Man having a greater liberty by the prerogative of his rational Soul, does make his choice, and wan∣ders amongst varieties both good and evil, and often deceives himself, chu∣sing what is destructive to his Being: So that breaking the Law of Nature, which he ought to observe as bounds and Rules to his actions, making them sanative and preservative; does on the contrary alter and change those necessa∣ry appointments and supports; renders them destructive by his irregular incon∣gruous use, vitious customs, and impru∣dent choice.
The most considerable things to be ob∣served by Man, as conducing and tend∣ing to the lengthening or shortning of his life, according to their mannagement and procurement, well or ill, do fall un∣der these Heads.Diaetetick regiment to be ob∣served. Meat and drink; place of abode; sleep and watching; ex∣ercise and rest; excretions and retenti∣ons; passions of mind. In the mode∣ration, use and choice of these (which particularly hereafter shall be handled) consists the length and brevity of life, per modum asistentiae, and as causae sine qua non, being auxiliary requisites, and ne∣cessary supports of life, appointed by Nature for the continuation, assistance and preservation thereof. But the length and brevity of life, fontaliter & radicaliter, consists in the fundamen∣tal Principles, and vital powers variously radicated and planted ab ortus in mans generation and fabrication. But this being not in the choice and power of man to alter or change, we shall prose∣cute upon the former Heads. Man consisting of Soul and Body, and this body compounded of heterogeneous & dissimilar parts, destinated to various actions and offices, dependent in Being
and conservation; will necessarily re∣quire variety of assistance and supply, proportionable and suiting to their se∣veral purposes, faculties, properties, and temperatures; in matter, manner, times, and order; for their maintenance and sustentation in the integrity of their acti∣ons, offices and duties, constitutional dispositions and Crases, peculiarly conservative of themselves, respective∣ly and consequently of the whole: And by the Law of Nature (being subject to corruption and dissolution, through the fragility of constitutive parts, con∣nexion and fabrication) is bound to ob∣serve Rules, Orders and Customs most consonant for preservation and conti∣nuance in Being. Now if there be a disproportion or unfitness, in the matter or quantum; or irregularity in the man∣ner, times or order of the auxiliary re∣quisites and conservatives, contrary to what the Law or necessity of his Nature requires and commands; there ariseth Distempers, Ataxies and discord, the praeludiums to ruine and dissolution. And this body being in a continual flux and reflux, conversant in vicissitudes and variations of opposites, dissimilars,
contraries and privations, as heat and cold, siccity and humidity, filling and emptying, rest and motion, sleeping and waking, inspiration and expiration, and the like; could not subsist amidst these various subalter nations and changes, if they were not bounded and regulated by due order of succession to fit and conve∣nient times, that they might not clash interfere, and encroach upon each others priviledges, due times and proprieties. If heat exceeds; the natural moisture dries up, the spirits evaporate, and the body withers. If cold; the faculties are torpid and benum'd, the spirits being frozen up to a cessation from their duties. If moisture prevails; the spirits are clogged, suffocated and drowned in the chanels of the body. If siccity and dryness; the organical parts are stubborn, unpliable and unca∣pable of their regular motions and due actions; the vital streams being drank up that should irrigate, refresh and sup∣ple them. Were the body alwayes taking in and sending nothing forth, it would either increase to a monstrous and vast magni∣tude;
or fill up, suffocate and stifle the soul: were it alwayes in excretion and emission, the body would waste away and be reduced to nothing. Nor is the receiving in of any thing, sufficient and satisfactory to the body for its preservation; but that which is ap∣pointed by Nature, proper and sutable: nor emission or ejection of any thing, but that which is superfluous and unnecessary to be retained. If sleep prevails contrary to the Law of Nature, the body in a lethargick so∣poriferous inactivity, stupefied and sense∣less, lies at the gates of death. If watching exceeds the limits, trans∣gresseth and steals away the due time for sleep; the faculties are debilitated and en∣ervated, the spirits tyred, worn out and impoverished. If inspiration were constant without intermission, the body would puff up and be blown like a Bladder. If expiration were continual, the soul and spirits would soon quit their habita∣tion and come forth. If alwayes exercised in motion, the bo∣dy would pine and wear away: if alwayes at rest, it would corrupt and stink.
There is a rule therefore, proportion, measure and season to be observed, in all the requisite supports & auxiliary helps, belonging to our preservation; and by how much, or often, any of these necessary alternative successions are extravagant and irregular, exceeding the bounds and limits prescribed by Nature, justling out the successive appointed action, duty, or custom, from its seasonable exercise and due execution; by so much is the harmony of Nature disturbed, vigor aba∣ted, and duration shortned, by these jars, discords and encroachments. The thwarting and crossing of Nature in any thing she hath enjoyned, either in the substance or circumstance, is vio∣lence offered to Nature; & is destructive more or less according to the dignity or quality of the thing appointed: For, Nature was not so indifferent in the insti∣tution of these duties and customes, that they might be done or not done; or so careless and irregular, to leave them at your pleasure, when and how; or to be used promiscuously & preposterously with∣out order, at the liberty of your will, fancy and occasions: for, as you may see in all other creatures, exactness of rule,
method and constant order impressed up∣on, and radicated in their natures, by which they act alwayes sutable, regular, and constant: you may not imagine so choice and exquisite a piece as Man, to be left without a Law and Rule to guide and steer him in the necessary actions concerning Life; and that he should rove in uncertain, unconstant, unlimited quantities, times, orders, manners, and the like; but is bounded and re∣strained upon penalties and forfeitures of Being, well being, and long being, to the nice and strict observance of these laws and customes necessary for the tui∣tion of Life, and defence of humane frailty. As moral good actions are placed in a mediocrity between two vitious ex∣treams; so natural actions and auxilia∣ry requisites conservative of life, have their golden meane digression from which, on either side, leads to ruine and destruction. Too much sleep, or too little; too much meat and drink, or too little; too much rest, or too much motion; too much Air, or alwayes close pent up; too great ex∣cretions, or too long retentions; too much
heat, or too much cold; either of the ex∣treams lead to ruine. And as Nature hath not appointed any thing, or every thing to be food, but this and that; so likewise not at any time to be received, not in any quantity, after any manner prepared, or in what order you please, but proportionable, suteable and conve∣nient. As there is variety of dispositions and inclinations of mind agreeing with, and likeing one thing, but disagreeing, re∣sisting, and disliking another: so is it in the variety of bodies and food: one body is of this constitutional propriety, temper and appetite; will sute and agree well with this meat, and disagree with ano∣ther; for if all meats were convenient for all bodies, to be used promiscuously without choice, how comes it to pass the antipathy, resistance, and abhorrency of some bodies against some particular meats? And this not from a fancy and conceit, but radicated in the constitution; that if it be eaten, though unknown, shall produce Fluxes, Vomitings, Swoon∣ings, and such like effects: here is ma∣nifested the opposition, disagreement, and distance between this constitution and this
kind of meat; which being so great, that the dislike and discordancy appears presently: other disagreements which are in a lower degree of opposition, do not manifest themselves immediately, yet they produce ill effects in the body, plus minus, pro viribus; which discover them∣selves gradually, at times, and seasons, and occasions. If you acknowledge the former, you must admit of the lat∣ter, the reason is, á majori ad minus. As sleep is appointed by Nature, to refresh the spirits, & repair lost strength: so the time for sleep is appointed and li∣mited; not when you please: the Sun, that glorious Light, was not made for you to sleep by, nor the night for sports, and revells, or business, but for rest. Nature does not onely command what to be done, but when, how much, how long, after what manner, in what order; the modification, circumstances and re∣quisite qualifications, as well as the thing it self, are to be regarded. And there∣fore by a diligent inquisition, and curi∣ous speculation into the works of Nature, you may as much admire the manner of preservation, government, order, weight, and measure, regular vicissitudes, alter∣nations
and successions, as the excellency and contrivance of the things themselves in their creation and generation. Whatever is appointed by Nature as necessary for conservation and support of Being, though never so good; yet if it be unseasonable, out of course, immode∣rate in quantity, quality or duration; alters the property and intention of Na∣ture; converts good purposes to bad ef∣fects. We say every thing is best in its own kind; and of continuance in its own Element: and Nature is most chearful, vigorous and durable in the course and method of her own injunctions: but be∣ing put by, thrust out of her own way, is not of long duration: the Birds can∣not live in the Sea, nor the Fish upon the Land; nor your Nature continue long in an unnatural way against her self. Are you composed of natural principles, and will you not live conformable to what you are? Do you not live by Na∣tures assistance and natural means, and do you think to continue long in a Counter-motion against the nature of your Composition? They that invert natures course, preposterously, promis∣cuously,
and incongruously using the necessary conservatives of life; not on∣ly are deprived of their benefit, but al∣so receive a positive hurt; disordering the constant regular motions in the bo∣dy, and discomposing the harmonious and sociable assistance of the parts in their Offices. There is a rule therefore, method, mea∣sure and season, in all the requisite sup∣ports and auxiliary helps belonging and necessary unto life, or natural actions and customs whatsoever; which duely observed, are of much advantage for the preservation of the body in its true natural state, vigor and prolongation of Being: but otherwise, a methodically and inordinately used, disturbs Natures course, uniformity and regularity of o∣perations, raiseth unnatural motions, commotions and cessations; introduceth disorders, and disjoynes the frame of na∣ture, accelerates and hastens the dissolu∣tion of the body.
The Impediments of long Life, are, An infirm and weak constitution from the Womb; derived from tender, imbecile and infirm Parents. Irregular and unfit tractation of In∣fants, whose tender bodies are soon dis∣composed & disordered by bad Nur∣ses, their erroneous customes, and the ill properties of their Milk. Noxious and intemperate Air. Irregular eating and drinking. Immoderate and unseasonable exer∣cise, motion or labour. Too much; or unfit rest, in the cir∣cumstances attending. Sleeping and waking in extreams. Immoderate Venus. Undue excretion and retention of Excrements. Inordinate passions, and perturbati∣ons of mind. All unnecessary and bad customs, as virulent Purgations; frequent and un∣necessary Phlebotomies; immoderate use of Tobaco.
SECT. II. The Preservation of Health. DIu & bene Valere; To live long and in health, said Plato, is the best thing in the World: and Thales Milesi∣us, one of the seven Greek Sages, being asked who was the happy Man? An∣swered, He that hath a healthy body: preferring health before riches and ho∣nours, or any earthly enjoyment. The truth of this Opinion will best be disco∣vered and proved, by consulting with the sick man, who is best able to judge of health, and knows rightly the value of it. Experimentally he hath found, that a Crown and Scepter, gives no con∣tent nor ease to a pained languishing bo∣dy:The excel∣lency of Health. and beauty brings no pleasure to a sick Bed: and dainty Dishes affect not the distemper'd Pallate with delight. Nor the sweetest Musick can recreate a restless faint-sick-man: but the enjoy∣ment of health alone is more sweet and
pleasant, and far more desirable then all these without it. Yet who is he that values health at the rate it is worth? Not he that hath it; he reckons it amongst the common ordinary enjoyments; and takes as little notice of it, or less regards it, then his long worn Cloathes: perhaps more careful of his Garments, remembring their price; but thinks his health cost him nothing; and coming to him at so easie a rate, values it accordingly, and hath little regard to keep it; is never truly sensible of what he enjoyed, until he finds the want of it by sickness; then hoc unum , health above all things is earnestly desi∣red and wished for. This great concernment Health, falls under a three-fold consideration: First, In its causes from whence it does imme∣diately arise in the body. Secondly, In its effects, the consequents and benefits that accrue to us by it, and what is the state of a healthy man. Thirdly, The right course to obtain, and means to preserve this invaluable treasure, so long as the capacity of humane nature will admit. And first, Here we must distinguish of Health, which may be taken either
strictly or largely:Health di∣stinguish∣ed. health in the strictest acceptation, admits of no organical in∣disposition, morbous effect, or morbifick Seminary to abide in the body; that al∣though no sensible injury, or inconveni∣ent alteration may appear; yet notwith∣standing a person may be said not to be in perfect health: as when the latent se∣minaries of Diseases are not budded, do not sprout forth so as to be dolorous, im∣pedite any faculty, or make some di∣sturbance or alteration; yet they are planted in the body, and have a real Be∣ing: as haereditary Diseases, whose se∣minaries are obscured, do not come to maturity of production until such an Age of the Person, or some irritating occa∣sion given to produce it sooner or later, as the person is ordered well or ill in the diaetetick regiment. So likewise the first ground-work and foundation of the stone is not perceptible, until some time and progress give it perfection; during which time that person is not in a state of health in a strict sence. So likewise some Diseases do lie dormant for a time, and discover nothing during that season, and have their periodick motions, where∣in they awake, and are stirred up to shew
themselves, upon some irritating provo∣cations and occasions given: as the epi∣lepsie, the Gout, Hysterical passions, and such like, that have their times of ces∣sation and returns: yet these during their intermissions and cessations from hostility, are in being, although they do not act so as to injure and deprave any function sensibly. Secondly, Health may be taken largely, and in the common acceptati∣on: as when no function is impedited, or sensible alteration from a good state does appear: we say then, such a man is in health. In the first and strictest sense, few can be said to be in health; but in the latter, many are to be accounted healthful. And this is the state of health understood by Galen, Avicen, and Averrboes, in their definitions of it. Which imports thus much. Health what it is.Health is a due power and aptitude for the exercise & discharge of all the facul∣ties in the body. So that when every part and faculty perform their duty re∣gularly and vigorously, that man is said to be in health: but when any faculty is impedited, ill affected, or depraved in its function, the man then is not in perfect
health. So that the actions of the body and mind are the chief discoverers of health and sickness: And here we see that health is seated in the faculties, and does assurge or result from the regular discharge of their functions. As when the appetite is sharp;Signs of Health. the digestion not sluggish and heavy: the belly soluble; the senses perfect, free from pain in all parts: the mind plea∣sant; quiet sleeps; the spirits brisk and lively; the whole body strong, nimble and vigorous in motion; these are signs of Health: so that examining all parts and faculties, we find nothing preter∣natural or irregular; but in every part and faculty we find a good discharge of their Office: then that person is to be ac∣counted in a right state of health, so far as is discoverable by any manifest or con∣jectural sign. The benefits and excellencies of this health is best known to those that have lost it; Carendo magis quam fruendo,Excellency of Health positive. quid valeat cognoscimus: You that have it and know not how to prize it, I'le tell you what it is, that you may love it better, put a higher value upon it, and endeavour to preserve it with a more se∣rious,
strict observance and tuition. Health is that which makes your meat and drink both savory and pleasant; else Natures injunction of eating and drinking, were a hard task and slavish custom. Health is that which makes your bed easie, and your sleep refreshing: that re∣news your strength with the rising Sun; and makes you chearful at the light of another day: 'tis that which fills up the hollow and uneven places of your Car∣case, and makes your body plump and comely: 'tis that which dresseth you up in Natures richest Attire, and adorns your face with her choicest colours. 'Tis that which makes exercise a sport; and walking abroad, the enjoyment of your Liberty. 'Tis that which makes fertile, and en∣creaseth the natural endowments of your mind, and preserves them long from decay; makes your wit acute, and your memory retentive. 'Tis that which supports the fragility of a corruptible body, and preserves the verdure, vigour and beauty of youth. 'Tis that which makes the soul take
delight in her mansion; sporting her self at the casements of your eyes. 'Tis that which makes pleasure to be pleasure, and delights delightful; with∣out which you can solace your self in nothing of terrene felicities and enjoy∣ments. Having cursorily glanced at the excellencies of Health, in this short Nar∣rative and Epitome of its worth; it re∣mains we should next draw forth and present to your view, the wayes and means to obtain and preserve this inva∣luable enjoyment. Health, as it is the result of Nature in her integrity and perfection; is main∣tained and kept in that order and due Oe∣conomy, by the regular and right use of those natural supports that our bodies daily require and do depend on in Be∣ing: as Air, Food, Sleep, Exercise, &c. Now those things that do necessarily be∣long and daily attend us, ought so to be chosen and mannaged, as does best conduce and sute with the institution of Nature, to which they are appointed; but if otherwise, unseasonably, disorder∣ly or immoderately used; they then prove pernicious and destructive, more
or less, according to the degree and con∣tinuance of their irregularity and incon∣gruousness. Nature hath appointed both times and order, and set a regular course, how and when every thing should be used in its proper mode and season: There is a moderation also en∣joyned, and limits prescribed by Nature in the use of these things, which if we exceed and run into excess, we then put Nature out of her mediocrity and equa∣lity, in which course she cannot long continue; and that also with much trouble to us, by bodily diseases and in∣firmities, the necessary consequents of such irregularities. The body of Man is as a curious En∣gine or Clook-work, moving with divers Wheels, and various internal motions, subordinate to each other, and con∣ducing to the general design of the whole; in a compleat order and exqui∣site method of contrivance, promoting and moving one another in their distinct Offices. Now if one Wheel goes too fast, too slow, or stops, the rest that depend upon that motion also, are disor∣dered and move irregular. So is it in the body of Man: If the Stomach be
clogged, and the digestion sluggish; the supply from thence will not come in due time to the other faculties to ope∣rate upon: and if the Chyliferous mat∣ter sent from the Stomach be not well transmuted and qualified, the rest of the digestive faculties cannot so well per∣form their task, because the alimentary matter is not transmitted to them proper and suteable, but imperfect, aliene and degenerate. The most experimentally and sensibly know; that meat and drink transgres∣sing either in quantity or quality, or un∣seasonably taken, does abate and injure a good Stomach, and depraves the di∣gestion: which defect redounds to the detriment of the whole, and all the body suffers by it, and every faculty in time will share in the prejudice: So that of necessity there must be rules observed, and bounds set in the use of these things, without which mans body is soon put out of frame, and the regular Oeconomy thereof discomposed and disordered. To prove and illustrate this farther by instance: fresh Air is necessary to ventilate the body, and chear the spi∣rits of man; and he that is pent up
within doors, is deprived of that great enlivener and refresher of Nature: but on the contrary, he that is exposed a∣broad to the night Air, is as much dam∣maged as the other; and both prove injurious and destructive: So that al∣though the open Air be good and neces∣sary for the healthful being of Man, yet not at all times, not in any condition, and upon any tearms, but suteable and con∣venient with the state of our bodies, as Nature hath appointed for you, and not otherwise. So likewise for Exercise and Rest, Method and Rule is to be observed: for if there be not seasons allotted, and a moderation used in these, they both are destructive, though in a contrary way, and by different mediums. The order of Nature to be ob∣served.To sleep when you should wake, or wake when you should sleep, are both in∣jurious and impairing of health: to in∣vert the order of Nature, by sleeping in the day, and watching in the night, is incongruous and unsuteable with your bo∣dies; because it crosseth the designment of Nature. When the Sun riseth, the spirits of Men are then most apt and fit for Action; are then most lively, brisk
and chearful in their functions: but when the Sun sets, and the Air cloath∣ed with darkness; the spirits then be∣gin to droop, grow more dull and heavy, incline to rest, retirement and a cessati∣on. Now to spur up and rouse the spi∣rits, when they naturally would be ta∣king their ease and respite; or laying a clog upon them, by your sluggishness and somnolent postures, when Nature calls upon them for action, (by darting the glittering light through the Air, with which they are affected and raised up) these are great injuries and affronts to Nature, in acting counter to her com∣mands and institutions; for which you must suffer the penalty; and that is the forfeiting your health, for this unnatural disobedience, and irrational courses. These Precautions and Rules I will assure you are not the inventions of man, to curb your darling inclinations, and re∣strain you of your just liberty; but they are the Institutions and Law of Nature, enjoyned to be observed, for your own preservation and well-being; and as bounds set to check your extravagant pernicious actions; and all for the tuition and safety of your life and health; and
to preserve the regular harmony through the whole course of Nature. And al∣though it be an old saying, as foolish as common; Qui Medicè vivit, miserè vi∣vit; He that lives strictly by rule, lives miserably: yet I must affirm the contra∣ry, grounded upon pure reason, and the preceding discourse;The penal∣ty of an irregular life. that he which does not observe the injunctions, the due me∣thod and regular course of Nature; does both shorten his life, and takes away much of the pleasure of it, by procu∣ring an uncomfortable and unhealthy bo∣dy. I know every of you would live long; but especially in health: you would fain continue and prolong your youth; your beauty and ability of parts: you are frighted at the thoughts of a wrinkled face, or a restless bed; an un∣wholsom diseased body, and a decrepid loathsom old Age: But yet you will not avoid these evils that you so much fear: you will not take the pains to prevent them, and secure your self: you rather take more pains; undergoe more trou∣ble to procure them, then there can be in avoiding them: nay, you lose the true pleasure of your life to purchase
these inconveniencies. Now what those things are, which so warily and choicely you are to observe, (wherein con∣sists your health and well-being) have been hinted before: the due method, course, and cautions, you are to take in the use of them, particularly shall be handled in their due place and order. But first we must briefly treat of Sick∣ness, and a valitudinary life; and shew you the great difference between that decaying condition, and a state of health; which Antithesis will prepare and stir you up to the strictness of duty; make you more cautious, and sollicitous for the preservation of your health, and prize it as the summum bonum, your greatest enjoyment in this life.
SECT. III. Of Sickness, and a Valetudinary State. IN the preceding Section, having ta∣ken a brief survey of natural life in the best estate; graced and adorned with the society of health, and its great attendants; the concomitant benefits, priviledges and enjoyments: now take a view of your self when health hath turn'd its back upon you, and deserts your company; see then how the Scene is changed; how you are rob'd and spoiled of all your comforts and enjoy∣ments. The want of health makes food to lose its wonted relish, and is become disgustful and unsavoury: the stomach now refuseth to receive its daily charge; no longer able to perform the task, but desires a quietus est, from the office. Sleep that was stretcht out from even∣ing to the fair bright day, is now broken into pieces, and subdivided, not worth
the accounting: the night that before seemed short, is now too long; and the downy bed presseth hard against the bones. Exercise now is toyling, and walking abroad the carrying of a burthen. The body that moved so light, and readily obeyed the steerage of the Pi∣lot; is now over-ballac'd with its own weight, and slowly tugs as against the stream. Conjugal imbraces are now but the faint offers of love; the shadows and representations of former kindness. The body that had the magnatism and secret attraction of souls; may now be approached without loss; or danger of being snared and fettered as a bond∣slave. The Lilly and the Rose that Nature planted in the highest Mount, to shew the World her pride and glory; is now blasted and withered like long blown flowers. The eye that flasht as lightning, is now like the opacous body of a thick Cloud, that roled from East to West swifter then a Celestial Orb; is now tyred and weary, but standing still; that penetra∣ted
the Center of another microcosm; hath lost its Planetary influence, and is be∣come obtuse and dull. The hollow sounding breast that echoed to the chanting Bird; and warb∣led forth delightful tunes; now runs divisions with coughing strains, and pauses with a deep fetch't sigh for breath, to repeat those notes again. The Venal and Arterial Rivulets that ran with vital streams, bedewing the adjacent parts with fruitful moisture, is now drunk up with parching heat; or muddied and defiled with an inundation of excremental humours. The want of health converts your House into a Prison; and confines you to the narrow compass of a Chamber; 'tis that which sowers the sweetest and most beloved enjoyments: 'tis that which disunites and breaks the league of co∣partnership between soul and body; ali∣enates and makes them at jars; dis∣composeth their harmony, and weary of their wonted sweet society. A sick man is like a Clock out of or∣der and due motion; which is of little worth or use, so long as it continues in that condition; so is man useless both
to himself and others in such a state: one Wheel being faulty or defective, puts the rest out of order and regulari∣ty, that depend upon that motion: and one part or faculty of Mans body be∣ing disordered and irregular; several others consent with, or share in the dis∣composure more or fewer; as the part is more noble and principal, command∣ing some chief Region of the Body; or inferior, and of a lower orb, or private station. The reason of this sympathy and consent of patts is; first, From the general agent and principle of life, which is one and the same throughout the whole: Secondly, Because all the parts of mans body, though they have their peculiar and different motions to them∣selves and special properties; yet they are all concurrent and cooperating; co∣ordinately or subordinately, serving to the general design of Nature, and main∣tainance of the whole body; and are so concatenated and linked together, in the Oeconomy of office, that their moti∣ons are dependant, and of mutual con∣cern for each others wellfare. Humane bodies being in a fluxible state, and apt for mutation and chang∣ing,
are not long in a through state of health; but some part or other, by some accident, natural debility, or dis∣orderly living; is discomposed and jarring, whereby the Oeconomical har∣mony is disturbed. The signs of such defections, and a preternatural change of the body approaching, is discovered by the senses, our own, or others, ma∣king observation. And these signal marks are very apparent to reasonable discerning persons; that every one may have some apprehensions (if they will be cautilous) of sickness coming upon them, and a discrasyed body. As a state of Health is known by all parts acting in their Offices unblamea∣bly; that viewing and examining from head to foot, nothing appears unwon∣ted or disordered: So on the contrary, when any part declines its duty, or ap∣pears any way unwonted from its natu∣ral condition; declares the beginning of a degenerate valetudinary state; which in time will dammage and disor∣der the whole; if not prevented in that particular part, and a stop given to that defection. Now what this part is, whe∣ther principal or inferior; of a general
or more private use; and how the pre∣judice does arise, is necessary to be con∣sidered; which will discover whether the infirmity be of greater or lesser con∣cern; of speedy or slower danger: So that by noting such signs, which are the fore-runners, and warnings of great diseases coming on, every one may in time look out for means to check the present evil, and avoid the greater threatned. If the Body which was fat, or plump and fleshy; afterwards grows lean and thin: or if lean and spare bodies grow big and corpulent; here is just cause of suspition, that all is not right, although no great prejudice at present, or sensi∣ble injury by the alteration: yet these cases require due examination, from whence they do proceed. If the Ap∣petite abate; or unwonted heaviness and fulness follow eating, argues the dige∣stion not good, and the Stomach falling from the due discharge of its duty and office. The Consequents of which are very considerable. If sleepiness exceed the Custom and Age of the Person; or watchfulness and indisposition to rest; both presage no good. So
likewise in other particulars, which for brevity sake I shall not instance. In general therefore, whatever alterations happens in any part or faculty of the body, unusual and contrary to the cu∣stom of Nature in her integrity; does not only declare for its self, as a parti∣cular infirmity of that part where it buds forth; but does presage (upon the continuance) something worse to come: and that the root from whence it springs is of a spreading Nature, able to bring forth more then what is manifest at pre∣sent: in as much as the parts are depen∣dant upon each other, in office, and use; and dammage to one, brings detri∣ment to the rest.
Precautions and Rules for the preservation of Health, and Prolongation of Life; In the choice of Air, and places of abode. AIR is so necessary to Life, that without it we cannot subsist: which surrounding us about, and being continually suck't and drawn in, must needs affect the body with its conditions and properties; and by observation you may find the body, by the various con∣stitutions and changes in the Air; to be variously affected, well and ill disposed; of which, infirm parts are most sensible, that they prognosticate before an altera∣tion come: the mind also by the media∣tion of the spirits is drawn into consent, and hath its dispositions and variations: when the Air is close, thick and moist, the spirits are more dull, heavy, and indisposed; but at the appearance of
the Sun, and a serene Skie; the Spirits are unfettered, vigorous and active; the mind more chearful, airy and plea∣sant. The Spirits are of an aetherial Na∣ture; and therefore do much sympa∣thize with the present constitution, and change of Air: for of the Air drawn in by the motion of the vital parts, are the vital spirits ventilated, & the blood volatised; therefore the pureness of the Air, makes much for the purity of the spirits and mass of blood. A gross impure and noysom Air, ob∣tunds and deads the spirits; makes a slow pulse, obstructs the Pores, and hinders ventilation; generates super∣fluous humours, and causeth putrefa∣ction. A serene sweet thin Air perfumes and purifies an unwholsome body, che∣risheth the heart, makes a lively pulse, and much enliveneth the vital spirits; rarifies and volatizeth a gross coagulate blood; opens the pores for transpirati∣on of putrid and offensive vapours, acu∣ates and sharpens the Appetite, and helps digestion. The best Air, and most agreeable to
temperate bodies, is in temperate Cli∣mates, for heat, cold, wet, and dry; not subject to sudden and violent changes, as in some parts of America, and other Countries very frequent; not gross and turbulent, infected with putrid vapours and noxious exhalations; from stink∣ing Ditches, Lakes, Boggs, Carrions, Dunghills, Sinks and Vaults; for which causes great Cities, and the adja∣cent places are not so healthful, nor the people so long liv'd. Change of Air sometimes is very necessary for the conservation of health, and the recovery of it declining and lost: for, temperate bodies by an intem∣perate Air, shall gradually and in time become intemperate: intemperate bo∣dies, by the contrary intemperate Air shall be reduced to temperature; at least, shall conduce much, and be very Auxiliary for the reduction. Therefore bodies declining from exact tempera∣ture, are best preserved in that Air op∣posite to their declensions; as cholerick, hot and dry bodies, in a moist and cool Air; Phlegmatick, cold and moist bo∣dies, in a dry and warm Air. It is not therefore of small moment,
in what place you live; and more espe∣cially such, who labour of, or are more subject to, any pectoral infirmity: for the Lungs being of so tender a substance and porous, continually drinking in the Air, is most apt to receive impres∣sions from it, according to the proper∣ties it is pregnant with and infested; and many diseases of the breast arise from this sole cause; and many exaspe∣rated by it and continued: hence it is Asthmatick, Phthisical and Consumptive persons shall not be cured in some pla∣ces, but may have cure in another. Be cloathed according to the clemen∣cy, season and temperature of the Air, your Age, and habit of body: lean thin bodies, and pervious, (corpora rarae texturae) and whose skin are loose and lax; may wear thicker cloathing, be∣cause such are more perspirable, do ma∣gis emittere & transpirare; and are also more penetrable and subject to injury of the Air. Fat and fleshy people, and whose bodies are solid, firm and hard; are more impenetrable and im∣pervious, and may wear thinner Gar∣ments. Infants and Children lately che∣rished in the stove of the Womb, being
of tender soft bodies, are easily expo∣sed to the prejudice of the Air. Vigo∣rous youth, and middle Age being ac∣customed to all weathers, whose spirits abounding, do strongly resist and keep out the assaults and injuries of an offen∣sive Air, may best indure hardship. Old Age, whose natural heat is abated, and spirits exhausted; stands in need of good defensatives against external cold, and to cherish internal heat. Observe the seasons and changes of the Air, and be then most careful, for at such times you are in most danger to exchange health for sickness: hence it is that Spring and Autum abounds most with Diseases; the Air then assuming new properties opposite to its former constitution; sets new impressions upon our bodies; which occasions the vari∣ous aestuations and turgid fermenting of humours, producing divers symptoms according to the variety of their nature; the organical difference, office and constitution of the several parts.
The Sun being risen, and the Air clear, open your Chamber-windows, that the fresh Air may perfume your Room, and the close Air and inclosed Vapours may go forth. Bad smells and putrid vapours being drawn in with the Air, are very injuri∣ous to the Lungs and vital parts; con∣taminating the spirits, and impressing upon the Crasis of those parts their te∣trid nature, are oftentimes the original of a Consumption; and if the Lungs be weak and infirm, are more apt to re∣ceive the prejudice then others. But fragrant smells refresh and chear the vi∣tal spirits, and are very wholsom, breath∣ing forth the vertue of those things from whence they do proceed. Be not late abroad, nor very early: before Sun rising, and after setting, the Air is not so good; being infested with noxious vapours, until the radient in∣fluence of the Sun dispells and purifies: and those whose custom it is to be often abroad at such times, are most frequent∣ly molested with Rheums and Rheuma∣tick Diseases; which their declining years will more evidently manifest the prejudice. Likewise in moist, foggy dark weather, 'tis better being within then abroad; and if it be a cool season,
good fires and fragrant fumes are then both pleasant and very wholsom. Be frequent abroad in the Fields when a clear Skie invites you forth, and let the fresh Air fan you with its sweet breath; but more especially in the morning; the Air is softer and more pleasant then your Bed, and sure I am, far more wholsom. Temperie Coeli corpusque Animusque juvatur. Ovid. In the choice of places to live in and abide;The choice of places to inhabit. these things are to be consider∣ed principally: First, The Climate; that it be temperate, and suting with the nature of the person; for some per∣sons may agree well with one Climate, which another cannot: cold and moist bodies agree best with a warm and dry Air; hot and dry bodies with a moist and cooler Air. Secondly, The scitu∣ation of the place and soyl is to be no∣ted; for as much as low, wet and mar∣rish Lands; is not so wholsom to inha∣bit, as gravelly Plains, and dry high∣land Countreys. Thirdly, In relati∣on to Countrey and City, regard is to be had; and here the Countrey does
prevail over the City for Health; and is to be accounted the best place of a∣bode. The continual smoke and anoy∣ances that are inseparable from great Cities, make those places to abound more with infirm people. Fourthly, The Waters that supply a place, do make it better or worse to live in, as they are good or bad; Water being of so con∣stant and general use, is much to be re∣garded, though little taken notice of, and procures many diseases from the variety of its nature; being impregna∣ted variously fom the Earth it passeth through; or accidents that happen to change it from its natural properties; by the admixture of any filth, carrion, or what else shall fall into it; and there∣fore River Waters that lie open to such injuries, are much to be suspected of unwholsomness. And this is a great procurer of the Scurvy in many places: as Pliny relates, that Caesars Army, by drinking of bad Water but a few dayes, had the symptoms of that Disease. The commendations of a place, in reaon to health and long life, are these: A mperate Air,Best place of abode dry serene and clear; Champion, or high Lands; a gravelly
dry soyl; watered with pure good Springs; remote from the Sea, Lakes, or Marshes: not frequented with un∣wholsom Winds and stormy blasts. So considerable is the Climate and Air in relation to our Being, that it not only changeth and altereth our bodies, but also our minds are wrought upon by it: in as much as the wit, inclinations and manners of a people are different upon this score. And for long life, we find that in some Countreys the people are longer lived by much then in other; and this from the wholsomness of the place, and purity of the Air: therefore the choice of places to live in, is of great concernment, and much to be regarded, by those whose Fortunes permits them to pitch in any place, for the advantages of health and long life.
SECT. V. Preservation of Health in the choice of Meats; and Regular Eating. THat which properly may be called Food or Aliment, is of that nature, as may fitly be transmuted and changed into the substance of the body which receives it: so that what ever will not be reduced and subdued by the digesti∣ons, for such a transmutation and assi∣milation, is not proper nor convenient food for that body: because the inten∣tion of eating is to repair the loss that Nature sustains daily; and if food will not be converted into the substance of the body, it answers not that intention, and is frustraneous: so that every meat which enters mans body, is not aliment, does not nourish; but that which yeelds obedience to the digestions, and is assi∣milated. And that which may be ac∣counted proper food for the species, mankind; may be unfit for some indi∣viduums,
this or that man, as common experience shews: the reason of this is from the peculiar properties of mens bodies that differ;Idiosyn Crasia, else the choice of Meats need not to be insisted on. In regular eating, you are to consi∣der; First, The substance and quality of the food. Secondly, The fit quan∣tity and proportion. Thirdly, Conveni∣ent and due times for eating. Concerning the first; That every one may be something instructed in the election of meats, this or that, most proper and sutable: take these obser∣vations for a general guide. First,Paulo pei∣or sed sua∣vior cibus & potus, meliori, at ingrato praeferen∣dus. Try by your Pallate; eat no meats that does displease the Gust, for a common food. Secondly, Examine your Stomach, whether such meats do not oppress, or rise in the Stomach, and cause a trouble; or is long in passing off, and flatulent: If any such symptom as these do follow, (and not upon other meats) then such food is not convenient, because it puts a difficulty upon the Stomach to digest; the consequents of which are bad. Thirdly, Inquire into the constitution or condition of your body, and have some respect to that in the election of
meats: for Phlegmatick cold bodies, and cholerick hot and dry bodies, will not well be dieted both alike; but (as commonly) they have different in∣clinations to meats; so Nature hath ap∣pointed, and is furnished with variety to sute such several bodies and appetiti∣ons. Therefore make choice of such for the most part as is commended to you, suting (commonly,) and conveni∣ent for that constitution you are of; as you will find prescribed in the several Constitutions or Conditions of body fol∣lowing. Now by these three Rules, every one may make a good choice of meats in a state of health; and reasonably instruct himself, for the preservation thereof. Next the quantity is to be consider∣ed; that you do not exceed such a pro∣portion, as is agreeable to your Nature, for a due supply, and not overcharge the body. And here I must commend to you temperance and moderation in eat∣ing, as a great preservative of Health; not a Lessian diet to pine and enfeeble the body; not so precise, but a mode∣rate allowance, proportionable to the strength and ability of the Stomach to
digest; considering also other conditi∣ons of body, and manner of life, whe∣ther active and laborious, or sedentary and idle.Plures gu∣la quam gladius. The contrary irregular pra∣ctice hath destroyed the lives of many. Some may think, the more plentifully they eat, the better they shall thrive in body, be more nourished, and the stron∣ger for it: but it will not prove so; a little well digested and assimilated, shall maintain the body in a stronger and more vigorous condition; then being glutted with superfluity; most of which is turned to excrementitious (not alimen∣tary juyce) and must be cast out, else sickness soon after will follow. For quantity, your own stomach must measure to you what is convenient; which is a certain rule of proportion, if you observe not to eat to a satiety and fulness; but desist with an appetite, be∣ing refreshed light and chearful; not dulled, heavy and indisposed to operati∣on and action, either of mind or body. A set quantity or measure of meat or drink, cannot be prescribed as a general rule and observation for all to follow; in regard of the variety and great diffe∣rence of persons, in Constitution, Age,
strength of Nature, condition of Life, and infirmities; that what is conveni∣ent for one, is too much for another, and too little for a third; the strong and healthy cannot conform to the sickly, weak and infirm in quantity; nor the labouring man to the sedentary and stu∣dious, or the idle: therefore every sto∣mach is to be its own judge: and every one ought to moderate themselves by the cautions before mentioned. Indulge not the cravings of an irra∣tional sensitive appetite; but allow such a supply of daily food, as will support and maintain bodily strength,Quicquid plus in∣geritur, gravat na∣turam, non juvat. and not over-load it: thereby the spirits will be vigorous and active; humors attenuated and abated; crudities and obstructions prevented; many infirmities checkt and kept under; the senses long preser∣ved in their integrity; the stomach clean, the appetite sharp, and digestion good. But by the surplusage and over-charge, the stomachical ferment is over-laid, and its incisive penetrative faculty obtunded; the appetite and digestion abated, the stomach nauseating, fluctuating, and belching with crudities; from whence Gripes, Fluxes and Feavers: the spirits
clogged, dull and somnolent; by their indisposition and inactivity, humors sub∣side, degenerate, incrassate, obstruct; from whence various symptoms and de∣praved effects throughout the body; debilitating and decaying the senses,Noxa etsi ad tempus fortasse de∣litescit; temporis tamen suc∣cessu sese exerit. en∣ervating and stealing away the strength of the body, by defrauding it of good nutriment, hastning old age, and short∣ning life. In Winter you may eat more freely; but in Summer the spirits are dilated, ex∣hausted and drawn forth by the exter∣nal heat opening the pores; wherefore the appetite is not so sharp, nor digesti∣on so quick. And the Rule is true, though heat be not the principal cause of concoction, yet it is a necessary A∣gent, Excitor and Cooperator. Change your dyet according to the seasons of the year, the variation of your body, and inclination to this or that distemper: in Winter more meat and less drink; in Summer less meat and more liquids: in Summer meats oftner boiled, in Winter roasted: a hot and dry body must have a cooling and moist diet; a cold and moist body, a hot and dry dyet: temperate bodies are preser∣ved
by temperate things and their like; distempered bodies are rectified and reduced by dissimilars. The more simple and single your dyet is, the better and more wholsom: but if your stomach must have variety, let it be at several meals, and so you may please your Pallat without prejudice. Accustom not your self to delicacies and compound dishes, the heterogenity of their nature, begets a discordant fermentation in the stomach troubling concoction; from whence eructations, nauseous belchings, and offensive risings in the throat,Aphor. Quo simplicior victus ra∣tio eo melior. Of all meats, flesh affords the most nourishment and the strongest. If your dyet sometimes be not so good and proper for you in the quality and substance; make amends in the quantity, and eat the less. Of all Sauces, a good stomach is the best; but if you must have other, let it be acide sharp or biting. Accustom strong stomachs, to strong meats; the weaker to lighter of dige∣stion: very light meats in strong sto∣machs are soon digested, but withal
parched and corrupted, and turn to a bitter and cholerick juyce: solid hard meats in weak stomachs lie long and heavy, and pass away crude and undi∣gested. Meats in respect of their facility and difficulty in digestion, are termed hea∣vy and light. Heavy meats be such as are more dry, hard, solid and dense, gross, course and tough, or over moist, slimy and cold: re∣quiring a longer time in fermentation, volatization and digestion, before they be fit to pass off the stomach. And they are either so in their Na∣ture: as all old flesh, Bull-Beef and Oxe, Brawn, Pork, Venison, Hare, Goose, Duck, Swan, Crane, Bittern, Heron, and most Water Fowl: Eels, Lobster, Lampreys, Tench, Stock-fish: Beans, Pease when they be somthing old: brown Bread, Barley and Rie Bread: Also some parts are of harder digestion then other: as Brains, Hearts, Livers, (ex∣cept of tame Fowl, Birds, and some very young flesh) Milts, Kidneys, Skin. Meats made heavy (or made worse then in their own nature) by preparati∣on,
keeping and dressing: as dryed, fryed and broyled meats: meats long salted and kept, as Bacon, hang'd Beef, and long powdered; old Ling, salt Cod, Haberdine, pickled Herrings, red Her∣rings, pickled Scallops, Sturgion, salt Salmon, hard Egs, tosted Cheese, tosted Bread, especially if it be scorched; Crusts, Pye-crust, Bread not well baked, unlea∣vened: meats over-baked, hard and dry; long kept, meats rosted dry, or scorched. Light meats and of quicker digesti∣on, be such as are most soft and tender, rare as it is opposed to density; there∣fore sooner penetrated by the stoma∣chical ferment; succulent, volatile, soon fermenting and yeelding to digestion. As young tender flesh: of Veal, young Mutton, Lamb, Kid, Pullet, Ca∣pon, Chicken, Conies, Turkie, Pheasant, Partridge, Plover, Woodcock, Snite, Heath-Cocks, and small Birds: Whiting, Smelt, Oister, Flounder, Soles, Plaise, Thornback, Turbut, Trout, Carp, Pike, Bream, Pearch, and such like: Rere Egs, Milk, Wheat Bread, white, light, and well baked; also Oaten Bread well made: and these may be divided into
two sorts: that is, meats very light, as Rere Egs, sucking Rabbits, Chickens, Whitings: and meats indifferent light, as Mutton, Lamb, Veal. Very light meats are soon digested,Quae faci∣le digerun∣tur, facile etiam cor∣rumpun∣tur. apt to be corrupted in strong stomachs; breeds tender and effeminate bodies, soft and loose flesh easily lost: solid strong meats are slower in digestion, not easily corrupted, slow in distribution, makes strong bodies, firm, hard flesh and durable. Use not meats that hath any quality in extream; as very salt, very hot, sower, binding, or the like, but keep to those that are moderate. Let your Bread be of Wheat, lea∣vened, well kneaded and baked, light and white; which you may eat new, but not hot; nor staler then two dayes old, and chuse the crumb rather then the crust. Seasonings of meat are used either as preservatives to keep them from putre∣faction and decay; or as correctives, to alter and change some ill quality, and promote digestion; or for delight to gratifie the pallat; as Sugar, Salt, Vine∣gar, Mustard, Pepper, Cloves and other Spices.
Meat moderately salted, having time to digest, ferment, volatize, and alter the crude qualities, is better and wholsomer then fresh: but to eat Salt at the Table is not so good, if the condition of the meat be such as to allow a praevious di∣gestion and seasoning. Salt is grateful to the pallate and stomach, excites the appetite, concocts crude flegmatick matter that lies upon the stomach, hin∣ders putrefaction, and is abstersive: but immoderately used, corrodes and frets, causeth itching and breakings out; very bad for thin lean bodies; it heats and dries the blood and natural moi∣sture. Sugar in a temperate clean body, moderately used, nourisheth and is good; but in a foul body is soon cor∣rupted, degenerates and makes the bo∣dy more impure; turns to choller, and inflames cholerick hot bodies. The frequent and immoderate use in any, obtunds and abates the appetite, causeth putrid humours, and makes an unwhol∣some body. Vinegar and sower juyces, as of Lem∣mons, Verjuce, and the like; procure appetite, and help the stomach in dige∣stion
of grosser meats: but the immo∣derate and frequent use, cooles, dries, constringeth and bindes the body, hurt∣ful to the Nerves and nervous parts; very bad for Women, and those that are subject to the Gout, Asthmaes and stop∣pings in the breast, or in other parts; and for lean and dry bodies. Mustard quickens the appetite, warms the stomach, dries up superflu∣ous moisture, helps the stomach, digest∣ing hard meats, opens stoppings in the breast and head. Mace, Ginger, Nutmeg, Pepper and Cloves, they help a cold stomack, com∣fort the heart and brain, refresh the spi∣rits by their atomatical odour, are grate∣ful upon the Pallate, and very accepta∣ble to Phlegmatick cold bodies. In the use of the forementioned, I shall give this caution: that young sto∣machs, and strong healthy bodies which need not a spur to their appetite, nor a help to digestion; that they frequent not the use of these seasonings and sau∣ces, but reserve them for Age, deficien∣cy of stomach, and other infirmities: for, if you accustom your self to them in youth and strength, to please your
pallate, and intice your stomach, there being no need: when the condition of your body does require them, you shall not find that benefit and assistance from them, which otherwise you might have expected and received, had you for∣born the use of them when it was not necessary. When you come to Meat, leave your care and business; but bring in your friend, and be as merry as you can: mirth and good company, is a great help to a dull stomach both for appetite and digestion. Eat not presently after exercise, and when you are hot, but forbear till the spirits be retired and setled in their sta∣tions. Eat not hastily, but chew your meat well; 'tis a good preparation for con∣coction, and your stomach will more easily and sooner digest it; but if it be half chewed, the stomach must have the labour to chew it over again with its incisive ferment. Drink a little and oft at meat, to macerate and digest, especially if your meat be dry and solid, and to help di∣stribution of aliment; but great draughts cause fluctuations.
Hasty motion opens the Orifice of the stomach, precipitates and vitiates dige∣stion. Forbear reading, writing, study, or serious cogitations for two hours after meat; else you draw off from the sto∣mach, abate the strength of digestion, and injure the brain. Omit a meal sometimes; it acu∣ates and sharpens the stomach, concocts indigested matter, and makes the next meal rellish better, Eat no late suppers, nor variety at once; a good stomach may endure it for a while; but the weaker is more sen∣sible of the injury; the best is prejudi∣ced in time. Let not the common custom of meals,Nemo sa∣nitatis suae studiosus aliquid co∣medat, nisi ad hoc cer∣to prius invitante desiderio; & ventri∣culo una cum reli∣quis supe∣rioribus intestinis à praesum∣pto cibo vacuatis. Avicen. invite you to eat; except your appetite concur with those times: and keep a sufficient distance between your times of eating, that you charge not the sto∣mach with a new supply, before the for∣mer be distributed and passed away: and in keeping such a distance, your stomach will be very fit and ready to re∣ceive the next meal, the former being wrought off perfectly; no semi-dige∣sted crude matter remaining to com∣mix
with the next food: and that is one chief cause of crudities and a foul sto∣mach; when a new load is cast in be∣fore the former be gone off, which be∣gets much excrements, not much ali∣ment; clogs the body, and procures Diseases. The stomach that is empty, receives, closeth and embraceth food with de∣light; will be eager and sharp in dige∣stion, and the body will attract and suck the aliment strongly; each part as it passeth along will perform its office rea∣dily and sufficiently; which they will not do, if often cloyed with depraved and indigested aliment, but slowly and with reluctancy: for although they do not act by reason, yet they have a natu∣ral instinct or endowment to discern their proper and fit object. If your body becomes lean, and your flesh looser then formerly; do not pam∣per and feed your self highly, expect∣ing to recover and regain the lost flesh: for in so doing you add more mischief, and make your body fouler then be∣fore,Corpora impura quo plus nutries, eò magis lae∣des. Hipp. and miss of your purpose: and unless the former impediments, that hindered and frustrated nutrition, be re∣moved,
in vain it is to expect it from the addition, and greater supply of food, or high nourishers. SECT. VI. Preservation of Health in the choice of Drinks, and Re∣gular Drinking. DRink for necessity, not for bad fellowship; especially soon after meat, which hinders the due fermen∣tation of the stomach, and washeth down before digestion be finished: but after the first concoction, if you have a hot stomach, a dry or costive body, you may drink more freely then others: or if thirst importunes you at any time, to satisfie with a moderate draught is bet∣ter then to forbear. Accustom youth & strong stomachs to small drink; but stronger drink, and Wine, to the infirm and aged: it chears the spirits, quickens the appetite, and helps digestion, moderately taken: but
being used in excess, disturbs the course of Nature, and procures many Diseases: for corpulent gross and fat bodies, thin, hungry, abstersive penetrating Wines are best, as white-Wine, Rhenish, and such like. For lean thin bodies; black, red and yellow Wines, sweet, full bodied and fragrant, are more fit and agreeable; as Malaga, Muscadel, Tent, Alicant, and such like. For Drink, whether it be wholsom∣er warmed then cold, is much contro∣verted; some stifly contending for the one, and some for the other: I shall ra∣ther chuse the middle way, with limita∣tion and distinction, then impose it up∣on all as a rule to be observed under the penalty of forfeiting their health, the observations of the one or the o∣ther. There are three sorts of persons, one cannot drink cold Beer, the other cannot drink warm; the third, either: You that cannot drink cold Beer, to you it is hurtful, cools the stomach, and checks it much: therefore keep to warm drink as a wholsom custom: you that cannot drink warm Beer, that is,
find no refreshment, nor thirst satisfi∣ed by it, you may drink it cold, nor is it injurious to you: you that are indiffe∣rent and can drink either; drink yours cold, or warmed, as the company does, since your stomach makes no choice. That warm drink is no bad custom, but agreeable to Nature in the genera∣litie; first, Because it comes the near∣est to the natural temper of the body, and similia similibus conservantur; eve∣ry thing is preserved by its like, and de∣stroyed by its contrary. Secondly, Though I do not hold it the principal Agent in digestion, yet it does excite, is auxiliary, and a necessary concomi∣tant of a good digestion, ut signum & causa. Thirdly, Omne frigus per se, & pro viribus destruit; Cold in its own nature, and according to the gra∣duation of its power, extinguisheth na∣tural heat, and is destructive; but per accidens, and as it is in gradu remisso, it may contemperate, allay, and refresh, where heat abounds, and is exalted. Therefore as there is variety of Pallates and Stomachs likeing and a∣greeing best with such kind of meats and drinks, which to others are utterly
disgustful, disagreeing and injurious, though good in themselves: so is it in Drink warmed or cold; what one finds a benefit in, the other receives a preju∣dice; at least does not find that satis∣faction and refreshment, under such a qualification; because of the various natures, particular appetitions, and idosyncratical properties of several bo∣dies, one thing will not agree with all: Therefore he that cannot drink warm, let him take it cold, and it is well to him; but he that drinks it warm; does better. And this is to be under∣stood in Winter, when the extremity of cold hath congelated and fixed the spirits of the Liquor in a torpid inacti∣vity; which by a gentle warmth are un∣fettered, volatile and brisk; whereby the drink is more agreeable and grate∣ful to the stomachs fermenting heat; being so prepared, then to be made so by it. There are three sorts of Drinkers: one drinks to satisfie Nature, and to support his body; without which he cannot well subsist, and requires it as necessary to his Being. Another drinks a degree beyond this man, and takes a
larger dose, with this intention,Primum crater ad sitim per∣tinere, se∣cundum ad hilarita∣tem, terti∣um ad vo∣luptatem, quartum ad insani∣um dixit. Apuleius. to ex∣hilerate and chear his mind, to banish cares and trouble, and help him to sleep the better; and these two are lawful drinkers. A third drinks neither for the good of the body, or the mind, but to stupifie and drown both; by ex∣ceeding the former bounds, and run∣ning into excess, frustrating those ends for which drink was appointed by Na∣ture; converting this support of life and health, making it a procurer of sick∣ness and untimely death. Many such there are, who drink not to satisfie Nature, but force it down many times contrary to natural inclina∣tion; and when there is a reluctancy against it: as Drunkards, that pour in Liquor, not for love of the drink, or that Nature requires it by thirst, but on∣ly to maintain the mad frollick, and keep the Company from breaking up. Some to excuse this intemperance, hold it as good Physick to be drunk once a month, and plead for that liberty as a wholsom custom, and quote the autho∣rity of a famous Physitian for it. Whe∣ther this Opinion be allowable, and to be admitted in the due Regiment for
preservation of health, is fit to be exa∣mined. Omne ni∣mium na∣turae est inimicunt.It is a Canon established upon good reason; That every thing exceeding its just bounds, and golden mediocrity, is hurtful to Nature. The best of things are not excepted in this general rule; but are restrained and limited here to a due proportion. The supports of life may prove the procurers of death, if not qualified and made wholsom by this corrective. Meat and drink is no longer susti∣nance, but a load and over-charge, if they exceed the quantum due to each particular person; and then they are not, what they are properly in them∣selves, and by the appointment of Na∣ture; the preservatives of life and health; but the causes of sickness, and consequently of death. Drink was not appointed man, to discompose and disorder him in all his faculties, but to supply, nourish, and strengthen them. Drink exceeding its measure, is no longer a refreshment, to irrigate and water the thirsty body, but makes an inundation to drown and suffocate the vital powers. It puts a
man out of the state of health, and re∣presents him in such a degenerate con∣dition both in respect of body and mind, that we may look upon the man, as go∣ing out of the World, because he is al∣ready gon out of himself, and strangely metamorphosed from what he was. I never knew sickness or a Disease, to be good preventing Physick; and to be drunk, is no other then an un∣sound state, and the whole body out of frame by this great change. What dif∣ference is there between sickness and drunkenness? Truly I cannot distinguish them otherwise then as genus and spe∣cies: Drunkenness being a raging Dis∣ease, denominated and distinguished from other sicknesses, by its procatar∣tick or procuring cause, Drink. That Drunkenness is a Disease or sickness, will appear in that it hath all the requisites to constitute a Disease, and is far distant from a state of health: for as health is the free and regular dis∣charge of all the functions of the body and mind; and sickness, when the fun∣ctions are not performed, or weakly and depravedly: then Ebriety may proper∣ly be said to be a Disease or sickness, be∣cause
it hath the symptoms and diagno∣stick signs, of an acute and great Dis∣ease: for, during the time of drunken∣ness, and some time after, few of the faculties perform rightly, but very de∣pravedly and preternaturally: if we examine the intellectual faculties, we shall find the reason gone, the memory lost or much abated, and the will strangly perverted: if we look into the sensitive faculties, they are disordered, and their functions impedited, or per∣formed very deficiently: the eyes do not see well, nor the ears hear well, nor the pallate rellish, &c. The speech faul∣ters and is imperfect; the stomach per∣haps vomits or nauseates; his legs fail: Indeed if we look through the whole man, we shall see all the faculties de∣praved, and their functions either not executed, or very disorderly and with much deficiency. Now according to these symptoms in other sicknesses, we judge a man not likely to live long; and that it is very hard he should recover; the danger is so great from the many threatning symptoms that attend this sickness, and prognosticate a bad event: here is no∣thing
appears salutary; but from head to foot, the Disease is prevalent in eve∣ry part; which being collated, the syndrom is lethal, and judgment to be given so. Surely then Drunkenness is a very great disease for the time; but because it is not usually mortal, nor lasts long; therefore it is slighted, and look't upon as a trivial matter that will cure it self. But now the question may be asked; Why is not Drunkenness usually mortal? since the same signs in other diseases are accounted mortal, and the event proves it so. To which I answer; All the hopes we have that a man drunk should live, is; first, From common experi∣ence that it is not deadly: Secondly, From the nature of the primitive or pro∣curing Cause, strong Drink or Wine; which although it rage, and strangely discompose the man for a time, yet it lasts not long, nor is mortal. The ine∣briating spirits of the liquor, flowing in so fast, and joyning with the spirits of mans body, make so high a tide, that overflows all the banks and bounds of order: For, the spirits of mans body, those agents in each faculty, act smooth∣ly,
regularly and constantly, with a mo∣derate supply; but being overcharged, and forced out of their natural course, and exercise of their duty, by the large addition of furious spirits; spurs the functions into strange disorders, as if nature were conflicting with death and dissolution; but yet it proves not mor∣tal. And this, first, because these adven∣titious spirits are amicable and friendly to our bodies in their own nature, and therefore not so deadly injurious, as that which is not so familiar or noxious. Secondly, Because they are very vo∣latile, light, and active; Nature there∣fore does much sooner recover her self, transpires and sends forth the overplus received; then if the morbifick matter were more ponderous and fixed; the gravamen from thence would be much worse and longer in removing: as an over-charge of Meat, Bread, Fruit, or such like substances not spirituous; but dull and heavy (comparativè) is of more difficult digestion, and layes a greater and more dangerous load upon the fa∣culties, having not such volatile brisk spirits to assist Nature, nor of so liquid
a fine substance, of quicker and easier digestion: So that the symptoms from thence are much more dangerous, then those peracute distempers arising from Liquors. So likewise those bad symp∣toms in other diseases are more to be feared and accounted mortal (then the like arising from drunkenness) because those perhaps depend upon malignant causes; or such as by time are radicated in the body; or from the defection of some principal part: but the storm and discomposure arising from drunkenness, as it is suddenly raised; so commonly it soon falls, depending upon benign causes, and a spirituous matter, that layes not so great an oppression; but inebriates the spirits, that they act very disorderly and unwontedly; or by the soporiferous vertue, stupefies them for a time, until they recover their a∣gility again. But all this while, I do not see, that to be drunk once a month, should prove good Physick: all I think that can be said in this behalf, is; that by overcharg∣ing the stomach, vomiting is procured; and so carries off something that was lodged there, which might breed Dis∣eases
This is a bad excuse for good fellows, and a poor plea for drunkenness: for the gaining of one supposed benefit (which might be obtained otherwise) you in∣troduce twenty inconveniences by it. I do not like the preventing of one dis∣ease that may be, by procuring of one at the present certainly, and many here∣after most probably: and if the disease feared, or may be, could be prevented no otherwise, but by this drunken means; then that might tollerate and allow it: but there are other wayes better and safer to cleanse the body either upwards or downwards, then by overcharging with strong drink, and making the man to unman himself; the evil conse∣quents of which are many, the benefit hoped for, but pretended; or if any, but very small and inconsiderable. And although, as I said before, the drunken fit is not mortal, and the dan∣ger perhaps not great for the present; yet those drunken bouts being repeated; the relicts do accumulate, debilitate Na∣ture, and lay the foundation of many chronick diseases. Nor can it be expe∣cted otherwise; but you may justly conclude from the manifest irregular
actions which appears to us externally; that the functions within also, and their motions are strangely disordered: for, the outward madness and unwonted actions, proceeds from the internal im∣pulses, and disordered motions of the faculties: which general disturbance and discomposure (being frequent) must needs subvert the oeconomy and go∣vernment of humane Nature; and con∣sequently ruine the Fabrick of mans body. The ill effects, and more eminent products of ebriety, are; first, A chang∣ing of the natural tone of the stomach, and alienateing the digestive faculty; That instead of a good transmutation of food, a degenerate Chyle is produced. Common experience tells, that after a drunken debauch, the stomach loseth its appetite, and acuteness of digestion; as belching, thirst, disrelish, nauseating, do certainly testifie: yet to support nature, and continue the custom of eating; some food is received; but we cannot expect from such a stomach that a good digestion should follow: and it is some dayes before the stomach recover its eucrasy, and perform its office well:
and if these miscarriages happen but seldom; the injury is the less, and soon∣er recompenced; but by the frequent repetition of these ruinous practices, the stomach is overthrown and alienated from its integrity. Secondly, An unwholsom corpulency and cachectick plenitude of body does follow: or a degenerate macilency, and a decayed consumptive constitution. Great drinkers that continue it long; few of them escape,A Caco∣trophy, or Atrophy. but fall into one of these conditions and habit of body: for, if the Stomach discharge not its office a∣right; the subsequent digestions will also be defective. So great a consent and dependance is there upon the stomach; that other parts cannot perform their duty, if this leading principal Part be perverted and debauched: nor can it be expected otherwise; for, from this Laboratory and prime office of digestion, all the parts must receive their supply; which being not suteable but depraved, are drawn into debauchery also, and a de∣generate state; and the whole body fed with a vitious alimentary succus. Now that different products or habits of body should arise from the same
kind of debauchery, happens upon this score. As there are different pro∣perties and conditions of bodies; so the result from the same procuring causes shall be much different and various:Quicquid recipitur, recipitur per mo∣dum reci∣pientis. Ax. one puffs up, fills, and grows hydropical; another pines away, and falls Consump∣tive, from excess in drinking; and this proceeds from the different disposition of parts: for, in some persons, although the stomach be vitiated, yet the strength of the subsequent digestions is so great, from the integrity and vigor of those parts destinated to such offices; that they act strenuously, though their ob∣ject matter be transmitted to them im∣perfect and degenerate; and therefore do keep the body plump and full, al∣though the juyces be foul and of a de∣praved nature. Others è contra, whose parts are not so firm and vigorous; that will not act upon any score, but with their proper object; does not endeavour a transmutation of such aliene matter, but receiving it with a nice reluctance, transmits it to be evacuated and sent forth by the next convenient ducture, or emunctory: and from hence the bo∣dy is frustrated of nutrition, and falls
away: So that the pouring in of much liquor (although it be good in sua na∣tura) does not beget much aliment, but washeth through the body, and is not assimilated. But here some may object and think; That washing of the body through with good Liquor, should cleanse the body, and make it fit for nourishment, and be like good Physick for a foul body. But the effect proves the contrary; and it is but reason it should be so: for, suppose the Liquor (whether Wine, or other) be pure and good; yet when the spirit is drawn off from it, the remainder is but dead, flat, thick, and a muddy flegm. As we find in the destillation of Wine, or other Liquors; so it is in mans body: the spirit is drawn off first, and all the parts of mans body are ready Receivers, and do imbibe that limpid congenerous enlivener, freely and readily: but the remainder, of greatest proportion; that heavy, dull, phlegmy part, and of a narcotick quality; lies long fluctuating upon the digestions, and passeth but slowly; turns sowr, and vitiates the Crases of the parts: So that this great inundation, and supposed washing of
the body, does but drown the faculties, stupefie or choak the spirits, and defile all the parts; not purifie and cleanse. And although the more subtile and thinner portion, passeth away in some persons pretty freely by Urine; yet the grosser and worse part stayes behind, and clogs in the percolation. A third injury, and common, mani∣fest prejudice from intemperate drink∣ing, is; An imbecility of the Nerves; which is procured from the disorderly motions of the Animal Spirits; being impulsed and agitated preternaturally by the inebriating spirits of strong Li∣quors: which vibration being frequent, begets a habit, and causeth a trepidati∣on of Members.
SECT. VII. Exercise and Rest, regulated and duly appointed. THat Exercise and due Motion con∣tributes to the preservation of Health, and prolongation of Life, will appear, if we consider the benefits that are procured by it. First, In general exercise it raiseth the spirits, and puts them upon vigo∣rous action in all the Faculties. Secondly, It empties the stomach, and promotes the appetite for the next meal: the remainders after digestion, that accumulate to clog the stomach, is moved by Exercise, and excited to pass away; and being thus discharged of those relicts; the appetite grows sharp, and craves food very strongly. Thirdly, It provokes expulsion of Excrements, and suffers not any super∣fluous matter to lodge in the body: For, by the turgid motion of the spirits,
the common ductures and conveyancies are dilated and expanded; which toge∣ther with the agitation of the body, gives a ready and free passage to any feculent or excremental matter that ought not long to be retained. Fourthly, Exercise opens the Pores, and gives a free transpiration; which otherwise by too much rest are occluded and shut up, contrary to the intention of Nature; having appointed these vents, and secret way of evacuation, to ventilate and cleanse the habite of the body, which in a short time would be very foul and impure, by congestion of superfluous humours, if not purified and transpired by these exhaling ports. Fifthly, Exercise, promotes, and adds much towards the nutrition of the body. For this we find generally, that active stirring people, are more fresh in countenance, more vegete and lively in spirit, more firm and solid in flesh, and stronger in their limbs; then other persons that live a sedentary, idle and sluggish life. And that it should be so there is good reason; in as much as exercise gives a free passage for nu∣triment to arrive at every member and
part of the body; and also excites the Archeus or ruling principle in each, for a more vigorous assimilation; and like∣wise does expedite and send away the superfluities of every digestion, all which promotes and sets forward a good nutrition. Exercises are various, and common∣ly chosen, as each person phansies, or the Company invites; as Dancing, Running, Ringing, Tennis, Hand-Ball, Foot-Ball, Riding, Fencing; with many others: some whereof are purely pas∣time, as those named; others necessa∣ry labours, as Digging, Sawing, and such like. Exercise is to be chosen, such as sutes best with the Nature of each persons body: Some require ex∣ercising of upper parts most, others of the lower parts, and some equally both: those Exercises which generally are ad∣vantagious, in using and stretching all the parts, and which I prefer before others, are Tennis, Hand-Ball, Fenc∣ing and Ringing. Yet I would not im∣pose upon any contrary to their inclina∣tion, for in these cases, that which is most delightful, will probably prove most beneficial.
Observations and Cautions to be re∣membred in exercising, are such as these. 1. Exercise daily, in the morning chiefly; with an empty stomach alwayes; and after excremental evacuation if you can procure it. 2. Vary exercise according to the condition of your body, and season of the year: the stronger, phlegmatick bodies, and in cold Weather, admit of stronger and swifter motions: Cholerick hot bodies, weak, and the Summer sea∣son; more mild and gentle. 3. Be not violent in exercise; nor continue it longer beyond a pleasure; but desist with refreshment, not a lassi∣tude and weariness. 4. Put on some loose garment, until your body be cool and setled in its na∣tural heat and temper; the Pores being opened by exercise, the cold is more apt to enter; from whence a greater pre∣judice then you could expect benefit from your labour or pastime. 5. Walk gently after Exercise, and settle by degrees; no suddain changes are suteable or profitable to Nature. 6. Eat not, untill you be fully redu∣ced
to that temper and moderate heat, as when you began; and when the spirits are retired to their proper stations. By this rational course the advanta∣ges that will accrue to you are these. Exercise rouseth dull inactive spirits; gives ventilation, opens obstructions by the motion, attenuation and penetration of the subtile spirits; agitates and vola∣tiseth feculent subsiding humours; a∣bates superfluous moisture; increaseth natural heat; promotes concoction, di∣stribution and conveyance of aliment, through the narrow Channels and Pas∣sages unto the several parts of the bo∣dy; procures excremental evacuations; strengthens all the Members, and pre∣serves Nature long in her vigour and virdure. Having set out the times for Exer∣cise and Motion; the remainder is al∣lotted for Rest and Ease, with such re∣fections and repast as Nature requires. Quod ca∣re alter∣na rquie durabile non est. Ovid.Rest is as necessary to preserve Health, and continue mans body in strength and vigour, as Exercise. These two, although much opposite in themselves, yet both in their order and seasons, are very suteable and agreeable to humane
Nature, and both contribute to the be∣ing and long being of Man. Nothing constant is liking and congruous with our Nature; but vicissitude is most ac∣ceptable and delightful. When the body is wearied with La∣bour, then rest is refreshing, and renews its strength; but when satiated with rest, does then thirst after motion & pleasant exercise.Interdum quies in∣quieta est; quoties nos male habet in∣ertia sui impatiens Sen. Rest is a burthen if forced upon Nature, longer then Nature does require; and that is but for a short space. So that the due timing of Rest and Motion, and limiting them to their hours and seasons, most agreeable and delightful to humane Nature, is that which preserves him in Health, and pro∣longs his Being. Avoid idleness, and a sluggish seden∣tary life: for want of due action and wholsom motion; the body, like stand∣ing Waters, degenerates and corrupts. If Rest exceeds, the vigor of Nature is abated; digestion not so good; distribu∣tion of aliment to the several parts re∣tarded and impedited, by reason of an obstructed foul body: excrementitious superfluities not freely transmitted and emitted; the spirits dulled, and all the
faculties of the body and mind, heavy and slow to action. Ignavia corpus habetat, labor firmat. SECT. VIII. Sleep and Watching, Limited and Cautioned. THE Life of Man being conver∣sant in vicissitudes, spends its whole course in these two different states, Sleep and Watching: the one appointed for Rest and Ease, the other for Action and Labour.Nemo dum∣dormit, a∣licujus est pretii, non∣magis quam si non vive∣ret. Quidam. If he were con∣stant in the first, his life were but the shadow of Death, not worth the name∣ing: if in the latter, he could not hold out long, but be tyred and worn out. Therefore Nature hath wisely contri∣ved, that he should not continue long in either, but should be transient from one to the other, and weave out his life by these short intervals. Watching, Action and Motion; Sleep, Rest and Cessation; are equally requisite for the
well-being of man: So that these two changes relieving one another, both be∣come a defence and support of humane life. Sleep is a placid state of body and mind, bringing refreshment and ease to both. Sleep takes off the Body from action, and the Mind from care, thought and business; and gives a cessation and quiet interval from their Labour. That sleep may prove most advantagious, an∣swering the intentions and designment of Nature, it must be regulated in these four particulars: the Time, and Limits, the Place, and the Manner. The Time most proper and fit for Sleep, and according to the appoint∣ment of Nature, is the Night; when most of the Creatures also do take their rest. At the shutting up of the day, and the Sun departed from the Horizon; the spirits are not so active and lively, but incline to a cessation, and then it is fit to give them their repose and rest, and not constrain them longer up∣on duty: in the morning again, at the rising of the Sun, they are fresh, brisk and agile; and then are no longer to be chained up in somnolent darkness but to
be set at liberty, and enjoy the bright light, which chears the spirits, and is a great enlivener to them. Turpis qui alto sole semisomnis jacet, Cujus vigilia medio die incipit. Sen. Moderate sleep refresheth the spirits; fortifies and increaseth vital heat; helps concoction; gives strength to the body; pacifies anger; calms the spirits, and gives a relaxation to a troubled mind. Immoderate sleep dulls the spirits; injurious to a good wit and memory; fills the head with superfluous moisture, and clouds the brain; retains excre∣ments beyond their due time to be voided; and infects the body with their noxious fumes and vapours; an enemy to beauty, and changeth the fresh flower of Youth. Go early to sleep (not with a full sto∣mach) and early from sleep; that you may rise refreshed, lively and active; not dulled and stupid. Avoid day sleeps as a bad custom; chiefly fat and corpulent bodies: but if your spirits be tired with much business and care; or by reason of old age, de∣bility
of Nature, extream hot weather,Sōnus me∣ridianus quibus conceden∣dus. labour or the like, that dissipates the spi∣rits, and enervates; then a moderate sleep restores the spirits to their vigor again, and is a good refreshment; but rather take it sitting then lying down. Night watching, and late sitting up, tires and wasts the animal spirits, by keeping them too long upon duty; de∣bilitates Nature; changeth Youth, and a fresh florid countenance; heats and dries the body for the present; in time abateth natural heat;Vigiliae longioris incommo∣da. breeds Rhumes and Crudities; and most injurious to thin lean bodies. Concerning the place for sleeping, take these cautions: First, That you do not expose your self to the open Air: for in the time of sleep, Nature is not so well able to defend the body from external injuries of the Air; but lies more open to such assaults, being off her guard, and retired to Rest. Know also that it is a bad custom to sleep upon the ground, as many in the Summer season do use to their preju∣dice: and those whose condition of life necessitate them to it, (as Soldiers)
although for the present they escape the mischief; yet afterwards, most are made sensible of the injury, by Aches, stif∣ness or weakness of Limbs, and many o∣ther infirmities that it procures. Sleep not in any damp place, Vault or Cellar, a ground Chamber, (much worse unboarded) a new washt Room, or new plaistered; but chuse a high Room, dry, sweet, well aired, free from smoke, and remote from any noise. Let your Bed be soft, but not to sink in; which sucks from the body, ex∣hausts and impairs strength: a Quilt upon a Feather-Bed, is both easie and wholsome. As for the manner or decumbiture, the body must lie easie, or sleep will be di∣sturbed: the head somthing elevated; the other parts as best likes every per∣son; but not upon the back, or con∣stantly upon one side; but by turns: and be covered according to the Cli∣mate and Season of the Year. The mind also must be in a good po∣sture, well composed and setled when you are in bed; or that will break off your sleep before due time, and de∣fraud you of your nights rest: if you lie
down with roving troubled thoughts; they commonly will call you up before it is fit to rise, and your sleep not so pla∣cid and refreshing. Therefore when you lay by your cloaths, lay aside also your business, care and thoughts, and let not a wandring phansie prevent your rest, or awake you before due time. SECT. IX. Preservation of Health, by Regular and Requisite Evacuation and Retention. ALL that the body receives is not fit to be retained; our food, though choicely pickt, and temperate∣ly used, yet all does not turn into the substance of the body; but some part is to be separated and sent forth, the rest to supply, nourish, and be assimila∣ted. This regular course being conti∣nued, the body thrives, and is in good order; but if that which should be evacuated and sent forth, be retained;
or that which ought to be retained, be prodigally wasted, and injuriously emit∣ted; then the body suffers and decayes, when the regular oeconomy thereof is subverted. Hinc ingens morborum turba. And here we are to consider of the various excretions that Nature does re∣quire, and is beneficial; and of such retentions as are injurious. Under this Head is comprised excre∣tions by Stool, by Urine, menstrual Pur∣gations, Venus, by the Pores, Nose and Ears: of which the former are of the greatest concernment, and special care to be had of them. Excremental evacuations are vari∣ous, proceeding from the several di∣gestions; conveyed out by several Channels and Vents of Natures fabrica∣tion: which duly evacuated, are no smal helps to the conservation of health, and are the effects of a temperate and regular body. The retention of them beyond due time, argue discrasy of parts, or irregu∣lar living; and brings much detriment to the body, by their noxious inpressi∣ons and putrid vapours, that infect and disturb the body.
If the Belly be costive and bound up; if the Urine be supprest; the monthly Courses stopt; the Pores occluded and shut up: the Soul will be stifled in the Body, and the Body polluted and cor∣rupted with its own Excrements: and as these are so, more or less in degree, swerving from rectitude; so it fares with the body better or worse. And on the contrary, if the Belly let pass too soon and forceably, before the alimentary part be separated, sweep∣ing down both together; if the Urine flows too freely, and drains the body; If the Female Courses be immoderately current, and exhaust the vital stream; If the Sperme be involuntarily issuing, and daily wasting; If the Texture be too lax and pervious, the Pores patent and evaporating; the damage is as great as the former, and as much to be fear∣ed, as these evacuations are more or less enormous. So that nothing but mo∣deration, and an even course between these two extreams are conservative of Health and longaevity. And that this may be so, all your actions and necessa∣ry customs must be bounded by medio∣crity: this is the Golden Chain that ties
all together; one Link whereof being broken, the whole is broken and disu∣nited; having a dependance and mutu∣al tye upon each other. As the discharging of Nature mo∣derately and seasonably, in all her re∣quisite evacuations, preserves the body in health and strength: so contrarily. Immoderate evacuations causeth weakness, debility of Nature by ex∣haustion, and procures several Dis∣eases, Cachexies, Consumptions, Drop∣sies, &c. To keep the body soluble is very good, that at least once a day you may not miss to have a stool; else the Faeces are hardned, the body heated, the sto∣mach molested, the appetite not so good, the head heavy, dull and some∣times pained; some grosser matter which should go away by seige, is brought by the Urinary passage; oc∣casioning obstructions, all which are very injurious and destructive to Health. Seasonable and moderate Venus, al∣leviates Nature, and helps digestion: but immoderate, exhausts the strength
by effusion of spirits; exsiccates and dries the Body, hurts the Brain and Nerves, causeth tremblings, dulls the sight, debilitates all the faculties, hastens old age, and shortens life. But of this more at large in my Treatise of Sper∣matick Consumptions. Cibo vel potu repletis, superfluè eva∣cuatis, sive exercitatis, coitus interdici∣tur. Tempus optimum est manè, & post dor∣mias. Hyeme & vere frequentius permitti∣tur; aestate parcissimè. Juvines sanguinei & pituitosi libera∣lius; parcius Melancholici, parcissimè biliosi, Senes, emaciati. Menstrual evacuations are proper to the Female Sex; and come to them at certain years, to some at fourteen or fifteen, to others at sixteen or seventeen: and then Nature challengeth them monthly as her due; except she hath conceived, nurseth, or being grown old Nature does not require this evacuati∣on: And this is of such concernment with them, that if this menstrual Flux be not right in the several requisites, ac∣cording to times, quantity and quality,
the whole body oftentimes is disturbed; but alwayes some infirmity or complaint does follow: And therefore it much behoveth Women to have a special re∣gard that this course of Nature be regu∣lar, according to each persons proprie∣ty of body; for all have them not a∣like, nor is it to be expected: and when it happens otherwise, a due course is to be taken to reduce them into order, and procure them aright. This Flux ariseth from a redundance, and is granted to Women for concepti∣on-sake; that they might both nourish the foetus in the Womb, and have suf∣ficient to supply their own bodies: Therefore when there is no conception, Nature hath appointed a menstrual eva∣cuation to spend the over-plus this way, during her capacity of having Chil∣dren; and when that time is past, Na∣ture taks up and makes no such provisi∣on; and then this evacuation ceaseth.
SECT. X. The different state and variation of Bodies. Commonly distinguished by four Constitutions. THat the Condition, Properties, and Habit of Bodies do much differ one from the other; and also the same by time doth vary and alter much from what it was, is that which I need not in∣sist on the proof; every one almost, will confess the , and is convinced of this truth. But how this comes to pass, and the reasons of this difference and variation, is not unanimously agreed upon, but great dissenting about the matter. The Galenists do comprise the diver∣sity of bodies under four Constitutions, Sanguine, Phlegmatick, Cholerick and Melancholick. And this they will have to arise from the difference of bodies in
mixtion, according to the different pro∣portions they receive of the four Ele∣ments, participating more of some, then the other. The Chymical Philosophers; some of them will have the difference of bo∣dies to assurge out of three Principles, Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury: Others increase that number, and will have have them five, Spirit, Salt, Sulphur, Water and Earth. But I must not now ingage in the controversie between the Chymists and Galenists, or make another party to oppose both; but reserve that as more proper for a Polemical Tract: This Work being not intended contro∣versal, but Canonical, I therefore pass on to state the Matter. These four tearms of Sanguine, Cho∣lerick, &c. although I do not adhere to them in the common acceptation, and in every point as the Galenists use them; yet they being so familiar and well known to such for whom chiefly this work is intended; I shall retain these names with distinction and limitation to serve our present purpose, rather then impose new words upon you, not so well understood.
I do not therefore understand by Phlegm, Choler, &c. that every body is composed of these four humours, as their constitutive parts, resulting from proportionate and disproportionate mix∣ture and combination of the four Ele∣ments: But that persons may participate of, or abound with a degenerate hu∣mour; and that the succulencies of the body may incline to such a condition, affine and analogous, or having such pro∣perties, as that which is assigned to, and called, Phlegm, Choler, &c. may be as∣certed, and we may call them by such names. But you must also take notice, that the degenerate matter in mans bo∣dy is so various, that you must not think to reduce all such depraved Jui∣ces exactly to these three heads, of Cho∣ler, Phlegm, and Melancholly; and if you add twice three more, the number would not be sufficient: But since there is not peculiar appellations to distinguish all precisely by, better have some gene∣ral tearms then none. The variation of bodies, in relation to Temperament, Habit, and Constituti∣on; does arise immediatè from the vari∣ation of digestions, and the different
products from thence: so that one and the same person shall by time be of dif∣ferent constitutions, according as the fun∣ctions of the body are performed well or ill. The changing or establishing of Con∣stitutions procatarcticè, does depend upon subjection and obedience to the Diaetitick Rules. As every one is or∣dered prudently and regularly, or neg∣ligently and incongruously, shall be dis∣posed to this or that Constitution. If a man live idle, plentifully feeding, in∣dulging himself in raw Fruits, and sleeps much; this disposeth him to be Phleg∣matick: that is, his digestions shall not be so good; and there will be crude re∣licts abounding, such as is called Phlegm. If a man be of an active cogitative spi∣rit, eager in business, giving himself little rest, accustomed to Wine and high seasoned Meats: This manner of life fires and heats the body; the Juices then will not be so mild, temperate, and balsamick: but acrid, bot and sharp; and this person then may be said to be of a cholerick constitution or condition of body.
If a fresh sanguine person, of a pure wholsom body; be oppressed with care and grief, live a sedentary life, or too much given to study and serious contem∣plation, and feed grosly. This course of life shall change and alter the best constitution; the sanguine brisk airy person shall by these means, be of a dull heavy disposition, and sad mind; the body also shall degenerate from its purity, the humours more fixed and feculent. The Soul being the great Spring, or Wheel that keeps all the fun∣ctions in motion, upon which they do depend, primò & principaliter, as the Fountain of all Vital Actions: If this be dejected and taken off its speed, the functions are then performed very hea∣vily, as if weights and clogs were hung upon them; and then the elaboration of food is not well performed, and a pure alimentary Juice produced; but a de∣generate succus of a heavy oppressing nature not duely fermented by the Spleen (dyscrasyed by the preceding Causes) from whence a melancholly con∣stitution is begotten, and may so be de∣nominated for distinction.
The diversity of Constitutions being thus understood, we may make use of, and retain these distinguishing tearms, at this time to serve the business in hand; since they are so familiar by use, and ea∣sie to be apprehended, by such for whom this is intended. But although I can close with them in relation to this purpose I am now upon, to order and appoint a Diaetetick Regiment for diffe∣rent bodies; yet I think them not of that concernment, for a Physician to tye himself strictly to their observance, in the designment of Cures; these noti∣ons being too superficial and remote from the quiddity, essence and spring of the Disease; are but Characteristical and Signal, to note how, and which way the vital Powers do deviate and swerve from their integrity; are but the Producta Morbi, the Products and Effects, separable, and the Disease may remain behind. Wherefore I cannot allow them, as they are severally injoyned in the Me∣thodus Medendi for indications, to sute Purgatives electivè, and other Medicines to, by peculiar appropriations; nor con∣cur with some Hypotheses that are foun∣ded
upon this Doctrine by the Galenists to steer them in their Therapeuticks; which indeed runs them upon great er∣rors in the Cure of most Diseases; be∣ing so nice in temperaments, humours and qualities, and eying them so much; that they neglect the spring from whence they do arise,Natura est morborum medica∣trix. Helm. and where the greatest stress of Cures do lie. Morbi in initiis vitalibus radicem habent. And although I have distinguished food for several constitutions or condi∣tions of body, as most proper and fit for them, and commonly most agreea∣ble and appetible; yet I do not thereby strictly enjoyn, or restrain any one of a dissenting appetite, from some things greatly coveted and suteable by experi∣ence, although appointed for another person of a different constitution: but that every person seeing the general Rule, may something be guided there∣by; and examining his peculiar proprie∣ty of Body, undiscernable to others; whether it will comply freely, or with reluctance. In such case where there is a refusal of this or that, as not suting, but disgustful; you are not to impose upon your Nature forcibly, though
injoyned by the general Rule: But where you are at a stand in things indif∣ferent, what to chuse when either will comply and sute your appetite, then fol∣low the Rule as advantagious. More∣over the strong robust bodies, active and laborious, are not so strictly enjoyned to observance, as tender weak bodies, soon discomposed and altered by ill dy∣et, or incongruous for their condition of body. If a person have a cold, waterish, Phlegmatick Stomach; those Meats, and Drinks, and Sauces, are not so a∣greeable and requisite for him, as will well agree and sute with a Cholerick, hot, and dry parching Stomach. A Phleg∣matick man most commonly takes no delight in Milk and Whey, cold Meats, and cooling Drinks, or cooling Sauces: but he loves seasoned hot Meats, strong Drinks, Spices, and hot Hearbs, to make his Meat savory and acceptable to his Stomach: But the Cholerick Man shall delight in the other; and they shall sute best, being temperately and discretely used. So that a Diaetetick Regiment, well appointed and observed, is physical to dyscrasyed and distempered
bodies, to contemperate and allay the the luxuriance of some predominant Humour; and something dispose the faculties to produce the alimentary Jui∣ces of another nature: which by time will alter and change the constitution or condition of Body from what it was, and reduce it nearer to what it ought to be. SECT. XI. Praecautions and Rules, Appointed for the Sanguine Con∣stitution; or purest State and Condition of Body. THis Constitution does result from the integrity of the faculties, and due Crases of the Parts, performing their offices rightly: When Food is well elaborated and transmuted in such manner as is proper for each digestion; then a good constitution and good habit of body is established. The Mass of
blood then hath its pure tincture, and all the liquors of the body their peculi∣ar properties suteable to the intentions of Nature: But if the Crases of the Parts be perverted by a spontaneous de∣fection and imbecility of the faculties; or otherwise procured to irregularity, by bad food, intemperance, and the Diae∣tetick Rules not observed; then the alimentary Juices do degenerate from their purity; the mass of Blood, and nervous liquor are depraved, the con∣stitution and whole habit of body al∣tered and changed for the worse. The sanguine person enjoyes the best state and condition of body; does not abound or is molested with crude, Phleg∣matick or acrid Cholerick Juices, or otherwise degenerate; but hath the succulencies of body in their right and proper natures, as is most fit for every vessel and part of the body: hence it is that this person is more fresh, tempe∣rate, lively, and florid; of a more plea∣sant mind, and good disposition, having pure blood, and other good Juyces to supply the Body; from whence the spi∣rits are generated both plentifully, and of a good extraction.
This State and Constitution of Body is best preserved and continued so from degeneration, by a good Diaetetick Re∣giment; disposing all the requisite sup∣ports of Life, Customs and Actions whatsoever; that they be moderate, seasonable and suteable to such Natures, contributing their assistance wholly, and not being any wayes detrimental, by their ill management. The Sanguine Person will continue long in that condition and good state of Body; by a due observance of Dyet, Exercise and Rest, Sleep and Watching, Excretions and Retentions, passions of Mind: For any of these irregular and unsuteable, will alter and change the best tempered body, into some other depraved condition answerable to their Causes: as the intemperate Air of a hot Climate, or sudden change of Wea∣ther not regarded; violent and unseaso∣nable Exercise, night-watchings, ill-dyet, &c. introduceth a depraved alteration and degeneration of the blood: and therefore most commonly sickness soon follows such injurious Courses. I might here forbid the smoaking of Tobacco; the common Purgatives falsly denomi∣nated,
but rather and more properly Corruptives; which stamp an ill im∣pression upon the parts, and vitiate the alimentary Juyces of the Body: but the injuries procured from Tobacco, and these Drugs, are declared at large in my Tract of the Scurvy; Therefore I need not repeat here. For the Election and Choice of Food, for quantities and due times in Eating and Drinking; for the choice of Air, and place of Abode; for Exercise, Sleep, &c. consonant and most agreea∣ble to this constitution and best state of Body; are to be sought in the general Hygiastick Rules before mentioned, which are most proper and applicable to this state and condition of Body; as be∣ing the Rule or Standard to measure o∣thers by: And by how much others va∣ry from this temperature & good condi∣tion of Body; by so much are they to be accounted intemperate and deviating from integrity; and do therefore re∣quire some particular Rules or Exempti∣ons from the general, to regulate them apart; because bodies in a right and good state are not to be governed by the same strictness of Law; but must have some
allowance and exceptions, which shall be observed in the particular constituti∣ons following. SECT. XII. Diaetetick Regiment, Assigned to the Phlegmatick Con∣stitution. THE Phlegmatick Person is such whose nature is not so vigorous and acute in the digestive faculties; and makes a transmutation of food not so perfect as the Sanguine, but some∣thing crude and raw. This Constituti∣on abounding with superfluous moi∣sture, and being more cool in tempera∣ture, (except preternaturally distempe∣red, and the Archeus disturbed) com∣monly hath a slower Pulse; not so live∣ly, active and brisk as the Sanguine per∣son; prone to sleep and ease; of co∣lour paler; by hot things benefitted, by cold things prejudiced. And thus it is
by reason the vital powers are remiss and sluggish; the several functions of the body are not performed vigorously and compleatly. Now this Constitution of body being fallen a degree from the integrity of Nature, and swerving from the best condition and state of body, which is the Sanguine; and finding by these Cha∣racters how Nature is defective, and which way declining: You ought so to order all your actions and customs, as may tend to the rectifying of this defi∣ciency, and be auxiliary for a reduction to the best state; at least prevent what may succeed worse, and stop the increase. And herein it will be no small advan∣tage, to know what is assisting and help∣ful to Nature in this case, and what is injurious. Meats agreeable and convenient for this condition of body, are such as be light and digest well, because the Sto∣machs ferment is not so acute; yet if the Stomach covets what is not of facil di∣gestion, let it be made savory and sea∣soned: And then a Phlegmatick raw stomach may better venter upon such. But Brawn, Pig, Goose, Duck, water-foul,
and such like, are not agreeable to a Phlegmatick Stomach: Also Eeles, fresh Herrings, Makerel, Lobster, fresh Salmon, Sturgeon, are injurious and difficult to be digested. But if you must please your pallate, drink Wine with these meats for a corrective. Let your dyet be warm Meats, oftner roast then boyled. Butter, Oyl, and Honey is good for you; Mustard, Salt and Spices are ne∣cessary for your use: especially with meats of slow digestion, and that a∣bound with much moisture, and are apt to clog the Stomach. Refuse Milk and Milk Meats, curd new Cheese, Butter-milk and Whey. Olives, Capers, Broom-buds, Sampire are good Sauce; also Garlick, Onions, Leeks in Broths, seasonings or Sauces, for a relish, but not raw. Refrain cold Hearbs and Sallads; as Lettice, Purslan, Violet-leaves, &c. ex∣cept Sorrel, which although cold, yet a sharpner of the appetite: but freely use Mint, Sage, Rosemary, Time, Mar∣jerome, Parsley, Penny-royal, and such hot Hearbs. Abstain from raw Fruits; Apples,
Pears, Plums, Cucumbers, Mellons, Pum∣pions, &c. But you eat may Wall-nuts, Filbirds, Almonds blanched, Ches-nuts, Fistick-nuts, Dates, Figs, Rasins. Drink strong Beer more frequently then small; and sometimes Sack. Not French Wine if you be Rheumatick. Indulge not yourself in lying long in Bed; or afternoon sleeps; and too much Rest and Ease: they dull the spi∣rits, increase flegm and superfluous moi∣sture. But frequent Exercise, and moderate abstinence in Meat and Drink; are great preservatives of your Health. Chuse a warm Air and dry Soil, re∣mote from Waters; the best place for your Abode. Hot Baths are profitable; seasonable and moderate Venus a friend: the for∣mer cherisheth the spirits, opens the pores for a transpiration and emission of superfluous moisture: the latter suffi∣tates and raiseth the spirits, alleviates na∣ture, and helps Concoction.
SECT. XIII. The Cholerick Constitution Regulated. THE Cholerick Person is more hot and dry than the Phlegmatick; ea∣ger and precipitate in action; froward, hasty and angry; lean of body and slender: the Veins big, a hard Pulse, and quick: of colour pale or swarthy; propense to waking and short sleeps; subject to Feavers, or febrile aestuation upon small occasions. That some bodies are in this state and condition, is apparent and certain: but whether by innate Principles so dis∣posed, or otherwise procured and ad∣ventitious; we will not controvert here: but shall proceed as granted, that a Diaetetick Regiment, well or ill mana∣ged, shall make this person or conditi∣on of body, better or worse. Where∣fore I advise such to these observati∣ons. Use a cool and moistning dyet; most
frequently boyled meats, rather than rost or baked; but fryed or broiled meats never. Eat Broths often made with cooling Hearbs; Rice-milk, Cock-broth, or Barly-broths with Rasins, Currants and Prunes. For flesh, chuse young tender and jucy; as young Beef, Veal, Mutton, Lamb, Kid, Pork, Green-geese, Turkie, Capon, Chickens, and such like. Observe fish dayes as good dyet: and then you may eat fresh Salmon, Lobster, fresh Herrings, Crabs, Prauns, fresh Cod, Thornback, Soles, Plaise, Whiting, Smelt, Oisters, Pike, Trout, Tench, and other fresh fish; Eeles not excepted which are unwholsome to o∣thers. But refrain salt Meats, and dryed; as Bacon, old Ling, Haberdine, salt Cod, pickled or red Herrings; pickled Sca∣lops, Oysters, Anchoves, Sturgeon, hand Beef, dryed Tongues, and such like. Milk and Milk meats are pleasant and good; as Custard, White-pots, new Cheese, fresh Cheese and Cream. For your Sauces use Verjuce, Sorrel,
Orange, Lemmon, Apples, Goosberries, Currans, Prunes, pickled Cucumbers: as boyled Veal and green-sauce; rost Veal and Orange; boyled Mutton with Verjuce and its own juce; rost Mutton and Cucumbers; green-Geese and Goos∣berries; Stubble Goose and Apples; Pig and Currants; Pork and green-sauce; boiled Chickens with Goosberries or Sorrel-sops; Calves feet stewed with Currans and Prunes: And your meat thus coock'd, is both food and Phy∣sick. Take a lawful freedom, and please your self with these fruits; Citrons, Pomegranats, Limes, Oranges, Lemmons, Quince, Pearmains, Pippins, Cherries, Mulberies, Grapes, Damsins, Bullaces, Prunellaes, Respass, Currans, Barberries, Strawberries: they cool and quench thirst, contemperate and aswage hot cholerick humours, and give a great re∣freshment to the parched spirits. Eat Sallads of Lettuce, Sorrel, Pur∣slane, Spinage, and Violet-leaves; they are medicamental aliment; but be spa∣ring in Mustard, Salt and Spices. Butter-milk, Whey and Sider allayes preternatural heat; checks the effre∣nation
of Choler, and are refreshing. Refuse the fat, and brown out-side of meat: also the crust of Bread: and be sparing in Butter and Oyl. Drink Wine, Spirits, and strong Li∣quors, but as Physick; to refresh and a∣sist a weak stomach, and not other∣wise. Fast not, but satisfie the Stomach when it vellicates and calls for meat; biting choller must have something to feed on, or it will disturbe the body. Cherish and indulge sleep, it cools and moistens; but let it not exceed in length, which puts Nature by her due times for necessary evacuations. Too eager and constant in study, or late sitting up: both exasperates this condition of body, and makes it worse. Use very gentle Exercise; be not laborious or toyling, but take your ease; avoid violent motion, for it fires the spi∣rits, and heats the body, which is very injurious to this Constitution. Frequent venus is most pernicious. Cold Baths is profitable, and refresh∣eth much; by cooling the blood, allay∣ing the spirits, and concentring them. Bannish anger immoderate care, pee∣vishness
and fretting, which discompo∣seth the spirits, heats and wasts them; augments Choller, dryes the body, and hastens old Age. Refrain Tobacco as a very injurious custom; it exasperates Choler by heat∣ing, drying, and evacuating dulcid Phlegm; which contemperates, bridles and checks the fury of acrid bilious hu∣mours. SECT. XIV. The Melancholy Constitution, Stated and Cautioned. BY Melancholy Constitution, I here understand such a condition of bo∣dy, as is procured, and most common∣ly is the consequent of habituated Me∣lancholy, or a melancholy heavy Soul, and a dyscrasied Spleen. To pass by the controversies that might arise here from the distinction of melancholly by the Galenists, as one of the four constituent humours: I shall take for granted on both sides, as well
Chymists as them; that the aforesaid causes do beget such a constitution or condition of body, as may well require a peculiar Diaetetick Regiment, as an al∣lay or mitigation of those preternatural Symptoms that necessarily follow such Causes: at least that they may not be aggravated by an injurious course of li∣ving. A melancholly, studious and sedentary life, does much abate and suspend the emanative vigour and activity of the Soul, equally distributed (geometricè) amongst the several faculties, as the spring of their motion and actions: from which abatement and depression of their power, the functions are not discharged so exactly and unblamably; but more or less, according to the agra∣vation or intention and remission of those Causes. Now as the Spleen is more e∣minently the seat of that passion; and commonly a part most apparently inju∣red, leading the rest into disorder: We shall appoint such a government, or prudent election and modification of such things comprised in the Diaetetick part of Physick; as may best sute with such a condition of body.
The melancholly splenetick person, whose digestive faculties are debilitated, must feed more tenderly and nicely than another; else that flatulency and oppression (which commonly does at∣tend this condition of body) will be a∣gravated and much more molesting: For by a gross and plentiful feeding, are those evils increased. Let not your common dyet be of such Meats as are hard and difficult to digest; that lie long upon the stomach, and require a strong incising ferment for separation and transmutation: as Meats long salted, dryed, fryed, or broyled, &c. but keep to such as are light and of facil digestion, that soon yeelds in fermentation, and is transmuted, without great labour and trouble. Meats thus distinguished, you will find set down in the 59, 60, and 61 pages preceding, where you may make election. If you have a hot and dry costive body, use Barley-broths, with Prunes, Rasins and Currans: and you may eat sometimes Pippins, Permains, Cherries, Respas, Straberries, and such like good fruits to cool and moisten. Take not a full meal at Supper, nor
late; but eat sparingly: And if that be too much, as may easily be discovered, then forbear Suppers wholly. Capers, Broom-buds and Sampire, are good Sauce; they please the Pallate, quicken the Appetite, open Obstructi∣ons and help Digestion: all which are profitable for this condition of body. Also Borrage, Bugloss, Endiue, Ci∣chory, Baum, Fumiterry, Mary-gold∣flowers, Violets, Clove-gilliflowers and Saffron, are of good use. Drink Sider sometimes, and small White-Wine; also Whey, if your sto∣mach agrees with it. Keep the body soluble; your Head will be more free from pains, fumes, and heaviness: Also the lower Region of the Body will not so freequently be disturbed with flatulent rumblings, dis∣tention and windy eruptions. Cherish Sleep; it refresheth the spi∣rits, pacifies a troubled mind, banisheth cares, and strengthens all the faculties: but tiresome waking in the night, is a great enemy to a melancholly per∣son. Fly Idleness, the Nurse of Melan∣cholly; but exercise often, and fol∣low
business, or recreations. Walk in the green Fields, Orchards, Gardens, Parks, by Rivers and variety of places. Change of Air is very good. Avoid solitariness, and keep merry Company. Be frequent at Musick, Sports and Games. Recreate the spirits with sweet, fra∣grant and delightful smells. Banish all passions as much as in you lies; fear, grief, dispare, revenge, de∣sire, jealousie, emulation, and such like. Opus est te Animo valere ut Corpore possis. Give not your self to much study, nor night-watchings; two great enemies to a melancholly person. Refrain Tobacco, though a seeming pleasant Companion; the phansie is pleased but for a short time; and the ill effects are durable.
SECT. XV. The various Dyscrasies or Passi∣ons of the Soul in general. MAN is made up of two grand Parts, Soul and Body: the one Active, ruling and governing; the other Passive, obeying and instrumental: The one hath its due Crasis, tranquility and placidness: The other due organization and fabrication: But both are subject to disorder, discomposure, and inapti∣tude, for the regular performance of their Actions and Offices. Great discoveries have been made of that Part of Man, which presents it self to the eye: We have viewed his Fabrick; and I may say exactly, Witness the excellent Anatomical pieces that are ex∣tant, wherein are discovered and laid open all the contrivances of this rare Machine: But the Spring that sets all on work; the intrinsick mover, the Soul, lies much in darkness, and acts as it were, behind the Curtain. Whose
deficiencies and aberrations are little ta∣ken notice of, except in the irregulari∣ties of passion; and then only in relati∣on to divine and moral rectitude: And therefore in our Physical Discourses, I find the Body to be accused of infirmi∣ty and failing throughout the Catalogue of Diseases; and that the indisposition of Organs to act, is the sole or main cause of the irregularity and deficiency of the Functions. And that the habi∣lity of the Soul to act ad extra, does depend wholly upon the capacity and aptitude of the instrumental parts. But I am otherwise perswaded to be∣lieve: That as there is great difference of Souls in divine and moral goodness; why not then in natural abilities and integrity, relating to health and sickness? And therefore it is very rational to as∣sert, that many defects or disorders in the Functions, and ruinous decayes of the Body, does arise and spring forth from the pravity and debility of the Soul by its lapsid nature: And that the first motions, ab intra, or emanations of the Soul, are and may be infirm and vi∣tious, when the Organs are in their re∣ctitude and aptitude for regular moti∣ons.
But to clear this out, and prose∣cute it to the full; I must ravel into the whole Doctrine de Anima, and assert contrary to the old Philosophy, (which will be found very erroneous) but that will take up a whole Tract, too big for this place; and must be the work of a∣nother time. Therefore I pass on. Passions of mind may be considered, either in relation to what is divine, mo∣ral, or natural. Passions respecting the two first, are either good or evil, as their object do's distinguish them: but in the latter they are ill, and produce bad effects, as they in degree are more or less turbulent, violent and durable. What concerns the Passions in the two former respects, is not our business in hand; but as they stand in relation to Health and Sickness; what disorders they produce in the regular oeconomy of the Body, how the Functions are depraved, debilitated or suspended by them is our task. The Diseases or Dyscrasies of the Soul most visible, are the perturbations and passions, wherein the Soul is put by her genuine state of placidness and serenity; and that aequanimous distri∣bution
of her energy into the Members and Parts of the Body, from thence disordered and disproportioned. Pas∣sions draws off the Soul from exercising and executing the functions of the Bo∣dy: For whereas the power of the Soul is equally or proportionably divided into all the faculties in her natural pla∣ced state and government: On the con∣trary, when Passion is predominant, much of that power is drawn away, and ex∣pended in the prosecution and support of this Passion. Passions puts the spirits upon several motions: sometimes contracts them, as in Grief, Fear, or Despare: Sometimes dilates them as in Joy, Love, and Desire: Sometimes drives them furiously, as in Anger: wherein also the humours are fluctuating sometimes this way, and sometimes that way; according to the nature of the Passion, which hath its peculiar motion and current. And as o∣ther Diseases have their Diagnostick Signs to distinguish them, and whereby they may be known: So likewise the Passions have their peculiar Characters of distinction; that it is not difficult to know under what passion a man labours.
We judge of other sicknesses very much by the Face, what alteration there: So by the Countenance we may know what Passion is predominant; each put∣ting on a different aspect, and present∣ing it self in another shape and visage. Passion in excess, although it be the perturbation and sickness of the mind; yet it is not confined there, but is com∣municated to the Body, which partakes and shares in the morbous effect. If the Mind be distempered and discom∣posed, the Body cannot continue in health. The Soul and Body are so in∣terwoven with each other, and conjunct in their Operations, that they act toge∣ther, enjoy and suffer together: They are so linked and conjoyned, as Part∣ners of each others ill and wellfare, that the one is not affected, but the other is drawn into consent; mutually act∣ing, enjoying and suffering until death. Hence it is, a diseased Body makes a heavy drooping mind; and a wounded, disturbed or restless mind, makes a youthful healthy body to decay and languish. Who therefore desires the health and wellfare of the body, must
procure Ease, Rest, and Tranquility of mind. , . That you may the better know, and rightly understand how passions of the mind, redound and reflect upon the body to the decay and ruine of it, and abbreviating mans life. First, Consider that the Body with∣out the Souls energy, is dead, and moves not at all: by vertue of the Souls con∣junction with it, and informing power; the Body acts with various motions and opperations; and according to the acti∣vity of the Soul, with organical aptitude and fitness of the Body, is the exqui∣siteness and perfection of their operati∣ons: The Soul then is Agent, the Body passive, receiving the influx virtue and power from the Soul, who is Rectrix and Gubernatrix, to whom the Rule and Government belongs. It is evi∣dent therefore, since the Body cannot act any thing of it self for its conserva∣tion, without the energy and assistance from the Soul, whose care is for the re∣gulating and moderating the Body in all actions external and internal; then the
distractions, inactivity, wandrings, and neglects of the Soul, does tend to the subversion of this due order and go∣vernment; and consequently the ruine and dissolution of the body, which re∣quires a constant supply of daily repa∣ration, and a regular tuition for its sup∣port and maintenance. Now the Soul transported by passion from its genuine Crasis of placidness and tranquility, and reduced into a turbulent, unquiet and distempered state; is that condition of incapacity and un∣fitness for government for the time be∣ing; and many damages arise thereby, as in each passion particularly hereafter will appear. In a threefold manner the Soul is put besides her self in the regularity of re∣ctory, and is incurious of the wellfare of the Body. First, The Soul is either carried a∣way by some delightful object; as for something vehemently desired; and deserting, as it were, the body to fol∣low after that thing desired and cove∣ted; extending her power and strength out of the body, to lay hold, if pos∣sibly to obtain, and bring within the
Sphere and Circle of her enjoyment, as in the Passion of Love. Or secondly, The Soul is in fury and disquieted within, by the appre∣hension of something assaulting and disturbing; to which the Soul hath a contrariety and antipathy against: as in the passions of Fear, Hatred, Revenge, Anger: And this disquietude and di∣sturbance is continued by representati∣ons of their causes in the phantasie; which still present themselves to the Soul, by way of a fresh assault, which feeds the Passion, and continues the Di∣stemper. Or thirdly, The Soul is languishing, heavy and inactive, altogether indispo∣sed to the government and tuition of the body; and perhaps desirous to be discharged and shake it off, being weary of the burthen; taking no delight in their partnership and society, as in me∣lancholly despair and grief. In all which cases you shall find the Body to suffer great prejudice and detriment. In the first Case: When the Soul ali∣enates her self, wanders away with a vehement desire to procure and obtain a∣ny thing most agreeable and delightful,
the Soul, as it were, contracts her self, and unites all her force; stands at full bent after this beloved; dischargeth all her thoughts upon it, and spends her strength in desire and longing; until at last she pines away with a tedious and starving expectation, if the beloved thing be not obtained. In the interim the oeconomy and government of her own mansion the Body is neglected; the spirits, which are accounted the Souls immediate Instruments in every Faculty, at least a considerable part, is inticed away, and called off from their proper and peculiar works and duty; perhaps to enlarge and increase the vigour of some other faculty, more immediately subservient and attending the Souls new design and business; preferred far be∣fore a good concoction, due excretion, nutrition, seasonable rest, or what else; and those spirits remaining which have the burthen of these duties incumbent on them, have so small and inconside∣rable support and supply of influence from the Soul, to direct and back them in their performance; that the functions are executed weakly and depravedly, to
the great prejudice and damage of the Body. Concoction now is not so good, nor the Appetite so quick; the stomach calls not for a new supply, as yet not being well discharged and quit of yesterdayes provision: the stomach now is weary of dressing and preparing long Dinners for the Body; Lenten and fasting dayes are its vacation from trouble. Separation now is not so good; the excrementitious and nutritious part walk hand in hand together, and pass with∣out contradiction or due examination: the watch now is not so strict at the Ports and privy passages, to discern what is fit to pass this way, and what the other, or what to reject and keep out; but promiscuously receive what presents it self. Distribution now is not so good; A∣liment tires by the way, wanting spirits to convey and bring it to its journeys end; and exercise to jog it on through the angust Meanders, and more difficult passages. Sanguification is now degenerated and vitiated; the preceding requisites
and fit praevious disposition in order thereto, being wanting. Membrification or Assimilation is now changed for a Cachectick and depraved habit. Excretion and Evacuation of what is superfluous and unfit longer to be re∣tained in the body; is not sent away in due time, but stayes for a Pass; the Governess is now taken up with other matters; neglects due orders and com∣mands to the expulsive faculty for their emission. All necessary and wholesome Customs are now neglected and disregarded: the Soul too oft is wandring and gad∣ding abroad, and best when she is ro∣ving from home; but neglects the air∣ing of her Cottage, and perfuming it with fresh aetherian breath. The Soul is now alwayes restless and disturbed; nor shall the Senses, her Attendants, take their due repose; but keeps an unquiet house at midnight. In the second Case: The regular and due order of government in the Body is subverted and changed; when the Soul in the forementioned passions, of Fear, Anger, Hatred, and Revenge; is di∣sturbed
and alarum'd by the assault, ap∣proach or appearance of some evil or injury: the Soul then summons the spi∣rits together, and commands them from their common duties; calls them to her aid and assistance, for security from danger, to repulse the violence offered, or revenge the injury; hurry∣ing them here and there, from one part to another in a tumultuous manner, if the assault be suddain and surprizing: sometimes inward to support the heart, to give courage and resolution, which by their suddain concourse and conflu∣ence to the Center, causeth great pal∣pitations, and almost suffocation: or else commanding them to the out-works; into the external parts, to repel the in∣vasion and violence of the evil present∣ing or approaching, or to revenge the quarrel: the Hands and Arms then re∣ceive a double or trebble strength; the Muscles being full and distended with agile spirits for their activity & strength in motion. The Eyes then are staring full, and stretch'd forth with a croud of inflamed spirits, darting forth their fu∣ry, and spending their strength upon the Adversary and Object of their trou∣ble.
The Tongue then is swelled with spirits and big words, that wanting a larger room for vent, tumbles out bro∣ken and imperfect speeches, and scarce can utter whole words. The Legs and Feet then have an Auxiliary supply, and double portion of spirits conveighed into their Nerves and Sinews, to increase their agility and strength, to come on or off. But in the mean time the Heart perhaps is almost fainting, so long be∣ing deprived of, and deserted by, those lively vigorous spirits, which did inha∣bit and quarter there for its Life-Guard, protection and support; but are now called off their Guard and common duties, imployed in Forreign Parts, commanded here and there as the emer∣gent occasions presents it self to the Go∣verness of this Microcosm. In the third case mentioned: the due order, government, and necessary exe∣cution of offices belonging to the well∣fare and maintenance of the body, and preservation of life, is neglected and weakly performed. When the Soul being darkned and overspread with a cloud of sadness, be∣takes her self to a sullen incurious re∣cumbency
and retiredness; willing to re∣sign up and cast off the government and tuition of the body; and as a bur∣then which she now delights not to bear about, begins to loose her hold, who before had embraced and clipt so close; suspending the virtue of her energy and vigorous emanations; acting faintly and coldly, those necessary mutual performances, without regard to their former friendship, or their future con∣junct preservation. The Body now be∣gins to sink with its own weight, and press towards the Earth the natural place from whence it came. That ae∣therian spirit which before had boyed it up, and took delight to sport it to and fro; is now ready to let it fall and grovel downwards, to leave it whether it must go. The wonted pleasures of their partnership and society, is now disgusted and rejected: Food now hath lost its relish, and is become unsavory: Sleep which before was pleasant, as a holy day in the fruition of rest and ease, is now composed of nothing but trou∣blesome unquiet dreams; linked toge∣ther with some fighting intervals, to measure out the weary night by. Ex∣ercise
and sporting Recreations is now accounted druggery and laborious toyl∣ing: unwilling is the Soul to move her yoak-fellow, farther then the enforcing Law of Nature, and necessity com∣mands and urgeth. Their joynt ope∣rations which before were duly and unanimously performed; are now ceas∣ed, abated or depraved, by the retracti∣on, reluctance and indisposed sadness of the Soul to act: the wonted vigorous emanations of the Soul, and her radi∣ant influence upon the spirits is now suspended, subducted and called back. These ministring attending Spirits and nimble Agents, which at a beck were alwayes ready, agile and active in the execution of her commands; now want Commands to stir, and Warrants to act by: but in a torpid and somnolent di∣sposition, unfit for action, and the ex∣quisite performance of their duties, and in a sympathizing complyance with the Soul, the excitrix and rectrix of their motions; are ready to resign their Of∣fices, and give over working; that what they now do, is faintly and re∣misly performed, with much deficien∣cy and depravation. When the Soul
is pleased and merry, the spirits dance and are chearful at their work; but when she droops and mourns, the spirits are dull, heavy and tired, the Functions weakly and insufficiently executed. From the preceding Discourse may easily be collected; that the Distempers and Alienations of the Soul from her genuine Crasis of serenety and quietude, is of great disadvantage to Health; for as much as the necessary Functions of the Body from hence are disorder∣ed and insufficiently performed; these perturbations also, impressing upon the Body various preternatural effects; forming the Ideas and Characters of Dis∣eases upon the spirits, are by them com∣municated, implanted and propagated in the body: likewise the morbifick Seeds, and secret Characters of Dis∣eases which lay dead and inactive; are by the oeconomical disturbance and per∣turbation of mind, awakened, moved, and stirred up to hostility and action, which otherwise would have layen dor∣mant: as by grief, fear, anger; hyste∣rical passions, swoonings, epilepsies, &c. are often procured: and it is evident, and commonly observed by infirm and
diseased people; how passion agravates and heightens their distempers; and according to the temper of their mind will their bodily infirmities be agrava∣ted or abated. I shall draw up this Discourse into three Corollaryes; being the Epitome of what hath been asserted and aimed at. 1. There is no perturbation or passi∣on of mind, whether little or great; but it works a real effect in the Body more or less, according to the nature and strength of the passion; and by how much the more suddain, great, often, and of longer duration the passion is, by so much are the impressions and effects worse, more durable and indeleable. You cannot be angry, or envious, or melancholly, or give way to any such passion, but you cherish and feed an e∣nemy that preys upon your life; and you may be assured that passion makes as great, nay greater alteration within the body, then the change of your countenance appears to outward view, which is not a little; although but a sha∣dow or reflection of the inward di∣stemper and disorder: And were it pos∣sible by any perspective to see the alte∣ration
and discomposure within made by a passionate troubled mind; the pro∣spect would be strange, and much dif∣ferent from that placidness and tranqui∣lity of an indisturbed quiet Soul. 2. Strong and vehement passions or affections of the mind too intent upon this or that object, whether desirable, and to be enjoyed, or formidable, and to be avoided; alienates, suspends and draws off the wonted vigour, influence, and preservative power of the Soul due to the body; whereby the functions and necessary operations are not duly and sufficiently performed, but intem∣pestively, remisly, and weakly: Nor is the dammage onely privative, but also introduceth and impresseth upon the spirits a morbifick Idea, which is ens re∣ale & seminale, producing this or that effect, according to the nature and pro∣perty of the Idea received, and apti∣tude of the recipient subject. Phansies and Idea's are let in naked, but they streight are invested and cloathed in the body, have a real existence, and are entia realia; though at first concep∣tion but entia rationis: as the longing of a pregnant Woman, being but the
Idea of a thing in her mind, begets va∣rious and real distemprs in her body, if not soon satisfied; and sometimes cha∣ractarized upon the Embryo in the Womb. Likewise a good stomach is taken off its meat suddenly, by the coming of some unwelcome bad news; the appetite is gone, now the Soul is disquieted, and the Body really affect∣ed and altered: Let this sad tydings be contradicted, and the Soul satisfied of the truth to the contrary; it sets a new impression upon the spirits, they strait are cheared, lively and active; the sto∣mach calls for meat and drink, and the faculties restored to their wonted ope∣rations. Whereby it appears, the two passions of joy and grief, as they are opposite in their objects, so are their ef∣fects wrought in the Body, as far distant and different. 3. A cogitative or contemplative per∣son to intent alwayes, or unseasonably employing the mind seriously and ea∣gerly either in real or fictious matters, fabricating Idea's upon the spirits; di∣sturbs and hinders other necessary offi∣ces and opperations conservative of be∣ing, enervates and weakens their per∣formance
in duty, impares Health, and hastens old Age: but those that live most incurious, and void of studious thoughts, too serious cogitations, and disqueting passions; preserve the strength of Nature, and integrity of all the Fa∣culties; protract the verdure and beauty of youth, much longer from declensi∣ons and decay: for by how much the rational faculty is over busie, disturbed and intempestively exercised; draw∣ing the full vigour of the Soul into the discharge of that faculty, and robbing other inferiour functions of their neces∣sary influential supply, and emanative power from the Soul; by so much the other faculties are impoverished and abated; their executions more languid and depraved: and therefore it is a close Students life, a careful or passionate mind, disposeth to, and introduceth many infirmities; enervates and debili∣tates nature, abbreviates and shortens her course.
SECT. XVI. Perturbations or Passions of the Soul particularly. Of Anger. THis Passion is a great Disease, if we consider the preternatural ef∣fects and alterations it maketh: for the functions of the body are disordered and discomposed by it, and the whole man changed from what he was. In giving judgement upon Diseases, so much worse is that person to be accounted, whose alteration is greater from what he was in a state of health; and as the fun∣ctions perverted are more in number, and superior in dignity. This Disease does not take up one particular part for its quarters; but it seaseth the whole Man. All the Facul∣ties are disordered, and every part is discomposed and disturbed. Take a
view of an angry Man; or rather a Man in the fury and perturbation of Anger: his Reason is supprest or suspended; he acts not rationally, but as a mad man: his face is changed; his eyes staires and sparkles; his Tongue stammers; his Heart pants; his Pulse beats high and quick; his Breath is almost gone; the Blood and all the Humours boyl; and the Spirits are agitated to and fro by gusts like an impetuous Wind; he trembles all over, and this storm shak∣eth the whole Fabrick of mans body. Surely this is a great Disease, that thus discomposeth, and puts the whole man out of frame and order: such storms as these do much weaken and enervate the ability of the Faculties; disorder their regular performance and dis∣charge of their Offices; but more espe∣cially infirm Parts are made sensible of the prejudice, and cholerick lean bo∣dies. An inflamation of any particular part is a great Disease; but Anger is an inflamation of the whole; and were this distemper to continue long, a man were in as much danger of life, as in the highest Feaver. Therefore take the Poets counsel.
Principiis obsta — — Ne frena animo permitte Calenti. Stat. Fear. Fear whether suddain and violently seazing, or gradually approaching and threatning an evil to come: both ener∣vate and debilitate Nature. Fear suddainly surprizing, chaseth the spirits to and fro from their residen∣cy and faculties, sometimes compressing and driving them to the heart, causing violent palpitations and suffocation: or scattering them from the Fountain of Life, into the external parts, making a dissolution almost to exanimation. Such frightful surprizes as these, are very dangerous, and seldom happen, but they leave some sad Characters and Impressions behind.Etiam fortes viri subitis terrentur. Tacit. Against this fear there is no remedy, having surprized and seized the Person before deliberati∣on can interpose to prevent it, or prepa∣ration made couragiously to meet, or valiantly to stand against this shock of terror. Fear that gives warning before the
evil comes: and threatens as yet afar off: that Soul which then yeelds up her courage and strength of resistance, is disarm'd by her own phansie, and van∣quished by her self: is conquered with nothing in Being, but with the fear of something that may be. The evil, al∣though to come, and possibly may be prevented and never come; yet it is made a present calamity: the suggesti∣ons being received, and the Soul sinks under them; make a pressure upon the Soul as really afflicting as the evil it self. Multos in summa pericula misit timor ipse mali. Luc. Such fears as these ought to be cha∣sed away, and manfully resisted; that which may be, is as far from us some∣times as that which never shall be. The fear of things that never come; are ten to those that come to pass. Quid juvat dolori suo occurrere? Satis citò dolebit cum venerit. Sen. As Anger swells the Soul, and thrusts forward the spirits into the exterior parts, to oppose and to revenge the ill: On the contrary, Fear makes the Soul to shrink, and the spirits to give
back. By this contraction of the Soul, her wonted vigorous emanations in all the faculties are suspended; whereby the functions of the Body are remisly and depravedly performed: the spirits retire inwards, the face grows pale, wan and thin; and the Soul pines and languisheth with the apprehension of a seeming future evil, and the prospect of a dubious impending fate. Plura sunt quae nos terrent quam quae premunt; & saepius opinione quam re la∣boramus. What if the evil threatned be too great for you to encounter with now: yet either your power may be enlarged before it comes; or that may be lessened and reduced within the compass of your ability to resist, and power to contend with. Quic quid humana ope majus est, Diis permitte curandum. Symach. Care. Care is a mixt passion, made up of Desire and Fear. There is in Care a desire of getting, and a fear of losing: the anxiety between these two, ener∣vates
and weakens the strength of the Soul: she spends her self in projection to acquire and get: and labours conti∣nually also under the fear of loss: ei∣ther of that already gotten, or of that which is in possibility, and likely to be obtained. Being thus disquieted, and alwayes in an unsatisfied condition; the Body is enfeebled and checkt from thriving: Meat and Drink will not nourish, if they be not changed duly, in the dige∣stions, and assimilated into the substance of the Body, by the energy of a vigo∣rous Soul, in a placid state of govern∣ment; not drawn off unseasonably and constantly, with perplexing thoughts. Alwayes plodding in mind is not good: if your purse gains and thrives by it; I am sure your body looseth and grows worse. The Poet's advice in this con∣dition is good sometimes, being dis∣creetly used. Nunc vino pellite curas. Hor. And another well admonisheth from perplexing your selves with future con∣trivances and provisions: Hodierna cura tantum; Qui cras futura novit? Anacr.
An indisturbed free mind, not loaded with the thoughts of many years to come, but bearing onely the burthen of the day; holds out much longer, and preserves the faculties in strength and vigour: but immoderate care, and a thoughtful life, wears out the faculties much sooner; tires the spirits by de∣nying them their due times for refresh∣ment, rest and ease; disables them from duty, and the true performance of their Offices; heats and wastes the spirits, and exsiccates the nutritious juces of the Body; which changeth a fresh counte∣nance into paleness; degenerates a good Constitution, and pines the Body: but most injurious to thin, lean, and cholerick Persons. Those too much thus addicted, and cumbred with care∣ful thoughts, may sometimes imitate this example for a Remedy. Nunc potemus laeti jucunda confabulantes; Quae vero post erunt, diis sint curae. Theog. Revenge, Jealousie, and Envy. These Diseases of the mind are as
painful Ulcers, continually lancinating, corroding or inflaming: they gnaw and eat like a Cancer; they take away the nourishment from food, and refresh∣ment from sleep: the anguish of these sores, render every thing unpleasant and unserviceable for the wellfare and support of the Body: so that these sick∣nesses of the mind, make the Body to pine and languish, introducing a secret Consumption, wasting the Spirits and nutritious moisture, and enfeebling all the faculties. Revenge (besides the trouble and disquietness of spirit) exposeth a man to a greater mischief,Multis  injuriis obiicit, dum una dolet. Sen. then what he hath received. Jealousie is a secret tormentor, that gauls the mind with continual suspition, and raiseth suggestions, that afflict the Soul with anxiety and restlesness. Envy is a Wolf in the Breast that must be satisfied, or it sucks the blood, and feeds upon the vitals. This Disease pines and starves a man in the midst of plenty: and he withers away in the Sun∣shine of anothers prosperity. Invidus alterius rebus marcescit opi∣mis. Hor.
These perturbations and Diseases of the mind, will not let the body thrive; for if that be sick, the Body cannot be in health. Love and Desire. These two, although they seldom go alone; and desire follows close at the heels of Love: yet they may be sepa∣rated and distinguished thus. Love is a delight, complacency and suteable∣ness with the thing loved. Desire, is the longing for, or stretch∣ing forth of the Soul to obtain, procure and bring into enjoyment. Desire gives wings to the Soul, and seemingly trans∣ports and brings her to the thing desi∣red: so that all her strength is spent in out-goings and stretchings forth to ob∣tain and joyn with the object of desire. —Quò non possum Corpore, mente feror. Ovid. Love and Desire, being inordinate and impetuous, seldom goes alone, but is attended with other Passions: as Hope, Fear, Melancholly, Despair, one or more for their consorts, with which the mind is racked and torn, and variously
affected as the several Passions acts their Parts by turns. Sometimes Love is bold and venturous; at another time cowardly and fearful: sometime hoping, and sometimes despairing; sometimes brisk, and sometimes sad and heavy. So that the Soul is tossed up and down, and filled with the disquietness of suc∣cessive mixt Passions, attending upon Love and Desire. Nor is the Soul onely disturbed and hurried away by this Passion of Desire; but the Body also is restless and unquiet: going from one place to another; be∣ing not satisfied Here, turns away, ho∣ping to find more content There. Desire is very sollicitous and troublesom, and importunate at unseasonable times; so that the bed does not give rest and quiet sleeps, but is tossing and turning there from side to side: and when up, cannot stand still, or sit still; this thorny de∣sire is alwayes spurring on from one place to another; but which way to take, this giddy Passion cannot well re∣solve: notwithstanding these perplexi∣ties, the doubts and difficulties of ob∣taining, the Soul is led away with an ig∣nis fatuus of fervent zeal; deserts her
own mansion, the Body, and follows af∣ter with an eager prosecution of enjoy∣ing; never at home but as a Prisoner; and Prisoners are but bad house-keep∣ers: the body needs must languish and decay, when the Soul thus delights and strives to run away. By the continuance of these Passions interfering and complicating with each other; the regular oeconomy and tuition of the Body is neglected; that decayes, grows lean and consumptive: the face grows pale, the appetite abates, and sleep departs, or is but short and inter∣rupted with troublesome dreams and wakings: the vigour and strength of the faculties is spent in desiring, and by the disquietness of the other attending Passions. For a remedy and check to the impe∣tuousness of this inordinate affection and immoderate desire; take these conside∣rations to calm, allay, and regulate your passion. First, That you cheat your self in setting too high a price upon the object of your affections, and lay out more in ex∣pectation then the income of your desire obtained can possibly make a return:
that it is far greater in non habendo, then it will be in fruendo; it will be much less when you have, then it seems to be now you have it not. Secondly, That the Delirium and fer∣vency of your desire, does not hasten the accomplishment of your aymes, but rather retards or frustrates: for the extremity and strength of passion debi∣litates and suppresseth Reason, the chief contriver and manager of your design; puts you upon inconsiderate, immature and rash attempts; and makes you more unfit, incapable, and unable to ef∣fect your purpose; for Passion is always spurring, but Reason hath its stops and pauses, keeps due times for onsets and progress. Thirdly, That prudent and vigorous action; not innane hungry volition, or thirsty desire, though ever so great, can acquire the satisfaction of your hopes. Fourthly, That the ardency & heighth of desire, will not imbetter, sweeten, or add to the heighth of your enjoyment, but rather abate and lessen it in your ac∣count and esteem: for what thing soe∣ver you purchase, and are mistaken and deceived in, you will not value at that
rate you first prized it, but at the worth you now find it. Vehement and lofty desires screw you up to such a heighth of expectation, mountain high; but you must descend into fruition, that's low as the valley; and when you find your self in a bottom, and your Sails not so filled and puft out, as formerly by the fresh gailes and blasts of a strong desire; your top-fails then begin to flap and flag when you come in to the still calm of fruition, and your lofty spirits and high thoughts will lower amain when you Anchor in the Harbour of Enjoyment: for in appearance it was great, when at a distance seemingly; but now you are come nearer, it is much less and inconsi∣derable really;Non ea jam mens res haben∣ti, quae de∣sideranti erat. and what swelled you full in the prosecution of attaining; will not fill you now with satisfaction, but prove aery when you grasp it, and soon emptied in enjoyment. Fifthly, That statutum est, it is ap∣pointed you must, or you must not obtain the thing desired; which to a rational creature, is sufficient without other Ar∣guments, to qualifie, moderate and blunt the keen edge of desire, and curb the vi∣olence of an impetuous affection: but
not to cowardise, daunt or stop a laudible active prosecution, to attain a noble, ver∣tuous and lawful end, with a moderate submisive desire. —quisquis in primo obstitit Repulitque amorem, tutus ac victor fuit. Sen. Qui blandiendo dulce nutrivit malum, Serò recusat ferre quod subiit jugum. Melancholly, Grief and Despair. These Passions being neer alied, we may rank them together, as the Compa∣nions and Attendants upon adversity and misfortunes: whose properties are to rob and steal away from the Soul, that viva∣cious enlivening power, which roborates and quickens all the faculties in the Bo∣dy. When these Passions are predomi∣nant, the energy of the Soul is abated, and all the functions insufficiently, weak∣ly and depravedly performed. A dark Cloud of Melancholly over∣spreading the Soul; suffocates & choaks the Spirits, retards their motion and agi∣lity, darkens their purity and light: these instruments in each faculty being thus disabled, their offices in every part of
the body are faintly executed, whereby the whole body decayes and languisheth: witness the common symptoms of a dejected sad condition: a pale thin face, heavy dead eyes, a slow weak pulse, loss of appetite, weakness, faintness, rest∣lesness; a weight or compression about the region of the heart, with continual sighing or palpitation: these are the ef∣fects wrought in the Body, by Melan∣cholly and Grief, which are to be avoid∣ed as great decayers of Nature, and great enemies to Beauty, Health, and Strength. Hope, Joy and Mirth. But embrace and cherish these, as the sup∣ports of your life; which raiseth the Soul to the highest pitch, and stretcheth forth her power to the utmost. These enlivening affections are the greatest friends to, & preservatives of health and strength. In this serene state of the Soul, all her endowments and abilities are advanced, both rational, sensitive and natural: the plea∣santness and delight of the Soul puts the spi∣rits upon activity, and excites them to a vigo∣rous operation and duty in all the functions: preserves youth and beauty, makes the body fresh, plump, and fat, by expanding the spirits into the external parts, and conveighing nutri∣ment to repair and replenish the utmost bor∣ders and confines of the Microcosm. — dum fata sinunt vivite laeti. Sen. FINIS.
