M2507 12171331 55404
THE CHARACTERS OR POURTRAICTS OF Th Pr COURT OF FRNCE: Wherein is described Th Ki, the Princes, the Generals, and the prin∣cipal Ministers of State, &c. Written Originally in French. LONDON: Printed by J for Thomas Palmer, at the Crown in Westminster-hall. 1668.
TO THE Reader. THe French Nation be∣ing at present the most considerable A∣ctors upon the great Theatre of the World, their Vast Designes and Notable Progress having made them become the chief Subjects of most mens daily Discourse; I thought it not amiss, until a more perfect Rela∣tion comes to our hands, to give in short the Names and Characters of the principal Persons, drawn by  Country-man of their own, and aithfully copied in this Rough-draught, where you will finde a brief account of that King, those
Princes, Generals and States-men who are now so acti and eager in the pursuit of Conquests. If this be received with any kindness, I may perhaps draw aside the cur∣tain, shew the Scenes, and accu∣rately describe the precedent and following Champagnes, with all the Contrivances, Turns, Counter∣turns, and Windings up of every Act as they shall succeed; which how it will conclude, is the enqui∣ry, concern, and expectation of all Europe, amongst whom our Interest is not so little, but we ought to inform our selves of all the Particulars: to which if this contribute in the least, I have my Ends. Farewel.
A Catalogue of books lately Printed, and are to be sold by Thomas Palmer, at the signe of the Crown in Westminster-hall. 1668. 1. THe Characters and Pourtraicts of the present Court of France: describing the King, Princes, Ministers of State, and others, in 8. 2. Rome exactly described: or, a Re∣lation of the state of the Court of Rome, made at the late Council of Pre∣gadi, in two curious Discourses: by the most Excellent, the Lord Angelo Corrare, Ambassadour from the most Serene Re∣publique of Venice to Pope Alexander 7. Translated out of scalian by John Bul∣teel Gent. in large 8. 3. Spare minutes: or, Resolved Medi∣tations, and Premedicated Resolutions, by Arthur Warwick, in 24.
4. The Essays and Counsels, Civil and Moral: whereunto is newly added A Fable of the Colours of Good and Evil: by the Right Honourable Sir Fr. Bacon, Lord Verulam, Viscount S. Alban, in large 12. 5. Flagelum, or the Life and death of O. Cromwel, from his Birth to his Burial. With an exact Account of his Policies and Successes: with a Discovery of his private and publike actions, not till now made publike. Impartially written by James Heath Gent. in large 8. 6. The English Rogue described, in the Life of Meriton Latroon a Witty Extra∣vagant: being a Compleat Discovery of the most eminent Cheats of both Sexes: in large 8. 7. Cupids Courtship: or, the Celebra∣tion of a Marriage between the Godd of Love and Psyche, in a Poem, by the same ingenious Author, in 8. 8. Venus Cabinet unlocked, and Na∣tures chief Miracles and Rarities laid open: being a Curious Collection out of the two eminent Physicians, Levinus Lemnius, and Sinibaldus, and others: made English by Rob. Miller M. D. in 12.
9. The compleat Sollicitor: perform∣ing his duty, and teaching his Clyent to run through his own Business, as well in his Majesties superior Courts at West∣minster, as in the Mayors Court, Court of Hustings, Court of Marshalsey, and other inferiour Courts both in the City of London and elsewhere: the like not formerly extant: written by R. T. Gent. in 80. 10. The first & second Part of Coun∣sel and Advice to Builders, for the choice of their Surveyors, Clerks of their Works, Bricklayers, Masons, Carpen∣ters, &c. With several Letters to his sa∣cred Majesty, his Royal Highness, Prince Rupert, Duke of Albemarle, and other Lords, Knights and Gentlemen of the Realm, concerning the three chief Principles of Magnificent Building, viz. Solidity, Conveniency, and Ornament. Written by Sir Balthazar Gerbier Don∣nilly, Knight, in 8. A Work very neces∣sary for all those that are concerned in rebuilding the citie of London.
11. Don Juan Lamberto: or, a Comi∣cal History of our late Times: wherein the Contrivances of the late Rebels un∣der their Names are Jovially discovered, and to the life displayed: in two parts. By John Philips Gent. in 4. 12. The Royal Game of the Ombre, written at the request of divers Honou∣rable persons, by R. F. Esq in 8. At the same Shop also, any per∣sons may have Histories, Ro∣mances, Plays, or other Books, lent them to read; or any that have Books to sell, may there have Money for them.
THE Characters and Pourtraicts OF THE COURT OF FRANCE. FOr the better understand∣ing of the Affairs and In∣terests of
France, it is fit to know those persons that Govern, and such as are any thing considerable, either for their Offices or Quality; And therefore we shall begin with the
Characters of those that are most Eminent and Illustrious. To which shall be added their several Offices and Functions. We will distinguish the Order of the Kings Council, and the several Employments in the War. And lastly, treat cursori∣ly of the Revenues whereby all these subsist.
THE Character or Pourtraict OF THE KING, And all His Preeminences.
THe Most Christian King is the Eldest Son of the Christian Church, by the consent of the States of Christendom, and the acknow∣ledgement of the very Infidels themselves, who in their Treaties between Henry the IV, and the Grand Signior, gave him the Title of the greatest Monarch of the Christian Faith; really Soveraign, Absolute, and Immortal in his own Kingdom of France. The succession is by a Natural Right, and by ver∣tue of the Salique Law, which con∣veys it from Male to Male, as they are nearest in Blood, to the exclu∣sion of the Females, who have ever contented themselves with the Ho∣nour of being Dames of France, and submitted to the Kings will there∣in; from whom they receive such advantages as he is willing to be∣stow, according to the greatness of his Dignity, and the interest of his Power. Childebert the First of the first Race, was preferred before the Daughters of Lewis the II, without any opposition against that Election. Philip the IV. of Valois was preferred before Isabella Daughter of France, and Queen of England. Lewis the XII. after Charles the VIII. Francis the First next to him, and Henry the IV. af∣ter Henry the III.
The present King is the Son and Successor to Lewis the XIII, Grand∣son of Henry the IV, descended from Anthony of Burbon King of Navarre, and from Robert of Cler∣mont, fourth Son of Lewis the IX. All his Genealogy derives from Hugh Capet, the first King of the third Race. He is of so handsome a shape and mine, that Don Juan of Austria seeing him pass by with∣out any attendance, and the Queen having said to him, Do you know that this is the King of France? Replyed, Although I am yet unac∣quainted with him, yet Madam I was perswaded in mind that he de∣served that quality, looking upon him as the best accomplish'd Frenchman, and most worthy to Reign over them.
He will be sole Master, and can∣not endure to be governed by any other; he is bold, haughty, and fearless; speaks but little, and well to purpose; constant in his resolu∣tions, very secret and judicious. The Portugal Ambassadour told him once, Sir, I shall dispatch this business with your Ministers. I have no Ministers, Sir, replied the King, you mean our inferiour Offi∣cers. At their return from Lions, the Cardinals having set some per∣sons aside, for whom the King had a particular esteem, he said in the presence of several of his Gentle∣men, who have often affirmed it to me, The Cardinal does all what he pleases, and I suffer it, because of the good services he has rendred me; but my turn will come to be Master one day.
He covets to imitate his Grand∣father, nay, even to surpass him, as himself once testified to Monsieur de Paris, who was discoursing of it: The King my Grandfather did many great things, and has left ma∣ny great things to do; if it please God to let me live twenty years lon∣ger, I may, perhaps, do as great, if not greater things then he. There was never any Prince that knew better how to make himself be re∣spected then this, nor to keep eve∣ry one within his duty and distance; all which he effects without any noise, or the least appearance of clamour. I have also been a wit∣ness of his patience, upon a trial which would have lost it self in any other person. One afternoon at Fountainbleau he had given order to his Coachman to have his Ca∣lesche there about four a clock, to go a hunting; the whole Court was in a readiness for the sport, and it had struck four a long while be∣fore by the Clock, yet the Kin Coach came not. The King him∣self came often to the Balcone to
look for him: but it was on the stroke of five before the Coach ap∣peared. The King going into the Calesche, said, Coachman, I told you I would have the Coach at four a Clock. Sir, replied the man, who had, it may be, tipled the time a∣way, It is but four now. The King, who knew the contrary, said no more, but, Drive along, that's your best way, and never commit the like agen. It is averred, that he par∣dons the first offence; severely re∣proves the second; but at third he turns them away without re∣mission. He requires an inviolable execution of all his Orders: when he had given command to seize on Monsieur Fouquet, at his coming forth from the Council,
Monsieur at Artagnan by accident miss'd him, for he had not taken his own Se∣dan, but retired in another into a little Alley, to give Audience to some certain people. Monsieur d'Artagnan very much surprized, and fearing Monsieur Fouquet might have some intelligence of the de∣sign, and make a secret escape, im∣mediately sent a Musquettier to give the King notice he was not to be found. The King was then wri∣ting a Letter about the detection of the said Treasurer to the Queen-Mother at that time at Fountain∣bleau; and the Souldier having told him the news, without naming any body, Go, said the King, and tell Artagnan that he must be found! and I shall find him well enough! And then turning himself towards the Prince,
'Tis Fouquet, Cousen, that I intend to seize upon, because be withholds all my Revenues, and puts me to a thousand troubles to get a little money of him, of which he never gives me any account. The Prince, and all the other Lords were much astonished at this, they knowing nothing of it; but every one commended the con∣duct and resolution of his Ma∣jesty.
He is very temperate, and was never known to give himself over to the least excess, amidst the abun∣dance of his delights and pleasures, no more then he does to his anger, for all his Power and Authority; which plainly shews he is a perfect Master over himself, not tainted with any passion that might eclipse his other excellent Qualities: Or if there be any Objection against him, it is his Frugality; but that is inherent to the Family of the Bur∣bons, who have ever been noted for great heapers up of Riches. But this reproach he hath wiped off ve∣ry judiciously, by saying publick∣ly, My Subjects will, I hope, con∣sider me as a young married man, who is about setling his Family, and ought to take care of furnishing himself plentifully; but within a while they shall find the effects of it; for I have a regard to them as well as to my self. He understands all his Exercises to the best advantage, especially the Mathematicks, and the Art of Fortification. There is no Officer can command his Troops so di∣stinctly, and with so much sweet∣ness. He rides the Great Horse ve∣ry gracefully and skilfully; and can use any Weapon with as much dexterity as any Master of those Sciences. He Dances admirably; and though he wear sometimes a disguize, yet his Majestick Garb and Ayr does soon discover him. He laughs but seldom, and with much moderation; and the Jest must be very witty and well placed to gain his approbation, however o∣thers esteem it.
In fine, it must needs be acknow∣ledged, that this Great King hath all the Vertues and Qualifications necessary to command so vast a Kingdom as his is: nay, so eminent∣ly is he endued with them, that he is worthy of the whole Worlds Em∣pire, there being nothing wanting towards it, but his being fully known to all Nations, who with∣out doubt would be charmed by his incomparable Vertues, and wil∣lingly submit themselves to the mildest and best-regulated Empire that was ever yet known to this Great Universe.
Of the Kings Family. THe wise Solomon upon his first advancement to his Fa∣thers Crown, built him a House, such as the Scripture represents to us of so marvellous a Structure, that it invited the Queen of Sheba to come and admire both its great∣ness and glory: and of this puis∣sant King of Lillies, under the Con∣duct of an Illustrious Woman, one who is worthy of the Title of Mo∣ther of the greatest Monarch in the World, I think we may say the same, if not more, who Reigns at present with so much splendour, through the Care and Noble Im∣pressions of that Regent who gui∣ded him during his minority, and hath seated him on the Throne with
so much Pomp and Majesty, after she had bestowed an universal Peace. The stately building of the Louvre continued with so much heat, besides the admirable Stru∣cture of a thousand other Royal and Publick Buildings; the Iustre of the Throne sustained with so much Judgement; the admirable Conduct in the establishment and reglement of the Royal Family; the present re-union of the Princes; the general Peace, which spreads a joy over all the Earth: In fine, the august and glorious presence of Lewis the Gift of God, hath not only attracted a High-born and Wise Queen to come and admire his Greatness; but likewise tempts the greatest and noblest part of all Europe besides to behold him, whom Fame hath noised all abroad. All these, I say, are Subjects suffi∣cient to be compared to all the Wonders of Antiquity, and to make us repeat that passage in Scripture, Verily I say unto you, That Solo∣mon in all his glory was never equal to this Triumphant Monarch. The Design or Model of the Louvre is to make four spacious Courts, where six thousand men may be drawn up in
Battalia: and besides the regu∣larity of the Buildings, and their ingenious Architecture, which is supposed shall surpass all that the height of Art or Greatness hath yet produced in the rest of the World; They are contriving Apartments convenient and sufficient to lodge the whole Royal Family, besides all the Principal Officers of the Crown. Thus the Grandeur and Magnificence of the Court will be more conspicuous in such an As∣semblage, then now as it is divided. In the mean while, till that Work be compleated, I shall trace out a slight draught of it, for the bene∣fit of such as desire the knowledge of it. This numerous and pompous Train belonging to his Majesty, may be comprehended under these three Heads: The multiplicity of the Princes, or such as the necessary Offices require, or those whom for his Majesties pleasure and for the Ornament of the Court are con∣stantly attending. Those that are most fixed, like some brighter Stars still following the Sun, are the Queen, the Princes of the Blood, and some other forraign Princes, who prefer the Honour of being under this Empire, above the Com∣mand of other Dominions, or the subjection of other Monarchs: and so highly do our Princes value their condition, though but Subjects in this Court, that those of the Blood Royal never did, nor ever will give
precedency to any other Subject Prince on Earth, nor to any of his Ambassadours, only to a So∣veraign when present. We have a Cloud of Examples, and one very fresh, between Mon∣sieur and the Duke of Savoy, to whom his Royal Highness would not give the right hand, even when he came to his own Lodg∣ings; which absolutely hindred the interview betwixt those two Princes. It is true, that Monsieur yielded to an Equality with the Prince of Denmark; but it was in respect of the infallible pretences he hath to be king of his Native Country, which is reckoned a
Soveraignty. But this must be noted, that he would not however yield to any more then an Equali∣ty; and for this cause they never came together. This preeminence of the Princes of the Blood shines brighter now, after the long contest betwixt the Princes of the House of Lorraine and ours, which but a few days since was setled after this manner. During the former Reigns of Henry the II, Charles the IX, and Henry the III, the House of Guise had acquired so much cre∣dit in the Court of France, that besides that they were become the absolute Masters of all Affairs under the Regency of Catharine of Medices, they had flatter'd themselves with some pretensions to the Crown; a certain Canon of Verdun published in a Printed Book of his, that they were de∣scended from Charles of Lorrain, who was deprived by the Estates of the right of Succession to the Crown of France, and Hugh Ca∣pett was substituted in his stead. And though this Genealogy was false, as divers Authors have de∣monstrated,
in clearing out their descent from the Counts of
Alsa∣tia; Nevertheless the Guises, who were very potent in the Kingdom, made use of this advantage: for the necessity of affairs, and the fear of their Authority, having obliged Henry the III. to conde∣scend that the Princes of the Blood should yield the right hand to the Chief of the house of Lorrain, and that the younger Sons of the House of Lorrain should in the same manner give the upper hand to the Princes of the Blood of France; Our Princes have ne∣ver observed this order, but op∣posed it very vigorously, till such time as the King by full Power and Authority, and knowing the Justice of their Cause, hath ordai∣ned, That ever hereafter, all the Lorrain Princes, and even the Head of that Family, should give place to the Princes of the Blood; and to this purpose he sent an Order by Monsieur Tellier to Mon∣sieur de Guise, who is here the Chief or Head of that Family, to go and give a visit to the Prince, and to give place to him upon all occasions, yea, even in his own House; and to observe the very same towards all the rest of the Princes of the Blood: Which or∣der was immediately executed by Monsieur de Guise, and afterwards by all the rest of that Family. There was another contest of Precedency between Strangers, or Forraign Princes, and the Dukes and Pairs. These preten∣ded a Right as well as the Princes of the Blood, to go before for∣raign Princes, especially at great Solemnities, where they pretend to represent Soveraign Persons by vertue of their Dignities, which
are undoubtedly the first and highest in the Kingdom. 'Tis true, they have heretofore been Sove∣raigns, and yet always Subjects or Vassals to the King, being ob∣liged to render homage for what they held of the Crown. Their rise is attributed to Hugh Capett; for that Prince, to make himself King, agreed to bestow his Dutchies and Pairies to those great Lords who were most able to oppose him in his advance∣ment to the Throne. This made them so potent, that having once declared to the Duke of Aqui∣taine, that he could not approve of his intents of making War up∣on the Duke of Anjou, and the Duke little regarding his resent∣ment, the King bidding some body ask him, Who it was had made him Duke of Aquitain? He replied with much haughtiness,
Those that made him King. And although they are now perfectly submitted to Regal Authority, yet they are careful of preserving the remainders of their Grandeur towards forraign Princes; where∣upon many of them would not appear at the entrance of the King and Queen into Paris after their Marriage, because the Count de Soissons, of the House of Savoy, would not yield them the prece∣dency and rank they claim in all Royal Ceremonies, by vertue of their Dignities. But what great∣ness soever these Nobles of France do attribute to themselves, yet there are others that do contend with them for precedency, and go already in equal rank, having no less Authority in the Kingdom then they. Our Kings, to maintain an equal poise and temperament in the State, have always equally considered Valour and Justice, and for this respect have made Gentlemen of the Robe, as well as of the Sword, having allowed them the same priviledges, ad∣vantages and immunities, without any distinction; it being indubi∣table, that a State consists equal∣ly of Power and Justice: the Sword-men however have still attributed something of preemi∣nence to themselves; but those of the long Robe, have wisely taken the Superiority on their parts, of which they do not vaunt, though in effect they dispose ab∣solutely of the Estates, Lives and Honour of the other, by an Au∣thority of the Crown, wherewith they shelter themselves, sitting upon the Royal Lillies, as Judges of the greatest Peers and Princes of the Blood, who are bound to stand to their Sentence, and come in at their Summons, to an∣swer for themselves. I remem∣ber an Example during the last troubles, in the person of Mon∣sieur the Prince; they had given him some cause to apprehend he might be again confined, though but newly out of Prison; which occasioned his retreat to S. Maur. The Parliament deputed two Counsellors to go to this Prince, and invite him to come and shew the Reasons for his retiremens, to the Parliament. He comes accom∣panied with his Royal Highness, the Prince of Conty, the Princes of Nemours, Guise, and other Lords that assembled themselves. There the first President addressing his Speech to the Prince, boldly re∣prov'd him for withdrawing him∣self tumultuously from
Paris, and told him, That he would make him responsable for all the disorders that should happen, those actions of his being but like the Alarms to a Civil War, during the Kings Minority; it being well known at Court, that he kept Secret Intelli∣gence with the Kings Enemies, and caused several places to be forti∣fied, amongst which Bellegarde was one. To which the Prince re∣plied, with as much heat,
That if any disorders did happen in the Kingdom, themselves would be the only causers of it; to which they had already given birth. That for his part, he detested the designe of any such disturbance in his Soul; and for the correspondence they mentioned he held with the Enemy, it was false; nor could they pro∣duce the least Witness against him; there being as little verity also in what they alledged touch∣ing Bellegarde, which they parti∣cularly objected; concerning which, he vow'd and protested both to his Royal Highness and the Court, that there had not been one shovel full of Earth removed to any such in∣tent. Upon which the first Presi∣dent with as much confidence as he began, resumed his Speech, and told him, That indeed his words were good and plausible, but yet many times mens words and in∣tentions look contrary ways, as his were suspected to do; and then proceeded to reprove him in these terms: It is very laudable to see the Prince of Conde keep within his Palace in the Fauxburgh Saint Germaines, and not vouchsafe to go over the new Bridge to wait up∣on the King his Lord and Master. This looks like an intrenching and barricading ones self on the other side of the River against the Louvre; and what will strangers say, Sir, when they hear of such proceedings of the Prince of Conde
towards the King? The Prince re∣plied again as smartly as at the beginning: That his Royal High∣ness had given him caution not to do it, and would not undertake for the security of his person, the Cardinal Mazarine ruling still in the hearts of the Court, where his Enemies were yet the strongest par∣ty, and threatned him with a se∣cond imprisonment. But that he still must attribute all the disor∣ders and disturbances that might happen, to their negligence, unless they would acquaint the King and Queen with his just Reasons, and most humble Remonstrances. This contest betwixt the Presidents and the Dukes and Pairs of France for Precedency, hath been of late started up more then ever, upon some accidents hapning in a gene∣ral Procession. One of these last Holydays, the President de Mesmes Footmen, being the more nume∣rous, took place of the Duke of
Brisac's, upon which there en∣sued a great quarrel and debate; but the Duke's were in fine con∣strained to yield to the number and strength of the others; upon which the Duke's preferred their complaints, with a great deal of heat, having demanded for Ju∣stice against them; each of them made their own defence, and the Duke's have newly produced their Manifesto, and presented it to the King to have a decision of it. It is said that his Majesty goes in person the next week to the Parliament for this end, and to give order to the Chancellour to collect first the Votes of the Dukes and Pairs before those of the Pre∣sidents. But others that are very clear-sighted, do believe that the business will be thus accommoda∣ted; That the Presidents shall have precedency in the Parlia∣ment, but shall any where else give it to all Dukes and Pairs, especially at Extraordinary Cere∣monies, and Triumphant Showes, where the Sword seems to claim a Right above the long Robe. Of this we expect the Issue.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of the QUEEN-MOTHER. ANna Maria Mauritia of Au∣stria, Daughter of Philip the III. King of Spain, was married to Lewis the XIII. King of France and Navarre. The Marshall d' Ancre made up this match, and carried the King to Bourdeaux to that end, whilest an Army lay amusing the Princes of the League in Champagne. She was married many years before she had any children, but at length she brought forth this King, and Monsieur on∣ly,
having never had any Daugh∣ters, or other Children then these two. After the death of Lewis the XIII, she was declared
Queen Regent, and made use of the coun∣sel and administration of Cardi∣nal Mazarine, during the time of her Regency and the Kings mino∣rity. The beginning of his Mi∣nistery was both peaceable, and happy enough: for, to gain the amity and good will of the great ones, he shewed the Kings fa∣vours upon them with an open hand indifferently, being conten∣ted to engage them to be of his party, that they should share with him in his Masters Grace and Au∣thority. He endeavoured like∣wise at first to strengthen himself with some considerable Alliance; and to this purpose he sent for some of his Nephews and Nieces, and other Relations, whom he caused to be bred up at Court af∣ter the French Mode and Air, up∣on the hopes of future Grandeur. But we shall mention this Minister in a Chapter apart, which shall describe both his Person and Con∣duct. The Queen-Mother is a good and vertuous Princess, of a paci∣fique spirit, and an exemplary Piety. She wants neither for re∣solution nor conduct in great af∣fairs, nor for good will towards the publick Interest. Her great courage was apparent during the troubles of her Regency: when she resolved to make use of her power against Paris, and asked the Prince upon his return from the battail, Will you suffer them to affront the Regal Authority? (meaning the business of the Bar∣ricadoes, when they would abso∣lutely have
Monsieur Broussel re∣leased leased upon their popular insur∣rection) This violence concerns you, continued she. To whom the Prince replied, Madam, be∣hold, this Sword of mine is ever at his Majesties service, which you may absolutely command. She shewed also a great deal of reso∣lution in her enterprize upon the Princes, whom she caused to be seized on by her Captain of the Guards; but her undaunted spi∣rit appeared most eminently after the Cardinals absence, when she took the Helme of the State into her own hands, and steering all affairs during that hideous tem∣pest, causing the King to be de∣clared in his Majority, after she had driven the Prince into Guy∣enne, and confined the Cardinal de Retz, who had been flattered with the hopes of being chief Mi∣nister. In a word, she appeared
to be, what she really was, that is to say, good natur'd, and pacifick in her heart, when she forgave her enemies, without the smallest re∣sentment of any injury; and stood for Peace in despite of the Cardinals intentions, even so far as to command him to make it up for the general good of all Chri∣stendom. She is Magnificent without excess, and glories in her Birth and Alliance. Her Devo∣tion is more then common, and often repeated, yet without affectation or severity. Her Vertue appears without any dis∣guize, she taking pleasure to do good in the best manner, thereby to attract the World to follow her vertuous Examples. Shee caused the Val de Grace to be built for her retreat, as a holy Solitude, whither she goes to seek her God out of the noise of the Court, and the confusion of State-Employments. She is very Cha∣ritable to the poor Convents, to whom she allows a comfortable subsistence; that so they may follow their Devotions and Stu∣dies, with their harmless Recre∣ations. She hath always endea∣voured to nourish a happy Union and Correspondence in the Royal Family; and by her vertue main∣tained her self as Mother to the King of France with so much discretion, that she yet retains a great Authority with a potent King, and a Noble Prince, who do each of them honour her most entirely. She made the match be∣twixt the King and the Daughter of Spain, whose Father is her Bro∣ther; having setled them in per∣fect Amity, to the great content of their Subjects, and the joy of all Christendom. She shewed a great deal of moderation amidst that power and plenty she was Mistress of; in an Age so corrupt and greedy of gain, that nothing is sufficient to glut the desires of most people. She alone never heaped up any Treasure, but rest∣ed content with what Nature, Ju∣stice, and her Quality brought freely to her Store.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of MONSIEƲR. HE is the Kings only Brother; a Prince well shaped, good natured, and very Gallant: he is not, however, so Majestick as the King; hath not that full stock of generous bounty, solidity, and haughty bravery. He is mild, a∣greeable, civil and obliging; very complaisant to the Ladies, always gay and active, curious of rarities, and nice in his Habits and Modes, in his Furnitures and Cabinets, and very perfect in the Orna∣ments
belonging to Architecture, the Art: of Musick, Perspective and Agriculture. Though this Prince hath ever shewed an exact submission to all the Kings com∣mands, and preserved an extreme respect for the Queen-Mother, yet he could never be brought to favour Cardinal Mazarine. For it is reported, that the Cardinal one day at St. Germains passed by him, and pulled off his Hat by way of salutation; he one∣ly cast an eye upon him, but moved not at all, not so much as to take notice of his civility, or return the ceremony. The Car∣dinal going immediately to the Queens apartment, complained o∣penly to her, saying,
I do not know what I have done to Monsieur, that he should treat me with so much scorn; I thought he had a better e∣steem of me, having never given him any occasion to treat me so. The Queen-Mother having sent for Monsieur, made him a thou∣sand reproaches for it, and threat∣ned him with some kinde of in∣dignation, for not rising up to the Cardinal: To which Monsieur at the instant replyed, Though he had been the Pope, I should not have risen to him. He was threatned to be chastised for saying so; but he explained it very handsome∣ly, telling them, One doth not use to rise up to the Pope, but fall down upon ones knees before him, which I should then have been obliged to do. He ever shewed himself a∣verse to that Ministers proceed∣ings, chiefly because he did not give him enough to maintain his Family, and his other divertise∣ments in that splendor and magni∣ficence as he desired, and as in∣deed was requisite to his quality of the Kings Brother. He was bred up with a great deal of fear and respect towards the King, with∣out much application to learning, or knowledge in the Art of War; yet he did sometimes ride the great Horse, but not with so much assiduity as the King. He hath a marvelous ready wit to make reparties: a mongst others, let this show his ability, it being some∣what remarkable. The King took him one day to visit the Buildings at the
Lonvre, before Monsieur Fouquet's dis∣grace; and complaining, That he wanted money to continue that vast Structure; Monsieur replyed very aptly, Sir, your Majesty must onely take upon you to be Super in∣tendent of your revenues for one year, and you will have enough to carry on your Building. He loves peace and quietness, seldom di∣sturbing sturbing himself with the tumult and trade of War; yet he hath kept his Majesty company, and endured all the fatigues of a long voyage, without trouble or com∣plaint. Before his Marriage he had a great deal of friendship for Madam de Hourdon; and the Queen, to make some discovery of his minde, told him once, That it seemed to her he was in love with that Lady, having sent her a pair of Pendants worth four thousand Crowns for a New-years gift. To which he answered, That for friendship and compassion, he had indeed some towards her, as being a poor stranger far from her own Country, and destitute of means; which were indeed the treasons why he sent her that Regalio.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of the PRINCE. PRince Lewis Son of Henry of Bourbon, descended from Lewis Prince of Conde, younger Brother of Henry the IV. is one of the most couragious and stout∣est Captains either of this or for∣mer Ages, not excepting either
Alexander or Gustavus Adolphus; being so fearless of any peril or danger, that it hath been some∣times judged he was rather de∣sperate then valiant. The Mar∣shal Gassion, who was one of the bravest men of his time, was de∣ceived in him: the Prince, to con∣vince him of his error, thought it sufficient to let him know by ex∣perience, that no danger could in any attaque shake his great Soul. At the Battel of Rocroy, where this Prince made his first Essay, he never shewed the least appre∣hension, although the beginning of it were very disadvantagious to his party, and himself threat∣ned with a general defeat; but he bestirred himself with so much cagerness, and rallied up his broken and flying Regiments with so much courage and heat, and good example, that he made all the French at last resolve ei∣ther to vanquish, or die with him. The Baron de Syrop, one of the best resolved men in his Army, did second him extraordinarily well in this sight, and justly merited a Marshals Staff for that eminent service; but he missed that due recompence, and all other advan∣tages since, rather by misfortune then any want of desert: that days actions having proclaimed his worth to all the world. Be∣sides the battle of Rocroy, which was both his maiden-attempt and Master-piece; He hath gained three other Victories, two in Ger∣many, at Fribourgh and Nordlin∣gen: He also took Philips bourgh in eighteen days, which had with∣stood a Royal Seige for eighteen months, and saved it self from the prosperous valour of the Great Gustavus. The last battle he won was that of Lens; the joy and triumph for which Victory was si∣lenced by the disorder of the Bar∣ricado's, where the whole King∣dom was in confusion, most peo∣ple in Arms, and the Kings Palace
almost besieged; all which up∣roar happened about Monsieur Bronstet, a Counsellor in Parlia∣ment, who had been that day arrested upon his vigorous pro∣ceedings on some points in the behalf of the people. The Pari∣sians in this action plainly violated all Authority through their obsti∣nacy, obliging the Ministers to surrender up the Prisoner, with two others who were taken with him; and in this great heat of theirs, they remained three whole days and nights in Arms; nor would they be appeased till he was restored, whom they called the Protector of the People, and had brought him back with tri∣umph and general acclamations in the Kings own Coach.
The Prince employed all his courage to revenge this seditious act; and his resolve being fixt to besiege the City, he went out thence in the night with the whole Court, leaving those that remain∣ed in a horrible consternation; but after much ado, things being brought to an accommodation, the Court returned to Paris; and the fruits of all the Princes labours came to this, that he drew the ge∣neral odium and hatred of the Citizens upon himself, by his be∣ing so forward and busie to en∣deavour their chastisement. How∣ever, the Prince having served the Court so faithfully on all oc∣casions, thought he had reason to expect some considerable recom∣pence; and being obliging, active, and restless, he after pressed the Cardinal, in favour of some of his relations, for some Command or Office. The Cardinal thinking to re∣move him from any vicinity to
the Court, presents him with the Government of Guienne in lieu of that of Burgundy; which the Prince readily gave way to, as well because it is more honoura∣ble, as because he hoped to keep the better correspondence and intelligence with the Sieur de Marsin, Lieutenant-General in Catalonia, who was his Crea∣ture.
But this not being enough to secure him from the private at∣tempts of Enemies, they assaulted his Coachon the Pont-Neuf in disguise, shot into it, and wound∣ed a Page, who then sat in the Princes Seat. The Prince made a narrow and diligent search after these Assasines; and some jea∣lousies there were of Monsieur de Beaufort, and the Cardinal de Retz: but whilst he was laying an Ambuscade to intrap some of the Accomplies, he never imagined they had pitched their Toils to take him, and conduct him to the Bois de Vincennes, whither he was led Prisoner by his Majesties Or∣der. Never did so great a heart so patiently submit to confine∣ment: himself directed the best way to that place, which he had found out upon an occasion of carrying some Guns thither, du∣ring the troubles at Paris, which could not be, drawn the other way, by reason of the deepness of it.
About thirteen months after∣wards he was released, upon occa∣sion of the Intrigue between the Cardinal de Retz and the Parlia∣ment: a Letter which he writ with a Back-lead-pen, and which was signed by the Prince of Conti and the Duke of Longueville his Brothers, and companions in his restraint, being presented to the Parliament, to whom it was di∣rected, did very much contribute to his release. He hath ever since been very jealous of the Cardi∣nal, and rather adventured to withdraw himself into Flanders, then to fall again into his hands. But although he ever was his E∣nemy, yet he never spake any ill of him; only he would sometimes let his friends know he did not approve of his Conduct. He was saying once, That there were three persons in France that made much noise; one was the Marshal of Turenne, who was the best and most prudent Captain of those times, but yet very unfortunate. Another, the Cardinal Mazarine, who was the ablest in the World for Counsel, but the greatest coward alive. The last was himself, who had nei∣ther of those two perfections, but
yet was much happier then either of them He is now returned to his duty, and yields his obedience with so much submission and ad∣herence, that it is easily judged, he had no quarrel with his Ma∣ster, but all his discontent arose from Cardinal Mazarine, with whom he was again presently re∣conciled. He is Brave, Generous, Learned, and Active as any man alive, nor does he want discreti∣on when occasions call for it. At present he is very intent about the Oeconomy of his Family, enquiring into all the minutest concernes thereof; and having made so great an Alliance betwixt his on∣ly Son, and a Princess of the Pa∣latine House, his chief care is to heap up Treasure sufficient for the maintenance of so Illustrious Persons.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of the DUKE. HE is a young Prince not at all wanting of that Courage and Spirit of his Ancestors; he is Prompt and Active, and keeps an absolute Authority over all those that are submitted to him: yet hath he Allay enough to temper his heat, and do all things with prudence and circumspecti∣on. He delights much in hunt∣ing, even to the discomposing himself sometimes, as he did at Fountainbleau. He hath been a
hard Student, and speaks divers Languages. He hates great Ce∣remonies, and tedious Discourses; and gives quick dispatch to those that address themselves to him about business. He promises ve∣ry much for the future, and hath both Heart and Capacity enough to imitate his Fathers exploits of Warre. It is said that he hath some hopes and pretences to the Crown of Poland. Certain it is, that he is the adopted Son of the King and Queen of that Coun∣try, as having espoused that Queens Niece. He does every thing very gracefully, and with∣out any affectation. He takes the upper hand of his Father, for what reason I know not, though some attribute it to a paternal Humility and Goodness, which I most encline to; as others say
that it arises from the considera∣tion of his Nobility, which aug∣ments the more, by how much it is the older and more distant from its Origine: others imagine it is only for his Fathers convenience, who thinks that place in the Coach less easie, holding this Maxime, That it is the Person gives the Dignity to the Place, not the Place to the Person; as may be observed in the Queen-Mother, who ever rides in the fore-part of the Coach. His knowledge is great in Poetry, he taking a de∣light to read and remember things that are exquisite in that kind. Every ordinary divertisement does not relish with him, but there must be something more then common in them to gaine his approbation. He answers any Philosophical Question with a great deal of Wit and Judgment;
and would please himself very much with a Magnificent Train, stately Balls and Masques, and all other splendid appearances, if his Father did not moderate his inclinations a little, and reform his expences to the just measure of Decency, and the quality of his Illustrious Birth.
THE Character or Pourtraict OF THE Prince of CONTY. HE is mild, good natur'd, and accomplished in all excellent Qualities. He is very Learned in all the Sciences, and hath been admired in the most celebrated Academy for his great Wit, and capacity in the knowledge of the highest points of Theology: but be∣sides his Titles and excellent Qualities, he is Master of a very great stock of Bounty and Ver∣tue. His life is a fit Exemplar for the best Courts, and makes
good the possibility of being a ve∣ry great Lord, and a very honest man.
His Lady is a most vertuous Princess, who agrees admirably well with him in his Zeal and Pie∣ty; and had the Cardinal brought no other benefit to France, but the bestowing of so rare a person on us, who is so Noble and Cha∣ritable to the World, he would deserve our eternal thanks and praises, since by her means, Mil∣lions of our lives have been pre∣served during the Famine; be∣sides the many Souls she hath sa∣ved by her frequent Prayers and eminent Examples; insomuch, as this Prince and Princess are the true patterns of Piety, amidst the Pomp and Bravery of this Age. I shall not mention the Beauty of this Woman; for though she be of an excelling Shape, yet that is the least of her perfections, she being infinitely good and wise, chari∣table and discreet, and in a word, a complete Model of Christian Perfection. There is a worthy Branch of the Noble Stock, who is called Monsieur le Comte, who is as yet too young to shew the World the advantages he is like to derive from such a worthy Birth. All that is yet observed, i his ravishing prettiness, and such a Physiognomy as promises he will hereafter keep up the Fame and Reputation of his Illustrious Pa∣rents.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of Mademoiselle de Montpensier. MAdemoiselle de Montpensier the elder is of the house Bourbon, both by Father and Mo∣ther. Gaston the Son of France, yonger brother to Lewis the XIII, was her Father; and Mary de Mont∣pensier, his first wife, derived her Birth from
Henry Duke of Mont∣pensier; and that Henry from a third Son of the house of Bourbon, whose direct line failed at the death of the Constable, & revived again in Charles the Second Son of that Family: the third Son having begotten the Prince de la Roche, Suryon, and the Duke of Montpensier, from whom Mary the Mother of Mademoiselle was de∣scended. The Princess being of the blood of Kings and Princes, is haughty, daring, and of a more then feminine courage. It may be truely said, she is an Amazon, and fitter to manage the Sword then a Distaff, which she made ap∣parent at the business of St. An∣thonies, where the Princes fortunes being desperate, and her Father not daring to appear, to save the Prince of Conde's party, who were at the brink of destruction; She went to the Town-hall, and took the Provost of the Mer∣chants and the Governor of
Pa∣ris by the Beards, using great threats, to oblige them to arm and raise the Citizens for the de∣fence of the Prince; from whence she went to her Father, his Royal Highness, in his Palace, whom she in a manner constrained to go with her to the Bastille, that so his presence might support the staggering forces: and all that rising of the Citizens, (an enter∣prize too rugged and daring for that foster Sex, especially against a Royal Army, and in presence of their Majesties) was an action hardly to be excused, but upon the consideration of the rashness of a woman, the Kings minority, and the general aversion at that time against Cardinal Mazarine. For she commanded them to fire their Cannon upon the Kings Ar∣my, and facilitated the Princes retreat, opening the City-Gates to him; which saved both him and his whole party from evi∣dent ruine. She is passionate, re∣solute and active, free in dis∣course, and endures not to be contradicted in her opinions. She never cared for the Kings, nor her Fathers Minsters, because that o∣bliged her to some condescenti∣on towards them. She had for∣merly some thoughts of marrying the Arch-Duke Leopold of Au∣stria without the Kings consent, which obliged his Majesty to have a Guard attending her, and to secure all the passages into
Flan∣ders, lest she should throw her self into his Arms, who then made War against France. It is said she otherwhile refused the King of Englands courtship, during his mis∣fortunes; which is a fault of youth, not to be repaired. I hold it some∣what difficult to believe that her great heart could submit it self to any mans commands, how po∣tent and noble soever he might be. She is the richest Princess in Europe: for she enjoys above eight hundred thousand Livres revenue in Lands yearly. She is of a very tall and handsome proportion, of a Masculine aspect, a confident and free garb and pace, a majestick presence, and yet a pleasing and graceful con∣versation. Her humour is some∣what impatient, sprightly, and forward to undertake whatever she designs; and being a stranger to any kind of dissimulation, speaking her minde freely with∣out disguise, not caring who li∣stens. It is thought they appre∣hended at Court, that she would express some discontent, by rea∣son of the Marriage of her youn∣ger Sisters before her, who were by another Mother; or else up∣on some resentment written or spoken, she was commanded to withdraw her self from the Court to her own Estate, where she remains in a great deal of free∣dom and liberty, and not with∣out much hopes of being sud∣denly recalled to Court, where some advantagious propositions are on foot for a fit match for her, but with what Monarch is not so well known.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of the House of Vendosme. THe Duke of Vendosme, na∣med Caesar of Bourbon, is the natural Son of Henry the IV, and the Marchioness of Estree, called the beauteous Gabriele. The ex∣cessive tenderness which the King his Father had for this La∣dy, and for this Son, had almost caused his legitimation by a Mar∣riage, which the King had given his promise for, in favour of that Mistress; which promise in writing Monsieur de Rosny tore in pieces
in her presence, as Monsieur de Sully mentions in his Memoires. He does very much resemble that great Prince his Father; is well shaped, and of a good meen. He is something jovial, and hath wit enough; but above these, he is really good natured, mild, and ex∣traordinary affable. He was a long while absent from Court with his Family, in the late Kings days; but since this Mans Reign, he re∣turned again with all the honour due to his birth and quality; nay, his Majesty conferred the office of high Admiral upon him, which is one of the highest in the King∣dom, and hath bestowed the re∣version upon Monsieur de Beaufort the youngest of his Sons, inso∣much that he is now higher at Court then ever; his age and ex∣perience making him capable of that great imployment, which he
executes with all the conduct and advantage required, especially by the assistance and activity of his Son. The Duke of Mercoeur is his eldest Son, who marryed one of Cardinal
Mazarines Neeces: which match was kept secret; but in fine, she being great with Child, they were compelled to a discove∣ry: there had been some propo∣sitions for this alliance before, which the Prince seemed to dis∣sent from, for the interest of the Family; but the riddle being re∣solv'd, there was no more with∣standing it: the Cardinal having plaid the surer Game, fearing some opposition might arise. This Prince is very free and open∣hearted, facile, and one that loves his divertisements; he minds not much the Court-intrigues, but being Governour of Provence, he passes his time very contented∣ly, without that noise or magni∣ficence natural to his Family. The Duke of Beaufort is a mild hum∣ble Prince, and civil even beneath his quality. He was in raillery called Roy des Halles during the troubles, because he was beloved and followed by all the populace, to whom he never refused to pull off his Hat. He is accomplish'd and well proportioned, very fair, and rides a Horse excellently; they say he is the best Marks-man with a Pistol in France. He had a sad occasion to try his skill, af∣ter the sight at St. Anthonies, up∣on the Person of Mr. de Nemours his Brother-in-law, whom he kill∣ed upon the place, though against his will and inclination, which tends another way: some youth∣ful rashness precipitated Monsieur de Nemours to that duel, where
Beaufort was engaged of necessity to defend himself: after the un∣happy shot, he betook himself to the Convent of the Chartreux with an inexpressible grief. The survivance of the Admiralty is bestowed upon him, in which quality he commands his Maje∣sties Fleet at Sea, against the Bar∣bary Pirates of Tunis and Algier.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of the Duke of GƲISE. THere are none I suppose that are ignorant of the grandeur of this family under the last reigns, their elevation under Henry the II, their increase under Charles the IX; to whom they became jea∣lous, as well for the good meen, as their Magnificence; and in fine, their prodigious authority under Henry the III, who was obliged, for the security of his Crown, to secure the head of this Family at
Blois, together with his Brother the Cardinal. The Duke of Guise his Son was propounded to be King of France by the Spani∣ards, during the League against Henry the IV, after his escape out of the Castle of Tours where the King held him priso∣ner. But the Duke of Mayenne looking upon him as a younger Brother of his Family, would not endure the proposition, ins;o∣much as their division served to the advancement of the Kings af∣fairs, who pardoned him for that rebellion, according to his usual clemency, and advanced, him to the Govenament of Pro∣vence.
Monsieur de Guise is at present the onely remaining branch of that Family; he retains very many of his Ancestors worthy qualities, and especially their Magnificence, which is as it were natural to him. He is one of the greatest Gallants in the Court, and in his youthful days was very amorous; he loved the Princess of Nevers, the Queen of Polands Sister, with a most vio∣lent passion. He married the Countess of Bossum, one of the beautifullest Ladies of Flanders; and being afterwards passionate∣ly enamoured with Madame du Pont, he went to
Rome to annul his first Marriage, that he might tye a new knot with this last. She kept an absolute correspondence with him, so that her love to him was as great as his to her. But be∣ing unable to obtain his desires of the Pope, he took occasion to go to Naples, where all was in confu∣sion, by reason of Thomas Anielo's revolt: At his arrival he became very considerable amongst the peo∣ple of that great City; and flat∣tering himself with the hopes of making a Conquest of it for the King, provided they would suc∣cour him from France, he added in his Letter, written to that pur∣pose, That he desired no other re∣compence for that glorious Ex∣pedition, but onely to have Madam du Pont. Whereupon the Cardi∣nal judging this passion and ex∣pression a sign of weakness in him; and being unwilling to hazard so many men upon so vain an at∣tempt, left him to himself; so that being taken Prisoner by the Spaniards, and carried into their Country, he was freed again du∣ring the troubles in Guienne, at the Request of the Prince, thinking thereby to gain him to his own party; but the King having dispatched Monsieur de Verderonne to release him, he
came directly to Court, without so much as once waiting on the Prince, to whom he was obliged for moving the business first; which occasioned the Court to take some notice of it, and after∣wards obtain his liberty. Since that time he hath sold and wasted most of his estate upon a new de∣sign on Naples, and the Idea's of conquering a Kingom. Without doubt he hath a great soul; but being unlimited, he hath wasted the Estate of the whole Family: whereupon Madam de Guise (speaking once to the Queen-Mother) said, That the Dukes of Guise had formerly amassed so much Riches, that they were become jealous and terrible, but there was now an Heir able to destroy and squander all away again, so that there would be no cause of fear and apprehension of their great ness hereafter. He is well shap'd, obliging, mild, civil, amorous; he speaks exactly, and writes good verse, having some knowledge of whatever is exquisite. He hath as it were, a natural faculty in riding and managing a great Horse, and behaves himself more gracefully then any man at the running at the Ring, or any kind of Turnament. He is infinitely delighted with those noble exer∣cises, which he undertakes with more happiness then any Querry in France. There are likewise in France some younger Brothers of the House of Lorraine; amongst o∣thers, the Count of
Harcourt, frank, haughty, valiant, as he hath shewed himself in several oc∣casions, especially before Turin against the Marquis D'Eguux, who had invited the Ladies of that City to see him make a breakfast of the French, where himself was soundly beaten by this Count of Harcourt, who had not above seven thousand men against fifteen thousand. He al∣so performed some things that seem to be above all belief at the taking the Isses of St. Marguerit, and St. Honorat, with a very small force, contrary to the Worlds expectation. He made War likewise in Catalonia, but not so succes∣fully, being forced in his Tren∣ches before Lerida. He under∣took, and effected above hopes, the conducting of the Princes of the blood, Conde, Conty and Longueville, Prisoners to Havre de Grace. He hath the Office of Grand Escuyer of
France, and the Count of Ar∣magnac his Son hath the re∣version version; and it is said, old and tyred as he is, he yet de∣sires the King would imploy him in his service, that he may dye no otherwhere but in the Field, the Bed of Ho∣nour.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of the House of Longueville. THe Count De St. Paul ought to have been ranged before the Duke of Guise; but because of the Kings Declaration in favor of the House of Lorrain, that they shall go next to the Princes of the Blood of France, I observe that Method, though it be yet but in
Idea, and against which, this Prince hath made his Protestati∣on; which for my part I shall not interest my self in, but leave it wholly to his Majesties decision. And truly his Family, although descended from John Count de Dunois, a natural Son of the Duke of Orleans, hath been de∣clared capable of succeeding to the Crown, having assisted the Pucelle of Orleans more then any one in regaining the Kingdome from the English, who had usur∣ped it in the time of Charles the VII. He is the Son of Henry of
Orleans lately deceased, who hath left him Heir of much Wealth, and more Vertues; he being a Prince of the greatest hopes in the World. He is a ve∣ry graceful Person, of much Wit, Courage and Learning; a great lover of Arts and Sciences, Ver∣tuous, and in sine, one that pro∣mises to be nothing less then his great Ancestor, who rendred this Kingdom such eminent and ex∣traordinary services. But he is yet only learning his Exercises, which he begins to perform with that dexterity, that the world ad∣mires him. His eldest Brother is become a Jesuite, and hath left him sole Heir of the richest Fami∣ly amongst the Princes.
THE Character or Pourtraict OF THE New House of Soissons. HE who at present bears the Title of the Count of Sois∣sons, is the youngest Son of the decased Prince Thomas of Savoy, and the Princess of Carignan, Daughter of the true House of Soissons. He is well shap'd, mild, and civil; and is, as it were, the eldest of the Family, his eldest Brother being both deaf and dumb. He married one of Cardi∣nal Mazarines Nieces, by which means he got very much in favor.
He enjoys the Command of Colo∣nel of the Swissers, which is one of the handsomest imployments about the Court. Besides this, he is Governour of Champagne and Brie, and in a word, is one of the best setled Princes in the whole Kingdom. He was in disgrace some years since for attempting to draw his Sword upon the Duke of Novailles, in behalf of his Wife, who contended with the Dukes Lady about the Priviledge of giving the Queen her Napkin; but he is now restored again, and more then ever respected by his Majesty.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of the House of Courtenay. THis Family, though very il∣lustrious, and indeed de∣scended from the Kings of France, is very low at present; and un∣less the King out of his meet bounty be pleased to raise them again, they must be contented to remain as they are, the Relicks of a Princely House, with onely the bare title of Nobility.
There are yet extant of this Family a Father and Son, called Princes of Courtenay; and a Knight of Malta, a younger Sprigg of them. Nothing is more true, then that they were of the Royal stock, having lost their right of Succes∣sion by their own default and negligence, having mis-allied themselves, and changed their Coat of the Arms of France, which they should ever have pre∣served, as an infallible mark of their Original. Thus have they deprived themselves voluntarily of a great advantage; and accord∣ing to Law, Volenti non sit Injuria. They remain still in obscurity, though they have many times en∣deavoured to raise themselves a∣gain, and restore their Family to its wonted quality and splen∣dour.
There are other Lords who take upon them the title of Princes, as the Princes of Bouillon, or Sedan, De la Rochefaucalt, De Marsillac, De Tarante; amongst whom, the most considerable for his great exploits, is the Marshal Turenne, younger Son of the Fa∣mily of Bouillon. He is a person of great conduct, and admirable judgement; prudent in the midst of Battles, and fearless in dan∣gers and perils: and though he hath not always had the success he deserved; yet in the opinion of brave Warriours, he is esteemed one of the greatest Captains this Age affords. He was ever most fortunate when he commanded for the King, as may be observed by the taking of
Stenay, his re∣lieving of Arras, and the gaining of the most important places in Flanders, before the conclusion of the last peace: On the contrary, at the Battle of Rhetel, he lost a great number of men, and had like to have been taken Priso∣ner himself. He married the Daughter of the deceased Mar∣shal de la Force, by whom he hath no Issue. He hath no defect, but that of his Religion, founded upon a false Maxime, That a man ought to dye in that Reli∣gion he was born in; which ought not to be maintained, but in the true Church. He is a man of Faith, and of his word, in respect of the world; and glories in this, that he never failed of his pro∣mise to any one; which begets a great deal of credit and assu∣rance towards him. There is likewise the Marshal Gramond, Soveraign of
Bidache, who is one of the ablest Coun∣sellours about the Court, and one that wants not for any cou∣rage at a time of need. He o∣beys Authority and Command as it were blindfold, and is ac∣cused for giving Battle at Ho∣nincourt against all appearance of success: but when this rash∣ness was objected against him, he answered, That he had a writ∣ten Order from the Cardinal Ri∣chelieu, who then had the sole command; and this was when the King was at Perpignan, and the Cardinal, as it were, in dis∣grace; who to re-establish him∣self in his former power, and get an opportunity to revenge himself of those Enemies that had brought him to that condition, by the means of his Royal Highness, and monsieur de St. Mare, he designed to give the King this considerable Chocque, being then at a great distance from
Paris and the Frontiers of Flanders; which succeeded just as he design∣ed it: for the King being surprized at this sudden blow, and imagi∣ning all was lost, said aloud, Alas! then shall I not return to Paris! for they had apprehensi∣ons for that great City, destitute of any Forces, and too far from any relief against a victorious Army. But Monsieur de Noyers taking his time, replyed, Sir, there is none but the Cardinal that can ward this fatal blow. Whereup∣on the King immediately sent for him, and restored all power and commands to him, enjoyning him to provide for the safety of the Nation, and take a just revenge of his opposers, who were imme∣diately seized, and Monsieur de St. Mare and Monsieur de Thou exe∣cuted at Lyons a while after, as guilty of Treason against his Ma∣jesty, in the person of his chief Minister of State.
THE Character or Pourtraict OF THE Cardinal de Retz.
THis Cardinal is the Son of the General of the Gallies, by name Father Gondy, Priest of the Oratory. And the reason which moved him to take a Religious Habit was this; having informed the King of somewhat, he quoted Monsieur de Liancourt for his Au∣thor: the King having sent for Monsieur de Liancourt to know the truth, he flatly denied that he had mentioned any such thing to Monsieur de Gondy. This affront of giving him the lye, should have succeeded to a Duel; but resign∣ing his resentment and satisfa∣ction to God in favour of his friend, he resolved to quit the Court, and indeed the World, and retire himself to those Fathers of the Oratory. His Son at that time Abbot of St. Berigre was elected Coadjutor to the Arch-Bishop of Paris his Uncle. During the Troubles, he made himself fa∣mous under that quality, having raised a Regiment for the Parisi∣ans, which at Court was in a scof∣fing way called the Corinthian Band, from his being entituled to that Arch-Bishoprick of Corinth, In partibus insidelium. He obli∣ged the Court to make him a Cardinal, even against their Wills; for the Cardinal
Maza∣rine being otherwise unable to break that Party called Les Fron∣deurs, whereof he was Chief, re∣solved to frustrate him of the Car∣dinals Cap, and deluded him; and therefore upon their dissol∣ving that League framed against him, he had the grant of the Kings nomination of him for a Cardinal∣ship; but another Express was immediately dispatched after his Messenger, to oppose his Promo∣tion at Rome, which he somewhat doubted of; and having given his Kinsman, the Bailly Gondy, Se∣cretary of State to the Great Duke of Florence, notice of it, he set all his Friends, and all the En∣gines imaginable on work to ad∣vance his Family by this means; and having at the same time cau∣sed Mazarines Messenger to be way-laid in his passage, he was stopp'd while they carried on their design at Rome, where they obliged the Pope to call an extra∣ordinary
Assembly, to expedite the business: So that having elu∣ded the Cardinals crafty design by this handsome subtilty, he grew very much fuspected at Court, where they believed him capable of great undertakings. Cardinal Mazarine became both jealous and afraid of him, and therefore to ensnare him, he was flattered with the hopes of being made a Minister of State, to which the Queen-Mother seemed to en∣cline. This extraordinary favour having swell'd his thoughts, he imagined he might attain it, and went to Court, accompanied with his Guards, attending the Queen with great exactness. In the end, staying there one day at Dinner∣time, the Queen bid him go to dinner himself; but he waiting till the Queens Fruit was served in, and then taking his leave with great respect, and having had some good words from her Maje∣sty, he was seized on upon the Stair by a Captain of the Guards, who commanded him in the Kings name, to go into a Room, where they had a Dinner provi∣ded for him; after which he was carried to Vincennes, and there transported to Nants Castle, be∣ing committed to the Custody of the Marshal de Milleray.
He made his escape from that Prison, and riding post to save himself, fell, and put his Arm out of joynt. There were some sent after him; but having caused some of his Gentlemen to continue riding in the ordinary Road, he deceived those that pursued him, and kept himself concealed in a Barn, which he afterwards for∣sook, and travelled in By-ways. He went out of the Kingdom the neerest way, and retired himself in St. Sebastians Port, which is under the Spaniards Dominion. The Governour having heard of his arrival, sent notice to the King his Master; and according to Order, came and visited the Cardinal
de Retz, and offered him 7000 Pistols. The Cardinal refused them, telling him, he would receive money from none but the King his own Master; and all he craved of the King of Spain was a free passage, and security against his Enemies, which he hoped for. The Governour re∣plyed, That the King of Spain was able enough to make such presents, and did not pretend thereby to gain a person of his quality to side with him, but he intreated him not to refuse that liberality. The Cardinal being fully resolved not to accept of any thing, though he were in the extremest necessity: The Gover∣nour returned next day with 2000 onely, and told him, That the King of Spain knew he was in want of some money, and there∣fore he would take it very kindly if he accepted but of that small sum: Whereupon the Cardinal being unwilling to shew too much obstinacy, took 500 to serve him only for defraying his charges in∣to:
Toscany, whither he designed to go; and returning his thanks to the King by the Governour, he prosecuted his journey the very next day. He arrived at Florence, where he was very cordially re∣ceived, and treated with all ima∣ginable magnificence: amongst other rarities which were shewed him at the Great Dukes Palace, he stood a while to gaze on the Picture of John de Medicis, a Car∣dinal, and General of an Army, in a negligent habit, as it was said, he was wont to go; whereupon he said, Those Gentlemen our Ance∣stors were not so Ceremonious as we are now adays; and yet I believe they were no less honest and consi∣derable then we are now. But though he had boasted then, that in despite of Cardinal Mazarine, he should die Arch-Bishop of Paris; yet he hath shewed a great deal of modera∣tion in his surrender of it into the hands of his Majesty, who made it known that such was his Royal pleasure. He is, without doubt, very ge∣nerous, magnificent, and full of honour and vertue; learned, wise, and very capable of being a Mi∣nister of State, were he called to it.
THE Character or Pourtraict of Cardinal Baberino, Called the Cardinal Antonio. HE is Nephew of Ʋrban the VIII, and the youngest Son of his Family. He is great Cham∣berlain of the holy Church (Chair) and in his Name are all affairs dispatched after the death of the Pope, and during the E∣lection, in whose life-time he keeps his Holinesses Ring. He is
great Almoner of France, Arch∣bishop of
Rheims, first Duke and Pair of France, Abbot of S. Denis. He was born Commander of the Kings Orders, and hath the right of Information touching the lives and behaviours of the Knights of the Order, and receives the pro∣fession of their faith. This Office is Solstitium Honorum in France, the Zenith of all Honours; which was created by Francis the first, in favour of Cardinal Antonio Menden. He administers the Oath of Fidelity to the King, and takes it of all the other Ecclesiasticks, according to the Court of Bishops and Archbishops of France, Grand Priors of Aquitaine, Auvergne, Champagne, and other considera∣ble Abbies. He delivers the pri∣soners from their bondage upon solemn Festivals, or days of Co∣ronation, and the like extraordi∣nary occasions. He disposes of the whole stock of the Kings Alms, and exercises all these Functions, without any dependence upon o∣thers as superiour; which power he can communicate to whomso∣ever he pleaseth. He is milde, peaceable and humble; loves the French way of living, and hath otherwhile governed the affairs of the Church during the life of his Uncle. It is reported of him, that when the War hapned to be made upon the Duke of Parma, having no great skill in the Military Art, he studied a whole night to frame an equivocal Letter when he was to send his Orders to the Generals; that so, in case things succeeded wel, he might reap the glory of the Enterprise; and if Fortune were a∣verse, there might be room enough left to excuse himself, by preten∣ding they had not comprehended his meaning in their attempts.
THE Character or Pourtraict OF The Chancellour.
MOnsieur Seguier, issued from a family of the Robe, hath had some of his ancestors officia∣ting in the greatest State-employ∣ments. Such men are usually made to pass thorow those lower employments of the Long Robe first, and are afterwards according to their abilities called up to the Soveraign degree of Chancellour of France, which is the chief of all Judicature. He is prudent and judicious, and is accounted the most learned person in the Kingdom. He declares his Ma∣jesties minde when he lists in Par∣liament; who having in few words expressed himself, to take off the trouble of a long
Harangue, tells them, My Chancellour shall inform of what I have more to say. He sits at the Kings feet on a black Velvet Cushion; presiding in the Great Council in his Majesties absence; which Office he holds for his whole life. The Seals may be sometimes indeed taken from him, and committed to such a Keeper as the King shall make choice of, to seal Orders that are passed. Though he perfectly sub∣mitted himself to the Kings will in all things, yet was the Seal gi∣ven from him to the first President Monsieur Molet, during the trou∣bles of Paris, he being pursued by the rascally people to the Hostel de Luynes, whither he was for∣ced to retreat, and in much dan∣ger even there of being forced out, had not the Marshal de la Milleray come and rescued him by force of arms. The fear and jealousie he had of Monsieur Fou∣quet at Fountainbleau, made him follow the King every where: and he shewed himself as able and active as any young man in the Journey to Britany, because he had heard, as it is reported, that the King should say to Monsieur Fouquet, who importuned him to take the Seals from him, seeing his very great age disabled him in the execution of that Office; Do not trouble your self; assoon as I return from Britany, I assure you the Seals shall be in your house: which was true indeed, all things being sealed there.
Monsieur Fou∣quet making a favourable, though not a right construction of that promise, was satisfied therewith; and the Chancellor had a great apprehension, endeavouring by his close attendance to make it appear to his Majestic, that he had yet vigour enough left him to ac∣quit himself of that trust. This is one of the causes of the enmi∣ty betwixt him and Monsieur Fou∣quet.
He cherishes his wealth above all the things in the world, and is sparing for nothing that may con∣tribute to prolong his days, ma∣king frequent use of Cordials, and excellent nourishment; which have been so effectual, that he is in a perfect condition of health at the age of Fourscore years. He hath always a Guard with him when he goes abroad; which is rather for a mark of his dignity, then for fear of any hurt or dan∣ger. He presides in the Court of Justice; but Monsieur Fouquet hath put in many Heads of Recu∣sation against him, by no means accepting or owning him for his Judge. He is prodigiously rich, and very oeconomical; and having no male-issue, his Succession is de∣volved to his daughters husbands, the chief whereof is the Marquis de Coaslin.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of Monsieur Colbert.
HE is the son of an eminent Citizen of Rheims: but those who are very well vers'd in Genealogies, affirm that he is de∣scended from one of the most Il∣lustrious Families of Scotland. He was first under Monsieur Tellier the Secretary of State; and when the Cardinal was exiled from the Court, and retired into Germany, having enquired of Monsieur Tel∣lier for some person whom he might conside in, to intrust with some Jewels of a very great va∣lue, and certain sums of money; Monsieur Tellier named
Monsieur Colbert to him, as a very honest confiding man, whose fidelity he was well acquainted with; who having a house at Rheims just up∣on the Road betwixt Paris and Cologne, the Cardinal left in his keeping the most considerable treasure he had, which he laid up for his last reserve, and found this the most convenient place that could be to dispose of it as occasion might require. His E∣minence lodged two nights at his house, and appointed him to re∣ceive and convey all his Letters of Correspondence which he either dspatched to, or received from the Court; which Commerce he was the fitter to drive, being then not generally known; of which he acquitted himself with so much exactness, integrity, and success, that he deserved to be in∣trusted with matters of more im∣portance: and indeed, from that time he grew much in favour with the Cardinal, who being re∣called into France, and happily resetled at Court, desired to have him from Monsieur Tellier, and made him Intendant of his house, which he governed till his death to the great liking of that grand Minister; insomuch as the Cardi∣nal upon his death-bed, and in his Will and Testament, whereof he was Executor, recommended him particularly to the King, intreat∣ing his Majestie to make use of him as a person of a tried Ability and Faith.
The King hath found him such a one indeed, according to his own desire, and the fittest man in the whole Nation to manage his Trea∣sury; and therefore having set aside Monsieur Fouquet, he gave the whole Administration and Ma∣nagement of it to this person, whom he hath likewise honoured with the Office of Chief Survey∣or of his Buildings and Royal Houses; and, which is more, does not seldom communicate the weightiest affairs of State unto him. He is indeclinably devoted to the will and service of his Master. A person he is without any thing of vain-glory or boasting, mode∣rate in expences, who willingly sacrifices all his pleasures and di∣vertisements to the interest of his Country and affairs of impor∣tance. He is active and vigilant, constant and inviolable in any thing of his duty; avoiding all making of Parties and Cabals, not treating with any body with∣out
the Kings knowledge, or an express Order from his Majestic. He seems not to thirst after much riches for himself, but is hugely diligent and active in heaping up Treasure for his Master, and pre∣serving the Revenues of the Crown; and being well versed in ordering those things, he gives the King his best advice to redeem that part of his Demesnes which hath been long engaged, thereby filling his Coffers, and increasing his daily Income. By these pru∣dent means he hath already re∣ceived many Millions, which were concealed, detained, and unjustly converted to other uses, by such as formerly had the management of the Treasury; not fearing the ill will of any, to do his Master service; relying wholly upon the justice and power of a Monarch able to protect him against all his adversaries.
It is reported, that he hath as∣sured his Majestie that in three years time he will redeem and clear all his Demesnes; which when accomplished, will make him the richest Potentate of Christendom, which he is indeed already, in the reputation of all stranger-Nations.
THE Character or Pourtraict OF Monsieur Tellier. HE is descended of a Family of the Long Robe; and rai∣sed himself to the height he is now at, as much by his own dili∣gence and conduct, as by the fa∣vour of the Cardinal Richelieu, who made him chief Master of Requests. He is of a friendly, discreet, and prudent temper, and one that understands Military af∣fairs better then any man in the Kingdom; I mean, as to the man∣ner how to keep up and maintain
an Army, what the charge will a∣mount to according to the num∣bers raised, and the like: which knowledge he hath acquired by a very long experience. He hath maintained himself unblameable in his Office, and was but feigned∣ly disgraced or set aside during the Intestine Troubles. For the Prince complaining that the Car∣dinal, though banished, still ruled at Court by means of his Crea∣tures, amongst whom
Monsieur Tellier & Monsieur de Lionne were counted the principal; the Queen, to take away all cause of jealou∣sie, caused them to be sent out of Paris, and promised to admit no more of them to her Council: which Order within a month was again reversed, and the policie of this Court-turn apparent. He is a person nothing tainted with the vanities of the times, having no ambitious thoughts, but perform∣ing his duty meerly out of a prin∣ciple of honour and honesty, not minding either concurrences nor enmities, not aiming at higher pre∣ferments or greater profits, being already in a condition, indeed, so good in these respects, that there is little left him to wish for. He hath a son, the Marquis de Louvais, very much in favour with the King, to whom his Ma∣jestie has granted the reversion of his Fathers Office of Secretary of State for Military affairs.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of Monsieur de Lionne. HE is of a Noble Family, and was formerly chief Secreta∣ry to the Queen-mother; and when she was Regent, he was em∣ployed in State-affairs; and the Cardinal, a while before his death, recommended him to his Majestie in particular, as a man fit for the employments he holds. He is one of the most prudent men in Eu∣rope; one that hath the most flegme, and reservedness of tem∣per, as the Italians themselves con∣fessed
when he was amongst them; they endeavoured by all the ways imaginable to make him discover himself, but with all their subtilty they could not make themselves Masters of the least of his secrets.
The Great Duke, and the whole House of Medices treated him to that very end, and laid all the plots & snares they could; but all their diligence and cun∣ning could not entice him to utter one sillable but what was meerly indifferent. He went since joynt Ambassadour with the Marshal de Gramont into Germany, at the E∣lection of the Emperour: and we may truly say, that the two sub∣tillest and wisest Politicians of France did then share together in that Illustrious Negotiation. He is a person of much honesty and conscience, and one that will not make use of any one that is not good and vertuous; though it were his misfortune a while since to have a person in his Family who was a Traytor both to him, the King, and the State: but this was a fellow taken in by his other ser∣vants, not of his chusing: and ha∣ving found that his Secrets were divulged to Forraign Ambassa∣dours by his infidelity, he caused him to be chastised according to his deserts, having made him con∣fess that he had never spoken so much as one word to him. He is a lover of Vertue and Arts; is milde, affable, of a good presence, and exactly faithful in the Kings concerns: and though he be Se∣cretary of State for all Forraign affairs, which he understands in∣comparably well, yet in the Car∣dinals Will he is preferred before all others to inform the King of all the concerns of Lorraine, and whatever is to be transacted with the Duke Charles, who is one of the subtillest and wary Princes of this Age; of whom the Duke said, that he was a fit man to be treated with, but it must be onely for three days. Which words he taking hold of, did indeed finish his Negotia∣tion within that space of time, as is apparent by the Treaty mutu∣ally Signed to by each of them.
THE Character or Pourtraict OF Monsieur Foucquet. HE is the son of a Citizen, and pretends the original of his Family is Noble. He rose to his Fortune by his Brother the Abbot Foucquet's means, who was much in favor with Cardinal
Mazarine. He borrowed a sum of money to buy the Office of Attorney-Gene∣ral, and in that quality did the Cardinal many good Offices in the Parliament, and the Govern∣ment of Paris. He was very ex∣act in prosecuting any that wrote against that Minister. Yet all these Services could not exempt him from being suspected; which obliged him to draw up that Pro∣ject, found amongst his rifled Pa∣pers, to defend himself in case he were attaqu'd. The Cardi∣nals favour procured him the em∣ployment of Superintendant, which he managed alone after the decease of Monsieur Servien, who during a time shared it with him. He hath a vast and lofty spirit, and was the profusest and most magnificent man in the Kingdom. His ambitious minde made him chuse this Motto for his Devise: Quo non ascendam? Whither shall I not climb?
And it is believed his thoughts a∣spired at being Chief Minister: but the King by no means endu∣ring to have any Subject raise him∣self to that Authority in his Reign, reserving that power most justly for himself, caused him to be arrested some years since in his journey to Brittany, and sent him to
Vincennes, and from thence to the Bastille. He was liberal with profusion, being accu∣sed of having squandred away infinite sums of money upon his Pleasures and Mistresses. He is likewise accused of allowing se∣veral large Pensions to the Gran∣dees at Court, to be his creatures; it being his Opinion and Maxime, that no mans Faith could be of proof against Fifty thousand Crowns. His Buildings do also shew his excessive Prodigality, together with the Furniture, Con∣ches, Attendance, Rarities, and unparallel'd Banquets; as for example, the Collation he gave his Majestie at Veau de Vicomte, where he expended Fourty thou∣sand Crowns, by all computation. He bestowed great Largesses like∣wise upon the Jesuites, viz. a Li∣brary, a Thousand livres of an∣nual Rent to maintain it, and Fourscore thousand livres for a Building within their Colledge.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of The First President of PARLIAMENT.
MOnsieur de la Mignon (issu∣ed from a Family of the Long Robe) enjoys this conside∣rable Office, which is onely at∣tained unto by Merit and Ability; i being never sold, no more then the Chancellors place, as being not to be valued at its worth. He represents the Kings person in Parliament, and acknowledges no Superiour to him in the whole Kingdom for Judicial matters, being Head of a Soveraign Court. He was a Fellow-President long before he arrived to this chief di∣gnity. He is eloquent without affectation, learned without am∣bition, and one of the wisest heads of the Nation. He is an enemy to the Jansenists, and all other Novelties; being so much wedded to ancient Customs, that he will not admit of any altera∣tion either in Church, or Maxims of State or Law. He adheres most strictly to the Royal Autho∣rity, and receives all Orders from his Majestie with a great deal of veneration, and zeal to put them in execution. They say he is ve∣ry much Jesuited, because he is of their opinion concerning the Doctrine of the Times: never∣theless he shews a very even tem∣per in all his actions, not refusing to hear any of the contrary party; judging with equity and consci∣ence, and doing justice where it is requisite. He is a person of an excellent good nature, very cha∣ritable, loving peace and quiet∣ness as well in State as Church. So that it may be truly said of him, that he is the common Fa∣ther to his Country, on whom he bestows all his Cares and Labours, in rendering every one what is his due; being just and merciful to the good, and a punisher of the wicked; which are the chief and onely Pillars of a State. So that the King hath reason to rely up∣on him for that part of his Go∣vernment, which he administers with an unbyassed integrity.
THE Character or Pourtraict OF THE The Duke of S. Agnan. HE hath signalized himself in divers encounters for his Majesties service, and verified it in his own person, That true Gal∣lantry does not debase a Coura∣gious heart. The height of his Valour and Skill was manifested in an odde Adventure, which might have proved his utter ru∣ine, and the loss of many a brave Courtier. Three men mounted to the best advantage, and having Vizards on, lay in Ambuscado
neer one of his Country-houses, to surprise him unawares and a∣lone, intending to murther him, as they had done infallibly, if his great courage and resolution had not carried him off that evident peril. The Story of it is so well known, that I thought it needless to insert it here at length.
He is the most obliging Gentle∣man in the world, from whom, I never heard any one say that he came dissatisfied. No man loves Learning, or persons of ingenui∣ty, more then himself: and so well versed he is, that several ve∣ry handsom Things have been composed by him; amongst the which is a Comedy of his fashion, made to divert the Court; and the Kings voyage to Bretagne; written in French in one nights time, at his Majesties command. He is highly cherished by the King for his gallant wit, and generous inclinations. It is very fit, that so brave a man should be in favour with so great a Monarch, whom he cannot but inspire with noble and good Sentiments: for all he either saith or does is honest and worthy. Formerly the Titles of Minions and Favourites were gi∣ven to such persons: at present, that of Consident is more in vogue. But this Duke has no o∣ther quality, then what Ephestion had from Alexander; and it may be truly said, that he entirely loves the person of the King, to whom he is a faithful Guardian, and a most zealous servant. He speaks very well and gracefully; hath a wonderful presence, and an unparallel'd sweetness in conver∣sation; so that he may very pro∣perly be esteemed as a Model of a compleat Courtier, and a very ho∣nest Gentleman.
THE Character or Pourtraict Of The Duke of Crequi.
THis Lord was son of a Mar∣shal of France, and is the chief Gentleman of the Kings Bedchamber; one of the hand∣somest, haughtiest, and bravest men of the whole Court. He is frank and liberal, and keeps up the Character of his ancient No∣bility. He neither is acquainted with dissimulation, intrigues, or designes, but goes roundly to work, and maintains the Kings interest with heat, not fearing any thing can be opposed. He is fit∣ter for the Camp then the Cabinet or Council, being as it were born to that Noble Exercise. Never∣theless he was sent upon an ex∣traordinary Embassie to Rome, to congratulate the Popes new Election, and complement him in his Masters behalf; which was onely an act of Civility, the King not being at all obliged, like some other Princes, to pay this respect to the Holy Chair, but onely of his free-will: so that the Romanes and their Gover∣nours did hugely mistake them∣selves, in forfeiting that respect due to the dignity of Monsieur de Crequi, and violating the right of Princes in his person, and the person of Madam the Ambassa∣drice. It must be noted here, that all Ambassadours wives in Italy take the same Title and
Quality as their Husbands, and as such, take place accordingly in all Assemblies. But the Contest being fully composed, and satiss∣faction given by the Legate from his Holiness, that troublesom Quarrel is now brought to a pe∣riod.
THE Character or Pourtraict OF The Duke of Novailles. HIs Extraction is Illustrious, and of the ancient Nobility: the whole Family have ever been remarkable for their Fidelity, and constant Adherence to their Kings Interest. He is one of the four Captains of his Majesties Life∣guards, and most commonly hath the sole Command in the
Louvre, still attending his Masters person where-ever he is pleased to go; always riding in the Boot of the Kings Coach with the Baton in his hand. He commands the Scotch Company under the White Co∣lours. And although he is one of the most daring Souldiers in the Nation, and as valiant as any of these times; yet no man is endu∣ed with more Meekness or Mode∣sty then he is. He executes his employment with so much satis∣faction and content to all the world, that he is beloved and esteemed by the whole Court: his very denials having so little of harshness in them, that peo∣ple seldom go away discontented, though they lose their Errand they came for. And so fair and obliging his nature is, that where∣ever he can do a good office, it is performed so freely and nobly, either to friends, or even strangers themselves, that he lays a double tye of gratitude upon them, ari∣sing as much from the manner, as the thing it self.
There is not a Noble-man in the Court that does not cover his friendship, nor any man so indif∣ferent as not to pay him a high re∣spect. Nor is any man, though nere so great a stranger, denied access to his presence, if they ad∣dress themselves but with civility to him. And yet is he severe e∣nough upon any occasion of con∣test, and will not suffer the least disorder either in the Kings fami∣ly, or any place where his Com∣mand extends. He speaks little, but very well to the purpose, and with a very great deal of solid Reason and Judgement.
THE Character or Pourtraict OF The Duke of Mazarine, AND de la Milleraye.
HE is the son of the Marshal de la Milleraye, Great Ma∣ster of the Ordnance; wherein he succeeds him, as well as in the Go∣vernment of Bretagne, in quality of Lieutenant-General to the Queen-mother. He is a very vertuous Gentleman, a pious man: and it is said, that in his younger days he had a desire of becoming a Religious. Frier. Cardinal Mazarine looked upon him as the man to whom he in∣tended to leave his great Wealth, his Name, and his Arms; upon which condition he married his Neece. So that he is very rich on all sides, and very potent; having besides this, the Principality of Elsas, and the favour of the King, which is an advantage above all those before mentioned. He is very stayd, speaks little, and does every thing with a great deal of moderation: and though he is at this instant one of the greatest and powerfullest Subjects in the world, yet is no whit the prouder, nor of a more difficult access. He receives every body with a great deal of frankness and civility, and dispatches the Kings affairs with all the conduct and exactness ima∣ginable.
He treated with the Princes of the Rhyne about many things of high importance, and hath gained a great deal of Credit and Reputation by his Moderati∣on, having refused the Title of His Highness, which they would needs have given him, in consi∣deration of the Principality of Elsas. His late Business was, to cause the French Troops to pass over a River on a Bridge of Boats, in the March towards the Empe∣rours Relief against the Grand Seignor. FINIS.
