M551 11937059 51209
THE Sea-mans Dictionary: OR, AN EXPOSITION And Demonstration of all the Parts and Things belonging to a SHIPPE: Together with an Explanation of all the Termes and Phrases used in the Practique of NAVIGATION. Composed by that able and experienced Sea-man Sr Henry Manwayring, Knight: And by him presented to the late Duke of Buckingham, the then Lord High Admirall of England. I Have perused this Book, & find it so universally necessary for all sorts of men, that I conceive it very fit to be at this time imprinted for the Good of the Republicke. Septemb. 20. 1644. JOHN BOOTER. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for John Bellamy, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Signe of the three golden Lions in Cornehill neare the Royall Exchange. 1644.
A Preface: Shewing the Scope and Ʋse of this Booke.
MY Purpose is not to instruct those, whose Experience and Observation, have made them as sufficient (or more) then my selfe: yet even they should lose nothing by remem∣bring: (for I have profited by mine owne labour, in do∣ing this;) But my intent, and the use of this Book, is, to instruct one, whose Qualitie, Attendance, Indisposition of bodie (or the like) cannot permit to gain the knowledge of Termes, Names, Words, the Parts, Qualities and manner or doing things with Ships, by long Ex∣perience: without which there hath not any one arrived (as yet) to the least judgement or knowledge of them: It being so, that very few Gentlemen (though they be called Sea-men) doe fully and wholly un∣derstand what belongs to their Profession; having only so me scrabling Termes and Names belonging to some parts of a Ship. But he who will teach another must understand things plainly, and distinctly him∣selfe, (that in stead of resolving another mans doubts, he doe not puzell him with more confusion of Termes of Art) and so (to appeare to know somewhat) will still expound Ignotum per ignotius. And for professed Sea-men, they either want abilitie, and dexteritie to expresse them∣selves, or (as they all doe generally) will, to instruct any Gentleman: If any will tell me why the vulgar sort of Sea-men hate land-men so much, either he or I may give the reason, why they are so unwilling to instruct them in their Art: whence it is that so many Gentlemen goe long Voyages, and returne (in a manner) as ignorant, and as unable to doe their Countrey Service, as when they went out. These Words, Termes, and Proper Names, which I set down in this Book, are belonging ei∣ther to a Ship, to shew her parts, qualities, or some things necessary to the managing and sailing of her; or to the Art of Gunnerie (for so muchas concernes the use of Ordnance at Sea,) and those which are familiar words, I set them downe; if they have any use, or meaning about a Ship, other then the common sence: And in expounding them, I doe shew what Use, Necessitie, Commoditie, discommoditie, wherefore, and how things are done, which they import: And therewith the Proper Termes, and Phrases, with the different uses, in any kind appertaining to that word; which for better and easier finding-out, and to avoid confusion, I have brought into an Alphabet. The Use and Benefit whereof is so apparent for any who hath com∣mand at Sea, or for any who may be called to censure and judge of Sea-affaires, that I need use two reasons, to enforce it: Only thus much: This booke shall make a man understand what other men say, and speake properly himselfe; which how convenient, comely, and necessary a thing it is, all men (of sence) doe know. Should not man be Leashed (being a hunting or hawking) if he should cry Hey,-Ret, to the Hownds, and hooke againe to the Spaniels: Or were it not ridiculous for a man (speaking of the wars) to call a trench a Ditch: Or (at Sea) the Star-boord, and Lar-boord, the right and the left-side of a Ship, and yet they doe simply the same, and both dogs and men will understand them alike. To understand the Art of Navigation is far easier learned then to know the Practique of Mechanicall working of Ships, with the Proper, Termes belonging to them: In respect that there are helps for the first by many books (which give easie and ordinary Rules for the obtaining to it,) but for the other, till this, there was not so much as a meanes thought of, to informe any one in it: if a man be a sufficient Sea-man with whom I converse, and yet know not how to instruct me, I grant he may be fit to save his Countrey, but not his friend: But I will speake it with as much confidence as truth, that in six monethes, he, who would but let me read this booke over with him, and be content to look some∣times at a Modell of a Ship, & see things how they are done, shall with∣out any great studie, but conversation, know more, be a better Sea-man, and speake more properly to any businesse of the Sea, then any other Gentleman, who shall go (two or three yeares together) to Sea, without this: for by the perusing of this Booke, he shall not only know what to question, or doubt of, but likewise be resolved. H.M.
The State of a CHRISTIAN, lively set forth by an Allegorie of a Shippe under Sayle:Prov 31.14. Iob 9.26. Isa. 22.1. Rev 8.9. Taken out of the Victory of Patience. MY Body is the Hull; the Keele my Backe; my Neck the Stem; the Sides are my Ribbes; the Beames my Bones; my flesh the plankes; Gristles and ligaments are the Pintells and knee∣timbers; Arteries, veines and sinewes the severall seames of the Ship; my blood is the ballast; my heart the principall hold; my stomack the Cooke-roome; my Liver the Cesterne; my Bowels the sinke; my Lungs the Bellowes; my teeth the Chopping-knives; except you divide them, and then they are the 32. points of the Sea-card both agreeing in number; Concoction is the Caldron; and hunger the Salt or sawce; my belly is the lower Decke; my kidnies Close Cabbins or receptacles; my thighes are long Galleries for the grace of the Ship; my armes and hands the Can∣hookes, my Midriffe is a large Partition or bulk-head; within the circum∣ference of my bead is placed the Steeridge-roome and chiefe Cabbins, with the Round house where the Master lyeth, and these for the more safety and decency are inclosed with a double fence, the one Dura mater something hard and thicke, the other Pia mater very thin and soft, which serveth in stead of hangings; The eares are two doores or Scuttles fitly placed for entertain∣ment; the two Eyes are Casements to let in light; under them is my Mouth the Stowidge or Stewards roome; my Lipps are Hatches for receit of goods; my two Nostrils serve as Gratings to let in ayre; at the one end stands my chin which is the Beakenead; my forehead is the upper deck; all which being trimmed with my fat in stead of pitch, and haire in stead of Ockham, are coloured with my skinne. The fore-deck is humility; the stearne Charity; active obedience the sailes; which being hoysed up with the severall Yards, Halliers and bowlings of holy precepts and good purposes, are let down againe by ficklenesse, faintings, and inconstancy; Reason is my Rudder; experience the helme; hope of salva∣tion my Anchor; passive obedience the Capstaine; holy Revenge the Cat and Fish to hawle the sheate Anchor or last hope; feare of offending is the Buoy; vertues are the Cabels; Holy desires and sodaine ejaculations the shroudes; the zeale of Gods glory is my Maine-mast, premeditation the fore-mast; de∣sire of my own salvation the Missen-mast; saving knowledge the
Boltesprit;Circumspection a sounding line; my Light is illumination, Justice is the Card, Gods word the Compasse; the meditation of lifes brevity a Foure-houre glasse; Contemplation of the creatures the Crosse-staffe or Jacobs staffe; the Creed a Sea grammer; the life of Christ my Load starre; the Saints falls are Sea-markes; Good examples Land-markes; Repentance Pumps out the sinke of my sins; a good conscience keeps me cleane; imputative righ∣teousnesse is my Flag, having this Motto (BEING CAST DOWNE WE PERISH NOT) The Flag-staffe is sincerity; the Ship is victualled afresh by reading, hearing, receiving; Books are Long-boates, Letters are little Sciffes to carry and recarry my spirituall merchandize; Perseverance is my speede, and patience my name, my fire is lust, which will not be cleane extin∣guished; full feeding and strong drinke is the fuell to maintaine it, whose flame (if it be not supprest) is jealousie; whose sparkes are evill words; whose ashes is envy; whose smoake is infamie; Lascivious talke is as flint and steele; Concupiscence as tinder, opportunity is the match to light it; Sloth and idlenesse are the Servants to prepare it. The Law of God is my Pilot; Faith my Captaine; Fortitude the Master; Chastity the Masters mate, my will the Coxen; Conscience the Preacher; Application of Christs death the Chirurgion; Mortification the Cook, Vivi∣fication the Caulker; Selfedeniall is an Apprentice of his; Temperance the Steward; Contentation his Mate; truth the Purser; thankefulnesse the Pur∣sers mate; Reformation the Boatswain; The 4. humours, Sanguin, Cholar, &c. are the Quartermasters; Christian vigilancy undertakes to supply the office of Starboorde and Larboorde watch; Memory is Clerke of the Check; Assurance the Corporall; the Armour Innocency; the Mariners Angels; Schismaticks are searchers sent abroad; my understanding as Master Gun∣ner culls out from those two Budgecaskes of the New and old Testament certaine threats and promises which is my only powder and Shot; and with the assistance of the Gunners mate, holy anger against sinne, chargeth my tongue, which like to a peece of Ordnance shootes them to the shame and overthrow of my spirituall Adversaries. My Noble passengers are Joy in the Holy Ghost and the peace of Con∣science, whose retinue are divine graces; my ignoble or rather mutinous pas∣sengers, are worldly cogitations and vaine delights, which are more than a good many; besides some that are arrant theeves and traytors, namely pride, envy, prejudice; but all these ile bid farewell when I come to my journies end, though I would but cannot before.
Heaven is my Countrey, where I am registred in the Booke of life; my King is Jehovah; my tribute Almesdeeds; they which gather it are the poore; Love is my Countries badge; my language is holy conference; my fellow companions are the Saints. I am poore in performances, yet rich in Gods acceptation; The founda∣tion of all my good, is Gods free Election; I became bound into the Corpora∣tion of the Church to serve him in my Baptisme; I was inrolled at the time when he first called me: my freedome is Justification, it was purchased with the blood of Christ, my evidence is the earnest of his Spirit; my priviledges are his sanctifying Graces; my Crown (reserved for me on high) is glo∣rification. My Maker and Owner is God, who built me by his Word which is Christ, of earth which was the materiall: he fraught it with the essence of my soule which is the Treasure; and hath set me to saile in the sea of this world, till I attaine to the port of death, which letteth the terrestriall part into the har∣bour of the grave, and the celestiall into the kingdome of Heaven; in which voyage conveniencie of estate is a sea-roome; good affections serve as a tyde, and prayer as a prosperous gale a wind to help forward. But innumerable are the Impediments and perills; for here I meete with the proffers of unlawfull gaine, and sensuall delights as so many Sirens; the baites of prosperity (as high bankes) on the right hand or weathershore, and there with evill suggestions, and crabbed adversitie (as Rockes) on the left hand or Lee-shore ready to split me; the feare of Hell like quickesands threa∣ten to swallow me; Originall sin like weeds clog me, and actuall transgres∣sions like so many Barnacles hang about me, yea every sin I commit springs a new leake; my senses are as so many stormes of raine, haile and snow to sinke me; lewd affections are roaring billowes and waves; selfe confidence or to re∣ly upon any thing but divine assistance, is to lose the bolt-sprit; Restitution is heaving goods over board to save the ship; Melancholy, is want of fresh∣water, the scoffes of Atheists and contempt of Religion in all places, is a no∣table becalming; the lewd lives and evill examples of the most a contagious ayre; Idlenesse furres it, and is a shrewd decay both of Hull and Tackling. "Moreover sayling along and keeping watch (for they that are Christs-friends you know must looke for all they meet to be their enemies) we no sooner looke up but presently we ken a man of Warre, and then we must be for warre too, and provide for a skirmish. "Now the Gallyon that hath our
Pinnace in chase, and always watchethfor advantages to surprise it, is the Piracy of Hell, the synagogue of Sa∣tan; her fraight is temptations and persecutions, with all the Engines of mischiefe; in which the Devill is Master; malice the Masters mate; cruelty the Captaine; Murder the Cooke; Flattery the Calker; profanenesse a Quartermaster; riot the Steward; never content his mate; pride the Cockeson; superstition the Preacher, hypocrisie the Boatswain; covetousnes the Purser; lust the Swabber; fury the Gunner; presumption the Corporall; sedition the Trumpeter; drunkennesse the Drummer; vices are the sayles; custome the Maine-mast; Example of the multitude the Fore∣mast; Lusts and passions the Cables; blindnesse of mind the Rudder; hardnesse of heart the helme; the wisedome of the flesh the Card; the mystery of iniquity the Compasse; the five Senses, or if you will scof∣fing Atheists, profane foule-mouthed drunkards, and all the rabble of Hell are the Marriners; lewd affections the Passengers; little conscience the Load-starre, she hath two Tyre of great Ordnance planted in her, here∣sie and irreligion (being either for a false God or none) Oathes, blas∣phemie and curses are the powder and shot, which they spit against all that worship the Lambe, or fight under the ensigne of Faith; her armour is car∣nall security; the Flag in her top, is infidelity, the motto (There is no God but gaine) Her ballast which keeps her upright, is ignorance, most of her tackling she has from Rome; Antichrist as Pilot, steares her in such a course that she goes on swiftly, proudly, securely, scorning and scoffing (Senna∣charib like) to heare that any Lord should deliver this poore Pinnace out of her hands; yet in the sequell this silly Pinke having the insurance of Gods omnipresence, finds not only succour from the Stock of the Churches prayers, which like another Merchant man comes into the rescue, but like∣wise that Gods Almightie power and providence is neare as hand as a strong Castle of defence to free her, whereby she escapes even as a bird out of the snare of the hunter, to praise the Lord, who hath not given her as a pray unto their teeth, that would have swallowed up all quick, but deliver her from such swelling waters, flouds of affliction, and streames of persecu∣tion, as else had gone over her, and even drowned her soule, as it is Psalm. 124. while this great Gallion (though, it seeme like that Invincible Ar∣mado) flies, and (having no Anchor) when the stormes of Gods wrath arise, downe she sinkes to desperation, and perisheth in the bottomlesse pit or burning lake of fire and brimstone, where wee'le leave her to receive a just recompence of reward. R. Y.
A BRIEF ABSTRACT, Exposition and demonstration of all Parts and things belonging to a SHIPPE and the Practique of Navigation. A Aft, or Abast. IS a Sea-terme properly used, a-boord a Ship, to distinguish betwixt things done, and placed from-wards the Stem, towards the Sterne of the Ship, as when they say, come aft: goe aft: or the like; that is, goe towards the Sterne: Hale the sheate aft: The Mast hangs aft: that is, towards the Sterne: A shot raked the Ship fort and aft. that is, came in before, and went out a Sterne. Also, we use to say, Abast the fore-mast: So that this word is not particularly limited to any part of the Ship; but from every part of the Ship hath relation to any thing done, or placed towards the Sterne, in re∣spect of any that are towards the stem. As for for example,
When we hoyce over yards, we say stretch forwards the maine hal∣liards, whose place is abast the maine-mast; and contrariwise, stretchaft the fore halliards, which are placed before the maine mast, but abast the fore-mast: When Ships meet, or being in consort, desire to know how all the company doth, they use to demand how they doe all fore and aft, the reason whereof is, for that the whole Ships company is de∣vided; both in respect of the labour and command, into two parts, the Boate-swaine and all the common Saylors under his command, to lie before the maine-mast; The Captaine, Master, Masters-Mates-Gunners, Quarter-masters, &c. to be abast the maine-mast. Aloofe. Is a terme used in conding the Ship, when she goes upon a Tack, and is commonly spoken from the mouth of the Condoy, unto the Steeres-man, when he suffers the Ship to fall-off from the wind, and doth not keep her so neere, by a wind as she may well lye. Amayne. Is a terme used by men of Warre, and not by Merchant-men: When they encounter a Ship, for that implies as much to the o∣ther as to bid him yeald. Amayne is used in this sense also: when any thing is to be let downe by a Tackle into the howlde or elsewhere, or that a yard is to be lowed, or the like, then when they would have it come-downe as fast as they can: they call a mayne, which is to let goe that part of the rope which they held before, to let it downe easily and by degrees: This word also is an adjunct to the greatest and chiefest of some parts of the Ship, viz. The maine-Mast, the maine-Sayle, the maine-Beame, &c. In men of Warre, we use waving a-mayne, which is either with a bright Sword, or any other thing, to make a signe to them that they should strike their top-sayles: (which commonly they doe, either in the fore-top, or on the Poope) to strike A-mayne, is to let fall their top-sayles. Anchor. The forme and generall use of an Anchor is commonly knowne: but the severall parts, proportions, distinctions and appella∣tions, understood by very few, but practised and experienced Sea-men: The Anchor doth consist of these severall parts: The Ring, the Eye, the Head, the Nutt, the Beame or Arme, the Shanck, the Flooke, to which be∣longs a stocke by which it is made to take hold.
The proportion which it holds in it selfe is, The shancke is thrice as long as one of the flookes, and halfe the beame. The proportion in re∣spect of Shipping is, To a Ship of 500 tun, we allow 2000 weight for a sheate Anchor, The higgest Ship in Englands Anchor, is but 3500;The distinctions are made by their use, according to the proportion they beare in the Ship in which they are imployed; for that, which in one Ship would be called but a Kedger, or Kedge Anchor, in a lesser, would be a sheate Anchor. The sorts of Anchors, which by occasion of their severall uses receive different names and appellations, are first a Kedge, which is the smallest, which by reason of their lightnesse, is first to stoppe the Ship in kedging downe a River. The next a Streame Anchor, which we use in deep waters to stop a tide withall in faire weather. The other they call by the name of the first, second or third Anchor, (all these being such as the ship may ride by in any reasonable weather, Sea-gate or tyde. These are something bigget one then an other: And usually when they sayle in any straights or are neere a Port, they carry two of these at the Bowe. In which respect, they are also called by the name of the first, second or third Bowes.) The other which is the biggest, and that which the Sea-men call their last-hope, and is never used but in great extremity, is called the Sheate Anchor, this is the true Anchora Spei, for this is their last re∣fuge. The Anchor is a Peeke, that is, when heaving up the Anchor, the Cabell is right perpendicular betwixt the Hawes and the Anchor. The Anchor is a Cock-bell, which is, when the Anchor hangs right up and downe by the Ships side: and this appointed by the Masters, when they are ready to bring the Ship to an: Anchor. Let fall the Anchor, that is, let in goe downe into the Sea. The Anchor is fowle, that is, when the Cabell by the turning of the Ship is got about the flooke, which will not only cut the Cabell a-sunder, but make the Anchor not in hold: And therefore when ever we come to an Anchor, where there is tyde, we lay∣out two Anchors, so as that, upon the turning of the tyde, the Ship wind up eleere of either Anchor, cleere the Anchor, that is, get the Cabell off the flooke; or generally, when they let fall the Anchor, they use this terme, to see that the Buoy-Rope, nor in other ropes do hang about it, fetch or bring home the Anchor, that is, to weigh it in the Boate, and bring it a-boord the Ship. The Anchor comes home, that is, when the Ship drives away with the tyde or sea; This may happen, either because the Anchor is too small for the burthen of the ship, or for that the ground may be soft and one, In such places, we use to shoe the An∣chor, that is, to put boords to the stooke in the forme of the stooke, and make it much broader then before: In Porto Fareen by
Tunis, I sawthe experience of Tallowing an Anchor, where the ground being so soft, we shod our Anchors and yet they all came home, and the Ships drave a-ground, only, one ship, which had an Anchor tallowed, too fast, the reason I could never truly know, but suppose that it might be, because that the tallow sunck deeper into oze, and finds some harder ground at the bottome, then the other. Boate the Anchor, that is put it into the Boate. Anchoring, or Anchorage. Is when we let fall an Anchor, or more, into the Sea, with Cabells to them, so that the Ship may ride-fast by them; we say, there is good Anchoring, where there is showle water, for in deep waters, the Sea hath more force against the Ship, and the An∣chors are very long a waying upon any occasion: Ground that is not too soft or ozie, in which the Anchors can have no fast hold: nor too hard or knotty, so that it may cut the Cabells: The best ground to ride in, is a stiffe clay, or hard sand: Also, where they may ride out of the way of the tyde: And lastly, where they may ride Land-locked, so as that the sea-gate, can have no power against them: To which may be added, that the Lee-shore on every side is so soft, that if a ship come a-ground, she can catch no hurt, or else that they may have sea-roome to set saile, if their Cabells breake, or their Anchors come home. That place which hath all these commodities, is good to ride in, and here we say is good Anchoring, or good Anchorage; bad Anchoring, or bad Ancho∣rage, is in a place where all or many of the contrary conditions are to be found. Anchor stock, This is a peece of Timber fitly wrought and fastned at the Nutts, crossing the flookes; The use thereof is so to guide the An∣chor upon the ground, that one of the flookes may be sure to fasten in the ground, without which, the Anchor would lye flat upon both the flookes, and take no hold: The proportion whereof is usually taken from the length of the shancke. Arme. This is not used as a word of Allarum, at Sea, as it is on Land; for at Sea, we use to say, make ready the Ship; which implies the fitting of all things belonging to a fight. A Ship that is full of Munition, small and great, and her fights and Ordnance well disposed and placed, is called a Ship well armed: To arme a shot, is to bind some Ockham, Rope, Yarne or old cloutes, &c. about one end, as in Crosse-bar shot, it is most commonly used, that that end which goes first out of the
peece, should not catch hold in any flawes of the peece, whereby it be in danger to breake it. The same we use to any kind of broken Iron, of two or three foot long, which we use when we come Boord and Boord in fight, out of our great Ordnance, we also use to Arme some small shot for Muskets, like our crosse-bar. An Awning. Is a saile or any other thing, made of Cantas or the like, which is spread over any part, or all of the Ship, above the Deck, to keep away the Sunne, that thereby in hot countreyes, men may take the ayre, and yet not be so subject to the beames of the Sunne; in all hot voyages, this is of insinite use, both to keep men from the Sunne by day, and the dewes by night, which in some places are wonderfull infe∣ctious. Axeltree. The Axeltree, is the same in cariage as in a Coach or Cart, and doth support the cheekes of the carriage whereon the peece doth lye. As also, we call the Iron which goes through the wheele of the chaine pump, and beares the weight of it: The Axeltres of the Pump. B To BAle. Is to lade water out of the Ships hould, with Buckets, Cans or the like; This because it is more labour, and tires men soo∣ner, and doth not deliver so much as all the Pumps will; we never use, but in great extremities, when either a leake doth over-grow the deli∣vering of the Pumps, or else that the Pumps doe faile us a which happens many times in extraordinary pumping, that the pumps with overmuch wearing, draw wind or chance to be stoaked, or else the pump boxes; Irons or the like doe faile us. Ballast. Is that Gravell, Stones, Leade or any other goods, which is layd next the keelson of the Ship to keep her stiffe in the sea; of Ballast, that is best which is heaviest, lyes closest, and fastest, and dryest, both for the ship bearing a saile, stowing of goods, health of the company, and sa∣ving of cask and other goods; whereof if a ship have too much, she will draw too much water, if too little, she will beare no sayle. To trench the Ballast, that is, to devide the Ballast in any part of the ships howld, which is commonly done, to find a Leake in the bottome of the ship, or to undock the ship. The Ballast shoots, that is, runs over from one side
to the other, and therefore Come and all kind of graine, is danger ous la∣ding, for that will shoote, but only that they make Ponches (as they are called,) that is Bulke heads of boords, to keep it up fast, that it doe not run from one side to the other, as the ship doth heele upon a Tacke. Beake, or Beake-head. Is that part which is fastned to the Stem of the Ship, and is supporred with a knee, which is fastned into the Stem, and this is called the Maine-knee; to this is fastned the Coller of the Maine-stay. In the Beake-head, the fore-tackes are brought a-boord, and is the proper stand, where men doe handle most part of the sprit-sayle, and sprit-sayle, Top-sayle rigging. And it is also placed for the fashion, to grace the ship. The Beaks-head steeves, or stands steeving, that is, stands very much with the outward most end up, towards the bolt spirit. The Beake-head of the Venetian Argozis, and Shoamsh Galeons, doe see very much: by which we know them afarre off. Beame. The Beames are those great crosse-timbers which keepe the ship sides afunder, and doe support the Daks, Odops; according to whose strength, a ship is much the better, or worse able to carry Ordi∣nance: All strong and great ships, have a Tire of Beames in hold, that is, a row of Beames, whereon lyes a Deck. The mayne-Beame, is ever the next to the mayne-Mast, at which place we reckon the bredth of the ship: And stom this we call the Beame, both fore-ward and aft-Ward, by the name of the first, second and third, &c. beginning from this, which we call the mid-ship Beame? To Beane. This word in some eases, is taken in the ordinary sense, as for cleering much, as when we say, a Ship will beare much Ord∣nance; that is, carry much by reason of her strength. Also the bearing, or stowing of much goods from whence, when we describe the great∣nesse of the ship, we say, she is a ship of such a burthen; but it is used in many senses, different, according to the diversity of the phrases. To
beare sayle well, that is as much as to say, she is a stiffe guided ship, and will not couce downe on a side, with a great deale of sayle. A ship to beare-out her Ordnance, that is meant, her Ordnance lye so high, and she will goe so upright, that in reasonable sighting weather, she will be able to keep out her Low-Tire, and not be forced to snut in her pores: One ship over-beares the other, that is, was able in a great gale of wind, to carry out more sayles then the other, viz. a Top-sayle more or the like. To beare with the Land, or with a Harbour, or a Ship, is to sayle to∣wardsit, when we beare too wind-ward of it: To beare under the Lee of a ship, is when that ship which is to weather comes under the other ships-sterne, and so gives the wind to her; this is the greatest curresie that a ship can give an other at sea. The Peece will beare more shot, or not so much, that is, she is over-charged, or will endure a greater charge. The Peece doth come to beare a terme in the use of Ordnance: by which is meant, that now she lyes right with the marke. Beare in. When a ship sayles before, or with a large wind, into a Harbour, or Channell, or else sayles large towards the Land, we say, she-heares-in with the Channell, Harbour or Land, but if she sayle close by a wind, we use not that speech. Beare-off. When a Ship would not come neere a Land, or an other ship, but goes more Roomer then her course doth lye, we say that she beares off from the Land. Also, when we tell how one head-Land Iseland ship, or the like, doth lye from another, that is, upon what point of the Compasse, we say, they beare right East, or West, or otherwise, off one an other: In hoysing any thing into the ship, if it hath hold by any part of the ship, or Ordnance or the like, they say beare it off from the ship-side: So if they would have the breetch or mouth of a peece of Ordnance or the like, put from-ward one, they say, beare-off, or beare-about the breetch; So that generally, Sea-men use this word beare off (in businesse belonging to shipping) instead of the word thrust off, which to the like sense, is most commonly used amongst others. Beare up. This is a word we use in conding the ship, whenas we would have her goe larger or more before the wind then she did: Beare-up round, that is, to put her right afore the wind, or to bring her by the Lee: The manner of doing it, is no more, but thrusting the helme up to wind-ward, as farre as it will goe towards the ships side. Bedds. When the Decks lye too low from the Ports of that the Carriages of the peeces, with the Trucks cannot mount the Ordnance fittingly, but that they will lye too neere the Port Lasse, or Gun-wale; then we make a false Deck, for so much as the Peece will require for her Travesing, to raise it higher, this we call a bed: Also in the carriage of the Peece, that planck which lyes lower-most next the Carriage under the breetch of the Peece, whereon the Quoynes doe lye, is called the Bedd. To Belage.
Is to make fast any running Rope when it is hailed, as much as you would, as the Halliards, when you hoyce a-yard, or thesheates or Tacks, &c. so that it cannot run forth againe till it be loosed. A Bend. Is the outwardmost tymber on the ships-side, and is also called a Wale: these are the chiefe strength of the Ships-side, to which the Futtocks and knees of the Beames are Boleed, and they are called by the name of the first, second, &c. beginning with that next the water. To Bend, or Bent. Is taken in the common sense: as when the shancke of the Anchor is with over-much strayning crooked, we say, It is Bent: But it is otherwise used, as when they say, Is the Ca∣bell bent, that is, when it is seased and made-fast to the Ring of the An∣chor. Unbend the Cabell, that is, unbind it, which we doe commonly when we doe make account to be long at Sea, before we come into Har∣bour: To bend two Cabells or Roapes together, that is, to tye them to∣gether with a knot, and so to make their own ends fast upon themselves: This is not so sure as splising two Roapes together, but it is sooner done, and most commonly used, when we meane to take them a sunder againe, as when a Warp, or any Roape is too short for the present use. A Berth. Is a convenient distance and roome to Moore a ship in: Also when they would goe cleere of a Point, or a Rock, they say, take a good berth, that is, goe a pretty distance off to sea-Boord of it. Berthing. They call the raising or bringing-up of Ship-sides, the Berthing of her: as they say, A Clincher, hath her sides Berthed-up, be∣fore any beame be put into her. A Bight. By a Bight, is meant any part of a Roape, as it is taken compassing, as when we cannot, or meane not to take the end in hand, because of a Cabell, or other small Roape being Quoiled up: we say, give me the Bight, or hold by the Bight; that is, by one of the fakes, which lyes rowled up one over the other. Bildge, or Buldge. The Bildge of the Ship, is the bredth of the flooce, where∣on the ship doth rest, when she is a-ground. A ship is Bilged, that is, when she strikes on a Rock, or an Anchor, or the like, and breakes off her Timbers or planckes there, and so springs a Leake. Bildg-water. Is the water by reason of the Ships bredth and depth, lyes in the Bildge, and cannot come to the well, and therefore the Flem∣mish ships have generally, broader and longer floares then our ships have, besides the ordinary Pumps at the Mayne-mast, two Bildge-Pumps. A Bittakle. Is a close Cubbard placed in the Steeridge before the Whip, or Tiller, whereon the Compasse doth stand, which is not fastned
together with iron nailes, but wooden pinnes, because that iron would draw the Compasse, so that it would never stand true. These are to be so contrived, that they may carry candles or lamps in them, to give light to the Compasse so as it may disperse no light, and yet to let any be seene about the Ship. A Bitter. Is no more, but a turne of the Cabell about the Bitts, which is used in this kind, when we come to Anchor in any great Tide, or current, or wind, especially in deep water, after the Cabell is run-out a convenient way. We take a turne which is about the Bitts, that we may by little and little, veere it out at ease: for otherwise, if a stopper should chance to faile, the Cabell would run all-out, or as the phrase is, End for End, now this turne of the Cabell is called a Bitter, and when the Ship is by this meanes stopped, we say the Ship is brought up to a Bitter. A Bitter-end. Is that end of the Cabell, which is used to be with∣in boord, still at the Bitts, when the Ship rides at an Anchor, so that upon occasion when they would have that end bent to the Anchor, they say, Bend to the Bitter-end. The Bitts. Are the two maine square peeces of Timber which stand piller-wise, commonly placed abast the Manger in the Loofe of the Ship: and for no other use, but to make fast, or as it were, to Belage the Cabell unto, when we ride at an Anchor; The lower part of them, is fast∣ned, in holde to the Riders, but the middle part doth beare, for their better strength, and are bolted, in great Ships, to two beames, which crosse to the Bowes of the Ship, and therefore sometimes, in extraordinary stormes, we are faine to make fast the Cabell to the Maine-mast, for the better relieving the Bitts and safetie of the Bowes which have in great Road-steads been violently torne from the after-part of the Ship. Blocks.
Are these small wooden things, having Sheevers in them, wherein all the running-Roapes doe run. There are divers kinds of blocks: as single Blocks, double blocks; Blocks with 3,4, or 5, shee∣vers in them, and they are called by the names of Roapes whereunto they serve. As the sheate Block, the tack-Block, the fish-Block, &c. Note that double-Blocks, doe purchase more then single-blocks, and there∣fore in all places where we have occasion to use strength with few hands, we have double-Blocks (as to the Tacks of our Ordnance:) But you must note also, that though double-blocks purchase with more ease, yetsingle-blocks doe purchase faster: When we hale upon any Tackle, Halliards or the like, to which two Blocks doe belong, when they meet and touch, we can haile no more, and this we call Block and Block. Blowe. Every man knowes when the wind blowes: but there are some speeches used at Sea, which are not generally understood, as the wind blowes-home, or blowes through; That is, when the wind doth not cease, or grow lesse, till it comes past that place: Also, blow through, is sometimes used, when they think the wind will be so great, that it will blow asunder the sayles, In some places, (as I have seene at Santa Cray in Barbarie,) the wind being right-off the Sea, and a fresh gale, as much as we could beare out top-sayles, when we came within lesse then a League of the Roade, we had little or no wind at all, and it is in∣fallibly ever so. The naturall cause whereof, I could never find out: for it cannot be the height of the land, since all that Bay is low land, on∣ly the Cape which is not very high; and we know that at the Peekes of Tenneriff and Fyall (which are the highest Lands in all the world) it doth the contrary. Nor can it be the heate of the Land, which should duller the wind, for this happens there in the winter also, and besides we see the contrary in hotter Countries, when a wind increases so much that they cannot beare any top-sayles, then they use to say, that they were blowne into their courses, (that is,) could only have out those sayles. It blowes hard, fresh, stiffe, high; all words easily known when they expresse an extraordinary wind, they say, it will blow the sayle out of the Bolt-roapes: If the touch-hole of a Peece be gulld, much powder will flame out, and that is also called blowing. Bluff, or Bluff-headed.
The Boate belonging to a Ship, is either called the Ships-boate, or the Long-boate, and this is ever intended to be able to carry-forth and waigh her sheate Anchor; other small Boats, which they carry for lightnesse, to hoyse in and out quickly, are called Skiffes and Shallops, according to their forme. A good long boate will live in any growne sea, if the water be sometimes freed, unlesse the sea breake very much: The Roape by which it is towed at the Ships sterne, is called the Boate roape, to which, to keepe the boate from sheering, we adde an other, which we call a Gest-roape: we doe also to save the Bowes of the boate, which would be torne out with the twitches which the Ship under sayle would give, use to swite her, that is, make fast a Roape round by the gun-wale, and to that, make fast the Boate roape.Free the Boate, that is, fling out the water: Man the Boate, that is, some men goe to rowe the Boate: The Boates Ging, that is, those that use to rowe in the boate, which are the Cockson and his Ging, to whom the charge of the boate belongs: Fend the boat, that is, save her from bea∣ting against the Ship-sides: Wind the Boate, that is, bring her head the other way. A bolde Boat, that is one that will indure a rough Sea well. A ships Boate, is the very Modell of a Ship, and is built in parts in all things answerable to those which a Ship requires, both for sayling and bearing a sayle, and they beare the same names, as doe all the parts of a Ship under water, as, Rake, Run, Stem, Sterne, Bowe, Bildge, &c. Bolt or Bolts. Are iron pinnes belonging both to the building, and rigging of a Ship; of which there are divers kinds, as Ring-bolts, which are of infinite necessary use, both for the bringing to of the planckes and wales to the ship, as also the chiefe things whereunto we fasten the tac∣kles and breetchings of the great Ordnance. Drive-bolts, which is a long one to drive out an other bolt, or Treenell by. Set-bolts, used in the buil∣ding, for fireing the planckes, and other works close together. Ragg-bolts, which are sharpned at one end and jagged, that they may not be drawn-out. Clench-bolts, which are clinched with a Riviting hammer, to prevent drawing out. Fore lock-bolts, which are made at the end with an eye, whereunto a fore-lock of iron is driven over a Ring, to keep it fast from starting-back. Fender-bolts, which are made with a long head and beate into the outward most bend of the Ship, to save the ship sides, if an other ship should lye a-boord her. Bolts are many times cal∣led according to the places whereunto they are used, as chaine-bolts, bolts for Carriages and the like: The use of them is so great, that without them a ship cannot be built strong, for they bind together all the timbers knees and the like, which doe strengthen the Ship. A Bolt-roape. Is the Roape into which the Saile is soawed, or made fast: that is a three-strained-roape made gentle and not twisted so hard as the others, of purpose to be the more pliant to the saile, as also that they may soaw the saile into it the better. Bolt-sprit.
To this is fastned all the stages that belong to the fore-Mast, and fore-top-Mast, and fore-top-gallant, &c. with their bowlings, tacks, besides the rigging which belongs to its particular sayles, which are only two: viz. Sprits-Sailes, and sprit saile-top-saile, if a ship spend her bolt-sprit, or, as the more proper speech is, if the bolt-sprit drop bythe boord, the fore-mast will quickly follow, if it be a rough sea, especially if you goe by a wind, this beares the same proportion for length and big∣nesse, as the fore-mast doth. A Bonnet. Is belonging to an other saile, but is commonly used with none but the Missen, maine and fore-sailes, and the sprit-sailes I have seene, but it is very rate, a top-saile bonnet, and hold it very usefull in an easie gale, quarter winds or before a wind, this is commonly as deepe as the saile it belongs to, there is no certaine proportion for some will make the Maine-saile so deepe that with a showele bonnet, they will latch all the mast without a drabler: Others will make the maine-saile-showler, that they may with foule weather beare it safer, and then the bonnet will be the deeper. Lase on the bonnet, or bring to the bonnet, that is, put it to the course: loosing is here very proper, be∣cause it is made fast with latchetts, into the eylot-holes of the sayle: Note that when we doe speake of the saile in any correspondence to the bon∣net, we call it the course, and not the saile: as we say when a ship hath those sailes out; course and bonnet of each: not maine-saile and bonnet, and fore-saile and bonnet. Shake off the bonnet: that is, take it off. A Boome. Is a long Pole, which we use commonly to spread out the clew of the studding-sayle; yet sometimes also we Boome out the clewe of the Maine-saile, and fore-saile, to spread them out so much the broader to receive more winde. When we say a ship comes booming towards us, it is as much as to say, she comes with all the saile she can make: Note that booming of sailes, is never used but quarter windes, or before a winde: For by a wind, Studding sailes, and booming the sailes is not usefull: In comming into harbours where the channell is narrow and crooked, and the land about it overflowen, they use to set poles with bushes, or baskets at the tops, to direct how men should steere along the channell by them: and these are also in many places called Boomes, but in some others, they are called Beacons. Boord, or a Boord.
By this is not only meant deales-boords, or the like, but otherwise: for when we use the word, A boord, at sea, it is as much as to say, within the ship; To goe a boord, that is to goe into the ship. Bring the tack close a boord, that is, pull down the tack close to the Chestree or the gun-wale: Boord and boord, that is, when two ships touch each other. The weather-boord, that is as much as to say, to wind∣ward. To make a boord, or as we use to say, to boord it up to a place, isto turne to wind-ward; which we doe, by standing sometimes one way, sometimes the other for the gaining a place to wind-ward: In which, note that the farther you stand-off upon one point of the Compasse, the better boord you shall make: and it is better making long boords, then short-boords, if you have sea roome. A long-boord is, when you stand a great way off before you tack or turne. A short-boord, is when you stand-off but a little. A good boord, is when we have got up much to wind-ward, for sometimes we take a great deale of paines, and get little, either by reason of a current or tyde, that may take her on the wea∣ther-bowe, or by reason of a head-sea, which may drive her to Lee-ward, and hinder her way, or for that the ship may be a Lee-ward ship: Sometimes againe, when it is a smooth sea; a current under the Lee-bowe, and a good ship by a wind, she will get a point or two more in the wind then we expect. Here note that a crosse-saile ship in a sea, cannot make her wag neerer then 6 points, unlesse there be tyde or cur∣rent which doth set to wind-ward, within boord, with-out-boord-over-boord: by the boord, all tearmes obvious to common sense. To leave a land on back boord, is to leave it asterne, or behind, for the back boord, is that which in boates or skiffes, we leane our backs against. In fight, to boord a ship, is to bring the ship to touch the other, where you must note the advantages and disadvantages of every place in boording: and know that when two ships sight, the defendant may choose whether you shall boord him or no, but only in the quarter, which is a bad place to boord: For men can worst enter there, in respect that it is the high∣est part of the ships hull: and for that there is only the Missen-shrowdes to enter by; as also, for that ships are hottest there, and men being en∣tred there can doe little good, and are easily skowred off with Mur∣derers from the close-sights: the best boording for entring; is if you can, to boord on the bowe, for then you may quickly bring all your broade-side to: but the greatest advantage for use of Ordnance, is to boord a-thwart her hawes, for then you may use all your Ordnance on one side, and she can only use her Chase and her Prowe Peeces. The Bowe. Is that part of the ship which is broadest before, and begins from the Loofe, till it come compassing about towards the stem. The proportioning of this part, is of great importance for the sayleing of the Ship: for this first breakes-off the sea, and is that part which beares all the ship forward, on which is in a manner all the bearing of the ship:
If the bowe be too broad the ship will not passe easily through the sea, but carry a great deale of dead water before her: if it be too leane or thin, she will pitch or beate mightily into a hollow sea, for want of bredth to beare her up; so that there must be a discreet meane betwixt both these: The shaping of this part, doth much import the ships going by a-wind; yet I have seene ships of both sorts goe will by a-wind; but most commonly those that have good bolde bowes, and yet it is certaine, that a ships way-after-on is of more importance for her sayle∣ing by a wind. A bold bowe, is a broad round bowe: a Leane bowe, is a narrow thin bowe: the bowe Peece, is that which lies in the bowe. Bowling. Is a Roape which is fastned to the Leetch or midle part of the out-side of the sail, the use wherof is to make the sail stand sharper or closer, by a wind: The Antients, as it is reported, did ever sail before the wind, the reason wherof, I conceive to be, because they had not the know∣ledge and use of this Roape: It is fastned in 2, 3, 4, or more parts to the saile, which they call the bowling bridle, only the Missen bowling is fastned to the lower end of the yard: This Roape belongs to all sailes, excepting sprit-saile and sprit-saile top-saile, which have no place to haile a Bowleing forward by; and therefore these sailes cannot be used close by a wind. Sharpe the maine-bowleing: Set taught the bowleing, hale up the bowleing; all these are to make it puld-up hard, or more properly be haled more forward on: East the bowleing, check or conie up the bowling, that is, let it more slacke. A Bower. Is any Anchor, which Ships doe usually carry at the bowe, and from thence, hath its name: for our greatest Anchor we carry in holde, and for better stowage sometimes unstock them. Bowes, or to Bowse. Is a word they use, when they would have men pull together, and is chiefely used by the Gunners, when they haile upon their tackles, to thrust a Peece out of a port: they will cry, bowse hoa; that is, pull more upon the tackle: and then they know to pull altoge∣ther: And also, when there is occasion to pull more upon tackle, then the other, they will say, Bowse upon the tackle. Bracketts. Are certaine little peeces, in the nature of knees, which belong to the supporting of galleries, or ship-heads. Brases. These Ropes doe belong to all the yards, excepting the Missen-yard, they have a pendant which is seased to the yard-armes; for to every yard, belongs two Brases, and at the end of a pendant, a block
is seased, through which the Roape is reeved, which they call the Brase: The use whereof is, to square the yards and travers the yards: Brase the yard to right, that is to make it to stand just crosse the ship: To make right Angles with the length of the ship, all the brases doe come after∣ward-on-as the maine brase-to the Poope, the maine-top-saile Brase to the missen-top-and so to the main shrowds: The fort-and-fore-top-sayle brases, downe by the maine-and maine-top-sayle-stages; and so of the rest. The Missen bowling doth serve for a brase to the yard; but the crosse-jack brases, are brought forwards to the maine-shrowdes when we goe close by a wind. Brayles. Are small-Roapes reeved through blocks, which are sea∣sed on either side the ties, some small distance off, upon the yards, and so come-downe before the sayle, and are fastned to the Creengleyes, at the skirt of the sayle: The use whereof is to haile-up the bunt of the sayle, when we doe farthell our sayles a-crosse, which are in this, com∣modious for a man of war, that he may instantly make up his sayles, and let them fall, if in fight he should fall a sterne: for note, that in fight we desire to use as few sayles as we can, both for the trouble in trimming them, for saving our sayles, for hiding our sight, and for avoiding of fire which might light in them; and therefore when we say we will ship our selves into our fighting sailes, it is meant we have only the missen maine-top-sayle, with which sayles, a ship will work every way: These brailes doe only belong to the two courses and to the Missen: Haile up the brayses, and braise up the sayle, is all one; when Marchant-men will seeme to brave a man of war, if he chase them, they will brayle up their sayles, which is as much as to make a signe, they will fight with them. Breetch, and Breetching. The Breetch, is the after-most part of the Gunne, from the touch-hole which is in brasse Ordnance, ever allowed, to be as thicke as the diameter of the Bullet; and those Roapes which are bigger then the tackles that doe make, or lash fast the Ordnance to the ship-sides, being brought about the breetch of the Peece, are called, Breetchings, these we do not use in fight, but at sea, and chiefely in foule weather. A Breize. Is a wind, which blowes out of the sea, and doth daily in all seasonable weather, keep his course, beginning likely about nine in the morning, and lasting til it be within little of night we do not com∣monly call al winds that blow off the sea upon any coasts, Breizes, unlesse
it be there where this course is certaine, or rarely misses but in stormes and fowle weather: As for example; here on our coast, the winds are never extreame, but on the coast of Barbery, and other places more southerly, they are certaine to have the wind off the land all night, and off the sea all day. This Breize is also called a sea turne. A Brest-fast. Is a Roape which is fastned to some part of the ship fore-ward-on, and so doth hold fast the ships head to a wharffe or any thing else, and a sterne fast is the same for the sterne. Brest Roapes. Are the Roapes which make fast the parcell to the yard. Brooming. Is, when a snip is brought a-ground, or on the careene, to be trimmed, that is, to be made cleane, they burne off the old weeds or stuffe, which hath gathered filth; which they usually doe, either with Reed, Broome, old Roapes, or the like. A Budge-Barrell. Is a little barrell (not altogether so big as a barrell) which holds an hundred waight of powder, and hath a purse of leather, made at the head of it, which is to shut over the powder, to keep it from firing: we use to lay Ordnance with this in harbour for healthes and the like, but at sea in fight not, if we can get cathrages, which is the safest way. There are also latten budge-barrels, which are the best. Bulke. The Bulk of a ship, is her whole content in hould, as to say, she is a ship of a great bulke, that is, will stowe much goods; sometimes it is taken for the Merchants goods, as when they say, let our stock goe in bulk together. To breake bulke, is as much as to say, to open the houlde, or sell, or part all the goods in the houlde; As the Indies ships may sell any goods, which they have betwixt the decks, but they must not breake bulke, till they have order from the Company, that is, they must not open the howld, to meddle with any merchandize therein contained. Bulk-head. Is generally any division, which is made crosse the ship, with boords, whereby one roome is divided from the other, as the Bulk-head of the cabbin, the bulke-head of the halfe deck, the bulke-head of the bread roome, gun toome, or the like. Bunt.
The Bunt of a saile is, as it were in comparison to the wind, the cod of the net, which receives all the fish; and may as well be called the bag of the saile, and therefore we give a bunt to all sailes, to the intent they may receive much wind, (in which is the Anima sensitiva of aship,) if a saile have too much bunt, it will hang too much to Lee-ward-wind, and as they call it, hold much lee-ward-wind, which will hinder the ships sayling especially by the wind, if it have too little, then it will not hold wind enough, and so not give the ship sufficient way; The dif∣ference is rather perceived in top-sailes then the other, for courses are cut square, or at the least, with allowance of small compasse. Bunt-lines. Is a small line, which is made fast to the bottome of the saile, in the midle part of the bolt roape, to a creengle, and so reeved through a small blocke, seased to the yard, the use whereof is to trise up the bunt of the saile, for the better fartheling and making up of the saile. A Buoy. Is that peece of wood, barrell, or the like, which floates right over the Anchor, and is made fast by the buoy roape unto the flooke; The use whereof, is not only to take knowledge where the Anchor, but also to waigh the Anchor with the boate, which is sooner done then to weigh it with the ship: Sterne the Buoy, that is, before they let the Anchor fall, whilst the ship hath way, they put the Buoy into the water, so that the Buoy roape may be stretched out strait, and then the Anchor will fall cleere from entangling it selfe with the buoy roape. Buoyant, is any thing that is floating or apt to floate: To buoy up a cabell, that is to make fast a peece of floating wood, barrell or the like, to the cabell, somewhat neere to the Anchor, that the cabell may not touch the ground; this we doe in foule grounds, where we feare the cutting of our cabells: There are Buoyes also which doe belong to ships, and these are left at an Anchor in the sea, to shew where any dan∣ger is of sands or rocks: these are especially most needfull to be used, where the sands doe use to alter, or where we can have no fitting land∣marke. A Butt. By this word taken indefinitely, is meant a vessell or cask, as a Butt of wine, &c. but in sea language, thus, a Butt, is properly the end of a plancke, joyning to an other, of the outward side of the ship, under water. To spring a Butt, that is, when a planke is loose at one end, and therefore they bolt (in most great ships) all the Butt-head: by Butt-heads, is meant the end of the plancks. The Buttuck. Is the bredth of the ship, right-a-sterne from the tucke upwards: and therefore according as she is built, broad or nar∣row at the transom or laying out of her sterne, we say that the ship hath a broad or a narrow Buttock.
C A Cabell. IS a three-strand Roape, intended to be sufficient for a ship, to tide by at an Anchor, for otherwise it is counted but a hawser; for a great ships hawser, will make a small ships cabell: Cabells have severall appellations, as the Anchors: and are called, the first, second or third, as they grow in greatnesse; beginning with the last, till it come to the sheate-Anchor-cabell. The best cabells, are those which are made of the whitest stuffe, and therefore Streights cabells are the best: The next, the Flemmish and Rowsie, the last, ours: The ma∣king a cabell is termed the laying: as to say, this cabell was well layed: Sarve the cabell, or plat the cabell, is to bind some old roapes, cloutes or the like to save it from gawleing in the house: Splife a cabell, is to fasten two cabells together with a splife: Quile a cabell, is to lay it up in rowles one above another: Cabell, tire, is the cabell so laid up in rowles. Pay more cabell, that is, when they carry out an Anchor and cabell in the Boate, to turne over into the sea some cabell, that the boate may rowe the easier, and the cabell be slack in the water: Pay cheape, that is, fling it-over-a part: Veere more cabell, that is, let more goe out: Shot of cabell, vide Shot. Caburne. Is a small lyne made of spun-yarne to bind the cabells, or to make a bend of two cabells, or to sease the winding-taks, and the like. Calme, and be Calm-ing. Is, when at sea we have not any wind, and then we adde to it, these Epithetons, flat, dead, or starke-calme: A calme, is more troublesome to a sea-faring man, then a storme. If he have a strong ship, & sea-room enough. In some places, as in the Straights, when it is an extraordinary great storme, with much wind, and a wrought sea, on a suddaine there will be no wind, but a flat-calme, yet an-extraordinary billow which is wonderous troublesome and dan∣gerous, for the having no use of saile to keep her steddy on a side; the great sea, will make a ship rowle, so that unlesse she be a very fast ship in the water, she will be in danger to rowle her masts by the boord, or her selfe under water. Be Calming. Is when any thing takes away the wind from an other: As when one ship is close under the Lee of an other, the winder∣most
ship doth be-calme the Let-ward most: Also when we are neere the land, which keeps the wind from us, we say, it doth be-calme us. To Camber, or Cambering. We say, is a decke lies cambering when it is higher in the midle, then at either end, and so doth not lie upon a right line: This word, is most commonly applied to the ships keele and beames, and other rounding-peeces, in the ships frame. Cam∣ber-keeled, is when the keele is bent in the midle upwards, which hap∣pens many times by a ships over lying a-ground, when either her after∣most part, or fore-most doth not touch: but the most common cause, and the chiefe reason of combering in great and long ships, is the sharpenesse of the Hull afore and abast, and the fowlenesse of their floare. A mid-ships, which having more bredth to beare upon the water, is har∣der to sinke then both ends before and abast: which by reason of their sharpnesse, and great waight, over-head, and in their rakes, which over∣hangs the ground-worke, sinke faster into the water, and so their weight forces the keele and whole worke in the mid-ships, to give way up∣wards, which is the maine reason of the ships cambering. The Cap. Is the square peece of timber, which is put over the head of any mast, with a round hole, to receive into it the top-mast, or flag-staffe, by which the top-mast is kept steddy; for if the head of the maine-mast, be too short, so that the Cap-stand too neere the heele, or bottom of the top-mast, the top-mast will never stand steddy, and besides the weight of the top-mast, will straine the head of the maine-mast so much that it will be in danger to spend it, or beare it by the the boord: Every mast hath a Cap, if it carry an-other, or but a flag-staffe at the top. Cap Squares. Are the broad peeces of iron, which belong to either side of the carriage of a peece of Ordnance, to look over the Trunnions of the Peece, over which they are made fast in an Iron pin, with a fore-locke, the use whereof, is to keep the Peece, from flying or falling out of the carriage, when it is shot off, the mouth of it lying very low, or as the phrase is, under-mettle. The Capstaine. There are two kind of Capstaines, the first called the capstaine, or the maine capstaine: and is that peece of timber which is over-placed, right up and downe, next abast the maine-mast, the foot standing in a step, on the lower-deck, and the head being, betwixt the two upper decks; The parts are these, the foot, the spindle, the whelps, the barrell and the holds for the barrs, to which also belongs the darle of
Iron; the use of it, is chiefely to weigh our Anchors, and generally to hoyse our strike-downe top-masts, or to have in any thing of weight, as Ordnance or the like, or indeed, to straine any roape that requires great force. The second, is a Geere capsthine, which is placed in the same manner, betwixt the maine, and fore-masts; the use whereof, is chiefely to heave upon the Geere-roape, or else to hold off by, when we weigh the Anchor: At the foot of this, there are whelpes placed, in a lesser proportion, which is to heave upon the viole for the help of the maine capstaines, in weighing a great Anchor. Come you up-cap∣staine, that is, those at the capstaine must goe backward, and slacken the roape or cabell which they did heave at. In the same sense, they also use these words, Launch at the capstaine, that is, heave no more; rowle the capstaine, that is, to stay it with the iron paule, which bearing against the whelpes, keep the capstaine from turning back. Capstaine Bars. Are small peeces of timber put through the bar∣rell of the capstaine, through square holes of equall length of both sides, by which the men doe heave and turne about the capstaine. A Card, or Sea Card. Is a Geographicall description of Coasts, with the true distances, hights and courses, or winds laid downe in it, Not describing any In-land (which belongs to Mapps) the differen∣ces and uses of them, will require a long discourse, and they are set downe in most books which write of Navigation, and therefore I leave them to those bookes. Careene.
Careening, is the best way of trimming a ship under wa∣ter, both for that the Carpenters may stand upon the scaffolds, most commodiously to caulke the seames, or doe any other thing that shall be requisite; Also for the saving of the ground timbers, which, especially in ships of great burthen and weight, must needs be much wroong, though they be laid never so strong: besides, it is a most necessary trim∣ming for great ships, which are either old or weake built, and also for any ships that have but small floate, and are built so sharpe under wa∣ter, that they will be in danger of overthrowing when they shall be brought a ground. This careening is to be done in harbour, where the slower the tide runs the better: And it is most commonly used in such places, where there are no decks to trim a ship in, nor no good places to grave a ship on, or else that it doth not ebbe so much that a ship may shew-drie; For the manner of careening, it will be too long and un∣necessaryto set downe all the particulars: In generall, it is thus, they take out all, or leave but little of the provision, Ballast, Ordnance (or the like) in the ship: and you must have a lower ship by her, with which she must be haled-downe on a side, and righted againe with tac∣kles (yet with the weight of ballast above, or below, they doe effect the chiefe force of the businesse, and so never straine the ships masts much:) Note that all ships are not of a like condition to careene; for some ships will be very hard to come downe, though they have no bal∣last in them, and those are flemmings, built with two standing streakes, these must have some weight upon the deck to help them downe, and yet these will right themselves very easie, and therefore need not much in holde to help to right them; Some, as our English built, and the like, will come downe easie, and be hard to right, and therefore we keep somewhat in all these (to right them) in holde, and having nothing on the deck, some will come-downe easie and right themselves well: Some will doe neither, so that there is not one way for all, but as we see the condition of the ship, we fit things, and worke accordingly, any kind of bringing the Ship over to lye on-one-side (she being on floate) is called careening, though it be but a few streakes; as we say, she was careened three, foure or five strakes: If a ship lie downe much with a saile, they will say, she sailes on the careene. Carlings. Are those timbers which lie alongst the ship, from one beame to another; which doe not only serve to helpe to strengthen the ship, but on them the ledges doe rest, whereunto the planckes of the deck are fastned. Carling-knee. Are those timbers which come thwart ships, from the ship-sides to the Hatch-way, which is betwixt the two masts: These doe beare upon them the deck, on both sides the mast: and on the ends doe lie the coaming of the hatches. A Carriage. Is that whereon we mount our Ordnance; The parts whereof, are the two cheekes, the axeltrees, the bolts, the cap-squares, the hooks, the fore-locks, the trucks, and the lins-pins, (vide) every one of these, in his proper place: The fashion of these carriages we use at sea, are much better then those of the land; yet the Veetians, and others use the other in their shipping. A Peece cleeres a shot well, that is, shootes farre, and right, which is a signe that she is smooth and well metled.
A Carthrage. Is a bag made of canvas, which is reasonable good, being made upon a former, the Diameter whereof must be somewhat smaller then the Sillender of the peece, and of such a length or depth, as that it shall containe just so much powder as is the charge of the Peece: This is wondrous necessary for our great Ordnance in fight, both for speedy lading our Ordnance, and also for saving the powder which is in danger to be fired, if in fight we should use a Ladle: These carthrages are many times made of paper, parchment, or the like, but are not so good as the other: There are also other carthrages, or more pro∣perly, they are to be called cases for carthrages, which are made of Lat∣tin; in which we use to put these other carthrages, to bring almongst the ship, so much the safer from fire till we put them into the Peeces mouth, which is a dare, that in fight, there cannot be too much diligence and or∣der used. Carnells. Are Vessels which goe with Missen sailes instead of maine sailes, these will lie neerer the wind then crosse-sailes, but are not so commodious to handle, we have here little use of them, and therefore I speake not much. Carnell-worke. The building of ships first, with their timbers, and beames, and after bringing on their planckes, is called carnell-worke, to distinguish it from clinch-worke. Case, Is commonly made round of wood hollowed, and fit for the bore of the Peece, by which most conveniently we can put murde∣ring shot into the Peece: We likewise use baggs to the same purpose, but they are not so convenient as wooden cases, because they are apt to catch hold by the way in the flawes of the Peeces: Also some call the sheathing of a ship, the caseing of her. Case-Shot. Is any kind of old Iron, stones, Musket-bullets, or the like; which we put into cases, to shoot out of our great Ordnance: These are of great use, and doe much execution amongst men, that ply their small-shot, when we come neere, or lie boord and boord. Casketts. Are small strings made of synnet, flat; they are made fast to the upper part of the yards, in little rings which they call Grommets; Their use is to make fast the saile to the yard when we farthell it up: The biggest and longest are placed just in the midle of the yard, betwixt the ties; these doe make up the bunt of the saile, and are termed the brest casketts.
Catharpings. Are small roapes, which run in little blocks (like a minnom) from one side of the shrowdes, to the other, neere the deck; The use whereof, is to force the shrowdes taught for the better ease, and safety of the mast in the rowleing of the ship; they are only used to the maine-shrowdes, and fore-shrowdes; Also at the setting on of the Puttocks of the shrowdes, they are used; but here they are ever made fast, and doe not run in blocks. Catt. The cart, is a peece of timber, fastned aloft, right over the hawse, and hath at the end thereof, two sheevers, wherein is received a roape, with a block, whereunto is fastned a great hooke of iron, after the manner of a double tackle: The use is to trise up the Anchor from the hawse, to the top of the fore-castle, where it is fastned with a stopper. Catt the Anchor, is to hitch the hooke in the ring of the Anchor. Catt-holes. Are two little holes above the gun-roome ports a∣sterne for this use, that when we have occasion to heave the ship a∣sterne, by a-sterne: Fast they bring in the cabell, or hawser, by them to the capstaine, the sterne Ports are not so good, because they lie not so even with the capstaine. Caulke. Caulking, is the driving of ockham, spun haire, and the like, into all the seames, rends and treenels throughout the ship, without the which, it is impossible for a ship, to be made thite to swimme, and keepe out water. Chafe. Or chasing is, when any roape is gualed, or fretted, as we say, the cabell is chafed in the hawse, or when a roape rubbs against any thing which is not smooth and even, we say, it will chafe the roape. Chaines. By naming the chaines of a ship indefinitely, is meant those chaines to which the shrowdes are made fast, on the ship-sides; also those that belong to the top-mast shrowdes, are called chaines: In fight we use to sling our yards in chaines, for feare least the ties should be cut, and so the yards fall downe, and these chaines are called slings. Chaine Walls. Is a broader timber, set on the out-side of the ship, then the ordinary walls, and is made of purpose to spread out the shrowdes wider, that they may the better succour the mast. A Chamber. Is a charge made of brasse or iron, which we use to put in at the breech at any murtherer, or fowley, and containes just so much powder, as is fit for to deliver away the murdering shot, or case shot, contained in that Peece: Also the chamber of a great peece of whole
Ordnance is counted so farre, or so much of it, as doth containe the whole charge it hath. Channell. By channell, is meant the deepest part of any River, or Harbours mouth; as when we say Steere in the channell, is meant the deepest part of the River; In places where there are loose sands, the channels doe alter much according to extraordinary winds, which come and drive the sands with the sea, sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other; As when I came into Mamora, the channell lay hast-south-hast, and west-north-west, but in two Moneths after, by reason of a fresh shot, it changed to lie in hast-north-hast, and west-south-west, which is five points of the Compasse; Sometimes we also call narrow seas, chan∣nels, as the English channell betwixt France and England, and Saint Georges channell, betwixt England and Ireland: but being in those Seas, if we say steere in the channell, it is meant in the middest of the sea. Charge. We use to say, charge a Musket, but load or lade a peece of Ordnance; A ship of great charge is commonly meant by a ship that drawes much water; and sometimes for an unweidie ship, that will not veere and steere, for then she is dangerous, and chargeable upon a lee∣shore; Also every mans office in a ship, is called his charge. Chase. When a man of Warre, doth follow any ship out of his course: or else when any other ship doth alter her course, so as to use all the meanes they can to fetch up and speake with the other ship; we call that chaseing: And the ship so followed, we call the chase: (as meaning by her,) we say, the chase stands thus, or the chase hath taken in her top-sailes, or the chase is strooke a hull, &c. There is great expe∣rience and judgement to be used in chaseing; For though two men be equally Mariners, and know how to saile and direct his ship, yet if one be a practique man of war, and the other not, the man of war will doe much better: The pretence in any chasing, is to make the shortest way of it that they can; which is by judging of the chases course so to shape yours, that you may meet in the neerest angles: There is no certaine rule for chasing; for we must many times be ruled by the condition of our ship: As if the chase clap close by a wind (it being a head-sea) and the man of wars ship, be a short ship, that beates much into the sea, and a lee-ward-ship, then if he clap close by a-wind, his ship will make no way, and therefore he must give a little more large, though he chase
under the lee of the other: In chasing, we alwayes connet to get to wind-ward, in respect that it is advantage in fight: And for that we cannot boord a ship, being too lee-ward, but sometimes (as if it be towards night) to keep sight of the ship, or the like, we must be con∣tent to come under his lee, and get as neere as we can: The sterne chase, that is, when we follow her right a-sterne, and she and we goe right upon one point of the Compasse: To lee with her fore-foot, is the neerest and shortest, that is (as you would say) to lie just a crosse her way, so that both keeping on their courses, they shall meet all at a cer∣taine point. Chase peeces, are those, which lie right forward one, when we say that a ship hath a good chase, indefinitely, it is meant of her chase for-ward, and that is, when she is so contrived, that she can carry many Peeces, to shoote right forward, for to the other, I use to adde the word sterne-case; The peeces of Ordnance, which lie right fore∣ward-on, are called chase-Peeces. Cheekes. Are two peeces of timber, which are fitted on each side of the mast, from beneath the hounds, to the upper end of the mast; and they are made of Oake, to strengthen the mast thereabouts, both for the bearing of the top-mast, and hoysing of the yards. In these are the honnes made for the ties to run in: The knees which fasten the beake-head to the bowe of the ship, are called cheekes: Also the sides of any blocks, are called the cheekes: Likewise the sides of the carriages, where the turnions of the Peeces doe lie, are called, the cheekes of the carriages. Cheteres. Are the two small peeces of Timber with a hole in them, in which the maine-tack doth run, and to which the tack is haled-down, these are placed a little abast the loofe of the ship, the one on the one side, the other on the other. Choake. When a running roape sticks in the block either by slipping betwixt the cheekes and the sheever or by any other occasion, that any thing be got about it, or that it have a kinke, so that it cannot run and be haled through, we say the blocke is choaked. Clamps. Are those thick timbers which lie fore and aft, close under the beames of the first orlep, and doe beare them up at either end, and are the same that the risings are to the other decks, vide risings. A Cleate. Is a small wedge of wood fastned on the yards, to keep any roapes from slipping by where that is fastned: There are also divers
other uses of it: as to keep the eating of the saile, from slipping of the yard. Clewe. The clewe of a saile, is the lower corner of the saile, which reaches downe to the place where the tacks and sheates are made fast to the saile, and it is counted that part, which comes goaring out from the square of the saile, towards the lower corner; when a saile is much goaring, then she hath a great clew; when a little goaring, then she hath a little clew; when it is cut right square and hath no clew, and yet that lower corner of the saile, shall retaine the name of the clew of the saile: A ship spreads a great clew, that is, hath very broad yards, and so spreads much canvas; it is good to allow a good clew to a maine saile; for by that meanes, the tack will come the better aboord, and the sheate will come farther aft, whereby the saile will hold more wind. Clew-garnet. Is a roape which is made fast to the clew of the saile, and from thence runs in a block, which is seased to the midle of the yard: The use whereof is, when we farthell our maine-saile, or fore∣saile; for the name of clew-garnet doth only belong to the clew-lines of those two sailes, then this roape doth hale up the clew of the saile, close to the midle part of the yard. Clew-line This is the same to top-failes, top-gallant-sailes, and sprit-sailes, that the clew-garnet is to the maine saile, and hath the very same use: Note in foule weather, the gust, when we take in our top-sailes, we hale home the lee-clew-line first, because the saile will be taken in so much the easier. A Clincher. Is a small Ship, Barke or Boate, whose planckes and boardes are larded over one an other, and clinched or nailed one through another, with nailes and rooves: whose out-side are berthed or wrought up without timber, framed as we doe in other ships, which worke is cal∣led carvell worke. To Clinche. Is to barter or rivet a bolts-end upon a ring, or turne back the end of any naile, so as to make it fast at that end which is driven through; we also call that part of the cabell, which is seased about the ring of the Anchor, the clinch of the cabell. Clinching.
Is as you would say, a slight caulking, and is most used when we are at sea, and suspect foule weather, so that we may take in water at the ports: we use to command the Carpenter to clinch the ports, that is to drive a little oacham into the seames of the ports,which may be done (to serve turne) either within boord, or without boord Cloathe. We say a saile doth cloath the mast when it is so long, that it touches the gratings or hatches, so as no wind can goe betwixt the saile and the hatches and gratings: A ship spreads much cloath, that is, when she hath broad sailes. Cloyde. When there is any thing got into the touch-hole, or breech of the Peech, so that the priming-powder cannot come to give fire to the rest, we say, the peece is cloyd. Coamings. The coamings or coaming of the hatches, or the gra∣tings, is that peece of timber or plancke, which beares them up higher then the decks, so as that they doe not lie even with the deck. The uses whereof, are to keep the water from running downe at the hatches to give some ease for men to stand upright betwixt the lower decks, if the decks be low, and neere together; and also in the coamings they may fit holes for to use Muskets, and so serve for a close fight. Coates. Those peeces of tard-canvas, which are put above the masts, at the partners, and the lumps at the deck, that no water may run down by them, are called coates. The same is used to the rudder-head. Cocks. Are little square things of brasse with a hole in them, put in∣to the midle of some of the greatest wooden sheaves, to keep them from splitting and gulling by the pin of the block whereon they turne. The Collar. Is that roape which is made fast about the beake-head, whereunto the dead-man-eye is seased, unto which the maine stay is fa∣stned. There is also a roape about the maine-mast-head, which is called a collar, or a garland, and is there placed, to save the shrowdes from galling. The Combe. Is a small peece of timber, set under the lower part of the beake-head neere the middest, with two holes in it, and is just in the nature, and hath the same use to the fore-tacks, that the chef-trees have to the main-tacks, which is, to bring the tack a-boord. Compasse.
Is that moveable instrument with a flie, whereon are described the 32 points or winds by which we direct the steere, our courses at sea. The fashion is knowne to all, and for the uses, they are handled at large in many books which write of Navigation. There are three kinds; First the plaine Meridionall compasse (which is the or∣dinary one;) the second, a compasse of Variation, which shewes thevariation of the Compasse from the true north and south. The third, is a dark-compasse, which being but an ordinary compasse in use, is only so called, because the flie hath the points described with no colours (as the other are, but only black and white, being most convenient to be seen, when we steere by night, without any light, but only skie-light. To Cond, or Cun. I think this word comes of conducere in Latine; so it imports as much as to leade or direct the ship which way she shall goe; it is commonly pronounced thus: Cun the ship, which implies as much as to direct him at helme how to steere. In long courses, when we are off at sea, there is not so much heed taken of it, for then they direct their course upon a point of the Compasse, and so let him at the helm look to the steere right on that point; but in chases and narrow channels (where the course lyes not directly upon a point of the com∣passe) there the Master, Mate, or some other standing-aloft, doth give direction to him at the helme; and this we call conding or cuning: Sometimes hee who commands the ship will be speaking to him at helme, at every little yawe, (which the sea-faring love not, as being a kind of disgrace to their Iteeridge) then in mockage they will say, sure the channell is narrow he conds so thick; whereby you may gather, that in narrow channels, it is necessary and usefull to cond thick. Note that according as the ships sailes are trimmed either before or by a wind, so they use severall termes in conding, and to use other, were improper and ridiculous amongst them: If the ship goe before a wind, or as they terme it, betwixt two sheates, then he who conds uses these termes to him at the helme, starr-boord, lar-boord, the helme a mid-ships. Note that when we say starr-board, the meaning is, that he must put the helme to the starr-board side, and then the ship will goe to larr-boord, for the ship doth ever goe contrary to the helme, if the ship goe by a wind, or quarter-winds, they say a loofe, or keep your loof; or fall not off, veere no more, keep her to: touch the wind; have a care of the lee-latch; all these do imply the same in manner, and are to bid him at the helme, to keep her neere the wind: East the helme; no neere; beare up; these words do appoint him to keep her from the wind, and make her goe more large or right before: Some speeches are common to both, as steddy, that is, keep the ship from going in and out, but just upon the point that you are to steere, and as you goe; and such like. Cooke-Roome. The Cooke-Roome, is the place, where they dresse
their victuals, and this room is to be placed in divers parts of the ship, ac∣cording to the ships imployment, in Marchant-men (who must imploy all their hold for the stowing of their goods, and so stow their victuals be∣twixt their decks (it is best to have the Cook-room in the fore-Castle) e∣specially being contrived in the furvasses, for the saving of wood, in long journies: as also for that in fight, they bring their stern and not their Prowe to fight: and therefore it will be the lesse discommodity to them: besides, they doe not carry so much ordnance fore-ward on, and therefore the weight of the Cook-room, is not so offensive: but in a man of warre, it is most inconvenient to have it in the fore-ship or fore-castle: my reasons these. 1. It will (be it placed as well as can be) hinder the use of the ord∣nance. 2. It will lie over the powder. 3. Being a man of war pretends to fight most with his prowe; that part is likewise to receive shot, which if any chance to come amongst the bricks in the Cooke-roome they will spoyle more men then the shot: And besides, the Cook-roome it self for that voyage is spoyled, there being no meanes to repaire it at sea, and then they must needs use another; so that I thinke no man of discretion wil commend or use that for most sufficient, wch is most subject to be de∣stroyed, and cannot be repaired. 4. A man of war, ever carries much ord∣nance there, and therefore it is fit to avoid (as much as may be, any weight that may charge her fore-ship.
5. It is dangerous for firing the ship: for being made-up to the ship-sides, so that men cannot go round about it in long continuance, and much heating they may fire the ship unawares. 6. It takes away the grace and pleasure of the most important and pleasantest part of all the ship: for any one who comes a boord a man of warre, will principally look at her chase, being the place where the chiefe offensive force of the ship should lie. And to conclude, I do not know any com∣moditie it can give to a man of warre: wherefore in my opinion, the best placing the Cooke-roome, is in the hatch-way, upon the first Or∣lop (not in the howld, as the Kings ships doe, which must needs spoyl all the victuals with too much heating the howld, or at the least, force them to stowe it so neare the stern and sterne, that it must needs wrong and wring the ship much, and loose much stowage: and it being there placed, as it doth avoid all the former inconveniences, both of the hold and fore-castle, and yet shall be as serviceable, so hath it this benefit more: That it doth wonderfully well aire the ship betwixt the decks, which is a great health unto the company. But if I were to goe to Sea,as a man of warre, I would have no Cook roome at all; but such an one as I would have contrived to be removed, and strooken downe in howld if I list, and yet it should waste no more wood then these doe, and dresse sufficient victuals for the companie, and roaste or bake some competent quantitie for the Commander; or any persons of qua∣litie. Cardage. All kind of ropes belonging to the rigging of a ship, is by a generall Appellation called Cordage. Cowneer, Is the hollow arching-part in the ship sterne, betwixt the Transom, and the lower part of the Gallerie, which is called the lower Counter, the upper Counter is from the Gallerie, to the lower part of the upright of the sterne. Cowrse. Is taken for that point of the Compasse, which the ship is to saile upon, as to say, the place we must now goe to lyes East, we then direct our course East. Alir the course, that is, saile upon ano∣ther point of the Compasse; Mistake the course, that is, not to know how the land lyes, or which way to goe, also Maine-course and fore-cowrse Missen-cowrse, are the failes without the bonners; note all ships of great burthen have double courses to hold more wind, and give the ship more way in a fresh gale, but in an easie gale they hinder (as doe all things that are weighty over head.) A Crabb. Is an Engine of wood, with three clawes placed on the ground, just in the nature of a Capstaine being placed, and most com∣monly used where they build ships, for the launching out, or heaving in of a ship into the docke, or off the key. A Cradle. Is a frame of Timber, brought along the out-side of the ship by the Bildge, wherein they doe launch ships for the greater safety. In Spaine, and other places, they use to trim all their great ships in them. Craft. Is any kind of Nets or lines, or hookes to catch fish, for at sea, they will say, when they have lost their lines or Nets, that they have lost their craft, we also call small vessels, as Ketches, Hoyes, Craes, and the like, small Craft, and he that sailes in them, we say he uses small craft. Cranckc. We say a ship is cranek-sided, when she will beare but small saile, and will lie downe very much, with little winde, the came thereof, is, that her breadth being laid too low, she hath nothing to
beare her up, when once she begins to heele, we also say she is cranckc, by the ground, when she cannot be brought a ground, but in danger to overthrow: the reason whereof is; she hath no bildge to beare her, her floare being laid too narrow. Creengles. Are little Roapes spliced into the bolt-Roapes, of all failes belonging to the maine and Fore-mast, unto which the Bowling bridles are made fast, and they are also to hold by, when we shake off a bormet. Cros-bar. Is a round shot, with a barre of iron, (as it were) put through the middle, comming out at both ends, some 6. or 8. Inches more or lesse, this will not flee so farre as a round shot, but further then a Langrell or chaine-snot; it is very good to use in fight; for the cut∣ting and spoyling of Roaps, sailes, yards and masts, as also to doe exe∣cution amongst men, where they stand plying their small shot, but it is not used under water, for that it will hardly goe through a good ship sides, unles it be used out of very great ordnance. Cros-Jack. Is a yard at the upper end of the Missen Mast, under the top, and there is sloong, having no halliards, nor ties belonging to it: the use whereof is to spread, and hale-on the missen top-saile Sheates. Cros-peece. Is the great peece of timber, which goes a crosse the bit-Pipes, and is that whereunto we be-lay the Cabell. Cros-trees. Are those crosse peeces of timber, which are set on the head of the Mast, being bolted and let into one another very strong. In a generall Appellation, all these fore-Peeces, being so made, and put together, are called the crosse-trees, but in truth and more strictly, on∣ly those two peeces, which goe thwart ships, are called crosse-trees, and the other which goe longst ships are called Treissell Trees, the use wher∣of is to beare and keepe the top-mast up, for the foot of the top-mast is fastned in them, so that they beare all the stresse. These also do bear up∣on them the tops, and do necessarily belong to all Masts, which carry a∣ny other top or flag-staffe at the head. Crow-feet.
Are those small lines or roapes, which stand in 6, 8, 10. or more parts, being so devided and put through the holes of a dead-man-eye, they are of no necessitie, but only set up by the boat-swaines, to make the ship shew full of small rigging; and are placed to the bot∣tome of the Back-stages of the fore-top-mast, sprit-saile-top-mast-mis∣sentoppe-mast, and the toppe-gallant-masts. Cubbridg-head. Is the same that is a bulke head: onely that we use this word to the bulke head of the fore-Castell and the halfe decke, which we call the cubbridge-head a-fore or the cubbridge-head abast. Culver-taile. Is a manner of letting one timber into another, so as that by no means they can slip out: All their Carlings have their ends so let into the beames. Cut. This word is used in this sence, cut the saile, that is, when men are aloft upon the yard, the maine saile, ok forr-saile, being far∣thelled up, they must let it fall downe, when a saile is well fashioned, they say it is well cut: Cut the Cabell in the lawse, that is most com∣monly used, when we ride in some stormes, and desire to set-saile, but cannot stay the waighing of the Anchor, for feare of driving too much to lee ward, or the like: Generally when upon any occasion, we can∣not stay to waigh the Anchor, then we put the Cabell in the hawse, to save so much as we can of it: In extraordinary occasion (either at an Anchor, or at sea, we sometimes cut the Masts, by the boord the cause) at an Anchor, is when the storme encreases, so that the power which the wind hath upon the rigging and the mast, doth force her Anchors to come home, or else endanger the breaking of the Cabel, then they cut downe the mast: but if therebe only a great sea gate, and little or no wind, there it is to no purpose to cut the masts, for they doe little or no hurt. This happens in many places, where the winde doth not blow home, as at Santa Cruz in Barbarie, where some have rid such a roade, that the sea hath broke over their fore-top, and yet not a breath of winde. At sea, they cut the masts on these occasions, when an extraor∣dinary gust or storme hath so laid the ship on-side, that there is no hope that she can right againe, and so would quickly be over-set, or filled with water, then in cutting the Mast, first cut the lee-shrowdes, for els when the mast is over boord, it will be hard cutting them, and the end of the mast may chance ro beate out the ships side, next cut a little into the weather-side of the mast, and then cutting the weather shrowdes, the mast will instantly and without danger fall over boord. Likewise at sea, in a great storme, where the ship rowles much, if the partners give way, the mast will rowle out the ships sides. In this case also, if they cannot be mended, the mast must be cut by the boord. Cut-Water. The Cut-water is the sharpenesse of the ship before,
which doth as it were, cut the water and divide it before it comes to the bowe, so that it may come by degrees, and not too suddainly to the bredth of the Ship, otherwise the ship would beate so full against the water, that she would make but little way: And therefore many times when a ship is to Bluffe, we put to a false stem, and as it were lengthen her for-ward-on, and this we call a Cut-water, which will not only make her saile better, but also make her keep a better wind and not to beate so much against a head-sea. D The DAvitt. Is a peece of timber, having a notch at one end, where∣on they hang a block by a strap: and this is only used for to hang that block on, which is called the fish block, by which they hale up the flooke of the Anchor, to the ships bowe or loofe. It is shifted to either side as they have occasion, and is not made fast to the ship, but laid by till it be used, it is put out betwixt the catt and the loofe: Launch out, or launch in the Davitt, that is, put it out or in: Also the boate hath a Davitt, which is set out over the head of the boate with a sheever, into which they bring the bouy roape to weigh the Anchor, and it stands in the Carlings that are in the boates bow. Dead men-eyes. Are a kind of blocks, wherein there are many holes, but no sheevers, wherein the Lanniers goe that make fast the shrowdes to the chaines; The maine stayes in some ships, are set taught by lanniers in Dead-men-eyes, but most great ships use double-blocks; the Crowe-feete doe reeve through dead-men-eyes. Dead-water. The water which is the Eddie water at the sterne of the ship, is called dead-water, and therefore we say, a ship holds much dead-water, that it hath a great Eddie followes her at the sterne or rud∣der, and this may be called dead, because it doth not passe away with that life, and quicknes as the other doth. Deck.
The Deck is that floare of planck, whereon we place our Ordnance, it lies upon the beames; they are called by the name of first, second or third deck, beginning at the lowest: also there is the halfe deck, that is, the deck which is from the Maine-mast to the stem, and quarter-deck, which is from the steeridge aloft to the Masters cabbin:There is also the spar-deck, which is the upper-most, betwixt the two Masts, and is made very slight, with a meting, or slight boords, towards the sides of the ship, and a grateing in the middest; also these decks are called by the name of Orlops, as they use to say, the first or second Or∣lop; a flush Deck, or as they use to say, a Deck flush, fore and aft, that is, when from stem to stem, it lies upon a right line without any fall: Note that the best contriving of a man of war, is to have the decks flush, and to have all her ports on that deck on an equall height, so as that every Peece may serve any port, the reasons are, for that the decks be∣nig flush, men may passe fore and art with much more ease, for the de∣livering powder and shot, or releeving one another; but chiefely for that if a Peece or two be dismounted by shot in any place where there is a fall, another cannot be brought to supply his place, besides the dis∣commoditie that by disjoyning the equall bearing part of the ship, the ship is much weakned, and also it looses much stowage in the sterne-sheates, yet there may be some use of these falls to a Merchant man for his defence, who may fit a close fight out of every fall, and though he loose one part of the deck, yet he may still keep more to be gained from him: The Deck cambers, that is, when it doth not lie flat, but compassing; To sinck a deck, or to let fall a deck, is to remove it and place it lower: To raise a deck, is to put it higher above water; the making of a deck is termed, the laying of a deck. Deep-see-Lead. Is the Lead which is hung at the deep-see line, to sinck it downe; the waigh: whereof is commonly 14. pounds; this hath some hard white tallow laid upon the lower end of it, which brings up the ground, and so by the differences of the ground, we know where and upon what coast we are: But in Ozie ground, we use a white wool∣len cloth upon the lead, with a little tallow, without which cloth, the Ozie would not stick unto the tallow. Deep-see-Line. Is a small line, with which we sound in deep wa∣ters to find ground, and so according to the depth and ground in many knowne places; as in the comming into our channell, and many other places (when we can see no land, yet we know where we are. To Disembogue. Is as much as to say, to come out of the mouth of any Gulph; which being large within, may have some straight, or nar∣row comming out being used thus; When they come out of the West-Indies, betwixt Cube and Cape, Florida, which is the straight where∣out
out the current doth set, they say, they Disembogued out of the gulph; but it is not used, for the going out of a Harbour, or the like. To Dispert. Disperting, is the finding out of the difference of the Dia∣metres of the Mettles, betwixt the breetch and the mouth of any peece of Ordnance, by which we know what allowance to give to the mouth of the Peece (being ever lesse then the breetch) that thereby we may make a just shot; there are divers wayes, but the plainest is the surest and best, which is, by putting in of a strawe, or small stick at the touch-hole, at the lower side of the concave or sillender of the Peece, and then apply it in the same manner to the mouth, and it will exactly shew the diffe∣rence of the thicknesse of the Mettle, at the breetch and mouth of the Peece. Dock. There are two kinds of Docks, a drie dock, which is made with flood-gates, to keep out the Tide, in which we build ships, and re∣paire them, wherein they sit without danger and harme: the other is a wet Dock, which is any creeck or place where we may cast in: a ship out of the Tides-way in the Oze, and there, when a ship hath made her selfe (as it were) a place to lie in, we say, the ship hath docked her selfe. A Drabler, Vide Bonnett. For this is in all respects the same to the Bonnett, that the Bonnett is to the Cowrse; This is only used, when the Cowrse and Bonnett are to showle for to cloath the Mast, some small ships which are Coasters, and therefore are, for most convenience, to have short cowrses, doe use two Drablers. Draggs. Any things that hang over the ship in sea, as Shirts, Gownes and the like, as also the Boate in that respect, all which doe hin∣der the ships way under saile, are called Draggs. Draught. By Draught in water, is meant so many foot as the ship goes in water: A ship drawes much water, that is, goes deep in water: A ship of small draught, that is, drawes but little water. Note that ships of great draught are commonly wholsome ships in the sea; and ships of little draught, commonly goe best, but rowle most, the first is best for a long voyage, the last for a discoverie. To Dregg. Or Dregging, is to take a little Crapnell, which being hung over the Boats-sterne, we let downe to dregge upon the ground, to find a Cabell which hath been let slip, unto whole Anchor there was no buoy, for this passing along the ground as the Boate doth row, will catch hold of it if it meet with it.
A Drift-saile. Is a saile used under water, being veered out right a-head, having sheates to it; the use whereof, is to keep a ships head right upon the sea in a storme; also it is good, where a ship drives in fast with a current, to hinder her driving in so fast; but it is most com∣monly used by Fisher-men in the North seas. Drive. We say a ship Drives, when we let fall the Anchor, and it will not hold the ship fast, but that she falls away with the tide or wind; for which we have no help, but to veere more cabell, for you must note, that the more Cabell is out, the faster and surer the ship will ride, or else to let-fall more Anchors: Also, when a ship is a-hall or a-trie, we say, she drives to Lee-ward, or drives in with the shore, and the like, according to the way she makes. Duck-up. This terme is used with the Clew-garnet and Clew∣lines of the maine-saile, fore-saile and sprit-saile, whenas the maine-saile or fore-saile doth hinder his sight fore-ward, that steerers, or any the like occasion: And to the sprit-saile, most commonly when we make a shot with a Chase peece, for the clew of the sprit-saile, will hinder the sight, and being not ducked up will be shot away, so then we say, Duck-up the Clew-lines. E EAring. Is that peece or part of the Bolt-roape which at all the fower corners of the saile is left open, as it were a ring; The two uppermost are put over the ends of the yards or yard armes, and so the saile is at those two ends made fast to the yard, into the lowermost, the tacks and sheates are seased, or as the more proper terme is, they are bent unto the clew. To Ease. This word is used in the same sence at sea, as otherwise we use the word stook, for generally, when we would have any roape slacker and not so hard strained, we say Ease it, (as ease the bowlings, sheates, &c.) only when the tack should be slackned; the proper terme is, let rise the tack, which is a very fit terme, in respect that the tack beng loosed, it rises up from the Chestrees unto which it was haled close. An Eddy. Is the running back of the water in some place, contrary
to the Tide, and so falling into the Tide againe, which happens by reason of some head-land, or great point, in a River comming out suddenly, and so hindring the full passage of the water, which is had in the Chan∣nell before it came to the point. An Eddy-wind. Is that wind, which recoyles, or returnes back from any saile, hawse, or the like, going contrary to that wind where it pro∣ceeds, but is never so strong as the other. End for End. That is a terme used, when any roape doth run all out of the block, so that it is un-reeved; or as when a cabell or hawse, doth run all out at the hawse, which may happen, either of purpose, to save the Cabell, or by chance, when comming to an Anchor, if they should misse laying on the stoppers, or that the stoppers should breake, then they say, the cabell at the hawse is run-out End for End. Enter. To Enter, is to come into a ship, but in fight, they must be carefull to cleere the Decks with Fire-pots, or the like, if it be possible from the traines of powder, before men doe enter; for it happens many times, that there are more men lost in a minute, by entring, then in long fight boord and boord; and therefore being so dangerous, it is fit, that men should be well advised first, though many times if a ship be not well provided of close fights, it is the speediest and safest way of taking them. Entring-ladder. Of this there are two, the one, which is used by the ships side, in Harbour, and faire weather, with Entring-roapes to it: this is all made of wood, the other is made of roapes, with small staves for stepps, which is hung over the gallery, for entring out of the Boate in fowle weather, when by reason of the ships heaving and setting, they dare not bring the Boate to the ship-side, for feare of staveing. Entring-roape. Is the roape which hangs by the side of the ship, in the waste, where men doe usually come a-boord the ship out of a boate, but it is taken generally for any roape which is given a man to enter by. Eyes. The hole wherein the ring of the Anchor is put, is called the Eye of the Anchor, also the compasse, or ring, which is left of the strap whereunto a block is seased, is called the Eye of the strap. Eylot-holes. Are those round holes alongst the bottom of those sailes, unto which doe belong Bonnets, and the Bonnets have the same for the Drablers, they have a little line sowen about them, to make
them strong; and serve for no other use but to receive into them the Latchets of the Bonnets, or, Drablers, with which the Bonnet is lased to the Cowrse, and the Drabler to the Bonner. F FAddom. A faddom is six foot, which though every one know, is set down to give notice that we measure the length of all our roapes, by Faddoms, and not by any other measure, as we doe the compasse of the roapes by inches; for we say, a Cabell or Hawfier is so many faddome long, or so many inches about; also we reckon in sounding by Faddomes. A Facke. Is one circle of any roape, a cabell that is queiled up round; and so when they veere out a cabell, they many times aske, to know how much is left behind within-boord, how many Fakes are left. Fall-off. When a ship (under saile) doth not keep so neere the wind, as we appoint, we say that the ship falls-off: This happens ma∣ny times by the negligence of the steenes-man, but many times the fault is in the ship, which happens, either because she may be light a-head, or that her masts may be stayed too fore-ward on, for these two things make a ship head fall from the wind. Falls. When we mention the Falls of a ship (as to say) a ship hath a fall, or many falls, it is meant by the raising or laying some part of the Deck higher, or lower then the other, also the small roapes which we hale-by mall tackles, is called the fall of the tackle; as to say, over-hale the Fall of your maine tackle, or cleefe the fall of your tackle (only the wanding tackle hath no fall. To Farthell. Or farchelling a saile, is when we wrap-up a saile close together, and so bind it with the Casketts to the yard, but towards the yard-arme we use mape yarnes, for the saile is not very waighty; this manner we use only to the maine-saile, fore-saile and sprit-saile. Farthelling-lines. Are small lines which are made fast to all the top-sailes, top-gallant-sailes, and also the missen yard-armes, the missen hath but one, the other one, on either side; by these we farthell those sailes, but the top-sailes have not the bunt bound up to the yard, as the
maine and fore-sailes have, but is laid on the top, and so bound fast to the head of the mast; this we call stowing the top-saile. The Fashion Peeces. Are the two timbers, which doe describe the bredth of the ship a-sterne, and are the outwardmost timbers of the ships sterne on either side (excepting aloft where the Coconter is connted. Fender-Bolts. Vide Bolts. Fenders. Are many peeces of old cabels, roapes or billets of wood, which are hung over the ships side to keep an other ship or boate from rubbing on the ships side, that they may not breake her bends, or rub off the stuffe when she is new trimmed; boates have the same, to save them from much beating against the ships side; in the boate, the men have also little short staves, which they call Fenders, hence we say, Fend the boate, that is, save her from beating against the ships side. Fidd. Is as it were an Iron pin, made tape-ring and sharpe at the lower end, which is to open the strands of the roapes when we splise two roapes together; but when we splise cabells we use fidders of wood, in the same forme and nature but much-bigger, which if they were made of Iron, would be too heavy to work withall; The pin in the heele of the top-mast which beares it upon the Ches-trees, is a fidd. Fidd-hammer. Is a Fidd made sharpe at one end, to splise a roape, and a Hammer at the other end, with a head and a claw, to drive or draw a Naile. Fightts. The mast-cloathes which hang round about the ship to hinder men from being seene in fight, are called the Fightts; also any bulke-head, afore or abast, out of which they may use Murderers, or small shot, or generally any place wherein men may cover themselves, and yet use their Armes, are called close fightts. Fire-works. Are any kind of artificiall receipts, applyed to any kind of Weapon, Engine or Instrument, whereby we use to set-on-fire the Hulls, sailes or Masts of a ship in fight, whereof there are many sorts, but the most commonly used at sea are these, fire-pots, fire-balls, fire-Peekes, Truncks, Brasse-balls, Arrowes with fire-workes, and the like; to say, all that might concerning these, will require too long a dis∣course for this that I here pretend A Fish. Is any peece of timber or plancke, which we make fast, either to Mast or Yard, to succour and strengthen it, when it is in danger
to breake, then we command the Carpenter to fish the Mast or yard, which is done, first hollowing it fit for the place, and then nailing it with speakes, and woulding it about with roapes, (This fish is very dry meate. The Fish-block. The block, is the block that belongs to the fish, and is called the fish-block. The Fish-hooke. Is the hooke belonging to the Fish, and is called the Fish-hooke. The Fish. Is a Tackle hung at the end of the Davie, by the strap of the block, in which block there is a runner with a hooke at the end, which doth hitch the flooke of the Anchor, and so they hale by the fall that belongs to it, and so raise the flock to the bow, or chainewale of the ship. Flaggs. These are not only used at sea for distinctions of Nations, or Officers of Fleets (as that the Admirall should have his in the Maine-top, the Vice-Admirall in the fore, and the Reare-Admirall in the Mis∣sen-top,) but also for distinctions and signes what ships must doe, ac∣cording as they have directions from the chiefe Commander, as to chase, to give over, to come to counsell, or the like; At sea, to lower, or strike ones Flagg in fight is a token of yeelding, but otherwise of great obedience and respect: And to be made to take it in perforce, the grea∣test disgrace that can be; when they would have the flag out, they say, heave out the Flagg, that is, to wrap it close about the staffe; To strike the Flagg, is to pull it downe upon the Cap, and so let it hang over loose. Flaire. When a ship is a little howled in neere the water, and above that the work doth hang over againe, and is layed out broader-aloft, they say, that the worke doth Flaire over, this makes a ship more roome within boord, for a man of War, but it is not so sightly, nor by the most common opinion hold to be wholesome for a ship; yet I have seene the experience, and am of opinion, that it can wrong a ship but little, if her bearing be laid high enough. Floane. When any of the Sheates be not haled home to the Blocks, then they say that the sheate is floane; but when they say, let flie the sheate, that is to let it goe amaine, or as farre as it will: This is most commonly used in great Gusts, for feare of spending the top-masts, or over-setting the ship; for the sheates being floane, doth hold no wind:
I have seene in an extraordinary gust, that when the ship hath beene downe on the quick-side in the water, we have to make her right a∣gaine let flie the sheate, but the gust hath fluttred all the saile to peeces, leaving not any jot, or but some raggs in the bole-roapes. Flood, It is flood when the water begins to rise, young-flood, quarter-flood, halfe-flood, are all termes commonly known. The Flooke. This is the broad part of the Anchor, which takes hold in the ground; as also those of the Crapnels, which have foure flookes. Flote. We say, any thing doth flote that swimmes above water, not touching ground, as the ship is aflote, that is, when it is borne up cleere from the ground by the rising of the water; A floaty-ship, is a ship which drawes but little water. Flowe. When the water doth rise or heighten, we say it doth flow: But note, that ever in all places (Seas or Rivers) where it flowes, it flowes by the shore, before it flowes in the offing or midle of the streame, and so it doth ebbe by the shore, before it doth in the streame; the reason is, for that the water is of most force and weight where it is deepest, and so is hardlier returned, being once bent away: When we say it flowes at London-bridge, South-west, or at any other place South or West, or as it happens: by this is meant, that when the Moone is at the full, or else new Moone, then upon that day, the Sun being in the South-west point, which is three of the clock in the after-noone, it is high wa∣ter at London-bridge. The Floore. The floore of a ship, is so much of the bottom of her, as she doth rest upon when she is a-ground; and therefore those which have long and broad floores, lie fast and safest with the ground, and the others are crank and dangerous, both to wring themselves, and to overthrow. Flush. When a Deck is lay'd from Stem to Sterne without any falls or risings, we say her Deck lies flush, fore and aft, and this word is not used in any other sence. The Flie. Is that part of the Compasse whereon the 32. points of the winds are described; to which underneath is the Needle made fast. To Free. When a ship hath much water in her, we say, the Pump will free her, or will not free her; Or when we bale out the water, that is called freeing the ship: Also, when the boate hath water in her, we
command them to free the boate; so that this word (Free) is not used in any other respect about a ship, but to get out the water, nor there is not any other word used so properly, for the getting-out of the water of ship, or boat, as this. Fresh-shott. When any extraordinary land-water comes downe a River suddainly, or else when any great River comes into a sea, so as that the water is fresh a mile or two (as in many places it is) we say it is a great fresh-shott. The Fore-foote. There is no such place of a ship which is termed her fore-foote; but it is a word used in this kind, when two ships saile, so that one doth lie with her stem so much a-weather the other, that keeping their courses, that ship which doth so lie, will goe-out a head with the other, then we say, that she doth lie with the fore-foote of the other, as she stands or comes with her fore-foote; but being once so past out before her a-head, and by her, we doe not say she is past by her fore-foote, but thus, she is gone-out a-head; so that this word fore-foote, implies no more, but one ships lying, or sayleing a-crosse an other ships way. Fore-locks. Are little flat peeces of Iron, made like wedges, which are put into the holes at the ends of bolts, to keepe the bolts from draw∣ing out or slipping back, all these keep downe, and fast the cap-squares of the Carriages. Fore-mast, Vide Mast. A Former. Is a peece of wood, turned round, somewhat lesse then the bore of the Peece for which it is made; as a Saker Former, a Mi∣mon Former, &c. The use whereof, is to make upon it Paper Carthra∣ges, or Linnen Carthrages. Fore-Reache. When two ships saile together, or after one ano∣ther, she which sailes best (that is fastest) doth Fore-reach upon the other. If two ships saile both one way by a wind, one may keep the better wind, the other may fore-reach, then he that doth fore-reach, if he would speake with the other, as suppose he be a Man of War, the o∣ther a Marchant, he must cast about when he is so far fore-reached upon her, that he may lie with her fore-foote. Fore-Saile, Vide Saile. Fore-Top-Mast, Vide Top-Mast. Fore-Yard, Vide Yard.
Foule. When a ship hath been long untrymmed, so that grasse, or any filth be growne or got about her, she is foule: Also when any roape which we should hale, is hindred by an other, or tangled in it selfe (as Top-saile, Halliards, Tackle, Falls and the like may be) or any thing else so that it cannot run, we say the roape is foule, as the Sheates are fowle of the Ordnance; the Halliards, Clew-lines, or the like, are foule and so must be cleered before they can be made to run. Foule-Water. When a ship (under saile) comes into shallow wa∣ter, so that she raises the mud or sand with her way, (which she may doe, though she doe not touch the ground, but come very neere it) we say she makes foule-water. Note that a ship in Showle-water, when she sailes with her Keele neere the ground, cannot feele her Helme, as well as in deep water: The reason is, for that neere the ground, the water hath not that weight and force as it hath when it is deep: and also by reason of an Eddy, which is made betwixt the ground and the bottom of the ship, being so neere together, the water cannot come so swift to the Rudder, as it doth in deeper-waters: And note also, that the swifter the water comes to the Rudder, the better the ship doth steere, or feele her Helme. Fownder. When a ship by any extraordinary leake, or else by any great sea that hath broaken into her, is halfe full, or full of water, so that we cannot free the water forth, we say, she is foundred. The word is significant, for just as a foundred Horse cannot goe, so a ship which is full, or neere full of water, will not feele her Helme, that it will nei∣ther veere nor steere, but drive away with the sea, just like a log of wood. Furr, or Furr'd
There are two kinds of furring, the one is after a ship is built, to lay on an other planck upon the side of her (which is called planck,) The other, which is more eminent, and more properly furring, is to ripp off the first plancks, and to put other timbers upon the first, and so to put on the plancks upon these timbers: The occasion of it is, to make a ship beare a better saile, for when a ship is too narrow, and the bearing either not laid out enough, or too low, then they must make her broader, and lay her bearing higher; They commonly Furr some two or three strakes under water and as much above, according as the ship requires, more or lesse: I thinke in all the world, there are not so many ships Furd, as are in England:and it is pitty that there is no order taken, either for the punishing of those who build such ships; or the preventing of it; for it is an infinite losse to the owners, and an utter spoiling and disgrace to all ships that are so handled. Futtocks. This word is commonly pronounced, but I thinke more properly it should be called Foote-hookes; for the Futtocks are those compassing timbers, which give the bredth and bearing to the ship, which are scarfed to the ground-timbers: and because no timbers that compasse, can be found long enough, to go up through all the side of the ship, these compassing-timbers are scarffed one into the other, and those next the keele, are called the lower or ground Futtocks, the other are called the upper Futtocks. G GAge. We are to Gage our Cask, that we may see how great it is, or how much is leaked out; which we doe, by putting downe a stick at the Boong, and that, by the wetnesse, will shew how much liquour is in it: Also, when we would know how much water a ship drawes when she is a-floate, we stick a naile into a pike or pole, and so put it downe by the Rudder, till this naile catch hold under the Rudder, and this we call gageing a ship: Note that we cannot exactly by this, tell how much water she drawes, for we must allow for the Rake of the ship aft-ward on: for the Lole doth not go downe in a Perpendicular Line, and so many foote as she drawes, is called the ships gage, when one ship is to-weather of another, she hath, as they terme it, the weather-gage, but they never use to say, the Lee-gage. Gale. When the wind doth not blow too hard, but reasonably, so that a ship may beare her top-sailes, a-tripp, we call it (according to the strength of it) either an easie, or loome-gale, which is, when it is little wind: a fresh, stiffe strong gale when it is much wind: Some∣times at sea, two ships being not farre asunder; if it be faire, smooth, gentle weather, and but little wind, one ship will have more wind then the other, and sometimes the one be flat, be calmed, the other have a little breath of wind, then they say, the ship which hath the wind, doth gale away from the other.
The Garboord. Is the first plancke, that is brought on the outside of the ship, next to the Keele. Gar-boordstrake. Is the first strake, or (as you may say) the first seame next to the Keele: Here is the most dangerous place in all the ship to spring a leake; for it is almost impossible to come to it within-boord. The Garnett. Is a tackle, wherewith we hoyce in all Cask and goods, if they be not too heavy, as great Ordnance, &c. It hath a pen∣dant comes from the head of the maine-mast, with a block which is strongly seased to the maine-stay, just over the Hatch-way where we use to take in our goods and howld. In this block, they doe reele the runner, which hath a hooke at one end, within which we hitch the slings, and at the other, a double block, in which we reeve the fall of the runner, and so by that we hale, and hoyse in the goods; when it is not u∣sed, it is made fast along by the stay, at the bottom of the stay. A Girding, Vide Trusses. Girt. When the Cabell is so taught, that upon the turning of the tyde, the ship cannot goe over it with her sterne-post; then she will lye a-crosse the tyde, and then we say, she is Girt; which will instantly be under, if the cabell be veered out slack. Goaring. A saile, is cut goaring, when it comes sloaping by de∣grees, and is broader at the clew then at the eareing; all top-sailes, and top-gallant sailes are so. Goose-wing. When we are going before a wind, or quarter winds, with a faire fresh gale, we many times (to make more haste) unparrell the Missen-yard, and so launch-out the yard and saile over the quarter, on the Lee-side, and so fitting Guyes at the farther end, to keep the yard steddy with a Boome: we Boome out the Sheate of the missen-sayle, this doth helpe to give the ship some way, which otherwise the missen-saile willnot, especially before a wind; this saile so fitted, is called a Goose-wing. Grapnells.
Are in the nature of an Anchor, being used for Gallyes, or Boates to ride by, only they differ in forme: for Grapnells have foure flookes, and never a stock, for it needs none, being that which way soever it fall, two of the flookes doe ever hold by the ground: In Men of War, we use them that are light to fling into a ship, to catch hold on some of the Grateings, Railes, Gun-wales, or the like, and so having achaine made fast unto it; we lash fast the ships together. There are also small Crapnels, with three hookes, but not broad like flookes, with which we use to sweepe for Hawsers or small Cabels. Gratings. Are small ledges laid over one crosse another like a Portcullisse or a prison gate, those which are called the gratings, are betwixt the maine and fore-masts which doe serve for a close fight, and also for the succour of men, either in hot, or foule weather, with a Tarpawling upon them: There are also in many places of the ship gratings made for aire and light, but chiefely over the Ordnance, for the vent of the smoake of the powder, which comes out of the touch-hole in fight. To Grave. Graveing a ship, is bringing her to lie drye a∣ground, and then to burne off the old filth and stuffe, with reed, broome, or the like, and so to lay on new; Some use only tallow, but that will quickly grow foule, others tallow and soape (which will also quick∣ly grow foule,) The most common and best, is with traine-oyle, Rosen and Brimstone boyled together, for this will last longest cleane: The laying on of the stuffe, is called Paying the ship. A Gripe. The Gripe of the Ship, is the compasse and sharpnesse of the Stem under-water, especially toward the lower part: The use whereof, is to make a Ship keep a good wind; And therefore sometimes when a ship will not keep a wind well, they put on an other false Stem to the true Stem to make her Gripe more, To Gripe. We say a Ship doth Gripe, when she is apt (contrary to the Helme,) to run her head or nose to the wind more then she should: There are commonly two causes of this, the one, when a Ship may be too deepe a-head, that her head is not apt, by reason of the weight which presses her downe, to fall away from the wind; the other may be the staying of the Mast; for if she be a short Ship, and draw much water, if her Masts be stayed too much aftward-on, it will cause her head still to run into the wind: The Flemmings being generally long floatie Ships, doe stay all their Masts aftward-on very much, else their Ships would never keep a wind, for it is apparent to sense, that all failes from the Maine-mast aftward-on the farther aft they stand, the more they keep the Ship to the wind: as the head-sailes, the more foreward on they stand, the more power they have to flat the Ship a∣bout from the wind.
Grommets. Are little rings, which are made fast to the upper-side of the yard, with staples, which are driven into the yard; which have no other use but to tie and make fast the Casketts into them. Ground and grounding. When a Ship is brought of purpose to be trimmed on the ground, or otherwise, that is called grounding the ship: There are three manner of laying a ship a-ground, that is, either laying her head upwards towards the bancke and her sterne towards the off∣wards, and is turned, laying her Pitch-long-to, this is used to Ships that are crank with the ground; for this way, they take the best advan∣tage for the Ship to beare her selfe: The second is, to lay her all alongst the shore, and to heele her to the shore-ward; this is used to ships which have reasonable good floats, and will beare themselves sufficient∣ly well: The third, is laying her alongst the shore, heeling her to the offward; this we use to Ships which have great broad Floarers (as Flemmings, which have standing strakes;) the reason is, for that other∣wise we should hardly come to her Keele: Some sea-fareing-men, are very superstitious of going to sea at certaine dayes, and commonly those hold it good to begin the voyage on Sundaies; and therefore to seeme to have begun the voyage that day (though they be not ready to goe) they will weigh, or as the terme is, tripp the Anchor, and goe a little way, and so come to the Anchor againe, this they call breaking ground. Ground-timbers. Are those timbers which are fast laid over the Keele, and so bolted through the Keelson into the Keele, and are those which make the floare of the Ship, and are therefore called ground-tim∣bers, because the Ship doth rest upon these when she lyes a-ground. Gudgins. Are those Irons which are made fast to the Sterne-post, into which the Pintells of the Rudders are hanged. To Gull. When the Pin of a Block, doth eate or weare into the Sheever, it is called Gulling: Also when a Yard doth rubb against the Mast, we say, it will Gull the Mast; and therefore, to avoide that, we put a Plat made of Synnet, to the middle of the yard, to keep it from gulling the Mast. The Gun-wale.
That peece of timber, which reaches on either side the Ship, from the halfe-Deck, to the fore-Castell (being the upper∣most bend as it were, which finishes the upper walls of the Hull there; and wherein they put the Stanshions which support the wast-trees) iscalled the Gun-wale, whether there be any guns there or not: Also the lower part of any Port where any Ordnance doth lie, is called the Gun-wale. A Guye. Is any roape, which is used to keepe a peece of Ordnance, or any thing else, the Boate or the like, which is hoysed into the Ship from swinging into the Ship too fast, when it is over the gun-wale, to be hoysed-in, then by this roape we doe ease it in greatly; and it is commonly made fast to the Stanshions of the wast-trees, and that is called a Guy, which word I think comes from Guide, for this doth guide it in. Also there is a roape, which is fastened to the fore-mast at one end, and is reeved through a single block, which is seased to the Pendant of the winding-tackle, and so reeved againe through an other, which is seased to the fore-mast, somewhat lower then the first part, and this is to hale foreward the Pendant of the winding Tackle, and this roape is called Guye. H To HAle, or over-hale. That which others commonly call pulling a roape, the sea-faring-men call ever haleing (as hale taught the Bowleings; or hale in a roape that hangs without boord, or the like in any kind,) To over-hale, is when a roape is haled too stiffe, or taught; then to hale it the contrary way that it was haled before, and so to make it slacker. To Hall, or Halling. Halling of a Ship, is calling to her to know whence she is, or whither she is bound, or any other occasion, which is done commonly in these words, ô the Ship, or (at sea,) no more but Hoâ, and the other then answers Hâe: These words are common to all Christian sea-men, to hall each other in: Also sometimes we seeme to call to them, or salute them with whistles or trumpets, and this is called Halling with Trumpets, or whistles. Halliards. Are the roapes by which we hoyse all the yards, only the crosse-Jack, nor the sprit-saile-yard have none, because they are ever slung: yet in small-craft, they have Halliards to the sprit-saile-yard. Hand, or Handing.
When they would deliver away any thing, tobe passed to another, or to have it brought to them, they say, hand this away, or hand me that, or hand it along; so when they want men to hoyse, or doe any labour, they use to call for more hands, not more men. A Hands peeke. Is but a wooden leaver, (which is used instead of a Croa of Iron) to traverse the Ordnance; but most especially to the wind lasse in the boate, or Ships which have wind lasses, to heave up the Anchor by. The Harpings. The Harpings of a Ship, is the bredth of her at the bowe: Also some call the ends of the bends, which are fastned into the Stem, the Harpings. Hatches. Are those loose parts, and as it were, dores of the Deck, which are in the mid-ship before the maine-mast that we open to let downe things in Hould; having at each corner, a sheackle of Iron, to lift them by. Hatch-way. By the Hatch-way, Is meant the place Perpendicular, over the Hatches: when they say, lay a thing in the Hatch-way, that is, on the Hatches. The Hawses. Are those great-round-holes, before, under the head, out of which the Cabels doe come, when the Ship is at an Anchor: A bold Hawse; Is when they lie high from the water, and this is best, for when they lie low, if there be great sea, the Hawse will still be in the water, and take in much water into the Ship: Fresh the Hawse, that is when we suspect that the Cabell is fretted or chafed, or is like, as many times it will, to burne in the Hawse (for there the Cabell en∣dures the greatest stresse) then we veere out a little, to let an other part of the Cabell indure the stresse: Also, when we lay new Platts upon the Cabell; In the Hawfe, it is called freshing the Hawse: Cleere the Hawse, that is, when two Cabels, which come out at two Hawses, and by the winding of the Ship, have some turnes one about the other, then undoing these turnes, is cleering the Hawse; which is necessary to be done, for else the Cabels will gall one another very much: Any ship, or thing that is crosse afore the Hawse, or lyes athwart the Hawse; or when one Ship rides with her sterne just afore the others Hawse, they say, she rides upon the Hawse. A Hawser. Is a three-strand roape, and may be called a little Ca∣bell, for that which is one Ships Hawser, will be an other Ships Cabell:
These doe serve for many uses, as to warp the Ship over a bar: the maine and fore-shrowdes, are made of Hawsers; only note the difference of the making or laying, is the cause of the difference of the names, which to know, Vide Roapes. The Head, Vide Beake-Head. Yet sometimes it is not exactly taken only for the Brake-head; for sometimes they say, a-head, that is, about the fore-mast, taking as it were, all the fore-part of the Ship, for the head. Head-lines. Are the roapes of all sailes, which are upper most next the yard, by which the saile is made fast unto the yards. Head-sailes, Are sailes belonging to the fore-mast, sprit-saile, and sprit-saile top-mast; for these are the sailes which governe the head of the Ship, to make it fall off, and to keep out of the wind; these head-sailes (quarter-winds) are the chiefe drawing sailes. Head-sea. When it hath been a great storme, the wind (it may be) will suddainely alter 6. points and more, but the sea will goe the lame way it did, for some howres, then if our course lie to goe right against this sea (as we may, the wind being altred) we shall meet this sea right a-head, and so we call it a head-sea: Sometimes also when it hath but a little wind, there will be a sea, which will come contrary to the wind, but then, not long after, the wind will come that way, and doth shew, that on that point of the Compasse, when as that sea comes, there hath been much wind. Note, that generally, before any great storme, the sea will come that way before any wind; which shewes that the sea out-runnes the wind; the reason I take to be, for that the sea be∣ing a continuate-body, one part being moved, the wind doth quickly infuse motion to the rest, as we see by the circles which a stone doth make, when it is throwne into the water. Note in head-seas, all short Ships are bad sailers, for they beate much against the sea, but long Ships doe goe more easily, for they will ride upon two waves at once, and fall more geraly into the sea. To Heave. As we commonly use the word, fling a-way, so sea∣men they use the word, heave away; for if it be but a roape, yard, or Ship, they will say, heave it a-way: Heave over-bood, that roape, yard, or the like; Also the turning about of the Capstaine, is called heaving at the Capstaine; Also when a Ship at Anchor doth rise, and fall with the waves, they say, she heaves and sets.
The Heele. The Heele of the Maine-mast, fore-Mast, or Missen, is nothing but that part, which is pared away a little, slaunting on the aftward-side of the foote of the mast, like a heele, to give the mast leave to be stayed aftward on; as the Flemmings doe especially; But the heeles of the top-masts are squares, and in that they put the fid of the top-mast. To Heele. Is for the Ship to lie downe on a side, whether she be a floate or a-ground, and so she heeles much or little: She heeles to Star-Boord, or to Port: Some superstitious sea-men, when they take in goods, or victuals for a voyage, if by chance in stowing the provision she heele to star-boord, will say, it is a signe of a long and bad voyage, for then they will say, she heeles from hand-ward, because they take in all their goods on the Lar-boord side; but if she heele to Lar-boord, it is a signe of a good-voyage, and some goods to come in: When she is a-ground, we say she heeles to the shore-ward, or to the offward, ac∣cording as it is. The Helme. Is that peece of timber, which the helmes-man doth hold in his hand, to steere and governe the Rudder, and one end is made fast to the head of the Rudder, but so as that it may be taken off: Though the Rudder be the cause of the Ships working, yet the helme is the in∣strument which governes the Rudder, and therefore we impute it all to the Helme; as when we say, the Ship feeles the Helme, or doth not feele the Helme, that is, will worke, and be governed by the Helme, or not; for if a Ship be very foule, or out of her trym, or too deepe, or too light, many times she will not feele the Helme, but saile as if she had none. Port the Helme: Star-boord the Helme: A mid-ship, or right the Helme, termes of conding, to direct which way the Steeres-man should put the Helme: In smaller Ships under the rate of 500. Tun, they use to put a whip to the other end of the Helme, and so steere and governe the Helme by that. To Hitch. Is to catch-hold of any thing with a roape, to hold it fast, or with a hooke; and we say, Hitch the fish-hooke to the flooke of the Anchor: When we hoyse in the boate, Hitch the Tackles in the rings of the boate, or the garnet, the slings, that is, catching hold of it by the hooke, to hoyse in the goods. To Hold-off. Is when we heave the Cabell at the Capstaine, if the Cabell be very stiffe and great, or else have layne in a slimie ozie-ground,
it surges, and slips back, unlesse that part, which is heaved in, be still haled away, hard from the Capstaine, to keep the Cabell close, and hard to the Capstaine whelpes, if it be a small Cabell, men may doe it in their hands, but if great, then either they hold off with Nippers, or else (as in all great ships) they doe bring it to the jeere-capstaine, and this is called, Holding-off. Honey Combd. When a peece of Iron Ordnance (either by being Ill-east, or with over much wearing, is rugged, and hath little holes in the concave of the Peece, she is said to be Honey-combd. This is very dangerous for a cross-bar-shot to catch in, or any ragged shot, as also that some rag of the Carthrage, or peece of the wad may stick in it, and so fire the powder, that shall instantly be put in; to try whether a Peece be Honey-combed, we put in a Naile, or crooked peece of wire at the end of a staffe, and so where that catches, we know she is honey-com∣bed, or else light a candle on the end of a staffe, and that will shew all the imperfections of the Peece. The Hookes. The Hookes of the Ship, are all those forked timbers which are placed upright on the Keele, both in the Rake, and Run of the Ship: These doe give the Narrowing and bredthing of the Ship in those parts, according as they are framed, and they are bolted into the Keele; The compassing timbers which are before, and doe help to strengthen the Stem and fore-part of the Ship, are called breast-hookes. A Horse. Is a roape which is made fast to one of the fore-mast shrowdes, with a dead-man-eye at the end of it, through which is ree∣ved the pendant of the sprit-saile-sheates; and is for no other use, but to keep the sprit-saile-sheates cleere of the flookes of the Anchor: Also when a man heaves the head of the shrowdes, there is a roape made fast to the shrowdes for him to leane against for falling into the sea; Also they use a roape to set taught the shrowdes, with wale-knots, one end made fast to the shrowdes, to the other, the Lanniers are brought, and so with a hand-speeke turning it, they set taught the Hal∣liards, this is called a Horse: Also those little short roapes, which are seased to the midle of the top-mast, and top-gallant-stages, with a block, wherein are reeved the top-saile and top-gallant bowlings are called Horses. The Howld. All the roome betwixt the Keilson, and the first, or
lower-decks, is called the Howld; and it is where all our victuals, goods, and stores doe lie; yet it is divided into severall roomes with bulk-heads, as the Stewards roome, the Powder roome, the Boate-swaines store, and the like: Runing the howld, stowe the howld, cleere the howld. Vide the proper names. The Hownds. Are the holes in the Checks which are fastned to the head of the Masts, wherein the tyes do run, to hoyse the yard; The top-masts have but one hole aloft in the head of the mast, because they have but single ties, and this is also called the Hownds. Howlsom. We say a Ship is a Howlsom Ship in the sea when she will hull, trie and ride well at an Anchor, without rowleing or tum∣bling and labouring much in the sea: A long ship, which drawes much water will hull well, trie well, and ride well: If she draw much water, and be short, she may hull well, but neither trie nor ride well at an An∣chor: If she draw little water, and be long, she may ride well, and trie well, but not hull well; If she be short, and draw little water, she will neither hull, trie nor ride well, and therefore those are the most unhowlsome Ships. Note also that the howseing-in, or laying of the upper works of a ship, doe much ease, or wrong her in all these manner of workings; but howsoever the over-carveing of her, is bad for all, and makes her more laboursome then otherwise she would be. Howsing-in.
When a Ship after she is pass the bredth of her bearing, is brought in narrow to her upper-works, they say that she is howsed-in: Most are of opinion, that the howseing in of a Ship, makes her the more howlsome in the sea, because the weight of the Ordnance, and her upper works, doe not over-hang the Naile, which as they sup∣pose would make her rowle the more, but I am sure it takes away a great deale of roome for a man of War, and the Tack will never come so well a-boord, as when she is laid-out a loft: I have so much expe∣rience of both sorts, that I am of opinion if two Ships be given, caeteris paribus, a ship which is laid out a-loft, not flairing but proportionably finished to her other works, shall be the howlsomer Ship; for that the counterpoise on either side (the whole weight, not so much over han∣ging the perpendicular of the Keele) shall keep her more steddy, and make her the longer in fetching over a seele: The reason is the same, and will hold proportion in a Ship to the wacking of a Tun-Ambulus, who with equall weight will goe much more sure, if his weight where∣withwith he doth steddy himselfe, be at the end of the Long-staffe, which by reason of the greatnesse of the circle, must have a long time to come over his perpendicular, then if the same were in a shorter staffe, or in a lump together in his hand, which once inclining either way, be hath nothing by which to succour and counterpoize the weight. To Hoyse. When they would hale up any thing into the Ship with a Tackle, or a dead-roape, or get up a yard, they call it Hoiseing: as hoyse the water in hoyse up the yards. The Hull. Is the very body or bulke of the Ship without Masts, Yards, Roapes or sayles. Hulling, Is when a Ship is at sea, and hath taken in all her sailes, in calme weather: It is done to save the sailes from beating-out against the Masts, but in fowle weather when they are able to beare no saile, the manner is no more, but taking in all the sailes, and tying downe the helme to the Lee-side of the Ship (and so if she be a good conditioned Ship) she will lie easily under the sea, and thus she makes her way one point afore the beame, that is, if the wind be at West, and the Ship looke South, she will make way East, and by South, which is one point afore the beame: the beame will beare East and West. It is not yet agreed amongst all Sea-men, whether it be better for a Ship to hull with her top-mast up or downe: the most received opinion is, to have her down, in respect that generally they suppose the weight aloft will make her steele the more dangerously in a storme. But besides (the experience which I have seene to the contrary) I can give this reason, why it is best in a dangerous and desperate storme, to hull with the top-masts up; all sea-men will confesse, that the weather Seele is the most dangerous Seele, and therefore must grant, that that is the safest hulling which doth most prevent the danger of the Seele: If her top-masts be downe when she Seeles to Lee-ward, the lesse weight over-bead she hath to hinder her from comming, and rowling back over a∣gaine to wind-ward, the faster she will Seele-over, and the shorter: so that meeting the wind-ward sea so short, and suddenly it may en∣danger to breake in and founder her, but if the top-Mast be up, she must needs be the longer in comming-up to wind-ward, and so meete the sea with more ease, that it may have more leisure to breake a way under her; yet it is true, she will make the greater Lee-Seele, but in that there is no danger, though to an unexperienced man, there may seeme to be.
A Hullock. Is a small part of a saile, which is loosed and left o∣pen in a great storme, when we dare not have any more out; and is on∣ly used in the Missen-saile, when vve would keep the Ships head to the sea, with a little saile; making all up, excepting a little at the Missen-yard arme: or else when a Ship vvill not weather-coile, to lay her head the other vvay, we loose (for that is the terme) a hullock of our fore-saile, and so changing the helme to the weather-side, the Ship will fall off, and lay her head, vvhere her sterne lay before. I The IEere. Is a peece of a Hawser, which is made fast to the maine-yard and fore-yards, close to the ties of great Ships (for small Ships doe not use it,) and so is reeved through a block, which is seased close to the top, and so comes downe, and is reeved through an other block at the bottome of the Mast close by the Deck: Great ships have one on one side, an other on the other side of the ties; the use of this roape, is to helpe to hoyse up the yard, but the chiefest is to succour the ties, and to hold the yard from falling downe if the ties should breake. The Jeere-Capstaine. This hath its name from the Jeere; which is ever brought to this Capstaine to be heaved at by; It stands in the wast in the hatch-way, and serves for many other uses (as to heave upon the Violl, or hold off the Cabell from the maine-Capstaine. Iron-sick. A Ship or boate is said to be Iron-sick, when the bolts, speeks or nailes are so eaten away with the rust or the salt-water, that they stand hollow in the planckes, and so the Ship doth receive in water by them, and this is the reason why they put lead over all the bolts heads under water. A Junck. Any peece of a Cabell that is cut off, most commonly any part of an old Cabell, is called a Junck; such as this, they hang for fenders by the Ships-sides, or else untwist it, and make plats for Cabels, roape-yarne or sinnet, if it be not too old and rotten, if it be old, then they make Ockham of it. A Jury-mast. When by occasion of storme, or fight, we have lost either the fore-Mast or maine-Mast, we doe reserve (if it be possible)
the Maine or fore-yard; which we put downe into the step of the mast, and so fasten it in the partners, and so take the Missen yard, or if we have any other, which serves for a yard, which fitting with sailes and roapes in forme of the other, we make a shift with a steere, and governe the Ship. K To KEckle, or Keckling. We use this terme only to the Cabell, and the Bolt-roape, when we feare the galling of the Cabell in the Hawse, or the bolt-roape against the quarter of the Ship, we turne a small roape round about it, but in manner it differs not from serveing of other roapes, though to these, this serveing is Keckling. A Kedger, Vide Anchor. To Kedge, or Kedging. When in a narrow River, we would bring up or downe a Ship, the wind being contrary to the tide, and we are to goe with the tide, then they use to set the fore-saile, or fore-top-saile, and the millen, and so let her drive with the tide; the reason of useing these sailes, is to flat her about, if she come too neere the shore: also they use a small Anchor in the head of the boate, with a hawser, that comes from the Ship; which Anchor they let fall in the middle of the streame: If the ship come too neere the shore, and so wind her head a∣bout by that, and so lift up the Anchor againe, when she is about; from this use the Anchor is called a Kedger, or Kedge-Anchor. The Keele. Is the first timber which is laid of a Ship, and is the bases whereon all the rest are fastned; and so much is to be accounted the Keele, as doth lie in a straight line, at the one end whereof, is scarffed in the Stem, and at the other, is let in the stern-post; to this are all the ground timbers and hookes, fore and aft, bolted; and on them all the upper-works are raised: A ranck Keele, is when a ship hath a deep Keele; and this is good to keep a Ship from rowleing; for if a floaty ship rowle too much, that hath but a showle-Keele, we put to an other Keele under the first, to make it deeper, for that will take some more hold in the water; and this we call a false Keele. The Keele-roape.
Is a roape which runs alongst the Ship upon the Keele within the Limbers of the ground-timbers, one end comming∣outout before, the other abast, some will have this of a basse-roape, but the best is a haire roape for lasting: The use of it is, to cleere the Lim∣ber-holes when they are stocked with ballast, or any thing else, so as the water which lies betwixt the timbers, cannot come to the well of the Pump. Keel-son. Is the lowest peece of timber within the Ships howld, which lies all along upon the ground-timbers right over the Keele, through which are driven the bolts which doe fasten the Keelson ground-timbers and the Keele together. A Ketch. Is a small-boate, such as uses to come to Belinsgate, with Mackrell, Oisters, &c. Kewells. Are small peeces of Timber, nailed to the inside of the Ship, unto which we be-lay the sheates and tacks. Keenke. When a roape which should run smooth in the block, hath got a little turne, so as it comes double (as it were) this we call a Keenke: also the same is in a Cabell, if it run-out-doubling in like manner, which happens either by ill quileing of the Cabell, or by letting it run out too fast; but if it be perceived, it is remedied by over-set∣ting the Cabell, else the Cabell very much in that place. A Knave-line. Is a roape, the one end fastned to the Cres-trees under the maine or fore-top, and so comes downe by the ties, to the Ram-head; unto which there is seased, a small peece of biller (some two foote long) with a hole in the end of it, in which hole this line is reeved, and so brought to the ships-side, and haled up-taught to the railes: The use whereof, is to keep the ties and halliards from turning about one an other, which being new, they would ibe, were it not for this line; but after the halliards and ties are stretched a while it is ta∣ken away, and no more used, but on the like occasion. Knees. Are those crooked timbers, which are so called, in respect they represent a mans knee bowing; these doe bind the beames and the futtocks together, being bolted into both of them; some doe stand alongst ships, and some right up and downe; you may eafily know them in part where they are used, by the forme of them. Kneetles. Are two roape yarnes twisted together in a knot at each end, to sease a roape, or block, or the like. The Knights.
There is the maine-Knight, and the fore-Knight; one standing aft the maine, the other abast the fore-mast, upon thesecond Deck, being fast bolted to the beames: A Knight is a peece of timber wherein are foure sheevers, three for the halliards and one for the top-roape to run in, when they are hoysed; they are commonly carved with the picture of some head upon them, by which they are ea∣sily knowne. Knittlidge, Vide Ballast, for it is all one. Knotts. There are two sorts of Knotts, which are used at sea, the one is a Bowling Knot (which is so made, that it will not slip norslide) with this knot the bowling bridles are made-fast to the Creengles, but it is also used in any other wayes: The other is a wale Knot, which is a round knot or knobb, made with three strands of a roape so that it can∣not slip. The tacks, top-saile-sheates and stoppers, have these wale∣knots, and many other roapes. L To LAbour. We say a Ship labours in the sea, when she rowles and tumbles very much, either a Hull, or under saile, or at an An∣chor: A ship rowles most a-hull, when it hath been a growne storme, and suddenly the wind ceases, but the seas continue still, then she will rowle, for want of wind: under-saile a ship rowles most, right before a-wind, but beares most upon a-head sea; so that some ships are most dangerous to put a-fore the fea in a great storme; and weake Ships dangerous to beate against the head-sea at an Anchor; Ships rowle and labour most when they lie betwixt wind and tide, which is upon the turning of the tide, when the wind and the tide are contrary; and nei∣ther hath got power to make her straine her Cabels, to ride with her head, either to the wind or tide. Ladder. There are three usuall Ladders belonging to a Ship, the entring Ladder in the waste; a ladder of roapes, which hangs out of the gallery for foule-weather and at sea, to come out of the boate, or goe into it; and one at the beak-head, which is made fast over the bolt-sprit to get up upon the bolt sprit by: The Venetians, and most Leavent Ships, and also Spanish Gallioons have Ladders, which goe into the top, and come downe abast the ties, for they seldo me goe up by the shrowdes.
To Lade. Is to fill the Ship with goods or provision, for when the Howld is full, they say, she hath her ladeing; Also to charge a peece of Ordnance, is to Lade the Ordnance; also some say, Lade the water out of the boate. A Ladle. Is that wherwith we put the powder into a peece of Ordnance, when we take the powder out of a Budge-barrell; we never use that in fight, unlesse we have spent all our Carthrages, for they are both troublesome, and not so speedy, and dangerous for scattering of powder. Land-fall. Is as much as the falling with the Land, as thus, If we say we shall see Land, such a day, and that it fall out so just according to our reconing, we say, we have a good Land-fall; or if we be mistaken, then we made a bad Land-fall. Land-locked. When we are in any Roade or Harbour, so that the Land lies round about us, and the sea lies not any point open upon us, we say we ride Land-locked, these are very good Roads and Harbours; for no sea can come in to wrong the Ship. Land-to. By this is meant, just so far off at sea as we can see the Land: as when we direct one to lie off at fea in the hight of a Cape∣land-to, that is so neere, and so far off, as he may even just see and discerne the land, and no neerer. A Land-turne. Is the same off the Land, that a Breize is off the sea, only differing that the Land-turne comes by night, and by sea-turne, or Breize by day. Vide Breize. A Langrell. Is a loose-shot, which goes in with a shackle, to be shortned when it is put into the Peece, and to flie out at length when it is discharged, with a halfe bullet, either of Lead or Iron at the either end: This is good shot neere hand, to use out of our Ordnance, to cut downe Masts, Yards, Roapes and Sailes; and also it will doe much exe∣cution among the men aloft; but it is not used betwixt wind and water, for it will not pierce a good Ships-sides. Laniers. Are the small roapes, which are reeved in the dead-men-eyes, of all the shrowdes and chames; and the use of them, is either to slacken, or to set-taught the shrowdes: also all the stayes belonging to any Masts (whether they have Blocks or Dead-men-eyes belonging to them) are set taught by a Lannier; also the small roape, which makes fast the stopper of the halliards to the halliards, is called a Lannier.
Large. When a Ship goes neither by a-wind, nor before a wind, but as it were, betwixt both (that is quartering) and such a wind that carries her so, we call a large-wind. To Lase, or Lasing. Is the proper terme, for putting-to the Bon∣net to the Course, or the Drabler to the Bonner, as Lase on the Bonnet: Also we say, Lase on the Netting to the Roose-trees or the Wast-trees. To Lash, or Lashers. When we bind any thing up to the Ships sides or Masts (as Pikes, Muskers, or a Butt to the Mast, or the like, as fishes and spare top-Masts without-boord) we call it lashing to, but the Lashers chiefely are those roapes, which doe bind-fast together the rackles and breechings of the great Ordnance, when they are haled within-boord: The reason is, because the breechings cannot be haed∣up taught by hand, therefore this roape is brought about the breeching and tackles a little before the carriage, right under the Peece, and so la∣shes them fast together. Lasking. Note that when we say, a Ship goes Lasking, Veering, Quarter-winds, Large and Roomer, it is in a manner all one, for then they neither goe by a wind, nor before. Latchets. Are small lines, which are sowne into the Bonnets and Drabler like loopes, wherewith they lase the Bonnet to the Cowrse, or the Drabler to the Bonnet, putting them into the Eylot-holes, and so lafeing them one over an other. Launch. This word is used instead of put-out, as we say; Launch a Ship out of a Dock, or out of the Key; Launch the boate, launch-out, or launch in the Davit; Launch-out the Capstaine barrs: Also in an other sence, when they have hoysed-up a yard high enough, or the top. Mast, they cry Launch-hoâ, that is, hoyse no more: Also in stowing the howld, they will say, Launch aft, or launch fore-ward, when they would have a Butt or the like brought fore-ward, or aft-ward-on; also when they are pumping, if the Pump sucks, then they cry Launch-hoa, that is pump no more. To Lay a Land. When we are sailed out of sight of a Land so that we cannot see it, we say, that we have layed the line; but if it be so, that some other point of Land doe hinder us from seeing it, then we say, that we have shut in, or shut it into the other point. A Leake. There is no Ship so tight, but that with her labouring in the sea, (nay though she ride in Harbour) she will make some water,
but we say a ship is Leake, when she makes more water then is ordi∣nary, which is some hundred stroakes in 24. or 48. howres: The causes of Leakes are, either the starting some Treevells, the opening of the Seames, the eating of the Wormes, or else by receiving some shot under water: The wayes of stopping are but two, either within-boord, (which can hardly be, if the Leake be low amongst the ground-tim∣bers or the hookes; but then the best remedy is, to drive downe Tal∣low and Coales mingled together; raw-Beefe, Oatmeale-baggs or the like) if it can be come at, then it is easily stopped with Lead; if it be a shot, they drive-in a Plug, with some Canvas about it; The other is without-boord; when it is easily stopped (if it be not too low) by heeling the Ship over on the other side, and so nailing lead over it; but if it be low, then to stirch a Bonnet, or a Netting which is better with long roape-yarnes opened, and so sucking it under the Keele, to bring it against the Leake: the in-drought of the water will suck in the Ock∣ham, and so stop her selfe; but this will not continue long; when a Ship is Leake, the terme is, she hath sprung a Leake, or she makes much water. Ledges. Are those small peeces of timber, which come thwart ships, from the Wast-trees to the Roofe-trees to beare up the Nettings: or so if there be a grating over the halfe-Deck. Lee.
This word is many wayes used, but generally the Lee is un∣derstood for that which is opposite to the wind: The Lee-shore, that is the shore against which the wind blowes; yet to be under the Lee of the shore, is to be close under the weather-shore, that is, whence the wind doth come: a-lee the helme, that is, put the helme to the lee∣fide of the ship: In conding they use to call him at helme, to have a care of the Lee-latch, that is, to looke that the ship goe not to lee-ward of her course (a Lee-ward ship, is one that is not fast by a-wind, and doth not make her way so good as she might: To come by the Lee, or to lay a ship by the Lee; is to bring her so, that all her sailes may lie against the Masts and shrowds flat, and the wind to come right on her bread-side, so that the ship will lie as it were starke still, or if she make any way, it will be with her broad-side right with the beame: The manner of bringing a ship by the Lee (if she have all her sailes a-boord) is to beare up the helme, hard to wind-ward: Let rise the fore-rack and veere-out the maine-sheate, and take in the Missen, or peake itup (which is called Spelling the Missen. The Lee-fange. Is a roape which is reeved into the Creengles of the Courses, when we would hale-in the bottom of the saile, to lase on the Bonnet, in a strong gale they serve also to helpe to take in the saile. The Leetch. The Leetch of a saile, is the outward side or skirt of the saile, from the earing to the clew; the midle betwixt which is espe∣cially to be accounted the Leetch. Leetch-lines. Are small lines which are fastned to the Leetch of the top-sailes (for they belong to no other sailes) and are reeved into a block at the yard, close by the top-saile-ties: The use whereof is, when they take in the top-sailes, to hale-in the Leetch of the saile; and note, they ever hale the Lee-leetch line first, for then the rest will come in with more ease. Leggs. They are called the Leggs of the Martnets, and are small roapes, put through the Blot-roapes of the maine and fore-saile, in the Leetch of the saile, neere a foote of length, and so at either end being splised into themselves, they have a little eye, whereinto the Martnets are made, with two hitches, and the end seased to the standing-part of the Martnets. Lett fall. Is a phrase generally used for the putting-out any sailes, when the yards are aloft; but not if the Maine-yard and ford-yard be stroken downe, so as that the sailes may be loosed before the yards be hoysed: but most properly, it is used to the maine-saile, fore-sailes, and sprit saile (for to top-sailes the more proper terme is, heave-out your top-sailes) because they doe lie in the top; and to the Missen-saile, we say, set the Missen, and not let it fall. Lifts. Are roapes which belong to the yard-armes of all yards: and doe only serve to top the yard-armes, that is, to make the ends of the yards hang higher or lower, or even, as we list. But the top-saile lifts, doe serve for sheates to the top-gallant-yards, as well as for lifts to the top-saile yards; the haleing of them, is called topping the Lifts, as top-a star-boord, or top a port, that is, hale upon the star-boord, or lar-boord-lift. Limbers, or Limber-holes. Are little square holes, cut in the bot∣tome of all the ground-timbers and hookes next to the Keele, right over the Keele (about 3. or
4. inches square) the use whereof, is to let the water passe to the well of the Pump, which else would lie betwixt thetimbers; into these is put the Keele-roape. Lins-pins. Are only used about the Trucks of the Carriages, to keepe on the Trucks upon the Axeltree, being little Iron pins just the same that keep on Coach-wheeles. Lockers. Any little boxes, or as it were, Cubbords which are made by the Ships-sides, to put in shot by the Peeces, or in any other places, are (by a common name) called Lockers: we have them to every Peece, to have the shot lie ready, if on the suddaine we should have oc∣casion; but in fight the shot lies not there, but in a roape made like a ring, which lies flat upon the Deck; so that the shot cannot doe so much hurt, if that an other shot should light amongst it. A Logg-line. Some call this a Minut-line; it is a small line with a little peece of a boord at the end, with a little lead to it, to keepe it edg-long in the water; the use of it is, that by judging how many fad∣dome this runs out in a Minut, to give a judgment how many leagues the ship will run in a watch, for if in a minut there run out 14. faddom of the line, then they conclude that the ship doth run a mile in an houre, (for 60. (the number of minuts in a howre) being multiplied by 14. (the number of faddome) make just as many places as are in a mile) so ac∣cordingly, as in a minut, there runs out more or lesse, they doe by judge∣ment allow for the Ships way; but this is a way of no certainty, un∣lesse the wind and seas, and the course would continue all one; besides the error of turning the Glasse, and stopping the line both at an instant, so that it is rather to be esteemed as a trick for a conclusion, then any sollid way to ground upon: the manner of doing it is, one stands by with a Minut-glasse, whilst another out of the gallery lets fall the logg, just as the logg falls into the water the other turnes the glasse, and just when the glasse was even out, he cries stop, then he stops, and reckons how many faddom are run-out, so gives he judgement. The Loofe. The Loofe of the Ship is counted that part aloft of the Ship, which lies just before the Ches-trees, as far as the Bulk-head of the Castell; and therefore we call those peeces of Ordnanee which lie there, the loofe-peeces: Loofe-up, a terme in conding the Ship, to have him keepe her neere the wind: Loofe into a Harbour, that is, to keep close to a wind, and so goe into it: Keep your Loofe, that is, to keep close to the wind: to spring-ones Loofe, that is, when a Ship is going large, to clap-close by a wind.
A Loofe-hooke. Is a Tackle, with two hookes; one to hitch into a Creengle of the Maine and fore-saile, which Creengle is in the bolt-roape of the Leetch of the saile not farre above the clew; and the other to hitch into a strap which is plised into the Ches-tree, and so to bowse downe the saile; the use whereof, is to succour the tackle in a great gale, that all the force and stresse may not beare up the tack, and also it is used when we would sease the tack surer, or the like. A Loome-gale. Vide Gale. To Loome. The Looming of a Ship is (as you would say) the very perspective of a Ship; for the word is used in this sence, a Ship loomes a great saile; that is, she seemes to be a great Ship: she loomes but small, that is, shewes or seemes to be but a little ship. A Lust. When a Ship heeles a little to Star-boord or port, we say, she hath a Lust that way, though this happen by stowing her Howld unequally: but most properly, a Ship is said to have a Lust to one side or other, when out of her own mold and making, she hath a kind of inclination to one side more then to the other; or it may be by the un∣equall weight of timbers; for it is a very hard matter, to carry a ships works so even, but that there shall be some small difference; I have seen the experience in many ships, that being equally ballasted, they would carry a greater saile, stop lesse, and goe better upon one tack then upon the other. Lie under the sea. When in a storme we are a-hull, and make fast the Helme a-lee, so as the sea doth breake upon the bowe and broad∣side of the ship, we say she lies, or is layed under the sea. M To MAn.
We say a Ship is well Man'd, when she hath men e∣nough to use her Ordnance, trym her sailes, and plye a conve∣nient number of small shot, besides the Surgeons, Carpenters, and some to hand along powder, and other men that are necessary, but not figh∣ters; I meane so as that men being appointed to their charge shall only intend that; though it be true that a man may step from a Gun to a roape, or from a roape to use a small-shot, and the like, and therefore it may be thought there should not need so many; yet I would havethose things done, as works of Supererogation, not as being forced to them, for if necessity then require, whilst the sailes are a trimming, the Ordnance or small-shot must lie still: What inconvenience the want of sufficient manning is, in a man of War, they can best tell, who have been best experienced in that loboursome fight at sea, which ma∣ny times doth not only last for a day, but two or three: for mine own part, though I might well be ashamed not to know, and dare to doe as much with a few men, as any other, yet to speake my conscience, and tell my mind cleerely, were I worthy to command the Kings ships in any service, I would rather have twenty men too many, then ten too few: A Marchant-man, is counted well manned when he hath double so many men, as would else barely saile his ship, yet commonly they loose their ships rather for want of men, then desire to save themselves; for though for a while, he may defend himselfe, yet the man of War will be sure of him, if he can have sea roome, and time enough; When they would have men to goe heave at the Capstaine, they say, man the Capstaine; also when Ships meet, and desire to shew all their men, they are commanded to come all up a-loft, and this they call manning the Ship: So when men are commanded to goe up into the top, to take in the Top-sailes, they say, man the top well (that is) a suffi∣cient number of men to goe into the top, to take in the saile; also man the boate. Man of War.
I doe not meane to describe what a Captaine or man is, who is a man of War, but a Ship of War (which is called a man of War among Sea-men) making use of the figure Metonimia, (continens pro contento) These qualities, commodities and condi∣tions, I require in a Ship, which I would say should be a right brave man of War: first, she must saile well; secondly, be roomie betwixt the Decks; thirdly, flush without any falls, (for hindering men to passe too and fro at ease,) she must beare out her lower tire all reasonable fitting weather (which if she doe, the lower she carries them the better) her chase and bowe must be well contrived, to shoote as ma∣ny Peeces right fore-ward, and bowing, as may be (for those parts come to be most used in fight) the Ordnance not to lie right over one an other, but so, as that upon the least yawe of the helme, one Peece or other may ever come to beare: And lastly, she must beare a stowte-saile, such a Ship well manned, with men convenient, to ply their Ord∣nance,handle the sailes, and use some small shot, were worthy to be called a man of War; That Ship which wants any of these, is like a Souldier who should want either a hand, a legg, or an Arme. The Manger. Is a place made with plancks, which are fastned upon the Deck, right under the hawse (some foote and a halfe high) and sometimes is made like a Triangle, meeting at the outward angle aft-ward, either a bast, or before the fore-mast; the use whereof, is on∣ly to receive the water which comes in at the hawses, when the Ship rides an Anchor in great stresses, that the water should not run aft in the Decks, and so in howld (as it may) Some Ships, whose hawses lie high, and that doe ride easily in the sea, need them not; but other have much use of them. Marling. Is a small line made of untwisted hempe to be more gentle and pliant then other lines, and it is also tar'd, the use whereof is to sease the ends of roapes from farsing out, also they use to sease the sides of the straps at the arsse of the blocks together with this: Also if a saile be ript out of the bolt-roape, then (if they have hast, or cold-weather, so as they cannot sow it in) they take Marling, and with that (put through the eylot-holes) they make fast the saile to the bolt-roape; this is called marling the saile. Marling-speeke. Is a small speeke of iron, made of purpose for the splising together of small roapes, and also to open the bolt roapes when they sow in the saile. Martnetts. Are small lines, which are fastned to the leggs on the leetch of the saile, and seeme like Crow-feete, the fall being reeved through a block and the top-mast-head, and so comes downe by the mast to the Deck: The Martnetts of the top-sailes are in the same manner, to the head of the top-gallant mast, but their fall comes no far∣ther then the top, where it is haled; when they are to hale these Mart∣netts, the terme is, top the Martnetts: the use of them are to bring that part of the Leetch of the saile which is next to the yard-arme, up close to the yard, when we farthell the saile; these most commonly be∣long to the two courses; yet many great Ships have them to the top-sailes and sprit-sailes. Masts. The Masting of a Ship, is of much importance to the sai∣ling and conditions of a Ship; for if she be over masted, either in length or bignesse, it will over-charge the Ship and make her lie-downe too
much by a wind, and labour too much a-hull; If she be under-masted, (that is too small, or too short) then she looses the benefit and advan∣tage of spreading so much more saile to give her way: There are some differences, in the proportioning of Masts, according to the use of the Ship, for those which are to goe long voiages, are not to be masted ac∣cording to true proportion, but to be made shorter, and bigger then ordinary, for feare of spending them in a long journey, where they cannot be repaired: But the rule and way whereby we give the true proportion, for the length of any Mast is, to take ⅘ of the bredth of the Ship, and that multiplied by 3. shall give the just number of feete, that the maine-mast shall be of in length; the bignesse to be one inch to a yard in length, but more, if it be a made-mast; for example: Take a Ship, whose bredth is 30. foote, foure fifties of 30. are 24. foote; so I say, that this Ships maine-mast must be 24. yards long, for every yard is 3. foote, and 24. inches through, allowing one inch to every yard: The fore-mast is in length to be ⅘ of the maine-mast, which will be 20. yards lacking one ⅘ part of a yard, and 20. inches through: The bolt-sprit ever the same in length and thicknesse, with the fore-mast, the missen mast to be halfe the length of the maine-mast, which will be 12. yards long, and 12. inches through: And so this is the true propor∣tion for the Masts of a Ship, which is 30. foot broad at the beame: for as we take the proportion of the length of our yards from the keele, so doe we take the proportion of her Masts from the beame, or bredth of the Ship. A long-mast is termed a tawnt-mast; a short mast is termed a lowe-mast. Matts. Are broad clowtes weaved of synnet and thrums toge∣ther, (and some are made without thrums;) the use whereof is to save things from galling, and are used in these places: To the maine and fore-yards, at the ties, (to keep the yards from galling against the mast) upon the Gun-wale of the Loofe, (to keep the clew of the saile from galling there) upon the bolt-sprit and beake-head, to save the clew of the fore-sailes. Mettle. By speaking of the mettle of a peece of Ordnance, is com∣monly meant, not the quality, but the quantitie of the mettle whereof it is made: (as to dispert the mettle: Vide dispert: (When they say, the Peece is laid under-mettle, that is, with her mouth lower then the breetch; or contrary, she lies over-mettle if the mouth lie higher then
the breetch: and if she lie point-blancke, then they say, she lies right with her mettle: So that it is seemes, because the breetch hath most mettle, they doe more singularly attribute the word mettle to that, then any other. If a Peece have much mettle in any part, they say, she is well fortified, and so contrary. The Missen. When we say the Missen, it is meant, that we speake of the saile, not of the mast, (as set the Missen, that is, fit the Missen-saile;) Change the Missen, (that is, bring the yard to the other side of the mast; and so the tack to the other boord:) And so, speek the Missen, (that is, put the yard right up and downe by the mast:) Spell the Mis∣sen (that is, let goe the Sheate and peeke it up) the use of the Missen, is to keepe the Ship close to a wind. Note, if a Ship gripe too much, then we use no Missen, for then she will never keep out of the wind; Sometimes also, we use the Missen when we are at an Anchor, to back the Ship a-sterne, to keep her from fouling her Anchor upon the tur∣ning of the tide: (sometimes also, we tie with the Missen: Some great long Ships require two Missens, then they call that next the maine-mast, the maine-missen; that next the Poope, the Bonaventure Missen. The Missen-Mast. Vide Mast. The Missen-Saile. Vide Saile. The Missen-Top-mast. Vide Top-Mast. The Missen Yard. Vide Yard. To Moore, or Mooring.
To Moore a Ship, is to lay out her An∣chors, as is most fit for the Ship to ride by in that place where she is: for there are these kind of Mooreings: first to moore a crosse, or thwart, which is to lay one Anchor on one side a river, and the other on the other, right against, so as both Cabels (either for Ebb or Flood) may beare together: Next, to Moore alongst, that is to lay one An∣chor right in the middle of the streame on a head, and the other a-sterne, and this is, where they feare driveing a Ship; for then both the Cabels will beare together, if she Tallee in upon either shore: The third is Mooreing water-shot, that is (as you would say) quartring betwixt both, for this is neither a-crosse the tide, nor a-longst the tide; when they come into any place, they perceive where, which way, and upon what point of the Compasse, the wind or sea is like to endanger them most, and so just there they lay-out an Anchor, and this they call Moore∣ingfor West, North-west, or is the Point is: Note, that a Ship is not said to be Moore with leste then two Anchors a-ground, yet if she have but one a-ground and a Hawser, a-short (which is called a proviso) we say she is Moored, with her head to the shore. To Mount. Mounting a peece af Ordnance, is taken in two sen∣ses, that is, either to put them upon, and in their Carriages, (as we say, the Ships Ordnance are not mounted, that is, not on their Carriages) or else when they are in their Carriages, and the mouth of her lies too low for the marke, we say, Mount the Peece higher; But if she lie with her mouth too high for the marke, we say, Let fall the Peece a little, and not dis-mount the Peece; for to dis-mount the Peece, is to take it out of the Carriage, or that the Carriage is not serviceable: as in fight, when a shot hath taken, or broken a Carriage, we say, the Peece is dis-mounted. Munck-seame. This is a kind of sowing the canvasses of the sailes together, the edge of the one is sowne over the edge of the other, and so it is sowne on both sides; this is the strongest way of sowing the sailes. Murderers. Are small Iron or Brasse Peeces with Chambers: In Marchant-men they are most used at the Bulk-heads of the fore-castle, half-deck, or steeridge; and they have a Pintell, which is put into a stock, and so they stand and are traversed, out of which they use Mur∣dering-shot, to scower the Decks, when men enter, but Iron Murde∣rers are dangerous for them which discharge them, for they will scale extremely, and endanger their eyes much with them, I have known di∣vers hurt with shooting them oft. N NEale-too. That is, when it is deep water close to the shore, (as you would say, a Banck,) that is right up and downe without any showling. Neapes, or Neape-Tide.
When the Moone is in the midst of the second and last quarter, then we have Neape-Tides: the Etimologie of the word I know not; but the meaning of it is this; The Neape is opposite to the spring, and there are as many dayes allowed for theNeape or falling of the tides, as for the springer rising of the These doe cause, that where it doth not ever flow high enough, we are forced to stay for the launching and grounding, and also for going over some Bar, till a spring: Note in Neape-tides, the water is never so high nor so low, as in the spring tides: Also the tides never run so swift in Neapes, as it doth at springs▪ Note, that as the highest of the spring, is three dayes after the full, or change of the Moone, so the lowest of the Neape, is foure dayes before the full or change; and then we say it is dead-Neape, when a Ship lacks water, so that it doth not flow high enough to bring her off the ground, or out of a dock, we say she is be-Neaped: So if a ship be within a Bard Harbour, that there lack w∣ter to carry her over till the spring, we say, she is be-Neaped. The Needle, Is that Iron-wire, which is made fast to the Plie of the Compasse; and is that which gives the motion to it, being tou∣ched with a Load-stone: The best for to receive and retaine the vertue of the stone, are made of steele, and the best forme is to make then round with two small points, directing to the North and South: For in this forme they doe most equally prize the Flie. Who would under∣stand more of these, let him read Dr Barlowes Book of the Lord stone, where all things belonging to the Needle are most exactly and compen∣diously set downe. Nettings. Are those small reapes, which are ceased together with roape-yarnes, in the forme of a Nett, with Mashes, and are for the most part only used in the wast (yet I have seene Flemmings have Nettings over all, from the top of the fore-castle over the Poope, and are ∣ched upon the Ledges, which are placed from the wast-trees to the roofe-trees:) In Merchant men it is chiefely used, having a saile laid over it, for to shadow their men, and for a close fight: but I think they are in an error, for it is most dangerous for fireing; of small defence if men enter, being quickly cut downe, and being once torne-downe (as it may easily with small crapnels) cloy all the wast. In a man of War, it is good to have them for the pleasure and succour of the company, but not to use them in fight. Netting-sailes. Are the sailes which they lay upon the Nettings. Nippers. Are small roapes (about a faddom and a halfe, or two faddom long) with a little Truck at one end (or some have only a wale-knot) the use whereof is to hold-off the Cabell from the maine-capstaine,
or the geere capstaine, when the Cabell is either so imy or so great, that they cannot straine it, to hold it off with their hands only. O To OBserve. Is to take the height of Sun, or Star, with any instru∣ment, whereby we know in what degree of latitude, the Ship is: I need not say much of this, for it would require many lines, and is taught in every book of Navigation. Ockham. Is nothing but old-roapes, or others untwisted, and so pulled out as it were into loose flax againe, also, toe, or flax being so imployed about a Ship, is called white Ock-ham; The use of this is to drive into the seames, and to ll parts where they suspect water may come in, as the heads of the treenells, &c. White Ock-ham is best to drive first into the seame next the water, when it is rowled-up, so as when the calker drives it, in it is rowled a thred of Ock-ham. The Offing. By this is means, as much as to say, out in the open sea, from the shore-ward; as if I be at sea in a Ship, the shore on one side me, and on the other side to sea boord, an other ship, she is in the offing: So if a ship be faileing into the sea-ward fore-ward the shore, we say she stands for the offing; So when a ship (as in our Channell) keepes in the middle of the Channell and comes not neere the shore, we say she keepes in the offing. Off-ward. Is a terme used, when a ship is ashore, and heeles to the water-ward, from-wards the shore, they say, she heeles to the off-ward: Or if her sterne lie towards the sea, we say her sterne lies to the off-ward, and her head to the shore-ward. Orlopp.
The Orlopp, is no other but the Deck (as we say) the lower Deck, the second Deck; so you may as well say the lower Orlopp, or the second Orlopp: and indeed it is commonly held the proper speech to call them the first Orlopp and the second Orlopp: for this word Orlopp seemes to be appropriated only to these two Decks: for if a ship have three Decks, they never call the upper-most, which is the third, by the name of Orlopp, but by the name of Deck, as to speake of them they will say, she hath a tire of Ordnance, on the firstand second Orlopp, and also the upper Deck. Over-sett. When a Ship at sea, with bearing too much saile is borne-over on a side and so founded in the sea, we say she was over∣sett: Sometimes with an extraordinary wind, the ship may be over∣sett, with nothing but the power which the wind may have over her Hull (especially if the wind and current goe contrary: I have heard some say, that disemboa-guing out of the Indies, by Cape Florida (where the current ever setts very strong to the North-ward) that if they have met with a gust at the North, the wind having power over the Hull of the ship a-loft, and the current setting to wind-ward, h∣ving power of the Hull alone, they have beene in great danger of f∣dring: Also the turning over of the Cabell or small roape which is quoi∣led-up, is called over-setting; as over-set the Cabell, &c. Over-throwe. When a Ship, that is brought to be trimmed a-ground doth fall-over on a side, we call it over-throwne, and not over∣set; the reason whereof is, her want of floore to beare her upon, and sometimes it may happen by the indiscretion of those who bring the ship a-ground, heeling to the off-ward, if the ground be too steepie, whenas they should heele her to the shore-ward, to prevent which, we have no way but to shoare her up with her top-mast and yard. The Out-licker. Is a small peece of timber (some or yards long, as they have occasion to use it) and it is made fast to the top of the Poope, and so stands right out a-sterne, at the outward most end, there is a hole, into which the standing part of the sheate is made fast, and so being reeved through the block of the sheate; is neeved againe through an other block, which is seased to this peece of timber neere the end, and so the use of this is to hale-downe the Missen sheat to it. This is seldome used in great ships, but the cause why in any-ship it is used, is for that the Missen-mast is placed so far aft, that there is not roome enough within-boord, to hale downe the sheace flat, and so are forced to use this without-boord. The small French Burtons and Al∣lownes, doe use this most of any ships which I have seene; and generally all New-castle Carnels have them. Oze, or Ozie.
Is a soft slimy, muddy ground, this is no good ground to ride at Anchor in, for the Anchors will not hold her in great stresses: but the best way to make them hold, is to shooe them, and in some places that will not serve neither: Besides this is verybad ground for rotting of Cabels; if a man would have a ship lie long a-ground, it is best laying her in Oze, for there she will lie very soft and easily; for she will quickly Duck her selfe there: It is very bad also for rotting the Planekes, and the Ocham, which is in the seames. P A PAntch. Those Matts made of Synnett, which are made fast to the Maine, and fore-yards (to save them from Gallinge against the Matts) are called Fanches, by a proper name. A Parbunckle. Is a Roape, which is used in the nature of a paire of Slinges: It is a Roape seased together at both ends, and so put double about the Cask, to hoyse it in by, and the hooke of the Run∣ner is hitched into it, to hoyse it in: this is the quickest way of Slinging the Cask, but not so sure a way for Slipping as the Slings. To Parcell, or Parcelling. Is to take a little Canvas (about the breadth of a hand) and so lay it over a Seame, which is first Caulked: and it is most commonly used alongst the Ships-sides, over the Cabbin. Then heate a little Pitch, and Tar every hott, and power upon this Can∣vas, and all this together is called Parcelling a Seame. Parrells. Are those things made of Trucks, and Ribbs, and Roaps, which goe about the Mast, and are at both ends made fast to the yard, and are so made with Truckes, and Ribbs, that the yard may slide-up easily. These also with the brest Roape, doe hold the yard close to the Mast. The Partners. Are those Timbers, which are Bolted to the Beames, and doe compasse the shoot in the Mast at the Deck: and are the strength that doe keepe up the Mast Steddy in the Stepp. And also that it should not Rowle-out the Ship-sides; There are Part∣ners at the second Deck, in the same nature, but the Missen hath but one paire of Partners: The Mast doth use to be wedged fast in these, from stirring or wagging; yet I have seene some Ships that would not saile well, unlesse the Mast were loose) and as they terme it, had leave to play in the Partners, but in a Storme it is dangerous to let the Mast have any play, for feare of wronging the Partners, which if they should give way, there is no remedie but to cutt the Mast by the Board.
A Passarido. Or more properly, a Nepas-artua-Roape, is any Roape where-with we hale-downe the sheate-Blocks of the Maine, and fore-sailes when they are haled afft the Clew of the Maine-saile to the Cubbridge head of the Maine-Mast; and the Clew of the fore-saile to the Catt head, and this is done, when the Ship goes large. The Pawle. Is a little piece of Iron, bolted to one end of the Beames, or the Decke, close to the Capstaine, but so easily that it hath leave to turne about: This is it, against which the wheeles of the Capstaine doe beare, when they would have the Capstaine kept back from turning back a-gaine, and therefore they said heave a Pawle: that is, heave a little more, that the Pawle may catch hold∣of the whelpes: this is very necessary sometimes, when they heave up the Anchor in a great fea-gate, to hold fast, least the force of the Sea, yerking up the Ship suddenly, should fling men from the Can∣staine, That is called Pawling the Capstaine; and when they would have the Capstaine goe back they say, un-Pawle the Capstaine. To Pay. Is the same that Parcelling is, only wanting the Canvas: for we call it, Paying a Seame, when after it is Caulked, we heate Pitch to lay upon the Seame, to keep is from being preised with the water: we also use no Tar to this: Also when we grave a Ship, we call the laying on the stuffe (what ere it be, Rozen and Brimstone, and Oyle, or the like: Paying her, for they say, Pay her up to the Bends: Pay thick, or the like.) Also when a Ship is to Tack, and that all her Sailes are a-Back-Stayes (that is flat against the Shrowds and M, so as we are sure she will not fall back againe) we say she is Pay, and then we let rise the Tack, and hale the sheates, and so come to lay the head the other way. A Peeke. To heave a Peeke, Is to heave the Hawse of the Ship-Right-over the Anchor, so that the Cabell is then a right perpendicular betwixt them. To Ride a Peeke, is to have the Maine-yard, and fore yard hoysed-up, and so one end brought up close to the Shrowdes, the other being raised up, and so are they done to contrary sides: the Star∣boord-yard-Arme of the Maine yard comming downe to the Star∣boord side, and the Lat-boord of the fore-yard, so the yards seeme to crosse one another, like a St
Andrew-crosse. The manner of doing it is from the Maine yard letting goe Star-boord-Top-saile sheates▪and Topping up the Lar-boord Lists; and so contrary-wise for the fore-yard. To Ride a Broud Peeke, is to Ride in the same manner, but the yard must be but halfe mast high; they never likely Ride in this manner with their yards, but in a River, the reason, lest rideing with their yards a crosse, some Ship might by chance come fowse of them, and breake their yards: Also that Roome which is in a Ships-howld from the bitts forward unto the Stem, is called the Peeke, or fore-Peeke of the Ship: In the Kings Ships the Powder is placed there: Merchant-men place their victuals there outward-bound: but other men of warre (which are full of men,) will use it for to ledge some of the Companie. Pendants. A Pendant is a short Roape made fast at one end, either to the head of the Mast, or to a Yard, or to the Clew of a saile, and are in bignesse, according to the places wherein they are used, having at the other end a Block with a Sheever, to Reeve some Running-Roape into it, as the Pendames of the Tackle, which are made fast to the head of the Mast, and so of the Pendants of the Back-stayes which are there made fast, and hang a little way downe on the inside of the Shrowds: Generally, all the yard-armes (excepting the Missen) have Pendants, into which the Braces are reeved, and by them they are easily knowne. Also they those Colours, which are hung-out on the yard armes, or from the head of the Mast for a shew, to beautifie the ship, Pendants. The Pillow. That Timber whereon the Bolt-sprit doth beare, and rest on, at the comming-out of the Hull of the Ship aloft, by the stem, is called the Pillow of the Bolt-spritt. A Pintell. Is a small iron Pin, which is fastned to murderers, as also to Harquabusses, a Crooke which is put into a Socket, or any hole, to keep the peece from recoyling: Also those Iron-Pins, which are made fast to the Rudder, and doe hang the Rudder to the Sterne-Post (being put into Icon Stockes) and called the Pintells of the Rudder. Pitching.
Is not only laying Pitch upon any place (which yet is more properly called Paying, but it is also taken for the placeing of the Step of a Mast, as they say, the Maine Mast is Pitched a little too-farre aft (that is, stand and is placed too fat towards the Sterne of the Ship) but it is not meant by the head hanging too-farte-aft: So the fore-Mast is pitched too far-forth (that is) the Ship stands too far-fore-ward on. Also if a Ship fall moon into a Sea, they say, she Pitchesmuch into the Sea: or else she beates much against the Sea: so as to en∣danger the Top-masts with the stroake, they say, she will. Pitch her Mast by the Boord. Platts. Are flatt-Roapes, made of Roape-yarne woven one over another, and are for to save the Cabell in the Hawse foom galling. Also we use them in the flookes of the Anchor to save the Pendant of the fore-sheate, from galling against the Anchor. A Plott. And Sea-Card is all one, Vide Card. To Pricke a Plott, is to Vote downe the Travers of the Ships way, and so comparing it to your observation, finding where the Ship is, to make a small Prick in the Plot in the Latitude and Longitude, where you suppose the Ship to be, and so still keeping account of the daies, you shall still see how neere, or farre off you are from the place, which you saile to. A Point. The shatpnesse to any head-Land, is called the point of the Land: when they say, that two points are one in another, that is, they are so just in a right line from us, one betwixt the other, that we cannot see the one for the other; Also the Compasse is divided into 32. points (representing 32. winds) so that we call sailing by the Compasse, sailing upon a point: They use also to undoe the Stroud at the end of a Cabell (some 2. foot long) and so make Synnet: of the Roape-Yarne, and lay them one over another againe, making it lesse to∣wards the end, and so at the end, make them all fast with a peece of Marling, or the like. This is called pointing the Gabell. The use where of is to keepe the Cabell from farsling, but chiefly to see that none of the end be stolne off, and cut away. The Poope. The Poope of the Ship is the upper most part terne of the Ships-Hull, and is the Deck over that, which is commonly the Masters Cabbin. A Port. Is that place out of which the Ordnance are put through the Ships-sides, and these are to be made so large that the Ordnance may have leave to Travers as much Bowing and Quartering as may be, (about 30. Inches is the ordinary rate for a Demi-Cuiverin.) To Port.
Is a word used in Conding the Ship, when she is right before a wind, or if the weather-sheate be aft as farre as the Bulk head (which is more then Quarter windes, but not right afore) they will use the word steddy a-Port, or Steddy a Star-boord, the Ship heelesto Port: bring things neere to port, or the like, termes easily un∣derstood. Pouches. Are small Bulk-heads made in howlde, either Thwart-Ships, or longst Ships. Those who carry Corne (or any such goods that will shoote over from one side to the other) doe make many bulke-heads, or severall Roomes (as it were) to keepe it up, and these are called Pouches, also when we Careen Ships, there are small bulk-heades, made some distance from the Keeleson, on either side in the holde, which serve to keep up the Ballast when we shirte it, either for the righting or bringing downe of the Ship when she is on the Carreen; and these are also called Pouches. Powdor. There are two sorts of Powder, the one serpentine Pow∣der, which powder is dust (as it were) without Corning, and this we never use at sea in Ordnance, not small short, both because it is of small force, and also, for that it will, with the aire of the Sea, quickly drie, and loose its force: The other is Corne Powder, whereof there are two sorts, Common powder (which is a great Corne, and not very strong) the other Musket-Powder (which is the finest, strongest, and best we can get:) The Ingredients, which make the powder, are, first, Salt-peeter (wherein the force of the Powder consists) next Brim∣stone, which is apt to flame, and once flamed, causeth the Salt-peeter to flame; (last, Cole, which is apt with any sparkle to kindle, but not to flame, yet doth maintaine the flame of the other two.) The best Salt-peeter is that which hath no fat, the best brimstone without drosse: and the best Cole, that which is made of the lightest wood: I only touch some chiefe things of this, because there are divers bookes concerning maine Conclusions touching the effect of powders in all kindes. The Powder-roome. Is that Roome, in howld where we lay the Powder; the great in placing this Roome, must be to have it farthest from the use of any fire, and freest from the danger of short. Proddy. Is a word used amongst them, in the stead of Ready. As when we come to sight, the Commander bids them make the Ship Preddy, make the Ordnance Preddy, that is, make them ready for to use in sight. A Proddy Ship, that is, when her Deckes are all cleere, and the Ordnance and all things fitted for sight. Also make the howld Preddy, is to lay any things out of the way, so as that they may stowe the good in commodiously.
A Preventure Roape. Vide Roape. A Proviso. Vide Mooreing. The Prowe. Is the fore-most part of the Ship considered aloft, and not below betweene the Decks, (or in howld) to enter into the Prowe, is to enter into the Fore-Castle. The Prowe peeces are those which lye aloft before: Goe fore-ward into the Prowe, that is, Goe into the fore-Castle, before the fore-Mast, and it is most truly understood for that part which is betwixt the Chase and the Loofe. Priming. Is so fitting, and filling the touch-holes, with fine-day Powder, and putting in a Priming Iron to pierce the Carthrage, so that that powder being fired, the powder in the Carthrage, may like-wise fire to: for if the powder in the touch-hole be fired, and the rest within the peece goe not off, we say she was not Primed, or not well primed: for this there is powder made very small, and extraordinary drie, and the Gunner hath it in a great home at his Girdle in fight, which horne he cals his Priming-horne: Also the first ground, or Co∣lour which is laid-on, for others to come over, it in painting the Ship is called Priming. Puddings. Are Roates nayled round to the yard-armes of the Maine and fore-yards, close to the end, and so (in . or 4. or more di∣stance one from another) upon each yard-Arme: The use of them, is to save the Robbins from Galling asunder upon the yards, when we hale-home the Top-saile-sheats: Also the Sarving of the King of the Anchor, which Roapes, to save the Clinth of the Cabell from galling against the Iron, is called the Pudding of the Anchor. Pullies. Are small Blockes, with one or two sheevers in them (and may either be so called, or by the name of small Bleckes) for great blocks are not usually called by the name of Pullies, as the Pullies of the Top-aile. Brases, Clew, Lines, Manners, &c. Pumps.
There are three sorts of Pumps used in ships: The first and most common, are ordinary Pumps, such as are used a shore, and thse doe stand by the maine Mast, the next is a But-Pump, which is not used in English Ships, but Flemmings have them in the sides of their ships, and are called by the name of Bildge, Pumps, because they have broad long floates that doe hold much Bildge-water; The man∣ner of these is to have a staffe, some 6. or 7. foot long, at the end where∣of is a Bur of wood, whereto the Leather is nailed, and this doth servein stead of the box: and so two men standing right over the Pump, doe thrust downe this staffe, to the middest whereof is seased a Roape long enough for 6.8. or 10. or more to hale-by, and so they pull it up, and draw the water, this Pump doth deliver more water then the former, and is not so laborious to pump at: The third and last sort, are Chaine-Pumps; these deliver most water, and with most ease, for the Com∣pany, and are soonest mended if any thing faile, having spare Esses, if any chance to give way: these have a Chaine full of Barres and a wheele, which makes it deliver so much, and goe so easily. The terme is for Pumping, to Pump by Spell, and at ordinary, and Bur Pumps, they reckon by the stroakes: As to say, a Spell of 00. Stroakes: bt a Chaine-Pump, the Spels goe by Glasses: the Pump suckes, that is, drawes wind, and hath no water that comes to it: There are also Pumps made of a Cane, or else of Lattin, which we put downe into the Caske, to Pump up the drinke: for at Sea, in howld, we use no spic∣ketts. The Pump-brake. Is the handle they Pump by in the ordinary sort of Pumps. The Pump-can. Is the Can which they draw water in to powre into the Pumps (and this is a great Can.) The Pump-dale. Is (as it were) the Trough, wherein the water doth run alongst the Deck, out at the Skupper-holes. To Purchase. We call the Caining, or comming in of a Roape by our haleing of it in with our hands, or heaveing it in at the Capstaine, or otherwise, Purchasing; as the Capstaine doth purchase apace, that is, drawes in the Cabell apace: Or, the Tackles doe purchase, and the contrary; when we cannot get in any thing, or hale it away, we say, we cannot purchase, with the Roape, Tackle, or the like. Note that the more parts that any Tackle, Halliard, or the like doe goe in, the more easily a man may purchase upon them (as it is easier to purchase with a Block which hath three sheevers then a Block which hath but two:) but then this is longer a doing. Puttockes. Are the small Strowdes, which goe from the Shrowdes of the Maine and fore-Missen-Masts, and allo to the Top-masts shrowdes, if the Top-mast have a Top-gallant-Top; the use whereof is to goe off the Shrowdes into the : for when the Shrowdes come neere up to the Mast they fall in so much that otherwise they could
not get into the top from them. The Puttockes are from the bot∣tome seased to a Staffe; which is made fast there to the shrowdes, or some Roape which is seased there, and above to a plate of Iron, or to a dead-man-eye, to which the Lanniers of the fore-Mast-shrowdes doe come. Q The QVarter, That part of the Hull, of the Ship, which is from the Steeridge to the Transom, or Fashion-peece, is called the Quarter, or the Ships-Quarter. Quarter Deck Is that Deck, which is over the Steeridge, till it come to the Masters Cabbin. Quartering. Is when a peece of Ordnance, lyes so, and may be so Traversed, that it will shoote in the same line, or on the same point of the Compasse as the Quarter beares; Also when a Ship sailes with Quarter-winds, we say, she goes Quartring; then we let rise the wea∣ther-Tack, and hale aft the sheate, to the fore-Mast Shrowdes, and Veere-out the Lee sheate a little; this way she goes fastest: for now all sailes draw together. Quarter-winds. Are when the wind comes in a bast the Maine Mast-Shrowdes just with the Quarter. A Quoyle. Or a Quoyle of Roapes, is a Roape laid up-round, one Take over another, as a Quoyle of Cabell, that is a Cabell quoyled up. But sometimes the word Quoyle is taken for a whole Roape quoyled, so that if halfe the Roape be cutt awaie, they say, there is but halfe a Quoyle of that Roape. To Quoyle. Is to lay the Takes of the Roape round, over one an∣other, so that when occasion is, they may run out smooth without any kneekes, and also to lie handsomely in the Ship, and many of the small running-Roapes, as the Brases, Top-saile-Hilliards, or the like: we hang up at the Ship-sides, when they are so quoyled: It is a manner at Sea, every night when they set the watch, or Quoyle-up all the Roapes in order, that so they may have them all Leere to come by in the night, if they have occasion to use any of them. Quoynes. There are three sorts of Quoynes used in a Ship, that is
the Quoynes which the Gunners use under their Ordnance, for to mount them higher or lower, they are made broad, but thinner at one end then at the other, with a handle at the broad end, to draw it out, or put it further in as you have occasion to mount the Peece; pulling out the Quoynes, is termed to draw the Quoyne, Another sort are called Can∣tick-quoines, these are short, the length of a hand, and are made with three edges, the use whereof is to put betwixt the Cask, at the Bildge hoopes of the Cask, to keepe the (ask steddy from rowling and labouring one against an other. The third sort are standing Quoynes, and they are made of Barrell-boords some foure fingers broad, and a fit length to be driven a-crosse betwixt the Butts, one end, two or three hoopes from the thin-hoopes of one Butt, and the other in the same manner to an other, to keep the chine of the Butt steddy from jog∣ging. R RAbbetting. Is the letting-in of the Plancks to the Keele, which is a little hollowed away, that the Planck may joyne in the better, and closer to the hookes and the Keele, and this is only used in the Rake and Run of the Ship, and not in the flat floore: And the hollowing-away is called the Rabbet of the Keele. Rake.
The Rake of a Ship, is so much of her Hull, as doth over∣hang both ends of the Keele: So that let-fall a-perpendiculer upon the end of the Keele upon the setting on of the Stem, so much as is without that foreward-on is her Rake foreward-on. And so in the like manner at the setting in of her Sterne-post, and that is her Rake aftward-on. Commonly the Rake foreward-on, is more then a third; but lesse then an halfe of the length of her Keele, there is not any more rule observed amongst all Nations; for some give long great Rakes, as generally all French built, the Flemmnigs not so much: And for the Rake aft∣ward-on (it being of no use for the Ship, but only for to make her Ship shapen, as they call it, they give as little as may be) which commonly is about a fourth or fifth part of her Rake fore-ward-on: (A great Rake fore-ward-on, gives a Ship good way, and makes her keep a good wind, but if she have not a good full Bowe, it will make her litch migh∣tilyinto the head-sea, besides it doth mightily charge the ship, because it doth over-hang the naile; And if a ship have but a small Rake, she will commonly be too bluffe, and so meet the sea too suddenly upon her bowe, which will hinder her going through much: The longer a ships Rake is, the fuller must be the bowe: The best conditioned ships have neither too much, nor too little. Ram-head. The Ram-head is a great block, with three Sheevers in it, into which are the Hilliards, and at the head of it, into a ho are reeved the ties, this block doth only belong to the maine and fore-Hil∣liards. A Rammer. Is a staffe, with a round peece of wood at the end of it, the outwardmost being flat, somewhat lesse then the bore of the Ordnance to which it doth belong, and this is to drive home the Pow∣der close to the breetch of the Peece, and so the shot to the powder, and the wood to the shot, and that is called ramming home the powder or shot. Ranges. There are two, one aloft upon the fore-castell a little abast the fore-mast, the other in the beake-head, before the wouldings of the bolt-sprit, that in the fore-castell, is a small peece of timber, which goes over from one side to the other, and there is fastned to two timbers, and on the middle on either side the fore-Mast, two knees which are fastned to the Deck and the timber, in which run the top-saile-sheates in a Shee∣ver; and hath divers wooden pins through it, to be-laye Roapes unto (as the fore-Takes, fore-top-saile-sheates and fore-bowlings; the fore-Loofe-hooke) and that in the Beake-head, is in the same forme, whereunto it be-layed the sprit-saile-lifts; the Garnet of the prit-saile, and other Roapes, belonging to the sprit-saile, and sprit-saile top-saile, Ratling. Is a Line wherewith they make the stepps by which we goe up the shrowdes, and the Puttocks, and so the Top-Mast-shrowdes in great ships, and these stepps which make the shrowdes looke like Ladders, are called the Ratlings of the Shrowdes. A Reache. Is the distance of any two Points of Land, which beare in a right line to one an other, which terme is most commonly used in Rivers, as Lime-House-Reache, Green-wich-Reach, long-Reach and the like, the Reach being counted so farre, as you can see the Reach to lie in a straight line; Also some call the distance, and crossing betwixt Cape-verd, and the first Iselands, entring to the West-Indies, long-reach.
To Reeve. This word is used just in the same sense (in respect of Roapes) that putting in, or putting through; or passing through would be▪ but they ever use this word Reeve; as when we would expresse that the Tack is put through the Ches-trees, we say it is reeved through, or instead of putting a roape through a block, we say, Reeve it in that block, (as the Halliards are reeved in the Knights and Ram-heads,) and it is generally to be understood and applied to all Roapes that passe through blocks, Dead-men-eyes, Ches-trees and the like; And so when we would have that Roape pulled out of the block, &c. we say, unreeve that Roape, or the Brases, Lifts, Sheetes, &c. are unreeved. Ribbs. By a resemblance that the timbers (that is the Futtocks of the ships have when the Plancks are off to the ribbs of a dead carkasle, we) doe in that kind, call all those timbers by a generall appellation, the ribbs of the ship, though otherwise they have particular names: As if two ships in a sea-gate, lie a-boord one an other, and hath broke with her weight some of the others futtock timbers, they will say, she hath broke some of her ribbs: Also those little long wooden peeces which are made with holes like the Combe under the beake-head, and doe be∣long to the Parrells of the yards, are called the Ribbs of the Patrells. To Ride.
We say a ship Rides, whenas her Anchors doe hold her fast, so as that she doth not drive away with the tide or wind: for though she sheere from one side to the other, yet if her Anchors doe hold fast, and come not home, we say she Rides: To Ride a good Roade, that is to Ride, where the sea, and wind had much power over the ship, and straine her Cabels very hard: Note a ship rides easiest, and with more securitie, having but two Cabels splised together (which they call a shot) then she will by three single Cabels, for the length of the shot will give her more scope, to play, and rise upon the sea with ease; for by reason also of the waight, the ship can hardly straine it: For when a great sea comes to yerk-up the ship, the shot is long before it comes to straining, that the force of the sea will be past before it can come up to beare so much stresse, as a shorter Cabell would doe: The deeper the water is, the worser it is to Ride, and requires much more Cabell in proportion then showler-water, the sea will breake more, yet it hath not that power and waight which the deep water hath, when we Ride any extraordinary roade, we strike downe our top-masts, and bring our yards alongst ships, in much wind especially: Toride a crosse, is to ride with our maine-yards and fore-yards hoysed up to the hounds, and both yard-armes topped a-like: To ride a Peeke, is to ride with the yards Peeked a-Peeke; and also when we ride with the Hawes just over the Anchor, then we ride a-Peeke, that is, when we ride ready to set saile; when they would expresse that they have rid a great Roade and stresse, they say they rid hawse-fall, that is, that the water brake into the Hawses: To ride thwart, is to ride with her side to the tide, then she never straines her Cabels: To Ride betwixt wind and tide, is when the wind and tyde have equall power, one, one way, the other, the other way, so that the ship lies rowleing with her broad∣side in the Trough of the sea, and thus she will rowle mightily, but not straine her Cabels. Riders. Are great timbers (in howld, or else aloft) which are not properly belonging to the Bult of the ship but only bolted on, upon the other timbers to strengthen them where they find the ship to be weake, Marchant-men doe spare them as much as they can, because they hinder Stowage of Cask in Howld. Rigging. The Rigging of the ship, are all Roapes which belong either to mast or yards; and more particularly, we say, the mast is rig∣ged, the yards are rigged; that is when they have all the roapes that belong unto them: (we say, a ship is well rigged, when the roapes be∣longing to her, are of a fit size (not too big, nor too little,) also when there are no unnecessary roapes put up (as to many shrowdes, Tackles for the Mast, Crow-feet, or the like:) whenas we say, a ship is over∣rigged, it is meant the roapes are too big for her, which is a great wrong∣ing to the ships saileing; for a little waight aloft doth hinder, more then a great deale below, by making the ship apter to heele, and howl∣ding wind-taught; for note, that the uprighter any ship goes, the bet∣ter she dothsaile; for a cranck sided ship can never saile well by the wind. To tel the particulars of rigging a ship, will require a small dis∣course by it selfe, and would be too long for this, therefore I leave it to some other occasion. Ring-bolts, Vide Bolts. The Riseings.
Are those thick Plancks, which goe fore and aft on both sides, under the ends of the beames and timbers of the second Deck, the third Deck, the halfe and quarter Deck, where on the beames and timbers of these Decks, doe beare at both ends, by the ship-sides:but those thick plancks which in the like sort doe beare up the lower Deck, are called Lamps. Rising-timbers. Are the hookes placed on the Keele; which beare this vaine in respect, that according to the riseing by little and little of these hookes; so the Rake and Run of the ship doth rise by little and lit∣tle from her flat-floare. A Roade. Is any place where a ship may ride neare the Land and yet cannot ride-land-locked for all winds: A good Roade is, where there is good ground for Anchor-hold, showle-water, and so as how ere the wind-blow, there can no great sea-gate come-in, being the Land may be in the wind, on one side, and some sands, Rocks, or the like, to breake of the sea on the other; (Also we say, if it be a place, as in divers places of Barbery and others) where the sea will give a man warning, that is, the sea will come swelling-in before the wind, as at Saint Sa∣phe, of any fowle weather, so that a man may have time, to set-saile and goe to some other Roade, on the other side of the Bay-head-land, or the like, this we call shifting of Roades; A wild Roade, is a Roade where there is little Land on any side, but lies all open to the sea: as to ride upon a head-land, or alongst a shore, where there is no Bay, nor any thing to breake off the sea, or wind if it come off the sea. A bad Roade is the contrary to the good. A Roader. We call any ship that Rides at an Anchor in a Roade, a Roader. Roapes. Generally, all the cordage belonging to a ship, is called by the name of Roape: as we say, a Cabell is a good or bad Roape (accor∣ding as it is) and so a Hawser or the like, but more particularly, only some, which besides their particular appellations, have the generall word Roape added to them: These are an Entring Roape, a Top Roape, a Bolt Roape, a Buoy Roape, a Quest Roape, a Keele Roape, a Bucket Roape, a Rudder Roape, a Preventure Roape, (which is a little Roape seased crosse over the Ties, close at the Ram-head, that if one part of the Ties should breake, the other should not run through the Ram-head to endanger the yard) a brest roape, and is the Roape which latches the Parrell to the Mast. Roape-Yarnes.
Are the yarnes of any roapes untwisted; but most commonly, it is made of the ends of Cabels, halfe worne, or so, they serve for many uses; to serve small Roapes with, or to make SynnetMasts, or the like; also Kneetles, which is two untwisted together and Caburnes: They serve also to wake-up the yard-aymes of the sailes; and therefore still, when we take in our sailes, the boyes of the ship are to attend the Saylor with these Roape-yarnes, to furnish them as they have occasion to use them. Robins. Are little lines reeved into the Eylot-holes of the saile, un∣der the Head-Roape, and sure to make fast the saile unto the yard: and the terme is, make fast the Robbins, and not tie them: and note that Sea faring men, use the word make-fast, instead of tying, as Land-men use to say, tie a Roape. Roofe-trees. Are those timbers, which are made of light wood (as of mast sawen) that goe from the halfe Deck, to the fore-Castell, and are to beare-up the grateings and the ledges wherein the Nettings lye, these are supported under the stamshions which rest upon the Deck: Also if they have occasion to use any such peece over the half-Deck, for Nettings or sailes, it is called a Roofe tree. Rove and Clinch. The Rove is that little iron plate, unto which the Clinch-nailes are clinched: The Planckes of Clincher-boates, are thus fastned so together, which kind of work is called Rove and Clinch. The Round-house. Is the uppermost Roome of the sterne of the ship, and that which commonly is the Masters Cabbin. Rownd-in. This is a terme used to the maine and fore-saile, when the wind larges upon them, they let rise the maine Tack, or fore-Tack, and hale aft the fore-sheate to the Cat-head, and the maine sheare to the Cabridge head; this they call Rounding aft, or rounding in the saile, the sheates being there, they hale them downe to keep them steddy from flying up, with a Roape called a Passaredo. The Rowle. Is that round peece of wood or iron, wherein the whip doth goe, and is made to turne about, that it may carry over the whip from side to side with more ease. Rowse-in. Is a word they use particularly whenas a Cabell or Hawser doth lie slack in the water, and they would have it made taught; as when a ship rides but by one Anchor, upon the turning of the tide, the Cabell will be slack, and so will be in danger to flow above the Anchor, then to keep it stiffe and taught, they will haile in so much as lies slack, and this they call Rowseing in the Cabell, or Rowse in the Hawser, but it is not used in the haleing in of any other Roape, as boate∣roape, or the like.
The Rudder. Is that peece of timber, which hangs at the sterne∣post of the ship, having foure, or five, or six irons, which are called Pin∣tels, according to the bignesse of the ship fastned to them, which Pin∣tels are fitted for the Gudgins at the sterne post, this is the bridle which governes the ship; the narrower the Rudder is, the better, if the ship doe feele it, for a broad Rudder doth hold much water, if the helme be put over to any side, but if the ship have a fat-quarter, so that the water cannot come quick and strong to the Rudder, then she will require a broade Rudder: The putting to of the Rudder, is termed the hanging the Rudder; The part or edge of the Rudder, which is next the sterne∣post, is called the in-side of the Rudder, the after-most part, is called the Rake of the Rudder. The Rudder Roape. Is a Roape or strap, which is reeved into one hole of the Rudder, neere the head, and so likewise through the sterne∣post, and then both ends are splised together; this serves to save the Rudder, if it chance to be beaten off, when the ship sticks a-ground. Rudder-Irons. Are the cheekes of that Iron, whereof the Pintell is part, and these are fastned and nailed round about the Rake of the Rudder. To Rumidge. Is to remove any goods, or luggage out of a place (betwixt the Decks, or any wheeles) but most commonly we use this word to the removing and cleering of things in the ships hould, so that goods or victuals may be well stowed and placed, so when they would have this done, they say, they will goe Ruming the howld. The Run.
Is that part of the ships hull under-water, which comes thinner, and lancker away by degrees from the floare-timber all along to the sterne-post: That is also called the ships way aft-ward-on, (for as she hath either, a good or bad Run, so the water doth passe away swiftly, or slowly alongst her, and the ship doth make more way) we say, a ship hath a good Run, when it is long, and comes off handsomely by degrees, and that her tack, doe not lie too low, which will hinder the water from comming strongly and swiftly to the Rudder,: And a bad Run, whenas it is short, and that the ship is too full below, so that the water comes slowly and weakely to the Rudder, the force of it be∣ing broken off by the bredth of the ship a-lowe, which will make as it were, an Eddy-water at the Rudder, and that we call a dead water: The Run is of much importance for the ships saileing; for if the watercome not swiftly to the Rudder, she will never steere well; and it is a ge∣nerall observation, that that ship which doth not steere well, cannot saile well, and then she cannot keep a good wind: for if a ship have not a fresh way through the sea, she must needs fall to Lee-ward with the sea, and therefore when ships will not steere well, they lengthen them aftward-on, or put to a false sterne-post: Merchant-men doe not give so much Run, as a man of War may doe, because the narrowing-in of the ships below, doth loose much stowage. Rung heads. Are the heads, or ends of the Rung, which are made a little compassing; and doe lead or direct (as it were the sweepe and mould of the Futtocks; for in these Rung-heads, the lines which give the compasse and bearing of the ship doe begin: Also more generally, the outward ends of the Hookes, which are in the same manner com∣passing, are called Rung heads; for the sleeper which is bolted into the other Rung heads, is also bolted into these, and they say, it is bolted fore and aft to the Rung heads. The Rungs. Are the ground-timbers, which doe give the flower of the snip; and these are bolted to the Keele, being straight, saving at the ends, where they begin to compasse a little. The Runner. Is a Roape, which is a part that doth belong to the Gar∣net, and the two Bolt-tackles, that before (that comes in the aftermost shrowds of the fore mast) and that Tackle abast (which comes in the fore-mast shrowdes of the maine-mast) it is reeved in a single-block, which is seased to the end of a Pendant, and hath at one end, a hooke to hatch into any thing, and at the other end a double-block, wherein is reeved the fall of the Tackle, or the Garnet, which doth pur∣chase more then the Tackle or the Garnet would doe without it; and therefore, to heavie things they use this; but for light ones, they only use the Tackle with the hooke, which is seised to the standing part of the fall: Over-hale the Runner, that is, pull downe that end which hath the hooke in it, to hitch it into the slings, or the like. S SAiles. To every Yard, in the ship, there belongs a saile, and they are called after the name of those yards, whereunto they belong:
All head-sailes (that is, those that doe belong to the fore-mast and bolt-sprit) doe keep the ship from the wind, and are used to flat the ship: All after-sailes, that is the mast and missen-sailes, doe keep her to the wind; and therefore few ships are so well conditioned, as to Steere-quarter-winds with one saile; but must have one after-saile, and an other head-saile (as it were to countermaund one an other) yet some ships will steere with their maine-top-saile only: at sea, they call a ship, a saile: as when they discry a ship, they say, A saile, A saile. The sailes are cut in proportion, as the Masts and yards are in length, and bredth, one to another (excepting the Missen and sprit-saile) The Mis∣sen-saile, is cut by the Leetch, twice as deepe as the Mast is long from the Deck to the Hownds, and the sprit-saile is ¼ as deep as the fore-sailes. To Sarve. To Sarve any Roape, is to lay synnet, spun-yarne, Roape-yarne: a peece of canvas, or any the like upon a Roape, and so rowle it fast about, to keep the Roaps from galling; as we sarve the shrowdes, at the head of the Mast, the Boate-roape, or any the like, which are in danger of fretting, against any part of the ships Masts or Yards. A Scarse. Is when the end of one timber, is let into the end of an other, very close and even, or as they terme it, wood and wood, that is, so much wood taken away of the one, as is of the other: In this man∣ner the stem is fastned to the keele, and that is called the scarffe of the keele: but yet when there is not a peece of timber long enough to make the keele, then they make it of more, which are scarffed one into the other, so when the stem or any other timber, (which ought to be entire and all one,) is too short, it is peeced in this manner, and that they call scarffing. A Scuttle.
Is a square hole (so much as conveniently a man may goe downe at) cut through any Hatch or any part of the Deck to goe downe by, into any roome, most commonly they are in these places, one close before the Maine-mast, at the Maine-Hilliards before the Knight, in the fore-castell; in the hatch-way, for the Stewards roome; one in the Gun-roome, to goe downe into the sterne sheates; one in the Missen cabbin, to goe downe into the Captaines cabbin, if they be put from the fight aloft, and so in any place where they delight to goe through one Deck, downe into an other: also for vent for the Ord∣nance, there are small scuttles with grateings; they have all coversfitted for them, least men in the night should fall into them: Also all the little windowes and holes which are cut-out aloft in the Captaines, or Masters cabbins, are called Scuttles. To Sease, or Seasing, Is to make fast (or as you would say) to bind fast any roapes together, with some small roape-yarne, marling or any line; Also the fastning of a block at the end of a pendant; Tac∣kle, fall, garnet, or the like, is called seising, it being bound to with some small line, or the like: So if any roape be too long (as the shrowdes are ever) and the end be bound up unto the same roape with any thing, we call it seasing. So that in generall, the word seasing, implies as much as binding any thing together, so as that they cannot slip out, as seasing the Tacks into the clew and the like: The boates seasing, is a roape made fast into a little chaine or a ring, in fore-ship of the boate, and is the roape which (in Harbours) they make fast the boate by, to the ships side. A Seele. There is no difference betwixt seeling and heeling, but that heeling is a steddy-lying downe of the ship-on a side, either when she is a-ground, at an Anchor, or under saile, and saileing, is a suddaine lying downe, or tumbling to one side or the other, when the sea doth forsake her, that is, when the wave of the sea is past from under, faster then she can drive away with it: then when the ship lies downe on a side, after it we say, she seeles; the Lee-seele, is when she rowles to Lee∣ward; there is no danger in this seele, though it be in a great storme, because the sea will presently come under, and right her: but then when she rowles back to wind-ward, the danger is, least she should come over too short and suddainly, and so the water breake right into her, and founder her, or carry away some of her upper works, as it hath falne out with many ships: So that seeling is but a suddaine heeling, forced by the motion, and feare of the sea or wind. Send. When a ship falls (whether under saile, or at Anchor) with her head, or with her sterne, deepe into the trough of the sea, we say she sends much, either a-sterne or a-head: The reason of sending with her head is, if she have a little bowe, not sufficient to beare her up, and a fat quarter to pitch her fore-ward: And so for her sending a-sterne, it is contrary, when she hath too lanck a quarter, and too full, or fatt a-bowe. To Set a-Land Sun. or, Ship by the Compasse.
That is to observeby Compasse, how the land beares upon any point of the Compasse, this they use most commonly to doe, when they are going off to sea from any land, to marke how it did beare off them, that thereby they may keepe the better accompt, and direct their course: Also they use to set the Sun by the Compasse, that is, to marke upon what point it is, to know thereby the heae of the day: So when two ships saile in sight (especially, when a man of War chases a ship) they will set her by the Compasse, that is, marke upon what point she beares, then if they stand both one way, as commonly they doe, if the chase strive to goe away, by his we know, whether we reach-forth upon her, that is, out-saile her, if we bring her forth, she out-sailes us, if we bring her aft, we out-saile her, if we alter not, then we goe both alike; as for example, the wind being at North, we stand both a-way West, and the chase beares North-west (that will be on any weather-bow) then if in saileing, I bring her to beare North-west, and I by North, I have brought her a point aft, and if I bring her North, I have brought her just with any mid-ship beame, and so I see I fetch upon her, and it is called bringing aft; because, whereas before, she bare upon my loofe, now she bares upon my quarter. Setle a Deck. When we have occasion to lay a Deck lower, it is termed, setling the Deck: As if her her Ordnance lie too high, and we would have them lie neerer the water: or that the Decks be close, and we desire rather to settle the lowermost, then to raise the uppermost. Sewing, or, to Sew. When the water is gone from the ship, so that she lies dry, we say the ship is sewed, or if it be but gone from any part (as her head) we say the ship is sewed a-head, if it be a place where the water doth ebb so much, that the ship may lie dry-round, we say she cannot few there. Shackles. Are a kind of rings (but not round) made somewhat long-wise, larger at one end then the other, in the middle of the ports, on the in-side, they are used to shut-fast the ports with a billet, which they use to bar-downe the ports with (and that is called the bar of the port) also the fashion, but small ones are made fast to the corners of the hatches, to lift the hatches up by them. The Shanck. The longest part of the Anchor, is called the shanck of the Anchor. Shanck-painter. Is a short chaine, fastned under the fore-mast-shrowdes,
with a bolt, to the ship-side, and at the other end hath a roape: upon the chaine doth rest the whole waighth of the after-part of the Anchor, when it lies by the ships-side, and the roape by which it is haled-up, is made fast about a timber-head, this is seldom, or not at all used at sea, but in a Harbour, or a Roade. Shearing. Is when the ship goes in and out under-saile, and heat the helme doth not sterne her steddy: Also where a tide-gate runs very swift, the ship will shere in and out, and so much in some places, that they are faine to have one stand at the helme, and to steere her upon the tide, for feare she should shere-home her Anchors (that is, draw them home) or if it be neere the shore, she may sheare a-ground. Sheates. The Sheates are bent to the clew of all sailes: In all sailes, that are lowe sailes, they serve to hale-aft, or round-aft the clew of the saile, but in top-sailes, they serve to hale-home (that is to hale close) the clew of the saile to the yard-armes, when they hale-aft the sheate of the fore-saile, it is to make her fall off from the wind, when the ship will not fall off from the wind, they flat-in the fore-sheate, that is, pull the saile flat in by the sheate, as neere into the ships side as may be; Ease the Sheate of the saile, that is, to veere-out, or let goe a little of it. Let fly the Sheate, that is, let it run-out as far as it will, and then the saile will hold no wind, but lie floating loose (and then if it be an ex∣traordinary stresse of wind) it will split the gale to peeces; but this we doe both with top-saile-sheates, and the other sheates, when we sus∣pect the wind will be so great that it will carry our masts by the boord, or over-set the ship: Also in great stiffe gales, we use to bind an other roape to the clew of the saile above the Sheate-block, to succour and ease the Sheate, least it should breake, and that roape we call a false Sheate, and this is only used to the maine, and fore-sailes: Those plancks under water, which come along the Run of the ship, and are closed to the Sterne-post, are called Sheates, and that part within-boord, abast, in the Run of the ship, is called the sterne-sheates. Sheathing.
Is, as it were casing of a ship: It is done with thin boords, and haire, and tar-laid betwixt the ship-sides and chose boords: this is done only under water, or a very little above; the use whereof is to keep the wormes from eating through the plancks, as generally in all places to the South-ward, they doe; the thinner the boords the better, for then, the worme will be presently at the Tar (which hecannot abide) and so hath no meanes, nor roome to work in and out of the planck, and so will eate away more when it is thick, then when it is thin. Sheep-shancks. When two masts, or yards, or if it be but poles, are set up an end a pretty distance off at the bottom, but seased a-crosse one an other aloft neere the top, we call them a paire of sheeres: To this seasing, is fastned a double block with a strap, they are placed at the bot∣tom upon the chaine wales of the Shrowdes, and there are lashed fast to the ship sides, to keep them steddy aloft: The use of them is either to set in a mast, or to take out a mast, or if they have no mast, this serves to hoyse in and out goods. Sheere-hookes. Are great hookes of Iron (about the bignesse of a small sickle, and more) they are set into the yard armes of the maine and fore-yards: The use whereof is, that if a ship under saile come to boord her that hath these hookes, she will cut her shrowdes, or teare her sailes downe with these hookes; some doe use them, but they are most unusefull and unnecessary things, and dangerous for the breaking of a yard, if the hooke should catch in the other ships mast. Sheevers. There are two sorts of Sheevers used, either of brasse or wood; the brasse sheevers are now little used but in the heeles of the top-masts: the wooden sheevers are either of one whole peece; and these they use for all small pullies, and small blocks: but in the Knights and winding-tackles-blocks, they use sheevers which are made of quar∣ters of wood let-in to each other; for these will hold when the whole Sheevers will split, and are called quarter-sheevers. Shoares. Are any peeces of timber, or any thing else, that is set to beare up an other from sinking or falling, as when a ship is in danger of overthrowing a-ground, we last fast masts or yards to their sides, they bearing on the ground, and these we call shoares, shoaring her up; Also some timbers, that are set to beare-up a Deck when it is weake, or over-charged with waight, are called shoares, The Shore. Is counted the land neere the sea, or the banck of the sea: The Lee-shore, is that whereon the wind blowes; Sea-men avoid these by all meanes, for they are dangerous if it over-blow: The wea∣ther shore is that from whence the wind comes. Shot. There are many kinds of Shot; that which flies farthest, and pierceth most, is round-shot, the next is crosse-bar, which is good for
roapes, sailes and masts: The other langrell; which will not flie so far, but is very good for the rigging, and the like, and for men; so is chaine-shot and case-shot, or barrell-shot, which is good to plye amongst men, which stand naked, plying of their small shot. Shot of Cabell. Two Cabels spliced together make a shot, and the use of them is great, in deep-waters, and great roades, for a ship doth ride much easier by one shot, then by three short cabels a-head, Vide Ride. Showle. Showle and shallow are all one: When they say there is very good showleing, it is meant that the water doth grow shallower, by degrees, and not suddenly: nor sometimes deep, and sometimes suddenly a-showle or banke: It is very safe and commodious going-in with a shore, where there is good showleing; for by that we have some certainty whereabouts we are, and how far distant from the land, if the showling be first knowne, and commonly, where there is good showling, the coast is not dangerous. Shrowdes. The Shrowdes are those Roapes which come from ei∣ther side of all the masts, the missen-maine-masts, and fore-mast-shrowdes, have at the lower end dead-men-eyes seased into them; and are set up taught by Lanniers, to the chaines, which have also dead-men-eyes in them: At the other end they are fastned over the head of the mast, the Pendants, fore-tackle and swifters being first put∣on under them: at this uppermost part they are sarved, for galling against the mast: The top-mast shrowdes, are in the same manner fa∣stned with dead-men-eyes and Lanniers to the puttockes, and the plates of Iron which belongs to them, and aloft over the head of the masts, the other ease the shrowdes, slack the shrowdes: that is when they are too stiffe set up: Set taught the shrowdes; set up the shrowdes; that is, make them stiffer: Some ships desire to have the shrowdes taught, some slack; The Lanniers are to set up the shrowdes, Vide Lanniers: The bolt-sprit hath no shrowdes. The Sillinder. The bore, or hollow concave of a Peece of Ord∣nance, is called the Sillinder. Sinnet. Is a line or a string made of roape yarne (commonly of 2, 6, or 9, which are devided in three parts, and platted one over an other, as they plat Horses maines) and so is beaten smooth and flat with a mallet; the use of it, is to sarve roapes.
The Skegg. Is that little part of the Keele, which is cut slaunting, and is left a little without the sterne-post: The reason and use whereof, is only intended to be, that it should save the Rudder from beating-off, if the ship should chance to beate a-ground, but these Skegges are very unusefull and inconvenient: for first they are apt to snap-off, and so endanger the sterne-post next in a Harbour or River: Where ride ma∣ny ships, they are apt to catch an other ships cabels, betwixt that and the Rudder: And lastly, when the ship is under-saile, they hold much dead-water betwixt them and the Rudder, therefore it is better ve no skegg, but to hang the Rudder downe close to the sterne-post, with the bottom ever to the bottom of the Keele, only pared away a little sloaping towards the after-most side of it. The Skiff. Vide Boate; Skuppers, or, Skupper-holes. Are the holes close to all the Decks, through the ship-sides, whereat the water doth run forth of the ship, from the Decks, and many ships have them made of lead. Skupper-leathers. Are the round leathers, which are nailed over the skupper-holes, that belong to the lower-deck, which will keep-out the sea-water from comming in, and yet give leave to any water to run-out of the Deck; these are also over the skuppers of the marger. Skupper-nailes. Are little short nailes with broad-heads, made of purpose to naile on the skupper-leathers, with these also they naile on the coates of the Masts and Pumps. A Slatch. When any part of a cabell or roape (that is meant of the middle, not of the end) doth hang slack without the ship (as the cabell, when it is slack in the water, or the Lee-tack, sheates, braces or the like, doe hang in the water, or loose by the ships sides) then they say, hale up the slatch of the roape or cabell: Also when it hath been a sect of foule weather, and that there comes an interim, or small time of faire weather to serve their turnes, they call it a little slatch of fair wea∣ther, or the contrary. Sleepers.
Are those timbers, which lie fore and aft the bottom of the ship, on either side the Keelson, just as the rung-heads doe goe; the lowermost of these, is bolted to the Rung-heads, and the uppermost to the futtocks; and so these between them doe strengthen and bind-fast the futtocks, and the Rungs which are let downe, one by an other, and have no other binding but the sleepers: These doe line-out (as itwere, and describe the narrowing of the ships floore. Slings. There are first slings, to sling-casks in (when we hoyse it in, or any the like) which are made of roape splised at either end into it selfe, making an eye at either end, so large as they, think fit, to receive into it the cask: and then the midle-part of the rope also, they sease to∣gether, and so make an other eye for to hitch in the hooke of the Tac∣kle or Garnet: An other sort are made long, with a small eye at either end, to put the one over the breetch of the Peece, the other to come over end of the crow of Iron, which is put into the mouth of the Peece, and so by these they hoyse it in: A third sort, is any roape or chaine, wherewith we bind fast the yards aloft to the crosse-trees, and the head of the mast, to the end, that if the ties should breake, the yard may not come downe: these are called slings, which are chiefly used when we come to fight for feare of cutting the ties. To sling. Is to make fast any cask, Ordnance, yard or the like, in a paire of slings. A Smitting-line. Is a small Roape, which is made fast to the Mis∣sen-yard-arme, below next the Deck; and when the Missen-saile is f∣thelled-up, this is made up alongst with it, to the upper end of the yard, the saile being made up with roape-yarnes, and so comes downe to the Poope: The use whereof is to loose the Missen-saile without striking downe the yard, for they pull the roape, and that breakes all the roape-yarnes, and so the saile comes down; this line is called a smitting line; so they smite the Missen, that is, pull that roape, that the saile may come downe. A Snatch-block. Is a great block, with a Sheever in it, and a notch cut through one of the cheekes of it, by which notch they reeve any roape into it, and this is for quicknesse, to reeve the roape in; for by this notch, one may reeve the middle part of a roape into the block, without passing it in by the end, which would be longer a doing; It is made fast commonly with a strap about the maine-mast, close to the upper Deck, and is chiefly used for the fall of the winding-tackle which is reeved in that block, and so brought to the Capstaine. Sockets. The holes into which the Pintels of the Murderers, fore∣lers, or the like doe goe, are called sockets: Also some call the Gud∣gins, wherein the Pintels of the Rudder doe hang, by the name of sockets.
A Sound. Any great in-draught of the sea, betwixt two head-lands, where there is no passage through, may be called a sound (as Plymouth sownd, &c.) But when they name the sound, it is meant of that of the East countries, being the most famous and greatest sea, that is known by the name of a sound. To Sound. Is to try with a line, a pole, or any thing else, the depth of the water: Also when we would know what water is in the well of the Pump, we put down a small line with some weight to it; and that is called sounding the Pump: Vide, Deep-see-line: if you would know more of sownding, instead of biding one sound, they say, heave the lead. Sounding-lead. Is as the deep-sea-lead; only it is commonly but se∣ven pound waight, and about 12. inches long. Sounding-line. The differences betwixt the sounding line, and deep-see-line, are these: the sounding line is bigger then the deep-see-line: A sounding-line is commonly cut to twenty faddom, or little more, the other will be a hundred, or two hundred faddom, the one is used in showle, the other in deep-water; the deepe see-line, is first marked at twenty faddom, and so to thirty, forty, &c. but the sounding line is thus marked, at two faddom next to the lead, it is marked with a peece of black leather put into it, betwixt the strands, and at three faddom, the like at five, a peece of white woollen cloth, at seven faddom, a peece of red cloth, at ten, a peece of leather, at fifteen faddom, either a white cloth or a peece of leather, and so it is marked no farther; This may be used, when the ship is under-saile, but the deep-see-line cannot with any certainty. Speekes. Are, as it were, great long iron nailes, with sint heads, and are of divers lengths (as a foot or two long) some of them are ragged speekes, that they may not draw out againe: they are used in many places for fastning of timbers and plancks, in foule weather, they use to speeke up the Ordnance, that is, naile downe a quoyne and the like, to the Deck, close to the breech of the carriage to help to keep the Ordnance strong up to the ship-sides, least they should breake loose, when the ship rowles; and for their further ease, they use to take off the after tackles. A Spell. Is (as you would say) the doing any labour for a short time, and so ceasing for others to take their turnes; as when they pump
an hundred stroakes, or a glasse, they call it a spell: A fresh-spell, that is, others come to work, as rowing in the boate, when one sayes to an other, he will give him a spell, that is, rowe, or pump in his place, and this word is commonly used, only to pumping and rowing. To Spell. When a saile hath much wind in it, and that for any oc∣casion (either to take in, or for feare of wronging the Masts) we let the wind out of it, so that it may have no force in it: we say, spell the saile, which is done by letting-goe the sneates and bowlings, and braceing the weather-brace in the wind; then the saile will lie all loose in the wind: but this word is most commonly used to the Missen-saile, when they take in the missen, or speeke it up, they say, spell the Missen. To spend. When a mast or yard is broke, by fowle weather, or any the like occasion; they say, they have spent their masts, or yards: But if it come by fight, or so, they doe not use the word spent, but shot, by the boord, or carried away by the boord, with a shot, or with an other ships-masts or yards, that may be bigger and stronger. A Spindle. Is the smallest part of the Capstaine, which is betwixt the two Decks: To the spindle of the jeere-capstaine, are whelpes to heave the Violl. To Splice. Is to make fast the ends of roapes, one into the other, by opening the strands, at the end of both the roapes, and then with a fid, laying every strand orderly one into an other; also when we would make an eye, at the end of a roape, we take the end of the roape and undoe the strands, and so opening the strands, where we would have the splice, with a tide, we draw in the ends of the strands, and so wea∣ving of them orderly, make the splise, and so sease the ends downe with some synner, or the like: There are these sorts of splises; The round splise, that is the splising of the ends of two roapes, one into an other, as I have described; the count-splise, that is, when the ends of either roapes are splised into the other roapes, some distance from the end, and not one end in an other (as the first), then they will make a long slit (as it were betwixt them) which is the reason of the name. Split. When the wind hath blowne a saile to peeces, we say the saile is split; Also when sheevers breake, we say they split, if a shot come and breake a Carriage of a Peece, we say, it hath split the Carriage. To Spoone.
Is to put a ship, right before the wind and the sea, with∣out any saile (and that is called spooneing afore.) This is done most com∣monly,when in a great storme, a ship is so weake with age or labouring, that we dare not lay her under the sea: For though a ship when she spoones afore, doth rowle more, yet she straines not so much: but if she be a dangerous rowling ship, then per-force she must be laid under the sea, for else she will rowle her mast by the boord: And also it is dan∣gerous; for if a sea should overtake her, when she hath a desperate seele, it may chance to breake in and founder her; sometimes then to make her goe the steddier, they set the fore-saile, which is called spoo∣ning with the fore-saile: When they doe this, they are sure of sea roome enough. To Spring. When a mast is but crackt in any part (as at the Hownds, Partners, or else where) we say, it is sprung, as they spring their masts with bearing a-saile, &c. To spring ones Loofe, Vide Loofe. The Spring, or, Spring-ride. When after the dead-neapes, the tides begin to lift and grow higher, we say, it is spring neere upon three dayes before the full and change of the Moone, the spring begins, and the top, or highest of the spring, is three dayes after; then the water doth high most with the flood, and lowe most with the ebb; which is the rea∣son, that at these times, we launch, and grave all of our great ships, the tides also run much stronger and swifter, then in the neapes. Sprit-saile, Vide Saile. Sprit-saile-top-saile. Vide Saile. Sprit-saile-top-mast. Vide Top-mast. Sprit-saile-yard. Vide Yard. Spunge. The spunge of a Peece of Ordnance, is that which makes it cleane; they are commonly Sheep-skinnes put at the end of a staffe, which is made somewhat bigger there according to the bore of the Peece, so as the spung may goe in full and close, but not too straight: but we have it also fitted to the ends of a stiffe roape, so is the rammer also, to spunge, and lade within-boord: we ever spunge a Peece of Ordnance, before we put in Powder. In fight, when the Ordnance is plied fast, to keep it from heating, we wet the spunges: Urine is the best, but else with Vineger, water, or what we have. Spun-yarne. Is Roape-yarne, the end scraped thin, and so spun one to the end of an other, with a wrench, and make it as long as they list: This serves to sarve some roapes with, but most commonly it is made to make caburne of.
Spurketts. Are the holes, or spaces betwixt the Futtocks, or be∣twixt the Rungs, by the ship-sides, fore and aft, above and below: To the spurketts below in hould (which are below the sleepers) there are boords fitted, which they take up, to cleere the spurkets if any ballast get in betwixt the timbers; but for those aloft, there is no use: only, it were good, they were in all ships, fitted-up with light wood, or old Juncks, to keep the ship-sides aloft, Musket-free. Standing-parts of Running roapes. The standing parts, are those parts of running roapes (or rather that end of a running roape) which is made fast to any part of the ship, to distinguish it from the other part, whereon we use to hale: (as the standing part of the sheate, is that part which is made fast, by a clinch into a ring of the ships-quar∣ter, and the like,) for when we say, hale the sheate, that is meant by the running-part, but if they say, over-hale the sheate, then they hale upon the standing part; the same is of all tackles, and running roapes. Standing roapes. Are counted all those roapes (as the shrowde stages, and back-stages) which are not used to be removed, or to run in any blocks; but are only set taught, and slacker as they have oc∣casion. To Stay, or, bring a Ship a-stay. When we tack the ship, before the ship can be ready to be tacked; she must come a-stages or a-back-stages, that is, when wind comes in at the bowe which was the lee-bowe before, and so drives all the sailes backward, against the shrowds and masts, so that the ship hath no way, but drives with the broad-side: the manner of doing it is, at one time, and together, to beare up the helme, let fly the sheate of the fore-saile, and let goe the fore-bowleing, and brase the weather brase of the fore-saile, the same to the top-saile, and top-gallant saile, only they keep fast their sheates: If the sprit-saile be out, then they let goe the sprit-saile sheate with the fore-sheate, and brase the weather brase; (the Tacks, Sheates, Brases, Bowlings of the maine-saile, maine-top-saile and missen standing fast as they did) to be taken a-stages: that is, when the wind comes contrary on the suddaine; (which happens most upon head-lands on calme weather) and so bring the ship a-stages: Sometimes by the negligence of him at the helme, sometimes if it be little wind, and a head-sea, on the weather-bowe: A ship may misse staying, that is to fall-back and fill againe: The best conditioned ships, are those which stay with least sailes, as with
two top-sailes, or fore-top-saile, or missen, but no ship will stay with lesse saile then those, and few with so little. Stages, and Back-stages. All the masts, top-masts, and flag-staves have stages, (excepting the sprit-saile-top-mast) the maine-stay is made fast by a Lannier, to a collar, which comes about the knee of the head: The maine top-mast stay is made fast into the head of the fore∣mast by a strap, and a dead-man-eye there: The maine top-gallant mast, is in like manner made fast to the head of the fore-top-mast: The fore-mast and masts belonging to it, are in the same manner stayed at the bolt-sprit, and sprit-saile-top-mast; and these stayes doe likewise help to stay the bolt-sprit; The missen stay comes to the maine-mast by the halfe deck, and the top-mast-stayes come to the shrowdes with crow-feet: The use of these stayes, are to keep the masts from falling aftward towards the Poope: There is much difference, in stay∣ing of masts in respect of a ships saileing or working: Generally the more aft the masts hang, the more a ship will keep in the wind, and the forwarder the lesse: The Flemmings stay their masts much aft, because else their ships being lofty ships would never keep a wind; but short and deepe ships rather cover upright masts: There are many dif∣ferences of conditions in ships for their saileing, according as they are stayed, for some will have the stay-taught, some slack: The back-stayes of all masts (which have them) which are only the maine-mast and fore∣mast, and the masts belonging to them, goe downe to either side of the ship, and are to keepe the mast from pitching for-ward-on over∣boord. The Sterne. All the after-most part of the ship, is called the sterne (by a generall appellation) but most exactly considered, only the very outwardmost part abast is the sterne; for the quarter is counted to be from the steeridge to the transom and faskion-peece of the sterne. Sterne-sheates. Vide Sheates. To Steere. Is to governe the ship with the helme: He steeres best, that keeps the ship evennest from yawning in and out, and also that uses least motion in putting the helme too far over: There are three kind of directions to steere by, the one is, by the land, that is, to steere by any marke on the land, and so to keep the ship even by that, this is easie: The next is, by the Compasse (that is to keep the ship upon a point of the Compasse; this is harder, because the ships head will come
before the Compasse:) The third is to steere, as they are directed, and conded (and that is easiest of all;) If you would know the termes belon∣ging to Steering, Vide, Cond. The Stieridge. Is the place where they Steere, out of which they may see the leech of the sailes, to see if they be in the wind or not. The Stem. The Stem of the ship, is that great timber, which comes compassing from the keele (wherein it is skarffed) up before the fore∣castell, this it may be, is not all of one timber (as in great ships it can∣not) And this doth guide the rake of the ship, when two ships stand, Stem for Stem, they come right with their heads one against an other: To give a ship the Stem, that is to run right upon her with the Stem: to goe Stemming a-boord a ship; that is the same, as giving the ship the Stem. A Stepp. They call that peece of timber, which is made fast to the Keelson, wherein the maine-mast doth stand, a Stepp: Also those places, and timber, wherein the missen-mast, fore-mast, and the cap∣staine doe stand, are called Stepps. To Steve, or Steving. Wee say the bold-sprit, or beake-head Steves, when it stands too upright, and not straight foreward enough: Also the Merchants call the stowing of their Cottons (which they force in with skrewes so much that the Decks will rise 6, or 8, inches) Steve∣ing of Cottons. Stewards-Roome. Is that part of the Howlde, wherein the Victuals are Stowed. Stoaked. When the water cannot come to the well, then we say, the ship is Stoake: and that is, when the limber-holes, have some bal∣last, or any thing else got into them, so that the water cannot passe, we say the limbers are Stoaked: Also when any thing is gotten in or about the bottom of the Pump, so that it cannot draw water, we say the Pump is Stoaked (Corne, and the like, is very bad for this.) Stopp. When they come to an Anchor, and have let run-out as much as a sufficient quantitie of Cabell, so much as will make the ship ride, or that the ship be in a current, where it is best to stop her a little by degrees, then they say, Stopp the ship; and so hold-fast the Cabell, and then veere-out a little more and so stopp her fully, to let her ride: for stopping leakes, Vide leakes. A Stopper. Is a peece of a Roape, having a wale knot at one end
and a lannier splised to it: and the other end is made fast to some part, as the Stoppers for the cabels, to the bottom of the bitts, by the Deck; the Stoppers for the maine Halliards, to the Knight: The use of them, is chiefly for the cabels, to stopp the cabels when they come to an An∣chor, that it may goe-out by little and little, the manner is, but binding the wale-knot about the cabell, with the lanniers, and it will instantly catch-hold in it, so that it cannot slip-away, as the Nippers doe, which hold off the cabell, the terme is, laying-on the Stoppers; and casting off the Stoppers: Also we use them to the Halliards, when the yard is hoysed aloft, to stopp it till the Halliards be so layed: A ship rides by the Stoppers, when the cabell is not bitted, but only held fast by them; but this is not safe rideing in a stresse. To Stowe. Is to put any goods in Howld (in order, for else we say it is not stowed, but lyes in howld) also we call it stowing betweene the Decks of any goods or victuals be placed in order upon the Decks: but it is not used in this kind to small things, as to a Chest or the like, Also the placing and laying of the top-sailes in the top, is called Stow∣ing the top-sailes. A Strake. Is the terme for a seame betwixt two plancks (as the Gard-boord, a-Strake; or the ship heeles, a-Strake, that is one seame) some ships are built, with a standing strake, or two, that is, when there is the whole bredth of a planck or two, rising from the keele, before they come to the floare timbers; these ships are naught to lie with the ground, for wringing their keeles; but this doth make them keep an ex∣cellent wind, this built is most used amongst the Flemmings. A Strap. A roape which is spliced about any block, that the block thereby may be made fast, to any place where they have occasion to use it: by the eye which is made in the Strap, at the arsse of the block. A Streame-Anchor. Is a small Anchor, which we use to the streame-cabell. Streame-Cabell. Is a small cabell, which we ride withall in streames, as rivers, or in faire-weather, when we stop-a-tide, for ever we use the smallest ground-tackle that we have if it will serve, both for lightnesse to waigh, and to save the best from wetting. A Stretch. They use this word, not as it is commonly, to straine a roape, but thus, when they goe to hoyse a yard, or hale the sheate, they say, stretch fore-ward the Hilliards, or the sheates: that is, deliver along
that part (which they must hale by) into the mens hands, that they may be ready to hoyse or hale. To strike. Is to pull downe the sailes, when one ship Strikes to an other, it is a signe of respect, unlesse it be for occasion of staying for one: If a man of War come up, with a Merchant, or any other, if he strike, it is intended that he yeelds himselfe: Also when a ship beates upon the ground, they say she Strikes: So when we take downe the top∣masts, they say, Strike them downe: So when we lower any thing into the howld with the tackles or any other roape, we call it Striking-down into Howld. Studding-sailes. Vide Boome. A Sturrop. When a ship by any mischance, hath lost a peece of her keele, and that we cannot come well to mend it, but (as it were) patch a new peece unto it, they bind it with an Iron, which comes under the keele, and so upon either side the ship, where it is nailed very strong with speekes to strengthen it, this peece so put to the keele, we call a Sturrop. Suck. When all the water is pumped cut, and that the Pump doth draw-wind, we say, she sucks: Also when a ship doth draw downe the helme, and doth (as it were) suck the whip-staffe out of his hand at the helme: A ship gripes, when she doth thus; the reason may be ei∣ther too much fowlenesse, the standing of her masts too much aft, or she may be out of her trim. Surge. We call a wave a Surge; but it is used in this sense, when they heave at the cap-staine, and the cabell slips back againe, they say the ca∣bell surges; to prevent which; Vide Nippers. Swifters. Doe belong to the maine and fore-mast, and are to suc∣cour the shrowdes, and keep stiffe the mast, they have Pendants, which are made fast under the shrowdes, at the head of the mast with a double block, through which is reeved the swifter, which at the standing part hath a-single block with a hooke, which is hitched in a ring by the chaine-wale, and so the fall being haled doth help to strengthen the mast: And this fall, is belayed about the timber-heads of the lower railes aloft. Swifting. When we bring ships a-ground, or careene them, we use to swift the masts, to ease them, and strengthen them, which is done in this manner, they last fast all the Pendants of the swifters, and tackles
with a Roape, close to the Mast, as neere the blocks as they can: Then they carry fore-wards the Tackles, and so bowse them downe as hard, and Taught as they can: and this eases the Masts: so that all the waight of the Mast, doth not hang by the head, as otherwise it would, and also doth help to keep it from rising out of the steppes. T TAcks. Are great Roapes, having a-wale-knott at one end, which is seased into the Clew of the Saile, and so reeved first through the Chestree, and then comes in at a hole of the Ship-side: The use of this is to carry forwards the Clew of the Saile, and to make it stand close, by a wind: and then the Sailes are thus, Trimmed: The main Tacke∣fore-saile, and Missen-Tacks, are close a-board, or haled-as foreward on-as may be, so are the Bowlings of the weather-side: the Lee-sheates, are haled close aft, but the Lee-sheates of the fore-saile; not so much un∣lesse the Ship-Gripe: the Lee-brases of all the yards, are brased aft: and the Top-sailes are governed, as the Sailes whereunto they belong: And hence they say, a Ship stands, or sailes close upon a Tack (that is close by a-wind) hale a-boord the Tack, that is to have it downe close to the Chestrees: East the Tack (that is, not so close a-boord:) Let rise the Tack (that is, let it goe all out) it is commonly belayed to the bitts, or else there is a Kevell which belongs to them: These Tacks doe only belong to the Maine-saile, and Missen, and they are ever made Tape∣ring. To Tack-a-Ship. To Tack the Ship, is to bring her head about, to lye the other way: as if her head lay first West-North-west, now it will lie East-North-East: the wind being at North. Then supposing the Ship hath all her Sailes out, which we use by a-wind, thus they doe: first, they make her stay (for which, vide to stayes,) when she is stayed, then they say, she is Payed, and so let rise, and hale, that is, let the Lee-Tack rise and hale aft the sheates: and so Trim all the Sailes by a-wind as they were before: that is, Cast off that Bowling, which was the weather-bowling and now set up-Taught thither, and so all Sheates, Brases, and Tacks, as a Ship that is trimmed by a-wind must have. Tackles. Are small Roapes which run in Three parts, having either
a Pandant with a hooke to it, or a Rammer, and at the other end, a block and hooke, to catch-hold, and heave in Goods into the Ship: there are these many sorts used, that is, the boates-Tackles (which stand one on the Maine-Mast Shrowds, the other on the fore-Mast shrowds, to hoyse in the boat, and doe serve also for other uses) the Tackles which belong to the Mast (which serve in the nature of Shrowds, to keep the Mast from strayning) The Gunners Tackles (with which they hale in and out the Ordnance) and lastly, a winding-Tackle (which vide.) The Roape of a Tackle, is called the fall (that part which we hale-upon) but that end whereunto the block is seased, is called the Standing part, to hale upon a Tackle, is termed to Bowse upon the Tackle. Tallee. When they hale aft the Sheates of the Maine or Fore-saile, they say, Tallee-aft the Sheates. Tampkin. Is a small peece of wood, turned fit for the mouth of any peece: which is put in there: to keep out the Raine, or sea-water from washing-in, when the peeces lie without boord. Tapering. Is when any Roape, or any thing else, is made bigger at, one end, then at the other: (as the Tacks are made Tapering) which makes them purchase the better, and saves a great deale of Stuffe, be∣cause the Roape at one end beares little, or no stresse; I have seen in Flemmings, the top-saile sheates Tapering. Taper-Bore. Is when a Peeces-bore is wider at the mouth, then towards the Breech: some are of opinion, that these peeces doe not re∣coyle so much, but they are not so good: for sometimes if the Shott be too high, it may be it will not come-home to the powder, which is dan∣gerous for the peece. Tar-pawling. Is a peece of Canvas that is all Tard over to Lash upon a Deck, or Grating, to keep the Raine from soaking through. Taunt. Is when a Mast is very high, for the proportion of the Ship, we say it is a Taunt-Mast, the Flemmings have them so, for the most-part: for Taunt-Masts, and Narrow-yards are best to saile by a-wind: for the Sailes stand so much the sharper: but yet they doe wring a∣ship-sides more then a short Mast, and a broad-yard: which is the rea∣son that our Ships use short-Masts and broad-yards. Taught. That is to set a Roape stiffe and fast, as we say, Set Taught the Shrowds, the Stayes, or any other Roape, when it is too slack.
A Tempest When it over-blowes so exceedingly, that it is not pos∣sible to beare any saile, and that it is a-wind mixt with Raine, or Haile, they call it a Tempest, which they accompt a degree above a storme. The Thaughts, Are the seates, whereon those that Rowe in the doe sit. Thight. When a Ship is staunch, and makes but little water, she is thight; which is quickly knowne by the smell of the water, for if the water stinck much, it is a signe it hath layd long in the ship, and if it be sweet, it is a signe it comes in newly. Thowles. Are the small pins, which they beare against with their Oares, when they Row: and stand in holes upon the upper-side of the Gun-wale of the boate, they are commonly made of Ash for tough∣nesse. Thwart-Ships. That is any thing that is done, or lies a-crosse the Ship, from one side to the other, we say it lies Thwart-Ships: and the contrary is Longst: that is, a-long the Ship. Tides.
This word Tide, is common both to Ebbe, and flow, for it is called Tide of Ebbe, as well as Tide of Flood: A wind-ward-Tide, is when the Tide runnes against wind, then the Sea breakes most, and goes highest; but a Ship, or Anchor straines the Cabels leaft a Lee-ward-Tide, that is, when the Tide and wind goes both one way, then the Sea is smoother: A Tide-gate, that is, where the Tide runnes strong. To Tide it over, or up to a place, that is, to goe with the Tide of Flood, or Ebbe, and so stop the contrary Tide at an Anchor, till the same Tide come againe: and this is used, when the wind is contrary, but doth not over-blowe: for then they cannot stop at an Anchor, and if they keep under-saile, they will loose more in one Lee-ward-Tide, then they shall get in two wind-ward-Tides: when they say, it flowes Tide, and halfe-Tide in any place, the meaning of it is thus: (for the speech is most improper to common understanding, implying as much as if it did flow a Tide and a halfe in some places together, and but halfe an Ebb.) that the Tide doth runne three houres (which is foure points, longer in the offing then it doth by the shore: by longer, is not meant more houres (for it doth ever Ebb and Flow six houres) but thus, if it be high∣water, at the shore, at twelve a Clock it shall not be high-water in the offing till it be three a Clock, (which is the compasse and time for the running of halfe a Tide) so according as it Ebbs or Flowes more, theysay it tunnes Tide, halfe, and halfe quarter (that is, five points) when they come into a Harbour, or over a Stand, they say, they will bring their Tide with them, that is, to come with the flood, which may carry them over: Note that where it flowes Tide, and halfe-Tide, that though the Tide of slood run aloft, yet the Tide of Ebb runnes under-foot, that is, close by the ground: And so for the tide of Ebb, it will flow under-foot. Ties. Are foure strand-Roapes, hawser-Laide, which is in respect, that this kind of laying doth not stretch so much as three-shrowd-Roapes, and besides, run smoother in the hounds. These are the Roapes by which the yards doe hang, and doe carry-up the yards when the Hil∣liards are strained to hoyse the yards: The maine-yard and fore-yard-ties, are first reeved through the Ram-head, then through the hounds at the head of the Mast, and so with a turne in the Eies of the sling which are made fast to the yard, they are seased fast, and close to the yard: the Missen-yard, and top-Mast-yard, have but single ties: that is, one doth runne in one part, the sprit-saile yard hath none, for it is made fast with a paire of slings to the bolt-spritt. Tiller. The Helme, and the tiller is all one, therefore (Vide Helme) only the word tiller is most properly used for that which we Steere the Boate by; as they say, Give me the tiller of the Boat, not the Helme, yet it is all one in use. Tire. When a Deck hath Ordnance fore and aft (though there want some) we call that a tire of Ordnance, some Ships have two tire or three, the fore-Castle, and the halfe Deck being furnished, make halfe a tire; the Cabell tire, that is, the row which is in the middle of the Cabell when it is Quoyled up. Top-Armors. Are the Cloathes, which are tyed about the tops of the Masts for shew: and also for to hide men in fight, which lye there, to fling fire-pots use small shott, or the like. Top-Gallants. Are the Masts above the top-Masts, these sailes doe draw very much Quarter-winds, in a Loome or fresh-Gale, so it Blow not too-much. Top-Mast. The top-Masts are ever halfe so long as the Masts unto which they belong: but there is no one absolute proportion in these and the like things: for if a man will have his Mast short, he may the bolder make his top-Mast long.
Top-Roapes. Are those Roapes wherewith we set, or strike the top-Masts: they belong only to the Maine and Fore-top-Mast: this Roape is reeved through a great block, which is seased under the Cap on one side, and then it is reeved through the heele of the top-Mast, where is a brasse sheaver, which is placed thwart ships, and then is brought up and made fast, on either side of the Cap, with a Chuch to a Ring, which is fastned into the Cap: the other part comes downe by the ties, and so is Reeved into the knight, and brought to the Captaine when they heave it. To Towe. Is to drag any thing a sterne the ship in the water (as to towe the Boate, or to towe a small Ship, or the like, with a Hawser out a-sterne. The neerer any thing is to the Boate, or the like when it is towed the lesse it doth hinder the Ships way: but the farther off the easier it is, for that which is towed, for then the Ship will not give it such twitches. Transome. That timber which lyes a thwart the Sterne of the Ship, betwixt the two fashion-peeces, and doth lay out her breadth at the Buttock, is called the Transome: This is just under the Gun-Roome-port a sterne: to lie with a Ships-transome, that is to lie Just with the end of the planks where they are fastned to the fashion-peeces a sterne: to come in a Ships-transome: that is just betwixt her Gun-Roome-port, and her Quarter-port: this is the safest coming-up, for their Ships are most naked: and their Gallies doe use to come-up, but now they begin to cut out ports close by the transome. Travers.
We call the way of the Ship (in respect of the points whereon we saile, and the Angles which the Ship makes in going to, and againe) the travers of the Ship; as we say, A man doth travers his ground, when he goes in and out: we use to note how many houres the ship hath gone upon a point, what sailes she hath forth, how neere a wind, and so judge what way she makes: this we set-downe upon a paper besides the Plot, which we call a travers, and then drawing a line from the place where we last were, to that place, where the last Pricke or Mark is, we set in the whole: what Course and how farre we are gone: this we call a dead reckoning, then if we can observe and finde the observation and this meet, we are sure we are right, otherwise, we trust more to the observation, and reforme our Reckoning by that: Also the laying and removing a peece of Ordnance, till it come to lye withthe mark, is called the traversing of the Peece. Travers-boord. Is a boord which they keep in the Steeridge, having the thirty two points of the Compasse marked in it, with little holes on every point, like a Noddy-boord, that is for him at the helme, to keepe (as it were) a skore, how many Glasses they have gone upon of the Compasse, and so strike a pin on that point; This is to save the Master a labour, who cannot with so much curiositie, watch every wind and course so exactly as he at helme, especially when we goe by a wind, and the wind veeres and hulls. Tree-nells. (Quasi nailes made of tree) Are the long wooden pins made of the hart of Oake, wherewith they fasten all the plancks unto the timbers, for though we bolt the bulke-heads for the better assurance and strength, yet the tree-nells are they which doe most fa∣sten the plancks (for we doe use as little Iron under water, as we may conveniently, least the ship should grow iron-sick.) These tree-nels, must be well seasoned, and not sappy, for then the ship will be conti∣nually leakie, and it will be hard to find: If a ship by any beating upon the ground, doe make a-give-back, and come a little out againe, they terme it starting of a tree-nell. Treenell-trees. Are joyned to the crosse-trees, and doe lie crosse each other, and serve to the same use; they differ only, that the treenell-trees are those which goe long ships, and the other thwart-ships. Vide crosse-trees. To Trise. Is to hale up any thing with a dead-roape, that is, when we hale by a roape that doth not run in any block, or hale up by any de∣vice, but by hand, as if an empty cask be made fast to a roape (that is no tackle) they say, trise-it-up, or any chest, or like goods, which is fastned to a roape, and so haled up by hand into the ship, we call it hale∣ing by hand, when we have not the helpe of any cap-staine, tackle or the like, which might purchase easier, but only doe it, by the immediate and only force of hands. To Trie. Trieng, is to have no more saile forth, but maine-saile, the tacks a boord, the bowleing set-up, the sheate close-aft, and the helme tyed-down close a-boord: some trie with their missen only, but that is when it blowes so much, that they cannot mainetaine the maine-saile: A ship a-trie with her maine saile (unlesse it be an extraordinary growne sea) will make her waigh foure points afore the beame, but with a missen, not so much.
The Trim. Though commonly by the trim of a ship, is under∣stood the swimming of her, either a-head, or a-sterne, or on an even keele: In whether of these, the ship goes best, that they call her trim, but that is not only to be counted her trim, for some ships will goe well or ill according to the staying of the masts: the slacknesse of the shrowds or the like: Therefore in my mind, the order of the swim∣ming considered with this fitting of her masts, and roapes, wherein the ships sailes best should be counted her trim, and not only the line of her swimming in water: The wayes of finding a ships-trym, must be with saileing with an other ship, to bring her a-head so many glasses, then a-sterne as many, then on even keele: That way which she goes best, is her trim, in respect of her mould under-water, then to make her goe better, ease the staies, or set them up, also the shrowdes, then wedge the mast, or give it leave to play, and so in time it is easie (with a little diligence) to find the trim of a ship: Next to men of War (whose daily practise it is) the Scotch men are the best in the world to find out the trym of a ship, for they will never be quiet, but trye her all wayes, and if there be any goodnesse in her, they can make her goe. The Trough of the Sea. That is in the hollow betwixt two waves, when we lay a ship under the sea (that is, when we lay her broade-side to the sea) we say, she lies in the trough of the sea. Trucks. Are those little wooden wheeles (being made without any spoakes) that the carriages of the Ordnance doe run-on: Also those little round things of wood, which belong to the parcels are called trucks. Trunnions, Are those knobbes which come from the side of the Ordnance, and doe beare them up upon the cheekes of the carriages. Trusses. Are roapes which are made fast to the parcell of the yards, and are used to two uses, one to bind-fast the yard to the mast, when she rowles either a hull, or at an Anchor; the other is to hale-downe the yards in a storme or gust; these belong only to the main-yard, and fore yard; and they are all brought too, but upon occasion, and also to the missen which hath ever a trusse. The Tucks. The word is significant (for it is as you would say) the very gathering-up of the ships quarter under water, if it lie low, that makes the ship have a fat quarter, and hinders the water from passing swiftly to the rudder: if it lie high, the ship must be well laid out in the
quarter, else she will want bareing, for her after-works, which being so high and waighty, doe charge a ship much. A Turne. Vide Boord. V VEere. To veere-out a roape, is to put it out by hand, or to let it run-out when you may stop it; (as veere more Cabell, that is, let more run-out:) veere, it is generally used to the letting-out of more roape to those roapes which are used without-boord, as to the boate-roape, log-line, or any roape whereby we towe any thing: but it is not used to any running-roape but only to the sheates: Veere more sheats (that is, put out) when the wind doth goe in and out, that is, sometimes to one point, sometimes to an other, and that suddenly, as in the stormes it will very much, they say the wind doth veere and hull. Veering. When a ship sailes, and the sheate is veered-out, we say, she goes veering: Vide Large, and quarter-winds, for it is all one. A Violl. When the Anchor is in such stiffe ground that we cannot waigh it, or else that the sea goes so high, that the maine cap-staine, cannot purchase in the cabell, then (for more helpe) we take a hawser, and open one strand, and so put in it Nippers (some 6, or 8, a faddom distant from each other) and with these Nippers we bind fast the haw∣ser to the cabell, and so bring this hawser to the Jeere-cap-staine and heave upon it, and this will purchase more then the maine cap-staine can; The Violl is fastned together at both ends with an eye and a wall-knot, or else two eyes seased together. W WAft. To waft, is to guard any ship, or fleete at sea, as we call men of War (which attend Merchans to conduct them safe along) wafters: Also wafts are used for signes to have the boate come a-boord (which is Coate, Gowne or the like, hung-up in the shrowdes) also it is a common signe of some extremitie, when a ship doth hang a waft upon the maine-stay, either that it hath sprung a-leake, or is in some distresse.
The Wake. The Wake of a ship, is the smooth-water, which the ship doth make a-sterne-her, shewing the way that the ship hath gone in the sea; by this we give a judgement what way the ship doth make; for if the wake be right a-sterne, then we know she makes her way good, as she lookes, but if the wake be a point, two or more to Lee-ward, then the ship goes to Lee-ward of her course; when a ship doth stay a-weather her wake, that is, when she doth not fall to Lee-ward at her staying but doth it quickly, and then when she is tacked the wake is to Lee-ward, it is a signe she feeles her helme well, and is a nimble ship: In chaseing they say, we have got her wake, that is, we are got as far into the wind as she, and so goe right after her as she goes. Wale. Vide Bend. Wale-reared. That is, when a ship is built right up, after she comes to her bearing, this is unsightly, and (as they terme it) not ship sha∣pen: but it makes a ship within-boord much the roomer, and not the lesse wholsome ship in the sea, if her bearing be well laid-out. Walt. A ship is said to be walt, when she hath not ballast enough, to keep her stiffe to beare a saile. A Warpe. Is any roape which is used to warpe a ship, which is most commonly a hawser. To Warpe. Is to have a hawser, or any other roape (sufficient to hale-up the ship) and an Anchor bent to it; and so to lay that out over the bar, over which we are to goe, and so by that, to hale the ship fore∣wards: It is used when we want a wind to carry us out, or into a Har∣bour, and this is called warping. To Wash a Ship. That is used at sea, when we cannot come a∣ground, or careene-her: we make her heeled-over with her Ordnance and men, upon the yard-armes to aside, and so wash that side, and scrape it, (so much as is out of the water, which is commonly some 5, or 6, strakes) this is done in calmes, or in a smooth roade. To Wash off the Shore. That is close by the Shore. Wast. Is that part of the ship, which is between the maine-mast and the fore-castell. Waste-boords. Are the boords which are set up in the waste of a ship, betwixt the gun-wale and the wast-trees; but they are most used for boates, to be set up alongst the sides to keepe the sea from breaking into them.
Wast-clothes. By a generall terme, all the clothes which are round about the cake-work of the hull of the ship, are called wast-clothes, and are the same that we call the fights of the ship. Watch. At the sea, the ships company is divided into two parts, the one called the Star-boord-watch, the other the Lar-boord-watch: The Master, is the chiefe of the Star-boord, and his right-hand mate of the Lar-boord: these are in their turnes to watch, trim sailes, pump, and doe all duties for foure howres, and then the other watch is to releeve them: Foure houres they call a whole watch: In Harbour, and Rhodes, they watch but quarter watch, that is, when one quarter of the company doe watch together. Water-borne. That is, when a ship is even just of the ground that she floates, then she is water-borne. The Water-line. Is that line, which the Ship-wrights doe pretend should be the depth that the ship should swin in, when she is laden both a-head and a-sterne; for you must know, a ship never drawes so much a-head, as she doth a-sterne, for if she should, she would never steere well. Water-shot. Is a kind of moreing, that is to lay the Anchors not crosse the tide, nor right up and downe the tide, but (as you would say) betwixt both, that is quartering. The Water-Way. That small peece, or ledge of timber, which lies fore and aft on the ships deck, close by the sides (which is to keep the water from running-down there) is called the water-way. Waving. Is making a signe for a ship, or boate, to come towards them, or else to goe from them; as the signe is made, either towards or from-wards the ship. Way of a ship. The Rake and Run of a ship, is called her way fore∣ward-on, or aftward-on: Also when she sailes a-pace, they will say, the ship hath good way, fresh way, or the like; Likewise, in casting the dead-reckning, they allow her Lee-ward-way, (that is so much as she drives to Lee-ward, from that she seemes to goe.) To Weather. That is, to goe to wind-ward of a place or ship; some∣times we are embayed, so that we cannot weather-a-head-land to get cleere, and then we must doe our best to turne in and out, till we can have a faire wind, or claw it off. Weather Bowe. That is the Bowe next weather, and so of all parts
of the ship, or any thing that is to the wind-ward-most-side, we say, it is the weather-part, or a-weather. Weather-coile. Is when a ship is a hull, to lay her head the other way, without looseing any saile; which is only done, by bearing up the helme: It is an excellent condition in a ship; for most ships will not weather-coile: The use of it is, that when we desire to drive with her head, the other way a-hull, then we need not open any saile, wherewith before the ship can come to veere, she will run a great way to Lee-ward, when once she is before the wind and sea, under saile. Wedges. We use to make fast the mast in the partners with wed∣ges; and also to put a wedge into the heeles of the top-masts to beare-up the top-mast upon the tressell-trees. The Whelpes. Are like brackets, set to the body of the cap-staine, close under the bars, downe to the deck; and are they which give the sweepe to the cap-staine; these are made so in parts, that the cabell may not be so apt to surge as it would, if it did run upon a whole round body. The Whipp. Is that staffe, which the Steeres-man doth hold in his hand, whereby he governs the helme, and doth port it over from one side to an other; it hath a ring at one end which is put over the end of the helme, and so comes through the rowle up into the steeridge: In great ships they are not used, for by reason of the waight of the rudder and the water which lies upon it in foule-weather, they are not able to governe the helme with a whipp, because conveniently there can stand but one man at the whipp. Whoodings. The plancks which are joyned and fastned alongst the ship-sides into the stem, are called the whoodings. To Winde. To winde a ship, is to bring her head about, either with the boate, or with some oares out at her hawse or sterne-portes (if she be a small ship) The ship winds-up, that is when she comes to ride by her Anchor: when they are under saile, they use to aske, how winds the ship, that is, upon what point of the Compasse doth she lie with her head. Winding-tackle.
The winding-tackle is thus fitted: A great double block with three sheevers in it, which is fast seased to the end of a small cabell, which is brought about the head of the mast, and so serves for a pendant: this hath a Guye brought to it from the fore-mast, into the block there is reeved a hawser, which is also reeved through an otherdouble-block, having a strap at the end of it, which strap being put through the eye of the slings is locked into it, with a fidd, and so hoyse the goods: The fall is reeved into the snatch-block, and so brought to the cap-stame, whereby they heave in the goods. Windlasse. Is a peece of timber (having some 6, or 8, squares) and is placed from one side of the ship to the other, close abast the stem, aloft where the cabels come in: These are never used in our great ships; but the Flemmings doe use them in good ships: the reason is, for that they goe very slightly manned, and the windlasse doth purchase much more then a cap-staine, and with no danger to the men: for the wind∣lasse they heave about with hand-speekes put into holes made at either end, and though they cannot heave foreward, or one should faile, the wind-lasse will paule it selfe: But at the cap-staine if any faile, they may be throwne from the cap-staine, and their braines beaten out a∣gainst the ship sides, if they waigh in a sea-gate, but the cap-staine doth purchase faster by much; and therefore we (having men enough to man it) doe use that: they have a windlasse also in the head of the boate, to waigh the Anchor by the buoy-roape. Wind-taugh. Any thing that holds wind aloft, which may pre∣judice the ship-faileing or riding, is said to be wind-taught (as too much rigging high roapes, and the like;) Also when we ride in any great stresse, we bring our yards alongst ships, strike downe our top-masts and the like: because they hold wind taught, that is, they hold wind stiffely, (for taught is as much as stiffe in the sense of sea language) as set taught the shrowdes, that is, set them stiffe. Wood and Wood. That is, when two timbers are let into each other, so close, that the wood of the one, doth joyne close to the o∣ther. A Worme. Is an Iron on the end of a staffe, wherewith they draw out the shot of a Peece, if there be any occasion. Worming. Is the laying of a small-roape, or line alongst, betwixt the strands of a cabell of hawser; The use whereof, is to help to streng∣then the cabell, or roape to which it is used; the Flemmings use this to new roapes, others to old roapes, that are almost decayed. To Would: or, Woulding.
Is to bind Roapes about any Mast, yard, or the like, to keepe on a fish, or somewhat to strengthen it: Some∣times when the whoodings give way by the over-charging of the bolt-sprit,they are faine to Would to the Bowes: which they doe, by pas∣sing a Cabell through both sides, and so bringing it in againe, and with hand speckes to twist it together as strong as may be: we never fish any Mast, or yard, but we Would it also: And that is called the Woul∣ding of the Mast or Yards. Also those Roapes, which come from the beake-head, over the bolt-spritt, and Lashes it fast downe from rising off the pillow, are called the Wouldings of the bolt-spritt. Y YArd. As the length of the Masts are proportioned by the breadth of the Beame, so contrary wise, the length of the yard is proportio∣ned by the length of the Keele: The proportion of this, is not absolute: for he who will have a Taunt-Mast may have the Narrower-yards (and so contrary) but the best, and most absolute agreed on, is this, the Main-yard of the Ship is to be ⅚ parts of the length of the Keele: The top-saile yard is to be 3/7 of the Maine-yard: and the Maine-yard for bignesse, is to be ¾ of an Inch for a yard in length: the length of the fore-yard is to be ⅘ of the main-yard: The Crosse-Jack-yard, and sprit-saile-yard, is to be all of a length, but allow the Missen-yards, and sprit-saile-yards ½ an Inch thicknesse to a yard in length: Top the yards, (that is, make them hang even:) the Clew-lines doe properly top the Maine and fore-yards: but when the Top-sailes are Stowed, then the Top-saile sheates will top them: Brase the yard (that is, Travers aft that yard-arme, whose brase is haled) and by the brases we square the yards, that is, make them hang right-a-crosse, and one yard arme not Traversed more then the other: If the Shrowdes be set too forward, they will hinder the traversing of the yard: Traversing the yard, is to brase aft the yard. A Yawe. When the Ship is not steered steddy, but she goes in and out with her head, they say she Yawes, this doth much hinder a ships∣way; and therefore when a man of warre is in Chase, he doth put such to the Helme, who can keepe her steddiest and evennest upon a point; which is done onely by Care and Judgement; to meet her with the Helme, before her head fall-off, or else come to.
A Yoake. When the Sea is so rough, that men cannot governe the Helme with their hands, then they sease two Blocks to the Helme, on each side, at the end, and Reeveing two fals through them, like Gunners-Tackles, bring them to the Ship-sides, and so having some at one Tackle, some at the other, they governe the Helme, as they are di∣rected: There is also another way, with taking a double turne about the end of the Helme, with a single Roape: The ends being be-layed fast to the Ship-sides: And by this they guide the Helme, but not with so much ease, as the other way: Now either of these is called a Yoake to steere by. FINIS.
An Index of the Names, and Termes expounded in this Booke. A AFt, or, Abast. Page. 1 Aloofe. 2 Amaine. ibid. Anchor. ib. Anchoring, or Anchorage. 4 Anchor-Stock. ibid. Arme. ibid. An Awning. 5 Axel-tree. ibid. B To Bals. 5 Ballast. ibid. The Beake, or Beake-head. 6 Beame. ibid. To Beare. ib. Beare-in. 7 Beare-off. ib. Beare-up. ib. Bedds. ib. To Belage. ib. A Bend. 8 To Bend, or Bent. ibid. A Berth. ib. Berthing. ibid. A Bight. ibid. Bildge, or Buldge. ib. Bildge-water. ibid. A Bittackle. ib. A Bitter. 9 A Bitter-end. 9 The Bitts. ibid. Blocks. ibid. Blowe. 10 Bluff, or Bluff-head. ib. Boate. ib. Bolt, or Bolts. 11 A Bolt-Roape. ib. Bolt-spritt. ibid. A Bonnett. 12 A Boome. ib. Boord, or, A-Boord. ib. The Bowe. 13 Bowling. 14 A Bower. ib. Bowes, or, To Bowse. ib. Bracketts. ib. Brases. ib. Brayles. 15 Breech and Breeching. ibid. A Breize. ib. A Brest-fast. 16 Brest-Roapes. ibid. Brooming. ibid. A Budge-Barrell. ibid. Bulck. ib. Bulck-head. ib. Bunt. ib. Bunt-lines. 17
A Buoy. p. 17 A Butt. ib. A Buttuck. ib. C A Cabell. 18 Caburne. ib. Calme and becalming. ib. To Camber, or Cambring. 19 The Cap. ib. Capsquares. ib. The Cap-staine. ib. Cap-staine-bars. 20 A Card, or, Sea-Card. ib. Careene. ib. Carlings. 21 Carling-knees. ib. A Carriage. ib. A Carthrage. 22 Carnells. ibid. Carnell-Work. ib. A Case. ib. Case-shott. ib. Casketts. ib. Catharpings. 23 Catt. ib. Catt-holes. ib. Caulke. ib. Chafe. ib. Chaine-Walls. ib. A Chamber. ib. Channell 24 Charge. ibid. Chase. ib. Cheekes. 25 Cheteres. ib. Choake. ib. Clamps. 25 A Cleate. ib. Clew. 26 Clew-garnet. ib. Clew-line. ib. A Clincher. ib. To Clinch. ib. Clinching. ib. Cloathe. 27 Cloyde. ib. Coamings. ib. Coates. ib. Cocks. ib. The Collar. ib. The Combe. ib. Compasse. ib. To Cond, or Cun. 28 Cooke-Roome. ib. Cordage. 30 Connter. ib. Course. ib. A Crabb. ib. A Cradle. ib. Craft. ib. Cranck. ib. Creengles. ib. Cros-bar. 31 Cros-Jack. ib. Cros-peece. ib. Cros-trees. ib. Crow-feete. ibid. Cubbridghead. 32 Culver-taile ibi. Cutt. ib. Cutt-Water. ib. D The Davitt. 33
Dead men-eyes. p. 33 Dead-water. ib. Deck. ib. Deep-see-Leade. 34 Deep-see-Line. ibid. To Disembogue. ib. To Dispert. 35 Dock. ib. A Drabler. ib. Draggs. ib. Draught. ib. To Dregg. ib. A Drift-Saile. 36 Drive. ibid. Duck-up. ib. E Earing. 36 To Ease. ib. An Eddy. ib. An Eddy-wind. 37 End for End. ibid. Enter. ibid. Entring-ladder. ib. Entring-Roape. ib. Eyes. ib. Eylot-holes. ib. F Faddom. 38 A Facke. ib. Fall-off. ibid. Falls. ib. To Farthell. ib. Fartherling-Lines. ib. The Fashion Peeces. 39 Fender-bolts. ib. Fenders. ib. Fidd. ib. Fidd-Hammer. 39 Fightts. ib. Fire-workes. ib. A Fish. ib. The Fish-Block. 40 The Fish-hooke. ib. The Fish. ib. Flaggs. ib. Flaire. ib. Floane. ib. Flood. 41 The Flooke. ibid. Flote. ibid. Flowe. ib. The Flowre. ib. Flush. ibid. The Flye. ib. To Free. ib. Fresh-shott. 42 The Fore-foote. ib. Fore-Locks. ib. Fore-Mast. ib. A Former. ib. Fore-reache. ib. Fore-Saile. ib. Fore-Top-Mast. ib. Fore-yard. ib. Fowle. 43. Fowle-water. ib. Fownder. ib. Furr, or Furr'd. ib. Futtocks. 44 G Gage. 44 Gale. ib. The Garboord. 45 Gar-boordstrake. ib.
The Garnett. p. 45 A Girding. ibid. Girt. ib. Goaring. ib. Goose-wing. ib. Grapnells. ib. Gratings. 46 To Grave. ib. A Gripe. ib. To Gripe. ib. Grommetts. 47 Ground and Grounding. ib. Ground-Timbers. ib. Gudgias. ib. To Gull. ib. The Gun-wale. ib. A Guye. 48 H To Hale, or Over-Hale; 48 To Hall, or, Halling. ib. Halliardds. ib. Hand or Handing. ib. A Handspeeke. 49 The Harpings, ib. Hatches. ib. Hatch-way. ib. The Hawses. ib. A Hawser. ib. The Head. 50 Head-Lines. ib. Head-Sailes. ib. Head-Sea. ib. To Heave. ib. The Heele. 51 To Heele. ib. The Helme. ib. To Hitch. ib. To Hold-off. 51 Honey-combd. 52 The Hookes. ib. A Horse. ib. The Howld. ib. The Hownds. 53 Howlsom. ib. Howsing-in. ib. To Hoyse. 54 The Hull. ib. Hulling. ib. A Hullock. 55 I The Jecre. 55 The Jeere-Capstaine. ib. Iron-Sicke. ib. A Junck ib. A Jury-Mast. ib. K. To Keckle, or Keckling. 56 A Kedger. ib. To Kedge or, Kedging. ib. The Keele. ib. The Keele-Roape. ib. Keeleson. 57 A Ketch. ib. Kevells. ib. Keenke. ib. The Knave-Line. ib. Knees. ib. Kneetles. ib. The Knights. ib. Knittlidge. 58 Knotts. ib. L To Labour. 58 Ladder. ib.
To Lade. p. 59 A Ladle. ib. Land-fall. ib. Land-Locked. ib. Land-to. ib. A Land-turne. ib. A Langrell. ib. Lanniers. ib. Lurge. 60 To Lase, or, Lasing. ib. To Lash, or, Lasbers. ib. Lasking ib. Latcetts. ib. Launch. ib. To Lay-a-Land. ib. A Leake. ib. Ledges. 61 Lee. ibid. The Lee-fange. 62 The Leetch. ib. Leetch-Lines. ib. Legges. ib. Lett-fall. ib. Lifts. ib. Limbers, or, Limber-holes. ib. Lines-Pins. 63 Lockers. ib. A Logg-Line. ib. The Loofe ib. A Loofe-hooke. 64 A Loome-Gale. ib. To Loome. ib. A Lust. ib. Lie under the Sea. ib. M To Man. 64 A Man of Warre. 65 The Manger. 66 Marling. ib. Marling-speeke. ib. Martuetts. ib. Masts. ib. Matts. 67 Mettle. ib. The Missen. 68 The Missen-Mast. ib. The Missen-Saile. ib. The Missen-Top-Mast. ib. The Missen-Yard. ib. To Moore, or, Mooring. ib. To Mount. 69 Munck-Seame. ib. Murderers. ib. N Neale-to. 69 Neapes, or, Neape-tide. ib. The Needle. 70 Nettings. ib. Netting-sailes. ib. Nippers. ib. O To Observe. 71 Ockham. ib. The Offing. ib. Offward. ib. Orlopp. ib. Over-sett. 72 Over-throwe. ib. Out-Licker. ib. Oze, or, Ozie. ib. P A Pantch. 73 A Parbunckle. ib. To Parcell, or, Parclling. ib.
Parrells. p. 73 The Partners. ib. a Passaredo. 74 The Paule. ib. To Pay. ib. a Peeke. ib. Pendants. 75 The Pillow. ib. a Pintell. ib. Pitching ib. Platts 76 a Plott. ib. a Point. ib. The Poope. ib. a Port. ib. To port. ib. Powches. 77 Powder. ib. The Powder-Roome. ib. Preddy. ib. a Preventur-Roape. 78 a Proviso. ib. The Prowe. ib. Priming. ib. Puddings. ib. Pullies. ib. Pumps. ib. The Pump-brake. 79 The Pump-Can. ib. Pump-Dale. ib. To Purchase. ib. Puttocks. ib. Q The Quarter. 80 Quarter-Deck. ib. Quartering. ib. Quarter winds. ib. A Quoyle. 80 To Quoyle. ib. Quoynes. ib. R Rabbitting. 81 Rake. ib. Ram-head. 82 A Rammer. ib. Ranges. ib. Ratlinge. ib. A Reache. ib. To Reeve. 83 Ribbs. ib. To Ride. ib. Riders. 84 Rigging. ib. Ring-bolts. ib. The Riseings. ib. Rising-timbers. 85 A Roade. ib. A Roader. ib. Roapes. ib. Roape-yarnes. ib. Robbins. 86 Roofe-trees. ib. Rove and clinch. ib. The Round-house. ib. Rownd in. ib. The Rowle. ib. Rowse in. ib. The Rudder. 87 The Rudder-roape. ib. Rudder-irons. ib. To Rumidge. ib. The Run. ib. Rung-heads. 88 The Rungs. ib.
The Runner. p. 88 S Sailes. ib. To Sarve. 89 A Scarfe. ib. A Scuttle. ib. To Sease, or, Seasing. 90 A Seele. ib. Send. ib. To Set a-land-Sun, or, Ship by the Compasse. ib. Settle a Deck. 91 Sewing, or, to Sew. ib. Shackles. ib. The Shanck. ib. Shanck-painter. ib. Shearing. 92 Sheates. ib. Sheathing. ib. Sheep Shancks. 93. Sheeres. ib. Sheere hookes. ib. Sheevers. ib. Shoares. ib. Shore. ib. Shot. ib. Shot of Cabell. 94 Showle. ib. Shrowdes. ib. The Sillinder. ib. Sinnet. ib. The Skegg. 95 The Skiffe. ib. Skupper, or, Skupper-boles. ib. Skupper-leathers. ib. Skupper-nailes. ib. A Slatch. ib. Sleepers. 95 Slings. 96 To Sling. ib. A Smitting-line. ib. A Snatch-block. ib. Sockets. ib. A Sound. 97 To Sound. ib. Sounding-lead. ib. Sounding-line. ib. Speekes. ib. A. Spell. ib. To Spell. 98 To Spend. ib. A Spindle. ib. To Splise. ib. Split. ib. To Spoone. ib. To Spring. 99 The Spring, or, Spring-tide. ib. Sprit-saile. ib. Sprit-saile-top-saile. ib. Sprit-saile-top-mast. ib. Sprit-saile-yard. ib. Spunge. ib. Spunge-yarne. ib. Spur ketts. 100 Standing-parts of Running-roapes. ib. Standing-roapes. ib. To Stay, or, bring a ship a-stay. ib. Stayes and Back stayer. 101 The Sterne. ib. Sterne-Sheats. ib. To Steere. ib. The Steeridge. 103 The Stem. ib.
A Stepp. p. 103 To Steve, or, stoving. ib. Stewards-Roome. ib. Stoaked. ib. Stopp. ib. A Stopper. ib. To Stowe. 102 A Strake. ib. A Strapp. ib. A Streame-Anckor. ib. Streame-Cabell. ib. A Streth. ib. To Strike. 104 Studding-Sailes. ib. A Sturropp. ib. Suck. ib. Surge. ib. Swifters. ib. Swifting. ib. T Tackes. 105 To Tack a Ship. ib. Tackles. ib. Tallee. 106 Tamkin. ib. Tapering. ib. Taper-bore. ib. Tar-pawling. ib. Taunt. ib. Taught. ib. A Tempest. 107 The Thoughts. ib. Thight. ib. Thowles. ib. Thwart-Ships. ib. Tides. ib. Ties. ib. Tiller. 108 Tire. ib. Top-Armours ib. Top-Gallants. ib. Top-Mast. ib. Top-Roapes. 109 To Towe. ib. Transome. ib. Travers. ib. Travers-boord. 110 Tree-nells. ib. Treenell-trees. ib. To Trise. ib. To Trie. ib. The Trim. 111 The Trough of the Sea. ib. Trucks. ib. Trunnions. ib. Trusses. ib. The Tuck. ib. To Turne. 112 V Veere. ib. Veering. ib. A Violl. ib. W Waft. ib. The Wake. 113 Wale. ib. Wale reared. ib. Walt. ib. A Warpe. ib. To Warpe. ib. To Wash a Ship. ib. To Wash off the shore. ib. Waste. ib. Wast-boord. ib.
Wast-clothes. 114 Watch. ib. Water-borne. ib. The Water-line. ib. Water-shot. ib. The Water-way. ib. Waving. ib. Way of a Ship. ib. To Weather. ib. Weather-bowe. ib. Weather-coyle. 115 Wedges. ib. The Whelpes. ib. The Whipp. ib. Whoodings. ib. To Winde. ib. Winding-Tackle. ib. Wind Lasse. 116 Wind-Taught. ib. Wood and Wood ib. a Worme. ib. Worming. ib. To Would or Woulding. ib. Y Yard. 117 a Yawe. ib. A Yoake. 118 FINIS.
