N1058 12638502 64961
THE ENGLISH ACADEMY: Or, A Brief INTRODUCTION TO THE SEVEN LIBERAL ARTS. Grammar, Arithmetick, Geometrie, Musick, Astronomie, Rhetorick, & Logick. To which is Added. The Necessary Arts and Mysteries of Navigation, Dyaling, Surveying, Mensuration, Gauging & Fortification; Practically laid down in all their Ma∣terial Points and Particulars, highly approved to be known by the Ingenious, and such as are desirous to Profit, or render themselves Accomplished. Chiefly intended for the Instruction of Young Scho∣lars, who are acquainted with no other than their Native Language; But may also be very useful to other Persons that have made some progress in the Studies of the said Arts. The Second Edition. By John Newton, D. D. LONDON, Printed by A. Milbourn, for Tho. Passenger, at the Three Bibles and Star, on London-Bridge, 1693.
Licensed, October 24th. 1677.
TO THE READER. I Have perhaps troubled thee and the Press al∣ready too much; if it be so, I shall how∣ever hope, that I am not unpardonable, because I have still intended well to the good of the Publick; every one I think desires to give their Children the best Education that they can; but the highest degree of Education is not always best: And I must beg thy Pardon, if I do offend thee, in saying, That next to the bare Reading of English, the sen∣ding of Children to the Latin School, is not the best way of giving them Education, for if
that were granted, which I must deny, That the Latin and Greek Tongues were not only necessary for all Children whatsoever, but also more easily learned, than the liberal Arts; yet Writing is so necessary to be first Learned, that it is almost impossible to attain the other without it. And as Writing is very necessary in order to the Latin and Greek Tongues, so is it also necessary in order to the true Spelling and Understanding of the English, or any other Native Language; and indeed the Art of Grammar is the only One of the Seven, that claims a propriety in every Na∣tive Language: As for the other Arts, they are the same, in all Languages, the Rules of Arithme∣tick and Geometry, of Musick and Astronomy, of Rhetorick and Lo∣gick,
are in the General, as Intel∣ligible in every Language, as in the Latin and Greek, or any other; and therefore to them, that have no other need of the Latin and Greek Tongues, than the Lear∣ning of these Arts, may, I con∣ceive, spare that pains, and Learn them in their own Native Lan∣guage, or as many of them, as will be thought useful for them, in their several Stations in the World. Again, these Arts are not only attainable in every Native Lan∣guage, but more easily attaina∣ble than the Latin and Greek Tongues are, to which some seem desirous to confine the Arts; and being so attained, do render other Languages more easie also. For these, and the like Reasons, as I have already Published distinct Introductions to every Art, except
Musick; for which I refer thee to Mr. Joh. Playford's Introduction; so now I have been easily perswaded, to give thee a short view of them altogether; he that desires more full Instruction, may peruse the several Tracts by me Written, in our own, or those that are Written by other Men in other Languages. The whole Building is but small, and therefore I will not make the Porch great, I have placed the Arts in that Order, in which, (with submission to better Judgments) I do conceive they should be lear∣ned: And although I cannot say now, as I have in some of my Epistles preceding my former Tracts, that there is not so much as one Mathematical School in England, for now there is by the Bounty of King Charles the Second a fair one Erected in Christs Hospital, London,
and a worthy Master chosen to Manage it, by Name Mr. Edward Pagett, who is so well known, that he needeth no Mans Com∣mendations to express his VVorth; Yet thus much I still declare to be my opinion, That it is more pro∣per, that the Latin School should be supplied with Scholars from the Mathematical, than that the Mathematical should be supplied from the Latin and Greek Schools: However by this means, I hope it will come to pass, that after-ages will be supplied with that Knowledge in Arithmetick, Geo∣metry, and Astronomy, which hi∣therto our Writing-Masters have not been able to Teach, nor our Grammar Masters either able or willing to undertake; so that in a Word, There are few School-Masters that can Teach these
things: But yet amongst them, the well Accomplished Mr. John Colson, now living in Goodmans-fields, with whom I have not had the happiness to be immediately Ac∣quainted, yet Report hath rend∣red him to the World a worthy Master and Teacher of that Science. And there are not many Tutors in either of our Universi∣ties that do; and yet the usefulness of these Arts cannot be denied, and therefore my hopes are, that some Universal Encouragement will yet be given for the Teaching of them. And could I be so happy, as to see something done in order to it, I should think my self abundantly satisfied for all the Pains I have hi∣therto taken, and shal1 ever rest, Thine and his Countrys Servant, JOHN NEWTON.
THE PREFACE OR, INTRODUCTION TO THE Arts and Sciences in the General. WIsdom is the principal thing, and therefore saith Solo∣mon, Get Wisdom, and with all thy getting, get Understanding. Pro. 4.7. And what is meant by Wis∣dom, Holy Job tells us, Job 28.28 Be∣hold the Fear of the Lord, that is Wis∣dom, and to depart from Evil, that is Understanding. They who seek for this
Wisdom, are the only true Philosophers: for Philosophy is nothing else but the love of Wisdom, and they who Fear God, and depart from Evil, are the lo∣vers of that, which is only real and true Wisdom: Now for as much, as we can∣not be said to fear God, except we know him, Wisdom may well be defined to be the Knowledge of God, and the things that are of him, the knowledge of things Di∣vine and Humane, and this is commonly called Philosophy, but somewhat impro∣perly, for Philosophy is not properly the Knowledge it self, but the love of that Knowledge; and what soever Art or Sci∣ence doth conduce to this Knowledge, may be rightly and truly called Sophia or Wis∣dom; and because all Men should love such Knowledge and Delight in it, I shall not gain say the general Name by which it is called, custom will have it so, let it therefore be called Philosophy. Sophia then, or Philosophia, Wisdom, or the love of Wisdom, is the Knowledge of all Arts and Sciences, which any way do conduce to the Knowledge of God: And because some of them do thereunto conduce
more, some less: These arts may be distin∣guished into two Sorts, Superiour and Inferiour. The Superiour Arts are four; 1. Theology or Divinity, whose Sub∣ject is the Divine Essence. 2. Metaphysicks, otherwise called the first Philosophy, whose Subject is, Being in common, or Being as Being. 3. Physicks, whose Subject is the Knowledge of Natural Bodies, as they are Natural. 4. Ethicks, whose Subject is Morality, or the Doctrine of Manners and Civil Honesty. The Inferiour Arts are of two sorts; 1. Internal or Liberal Arts, so called, because they are attained by the faculties of the Soul, which is a liberal or free agent, and not by the Labour or Ministry of the Hands; and these are seven: 1. Grammar, 2. Arithmetick, 3. Geometry, 4. Musick, 5. Astronomy, 6. Rhetorick, 7. Logick.
And these are the Subjects of this lit∣tle Book. 2. The External or Mechanical and Manual Arts, so called, because they depend more upon the labour of the Body, than the Mind; such are the Arts of Til∣lage; Hunting, Fishing, Fowling, Weaving, and many more, not needful to be named, because no part of the ensuing Discourse.
THE ENGLISH ACADEMY. The FIRST PART. OF GRAMMAR. BOOK I. CHAP. I. Of Letters and Syllables. GRammer is an ART which Teacheth how to Speak and Write truly. The Parts thereof are Four, Letters, Syllables, Words, and Sentences. A Letter is a Character, or Index, of a simple sound. And in the English Tongue there are Twenty four. The which Letters are distinguished from one another, partly by their shapes and partly by their sounds.
In reference to their shapes, they are di∣stinguished by three different Characters, the Roman, Italick, and black English. And in each of these Characters there is the great and the small Letter. In the Roman Character, the Great Letter is thus formed, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z. The small thus, a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, s, t, u, v, w, x, y, z. The great and small Italick Letters are made thus, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z, a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, s, t, u, v, w, x, y, z. The great and small black English thus, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, V, W, X, Y, Z. a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, r, s, s, t, u, v, w, x, y, z. The great Letters are used in the begin∣ning of proper Names, Emphatical words, Sentences, and Verses. The Letter I when it stands alone, is always written with a great Character.
These Twenty and four Letters are divi∣ded into Vowels and Consonants. A Vowel is a letter which maketh a full and perfect sound of it self, and they are five, a, e, i, o, u, besides the Greek Vowel y. A Consonant is a letter which maketh a sound by help of a Vowel, and these are Eighteen, besides the letters j, v, and y, which sometimes are Consonants also. Of the eighteen Consonants, some are mutes, as these eight, b, c, d, g, k, p, q, and t. Some semi-Vowels, as these eight, f, l, m, n, r, s, x, and z, of which these four, l, m, n, r, are also called Liquids, x, and z, double Consonants, and the other two, h, and w, irregular Letters. Some of these Letters, as well Vowels as Consonants, have sounds very different from their common names. Thus the let∣ter c, before e, and i, is sounded like f, but before a, o, u, it is sounded like k, as in cat, cot, cut. The Letter f, is sometimes sounded ac∣cording to its usual name, as when it fol∣lows a Vowel, as in if, of, effeminate, but when it begins a Word or Syllable, it is sounded fee, as in feet, foolish. The Letter g, before a, o, and u, is soun∣ded hard, thus, ghee, as in gad, God, gut, but before e and i it is sometimes, but not always, sounded according to its usual name gee, as in danger, ginger.
The Letter h, is never sounded according to its name ach, but thus, hee, as in hand, help, him. The letters j and v, when they come be∣fore themselves, or any other Vowel in the same Syllable, become Consonants, and have different sounds from their usual names, j is pronounced like g soft, thus ji is pronounced like gi, in ginger, v is pronounced vee, or vu, as in vanish, vine; and when they are thus sounded, their shape is also changed, and hence some would have them to be distinct letters, and would have the number of our letters to be not 24 but 26. The Liquids l, m, n, and r, when they be∣gin a Word or Syllable, are sounded thus, lee, mee, ree, as in light, mind, need, read. The letter q, hath always u after it, to help its sound, but is not to be sounded accor∣ding to its name eu, but que, as in question. The letter s, when it begins a word or Syllable is to be sounded thus; see, as in sad, secret, but in the end of a word, or between two Vowels or Dipthongs, it hath for the most part the sound of z, as in easie, bosom. The letter t before i, if another Vowel fol∣loweth, hath the sound of si, as in Egyptian, patience; but when it followeth s or x, it hath its own proper sound, as in bestial, mixtion. The letter w, hath its name from its shape, being composed of twice u, it is called dou∣ble u; but is in no case so sounded, but we, as in wall, well, will.
The letter x, when it begins a word or Syllable, is sounded thus, xee, as in Xerxes; in other cases thus, ex, or ecs. The letter y hath by no means its sound according to its usual name wi, but when it begins a word or Syllable, and so becomes a Consonant, it is sounded yee; when it comes in the middle or end of a word, it is sounded like i Vowel, as in my, thy. The letter z is to be sounded zee, as in Zeal. A Syllable is a literal or articulate Voice of one individual sound. Syllables are of two sorts, improper and proper. An improper Syllyble is made of one or more Vowels without a Consonant; as a-ny, e-vil, Ae-neas, Oe-dipus. A Proper Syllable is the comprehension of one or more Consonants, with one or more Vowels, in one sound or breath; as Ge-ne-ra-ti-on, Moun-tain, and in our English Tongue doth sometimes consist of eight let∣ters, as strength. When two Vowels are joyned together in one sound or breath, they are called Dip∣thongs; of which there are two sorts, Proper and Improper. Of proper Dipthongs, there are these eight, ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ou, ee, and oo. The first six are sometimes written thus, ay, ey, oy, aw, ew, ow.
Of improper Dipthongs there are but these three, ea, oa, and ie. The two Vowels which make a Dipthong, are for the most part to be sounded together, as in Faith, neither, Eunuch, but in these words, Laity, Mosaick work, Deity, Atheist, moity, doing, reenter, reiterate, and such like; and in most Proper Names in the Bible they are to be sounded severally. The Improper Dipthongs ea, and o, are sounded together, except in these words, beatitude, Creator, creation, real, theatre, and most proper names of Women, Cities, and Countries; but the two Vowels in this Dip∣thong ei, are usually parted, except in these two words, friend, grief, and when they come in the end of a word, as in mer∣cie, charitie, and such like. An English syllable, though it may consist of eight letters, yet doth it never begin with more than two Vowels before a Con∣sonant, of three Consonants before a Vowel or Dipthong. The two Consonants which may begin an English word or syllable, are these thirty, Bl, br, ch, cl, cr, dr, dw, fl, fr, gl, gn, gr, kn, pl, pr, sc, sh, sk, sp, sl, sm, sn, sq, sw, th, tr, tw, wh, and wr. And the three Consonants that may begin an English word, are these nine, Sch, scr, shr, skr, spl, spr, str, thr, thw. In the sounding of the Consonants, which
are joyned together in the beginning of a word, there is no difficulty, but in these few, ch, gh, and th. The letters ch, when they come before a Vowel in a pure English word, they are to be sounded as in chance, cheap; and when they come after a Vowel, they are to be sounded, as in ach, reach, rich. But in words derived from the Greek and Hebrew, they are to be sounded like k, as in character, these few only excepted, Rachel, Cherubin, Tychicus, Arch-Bishop, Arch-Duke, Architect, Arch-enemy, Arch-pirat. The letters gh, in the beginning of a word, are to be sounded like g hard, as in ghost, ghess, in the midd1e of a word, they are ei∣ther not sounded at all, or but softly, as in might, light, and in the end of a word they have the sound of ff, as cough, tough. These letters th, in words of one syllable, and in words of more than one, ending in ther, thed, theth, thest, thing, they have the sound of d, in other words the sound of t, or the Greek Theta. The letters ph, never begin a pure English word, but such only as are derived from the Greek and Hebrew, as Pharisee, Pharez, Epi∣taph, and in these they are sounded like f. The Liquids, l, m, n, r, when another Consonant doth precede them in the begin∣ning or middle of a word, do retain their own sound, but in the end of a word, though
the Vowel e, ought to be written, yet in the pronounciation, you must stop at the two Consonants, and omit the Vowel; for Ex∣ample, fable, acre, uncle, must be pronoun∣ced as though they were written thus, fabl, acr, uncl. CHHP. II. Of Words. A Word, is such a comprehension of letters and syllables, as helpeth Man-kind to express their minds to one another. There are eight kinds of Words, or parts of Speech, Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Participle, Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection. A Noun, is the name of a Person or Thing; as, an Author, a Book, learned, guilded. Of Nouns, some be Substantives, and some be Adjectives. A Noun Substantive, is a Word, that sig∣nifieth something, and may have the sign (a) or (the) before it; as a Man, the Book. A Noun Adjective, is a Word, that can∣not signifie a thing of it self; as, good, bad. There are two sorts of Nouns Substantives. A Noun Substantive proper, and a Noun substantive common. A Noun Substantive proper, is a Noun that is proper to the person or thing, that it be∣tokeneth; as, Henry, England.
A Noun substantive common, is a Noun common to all things of the same kind; as, a Man, a Land, an Angel. To a Noun there doth belong two things, number and comparison. There be two Numbers, the singular and the plural; the Singular number speaketh but of One; as a Man, a Book, a Stone. The Plural number speaketh of more than One, as Men, Books, Stones. Nouns Substantive of the singular number, are turned into the plural, by adding unto them s or es, as web, webs, robe, robes, Church, Churches, hedge, hedges. Some Nouns of the singular number ending in f, being plurals, do change f into v, as beef, beeves, calf, calves. And some are made plurals, by adding of en or ren; as, Ox, oxen, chick, chicken, brother, brotheren, or by contraction brethren, child, children; of Man is formed mannen, or men, house, housen, hose, hosen; to which may be added, mouse, mice, louse, lice, die, dise, sow, swine, cow, kine, peney, pence, goose, geese, tooth, teeth, foot, feet; these two; Sheep and Mile, are both singular and plural; as, one sheep, ten sheep, one mile, ten mile or miles. Other variation of Nouns we have none in the English Tongue; all other distinctions are made by these Articles and Prepositions; a, of, to, the, o, and in, or from, &c. Nouns that signifie the Male-kind, we call hees; such as signifie the Female, we call
shees; and of such as signifie neither, we say it; as, Esau could not obtain his Fathers blessing, though he sought it, with tears: Jezabel was a wicked woman, for she slew the Lord's Prophets. Comparison belongeth only to Nouns Adje∣ctives, whose significatoin may be increased, or diminished. There be three degrees of Comparison, the Positive, Comparative, and the Superlative. The Positive degree setteth down the qua∣lity of a thing absolutely without excess, as hard, soft, swift. The Comparitive degree raiseth the signi∣fication of the Positive, in comparison of some other, as harder, softer, swifter. The Superlative exceedeth his positive in the highest degree, as hardest , softest, swiftest. Adjectives are compared in the English tongue, either by the signs more and most, or by the terminations er, and est, as hard, hader, or more hard, hardest, or most hard. Some Adjectives are compared irregular∣ly; as, Good, better, best; bad, worse, worst, little, less, least. CHAP. III Of a Pronoun. A Pronoun is a part of Speech, much like to a Noun, implying a Person, and not ad∣mitting the sign a or the, before it.
There are twelve Pronouns, I, Thou, He, who, which, that, the same, my, thy, this, his, whose. Of Pronouns, some be primitives, and some derivatives. Pronoun primatives are of three sorts, Per∣sonal, Relative, and Demonstrative. There are three Pronoun personals, I, Thou, and He. Pronoun Relatives, are likewise three, who, which, and that. Pronoun Demonstratives, are these two, this, the same. Pronoun Derivatives, are these four, my, thy, his, whose. All which with their va∣riations, are expressed in the following Type. Possessives. 1. Person. Sing. I, me, my, mine. 1. Person. Plur. we, us, our, ours. 2. Person. Sing. thou, thee, thy, thine. 2. Person. Plur. ye, you, your, yours. 3. Person. Sing. Mal. he, him, his. Fem. she, her, hers. neith, it, its. 3. Person. Plur. they, them, their, theirs Relatives. To pers. who, whom, whose. Relatives. To thing. what, whereof.
Own is a Noun adjective, and self, or selves, a Substantive, but are sometimes joyned to, or compounded with the Pro∣nouns; as, my self, thy self, themselves, his own self, their own selves. This word where, with certain Preposi∣tions following it; as, about, at, by, in, of, unto, with, hath the signification of which as, wherein, or in which. And these words, here, there, and in like manner used for, this, that; as, herewith, therewith, for with this, with that. CHAP. IV Of a Verb and Participle. A Verb is a part of Speech, that joyneth the Signification of other words to∣gether. There are three kinds of Verbs, Active, Passive, and Neuter. A Verb Active, is a Verb that betokeneth doing, as, I love. A Verb Passive, is a Verb which betoken∣eth suffering, as I am loved. A Verb Neuter, is a Verb which betoken∣eth being, as I am. Four things belong to a Verb, Mood, Tense, Number and Person. There are four Moods, the Indicative, the
Imperative, the Potential, and the Infinitive. The Indicative either sheweth a reason true or false, as I love, or asketh a Questi∣on, as, dost thou love. There Imperative Mood, intreateth, per∣mitteth, or commandeth, as love he, or let him love. The Potential Mood, signifieth a power, duty, or desire, and hath one of these Signs, may, can, might, would, should, could, or ought, as I may or can love. The Infinitive Mood, notes no certain Number or Person, but followeth another Verb, or an Adjective, and hath commonly this Sign (to) before it, as I desire to learn, worthy to be praised. The Tenses or distinctions of Time, are five, The Present Tense, the Preterimperfect Tense, the Preterperfect Tense, the Preter∣pluperfect Tense, and the Future Tense. These Tenses in respect of signification, are thus distinguished; in the Indicative Mood, do is the sign of the Present Tense, did of the preterimperfect Tense, have of the Preterperfect, had of the Preterpluper∣fect, shall and will of the Future, In the Potential Mood, by the signs alrea∣dy given, the Present Tense by the signs may or can, the Preterimperfect would, should, could, or ought, and the Preterperfect, by annexing the sign have to the former Signs, and the Future, by adding hereafter to the
signs of may or can, the Signs of the Present, as, I may or can hereafter, the Preterpluper∣fect in this Mood is wanting in the English Tongue. But in respect of Termination, there are no Moods but one, no Tenses but two, namely, the Present, and Preterimperfect Tenses. And the Preterimperfect Tense is formed from the Present, by adding thereto the ter∣mination (ed) and in some few the termina∣tion (en) as of love is formed loved, of fall, fallen. The Persons in every Tense are distin∣guished by the personal Pronouns, I, Thou, and He, in the Singular Number, and We, Ye, They, in the Plural; only the Second Per∣son Singular in the Present and Preterimper∣fect Tenses is formed from the first, by ad∣ding thereto the Termination est, as of love, lovest, of loved, lovedst; and the Third Per∣son Singular in the Present Tense is formed from the First, by adding thereto the Ter∣mination (eth) as of love is formed loveth. other variations of Persons or Tenses there is none, but what is done by Signs, as was said before. A Verb Active then is thus formed in the Indicative Mood. Present Tense. Sing. Love, lovest, loveth. Plur. Love, Infinitive, To love.
Preterimperfect Tense. Sing. Loved, lovedst, loved. Plural. Lo∣ved. This Verb Neuter, Am or Be is thus form∣ed. In the Present Tense. Am, art, is, Plur. Are. Be, beest, be Plur. Bee. In the Preterim∣perfect Tense. Was, wast, was Plural. Were. Were, wert, were, Plural.Were. Infinitive. To be. A Verb Passive, is the same throughout all Moods and Tenses, with a Verb Neuter, the Preterimperfect Tense of the Active Voice, be∣ing added thereunto; Thus the Passive Voice of this Verb Active, I love, is formed, by adding loved to all the Tenses and Per∣sons of this Verb Neuter, I am. For example. The Present Tense of the Indicative Mood is thus formed, I am loved, Thou art loved, He is loved. We are loved Ye are loved, They are loved A Participle is a part of Speech, derived of a Verb, from which it hath Signification, of Time present, past, or to come.
There are two Participles, one of the Active, and another of the Passive Voice. The Participle of the Active Voice is deri∣ved from its Verb, by adding the Termina∣tion (ing) to the Present Tense; as of love, loving. The Participle of the Passive Voice is for the most part, the same with the Preterim∣perfect Tense of the Active; as the Partici∣ple of the Passive Voice in this Verb love is loved. From this General Rule many Verbs are Excepted, for of Make Is formed made take, took, taken lead led shake, shook, shaken bereave bereft seeth, sod, sodden smell smelt shear, shore, shorn seek sought rise, rose, risen beseech besought give, gave, given think thought strive, strove, striven work wrought sing, sang, sung buy bought know, knew, known grinde ground throw, threw, thrown stand stood go, went, gone, Of these, see more in my School Pastime.
CHAP. V. Of Adverbs, Conjunctions, Prepositions, and Interjections. AN Adverb is a Word joyned to a Verb or Noun, to declare their Signification. Some of Time, as when, now, then, to day. Some of Number, as, how oft, once, twice. Some of Order, as, first, next, afterward. Some of Place, as where, here, there. Some of Affirming, as, yea, perhaps. Some of Denying, as, no, not. Some of Shewing, as, lo, behold. Some of Similitude, as, so, how much, more. A Conjunction is a part of Speech, which joyneth Words and Sentences together, of which these are some, And, also, likewise, nor, neither, whether, or, either, but, for, &c. A Preposition, is a Word commonly set before other parts of Speech, either in ap∣position, as before the Master, or in composi∣tion, as overwise. An Interjection is a Word, expressing some suddain passion of the Mind, oh, alass, O strange, ho, hark, sirrah.
CHAP. VI. Of Dividing of Words into Syllables. FOr the dividing of Words into Syllables there are four Rules. 1. Two Vowels which make no Dipthong, must be divided; as, ie, iu, ua; as in qui-et, tri-umph, mutu-al. 2. Those Consonants which are doubled in the middle of a Word, must be divided; as in Abba, accord, adder. Except they be needlesly doubled, as in words of the Plural Number; as in crabbs, rodds. Except such words in which they are dou∣bled for distinction sake; as in the words, Ann, Cann, Inn. 3. Rule. When a Consonant cometh be∣tween two Vowels, it is to be joyned to the latter; as in a-vail, a-ni-mate. But to this Rule there are four Exceptions 1. Except Words ending in es, as in Nouns, of the Plural Number, and Verbs of the third person Singular, in which this particle is for the most part swallowed up, in the for∣mer Syllable; but in all proper Names, ex∣cept Charles and James, it makes a distinct Syllable. 2. Except Words that are compounded of such Simple Words, as are significant a∣part,
in which each Simple Word must re∣tain its own letters; as, Trades-man, safe-guard, hence-forth. 3. Except Derivative Words, whose ad∣dition to the Primitive, doth signifie nothing of it self, in which the Primitive must be sounded by it self, and the addition by it self; as, hope-less, lov-ing, joyn-ing, and such like. 4. Except such Words in which x cometh between two Vowels, in which it must be joyned to the first Vowel; as, ox-en, ex∣ercise. 5. Rule. Any two or three Consonants, which may be joyned together in the begin∣ning of a word, are not to be seperated in the middle; as in a-gree, bestow, en-thrall; destruction; but in compounded words, each simple word must retain its own Letters. When you are to write any hard long word, mark how many sounds or Syllables it hath, as if you were to write disdainfullness, universalitie, or the like, before you write it, say thus to your self; dis-dain-full-ness, u-ni-ver-sa-li-tie, and you shall hardly miss in the writing thereof.
CHAP. VII. Of Sentences, and such Distinctions, or Points as are to be used in Writing, and ob∣served in Reading. A Sentence, is a number of words, joy∣ned together in perfect Sense. The Stops or Points to be observed in Sen∣tences, are of two sorts, Primary, and Secun∣dary. The Primary Points are these Eight. 1. A Comma, made with a little stroke thus (,) 2. A Colon, made with two points thus (:) 3. A Semi-colon, made with a point, and a little stroke under it thus (;) 4. A Period, made with a single point thus (.) 5. An Erotesis or Interrogation, made in this manner (?) 6. An Ecphonesis, or note of Admiration, whose note is a perpendicular right line, with a point under it thus (!) 7. A Parenthesis, is a note, like two half Moons, inclosing a sentence, which may be used or omitted, and yet the sense remain in∣tire, thus ()
8. A Parathesis, is a note, which doth in∣clude a word which is opposed to another word, and is made with two Semiquadrats, thus [] The Secondary Points are these six. 1. An Apostrophe, which is a note, set on the top or side of a Letter, whereby two Syllables are contracted into one, and is made like a Comma, thus (') as it's for it is. 2. An Eclipsis, which is a note cutting off one or more words in the beginning or end∣ing of a Verse or Sentence, cited in our Writing, and is made with a long stroke thus — as — Princes are not wise, Who sleep themselves, and trust their servants Eyes. 3. A Dieresis, which is a note for the par∣ting of two Vowels, which otherwise might seem to make a Dipthong, and is made with two pricks over the two Vowels, thus, (") as in Laïs. 4. An Hyphen, which is a note of con∣tinuation, made thus (-) and is to be used when one part of a word conclud∣eth the former line, and the other part beginneth the next; or else, when two words are, by way of Elegancy, as it were
joyned into one; as self-love, for the love of ones self. 5. An Accent which is a small stroak drawn slopewise towards the left-hand, thus, (') and is to be set over that Syllable in a word, which is to be pronounced long. 6. A Circumflex, which is the joyning to∣gether of two oblique stroaks into one figure, one of them being made towards the right hand, and the other towards the left, and is to be set over a Vowel, thus, (â) which is to be pronounced long, as in bîte, wîle, stîle, not in bit, will, still. The Accent in words of many syllables is commonly placed on the third Vowel from the last; as in tolerátion, índustry. But words ending in (ary) have the accent on the first syllable; as témporary; words that have many Consonants in the last syllable save one, have their accent on that syllable, as in etérnal; words ending in ire and ure, have their accent in that syllable; as inúre. A Noun hath its accent in the first, a Verb in the last syllable; as ábsent, to absènt. So Húmane, when it comes before a Sub∣stantive, as húmane-learning; but in the last syllable, when it comes aftér a Substantive, as Christ had two natures, the one divìne, the other humàne.
THE ENGLISH ACADEMY. The SECOND PART. Of ARITHMETICK. CHAP. I. Of single Arithmetick in whole Numbers. ARithmetick is the art of accompting by Numbers; it is either positive or negative. 2. Positive Arithmetick, is that which is wrought by certain and infallible Numbers at first propounded; and this is either single or comparative. 3. Single, which is wrought by Numbers, considered alone, without relation to one a∣nother, and this either in whole Numbers; or in Fractions.
4. The parts of single Arithmetick, are two, Notation and Numeration. 5. Notation hath two parts; the first shew∣eth the value of the Notes, by which all num∣bers are expressed; the second sheweth how to read the Numbers which are expressed by those notes. 6. The Notes or Characters, by which all Numbers are usually expressed are these, 1. one, 2. two, 3. three, 4. four, 5. five, 6. six, 7. seven, 8. eight, 9. nine, 0. nothing. 7. These notes are either significant Fi∣gures, or a Cypher. 8. The significant Figures, are the first nine, viz. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. The first whereof is more particularly termed an u∣nite or unitie, the rest are said to be compo∣sed of unities; so 2, is composed of two unites 3, of three unites, &c. 9. The Cypher, though it signifie nothing of it self, yet being set before or after any of the rest, increaseth or decreaseth their va∣lue, as shall be farther shewed hereafter. 10. The second part of Notation, is the reading of the Number expressed by these notes; and this is done by distinguising the Number given into Degrees and Periods. 11. The degrees are three, the first is that first place of a number towards the right hand, and is the place of Unity. The second is the second Figure towards the right hand, and this is the place of Tens. The third is the
third Figure towards the right hand, and is the place of Hundreds; so this Character 9, doth signifie Nine; these Notes 27, Twenty seven; and these 235, Two hundred thirty five. 12. A Period, is when a number consisting of more notes than three, hath each three notes thereof (beginning at the right hand) distin∣guished by Points or Commas: The several parts of the Numbers so distinguished, are called Periods; so the Number 38156249, being distinguished into Periods, will stand thus, 38.156.249. of which the first Period is read thus, Two hundred forty nine; the first Figure in the second Period is the place of Thousands, the second Tens of Thousands, and the third Hundreds of Thousands. In the third Period, the Figure is in the place of Mil∣lions, the second Tens of Millions, and so this Number is thus to be read. Thirty Eight Millions, One Hundred Fifty Six Thousand, Two Hundred Forty Nine. 13. Numeration, is that which by certain known Numbers propounded, doth discover another Number unknown. 14. Numeration hath four Species; Additi∣on, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division. 15. Addition, is that by which divers num∣bers are added together, to the end that the Sum or Total may be discovered. For which purpose, having placed the numbers as in the following Example, begin with those in the
Unity place first, then with these in the place of Tens then of Hundreds, and so forward, according as the Numbers given do consist of places, carrying the Tens, if there be any, to the place of the next greater rank, as here you see. 472961 341608 74325 6739 895633 3814527 4567890 6549238 816365 15748020 16. Subtraction is that, by which one num∣ber is taken out of another, so that the Resi∣due or remainder may be known. To per∣form this, you must rank your Numbers, and begin as in Addition; and in case any of the figures of the Number to be subtracted shall be greater than that, from whence the Sub∣traction is to be made, you must borrow one from the next place above it; as in the Ex∣amples following. 17. 895633 341695 553938 6549238 3814527 2734711 Multiplication, is that by which we Mul∣tiply two numbers, the one by the other, to the end, that their Product maybe discovered. 18. Multiplication hath three Parts, the Multiplicand, the Multiplicator, and the Pro∣duct.
19. Multiplication, is single or compound. 20. Single Multiplication, is when the Mul∣tiplicand, and Multiplicator, do each of them consist of one only Figure; as if 9 were given to be Multiplied by 6, 9 is the Multiplicand, 6 is the Multiplicator, and 54 is the Product. 21. Compound Multiplication, is when the Multiplicator and Multiplicand do either, or both consist of more Figures than one. 22. When the Product of any of the par∣ticular Figures shall exceed ten, place the Ex∣cess under the Line, and for every ten that it so exceeds, keep in mind one to be added to the next rank: Example; 76147, being to be Multiplied by 5, the Product is 180735, and 39634 being gi∣ven  to be Multiplied by 47, the work will stand as in the Mar∣gin, where the Product by 7 is 277438, and the Product thereof by 4, is 158536, and the Sum of these two Products is 1862798. 23. Division is that by which we discover how often one Number is contained in ano∣ther, that we may find out the Quotient. 24. Division hath three parts, the Dividend, the Divisor, and the Quotient; thus, if 35 were given to be Divided by 5, 35 is the Dividend, 5 the Divisor, and 7 will be found to be the Quotient.
25. In Division, make a crooked line at each end of your Dividend, that on the left hand serving for your Divisor, and that on the right for the Quotient; then see how oft your Divi∣sor is contained in the first Figure or Figures of your Dividend, and put the answer in the Quotient, then Multiply your Divisor by the Figure in the Quotient, and the Product sub∣tract from your Dividend, then draw down the next Figure of your Dividend, and ask how oft your Divisor may be found in the re∣mainer so increased, & the answer put in the Quotient, and proved as before, till there be no Figures left in your Dividend, and so oft as the Question is repeated, so many places must be in the Quotient, as in manifest by the following Example.
Let 1862798, be given to be divided by 47, I ask how often 47 may be had in 186? the Answer is 3, which I place in the Quotient, then I Multiply 47 by 3, the Product is 141, which being Subtracted from 186, the Re∣mainer is 45, to which draw down 2 the next Figure in the Dividend, and then it will be 452, now then I ask how often 47 may be had in 452? the which by the Table made by the continual Addition of 47 unto it self, is 9 times, therefore I place 9 in the Quotient, and the Product of 47 is 423, which being Subtracted from 452, the Remainer is 29, to which I draw 7 the next Figure, and then proceed as before, and so at last I find the Quotient to be 39634. 26. Multiplication and Division, prove one another, for if you Multiply the Quotient by the Divisor, the Product will be equal to the Dividend: so 39634, being Multiplied by 47, the Product is 1862798, and this Pro∣duct being Divided by 47, the Quotient is 39634.
CHAP. II. Of Single-Arithmetick in Fractions. SIngle Arithmetick in a whole Numbers, hath been shewed in the last Chapter; Single Arithmetick in Fractions now followeth. 2. A Fraction is a part of an Integer. 3. Single Arithmetick in Fractions, doth al∣so consist of two Parts, Notation, and Nume∣ration. 4. Notation of Fractions, is that which sheweth how the Fraction part of any Inte∣ger may be expressed in numbers; that is, an Integer on one whole thing being Divi∣ded into any Number of equal parts, Notati∣on sheweth how these parts may be expres∣sed; as if a Yard were Divided into four parts, and it were desired, that I should set down three of these parts; the usual manner is thus, draw a line, & set the Number of parts into which the Integer is supposed to be di∣vided, under the line, and the Number of parts you would express set above the line; thus to express three of four parts, I write 4 under a line, and 3 above it, thus, ¾; and so may you do with any other number pro∣pounded: Where note, that the number a∣bove the line is called the Numerator, and the number under the line the Denominator. 5. A Fraction is either Proper or Improper.
6. A Proper Fraction is that whole Nume∣rator is less than the Denominator, such as are these ¾ 6/12 25/100. 7. A Proper Fraction is either single or com∣pound. 8. A Single Fraction is that which consists of one Numerator and one Denominator, such as are ¾ 6/12 25/100. 9. A Compound Fraction (otherwise called a Fraction of a Fraction) is that which hath more Numerators and more Denominators than one, which kind of Fractions are disco∣verable by this word (of) which is interpo∣sed between their parts; as, ⅔ of ¾ is a Fra∣ction of a Fraction, or a Compound Fracti∣on, and expresseth two thirds of three fourths of an Integer. 10. The things expressed by broken num∣bers or Fractions, are principally the Parts or Fractions of Money, Weight, Measure, Time, and things accounted by the Dozen. 11. The least part or Fraction of Money used in England is a Farthing; and four Far∣things makes a Peny; twelve Pence, a Shil∣ling; and twenty Shillings, one Pound Ster∣ling. 12. The least Fraction of weight used in England, is a Grain; that is, the weight of a Grain of Wheat, well dryed and gather'd out of the middle of the Ear, whereof 32 make a peny weight, and twenty peny weight an ounce Troy, and twelve ounces a Pound; but
a peny weight being thus ascertained, it is now subdivided into twenty four Grains. 13. The weights used by Apothecaries are de∣rived from a Pound Troy, which is subdivi∣ded in this manner. lb A Pound Troy, is 12 Ounces. ℥ An Ounce, is 8 Drams. ʒ A Dram, is 3 Scruples. ℈ A Scruple, is 20 Grains. 14. Besides Troy weight, there is another kind of weight used in England, called Aver∣dupois weight, a Pound whereof is equal to fourteen Ounces, twelve peny weight Troy, the which is subdivided into 16 Ounces, each Ounce into 16 Drams, and each Dram into 4 Quarters. Of this weight 112 makes a Hundred. 15. The Measures used in England are of Capacity or Length. 16. The Measures of Capacity are Liquid or dry; Liquid Measures are according to this Table.
One pound of Wheat Troy weight— One Pint. Two Pints One Quart. Two Quarts One Pottle. Two Pottles One Gallon. Eight Gallons One Firkin Of Ale. Nine Gallons One Firkin Of Beer. Two Firkins One Kilderkin. Two Kilderkins One Barrel. Forty two Gallons One Tearce of wine Sixty three Gallons One Hogshead. Two Hogsheads One Pipe or But Two Pipes One Tun. 17. Dry Measures are those in which all kind of dry substances are Meted; as Grain, Sea-coal, Salt, and the like; their Table is this that followeth. One Pint Makes One Pint. Two Pints Makes One Quart. Two Quarts Makes One Pottle. Two Pottles Makes One Gallon. Two Gallons Makes One Peck. Four Pecks Makes 1 Bushel land measure. Five Pecks Makes 1 Bushel water measure. Eight Bushels Makes One Quarter. Four Quarters Makes One Chaldron. Five Quarters Makes One Wey.
18. Long Measures are expressed in the Table following. Three Barley-corns in length Make One Inch. Twelve Inches Make One Foot. Three Foot Make One Yard. Three Foot 9 Inches Make One Ell. Six Foot Make One Fathom. Five yards & a half Make One pole or pearch. Forty Poles Make One Furlong. Eight Furlongs Make One English Mile. Note that a Yard, as also an Ell is usually subdivided into four quarters, and each quarter into four Nails. 19. A Table of Time is this that followeth. Sixty Minutes Make One Hour. Twenty four hours Make One Day natural. Seven Days Make One Week. Four Weeks Make 1 month of 28 days Fifty two Weeks, one Day, and six hours make one Year. And these Fractions of Money, Weight, Measure, &c. are usually written under their several Denominations, instead of having their Denominators written under them thus; lib. shill. pence. farth. 23. 19. 08. 3.
And as their Notation is two-fold, so is their Numeration also, First, then I will shew you the Numeration of parts when written, as Integers, and then as vulgar fra∣ctions. 20. Numeration of parts when written, as Integers, is Accidental or Essential. 21. Accidental Numeration, otherwise cal∣led Reduction, is either descending or ascen∣ding. 22. Reduction Descending, is when a num∣ber of greater Denomination being given, it is required, to find how many of a lesser de∣nomination, are equal in value to that gi∣ven Number of the greater. And this is performed by Multiplication; as if it were required to Reduce 329 Shillings into Pence, if you Multiply 329 by 20, the number of shillings in a pound, the Product will be 6580 shillings, and 6580 shillings being mul∣tiplied by 12, the number of pence in a shil∣ling, the Product will be 78960 pence. 23. Reduction Ascending, is when a num∣ber of a lesser Denomination being given, it is required, to find how many of a greater Denomination, are equal to that given num∣ber of the lesser: And this is done by Divi∣sion; as if it were required to find how ma∣ny Pounds there were in 78960 pence; if 78960 pence be divided by 12, the number of pence in a shilling, the Quotient will be 6580 Shillings, and if 6580 shillings be divi∣ded
by 20, the number of shillings in a pound, the Quotient will be 329 Pounds, and so for any other. 24. Essential Numeration, doth consist of four Species, Addition, Subtraction, Multipli∣cation, and Division. 25. In Addition of Numbers of several Denominations, you must begin with the least first, and when the sum of any of the Denominations amounts to an Integer, add it to the next Denomination that is greater. Example. 26. In Subtraction of Numbers of several Denominations, when any of the parts of the greater Number are less than the parts of the lesser Number subscribed, Deduct the parts of the lesser Number from the parts of the greater, increased with an Integer, of the next superiour Denomination, and keeping one in mind, add to the next place of the number given to be Subtracted.
Example. 27. In Multiplication of numbers of several Denominations, you must first reduce the numbers given to their least Denominations and then Multiply them as hath been shewed in whole numbers, the Product divided by the square of the parts of an Integer, reduced to the least Denomination, shall in the Quo∣tient give the Product required. Example. Let the Product of 17 l. 19 s. 6 d. by 5 l. 13 s. 6 d. be required. 17 l. 19 s. 6 d. being reduced to make 4314 Pence. And 5 l. 13 s. 6 d. reduced do make 1362 Pence. The Multiplicand. The Multiplicator. The Product.
The number of pence in a pound are 240, and the square thereof is 57600, by which dividing 5875668 the Quotient; 102 lib. 00 shill. 01 peny. 3 farthings, and 4608/5760 is the Quotient sought. 28. In Division of numbers of several De∣nominations, first reduce your Divisor to its number of parts in the least Denomination, then Multiply your Dividend, by the square of the parts in an Integer reduced to the least Denomination; & if there be any parts annexed, to the Integers of the Dividend, they must be reduced to the highest Fracti∣on, that the square of the parts in an Inte∣ger reduced to its least denomination will bear, and added to the former Product, the whole being divided by your divisor redu∣ced, will give you the Quotient sought. Example. Let 102:00:01:3 4608/1760 be given to be divided by 5:13:6. First I reduce the divi∣sor given to its number of parts in the least denomination, and it makes 1362 pence, then I Multiply 102 the Integral part of my dividend, by 57600, the square of pence in a pound, the Product is 58752, and the Fra∣ction of my dividend 00:01:3 4608/5760 being reduced, is 468/57600, which being added to the former Product 58752, the sum is 5875668, for the dividend; which being divided by
1362, the Quotient is 4314 pence, that is 17 lib. 19 shill. 6 pence. 29. Numeration of Fractions, when written with their Numerators and Denominators, is also Accidental and Essential. 30. Accidental Numeration, otherwise called Reduction, is three-fold. 1. To Reduce one Fraction which is not already in its least terms, to a lesser denomi∣nation. To do this, divide the numerator and de∣nominator by their greatest common mea∣sure, the two Quotients shall be one of them, a new numerator, and the other a new de∣nominator of a Fraction equal to the Fra∣ction given, and in its least terms. Example 91/117 being given to be Reduced, the greatest common measure is 13, by which dividing 91, the Quotient is 7, for a new numerator, and dividing 117 by 13, the Quotient is 9 for a new denominator, and so 91/117 is reduced to 7/9. The greatest common measure between two numbers is found thus; divide the grea∣ter number by the less, and your divisor by the Remainer, if there be any, your last di∣visor is the common measure sought, as in the following Example.
2. To Reduce many Fractions of divers Denominations into one Denomination. To do this, Multiply each Numerator by all the Denominators except its own, the Products shall be the new Numerators, then Multiply all the Denominators together, and the Product shall be the common Deno∣minator sought. Example. ⅔ ⅘ 6/7 will be reduced to 70/105 84/105 90/105. 3 To Reduce any Fraction from one De∣nomination, to any other Denomination desired. And to do this Multiply the Nu∣merator given, by the Denominator requi∣red, & divide the Product by the Denomina∣tor given, the Quotient shall be the Numera∣tor desired. Example, let it be desired to Reduce 17/20 to a Fraction, whose Denominator shall be 100, first Multiply 17 by 100, the Product is 1700 which being divided by 20, the Quotient is
85, for the new Numerator desired. 31. Essential Numeration of Fractions hath four Species, Addition, Subduction, Multiplication and Division. 32. In Addition of Fractions, the Fracti∣ons given must be first Reduced to one De∣nomination, and then add the Numerators together, so have you the Sum of the Fra∣ction, so 2/9 and 5/9 make 7/9. 33. Subtraction of Fractions is thus, if of one Denomination, deduct the less from the greater, their difference is the remainer, so 2/9 taken from 7/9 rest 5/9. 34. Multiplication of Fractions, is thus, Multiply all the Numerators together, so is their Product a new Numerator, then Mul∣tiply all the Denominators together, and their Product is a new Denominator. Thus if 7/12 and ⅝ were to be Multiplied, the Product will be 35/96. 35. Division of Fractions is thus, Multi∣ply the Numerator of the dividend by the denominator of the divisor, the Product shall be a new Numerator; also Multiply the nu∣merator of the divisor, by the denominator of the dividend, so shall the Product be a new denominator, and this new Fraction is the quotient sought; so if 4/9 were to be di∣vided by 3/5, the Product will be 20/27. 36. When the denominator of a Fracti∣on is an Unite with Cyphers, the Fraction is more particularly called a Decimal; and
such Fractions may be expressed without their denominators as well as with them, thus, 5/10 may be written thus, 5. 37. When the Numerator doth not con∣sist of so many places, as the denominator hath Cyphers, fill up the void places of the Numerator with Cyphers, so, 5/100, 25/1000, are written thus, .05, and .025. 38. Numeration of Decimal-Fractions, is likewise two-fold, Accidental and Essential. 39. Accidental Numeration, otherwise called Reduction, is performed, by the third way of Reduction; shewed in the Twenty seventh Rule of this chapter. 40. Essential Numeration, hath in it the four usual Species, Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division. 41. Addition of Decimals is the same with Addition of whole Numbers, if a point or line be set between the Integers and the Parts, as in the following Examples. 2.00741 .74258 .96314 3.71313 23.06578 16.14365 32.76108 71.96151 42. Subduction of Decimals doth differ from Subduction in whole Numbers, but by a point to distinguish the whole number from the broken; as in the Example fol∣lowing.
23.07496 17.89637 7.17859 36.01436 17.83589 18.17847 43. Multiplication of Decimal Fractions, is the same with Multiplication in whole numbers, but when the work is finished, to distinguish the Integers from the Decimals, do thus; so many places of parts as are in both the numbers given, being separated by a point, the rest of the figures towards the left hand are Integers, and those towards the right are Decimal parts; as in these Exam∣ples. 44. Division of Decimal Fractions is the same with Division in whole numbers, but when the Work is finished, to distinguish the Fractional part from the Integers, ob∣serve this general Rule.
The first figure in your quotient will be always of the same degree or place with that Figure or Cypher in your dividend, which standeth over the Unites place in your divisor. For Example: 78925, being given to be divided by 32, the quotient will be 2466, & because the place of Unites in the divisor, doth stand under the place of seconds in the dividend, therefore the first figure in the quotient, will be in the place of seconds, and the first must be supplied with a Cypher, and then the quotient will be 0.02466. CHAP III. Of Comparative Arithmetick. THus much hath been said concerning Single Arithmetick, Comparative fol∣lows, which is wrought by Numbers, as they are considered to have relation to one ano∣ther. 2. This Relation consists either in quan∣tity or in quality. 3. Relation in quantity is the reference that the Numbers themselves have one to another; as when the comparison is made be∣tween 8 and 2, or 2 and 8; 7 and 3, or 3 and 7.
And here the Numbers propounded are always two, whereof the first is called the Antecedent, the other the Consequent. 4. Relation in quantity, consists either in the difference, or in the rate or reason found between the Numbers propounded; the one is found by Subtracting the less from the greater; so 6 is the difference between 8 and 2; but the other, to wit, the rate or reason, is found by dividing the greater by the less, and thus the rate between 8 and 2 is four-fold, because 2 is found four times in 8; Or the rate may be also found by di∣viding the less by the greater, or setting the Numbers given in manner of a Fraction, and thus the rate between 2 and 8 is 4 also, or 2/8 that is ¼. 5. This rate or reason of Numbers is ei∣ther equal or unequal; equal reason, is the relation that equal Numbers have one to another, as 5 to 5, 6 to 6. Unequal Rea∣son is the relation that Unequal Numbers have one to another, and this is either of the greater to the less, or of the less unto the greater. In the one the greater Number is the An∣tecedent, and the less the Consequent; and in the other the lesser Number is the Ante∣cedent, and the greater is the Consequent. 6. Relation in quality, (otherwise called Proportion) is the reference or respect that the reasons of Numbers have one to ano∣ther,
and therefore the Numbers must be more than two, or else three cannot be the comparing of reasons in the Plural Number. 7. Proportion is two-fold, Arithmetical and Geometrical. 8. Arithmetical Proportion, is when num∣bers differ according to equal reason; that is, have equal differences; as 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, or 3, 6, 9, 12, in the first rank the common dif∣ference is 2, and in the second 3. 9. Arithmetical Proportion, is either con∣tinued, or interrupted. 10. Arithmetical Proportion continued, is when divers numbers are linked together by a continued Progression of equal differ∣ence; and in such a Progression, the sum of the first and last Terms being Multiplied by half the number of the Terms, the Product will be the sum of all the Terms; as in this Progression, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, the sum of the first and last is 13, which be∣ing Multiplied by 6, half the number of the Terms the Product is 78, the sum of all the terms in that Progression. 11. Three Numbers being given in A∣rithmetical Proportion, the mean number be∣ing doubled is equal to the sum of the Ex∣treams; so 3, 6, 9, being given, the double of 6, the mean number is equal to the sum of 3 and 9, the two Extreams. 12. Arithmetical Proportion Interrupted, is when the Progression is discontinued,
as in these numbers, 2, 4, 8.10. 13. In Arithmetical Proportion continued, or discontinued, the sum of the Means is e∣qual to the sum of the Extreams, as in 3, 6, 9, 12, being given, the sum of 6 and 9 is e∣qual to the sum of 3 and 12; or 3, 6, 12, 15, being given, the sum of 6 and 12, is e∣qual to the sum of 3 and 15. 14. Geometrical Proportion is, when di∣vers numbers differ by the like reason; as, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, which differ one from ano∣ther by double reason; for as 1 is the half of 2, so 2 is the half of 4, 4 of 8, 8 of 16. 15. Geometrical Proportion is either con∣tinued or interrupted, Geometrical Proportion continued, is when divers numbers are lin∣ked together, by a continued Progression of the like reason; as 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, or 3, 6, 12, 24, 48. 16. In numbers Geometrically proporti∣onal, If you Multiply the last Term by the common rate by which they differ, and from the Product deduct the first Term, and di∣vide the Remainer by the former rate less by an Unite, the Quotient shall be the sum of all the Progressions; So 2, 6, 18, 54, 162, 486, 1458, being propounded the last term 1460, being multiplied by 3 the rate, the Product is 4374 out of which deducting 2 the first Term, the Remainer is 4372, which being divided by 2 the rate less one, the quotient 2186 is the sum of that Progression.
17. Three Proportionals being given, the square of the Mean is equal to the Pro∣duct of the Extreams; so 4, 8, 16, being given, the square of 8 is equal to four times 16. 18. Geometrical Proportion interrupted, is when the Progression of like reason is dis∣continued; as, 2, 4, 16, 32, where the Term between 4 and 16 is wanting, and therefore the rate between 4 and 16 is not the same that is between 2 and 4, or 16 and 32. 19. Four Proportional Numbers what∣soever being given, the Product of the two Means is equal to the Product of the two Extreams; so 2, 4, 16, 32, being propound∣ed, 4 times 16 is equal to 2 times 32, which is 64. CHAP IV. Of the Rule of Proportion, or Rule of Three. FRom the last Rule of the former Chap∣ter ariseth that precious Gem in Arith∣metick, the Rule of three, which for its ex∣cellency, deserves the name that is given to it, The Golden Rule.
2. The Golden Rule, is that by which cer∣tain numbers being given, another number Geometrically proportional to them may be found out. 3. The Golden Rule is either single or compound. 4. The single Rule, is when three terms or numbers are propounded, and a fourth in proportion to them is desired. 5. The Terms of the Rule of Three con∣sist of two Denominations; two of the Terms propounded have one Denominati∣on, the third propounded and fourth requi∣red, have another. 6. Of those two numbers given which are of one Denomination, that which moves the Question must possess the third place, the other number of the same Denominati∣on, must be put in the first place, and con∣sequently, the other known Term, which is of the same Denomination with the fourth required, must possess the second place. 7. The three Terms propounded being thus placed, consider whether your third doth require more or less; if it requires more, Multiply the middle number by the greater of the two Extreams, and divide the Product by the lesser, the Quotient is the fourth Number or Term desired. But if the third Term in the Question re∣quire less, Multiply the middle Term by the lesser of the two Extreams, and the Pro∣duct
Divide by the greater, the Quotient shall be the fourth Term desired; An Exam∣ple in each Case will sufficiently explain the Rule. If 7 Pound of Sugar cost 2 s. 7 d. What shall 28 Pound of Sugar cost? The Terms must stand thus, lb sugar. s. d. lb sugar. 7 2 7 28 Where it is plain, that 28 pound of Su∣gar must needs cost more than 7, therefore I Multiply 2 s. 7 d. or 31 pence, by 28, the Product 868 being Divided by 7, and the Quotient is 124 d. or 10 s. 4 d. 2. Example: If 7 Men will digg a Gar∣den in 31 Dayes, In how many Dayes will 28 Men digg the same Garden? Here the Terms must stand thus, Men. Dayes. Men. 7 31 28. And by the state of the Question it plain∣ly appears, that the third Term requireth less: therefore I Multiply 31, the middle Term, by 7, the lesser Extream, and the Product 217 being Divided by 28, the Quo∣tient 7 21/28 is the fourth Term desired.
CHAP. V. Of the Compound Rule of Three. THe Compound Rule of Three, is when more than three Terms are propoun∣ded. 2. Under the Compound Rule of Three is comprehended the Double Rule of Three, and divers Rules of plural proportion. 3. The Double Rule of Three, is when five Terms are propounded, and a sixth in pro∣portion to them is required. 4. In this Rule the five Terms given do consist of two parts; first a Supposition, and then a Demand; the Supposition is expres∣sed by three of the Terms propounded, and the demand by the other two. 5. And here the greatest difficulty is in placing of the Terms; for which observe amongst the Terms of Supposition, which of them hath the same Denomination with the Term required, reserve that for the se∣cond place, and write the other two Terms in the Supposition one above another in the first place; and lastly, the Terms of De∣mand one above another, likewise in the third place, in such sort, that the upper∣most may have the same denomination with the uppermost of those in the first place.
Example. If 6 Clerks can write 45 sheets of Paper in 5 Dayes; How many Clerks can write 300 sheets in 72 Dayes? Here the Questi∣on is concerning the number of Clerks , the 6 Clerks must therefore possess the second place, and the Dayes and Paper in the Sup∣position must be set in the first, one over the other, of which, if Paper be the uppermost in the other Terms, the Paper must be set over the Dayes in the third place, and then the Number in the Question will stand thus, 45 6 300 5   13 6. The Terms propounded being thus placed, the Question may be resolved by two Single Rules of Three in this manner. 1. As the uppermost Term of the first place is to the middle, so is the uppermost Term in the last place to a fourth Number. 2. As the lower Term of the first place is to that fourth Number, so is the lower Term of the last place to the Term requi∣red. But in both these Proportions, conside∣ration must be had to the Term required, namely, whether it must be more or less than the middle Term given.
In our present Question, the fourth term in the first proportion must be greater than the second; for it is plain, that more work will require more men; therefore I say, as 45 . 6 ∷ 300 . 40 Clerks. But in the second proportion, it is like∣wise plain, that the more time is given, the fewer persons are required; and therefore in this proportion, 5.40.13. I multiply the middle term by the first, and the pro∣duct 200 I divide by 13, the last, and the Quotient is 15 10/13. 2. Example: If 100 l. gain 6 l. in 12 months, what shall 276 l. gain in 18 months? In this Question the terms must be thus pla∣ced. 100 6 276 12   18 1. 100 . 6 ∷ 276 . 16 . 56. 2. 12 . 16 . 56 ∷ 18 . 24 . 84.
CHAP. VI. Of the Rule of Fellowship. THe Rules of plural proportion are those, by which we Resolved Questions that are discoverable by more Rules of Three than one, and cannot be performed by the double Rule of Three mentioned in the last chapter. Of these Rules there are divers kinds and varieties, according to the nature of the Question propounded; I will only mention one, and refer the rest to my larger treatise of this Subject. 2. The Rule of plural proportion that I mean to mention, is the Rule of Fellowship. 3. And the Rule of Fellowship is that by which in Accompts amongst divers Men, (their several stocks together) the whole Loss or Gain being propounded, the Loss or Gain of each particular man may be disco∣vered. 4. The Rule of Fellowship is either single or double. 5. The Single Rule of Fellowship is, when the stocks propounded are single numbers; As in this Example: A and B were Partners in an Adventure to Sea, A put in 25. l. B 56, and upon return of the Ship, they sold the
Fraight for 50 l. profit; the question is, What part of this 50 l. is due to A, and what to B? to resolve this and the like Que∣stions, the sum of the stocks must be the first term in the Rule of Three, the whole gain the second, and each particular stock the third; this done repeating the Rule of Three, as often as there are particular stocks in the Question, the fourth term pro∣duced by these several operations are the respective Gains or Losses of those particu∣lar stocks propounded; so in the present question, the Resolution will be as here you see. 6. The Double Rule of Fellowship is, when the stocks propounded are double numbers, that is, when each stock hath relation to a particular time. A, B, and C, hire a piece of Ground for 45 l. per Annum, in which A had 24 Oxen 32 days, B 12, for 48 days, C 16, for 24 days; now the question to be resolved is, What part of the Rent each person must pay? For this purpose you must first Multiply each particular stock by its respective time, and take the total of their Products for the first term, the Gain or Loss for the second, and every man's particular stock and time
for the third; this done repeating the Rule of Three so often as there are Products of the double Numbers; the fourth terms pro∣duced upon those several operations are the numbers sought. So then in the question propounded, the Product of 24 and 32 is 768; the Product of 12 and 48 is 576, and the Product of 16 and 24 is 384, the sum of these Products is 1728, which is the first term, 45 l. the Rent is the second, and each particular Product the third; By which three Operations the question is Resolved. FINIS.
THE ENGLISH ACADEMY. The THIRD PART. Of GEOMETRY. CHAP. I. Of the Definition and Division of Geometry. GEOMETRY is the Art of Measu∣ring well. 2. The Subject of Geometry is Magnitude, or continued Quantity, whose parts are joyned together by a common term or limit. 3. Magnitude is either a Line, or some∣thing made of a Line or Lines. 4. A Line is a Magnitude, consisting on∣ly of length, without either breadth or thick∣ness, the term or limit whereof is a Point.
5. A Point is an indivisible sign in Magni∣tude. A Point therefore is no quantity, but the beginning of all continued quantities, which are divisible in power infinitely. 6. A Line is either considered simply by it self, or else comparatively with another Line. 7. A Line considered simply of it self, is either Right or Oblique. 8. A Right line, is that which lyeth equal∣ly between his Points. 9. An Oblique line, is either circular or mixt. 10. A Periphery, or Circular Line, is that which is equally distant from the middle of the comprehended space, which middle is called the Centre, and the distance between that Centre and the Circumference, is cal∣led the Radius. 11. Lines compared to one another are or the same or different Species. 12. Lines compared together of the same Species, are either Parallel or Angular. 13. Parallel lines, are such as are equally distant in all places, and are either Right lined Parallels, or Circular. 14. Right lined Parallels, are such as being in one and the self same plane, and infinite∣ly produced on both sides, do never meet in any part. 15. A Circular Parallel is a Circle drawn within or without another Circle.
16. Angular lines are such as inclining, or bowing to one another, touch one another, but not in a direct line. 17. An Angle is either Right or Oblique. 18. A Right Angle, is that whose legs or sides are Perpendicular to one another. 19. An Oblique Angle, is that whose legs or sides do incline to one another upon one side more than upon another. 20. An Oblique Angle is either Acute, or Obtuse. 21. An Acute Oblique Angle, is that which is less than a Right. 22. An Obtuse Oblique Angle, is that which is greater than a Right Angle. 23. The Measure of an Angle, is the Arch of a Circle described upon the Angular Point, and intersected between the sides of the Angle sufficiently prolonged; but of this Measure there can be no certain know∣ledge, unless the quantity of that Arch be ex∣pressed in Numbers. 24. Every Circle therefore is supposed to be divided into 360 equal parts, called De∣grees, and every Degree into 60 Minutes, and every Minute into 60 Seconds, and so forward; others suppose every Degree to be subdivided into 10 parts, and every one of those into 10 more, and so forward, as far as you please. 25. A Semi-circle is the half of a whole Circle, and containeth 180 Degrees.
26. A Quadrant, or fourth part of a Cir∣cle, is 90 Degrees; and seeing that a Right Line falling Perpendiculary upon a Right Line, doth make the Angles on both sides e∣qual, and cutteth a Semi-circle into two e∣qual parts, the fourth part of a Circle, or 90 Degrees, must needs be the Measure of a Right Angle. 27. Thus are Lines compared with Lines of the same Species, the comparing of Lines of different Species, is the comparing of Right Lines with those that are Oblique or Circular. 28. And Right Lines, as they have refer∣ence to, or are compared with the circum∣ference of a Circle, are either such as are in∣scribed within it, or applyed to it. 29. A Right Line, inscribed in a Circle, either passeth through the Centre, as the Diameter and Radius, or is drawn besides the Centre, as Chords and Sines. 30. A Diameter, is a Right Line inscrib∣ed through the Centre of the Circle, divi∣ding the Circle into two equal parts. 31. The Radius of a Circle is the one half of the Diameter, or a Right Line drawn from the Centre to the Circumference; thus the Right Line GBD, in Fig. 1. is a Dia∣meter, GB, or BD, the Radius. 32. A Chord or Subtense, is an inscribed Right Line drawn through or besides the Centre bounded at both ends with the Cir∣cumference.
33. A Chord or Subtense, drawn through the Centre is the same with the Diameter. 34. A Chord or Subtense, drawn besides the Centre, is a Right Line bounded at both ends with the Circumference, but always less than the Diameter. 35. Sines are either Right or Versed. 36. A Right Sine is half the Chord of the Double Arch and it is either the whole Sine, and Sine of 90 Deg. or Sine less than the whole. 37. The whole Sine is equal to the Semi∣diameter or Radius of a Circle, as the right Line BE. 38. A Sine less than whole, is half the Chord of any Arch less than a Semi-circle; as CA is the sine of CD. 39. A Versed Sine, is a part of the Diame∣ter lying between the right sine and the cir∣cumference, as the Right Line AD, which is one part of the Diameter, is the versed sine of the Arch C D, and the right line AG, which is the other part of the Dia∣meter, is the versed sine of the Arch CEG. 40. A Right line applied to a Circle, is either a Tangent or Secant. 41. A Tangent, is a right line without but touching the Circle, drawn Perpendicular to the end of the Radius or Diameter, conti∣nued to the Secant. 42. A Secant, is a right line drawn from the Centre of the Circle, through the term
of an Arch, and continued to the Tengant; thus the right line FD, is the Tangent, and the right line BF, is the Secant of the Arch CD, or of the Arch CEG, the Comple∣ment thereof to a Semi-circle. 43. These Lines thus inscribed in, or ap∣plyed to a Circle, may to any limited Radi∣us be drawn or made upon a Rule of Wood, Brass, or other Metal; or, a Table may be made, expressing the length of these lines in numbers, answering to every Degree and part of a Degree in the Quadrant or Semi-circle; That is, the lines of Chords and Ver∣sed Sines may be made to any part of a Semi-circle, and the lines of Sines, Tangents and Secants, to any part of a Quadrant: The use of such Scales and Tables is such, that no Student in Geometrie can well be without them; here therefore I will lay down such Propositions as will sufficiently demonstrate the way of making these lines upon a Scale or Ruler, but as to the construction of the Tables by which the lengths of these lines are expressed in Numbers: I refer them to my Trigonometria Britannica, and other Books of the like nature.
Proposition I. Vpon a Right Line given, to erect a Perpen∣dicular, from any Point assigned. Let it be required to erect a Perpendicu∣lar to the line DG, from the Point B, in Fig. 2. take two equidistant Points, as D and G, open your Compasses to a convenient distance, and setting one Foot of your Com∣passes in B, draw the Arch EC, and keep∣ing your Compasses at the same distance, set one Foot in G, and with the other draw the Arch HIF, and through the Intersections of these two Arches draw a right line, as BL, which shall be perpendicular to the Point B. But if it were required to erect a Perpen∣dicular from the end of a line, do thus, your Compasses being opened to any convenient distance, set one Foot in the Point given, as at A, in the line AB, and the other at D, or where you please, and making D the Cen∣tre, draw the Arch CAE, and from the points C and D, draw the right line CDE, then draw the line AC, which shall be Per∣pendicular to the line AB, from the point A, as was required.
Proposition II. From a Point assigned without a Right Line given, to let fall a Perpendicular. Let the given line be DG, and let the point assigned be L, at the distance of LD draw the Arch DAGF, then setting one Foot of your Compasses in D, draw the Arch IK, and keeping your Compasses at the same distance, set one Foot in G, and with the o∣ther draw the Arch M, the right line LBD drawn through the Intersections of those two Arches shall be Perpendicular to DG, from the Point L, as was required. But if it were required to let fall a Per∣pendicular from the point E, upon the line AB, draw the line EDC at pleasure, which being bisected at D, upon D as a Centre at the distance of ED, draw the Arch EAC, so shall the line EA be perpendicular to AB, as was required. Proposition III. To Divide a Right Line given into any num∣ber of equal parts. Draw the line AC, and from the points A and C erect the Perpendiculars AE and XC, and at any distance of the Compasses,
set off as many equal parts as you please up∣on the Perpendiculars AE, and XC, and draw the Parallel lines EX, FV, GT, HS, KR, LQ, MP, and NO; and let it be re∣quired to divide the right line into three e∣qual parts, open your Compasses to the length of the line given, and setting one foot in A, where the other foot shall touch the third Parallel, make a mark which is at Z, draw the line AZ, so shall the line AZ be divided into three equal parts, as was desi∣red. And thus may that line be made, which is commonly called the Diagonal Scale. Proposition IV. How to divide a Circle into 120 Parts, and by consequence into 360. Draw the Diameter BC, and upon the point A, describe the Circle CDBL, then draw the Diameter DAN, at Right Angles, to the Diameter CAB. 2. The Semidiameter or Radius of a Cir∣cle will divide the Circle into 6 equal parts, and so is equal to the Chord of 60 degrees, AC, therefore being set from D to F, shall mark out the Arch DF, 60 degrees. 3. The side of a Pentagon of fifth part of a Circle, is 72 degrees; now then, if you bisect the Radius AC in the point E, and
make EG = ED; then shall DG = DM, the side of a Pentagon or Chord of 72 degrees, and FM the difference between DM, 72 and DF 60, that is the Chord of 12, which by bisection shall give the Chord of 6 and 3 degrees, and so the Circle may be divided into 120 parts, as was propounded. 4. A Circle being thus divided into 120 degrees, the Arches are so equal, that the third part of the Chord of 3 degrees will subdivide it into 36, without sensible error; and your Circle being thus divided into 360 parts, lines at every degree, or half degree, drawn parallel to the Diameter, shall consti∣tute the line of Chords, & half those Chords the line of sines; and the Segments of the Diameter, the line of versed sines, and as for the Tangents and Secants, a line touching the Circle drawn perpendicular to the end of the Diameter, and continued to the seve∣ral lines drawn from the Centre, through every degree of the Quadrant, shall consti∣tute the line of Tangents, and those lines drawn from the Center to the Tangents, shall constitute the line of Secants also. And thus may a Scale be made with the lines of Sines, Tangents, Secants, and equal parts.
CHAP. II. Of Right Lined Triangles. HItherto we have spoken of the first kind of Magnitude, that is, of Lines, as they are considered of themselves, or among themselves. 2. The second kind of Magnitude, is that which is made of Lines, that is a Fi∣gure. 3. A Figure is that which is every where bounded, whether it be with one only limit as a Circle; or with more, as a Triangle, Quadrangle, Pyramis, or Cube, &c. 4. The terms or limits of every Figure, are either Lines or Superficies. 5. A Figure, which is terminated by Lines is a Superficies. 6. A Figure, which is bounded or limited with several Superficies, is a Body or Solid. 7. A Superficies is a Magnitude, consisting of length and breadth, and is either right lined, curved lined, or composed of both. 8. A Right Lined Plane or Superficies, is that which is Terminated with right lines; and it is either a Triangle, or a Triangu∣late. 9. A Triangle, or the first right lined Fi∣gure, is that which is comprehended by
three right lines. It is distinguished from the sides, or from the Angles. 10. In respect of the sides, a Triangle is either Isopleuron, Isosceles, or Scalenum. An Isopleuron Triangle, is that which hath three equal sides. An Isosceles, which hath two equal sides. And a Scalenum, whose three sides are all unequal. 11. In respect of the Angles, a Triangle is either Right or Oblique. 12. A Right Angled Triangle, is that which hath one right line. 13. An Oblique Angled plane Triangle, is either Acute or Obtuse 14. An Oblique and Obtuse Angled plane Triangle, hath two Acute Angles and one Obtuse; an Acute angled Triangle hath all the three Angles Acute. 15. The second sort of right lined planes is called a Triangulate, or a Plane, composed of Triangles. 16. The sides of a Triangulate, are in number more by two than the Triangles, of which it is composed. 17. A Triangulate, is either a Quadrangle, or a Multangle. 18. A Quadrangle, is a Plane comprehen∣ded, by four right lines, and is either a Pa∣rallelogram or a Trapezium. 19. A Parallelogram, is a Quadrangle, whose opposite sides are Parallel or Equidi∣stant, and it is either Right Angled or O∣blique.
20. A Right Angled Parallelogram, is that which hath every Angle Right; and it is ei∣ther a Square or an Oblong. 21. A Square is a Right Angled Parallelo∣gram, whose four sides are equal, and the Angles Right. 22. An Oblong, is a Right Angled Paral∣lelogram, whose Angles are all right, but the sides unequal. 23. An Oblique angled Parallelogram, is that whose Angles are all Oblique, and is either a Rhombus, or a Rhomboides. 24. A Rhombus, is an Oblique Angled Pa∣rallelogram, of equal sides. 25. A Rhomboides, is an Oblique angled Parallelogram of unequal sides. 26. A Trapezium, is a Quadrangle, but not a Parallelogram, and it is either Right angled, or Oblique. 27. A Right Angled Trapezium, hath two opposite sides, parallel, but unequal, and the sides between them perpendicular. 28. An Oblique Angled Trapezium, is a Quadrangle, but not a Parallelogram, hav∣ing at least two Angles thereof Oblique, and none of the lines Parallel. 29. A Right angled Multangled Plane, is that which is comprehended by more than four lines. 30. A Multangled Right lined Plane, or Polygon, is either Ordinate and Regular, or Inordinate and irregular.
31. Ordinate and Regulate Polygons, are such as are contained by equal sides and an∣gles, as a Pentagon, Hexagon, &c. 32. Inordinate or Irregular Polygons, are such as are contained by unequal sides and angles. 32. Having thus shewed what a right lin∣ed Figure is, with the several sorts of them, we will now shew, how they may be measur∣ed, both in respect of the lines by which they are bounded, and also of their Area or Superficial Content. 33. And first we will shew how the lines, and angles of all plane Figures, especially Triangles, may be measured, as being the first and chiefest of them, and into which all other may be reduced. 34. The sides of all plane Triangles, and other plane Figures, are to be Measured by the scale or line of equal Parts. 35. The Angles may be measured by the lins of Sines, Tangents, or Secants, as well as by the line of chords; but here it shall suffice to shew how any Angle may be pro∣tracted, or being protracted, be Measured by the line of Chords only.
Proposition I. How to protract or lay down an Angle to any quantity or number of Degrees proposed. Draw a line at pleasure at AB, then o∣pen your Compasses to the number of 60 de∣grees in your line of Chords, and setting one of that extent in B, with the other describe the Arch CD, and from the point B, let it be required to make an Angle of 40 degrees; open your Compasses to that extent in the line of Choads, and setting one Foot in D, with the other make a mark as at E, and draw the line EB, so shall the Angle ABE contain 40 degrees, as was required. Proposition II. How to find the quantity of any Angle alrea∣dy protracted. Let the quantity of the Angle ABE, be required; open your Compasses in the line of Chords, from the beginning thereof to 60 degrees, and setting one foot thereof in the point B, with the other describe the Arch DE, then take in your Compasses the distance between E and D, and applying that extent to the line of Chords, it will shew you the number of degrees contained
in that Angle, which in our Example will be found to be 40 degrees. These things premised, we will now shew you how all plane Triangles may be measu∣red, in respect of their Sides and Angles, both by the Scale, and also by the Tables of Sines and Tangents. CHAP. III. Of the Solution or Mensuration of plane Triangles. IN the Solution of plane Triangles, the an∣gles only being given, the sides cannot be found, but the reason of the sides only; it is therefore necessary, that one of the sides be known. 2. In all plane Triangles, the three angles are equal to two Right: two Angles therefore being given, the third is also gi∣ven; and one of them being given, the sum of the other two is also given. 3. In a Right angled plane Triangle, one of the Acute Angles being given, the other is also given, it being the Complement of the other to a Quadrant or 90 degrees. 4. In a Right Angled plane Triangle, there are seven Cases, whose Solution shall be shewed in the Problems following.
5. The sides comprehending the Right angle we call the legs, and the side subtend∣ing the Right angle, we call the Hypothenuse. Problem I. The Legs given, to find an Angle and the Hipothenuse. In the right angled plane Triangle ABC, let there be given the legs. AB 512. To find Hypot. BC. AC 384. To find Angl. B and C. Draw a line at pleasure, as AB, and upon the point A, erect the perpendicular AC, and by help of your Scale of equal parts, set off from A to B, 512, and also from A to C, 384, and draw the line BC, for the Hy∣pothenuse, which being Measured by the scale of equal Parts, will be found to be 640. and by the line of Chords, the angle at B 36.87, whose complement is the angle ACB, 53.13. By the Tables, the Proportions are, 1. A . AC ∷ Radius . tang. B. 2. s . AC ∷ Radius . BC.
Problem II. The Angles and one Leg given to find the Hy∣pothenuse and the other Leg. Draw a line at pleasure, as AB, and at Right angles the point A erect the perpen∣dicular AC, and by your scale of equal parts set off from A to B 512, and upon the point B lay down the angle ABC, 36.87. and draw the line BE, till it cut the perpendi∣cular AC, then measure the lines BC and AC, by the scale of equal parts, so shall the one, to wit, BC, be the Hypothenuse, and AC, the other leg inquired. By the Tables, the Proportions are, 3. Rad. . AB ∷ 4 B . AC. 4. Sine C . AB ∷ Rad. . BC. Problem III. The Hypothenuse and Oblique Angles given, to find the Legs. Draw a line at pleasure, as AB, and upon the point B protract one of the angles gi∣ven, suppose the lesser ABC, 36.87. and
draw the line BC, & by your scale of equal parts, number the given Hypothenuse from B to C 640. and from the point C to the line AB, let fall the Perpendicular AC, then is BA one, and CA, the other leg inquired. By the Tables, the Proportion is, 5. Rad. . BC ∷ sB. AC. Problem IV. The Hypothenuse and one Leg given, to find the Angles and the other Leg. Draw a line at pleasure, as AB, and by your scale of equal parts, number from B to A, the quantity of the given leg AB, 512. then upon the point A erect the Perpendicu∣lar AC, and opening your Compasses to the extent of your Hypothenuse BC 640, set one Foot in B, and move the other, till it touch the Perpendicular AC, and there draw BC, so shall AC be the leg inquired, and either Angle may be found by the line of Chords.
By the Tables, the Proportions are, 6. BC . Rad. ∷ AB . Sine C. 7. Rad. . BC ∷ Sine B . AC. 6. Hitherto we have spoken of Right angled plane Triangles, the Problems fol∣lowing concern such as are Oblique. Problem V. The angles in an Oblique angled plane triangle one side given, to find the other sides. In the Oblique angled plane Triangle BCD, let there be given the side CB 632, and the Angles DCB 11.07. D. 26.37. Draw the line CB at pleasure, and by your scale set off from C to B 632, and up∣on those points protract the given Angles DCB 11.07 CBD. 142.56, and draw the lines CD and BD, till they intersect one a∣nother, then shall the one side be CD 865, and the other DB 273. By the Tables, the Proportion is, 1. Sine BDC . BC ∷ sDCB . DB.
Problem VI. Two sides of an Angle opposite to one of them being given, to find the other Angles and the third side, if it be known whether the Angle op∣posite to the other given side be Acute or Obtuse. In the Oblique angled plane Triangle BCD, let there be given, The Sides CB 632 Ang. D. 26.37. The Sides CD 865 Ang. D. 26.37. Draw the line CD at pleasure, and by your scale set off from C to D, 865, and up∣on the point D protract the Angle CDB 26.37 and draw the line DB, then open your Compasses to the length of the other side CB 632, and setting one foot in C, turn the other about till it touch the line DB, which will be in two places, in the point B or point nearest to D, if the angle opposite to the side CB be Obtuse, but in the point E, or point farthest from D if Acute; accor∣ding therefore to the Species of that Angle, you must draw either the line CB or CE, and then you may measure the other angles and the third side, as hath been shewed. By the Tables, the Proportion is, 2. CB . Sine D ∷ CD . Sine B. 3. Sine D . CB ∷ Sine C . BD.
Problem VII. Two Sides with the Angle comprehended be∣ing given, to find the other Angles, and the third Side. In the Oblique angled plain Triangle BCD, let there be given, The Sides DC 865 Angle C. 11.07. The Sides BC 632 Angle C. 11.07. Draw a line at pleasure, as DC 865, and by your Scale set off from C to D, 865, then protract the Angle at C 11.07, and draw the line BC, and by your Scale set off from C to B 632, and draw the line BD, and so have you constituted the Triangle BDC, in which you measure the Angles and the third side, as hath been shewed; but to resolve this Problem by the Tables, it is somewhat more troublesome. 1. To find the Angles, the proportion is, . 2. To find the third Side. Sine D . BC ∷ Sine C . BD.
Problem VIII. The three sides given to find an Angle. Let the given sides be DC 865. BC 632. and DB 273. Draw a line at pleasure, as DC, and by your Scale set off from C to D 865, then o∣pen your Compasses to the extent of either of the other sides, and setting one foot of your Compasses in C, with the other draw an Occult arch, then open your Compasses to the extent of your third side, and setting one foot in D, with the other foot describe another Arch cutting the former in the point B, then will the Lines BC and DB, constitute the Triangle, whose Angles may be measured, as hath been already shewed. To resolve this Problem by numbers, the Proportions are for the Segments of the Base. As the base is to the sum of the other sides, so is the difference of those sides to the dif∣ference of the Segments of the Base; which being subtracted from the Base, half the re∣mainer will shew where the perpendicular must fall, suppose at F, and constitute the two Right angled Trianges BDF, and FDC, in which we have given the Hypo∣thenuses BD and DC, and the Legs BF and CF, and therefore we may find the
Angles of those Triangles, as hath been shewed in the fourth Problem. Problem IX. To find the Superficial content of Right lined Figures. Having shewed the Mensuration of Trian∣gular planes in respect of their sides and Angles, we will now shew how the Area or Superficial content of them, and any other plane Figures may be found: And because all many-sided Figures may be best Measu∣red by reducing them first into Right an∣gled Triangles, Quadrangles, or Trapezias, we will first shew how the Area or Superfi∣cial content of these Figures may be readily found; and first of a Right or Oblique an∣gled plane Triangle. 2. To Measure the Right angled plane Triangle BDF, in Fig. 7. Multiply BF by FD, half the Product shall be the content. 3. To Measure the Oblique angled plane Triangle BDC, let fall the Perpendicular DF, then Multiply BC by DF, half the Product shall be the content. 4. To find the Area or Superficial con∣tent of any Oblique angular Trapezium, convert it into two Oblique angled Trian∣gles, by a Diagonal, as the line BD in the Trapezium ABCD, then turn the Oblique
angled Triangles into Right, by letting fall the Perpendiculars AE and CF, then Mul∣tiply BD by the sum of AE and CF, half the Product shall be the content. In like manner may any other Irregular Multangle be also measured by turning it into Trian∣gles and Trapeziums, and computing them severally, and adding all their contents to∣gether. Vide A. Problem I. The Diameter of a Circle being given, to find the Circumference. Vide B. The Circumference of a Circle whose di∣ameter is 1, is 3.14159 and therefore, As 1 is to 3.14159, so is any other Dia∣meter, to the Circumference answering that Diameter. Problem II. The Diameter of a Circle being given, to find the Superficial content. Archimedes hath Demonstrated, that the Area of a Circle is equal to the content of a Right angled plane Triangle, whose Legs
comprehending the Right angle, are one of them equal to the Semidiameter, and the o∣ther to the Circumference of a Circle. And therefore the Area or Superficial content of a Circle may be found, by Multiplying half the Circumference by half the Diameter, or the whole Diameter by the fourth part of the Circumference, they taking the Diame∣ter of a Circle to be one, and the Circum∣ference 3.14159, the Superficial content of such a Circle will be found to be 07853975. And therefore, As 1 is to 78539, so is the Square of any other Diameter to the Super∣ficial content required. Problem III. The Diameter of a Circle being given, to find the side of a square which may be inscribed within the same Circle. The Chord or Subtense of the fourth of a Circle, whose Diameter is 1, is 7071067; therefore, as one, to 7071067, so is the Dia∣meter of any other Circle, to the Side required.
Problem IV. The Circumference of a Circle being given, to find the Diameter. By the Diameter to find the Circumfe∣rence, the proportion by the tenth Problem is; As 1 to 3.14159, so the Diameter to the Circumference, and therefore putting the Circumference of a Circle to be 1. As 3.14159 . 1 ∷ 1. 318308. And therefore as 1 to 318308, so is any other Circumference, to the Diameter sought. Problem V. The Circumference of a Circle being given, to find the Superficial content. As the Square of the Circumference of a Circle given, is to the Superficial content of that Circle, so is the Square of the Circum∣ference of any other Circle, to the Superfi∣cial content of that other Circle. And in a Circle whose Diameter is 1, the Circumference is 3.14159, and the Area 7853975, and supposing an Unite to be the Circumference of a Circle, it is, as the square of 3.14159 . 7853975 ∷ 1 . 0079578, and therefore, As 1 . 0.079578, so is the
square of any other Circumference, to the Area desired. Problem VI. The Circumference of a Circle being given, to find the side of a square which may be inscribed within the same Circle. As the Circumference of a Circle whose Diameter is 1, viz. 3.14159, is to 707107, the side of the inscribed square of that Cir∣cle, so is the Circumference of any other Circle, to the side inquired; and putting the Circumference to be Unity, it is, as 3.14159 . 707107 ∷ 1 . 225078, there∣fore, As 1 to 225078, so is the Circumference given, to the side inquired. Problem VII. The superficial content of a Circle being gi∣ven to find the Diameter. This is the Converse of the 11. Problem, the Diameter given, to find the Content, for which the Proportion is; as 1 to 7853975, so is the square of the diameter, to the content: and therefore we must say; as 7853975 is to 1 so 1 to 1.27324; and hence, as 1 to 1.27324, so is the Area, to the Square of the Diameter.
Problem VIII. The Superficial content of a Circle being gi∣ven, to find the Circumference. This is the Converse of the 14. Problem, the Circumference given, to find the Content. As 1 to 079578, so Circumference square, to the Content: And therefore, As 079578 . 1 ∷ 1 . 12.5664, and by consequence, As 1 to 12.5664, so the Area, to the Square of the Circumference. Vide C. Problem IX. The Axis or Diameter of a Sphere being gi∣ven, to find the Superficial Content. As the square of the Diameter of a Circle, which suppose 1, is to 3.14159 the Area, so is the square of the Axis given, to the Area that is required.
CHAP. IV. Of Bodies or Solids. AFter the description of lines and planes, the Doctrine of Bodies is to be consi∣dered. 2. A Solid or Body, is that which hath Length, Breadth and Thickness, whose bounds or limits are Superficies. 3. A Solid is either Plane or Gibbous. 4. A Plane Solid, is that which is compre∣hended of Plane Superfices, and is either a Pyramide or Pyramidate. 5. A Pyramide, is a solid Figure, which is contained by Planes, set upon one Plane or Base, and meeting in one point. 6. A Pyramidate, is a solid Figure, com∣posed of Pyramides, and is either a Prisme or a mixt Polyhedron. 7. A Prisme, is a Pyramidate or solid Fi∣gure, by Planes, of which these two which are opposite, are equal, like, and parallel and all the other Planes are parallelograms. 8. A Prisme, is either a Pentahedron, a Hexahedron, or a Polyhedron. 9. A Pentahedron Prisme, is that, which comprehended of five sides, and the Base Triangle.
10. An Hexahedren Prisme, is that which is comprehended of six sides, and the Base a Quadrangle. 11. An Hexahedron Prisme, is either a Parallelipipedon, or a Trapezium. 12. A Parallelipipedon, is that whose sides or opposite planes are parallelograms. 13. A Prisme, called otherwise a Trapezi∣um, is that solid, whose opposite planes or sides are neither parallel nor equal. 14. A Parallelipipedon, is either Right an∣gled or Oblique. 15. A Right angled Parallelipipedon, is that which is comprehended of right angled sides and it is either a Cube or an Oblong. 16. A Cube, is a Right angled parallelipi∣pedon of equal sides. 17. An Oblong, is a right angled paralleli∣pipedon of unequal sides. 18. An Oblique angled Parallelipipedon, is that which is comprehended of oblique sides 19. A Polyhedron, is that which is compre∣hended of more than five sides, and the Base a Multangle. 20. A mixt Polyhedron, is that whose Ver∣tex is in the Centre, and the several sides exposed to view, and of this sort, there are only three; the Octahedron, the Icosohedron, and the Dodecahedron. 21. An Octahedron, is a solid Figure, which is contained by eight Equal and Equilateral Triangles.
22. An Icosohedron, is a solid Figure, which is contained by twenty Equal and Equilate∣ral Triangles. 23. A Dodecahedron, is a solid Figure, which is contained by twelve Pentagons, E∣quilateral and Equiangled. 24. A Gibbous solid, is that which is com∣prehended of Gibbous Superficies, and it is either a Sphere or Various. 25. A Sphere, is a Gibbous body, abso∣lutely Round and Globular. 26. A Various Gibbous Body, is that which is comprehended by various superficies and a circular base; and is either a Cone, or a Cylinder. 27. A Cone, is a Pyramidical Body, whose Base is a Circle. 28. A Cylinder, is a solid Body of equal thickness, having a Circle for its Base. The solid content of these several Bodies may be measured by the Problems following. Problem I. The Base and Altitude of a Pyramide or Cone given, to find the Solid Content. Multiply the Altitude by a third part of the Base, or the whole Base by a third part of the Altitude, the Product shall be the so∣lid Content required.
Problem II. The Base of a Prisme or Cylinder being gi∣ven, to find the sold content. Multiply the Base of the Prisme or Cylin∣der given, by the Altitude, the Product shall be the solid content. Problem III. In a Piece or Frustum of a Pyramide, Cone or other irregular Solid, both the bases being gi∣ven, to find the content. If the Aggregate of both the Bases of the Frustum, and of the mean Proportional be∣tween them, be drawn into the Altitude of the Frustum, the third part of the Product shall be equal to the solid content required. Problem IV. The Axis of a Sphere being given, to find the solid content. A Sphere (as Archimedes hath shewed) is equal to two thirds of a Cylinder circum∣scribing it; now then, such a Cylinder be∣ing made; by the Area of a Circle multi∣plyed by the Diameter; and therefore the
Area of a Circle being multiplied by two thirds of the Diameter, the Product shall be the solid content of a Sphere. The Area of a Circle whose Diameter is 1, is 7853975, which being multiplied by 666666, the two thirds of the Diameter, the Product 523598 is the solid content of such a Sphere; therefore, As 1 to 523598, so is the Cube of any Ax∣is given, to the solid content required. FINIS.
THE ENGLISH ACADEMY: The FOVRTH PART. Of MUSICK. CHAP. I. Of SINGING. MVSICK is the Art of modulating Notes in Voice or Instrument. 2. It doth consist in Singing or Setting. 3. In Singing there are five things to be considered: 1. The Number of the Notes. 2. Their Names. 3. Their Tunes. 4. Their Times. And 5. Their Adjuncts. 4. The number of Musical Notes are three times seven, or twenty one, that is from the lowest Note of a Man's Base, to the high∣est of a Boy's Treble, we usually reckon twenty one Notes; though there are some
Bases that reach below, and some Trebles that arise above this ordinary compass. The number of Musical Notes is there∣fore divided by Septenaries, because there are in Nature, but seven distinct sounds ex∣prest in Musick, by seven distinct Notes, in the several Cliffs or Cleaves of the Scale; for the eighth & fifteenth have the same sound or tune, and therefore the name and cliff of the first; the 9th and 16th of the second; the 10th and 17th of the third; the 11th and 18th of the fourth; the 12th and 19th of the fifth; the 13th and 20th, of the sixth; the 14th and 21th, of the seventh. 6. These thrice seven Notes are descern∣ed by their places. A place is either a Rule or space, and therefore in eleven rules with their spaces, is comprehended the whole scale. 7. At the beginning of each rule and space is placed one of the first seven Letters in the Alphabet, and these Letters are thrice re∣peated one above another, the letter G be∣ing put upon the first or lowest place of each sepentary being the first letter in the word Greece, and in the first sepentary, retained the Name and Form of the Greek Gamma, in remembrance, that the Art of Musick, as other learned Arts came to us from that seat of the Muses. 8. By these seven letters of the Alphabet, otherwise called seven cliffs or cleaves, the
scale is divided into three several parts of Musick; the first and lowest is called the base; the 2d. or middle part, the Mean; the third or highest part, the Treble. As for the Notes, which do exceed this compass, ei∣ther in the base or treble, they are signed with double letters in the same manner, that the ordinary Notes are with single. 9. The second thing to be considered in Singing, is the Name by which each of these Notes is called. 10. And for these seven notes, signed by the first seven letters in the Alphabet, there are but six several names invented to help the lear∣ner in the tuning of them; ut, re, Mi, fa, sol, la, and for the seventh note, because it is but half a tone above la, as the fourth is above Mi, (whereas the rest are all whole tone) it is fitly called by the same name with the fourth, and so the next will be an eight, or Diapason to the first, and consequently placed in the same let∣ter or cliff, and called by the same name. And thus they were wont to be placed in the scale, in which the first name ut being placed upon the same line with the Greek Gamma, hath caused the whole scale to be called the Gamut; but modern Musicians in these latter times, have rejected the names of ut and re, as finding the other four to be sufficient for the expressing of the several sounds, and less bur∣thensome to the Memories of Practisioners. 11. This scale or Gamut then is divided into
four Columns. In the first you have the Al∣phabetical letters or cliffs, the other three shew the names of the notes, ascending and de∣scending, according to their several names & keys▪ In the second column is set the names of the notes as they be called, where is B duralis, or B sharp, as having no flat in B mi, and then your notes are called as they are set there on the rules and spaces ascending. In the third Column is B proper, or B na∣turalis, which hath a B flat in B mi only, which is put at the beginning of the line with the Cliff, and there you have also the names as they are called on Rule and Space. In the fourth Column is B fa, or B molla∣ris, having two B flats, the one in B mi, the other in E la mi, placed as the other; by serving of which you have a certain rule for the Names of the Notes in any part. 12. In these three columns observe this for a ge∣neral rule, that what name any note hath, the same name properly hath his eight above or below. 13. Although the whole ordinary scale of Musick doth contain three septenaries of lines and spaces; yet when any of the parts which it is divided into, shall come to be Prick'd out by it self in Songs or Lessons, five Lines is only usual, for one of those Parts as being sufficient to contain the compass of notes thereunto belonging: And if there be any Notes that extend higher or lower, it is usual to add a Line in that place with a Pen.
THE GAM=VT OR SCALE OF MUSIC The Treble or highest Keyes aa la mi re la la mi gg sol re vt sol sol la ff fa vt fa fa sol E la la mi ♭ fa D la sol sol la la C sol fa fa sol sol B fa ♯ mi mi ♭ fa ♭ fa A la mi re la la mi G sol re vt {G-clef} cliffe {G-clef} sol {G-clef} la The Meane or middle Keyes G sol re vt {G-clef} cliffe {G-clef} sol {G-clef} la ff fa vt fa fa sol E mi la mi ♭ fa D la sol re sol la la C Sol fa vt {C-clef} cliffe fa {C-clef} Sol {C-clef} Sol B fa ♯ mi mi ♭ fa ♭ fa A     la mi sol re vt sol sol la F fa vt {F-clef} Cliffe fa fa {F-clef} sol The Basse or lowest Keyes F fa vt {F-clef} Cliffe fa fa {F-clef} sol E la mi la mi ♭ fa D sol re sol la la C fa vt fa sol sol B mi mi ♭ fa ♭ la A re la la mi G Γamvt sol sol la FF fa vt fa fa sol EE la mi la mi fa DD sol re sol la la CC fa vt fa B Duralis 1 sol B Naturalis 2 Sol B Mollaris 3
14. Though the seven Letters set at the beginning of each Rule and Space, are se∣ven Cleaves, yet four of them are only usual: The first is called the F fa ut Cleave or Cliff, thus marked {F-clef} this is proper to the Base or lowest Part, and is set upon the fourth line, at the beginning of Songs or Lessons. The second is the C sol fa ut, which is proper to the middle or inner parts, and is thus mar∣ked. {C-clef}. The third is the G sol re ut Cleave or Cliff, which is only proper to the Treble or highest, and is signed thus, {G-clef} on the second line of the Songs or Lessons; and these are called the three signed Cliffs. The fourth is the B Cliff, which is proper to all Parts, as being of two natures and pro∣perties; that is to say, Flat and Sharp, and doth only serve for the Flatting and Sharp∣ing of Notes; it is called by two Names, and signed by two Marks, the one is B fa, or B flat, and is known on Rule or Space by this mark, (♭), The other is called B mi or B sharp, and is known by this mark ♯ 15. Concerning this fourth Cliff, you are to observe: 1. That the B fa, or B flat doth alter both the Name and Property of the Notes before which it is placed; changing mi into fa, and making that Note to which he is joyned, a Semi-tone, or half a note low∣er. 2. That the B mi or B sharp alters the pro∣perty of the Notes before which he is pla∣ced, but not the Name; for he is usually pla∣ced
either before fa or sol, and they retain their name still, but their sound is raised half a Tone or Sound higher. Lastly, note, that these two B Cliffs are placed not only at the beginning of the Lines with the other Cliff, but is usually put to several Notes in the middle of any Song or Lesson, for the flatting and sharping of Notes, as the Har∣mony of the Musick doth require. 16. Of these four Notes now in use, Mi is the principle or master Note, for that be∣ing found, the rest are known by this dire∣ction; after Mi, sing fa sol la, twice upward and la sol fa, twice downward, and so you come to Mi again in the same Cliff both wayes. 17. This Note Mi, hath his being in four several places, but he is but in one of them at a time. Its proper place is in B mi, as in the second Column of the Gamut; but if a B fa, or B flat, be in its place, then he is in E la mi, as in the third Column of the Gamut, which is its second place. But if a B flat be placed there also, then its in A la mi re, which is its third place. If a B flat come there also, then it is remov'd into its fourth place, which is D la sol re, according to these Examples. 1. Example. Mi in B mi.Sol la mi fa sol la fa sol.
II. Example. Mi in E la.Sol la fa sol la mi fa sol. III. Example. Mi in Ala mi re.La mi fa sol la fa sol la. IV. Example. Mi in D la sol.La fa so la mi fa sol la.
CHAP. II. Of the Tunes of Notes. THe next thing to be considered in Sing∣ing, is the Tunes of Notes, which can∣not be declared by Precept, but must be lear∣ned either by the lively Voice of the Tea∣cher, or by some Instrument rightly Tuned. Only observe that from mi to fa, and so from la to fa, is but half a Tone; but between a∣ny other two Notes is a whole Tone, as from fa to sol, or sol to la. And in the first guiding of the Voice, it will much help, if at the first Tuning, you sound by degrees all these Notes, as sol la mi, and at the second Tuning, leave out la the middle Note: this will not only help you to Tune a Third, as from sol to mi, but it will also help you in the raising of Fourths and Fifths, &c. Of which there are some Examples in the plain Songs following. First. Sol la mi fa sol la fa sol sol fa la sol fa mi la sol. Second. Sol mi la fa mi sol fa la la fa sol mi fa la mi sol la so
Third. Sol la mi sol mi sol la mi fa sol fa sol la mi fa sol sol sol sol la mi fa sol la sol la sol la mi fa sol la fa sol fa sol la mi fa sol la fa sol sol sol sol fa la sol la sol fa la sol sol sol sol fa la sol fa sol fa sol fa la sol fa mi sol mi sol fa la sol fa mi la sol la sol fa la sol fa mi la sol sol sol fa sol la sol sol sol fa sol mi sol la sol.
CHAP. III. Of the Time of Notes. THe Notes in Musick have two Names, one for Tune, the other for Time or Pro∣portion. The Names of Notes in reference to their Tunes, are, as hath been said, these four, Sol La Mi Fa; And their Names in Proportion of Time, are Eight; A Large, a Long, a Breve, a Semi-breve, a Minum, a Crotchet, a Quaver, a Semi quaver. The four first are of Augmentation, or Increase; the four latter are of Diminuti∣on or Decrease, and are thus proportioned. The Large being the first of Augmentation, and longest in Sound; the Semi-breve is the last of Augmentation, and the shortest in Sound, and in Time is called the Master-Note, being of one Measure by himself, all the other Notes are reckoned by his value, both in Augmentation and Diminution. In Augmentation, the Large is Eight Se∣mi-breves, the Long four, the Breve two, the Semi-breve is one Time or Note. In Diminution, the latter four do decrease in this proportion; two Minums make a Semi-breve, two Crotchets make a Minum, two Quavers make a Crotchet, and two Se∣mi-quavers make a Quaver. As in the Ta∣ble following may be seen.
Notes of Augmentation. {large note} — A Large. {long note} {long note} — A Long. {breve note} {breve note} {breve note} {breve note} — A Breve. {semibreve note} {semibreve note} {semibreve note} {semibreve note} {semibreve note} {semibreve note} {semibreve note} {semibreve note} — A Semi-breve. Notes of Diminution. {semibreve note} — A Semibreve. {minim note} {minim note} — A Minum. {crotchet note} {crotchet note} {crotchet note} {crotchet note} — A Crotchet. {quaver note} {quaver note} {quaver note} {quaver note} {quaver note} {quaver note} {quaver note} {quaver note} — A Quaver. {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} {semiquaver note} — A Semiquaver.
CHAP. IV. Of the Adjuncts belonging to Musical Notes. THere belong to Notes, thus described by their Number, Names, Tunes, and Time, these seven things. A Tye, a Repeat, a Pause, a Direct, a Close, and single and double Bars, and several Moods. 2. A Tye is a Semi-circle, whose two ends point to the two Notes conjoyned, as when two Minums, or one Minum and a Crotchet are tyed together; as also, when two or more Notes are to be Sung to one Syllable, or two Notes or more to be plaid with one drawing of the Bow on the Viol or Violin. 3. The middle and principal Note is the Se∣mibreve: And when any Note & his half note in the same place are conjoyned for one Syl∣lable, the mark of the half Note, and of the Ligature too, is a point set by the Note, as {semibreve note}· {minim note}· and it is as much, as if with the Note his half Note were exprest, and conjoyned by Ligature, and prolongeth the sound of that Note it follows, to half as much more; thus a Semi-breve, which is of it self but two Minums, having a prick after it, is made three Minums, in one continued sound, and so in other Notes.
4. A Repeat is either of the same Notes and Ditty together, or of Ditty with other Notes, and is marked thus, {vocal join} and is used to signifie, that such a part of a Song or Lesson must be Play'd or Sung over again from that Note over which it is placed. 5. A Pause is a mark of rest or silence in a Song for the time of some Note, whereof it hath its name. A line discending from a superiour Rule, and not touching the Rule below, is a Semibreve Rest: the like line ri∣sing from an inferiour Rule, and not tou∣ching the Rule above, is a Minum Rest: the same with a crook to the Right hand, is a Crotchet Rest, and to the left hand, a Qua∣ver Rest: Also a line reaching from Rule to Rule, is a Breve Rest, or a Pause of two Semibreves; a line from a Rule to a third Rule, is a Long pause, or of four Semibreves, and two of them together make a Large pause, or a Rest of Eight Semibreves. 6. A Direct in the end of a line, sheweth where the Note stands in the beginning of the next line, and is marked thus, 7. A Close is either Perfect or Imperfect; A Perfect Close is the end of Song, no∣ted thus, {fermata} or thus, {fermata below} or with two Bars thwart all the Rules, or both ways. An Imperfect Close, is the end of a Strain, or a∣ny place in a Song, where all the Parts do
meet and Close before the end, and it is marked with a single Bar. 8. The usual Moods are two, the Imper∣fect of the more, when all goes by two, ex∣cept the Minims, which goes by three, as two Longs to a Large, two Breves to a Long, two Semibreves to a Breve, three Minums to the Semibreve, with a prick of perfection; this Mood is thus signed, {timeimperf-prolatperf}3 and is usually called the Triple Time. The other usual Mood is the Imperfect of the less; when all goes by two, as two Longs to a Large, two Breves to a Long, two Semi∣breves to a Breve, &c. this is called the Com∣mon Time, because most used, and is marked thus, {timeimperf-prolatperf-str}. Thus much, concerning singing; I leave setting to the larger Treatises of this subject. FINIS.
THE ENGLISH ACADEMY: The FIFTH PART. Of ASTRONOMIE. CHAP. I. Of the General Subject of Astronomie. AStronomy, is an Art, by which we are Taught the Measure and Moti∣on of the heavenly Orbs and Stars that are in them. 2. The Heavenly Orbs are either , without Stars, as the Primum Mobile, or , such as have Stars in them, as the eight inferiour Orbs. 3. The Stars are either fixed or movea∣ble: The fixed Stars are those which always keep the same distance from one another; but the moveable Stars, otherwise called
Planets, are such as do not always keep the same distance. 4. All the Stars, as well fixed as moveable have a double motion; the one occasioned by the Primum Mobile, from East to West, the other natural or proper to themselves, by which they move from West, to East. 5. According to this double motion of the Stars, this Art of Astronomy is divided in∣to two Parts; the first sheweth the motion of the Primum Mobile, and how the several Heavenly Orbs are by that carried round the World, from East to West, which is called the Diurnal motion of the Stars. The second part of Astronomy, sheweth the Periodical motion of the Stars, in which the inferiour Orbs, according to their own proper and natural motion, do move from West to East. 6. For the better understanding of these several motions, the Primum Mobile, or tenth Orb, is usually represented by a Sphere or Globe, with such lines drawn about it as the Stars in their motions are supposed to make, or may help to discover unto us, the quantity of their motions, and shew the time of their Risings and Settings, and such like. 7. This Sphere or Globe, is a round bo∣dy, containing one Superficies, in the mid∣dle whereof there is a Point, from whence all Right Lines drawn to the Superficies are equal.
8. In the Sphere or Globe, there are ten imaginary Lines or Circles, of which six are great, and four are small. 9. The great Circles are these which di∣vide the Sphere or Globe into two equal Hemispheres, and such are the Horizon, Ae∣quinoctial, Zodiack and the two Colures; the two first of which are called external and mu∣table, the other internal and immutable. 10. The Lesser Circles, are those which divide the Sphere or Globe, into two une∣qual Hemispheres, whereof one is more, and the other less than the half of the Sphere or Globe; such are the two Tropicks of Can∣cer and Capricorn, and the Artick and An∣tartick Circles, all which are represented in Fig. 9. 11. The Horizon, which is also called the Finitor, is a Circle, which divideth the visible part of the Heavens from the not vi∣sible; that is, the lower Hemisphere from the upper, as the line AB; one of whose Poles is in the Point directly over our heads, and is called the Zenith, the other Diame∣trically opposite, called the Nadir, and no∣ted with the Letters Z. N. 12. The Horizon, is either Sensible or Ra∣tional. 13. That is called the Sensible Horizon, which bounds our sight, and seemeth to di∣vide the Heavens into two equal Hemis∣pheres.
14. And that is called the Rational or In∣telligable Horizon, which doth indeed bisect the Heavens; and this is Right, when it passeth through the Poles of the World; or Oblique, when one of the Poles is some∣what elevated, and the other depressed; or Parallel, when one Pole is in the Verti∣cal Point or Zenith, for then the Horizon is Parallel to the Aequator; it otherwise makes therewith either Right or Oblique Angles. 15. Hence there is a threefold position of Sphere. 1. A Right, where the Horizon is Right; that is, where the Aequator pas∣seth through the Zenith and Nadir, 2. Ob∣lique, when the Horizon is Oblique; that is, when one Pole is somewhat elevated and the other depressed. 3. Parallel, when one of the Poles of the world is in the Zenith. 16. In a Right Sphere, all the Stars do Rise and Set, but in an Oblique Sphere, some are hid from our sight, and some are always above the Horizon. 17. The Meridian is a great Circle pe∣culiar and proper to every place, and drawn through the Vertical point and the Poles of the World, to which when the Sun comes in his Diurnal motion, in the Day-time he mak∣eth the Mid-day, and in the Night time, he maketh Midnight. There may be as many Meridians as there are Vertical points, but upon the Globe they are usually drawn thro' every tenth or fifteenth Degree of the Ae∣quator.
CHAP. II. Of the Internal and Immutable great Circles. HItherto of the two External and Muta∣ble Circles, the Horizon and Meridi∣an, I come now to the Internal and Immu∣table. 2. The first Internal and Immutable Cir∣cle is called the Aequator, or Equinoctial Circle, which divideth the whole Sphere òr Globe into two equal parts between the Poles, to which when the Sun cometh, which is twice in the Year, the days and nights are equal in all places but in a Parallel Sphere: this Circle is noted with the letters EF. 3. This Circle is also the measure of Time; for as oft as 15 Degrees of this Cir∣cle do ascend above the Horizon, so many hours are compleated in its going round. 4. The second Immutable Circle is called the Zodiak, which is a great Oblique broad Circle, under which the Planets do always move; the Poles of this Circle are distant, from the Poles of the world 23 Degrees, 31 Minutes, and 30 Seconds, or 23.53 Cen∣tesms. 5. This Circle doth differ from other Circles in the Heavens, in that other Circles to speak properly, have Longitude or
Length, but no Breadth, whereas this Cir∣cle is allowed to have both. 6. In respect of Longitude, this Circle is divided as other Circles commonly are into 360 Degrees, but more peculiarly into 12 parts, constituting, as it were, the 12 Parts or Months of the Year, or 12 Constellati∣ons of Stars, called Signs, each Sign being subdivided into 30 Degrees or Parts. The Names and Characters of these 12 Constel∣lations, or Signs, are as followeth. A∣ries ♈, Taurus ♉, Gemini ♊, Cancer ♋, Leo ♌, Virgo ♍, Libra ♎, Scorpio ♏, Sagit∣tarius ♐, Capricornus ♑, Aquarius ♒, Pis∣ces ♓. 7. The Zodiack, in respect of Latitude, is divided into 16 Degrees, that is, into 8 Degrees North-ward, and 8 Degrees South-ward, because all the Planets, except the Sun, do in their Motions vary from the middle Line, sometimes one way, and some∣times another; to the quantity of 8 De∣grees; and the middle Line in which the Sun moves, is the Ecliptick Line, because when the Sun and Moon are in Conjunction, the Sun is Eclipsed, but when they are in Opposition, the Moon is Eclipsed. 8. Of these 12 Signs, 4 are called Cardi∣nals, viz. Aries and Libra, in which do happen the Vernal and the Autumnal Ae∣quinoctials; Cancer and Capricorn, in which do happen the Summer and the Winter Sol∣stices.
9. Again these Signs are distinguished in∣to Northern and Southern; the Northern signs are those which decline from the Ae∣quator towards the North Pole, as ♈, ♉, ♊, ♋, ♌, ♍; And the Southers signs are those which decline from the Aequator to∣wards the South Pole, as ♎, ♏, ♐, ♑, ♒, ♓. 10. All other Constellations or fixed stars are referred to some one or other of the 12 signs, whether they be the 21 Northern con∣stellations, called Vrsa Minor, Vrsa Major, Draco, Cepheus, Arctephylax, Corona Bore alis, Engonasus, Lyra, Avis, Cassiopeia, Persius, Heniochus, Serpentarius, Serpens, Sagitta, Aqui∣la, Delphinus, Equisectio, Pegasus, Andromeda, Triangulus. Or whether they be the 15 Sou∣thern constellations, called Cetus, Orion, Eri∣danus, Lupus, Canis Major, Precyon, Argo, Hy∣dra, Crater, Corvus, Centaurus, ra, Ara, Corona Austr. Pisces Austra. 11. The two other great Circles called the Colures, are the two Circles which pass through the Poles of the World, and the four Cardinal points in the Zodiack. 12. That circle which passeth thro' the Poles of the world, and the two Solstitial points in the Zodiack, which are the beginnings of ♋ and ♑, and is called the Solstitial Colure. 13. That Circle, which passeth through the poles of the world and the two Aequino∣ctial points, or first entrance into ♈ and ♎, is called the Aequinoctial Colure, and in Fig. 9. represented by the line D. C.
14. The Lesser Circles of the Sphere are the two Tropicks of ♋ and ♑ with the Ar∣tick and Antartick Circles. 15. The Tropick of ♋ is a Circle joyned to the Zodiack in the beginning of ♋, and is de∣scribed by the Suns Diurnal Motion, when he is in the Summers Solstitial point, and is di∣stant from the Aequinoctial towards the North Pole 23 deg. 31' 30" or in Decimal Numbers, 23 deg. 5.25. to which when the Sun cometh, he causeth the longest day and shortest night to all Northern; the shortest day and longest night to all Southern Inha∣bitants; and is noted with G ♋. 16. The Tropick of ♑, is a Circle joyned to the Zodiack in the beginning of ♑, and de∣scribed by the Suns Diurnal Motion, being in the winters Solstitial point, and is distant from the Aequinoctial towards the South Po 3 deg. 31' 30", or in Decimal Num∣bers, 23 deg. 5.25 parts, to which, when the Sun cometh, he maketh the longest day and shortest night, to all Southern; the shortest day and longest night to all Northern Inha∣bitants, and is noted with H ♑. These two Circles are called of the Greeks , à convertendo, because when the Sun toucheth any of the Circles, he is at his greatest distance from the Aequator, and returneth thither again. 17. The Artick Circle, is distant from the North Pole of the world, as much as
the Tropick of ♋ is distant from the Aequi∣noctial and is noted with KL. The Antartick Circle is distant from the South Pole as much as the Tropick of ♑ is di∣stant from the Aequator, & is noted with OM. 18. By the Intersection of any three of the greatest Circles of a Sphere is made a Spherical Triangle. 19. A Spherical Triangle, is either Right Angled or Oblique. 20. A Right Angled Spherical Triangle, hath one Right Angle at the least. 21. An Oblique Angled Spherical Triangle, is either Acute or Obtuse. 22. An Acute Angled Spherical Triangle, hath all its Angles Acute. 23. An Obtuse Angled Spherical Triangle, hath all his Angles, either Obtuse or mixt, that is one Angle at the least Obtuse, and the other Acute. 24. In Spherical Triangles, there are 28 Varieties or Cases, 16 in Rectangular, and 12 in Oblique Angular, whereof all the Rectan∣gular and 10 of the Oblique Angular, may be resolved by one Catholick, and Universal Proposition; for the understanding where∣of, some things must be premised. 1. That in a Right Angled Spherical Triangle, the Hypotenuse and both the Acute Angles are supposed to be noted with their Complements. 2. That the Right Angle is not reckoned a∣mongst the Circular parts, and therefore one of the other five will be always a middle part, and the other four extreams Conjunct or Disjunct.
The Proposition is this: A Rectangle made of the Sine of the middle part & Radius, is equal to the Rectangle made of the Tangents of the Extreams Conjunct, or of the Cosins of the Extreams Disjunct: Therefore, When two things are given, and a third re∣quired, you must first find out the middle part, and where the other Terms be Extreams Con∣junct or Disjunct; if the things given and in∣quired lie together, the middle is the middle part, but if they be disjoyned, that which stan∣deth by it self is the middle part. Note also, that when a Complement in the Proposition doth chance to concur with a Com∣plement in the Circular Parts, you must take the Sine it self, or the Tangent it self, because cs of the cs=S. and ct of the ct=t. 25. These things being understood, the Analogies to be used in every of the 16 Cases of a Right angled Triangle, will from this Proposition be as followeth.   Bata Q. Analogia. 1 BCA AB Rad cot . A ∷ tBC . sAB. 2 AAB BC cot A . Rad ∷ sAB . tBC. 3 ABBC A tBC . sAB ∷ Rsd . ctA.
4 ABA AC tAB . csA ∷ Rad. cotAC. 5 ACAB A Rcot . AC ∷ tAB . csA. 6 ACA AB cot AC . Rad ∷ csA. tAB. 7 AC AC Rad . ctC ∷ ct A.csAC. 8 ACA C ctA . csAC ∷ ctC. 9 ACA BC Rad . sA ∷ sAC . sBC. 10 BCA AC SA . sBC ∷ Rad. sAC. 11 ACBC A SAC . sBC ∷ Rad . sA. 12 ABA C Rad . sA ∷ csAB . csC. 13 ABC A csAB . csC ∷ Rad. sA. 14 AC AB sA . csC ∷ Rad. csAB.
15 ABBC AC Rad csAB ∷ csBC . csAC. 16 ACAB BC csAB . csAC ∷ Rad . csBC. 26. In Oblique angled Spherical Triangles, there are, as hath been said, 12 Cases, 10 whereof may be resolved by the Catholick Proposition, if the Spherical Triangle pro∣pounded be first converted into two Right, which may be done by this General Rule. From the end of a side given, being adjacent to an Angle given, let fall the Perpendicular. A Type of the several Varieties here followeth. 1. AC CD D A Rad . SCD ∷ sD . sBC. sAC . Rad ∷ sBC . sA. 2. CD A D AC sA . sD ∷ sCD . sAC. 3. AC CD D AD cot CD . R ∷ csD . tBD. cosBD . csCD ∷ R . csBC. R . csBC ∷ csAC . csAB. BD + AB = AD. 1 Tri. BD − AB = AD. 2. Tri.
4. AC CD D C ct D . Rad ∷ csCD . ct BCD ctCD . csBCD ∷ R . tBC. R. tBC ∷ ctAC . csACB. BCD + ACB = ACD. 1. Tri. BCD − ACB = ACD. 2. Tri. 5. A D CA C ctA . R∷ csAC . ctACB. sACB . csCAB ∷ R . csBC. csBC . R ∷ csBDC . csBCD. ACB + BCD = ACD. 1. Tri. BCD − ACB = ACD. 2. Tri. 6. A D A C AD ct . AC . R ∷ csDAC . tAB. ct . DAC . RAB ∷ R . tBC. R . tBC ∷ ctADC . sBD. AB + BD = AD. 1. Tri. RD − AB = AD. 2. Tri. 7. A A AC AD ct . CAB . R ∷ csAC . ctACB. ACD − ACB = BCD. 1. Tri. ACD + ACB = BCD. 2. Tri. s ACB . csCAB ∷ R . csBC. R . csBC ∷ sBCD . csCDB. 8. A C AC DC ctCAB . R ∷ csAC . ctACB. ACD − ACB = BCD. 1. Tri. ACD + ACB = BCD. 2. Tri. ctAC . csACB ∷ R . tBC. tBC . Rad. ∷ csBCD. ctDC.
9. AD AC A DC ctAC. R ∷ csCAD. tAB. AD − AB = BD. 1. Tri. AD + AB = BD. 2. Tri. csAB. csAC ∷ R. csBC. R. csBC ∷ csBD. csDC. 10. AC AD A C ctAD. R ∷ csCAD. tAE. AE − AC = CF in 1. Tri. AE + AC = CF 2. Tri. ctCAD. sAE ∷ R . tDF. tDF. R ∷ sCF . ctDCF. 11. AC AD DC C sAC x sCD . Rad. square. s ½ z − AC x s ½ z − CD. Q. s 1/ C. The Twelfth, is but the Converse of the last taking the Angles for Sides, and the Sides for Angles; so shall the Angle found, be the Side inquired. CHAP. III. Of the Ascensions and Descensions of the Parts of the Zodiack. HItherto we have spoken of the general Principles of Astronomy, from whence the motion of the Primum Mobile is explai∣ned; come we now to these affections which properly belong to the motion there∣of, and these are the Ascension and Descension
of the Parts of the Zodiack, or Astronomi∣cal Rising and Setting. 2. Astronomical Rising and Setting, is the Elevation of the parts of the Zodiack or E∣cliptick above the Horizon, and Depressed under it, compared to the Ascension and de∣scension of the parts of the Aequator; and this comparison is in reference to diverse Elevations of the Poles. 3. But this Astronomical Rising and Set∣ting, takes his Denomination from the parts of the Zodiack; which are above the Horizon or beneath it, and are measured with respect unto the Aequator; for Astro∣nomers do not refer the Aequator to the Zodiack, but the Zodiack to the Aequator, for it is Zodiack, and not the Aequator which stands in need of measuring. 4. And an Arch of the Ecliptick or Zodi∣ack, is to be understood two manner of ways; namely, Continued or Discreet; A Continued Arch, is when it is reckoned in the Aequator in a Continued Series, from the beginning of Aries, and so forward into the consequent Signs. 5. A Discreet Arch, is so called, because it is not reckoned from the first Degree of Aries, but from any other point; as from the fourteenth of Gemini, to the fourteenth of Taurus. 6. Any part of the Zodiack is then said to Ascend Right, when a greater part of the
Aequator riseth above the Horizon than of the Zodiack. And that is said to be a grea∣ter Arch of the Aequator, which is more than 90 Degrees. 7. Any part of the Zodiack is then said to Descend Right, when a greater part of the Aequator than of the Zodiack is beneath the Horizon. 8. Any part of the Zodiack therefore is said to Ascend Obliquely, when a less part of the Aequator than of the Zodiack doth As∣cend; as also, to Descend Obliquely, when less of the Aequator than of the Zodiack is below the Horizon. 9. Ascension, is either Right or Oblique. 10. Right Ascension or Descension, is that which is in a Right Sphere. 11. In a Right Sphere, the four Quadrants of the Zodiack beginning from the Aequino∣ctial and Solstitial Points, do equally Ascend and Descend, so that in these whole Qua∣drants, as many Degrees of the Aequator as of the Zodiack do Ascend; but the interme∣diate parts of those Quadrants in the Zodi∣ack do vary, and have not equal Ascension and Descension with the parts of the Aequa∣tor. 12. Those Signs that are equally distant from any of those Points, have also equal As∣cension, as Gemini and Cancer. And the As∣cension of a Sign is always equal to the Des∣cension of the same.
13. In a Right Sphere therefore, four Signs only do rise Right, all the rest do rise Obliquely. 14. In an Oblique Sphere, the two halves that begin at the two Aequinoctial Points, do rise together, but the parts of those halves do rise Obliquely. And those Signs that rise Rightly, do Descend Obliquely, and the contrary. 15. The Ascension of opposite Signs in an Oblique Sphere, taken together, are equal to the Ascension of the same in a Right Sphere. And those signs that are equall di∣stant from either of the Aequinoctial Points, have equal Ascensions, because they equally Decline from the Aequator. 16. Besides the Astronomical Rising and setting of the stars, or their rising and set∣ting, in respect of the Horizon and Aequa∣tor, there are other affections of the stars to be considered, namely, those which they have in respect of the sun. 17. In respect of the Celestial Circles, that is in respect of the Zodiack, Aequator, and Horizon, there is a fourfold affection of the stars. 1. Longitude. 2. Of Altitude. 3. Of Latitude. 4. Of Declination. 18. The Longitude of a star is his distance from the first Degree or Point of Aries, ac∣counting from West to East. 19. The Altitude of a star is to be conside∣red generally or specially. Generally con∣sidered,
the Altitude of a star is the height thereof above the Circle of the Horizon. 20. Specially considered, the Elevation of the Pole star above the Horizon, is called the Altitude. 21. The Latitude of a star is his dDstance from the Ecliptick, that is from the very mid∣dle of the Zodiack towards either Pole, whe∣ther North or South. 22. The Declination of a star, is his Di∣stance from the Aequator, and as he declines from thence either Northward or South∣ward, so is his Declination nominated ei∣ther North or South. 23. Thus much of these affections of the stars, which they have in respect of the Ce∣lestial Circles; come we now to those which they have in respect of the sun; usually cal∣led the Poetical rising and setting; and this is threefold. The first of these in Latin, is called Ortus Matutinus sive Cosmicus, The Morning or Cosmical Rising. The second, Vespertinus five Achronicus, The Evening or Achronical; and the last, Heliacus vel Sola∣ris, Heliacal or Solary. 24. The Cosmical or Morning Rising of a star, is when it Riseth above the Horizon, together with the sun. And the Cosmical or Morning setting of a star is, when it-set∣teth at the opposite part of Heaven, when the sun riseth. 25. The Achronical, or Evening Rising of
a Star, is when it Riseth on the opposite part, when the Sun setteth; And the Achro∣nical Evening setting of a Star, is when it setteth at the same time with the Sun. 26. The Heliacal Rising of a Star, which you may properly call the Emersion of it, is when a Star that was hid by the Sun beams, beginneth to recover it self out, and to ap∣pear. And so likewise, the setting of such a star, which may be also called the Occultati∣on of the same, is when the Sun by his own proper motion overtaketh any star, and by the brightness of his beams doth make it invisible unto us. And thus having briefly shewed the chief affections of the Primum Mobile; how the quantity of these affections may be compu∣ted, by the Doctrine of Spherical Triangles, shall be declared in the Problems following. Problem I. To find the Suns Greatest Declination and the Poles Elevation. In Fig. 9. AZ, BN represents the Meri∣dian, EF the Aequinoctial, HR the Zodiack, P the North Pole; O, the South; AB, the Horizon; Z, the Zenith; N, the Nadir; HC, a Parallel; of the Suns Diurnal Moti∣on at H, or the Suns greatest Declination from the Aequator towards the North Pole;
RQ, a Parallel of the Suns greatest Declina∣tion from the Aequator towards the South Pole. From whence it is apparent, that from A to H, is the Suns greatest Meridian Altitude, from A to Q, his least; if there∣fore you deduct AQ, the least Meridian Al∣titude, from AH, the greatest, the Differ∣ence will be HQ, the Suns greatest Declina∣tion on both sides the Aequator; and because the Angles E D H, and F D R, are equal, therefore the Suns greatest Declination to∣wards the South Pole is equal to his greatest Declination towards the North, and conse∣quently, half the Distance of the Tropicks; that is, EQ, or EH, is the quantity of the Suns greatest Declination; and then if you deduct the Suns greatest Declination, or the Arch HE, from the Suns greatest Meridian Altitude, or the Arch AH, the Difference will be AE, the height of the Aequator a∣bove the Horizon, the Complement whereof to a Quadrant, is the Arch AO equal to BP, the height of the Pole. Example. The Suns greatest Meredian Altitude, taken June the Ele∣venth at London. — 61.99167 The Suns least Meridian Al∣titude December the tenth — 14.94167
Their Difference is the distance of the Tropicks.— 47.05000 Half that is the Suns greatest Declination whose difference from the Suns least Meridian Al∣titude, is — 23.52500 The Elevation of the Aequator and the Complement thereof to 90, is the Elevation of the Pole— 38.46667 51.53333 Problem II. The Suns greatest Declination being given, to find his Declination in any point of the Ecliptick. In Fig. 9. In the Right Angled Spherical Triangle GLD, we have given the suns grea∣test Declination GDL, and the suns distance from the next Aequinoctial point LD, to find the present Declination GL, for which the Proportion is Rad. sLD ∷ sD. sGL. Problem III. The suns greatest declination and his distance from the next Equinoctial point given, to find his Right Ascension. In Fig. 9. In the Right Spherical Triangle GDL, we have given as before the Angle, GDL, and the Hypotenuse DL, to find
the suns Right Ascension DG; the Propor∣tion is Rad. tDL ∷ csD . tDG. Problem IV. The Elevation of the Pole, and declination of the sun being given, to find his Amplitude. In Fig. 9. In the Right Angled spherical Triangle DTV, we have given the Comple∣ment of the Poles Elevation or Angle VDT, and the suns declination VT, to find DT, the suns Amplitude; for which the Propor∣tion is; sVDT. Rad. ∷ sVT, sDT. Problem V. The Poles Elevation and suns declination be∣ing given, to find the ascentional difference. In Fig. 9. In the Right Angled spherical triangle DVT, we have given the Comple∣ment of the Poles Elevation, or Angle VDT, and suns declination VT, to find the Ascen∣sional Difference DV; the Proportion is, tVDT, Rad. ∷ tVT . sDV.
Problem VI. The right ascension, and ascensional diffe∣rence being given, to find the Oblique ascension and declination. In Fig. 9. GV, represents the right As∣cension; DV, the Ascensional difference; GD, the Oblique Ascension, which is found by deducting the Ascensional difference DV, from the Right Ascension GV; for if the Declination be North, Add The Ascensional diff. to or from the right Ascen. and it will give Obl. Asc. Sub. Desc. If the Declination be South, Sub. The Ascensional diff. to or from the right Ascen. and it will give Obl. Ascen. Add Desce. Problem VII. To find the time of the Suns rising and setting with the Length of the day and Night. First find the Ascensional difference, as hath been shewed in the fifth Problem; which, when the Sun is in the Northern
signs, is to be added to the Semi-diurnal Arch of the Right sphere, which is 90, but is to be subtracted from the same, if he be in the southern signs, and the sum or difference will be the semi-diurnal Arch, which doub∣led, is the day Arch, whose Complement to 24, is the night Arch, which Bisected, is the time of the suns rising. Problem VIII. The Poles Elevation, and the suns Declinati∣on given, to find the time when he will be due East and West. In Fig. 10. In the Right Angled spherical Triangle TPZ, we have given PZ, the Complement of the Poles Elevation, and TP, the Complement of the suns declination, to find the Angle TPZ, for which the Propor∣tion is, Rad. . tPZ ∷ ctTP . csTPZ. whose Complement to a Quadrant TPD, being converted into time, sheweth how much it is after six in the Morning, when the sun will be due East, and before six at night, when he will be due West.
Problem IX. The Poles Elevation, with the Suns Altitude and Declination given, to find the Suns Azimuth. In Fig. 10. In the Oblique Angled spheri∣cal Triangle SPZ, we have given SP the Complement of the suns declination, PZ the Complement of the Poles Elevation, and SZ the Complement of the suns Altitude, to find the Angle SZP, the suns Azimuth from the North; for which by the eleventh case of Oblique Angled spherical Triangles, the Proportion is; As the Rectangle of the sines of SZ, and ZP, is to the square of Radius, so the Rectangle made of sines of the differen∣ces of those containing sides and half sum of three sides given, to the Square of the sine of the half angle inquired. CHAP. IV. Of the Secondary or Periodical Motion of the Stars. Having done with the first part of Astro∣nomy, the motion of the Primum Mobile, and the affections of the stars, occasioned by that motion; we are now to speak of their
own Proper or Periodical motion; in which contrary to the motion of the Primum Mo∣bile, they are carried from West to East. 2. This motion of the fixed stars is very slow; for they alter their places but little in many Years, but are not immoveable as some thought; the quantity of their annual moti∣on, according to Tycho Brahe is 50 seconds, and 37 thirds of a degree, and others since him do conceive that 50 seconds only is the quantity of their annual motion, that is most agreeable unto truth and observation. 3. This motion in the Planets is more swift, and although they never move out of the Zodiack, yet they do move sometimes in one part of Heaven, sometimes in another, sometimes towards the south Pole, sometimes towards the North, sometimes near one fix∣ed star, sometimes near another, and some∣times nearer, sometimes farther from one a∣nother also, whereas the fixed stars do al∣ways keep the same distance from one another. 4. The Planets do not move in one Orb, but every Planet hath a several Orb, where∣as the infinite number of fixed stars do all move in one only sphere or Orb. 5. The Names and Characters of the pla∣nets are these: 1. Saturn, whose mark is ♄, finisheth his re∣volution in 29 Years, 174 Days, 4 Hours. 2. Jupiter, whose mark is ♃, finisheth his Revolution in 11 Years, 317 Days, 15 Hours.
3. Mars, whose mark is ♂, finisheth his Revolution in 1 Year, 321 Days, 23 Hours. 4. The Earth or Sun, marked thus ☉, finisheth his Course in 365 Days, 5 Hours, 49 Minutes, 4 seconds, and 21 thirds. 5. The Moon, marked thus ☽, finisheth her Course in 27 Days, 7 Hours, 43 Minutes, and 6 seconds, but returneth not into Conjuncti∣on with the Sun, under 29 Days, 12 Hours, 44 minutes, and 3 seconds. 6. Venus, marked thus ♀, finisheth her Course in 224 Days, 16 Hours, 40' and 30". 7. Mercury, marked thus ☿, finisheth his Course in 87 Days, 23 Hours, 00' and 15". 6. The Civil Year, though it doth not ex∣actly agree, yet hath it some proportion with the Motions of the sun and Moon in every Nation; Romulus the founder of Rome, ap∣pointed the year at first to consist of 10 Moons, or Months, and called the first March, 2. April, 3. May, 4. June, the rest Quin∣tilis, Sextilis, Sptember, October, November, December, because they were 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 Months distant from March. After whom, Numa Pompilius added two Months more, and called them January and February, and appointed each Month to con∣tain 29 and 30 Days, whereby the Year, did consist of 354 Days, in which time the Moon returneth into Conjunction with the Sun, and this is the quantity of the Year in Turky
at this day; only in every third Year, they reckon 355 days. The Persians and Aegypti∣ans do also count 12 Moons or Months to their Year, but their Months are proporti∣oned to the time of the Suns continuance in every of the 12 signs: In their Year there∣fore, which is solar, there are always 365 days, that is, 11 days more than the Lunar Year. And the Julian Year, which is the accompt of all Christendom, doth differ from the o∣ther only in this, that by reason of the suns excess in motion above 365 days, which is about 5 Hours, 49 Minutes, it hath a day in∣tercalated once in four Years, and by reason of this Intercalation, it is more agreeable with the motion of the Sun, the former dif∣fering from the Numan Year, 11 days and 6 Hours, the which 11 days, Julius Caesar di∣stributed amongst the Months, and the month Quintilis, was by him called July, ac∣cording to his own name; and Augustus Cae∣sar called the Month Sextilis, by the name of August, and altered the Position of days in each month to that which we now use, in which there are 52 Weeks, and one odd day, and this one day supernumerary, maketh an alteration in all the rest, so that the days of the Week, which used to be assigned by the Letters of the Alphabet, fall not alike in se∣veral Years, but Sunday this Year, must fall out upon the next years Monday, & so forward, till
seven years; and because the six odd Hours do make a day in four years, every fourth year hath a day added to its accompt, and such a year doth consist of 366 days, which doth occasion the Sunday letter still to alter till four times 7, that is, 28 Years be gone about. This Revolution is called the Cycle of the Sun, taking name from ☉, Sunday, the Letter whereof it doth appoint for every year, as by the Table may be seen. To find which of 28 the present is, add 9 to the Year of Our Lord, because this Cir∣cle was so far gone about at that the time of Christ's birth, divide the whole by 28, what remains, is the present year; if nothing re∣main, the Cycle is out, and that year you must call the last, or 28. This Intercalation of a day, placed in Fe∣bruary, doth occasion the Letter F to be twice repeated in the latter end of that Month, viz. upon the 24 and 25 days, and in such a year St. Matthias day is to be observed upon the 25 of that month, and the very next Sunday doth change and alter this letter, from which Leaping or Changing, such a year is called the Leap Year, and the Number of days in each Month is well expressed in these Distichs.
Thirty Days hath September, April, June, and November; February hath Twenty Eight alone, All the rest hath Thirty and One: —But when of Leap Year cometh the time, Then Days hath February Twenty & Nine. That this Accompt is somewhat too long, is acknowledged and confessd by the most skilful Astronomers, as for the Number of days in a year, the Emperours Mathemati∣cians were in the right, for it is certain, no Year can consist of more than 365 days, but for the odd Hours, it is a certain that they cannot be fewer than five, nor so many as six, so that the doubt is upon the minutes, sixty whereof goeth to the making of an Hour; a small matter one would think, and how great in the recess and consequence we shall see. Julius Caesar alotted 365 days, 6 hours, to his Revolution; but the Sun goeth about in less time, that is, (according to the most exact accompt,) in 365 days, 5 hours, 49 Minutes, and a little more; so that the Em∣perours year must of necessity breed a diffe∣rence in so many Minutes every year, be∣twixt the year which the Sun it self describes in the Zodiack, and that which is reckoned upon in the Calender, which though for a year or two may pass insensibly, yet in the space of 134 years it will rise to a whole day
that is, the beginning of the year in the Calender must be set one day back. As for Example. Let the Year begin in the Vernal Aequi∣nox, or Spring, in the Emperours time, that fell out to be the 24th of March, but now this year it fell out the 10th of March, 13 days backward and somewhat more; and so if it be let alone, will go back to the first of March, and first of February, till Easter come to be on Christmas day, and so infi∣nitely. To reform this difference in the accompt, some of the latter Roman Bishops earnestly endeavoured, and the thing was brought to that perfection it now standeth, (so much as it is,) by Gregory the Thirteenth, in the year 1582. his Mathematicians, (whereof Lylius was the chief) advised him thus: That considering there had been in agitation in the Council of Nice, somewhat concerned in this matter upon the motion of the Que∣stion about the Celebration of Easter; and that the Fathers of that Assembly, after due deliberation with the Astronomers of that time, had fixed the Vernal Aequinox; at the 21th of March, and considering also, that since that time a difference of 10 whole days had been past over in the Calender, that is, that the Vernal Equinox or Spring, which began upon the 21th of March, had prevented so much as to begin in Gregories
days, at the 10th of the same, 10 days dif∣ference, or thereabout; they advised, that 10 days should be cut off from the Calender, which was done, and the 10 days taken out of October, in the Year 1582, as being the Month of that Year in which the Pope was born, so that when they came to the 5th of the Month, they reckoned the 15th, and so the Aequinox was come up to its place again, and happened upon the 21th of March, as at the Council of Nice. But that Lylius should bring back the beginning of the year to the time of the Nicene Council, and no farther is to be mar∣velled at; he should have brought it back to the Emperours own time, where the mi∣stake was first entred; and instead of 10, cut off 13 days; however this is the reason why these two Calenders differ the space of 10 days one from another. And thus I have given you an accompt of the year as it now stands with us in England, and with the rest of the Christian World, in respect of the Sun; some other particulars there are with us and them, that do depend upon the motion of the moon, for the better understanding of them, I will give you a brief accompt of her Revolution. The Solar year consisting, as hath been said, of 11 days more than the Lunar year; those 11 days called the Epact, are there∣fore added to the Lunar Year, to made it e∣qual
with the Solar, by the addition of which access, in every three years there is gotten a number more than 30, but because the Moon between change and change doth never pass 30 days, the Epact cannot exceed that num∣ber, and the time in which the Moon is sup∣posed to make her several Motions and so return to the place where she first began, is a circle or Revolution of 19 years, first found out by Meton, and Athenian, who lived about 439 years before Christ, this Cycle is therefore called Cyclus Decenno ennalis, and from the Autor Anus Metonicus from whose Atheni∣ans, the Aegyptians may seem to have receiv'd it, as the Romans from them, in letters of Gold, from whence (if not from the more precious use of it) it attained to be called, as yet still it is, the Numerus Aureus, or Golden Number: It is made Christian, by the Fathers of the Ni∣cene Council, as being altogether necessary to the finding out of the Neomenea Paschalis, up∣on which the Feast of Easter and all the rest of the moveable Feasts depend: It self is found by adding a Unite to the year of our Lord, and dividing the whole by 19, the Remainder shall be the Cycle of the Moon, or if nothing remain, the Cycle is out, that is, 19. And the Epact is found by Multiplying the golden Number by 11, and dividing the Pro∣duct by 30, what remains is the Epact; but to save this trouble of Calculation, you have it set down to your hand in the table before the Ca∣lender
the use whereof as of the Golden Number is to find the Change of the Moon, for the Ancient Philosophers supposing the Moon to make a perfect Revolution in 19 years, did Calculate the several Changings of the Moon that happened in each Month for that time, and placed the golden number for each year, right against the day of the Month on which the Moon changed, that so having found the golden number, they might thereby presently know on what day of the month the Moon did change, in any Month of the year for ever, as also the time, when the Feast of Easter was to be observed, according to the Canon made at a General Council held at Nice, in the year of our Lord, 322, in which it is commanded that Easter should be Celebra∣ted upon the next Sunday following the first Full Moon after the Vernal Aequinox, which then was upon the 21th day of March, and accor∣ding to this rule is this Feast observed with us at this day, and not according to the true Mo∣tion of the Moon, or precise time of the Ver∣nal Aequinox, which now is about the 10th of March; This use of the Golden Number is well expressed in these Distichs. In March after the first C, Look the Prime where e're it be; The third Sunday after Easter day shall be, And if the Prime on the Sunday be, Then reckon that for one of the three.
To find the New Moons by the Epact, do thus, To the Epact for the year given add the number of the months from March including both Months, and the days of that Month past, the Sum of these three Numbers shall give you the age of the Moon, if they exceed not 30, if more than 30, cast away 30, and the Remainder shall be the Age as before. Example. I would know the Age of the Moon on the Fifteenth day of August, 1672. The Epact is 11, and the Months from March to August are 6, and 15 the day of the Month, all which put together, do make 32, from whence take 30, and there rests 2, the Age of the Moon that day. And to know the day of the Change, do thus: To the Epact add all the months from March, and if they joyned together, come not to 30, look what they lack of 30, and at so many days of the month the moon chan∣geth: If they be above 30, and the month you desire have 31 days, then Subtract 30; but if 30 days, then Subtract 29, and that rest take from 30, then look what remains, and at so many days of the month the moon changeth, by either of these ways the time of the new moons may indeed be guest at, but not exactly found: How that may be done, is shewed in the larger Treatises of this Subject; this we deem sufficient for our present purpose.
A Table, shewing the Cycle of the Suns, Dominical Letter, Golden Number, and the Epact. Year of our Lord. Cycl. ☉ Dom. Lett. 1672 1 GF 1673 2 E 1674 3 D 1675 4 C 1676 5 BA 1677 6 G 1678 7 F 1679 8 E 1680 9 DC 1681 10 B 1682 11 A 1683 12 G 1684 13 FE 1685 14 D 1686 15 C 1687 16 B 1688 17 AG 1689 18 F 1690 19 E 1691 20 D 1692 21 CB 1693 22 A 1694 23 G 1695 24 F 1696 25 ED 1697 26 C 1698 27 B 16 28 A Year of our Lord. Golden Number. Epact. 1672 1 11 1673 2 22 1674 3 3 1675 4 14 1676 5 25 1677 6 6 1678 7 17 1679 8 28 1680 9 9 1681 10 20 1682 11 21 1683 12 12 1684 13 23 1685 14 4 1686 15 15 1687 16 26 1688 17 7 1689 18 18 1690 19 29
  January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. 1 3 a Circum. d 3 d David. g 11 b Philip & Jacob. e 19 g 8 c Lammas. 16 f 16 a d All Sain. f 2 b 11 e Purifica. e 11 a c 19 f 8 a 16 d 5 g 5 b 13 e 13 g 3 11 c 19 f 11 f b 19 d 8 g b 5 e a 13 c 2 f 2 a 4 d 8 g g 19 c 8 e 16 a 16 c f 13 b 2 d g 10 b 5 19 e a 19 a 8 d f 5 b 5 d 13 g 2 c e 10 a c 6 8 f Epipha. 16 b 8 b 16 e 16 g c e 2 a d 10 f b 18 d 7 g 5 c c 5 f 5 a 13 d 13 f b 10 e g 18 c 7 e 8 16 a d 16 d g b 2 e 2 g 10 c 18 f 18 a 7 d f 9 5 b 13 e 5 e 13 a 13 c f a d 7 g 7 b e 15 g 10 c 2 f f 2 b 2 d 10 g 10 b 18 e a c 15 f 4 a 11 13 d g 13 g c e a c 7 f 15 b 15 d 4 g b 12 2 e 10 a 2 a 10 d 10 f 18 b 18 d g 4 c 4 e a 12 c 13 f b b e g 7 c 7 e 15 a d f 12 b 1 d 14 10 g c Valent. 10 c 18 f 18 a d f 4 b 12 e 12 g 1 c e 15 a 18 d d 7 g 7 b 15 e 15 g c 1 f 1 a d 9 f 16 18 b 7 e 18 e a c 4 f 4 a 12 d g b 9 e g 17 7 c f 7 f 15 b 15 d g b 1 e 9 a 9 c f 17 a 18 d 15 g g 4 c 4 e 12 a 12 c f b d 17 g 6 b 19 15 e 4 a 15 a d f 1 b 1 d 9 g 17 c 17 e 6 a c 20 4 f b 4 b 12 e 12 g c e a 6 d 6 f b 14 d 21 g 12 c c 1 f 1 a 9 d 9 f 17 b e St. Mat. g 14 c 3 e S. Tho. 22 12 a 1 d 12 d g b e g 6 c 14 f 14 a 3 d f 23 1 b e 1 e 9 a 9 c 17 f 17 a d 3 g 3 b e 11 g 24 c 5 f f b d 6 g Jo. Bapt. 6 b 14 e S. Bar∣tholo. a c 11 f a 25 9 d 17 g S. Math. 9 g Annun. 17 c S. Mark. 17 e a c Jam. Ap. 3 f 11 b 11 d 19 g 19 b Christm. 26 e a a 6 d 6 f 14 b 13 d g 19 c e a 8 c S. Steve. 27 17 f 6 b 17 b e g 3 c 3 e 11 a d 19 f 8 b d S. John. 28 6 g 14 c 6 c 14 f 14 a d f b 8 e 3 g Simon & Jude c 16 e Innoce. 29 a   d 3 g 3 b 11 e Pet. Ap. 11 g 19 c f S. Mich. a 16 d 5 f 30 13 b   14 e a c f a 8 d g 16 b 5 e Andrew g 31 3 c   3 f   11 d   19 b e   5 c   13 a
THE ENGLISH ACADEMY: The SIXTH PART. Of RHETORICK. CHAP. I. Of the Definition and Parts of RHETORICK. RHETORICK, is the Art or facul∣ty of Eloquent and delightful Spea∣king. The Parts of Rhetorick are Five; Invention, Disposition, Elocution, Memory, and Pronounciation. In Invention, we are to consider three things: 1. What we are to Invent. 2. By what Arguments we may confirm the Matter In∣vented. 3. From what Topicks or gene∣ral
Heads those Arguments may be raised. And first, the thing or matter which we are to invent, is the scope and purpose of the intended Oration: That is, we must propound some certain Proposition to which we mean to direct our Speech; and of those several Propositions which may be raised from the subject propounded, we should still make choice of that which is most agreea∣ble to the Sentence given. Secondly, When we have resolved upon a Proposition, we are to bethink our selves of some Arguments or probable Reasons, by which that Proposition may be confirmed. Thirdly, We are to consider the several Topicks or common places from whence these probable Arguments may be invented and raised, and these are of two sorts; In∣trinsecal and Extrinsecal; those that are called Intrinsecal, which are comprised in the matter which is propounded, and the Topicks or Heads, from whence such Argu∣ments may be invented, are these following. 1. Definition. 2. Division. 3. Notation. 4. Conjugation. 5. Genus. 6. Species. 7. Semilitude. 8. Dissimilitude. 9. Contraries. 10. Opposites. 11. Comparison. 12. Causes. 13. Effects. 14. Adjuncts. 15. Antece∣dents. 16. Consequents. All other Topicks, from whence Intrinsecal or Artificial Argu∣ments may be raised, are contained in these, or may be derived from them.
1. Definition, is a Speech explaining or declaring what a thing is; The parts where∣of, according to Logicians are two; 1. The Genus, or general name agreeing with the thing defined, and with several other things besides. 2. The difference or particular name, which doth only agree with that which is defined: For Example. Man is a Living Creature, endued with Reason. In which the Genus is living Crea∣ture; and this agrees with other Creatures besides Man; the Difference, is endued with Reason, and this is proper to Man only. But such Definitions as these, are seldom used by Orators, but such rather as are cal∣led Descriptions, more properly than Defi∣nitions; as when a thing is described by its parts, or by its effects, or by the causes by which effects are produced, and such like. 2. Division, is the distribution of the mat∣ter propounded into its parts; Thus the Life of Man may be divided into Infancy, Child-hood, Youth, Middle-age, Old-age. 3. Notation, or Etymologie, is the Inter∣pretation of a Word, shewing as well the Original thereof, as the Signification; As a Senate is so called from the convention of the Seniors or Old Men. 4. Conjugation, is either when one word hath various endings; as knife, knives; or
when several words do come from one Pri∣mitive, thus; beautiful and beautifulness, are both derived from beauty. 5. A Genus, is that which comprehends se∣veral things under it; which are really dif∣ferent from one another. 6. A Species, is that which may with o∣ther things be referred to one common Ge∣nus: And thus this word Art, is a genus, in respect of the seven Liberal Sciences; as Grammar; Rhetorick, &c. and these Sciences Grammar, Rhetorick, &c. are the Forms and Species which are contained under this Genus or general term, Art. 7. Similitude, is the comparing of two or more things together, which are in themselves divers, but do agree in some particular. For Example. A shadow and glory, are in themselves ve∣ry different things; but yet they agree in this, that the shadow doth accompany the body, and glory, virtue. 8. Dissimilitude, is the disagreeing of two or more things in some particular. 9. Contraries, are such things which can∣not both at the same time, agree with one & the same thing: Thus no man can be said to be wise in that thing in which he is a Fool. 10. Opposites, are such things as can ne∣ver agree together, as wrath and friendship. 11. Comparison, is the comparing of one
thing with another; This is either equal or unequal. Equal Comparison is, when two equal things are compared together; as thus, He hath deceived thee, therefore he will deceive me also. Unequal Comparison, is two ways, first, when we argue from the greater to the less: As God spared not the Angels that sinned, how then shall He spare Man? Secondly, when we argue from the less to the greater; As, He will not let one sin go un∣punished; much more will he therefore punish a multitude of sins. 12. Causes, are such things by which any thing is in any sort produced; there are Four sorts of Causes; Efficient, Material, Formal, and Final. The Efficient cause, is that which maketh a thing: Thus the Sun causeth or maketh the day. The Material cause, is that of which a thing is made, as Money, of Gold and Sil∣ver, &c. The Formal cause, is that by which the thing is what it is, or that by which it is distinguished from other things; thus a Ship and a Timber-house do differ in the form, or divers disposing of the parts. The Final cause, is that for which a thing is made. 13. Effects, are such things as are pro∣pounded by their causes.
14. Adjuncts, are such things which are joyned to the thing or person propounded, but not of necessity; and these are usually seven. Quis? Quid? Vbi? Quibus Auxiliis? Cur? Quomodo? Quando? In English thus, First ask, Who? What? and Where? and Then, What aid? with Why? and How? and When? Quis? Who? doth signifie the quality of the Person, in which there must be conside∣red his Nature, Sex, Age, Nation, Kindred, and Estate, in respect of his Body, Mind, and Fortune. Quid? What? importeth an Inquiry af∣ter the nature of a thing, as whether it be of importance or not; whether great or small; noble or ignoble. Vbi? Where? denotes the place. Quibus Auxiliis? VVith what aid? notes an inquiry concerning the person that joyn∣ed with him in that action, or other In∣struments by which it is effected. Cur? VVhy? denotes the final cause, with what intent, or to what end it was done. Quomodo? How? shews the manner of do∣ing it; as namely, with ease, or how hardly. Quando? When? notes the time in which it was done, and this head doth many times afford great plenty of matter. 15. Antecedents, are such things which go before the thing or matter; as you made
him tremble, therefore he is sensible. 16. Consequents, are such things which do necessary follow after the thing or matter as he that is thrust through the heart, must needs die; these are the Intrinsecal or Arti∣ficial Topicks, from whence Arguments may be raised on any Theme or matter propoun∣ded in this manner. Every Theme or Proposition doth consist of three parts; a Subject, a Predicate, and a Copula. That is called the Subject, of which we speak; The Predicate, is that which is spo∣ken of the Subject; and the Copula, is some Verb, which joyns the Subject with the Pre∣dicate, as in this Proposition; Claudius laid snares for Milo: Claudius is the Subject, be∣cause it is of him that we are to speak. Snares for Milo, is the Predicate; because that is the thing which is said of Claudius. And the Verb laid, is the Copula, which joyns the Subject with the Predicate. Now then if you will find out Arguments on this Proposition, take the Subject, and go through every Topick: First go to Definition, and ask what it is? what is the nature of it? and how it is distinguished from other things? then go to Division, and see into how many parts the Subject may be divided; and so forward from Topick to Topick. And still observe to yourself every Argument, which doth by this means arise from the Subject,
and apply it to the Predicate; so shall you easily see, whether it doth fully confirm your Proposition, and when you have done with the Subject, take the Predicate, and run through the several Topicks with that also; but if the matter require it, and that you judge it more convenient to take the whole Proposition, then the Subject and Pre∣dicate a part by themselves, you may in that manner run through all the heads of Inven∣tion; but stay not too long upon any one, for if matter offer not it self in one head, go to another, for every head perhaps may not afford matter, at least not such as is apt and fit. But if you would know whether your Arguments or matter be drawn from the Subject, or from the Predicate, put it into the form of a Syllogism, and if the major be most certain, you may conclude, that the Argument is drawn from the predicate; but if the minor be most certain, it is then drawn from the Subject. VVhen you have found the Arguments which prove the Proposition, you must re∣duce them into the form of a Syllogism, which doth consist of three Propositions: the first whereof is called the Major, the se∣cond the Minor, and the third the Conclusion or Inference. For Example. In the former Proposition, Claudius laid snares for Milo; the matter or Subject of the
Discourse may be drawn from the Predicate the snares laid for Milo; which being a trea∣cherous thing, every one may naturally in∣fer, that it doth deserve punishment. Now then joyn this Inference with the Pre∣dicate of your Proposition; saying, He that layeth snares deserveth punishment, and this is your Major; then take the Subject of your Proposition, and joyn that with the Predi∣cate, and say, Claudius layeth snares, and that is your Minor: From both which, this con∣clusion must needs follow, Therefore Claudi∣us deserveth punishment. 17. Hitherto we have spoken of Artificial Arguments, Inartificial are either Testimo∣nies or Examples. Testimonies are either Divine or Human, a Divine Testimony, is that which hath God for its Author; such are the Oracles of God, and the predictions of his Prophets. Humane Testimony, is either Common or Proper. Common Testimony, is that which de∣pends either upon some Law, Custom, or Opinion and Sayings of wise Men. Proper Testimony, is that which is pecu∣liar to some particular Causes. Example, is an Inartificial Argument, by which the truth of a thing is confirmed and illustrated.
CHAP. II. Of Disposition. DIsposition, is the orderly placing of those things which are invented: It is two-fold. First, Natural, in which things are dis∣coursed in that order in which they were done, or in which according to Nature, they should be done; as if you were to commend a Person, you should begin with his Child∣hood, next his Youth, and so to the other degrees of his Age. The second way is Artificial, which doth either for delight or profit diversly mingle and confound the matter, putting that in the end, which should be in the beginning, and the beginning in the end, that so he may both delight the Auditors, and hold them in suspense; which in an unexpected e∣vent doth not a little please and delight the Hearers. The Orator then having resolved of his Proposition, must first consider of what na∣ture it is, whether single, or consisting of se∣veral parts; and which of the parts should be first handled, which next. Secondly, he must choose some few of the best Arguments he hath invented, and place
some solid Argument in the beginning, those that are less forcible in the midst, re∣serving still the best and most convincing for the conclusion; because the Auditor at the first being greedy of knowing, must be prepos∣sessed and convinced; but in the end he must be strongly confirmed and forced. And the most perswasive Arguments are those which proceed from the Definition, Distribution, Genus, Causes, and Effects of the thing discoursed of, for these explain the nature thereof; and less forcible Argu∣ments are such as are collected from some trivial Adjuncts and Conjectures. Thirdly, he must Logically dispose of these Reasons and Arguments; First, into Syllogisms; and then consider how to enlarge them in an Oratorical manner. Fourthly, he must consider into what parts his Oration should be divided, and the parts of an Oration are usually reckoned to be these five. 1. Exordium. 2. Proposition. 3. Narration. 4. Confirmation. 5. Peroration, or Conclusion. As for Confutation, it is comprised in Confirmation: But all these parts are not always necessary; for the ingenious Orator, may as he shall see it convenient, sometimes omit the Narration, sometimes the Exordi∣um,
sometimes the Peroration or Conclusion, yea, and the Confirmation is many times scarce discernable; as when the things pro∣pounded are certain, there is more need of Ornament than Proof, as in Gratulatory O∣rations, and the like. As for the placing of these parts, their natural Order is that in which we have named them. 1. The Exordium. 2. The Proposition. 3. The Narration, if it be not thought fit to omit it. 4. The Confirmation; and Lastly, The Pe∣roration. An Exordium, is as it were the door of the Oration, in which the Orator doth pre∣pare the minds of the Auditor for that which is to follow: And this is commonly done by one of these three ways; By bespeaking their favour; by making them Docible; or by begging their Attention. The Favour of the Auditors is bespoke either from the person of the Orator, from the persons of the Auditors, from the persons of the Ad∣versaries, or from the subject matter of the Discourse. The Orator may bespeak the Favour of the Auditors, in respect of him∣self, if his gesture and deportment be suita∣ble unto theirs that are his Auditors, and express himself modestly. And in respect of the Auditors, if he shew how well they have deserved of the Common-wealth, of him, and other men. And in respect of the Adversaries, if he modestly shew wherein
they are faulty, and render them to the Au∣ditors inexcusable. And lastly, in respect of the matter in hand, if he say, that it is some excellent, necessary, and profitable thing. Secondly, the Orator may be said to make the Auditors Docible, if he clearly explain the thing of which he is to speak, and how he purposeth to enlarge upon it. Thirdly, the Attention will be quickened, if he saith, that he intends to speak of some great and wonderful thing, and something that is delightful; necessary, and very much concerns his Auditors, &c. The second part of an Oration is the Pro∣position; and the Proposition is that part of the Oration, in which the Orator doth briefly deliver the sum of the whole Matter, of which he intends to speak, and bespeaks the Hearers Attention, if need be. Some∣times it doth immediately follow the Exor∣dium; sometimes it follows the Narration; in what place soever it be put, it must be short and clear, and fit for Confirma∣tion. The third part of an Oration is Narrati∣on, by which a relation is made of the mat∣ter or thing done. And this is either a di∣stinct part of the Oration, and then for the most part it doth immediately follow the Exordium, that the Proposition with the Con∣firmation, which is to be done in such Ora∣tions which assume the explaination of
the thing done to prove the matter in hand. For Example. If you were to prove that some Valiant Person had been a Souldier in some Warr; it is necessary that you should declare what the particular Actions were in which he shewed his Valour. But now in that Narration, which is made a distinct part of the Oration, the thing done must be briefly and simply decla∣red without any exaggregation: And in such a Narration as makes way for Confir∣mation, the things done may be illustrated with great neatness of Language, with Sen∣tences and Figures, and some Discourses may be made concerning the worthiness of the action, with some amplification from Si∣militudes and Comparisons. The fourth part of an Oration, is Confir∣mation: and Confirmation is as it were the ve∣ry Heart and Soul by which an Oration may be chiefly said to Live: Or it is the chief part of an Oration in which the Argu∣ments are produced, by which we would prove our Proposition, and refute or answer the contrary opinion of our Adversary, if need require. What is necessary in this be∣half, may be collected from what hath been already said. Seeing that Confirmation doth consist of the Arguments that are invented and the right disposition of them, both which have been fully enough declared be∣fore.
Confutation, is a part or kind of Confirma∣tion, in which we Answer all Objections; it doth either precede or follow Confirma∣tion, or may be here or there used in all the parts of the Oration. And these objections may be either all Answered together, or those first which are first made, and then the latter; or those first which are most material, and the rest may fall of themselves; or the weakest first, that they being avoided, the strongest Arguments may be somewhat weak'ned. And the man∣ner of doing this, is by shewing, that the Adversaries Allegation is either false, impos∣sible, uncertain, or impertinent, and the like. Peroration, or Conclusion, is the last part of an Oration, in which the Orator should very much endeavour to set an edge in the minds of his Auditors, and incline them to be of his side; and here he should therefore use such Figures, as are most proper to move the Affections: It doth chiefly consist of two parts, Enumeration, and Amplificati∣on. Enumeration is required, that the chief Arguments more largely opened in the for∣mer discourse may be clearly repeated in a new form of words. Amplification, desires that this repetition may be made, by some serious expressions, a∣dorned with Sentences and Figures.
CHAP, III Of Elocution. ELocution, or the garnishing of Speech, is an Art by which the Speech is beautified with the Elegancy of Words and Sentences. And this is performed two ways; by the fine manners of Words, called a Trope; or by the fine frame of Speech, called a Figure. A Trope is such an Elocution or manner of Speech, as doth change the signification of a word into a different signification from the natural. In a Trope two things are to be considered. 1. The Affections. 2. The Kinds. The Affections of a Trope are four, Catachresis. Hyperbole. Matalepsis. Allegoria. Catachresis, is a harsh and unpleasant change of a Word; as namely, when one word or name is put to another, not by any proper relation, but by a kind of force. He threatens me a good turn. Hyperbole, is a very high relation of a thing, or a more bold excess of a Trope, which doth exceed belief, either by Augmen∣tation
or by Diminution. Note that though an Hyperbole doth vary from the truth, yet doth it not deceive us through-Fiction, or such variation. An Hyperbole is two-fold; Auxesis or Meio∣sis. An Auxesis is, when for Argumentation sake or Amplification, we interpose a more vehement expression, in his proper place; as when we say, magnificent for liberal. A Meiosis, or a Tapinosis, is when for ex∣tenuation sake, we use a milder or more fa∣vourable expression, than the matter requi∣reth; as when we say a flatterer is a courteous and an affable person. A Matalepsis, is that which containeth ma∣ny Tropes in one expression; as, when we by an improper Speech, signifie, first, that which is improper, and by that improper Speech perhaps another, and so forward, till we come to that which is proper, making way for Transition, by interposing a mean degree; as All the City was moved. Mat. 21.10. where the City is put for Jerusalem, by a Synechdoche Generis: and Jerusalem for its In∣habitants, by a Metonymy of the Subject. An Allegory, is the continuation of a Trope as where many Tropes of the same kind are joyned together; as, Put on the whole Armor of God, Ephesians 6.11. In an Allegory, observe to end with the same kind of Trope with which you begin, or
else the Consequence will be abused. The several kinds of Tropes are these four: 1. A Metonomy. 2. An Irony. 3. A Metaphor: and 4. A Synechdoche. A Metonomy, is a Trope of the Cause to the Effect, of the Subject to the Adjunct: and the contrary, of the Effect to the Cause, or of the Adjunct to the Subject. There are four kinds of Causes. 1. The Efficient Cause, by which a thing is. 2. The Material Cause, of which a thing is made. 3. The Formal Cause, by which a thing is what it is. 4. The Final Cause, for which a thing is; of which the two first only belong to our pre∣sent purpose. A Metonymy of the Cause, is of the Effici∣ent, or of the Matter. A Metonymy of the Efficient Cause, is when the Author or Inventor of any thing is put for those things which he hath invented; as Virgil, for the Poem or Works composed by Virgil. A Metonymy of the Material Cause, is when the name of the Matter is put for the Effect; as Brass, for Brass Money. A Metonymy of the Effect, is when the Ef∣ficient Cause is signified by the Effect; as, Pale Death, which maketh Pale.
A Metonymy of the Subject, is when the proper name of any Subject is made to sig∣nifie the Adjunct; as, the Cup, for the Drink in the Cup. A Metonymy of the Adjunct, is when the Adjunct is put for the Subject; as Gen. 31.53. Jacob swear by the fear of his Father Isaac, i. e. by God, whom Isaac feared. An Irony, is a Trope from one opposite to another, or in which we speak by con∣traries. Opposites; are either unlike or contrary; all things of different natures are said to be unlike, as a Man, a Stone; and all things of contrary natures are said to be contrary to one another; as light and darkness. An Irony of a thing unlike, is when any thing is spoken of one person, and under∣stood of another. An Irony from the contrary, is when one contrary is signified by another; as O thou hast done very well; meaning that he had done very ill. Paralepsis, is a kind of Irony, by which we seem to pass by, or take no notice of such things which yet we strictly observe and re∣member. Apophasis, is a kind of Irony, by which we deny to say or do what yet we speak with greatest earnestness, and do with all our might. A Metaphor, is a Trope, by which we
express our selves by a word, which is of the like signification with that we mean; as, the King is the Head of the Common-wealth. Synecdoche, is a Trope, by which a part is put for the whole, or the whole for a part. A Part, is either a Member or Species. A Synecdoche of a Member, when by a Member the whole is signified; as, the Roof for the House. A Synecdoche of the Species, is when the Species is put for the Genus; as, Croesus, for a Rich man. The whole is either an Integer or Genus. A Synecdoche of an Integer, is when an In∣teger is put for a Member; as, His Army was so great, that it drank the Rivers dry; mean∣ing a great part of the Water in the River. A Synecdoche of the Genus is, when the general is put for the special; as, Preach the Gospel to every Creature, meaning Mankind only, and not to every Creature. Hitherto of Tropes, the first kind of elocu∣tion, the second kind of Elocution by Fi∣gure.
CHAP. IV. Of a Figure. A Figure, is a kind of Elocution, by which the form of a Speech is changed from its right and plain use. A Figure, is either of a Word, or of a Sentence. A Figure of a Word, is that by which an Oration or Speech is composed of words aptly and sweetly suitable to one another, and this consists in the Dimension or Repe∣tition of Sounds or VVords. A Figure, in the Dimension of Sounds, is the sweet number of Sounds in a Sentence. Number, is either Poetical or Oratorical. A Poetical Number, is that which is con∣fined to a perpetual observation of certain Spaces. A Number Poetical, is either Rhyme or Meter. Rhyme is a Poetical Number, containing a certain number of Feet, without any regard to the quantity of the Syllables; whether long or short, As, Dare to be true; nothing can need a lye: A fault that needs it most, grows two thereby. A Meter, is a Poetical Number, consisting
of certain Feet, of which the last Foot hath the last Syllable indifferent or common; that is, long or short. Oratorical Number doth indeed consist of Feet, but not of any certain number of Feet, but of as many or as few as the Orator plea∣seth. The Figure of a word in respect of the re∣petition thereof, is either of like or unlike Sounds. A Figure of a word in the repitition of the like Sound, is either with, or without Inter∣mission. Repetition of the like Sound without inter∣mission, is either an Epizeuxis, or an Ana∣diplosis. An Epizeuxis, is when a like Sound is re∣peated in the same Sentence without Inter∣mission; as, a sword, a sword is sharpened. An Anadiplosis, is when a like sound with∣out Intermission is repeated in divers senten∣ces, i. e. when it ends one and begins ano∣ther; as, If then, why I take not my leave, she ask; Ask her again, why she did not unask? Repetition of like sound with intermission in the same place, is either an Anaphora or Epistrophe. An Anaphora, is when a like sound is re∣peated
in the beginning of Sentences; as, By art of Sails and Oars, Seas are divided: By art the Chariot runs, by art Loves guided. An Epistrophe, is when a like sound is re∣peated, in the close of sentences; as, Are they Hebrews? so am I: Are they, Israelites? so am I: Are they of the seed of Abraham? so am I. Repetition of like sound with intermission in divers parts or places, is either an Epa∣nalepsis, or an Epanados. An Epanalepsis, is when a like sound is re∣peated in the beginning and ending of the same Sentence; as, In sorrow was I born, and I must dye in sorrow. An Epanados, is when the like sound is in the beginning and ending of divers senten∣ces, an Anadiplosis coming between; as Par∣thenia desired above all things to have Arga∣lus; Argalus feared nothing but to miss Par∣thenia. A Figure of a Word made by the repeti∣tion of sounds somewhat unlike, is either Pa∣ronomafia, or Polyptoton. Paronomafia, is when a Word being chan∣ged in a Letter or Syllable, it is also chan∣ged in sense and signification; as, Though you advise me to repent, I have not Grace to follow your advise. A Polyptoton, is when words of the same
Original are reiterated, but with some variati∣on; as, Deceiving, and being Deceived. A Figure in reference to a sentence, is a Figure which affecteth the whole sentence with some motion of the Mind, either in absolute reasoning, or in reasoning Dia∣logue-wise. Logismus, or absolute Reasoning, is when a sentence is composed without any talk∣ing with other supposed; this is either Ec∣phonesis, a recalling of ones self, Apostrophe, or Prosopopeia. Ecphonesis, is a Figure in reasoning, by way of Exclamation, by an Adverb expres∣sed, or understood; as, O wretched man that I am! Recalling of ones self, is when something is called back; and it is as it were a Dimi∣nution of the over-hastiness or heat of speech; and this is either Epanorthosis, or Aposiopesis. An Eparnorthosis, is when something pre∣cedeing is called back, by correcting it; as, I had one only Young Man to my son; ah! what have I said! I had! yea I had! It is now un∣certain whether I have or not. An Aposiopesis, is when the close of a sen∣tence begun is stopped, by keeping in a part, which yet is understood; as, You Rogue if I Live! An Apostrophe, is when a speech is dire∣cted to another, than was by the speech it
self at first intended; as, God knows I lye not. A Prosopopoeia, is when in our Oration, we suppose another person to be speaking; as, Josh. 24.27. Behold this shall be a witness un∣to us; for it hath heard all the Words of the Lord, which he hath spoken unto us. A Figure, in reasoning Dialogue-wise, is when a sentence is composed in form of a Conference; this consisteth in Question and Answer, in Consenting or dissenting Dialogism. A Figure of consenting Dialogism, is when ones Answer doth admit of the Obje∣ction expressed or understood; yet so, as that from thence the inconsequence of the Objection may be shewed if need be. Dissenting Dialogism, is when ones an∣swer doth impugn or cross the Objection. And thus much concerning Elocution, as for Memory and Pronounciation, which are the other two parts of Rhetorick, I purpose∣ly omit them, as being natural Endowments, which may be better improved by constant practice, than by any Precepts which can be given. FINIS.
THE ENGLISH ACADEMY: The SEVENTH PART. Of the ART of LOGICK. CHAP. I Of Simple Themes. LOgick, is an Art which conducteth the Mind in the knowledge of Things. 2. The Parts of Logick are two, Thematical and Organical. 3. The Thematical part is that, which Treateth of Themes, with their various af∣fections, and second Notions, as of the mat∣ter of which Logical Instruments are com∣posed. 4. The Organical part, is that which trea∣teth of these Instruments, and their Com∣position. 5. A Theme, is any thing propounded to
the understanding, that it may be known. 6. A Theme, is either simple or compound. 7. A Simple Theme, is one Voice, signifi∣ing one thing as, a Man, a Horse. 8. A Compound Theme, is a Theme made of several simple themes rightly Joyned to∣gether; signifying many or several things; such are all Orations. 9. A Simple Theme or Voice, is, 1. Concrete, which expresseth a thing Concretely or Joyntly; as, Learned. 2. Abstract, which noteth something Ab∣stracted from all others; as, Learning. 10. An Abstract Voice, or simple theme, is Singular or Universal. 11. A singular theme, is that which in its own nature can be spoken of no more than one, and is called an Individual. 12. Individuals are of two sorts. 1. Such as are Certain and Determinate; as, this man, Paul, Alexander, the Apostle of the Gentiles, &c. 2. Such as are uncertain and indetermi∣nate, as some man. 13. An Vniversal simple Theme, otherwise called a Predicable, is that which may be spoken of many; as, a Body; and this is either of the first or second Intention. 14. A simple Theme of the first intention, is that which expresseth the thing it self; as, Gold, Stone, &c. so called, because they are the names by which the things themselves are first made known.
15. A simple Theme of the second Intention, is that which doth not express the things it self, but certain affections agreeing to the thing, and such are all Words of Art; as, a Noun, a Metaphor, &c. 16. An Vniversal simple Theme, may be spoken of many, two ways. 1. In Quid? or by declaring what a thing is; and thus it is spoken of such as do dif∣fer in the species, and is called Genus; as, a li∣ving Creature, colour, &c. or else of such as do differ in number only, and is called spe∣cies; as, a Man. 2. In Quale, or by declaring what a kind of thing it is, of which it is spoken; & that Essentially or Accidentally, Essentially, and then it is called Difference, the which is, 1. Divisive, by which a Genus is divided in∣to its several species, as by rational and irra∣tional a Living Creature is divided into a Man or a Beast. 2. Constitution, which doth Essentially constitute some species, and this is, 1. Generical, which doth constitute some remote species, but not the next, for the next is the Genus, thus sensibility in respect of Man, is a generical difference, constituting first a living Creature, and then a man. And this is always spoken of many differing in species, or number. 2. Specifical, which doth constitute the nearest species; as, rationalibility doth constitute man. 2. Accidentally, and that either of neces∣sity,
and then it is called a proper Accident, which is convertable with its Species, per∣petually inherent in every of them, and in no other, as the visible faculty in a Man. Or not of necessity, and then it is called a common or simple Accident, not converti∣ble with its Species; as white. 17. All simple Themes, may be reduced to ten ranks or orders, called Predicaments, of which some are more principal, some less. 18. The more principal Predicaments are the first six, the less principal, are the other four. 19. The Predicamental Ranks or Orders, are of two sorts, the one of Substance, and the other of Accidents. 20. Of Substance, there is only one, and it is called by that name Substance, which is a thing subsisting of it self, and it is ei∣ther first or second. 21. The first substance, is a Singular sub∣stance, or a substance that cannot be predi∣cated of its subject; as, Alexander. 22. The second Substance is an Universal substance, or a substance which may be pre∣dicated of its subject; as, a Man, a Horse. The first substance is chiefly and properly a substance, and among the second substan∣ces, every one is by so much more a substance, by how much it is nearer to the first. 23. The Predicamental Ranks or Orders of Accidents, are of two sorts. 1. Absolute, as the Predicaments of quan∣tity,
Quality, Action, and Passion. 2. Relative, as the Predicament of Relation. 24. Quantity, is an absolute accident, by which a thing is said to be great in bulk or number. 25. Quality, is an absolute Accident, by which it is simply and determinately decla∣red what kind of thing, that subject is, of which it is the Quality. 26. Action, is an Accident, by which a subject is said to be doing. 27. Passion, is an Accident, by which the subject is called Patient; or it is the recep∣tion of Action. 28. Relation, is a respective accident, by which one thing is predicated of another, or may by some way be referred unto another. 29. The less principal Predicaments are these four, When, Where, Scituation, and Habit. 30. The Predicament When, is an acci∣dent, by which finite things are said to be in time, past, present, or to come. 31. The Predicament Where, is an acci∣dent, by which things finite, are said to be in some place. 32. The Predicament of Scituation, is a certain Ordination, or placing of parts in Generation. 33. The Predicament of Habit, is an ac∣cident, by which some garment or something like a Garment, is put about, hanged upon, or some way or other joyned to a Body.
CHAP. II. Of Compounded Themes. HItherto of Simple Themes: Compounded Themes, or such as are made of several Simple Themes are next to be considered; otherwise called Enunciations, or Propositions. 2. An Enunciation, or Proposition, is an Indi∣cative, Congruent and perfect Oration, signi∣fying true or false without any Ambiguity. 3. The parts of a Proposition are two, the parts Signing or Signed. 4. The parts Signing are simple terms, whose parts can signifie nothing, being se∣parated from the whole, or no such thing as they did signifie being joyned all together. 5. These simple terms are of two sorts, Categorematical, or Syncategorematical. 6. Categorematical, or Significative terms, or such simple terms, as do by themselves signifie something perfectly; and these are either Nouns or Verbs. 7. A Noun, is a simple term or word, which doth signifie some certain thing with∣out destinction of time; as, a man, a horse. 8. A Verb, is a simple term, which doth sig∣nifie something, with some destinction of time past, present, or to come; as, he runneth. 9. Syncategorematical, or Consignificative terms, are simple terms, which of them∣selves do not signifie any certain thing, or
constitute a Proposition, but being joyned with other Words, are significative, to ex∣press the manner of such a thing; and such are all Words which serve to express the quantity of a proposition; as, all, none, some, &c. with all Adverbs, Conjunctions, Pre∣positions, and Interjections. 10. The parts signed are three; the Sub∣ject, the predicate, and the Copula. 11. The subject is all that which precedes the Copula in the Proposition. 12. The Predicate, is all that which is spoken of the subject. 13. The Copula, is the principal Verb, joyning the Predicate to the subject, and in e∣very Proposition is some person of this Verb Substantive, as in this Proposition, A Man is a living Creature; a Man is the sub∣ject; a living Creature is the Predicate; and the Verb is the Copula; sometimes the Co∣pula is some Person of a Verb Adjective; as in this Proposition, Socrates lived at Athens. Here note, that the subject doth not always precede, and the predicate follow the Copula, in order of the parts or terms, but in sense and construction; and also, that in some Pro∣positions, the three terms are not always ex∣prest, but implyed; as, I walk, for I am walking. 14. Propositions are distinguish'd three ways, according to Substance, Quantity, and Quality. 15. A Proposition, in respect of the substance or parts of which it doth consist, is either Categorical or Hypothetical.
16. A Categorical Proposition, is that which doth consist of one subject, one Predicate, and one Copula; as, a man is a Living Creature, and this is either Pure or Modal. 17. A Pure Categorical Proposition, is when the Predicate is purely affirmed or de∣nyed of the subject, without expressing the manner of affirming or denying. 18. A Modal Categorical Proposition, is when besides the subject, predicate, and Copu∣la, we add some modification, to shew how the Predicate is in the Subject, as, it is neces∣sary; it is contingent, it is possible; it is impos∣sible that a man should be without reason. 19. An Hypothetial Proposition, is that which doth consist of two Categorical Propositions, joyned together by some Conjunction, as, if a man be a living Creature, then a man is a Body. 20. A Proposition, in respect of Quality, is distinguished two ways; first, according to the Quality of the sign, and so it is Affirmative or Negative; secondly, according to the quantity of the thing; & so it is either True or False. 21. A Proposition, in respect of Quantity, is universal, particular, indefinite, or singular. 22. An Vniversal proposition, is that which hath a note of Universality added to a com∣mon or universal Subject; as, every man is a Living Creature. 23. A particular proposition, is that in which a note of particularity is added to an universal
Subject; as, some man is a Living Creature. 24. An Indefinite proposition, is that, in which no note, whether Universal or Par∣ticular is put before the universal Subject; as, a man is a Living Creature. 25. A Singular proposition, is that in which the subject is singular, whether it be a proper Name; as, Secrates is a Philosopher; or whether it be a common name, with a note of singulari∣ty set before it; as, this man is Learned. 26. Pure Categorical propositions, as they have reference to one another, have three affections; Opposition, Aequipollency, and Conversion. 27. Opposition, is the repugnancy of two ca∣tegorical propositions, either in quantity alone, or in quality alone, or else in quantity and qua∣lity both, in which there is the same subject, the same predicate, and the same Copula, as, every man is just, no man is just. 28. The categorical propositions, may be said to be opposite four ways; Contrarily, Subcon∣trarily, Subalternately, and Contradictorily. 29. Two propositions, that are contrarily, and subcontrarily opposite, are opposite only in quality; and such as are subalternately oppo∣site, are opposite only in quantity; and such as are contradictorily opposite, are opposite both in quantity and quality. 30. Opposition, by way of contrariety is the repugnancy of two Universal Propositions in quality; as, every man doth run, no man doth run;
and these in a contingent matter, may be both False, but cannot be both together true. 31. Subcontrary Opposition, is the repugnan∣cy of two particular Propositions in quality; as, some man doth run, some man doth not run; and these in a contingent matter may be both true, but cannot be both together False. 32. Sabalternate Opposition, is the repug∣nancy of two Affirmative, or two Negative Propositions in their quantity; as, every man doth run, some man doth run. 33. Contradictory Opposition, is the repug∣nancy of two Propositions, both in quality and in quantity, so that if one of them be Affirmative, the other shall be Negative; if one be Universal, the other shall be particu∣lar; as, Every man is Learned, some man is not learned: All which may be easily appre∣hended by the following Scheme.
34. Aequipollency, is the equivalency of two Propositions, in sense and signification, though they differ in Words, by virtue of this Word of Negation (not) being set be∣fore the Sign and Subject, after the Sign and Subject, or both before and after, in which there is the same Subject, and the same Pre∣dicate; as, some man is Learned; not every man is Learned: The several varieties where∣of are fully expressed in these Distichs. If after sign and subject, this (not) be, Contraries then, make Aequipollencie. Only before make contradictories, But 'fore and aft' are subalternate guise. 35. Conversion, is an apt mutation of the whole subject, into the place of the whole Predicate, and of the whole Predicate, into the place of the whole subject, keeping the same Quality, but sometimes changing the Quantity; as, Every man is a Living Crea∣ture; some Living Creature is a man. 36. This Conversion is three-fold; 1. Simple, in which the predicate is chan∣ged into the place of the whole Subject, and the Contrary, keeping the same both qua∣lity and quantity; as, No man is a Stone, therefore no stone is a man. 2. By Accident, in which the whole pre∣dicate is changed into the place of the whole Subject, and the Contrary, keeping the same
Quality, but changing of the Quantity; as, Every man is a living Creature, therefore some Living Creature is a man. 3. By Contraposition, in which the whole Subject is changed into the place of the whole predicate; and the contrary, keep∣ing both the same Quality and Quantity, but changing the terms from Finite to Infi∣nite; as, Every-Man is a Living Creature, therefore every thing that is a Living Creature, is not a man: What Propositions may be con∣verted this or that way, these Verses do express. E E, I I, Conversion Simple make. A I, E O, of Accident partake. A A, O O, for Contraposits sake. And what these Letters A, E, I, O, do signifie there Distichs do declare: A, affirmes, E, denies both universal are, I, affirms, O, denies, but both particular.
CHAP. III. Of Difinition and Division. HAving done with the first part of Logick, namely, that which treateth of Themes. I come now unto the second, called the Organical, or that which treateth of Logical Instruments, and their Composition. 2. Logical Instruments are four; Definiti∣on, Division, Argumentation, and Method. 3. Definition, is the explication of the thing which is defined; and this is either Nominal, or Real. 4. A Nominal Difinition, is that which sheweth the Signification of the Name; whe∣ther it be by giving the Etymology thereof, or by expressing it by some other Synony∣mous word more generally known. 5. A Real Definition, is that which shew∣eth what the thing is; and this is either perfect or imperfect. 6. A Real and a Perfect Difinition, is that which doth explain the thing by Essential Attributes. 7. A Real, but Imperfect Definition, other∣wise called a Description, is that which ex∣plains the Nature of a thing, by certain Ac∣cidental Attributes. 8. Division, is the Deduction of some¦thing
that is large, into a straighter and narrower comprehension; and this is either of some ambiguous word, into its several significations, and then it is called Distincti∣on, or of the whole into its parts. 9. The whole is either Simple, or Aggre∣gate; Division of the whole, simply and pro∣perly so called is three-fold. 1. Vniversal into its subjective parts, or of the General into the Specials; as, to di∣vide Animal into Man and Beast. 2. Essential, which resolves the whole in∣to essential parts, and this either of a Species into its Genus and Difference, or of some spe∣cial nature into its matter and form; as, A Man into Soul and Body. 3. Integral, which resolveth the whole in∣to Integral parts, and this is the Division of some individual, either into its sensible or material parts. 4. Division of the aggregated whole into its parts, and by Accident is five-fold. 1. When the Subject may be divided by its Accidents; as, Men are Learned or Vn∣learned. 2. When an Accident may be divided by its Subjects; as, Feavers are in the Spirits or in the Humours, or in the solid parts. 3. When an Accident may be divided by Accidents; as, Good is either profitable, ho∣nest, or pleasant. 4. When things may be divided by their
Objects; as, Sight by Colours, Hearing by Sound. 5. When Causes may be divided by their Effects; and the Contrary; as, Heavenly heat is from the Sun, and Elementary from Fire. CHAP. IV. Of Argumentation. ARgumentation is an Oration by which some Problem is proved by inference. 1. A Problem, is the proposition or Que∣stion to be proved; the which Problem, when it is so proved is the Conclusion, and follows the Illative note, or note of infe∣rence: All that which precedes is the Ante∣cedent, that which follows is the Consequent or Conclusion; the Illative is commonly this word (therefore,) and in this doth the tye or force of the Argument consist. 2. Argumentation, may be considered ei∣ther in reference to the form and manner of Arguing, which is the more general con∣sideration; or as it is restrained to certain matter, as shall be shewed in his place. 3. The kinds of Argumentation are usual∣ly reckoned to be four; Syllogism, Induction,
Enthymeme, and Example, but may be redu∣ced to two; for an Enthymeme is nothing but an imperfect Syllogism; an Example, an imperfect Induction; Other less principal kinds of Argumentation there are, which either are of no use, or may be reduced to a Syllogism; as, Sorites and Dilemma, which are indeed redundant Syllogisms; Sorites Ca∣tegorical, and Dilemma Hypothetical. 4. A Syllogism, is an Oration, in which something being taken for granted, some∣thing else not granted before, is proved or inferred from them. 5. A Syllogism is two-fold, Categorical, in which all the propositions are Categori∣cal: or Hypothetical, in which one or more of the propositions are Hypothetical; in both which we are to consider the Matter and the Form. 6. The Matter of a Syllogism, is either Remote or Next. 7. The Remote matter, is that of which it is remotely made, as the Simple Terms which in the propositions of the Syllogism are made Subject and predicate. 8. The Simple Terms of a Syllogism are three, of which one is called the Middle Term, the other two are the Mjor and the Minor Extreams, The Major and Minor Extreams are the Predicate, and the other the Subject of the question, and the Middle Term or Argument, is the Term not ex∣pressed
in the question, but is united once to the Major Extream, and once to the Minor. 9. The next or immediate matter of a Syllogism, is that of which the Syllogism is immediately made, as the three propositi∣ons, which are made of the simple terms, of which the first is called the Major, the second the Minor, & the third is call'd the Conclusion. 10. The form of a Syllogism is the right disposing of the two-fold Matter, Next and Remote, and this comprehendeth two things, Figure, and Mood; the one, to wit Figure, hath respect to the Remote Matter or Simple Terms, and Moods respects the next Matter or the propositions. 11. A Figure, is the fit disposing of the middle Terms with the Extreams, in refe∣rence to subjection and Predication; this is three-fold. 12. The first Figure maketh that which is the middle simple term to be the subject in the major proposition and the Predicate in the minor. 13. The second Figure, maketh the middle simple term to be the Predicate, both in the major and the minor propositions. 14. The third Figure maketh the middle simple term to be the subject both in the major and the minor propositions; according to these Distichs. Both sub and prae, doth the first Figure use. Twice prae the next, the third twice sub I muse.
15. A Mood is the disposing of the pro∣positions according to quantity and quality. 16. There are 19 Moods, of which there are nine in the first Figure; four in the se∣cond; and six in the third, according to these Verses. 1. Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio, Baralipton. Celamtes, Dabitis, Fapesmo, Fricesomorum. 2. Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco. 3. Darapti: Felapton, Disamis, Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison. 17. These moods are so many words of Art, which serve only to denote the quali∣ty and quantity of every proposition, by help of the Vowels, A, E, I, O, as hath been shewed already; and are some of them per∣fect, as the four first Moods in the first Fi∣gure, and all the moods in the second and third Figures; the rest are imperfect. 18. And the question propounded is pro∣ved by or inferred from the premises, by help of these moods two ways, viz. Directly, and Indirectly. 1. Directly, when the Minor Extream is the subject in the Conclusion, and the Major in the Predicate. 2. Indirectly, when the Major Extream is the subject in the Conclusion, and the Minor the Predicate, and this is in the five last moods of the first Figure only, according to these Distichs.
All the Nineteen directly do conclude, Except of Figure first, the last 5 Mood. 19. These things premised, a Syllogism, may be made in any Mood and Figure in this manner. The question propounded is always the conclusion of the Syllogism, and by the quan∣tity thereof doth plainly shew in what mood or moods it may be framed, and by conse∣quence, in what Figure also. 20. If the Syllogism be to be made in such a mood as doth directly infer the Conclusion from the Premises; then the subject in the Proposition is the Minor Extream, and the Predicate the Major; as in the four first moods of the first Figure, and in all the Moods of the second and third Figures; but in the five last Moods of the first Figure, the subject in the Proposition is the Major Extream and the Predicate the Minor; and the mid∣dle term is the Cause or Argument by which the truth or falsitie of the proposition is to be proved. 21. The Middle Term or Argument be∣ing joyned to the Major Extream, doth make the Major proposition, and being joyned to the Minor Extream, it maketh the minor propositi∣on.
Example. Let this be the Proposition, No Man is a stone: This Proposition being an Universal Negative, the Syllogism may be framed in Celarent, Celantes, Cesare or Camestres; if in Celarent, man is the Minor Extream, and Stone the Major; and to find out the middle Term, I consider of some Reason or Argu∣ment by which to prove the Question; as, A Man is not a Stone, because he is a Living Creature; so then Living Creature is the Middle Term, and these three Terms being thus placed; Middle Term. Living Creature. Minor Extream. Man. Major Extream. Stone. Because Celarent belongs to the first Fi∣gure, the middle Term Living Creature must be the Subject in the Major Proposition, and the Predicate in the Minor; thus,   Subj. Praed. Major. Living Creature. — Minor. — Living Creature. Conclu. No man is a Stone.
And joyning this middle Term to the Major Extream, and also to the Minor; the several Propositions will be these; Major. A living Creature is not a stone. Minor. A man is a living Creature. Conclu. A man is not a stone. Lastly adding the Quantity to every Pro∣position according to the Vowels in this Mood, the Compleat Syllogism is, Major Ce- No living Creature is a Stone. Minor la- Every man is a living Creature. Conclu. rent. No man is a stone. The like may be done in the other moods. 22. An Enthymem, is an Imperfect Syllo∣gism, inferring the Conclusion from some one Proposition only; as, A man is a living Creature, therefore he hath a soul. 23. An Induction, is an Imperfect syllo∣gism, in which from many singulars, some Universal Conclusion is inferred; as, This man is a living Creature, and that man is a li∣ving Creature, &c. therefore every man is a li∣ving Creature. 24. Example, is an imperfect syllogism, in which from one or more singulars, we infer another particular; as, Catiline was punished
for making of Sedition, therefore this Seditious Fellow should be punished. 25. Sorites, is an imperfect syllogism, in which, from four or more Premises, we in∣fer a Conclusion, in which the first subject is joyned with the last Predicate; as, Socrates is a man, a man is a living Creature, a living Creature is a Body, a Body is a substance, therefore Socrates is a substance. 26. A Dilemma, is an Argumentation which by disjoyning of the Members, doth so enforce the Adversary, that which part soever he chooseth, he will be catched, as, Tribute must be given to Caesar, or to God; If to God, then not to Caesar, and this is Treason; If to Caesar, then not to God, and this is Sacri∣ledge. And thus much concerning a syllogism in the General, with the several kinds and forms thereof. CHAP. V. Of A Material Syllogism. I Come now to speak of a Special or Mate∣rial syllogism, as it is constrained to cer∣tain Conditions of Matter. 2. A special or material syllogism, is of
three sorts; Apodictical, Dialectical and So∣phistical. 3. An Apodictical syllogism, otherwise cal∣led a Demonstration, may be defined two ways; either from the end, or from the mat∣ter of Demonstration. 4. From the end of Demonstration, an Apo∣dictical syllogism, is a syllogism begetting knowledge, or making to know. And we are then said to know a thing, when we know the cause for which it is so, and can∣not be otherwise. 5. All Knowledge is of such Conclusions, to which we assent, for our preceding know∣ledge of the Premises; and the Praecognita in every Science are these three: The Sub∣ject, the Affection, and the Cause. And the means by which these are foreknown, are called Praecognitions, and they are two; That a thing is, and what a thing is. 6. The subject, is the less Extream, in a Demonstration, concerning which some acci∣dent is Demonstrated by its next Cause; as, a man, concerning whom we must know both that he is, and what he is. 7. Affection or Passion, is a proper acci∣dent, which is Demonstrated of the subject, by a proper Cause, it is always the greater Extream, which is Predicated in the Conclu∣sion; as, Risibility, the which is necessary to be foreknown, in respect of its name, What it is, but not, that it is; for that is the thing
to be enquired after, the thing we are to find by Denomination. 8. A Cause, is that by which the Affection is Demonstrated of its subject, and is always the Major Proposition in the Demonstrati∣on; as, Every rational Animal is risible; what the Cause is cannot be foreknown, be∣cause it is a compounded Proposition, but it ought to be known, That it is, or else the Conclusion cannot be inferr'd from it. 9. An Apodictical syllogism, being defined from the matter of Demonstration, is a syl∣logism, which proveth its Conclusion from such Premises, as are of themselves suffici∣ently known. 10. A Demonstration, is to be considered, either in respect of the Matter or in respect of the Form. 11. In respect of the Matter, one kind of Demonstration, sheweth why the Predicate is inherent in the subject, and another sheweth that it is inherent in the subject. 12. In the first of these kinds of Demon∣stration, called the Demonstration causal, why a thing is; the Conditions to be observed, do partly belong to the Question, partly to the Cause or Medium of the Demonstration, and partly to the Premises. 13. Every Question doth not admit of the first and most perfect kind of Demon∣stration, called, Why a thing is? but such a Question only as is true, and hath a certain
and immutable Cause of its own Truth. 14. The Medium of a Demonstration, ought to be the next Cause of the Predicate; and that either Efficient or Final, and the Ef∣ficient either Internal or External. 15. The Conditions to be observed in the Premises of a Demonstration, are Absolute or Relative. 16. The Absolute Conditions are two; the first is, that the Propositions be necessarily true and reciprocal; The second, is that they be immediate or first, in respect of the subject; as, A man is Rational, and in re∣spect of the Causes; as, That which is ratio∣nal, is visible, a man is rational, Ergo. 17. The Relative Conditions to be obser∣ved in reference to the Conclusion, are three. 1. That the Premises be the Cause of the Conclusion. 2. That they be before it: and 3. That they be more known than the Con∣clusion. 18. The other less principal kind of De∣monstration in respect of the Matter, or the Demonstration what, is two-fold, the one is from some sensible Effect, and the o∣ther from a remote Cause. 19. The form of these Demonstrations, is descerned partly from the Quantity, and so it is Vniversal or Particular; Partly from the Quality, and so it is Affirmative or Ne∣gative; partly from the manner of the proof, and so it is Ostensive, or by Reduction to Im∣possibility.
CHAP. VI. Of a Topical Syllogism. HItherto we have spoken of a Demon∣strative syllogism, whose matter is ne∣cessary, and the end a perfect Knowledge; come we now to a Dialectical or Topical syl∣logism, whose matter is Probable and Con∣tingent, and the end Opinion. 2. In a Dialectical, or Topical Syllogism, we are to consider of Problems, Propositions, and Invention of Arguments. 3. A Problem or Question, is the thing of which it is probably discoursed, and the Conclusion of a syllogism already made. 4. Dialectical Propositions, ought to be certain, at least probable, and not Paradox∣es; now that is said to be Probable, which not being absolutely true, doth seem to be true rather than false: And that is said to be a Paradox, which is true, though contra∣ry to the vulgar opinion. 5. For the Invention of Arguments, we are to consider Common places and Rules. 6. A Place, is common Note, by whose help an Argument is found. 7. A Rule or Canon is a Proposition, con∣taining
the Reason of the Consequence, in a Dialectical syllogism. 8. Arguments are of two sorts, Artificial and Inartificial. 9. Artificial Arguments, are such as from the consideration of the parts of a Problem, are not found but by Rules of Art. 10. Inartificial Arguments, are such as are found without any help of Art, and these are nothing but Testimonies. 11. Artificial Arguments, may be raised from these seven Topicks or Heads. 1. From the Cause and the Effect. 2. From the sub∣ject and the Accident. 3. From Dissentany and Comparison. 4. From Conjugates and Notation. 5. From the Whole and its Parts. 6. From Genus and Species. 7. From Defi∣nition and Division. 12. A Cause in General, may be defined to be that, by whose power a thing is. An Argument therefore from the Cause, is when in a probable syllogism, the middle term is the cause of the Major Extream. 13. There are two kinds of Causes; In∣ternal as the material, or matter, of which a thing is made; and the Formal, by which a thing is; as, The shape and form of a statue. External, as the Efficient, which doth bring the thing to pass; and the Final or End, for which a thing is done. 14. An Argument from the Efficient Cause, is when in a probable syllogism, the
middle Term is the Efficient of the Major Ex∣tream: as, The Earth is Diametricaly inter∣posed between the Sun and the Moon, therefore the Moon shall be eclipsed. 15. An Argument from the Final Cause, is when in a probable syllogism, the middle Term is the Final Cause of the major Ex∣tream. 16. An Argument from the material cause, is when in a probable syllogism, the middle Term is the material cause of the Major Ex∣tream, or the Genus or Species thereof. 17. An Argument from the Formal Cause, is when in a Probable syllogism, the middle Term is the Form, Definition, Description, or Difference of the major Extream. 18. In the Topicks of the subject and the Accident, we do not take the subject for the substance, in which the Accident is inherent, or the Accident for that which doth precise∣ly and adiquately adhere to the substance; but subject is here taken for all that, to which any thing not belonging to its essence is at∣tributed: And Accident is here taken for a∣ny such attribute, as, Number is the subject of Equality, that is, it is an Accident of an Accident. 19. An Argument from the subject, is as oft as the middle Term in a Probable syllo∣gism, is the subject of the major Extream. 21. The third General Topick for the In∣vention of Arguments, is from Dessentainies and Comparison.
22. Dessentanes, are either Opposites or Disparates; as, a Horse, and a Bull: There are four kinds of Opposites; Relative, Contra∣ry, Privative, and Contradictory. Compari∣sons are either in respect of quality; as, like and unlike, or in respect of quantity, or also of degrees; as, equal and unequal; and what ever may be said to be more or less or equal. 23. An Argument from Dissentanies, is when in a Probable Syllogism, the middle Term is opposed to the Major Extream, whether it be by way of a Disparate, or a Contrary, or otherwise. 24. An Argument from Comparison, is as oft as in a probable syllogism, one part of the Major Proposition is compared with the other, in reference to their agreement or their disagreement. 25. The fourth general Topick, for the Invention of Arguments, is from Conjugates and Notation. And they are properly cal∣led Conjugates, which for the affinity of signification, have also an affinity in the Voice or Sound; as, Just, Justice, and Just∣ly; some Conjugates are only Nominal, and some Real, and some both, and do compre∣hend Denominatives under them, and are either substantives where one is a Noun sub∣stantive abstracted from the Subject; as, Justice, Just; or Adjectives, where they be both Denominatives, or Concretes, which
shew the form in the Abstract; as, Just, Justly. Notation or Etymology, is the Ex∣plication of a Word by the Original there∣of; as, a Consul, from Counselling the Com∣mon-Wealth. 26. An Argument from Conjugates, is as oft as in a probable syllogism; the one the Conjugates in the major proposition, is the subject of the major Term; as, He that doth Justly is Just. 27. The first General Topick for the In∣venting of Arguments, is from the whole and its parts. And an Argument from the thing divided to the divided members, is as oft as the thing divided is the middle Term, and the dividing Members the Major Ex∣tream, in a Probable Syllogism. And an Argument from the dividing Members, to the thing divided, is as oft as the di∣viding Members are the middle Term, and the thing divided the Major Extream. 28. The sixth General Topick, is from Genus and Species; And an Argument from Genus and Species, is when we prove that a thing doth not agree with the Genus, be∣cause it doth not agree with the species; o that it doth not agree with the species, be∣cause it doth not agree with the genus. 29. The seventh General Topick for the Inventing of Arguments, is from Definition, and Division. We raise an Argument from the Topick or Definition, when we seek for
the Definition of either Extream, that is, of the Subject or the Predicate in the question, which being found, is put into the place of the Mean, that it may be known whether the Extreams should be conjoyned or sepa∣rated; thus we prove that Peter is a man, because he is a Rational living Creature. We argue from the Topick of Division, when we shew something to agree with the dividing Members, because it agrees with the thing divided, or not to agree with the thing di∣vided, because it doth not agree with any of the Dividing Members. 30. Inartificial Arguments, are only such as are raised from Divine or Humane Te∣stimony. And an Argument is raised from Testimony, as oft as the Authority of him that beareth witness, is the middle Term, a∣greeing or not agreeing with the Major Ex∣tream.
CHAP. VII. Of a Sophistical Syllogism. A Sophistical Syllogysm, is a Captious Ar∣gumentation, which is seemingly, or apparently true, but is indeed deceitful. 2. Sophistical, or Fallacious Arguing, is either in respect of the Words or of the Things. 3. Fallacies in Words, are five; Ambigui∣tie, Amphibolie, Composition, Division, and Figure of a Word. 4. Fallacies in things are seven, Accident, Of a thing spoken after a sort, to a thing spoken Simply; Ignorance of the Argu∣ment; a false or wrong Cause, Consequent, Beginning of the Question, and an asking of many Questions.
CHAP. VIII. Of Method. MEthod is the disposing of things belong∣ing to the same Matter or Subject, so, as that they may be best understood, and ea∣siest remembred. 2. Method is two-fold, Natural or Arbitrary. 3. A Natural Method is that, in which the order of Nature and our distinct Know∣ledge is observed. 4. In a Natural Method, we must speak first of Generals, and then of Particulars, and as we proceed from one thing to ano∣ther, every part must have a dependence on that, which was last spoken of by some apt transition. 5. A Natural Method is either Total, or Partial. 6. A Total Method is that, in which a whole Science is Methodically ordered or dispersed. And this is either, Synthetical, or Analytical. 7. A Synthetical or Compositive Method is that, which begins with the first and most simple Principles, and so proceeds to those which do arise from, or are Composed of the first Principles. 8. An Analytical or Resolutive Method, is
that, which begins with the end, and so pro∣ceeds still lower and lower, till we come to the first and most Simple beginnings. 9. A Partial Method is that, by which a∣ny part of any Art or Science is Methodi∣cally ordered or disposed: or by which any particular Theme or Subject is handled by it self. 10. An Arbitrary Method is that, which not regarding the Natural order, is fitted for such a confused Knowledge, as may be most taking with the People, or sure best with their Capacities. And thus much concerning Method, which is the fourth and last-Logical Instrument; and with this I shall conclude these my Lo∣gical Precepts, and last Part of my English A∣cademy: He that desires to be more fully ac∣quainted with these Arts and Sciences, may for all, but Musick, Read my other particu∣lar Tracts of these Subjects, till some body that hath more knowledge in them, shall fur∣nish us with more ample and perfect Instru∣ctions; and as for Musick, I am much of Opinion, that Mr. Playford's Introduction may very well serve, to Instruct our Youth in the first Principles of that excellent Science; For which, and all other helps of Learning, To the only Wise God, be all Honour and Glory, now and for ever. Amen. FINIS.
The ART and MISTERY of NAVIGATION; As to Observation in taking Heights, &c. Sailing the Sundry ways, &c. And other useful matters worthy of note to Navigators, &c. AMongst the many Undertakings, that redound to the Advantage of Man∣kind, Navigation is very consider∣able; for on it depends not only the Welfare of private Persons, but of Na∣tions and Kingdoms, as being Enriched and Improved in Knowledge by it: Wherefore it is highly necessary to speak something of it in this Treatise of Arts and Sciences, that may Instruct the Unexperienced, and, per∣haps, improve the knowledge of the Elder Practitioners. In the Treatise of Astronomy, you find the names of the Stars, and many other things necessary to be taken notice of in Navigati∣on; for on that Art much of this depends, especially in taking the Suns height or Meri∣dian Altitude, and the Elevation or height
of the Pole, as being the Computation or Distance in Latitude from the Aequator, ei∣ther North or South, or any other Imagi∣ned Parralel, as we find East and West is the distance of Longitude, where ever the Meri∣dian is found, there must consequently be computed an equal distance on either side of it; so that the Meridian thus considered, the Rumb must be so likewise, for that leading from place to place, may be termed the di∣stance run upon such a point of the Compass. And to come nearer the taking of these di∣stances and heights are the principal things to be observed in this Art as to the Carry∣ing a Ship to any Country and Port, and knowing at any time where you are, and all these (according to the greatest Proficients) are more closely, or briefly comprized. 1. In the difference of the Latitude. 2. In the difference of the Longitude. 3. The Rumbs. 4. The distance run upon the Rumb. Now if two of these be known or given, the two that remain may be easily found, the first by Observation, and the last by Tri∣gonometry, or Arithmetical Calculation, &c. And in further consideration of these things, to find the Latitude or Elevation of the Pole, you must observe the Meridian Altitude ei∣ther of the Sun or Stars, and though there are many ways described to do this, yet what ensues is found the most plain and easy. Do it by the Astrolabe or Quadrant in this
manner, viz. by what we call backward ob∣servation, and not troubling your Eyes with looking through the sights, permit the Sun to shine through the sight, that is next to the Center, so ordering it, that the beam may fall directly upon the hole of the other sight, by which means the thread will fall upon the right Altitude in the Quadrant, or the Index in the Astrolabe will in the same man∣ner divide the degrees of Altitude. If the Sun shine not, and you are desirous to find its Meridian Altitude, you may do it by informing your self of the declination and Latitude; And upon this observation, if you find the declination North, then add to the Complement of the Latitude, which you will ever find to be the same with the height of the Aequinoctial, but on the con∣trary, if it be a South declination, then sub∣tract from the Complement of the Latitude, and that will at any time give you the Meri∣dian Altitude. As put the case we find in any place the Elevation of the Pole, that is the Latitude to be 52 degrees, the comple∣ment thereof to 90 degrees, is 38 degrees, which likewise is found to be the height of the Aequinoctial, and then it being granted, that on May 2. the Sun being 20 degrees, 24 minutes of Taurus, his declination North∣ward is 117 degrees, 56' 21 s. which, when you add to 38, brings the Suns Meridian Al∣titude to be 55 degrees, 56 minutes, and
12 seconds, but if this be required to be found when the Sun comes to the Aequino∣ctial, either on the 13 of September, or the 11 of March, then the height of the stars or sun, when they are upon the Meridian, will shew the true Latitude if subtracted from 90 degrees, but at other times you must find out their declinations, and if it happen Nor∣therly, subtract it from the Altitude, but if Southerly, you must add it to the Altitude, by which means you will find the height of the Aequinoctial above the Horizon, and Consequently subtracted from 90 degrees, will give you the true Latitude of the place where you make your Observation. If by the Globe you are desirous to find the Elevation of the Pole, take the Suns Me∣ridian Altitude, bringing the Suns place in the Ecliptick, or the Stars to the Brazen Me∣ridian, and so move that Meridian with the Globe through the notches it stands in, till you find the stars, or the suns places Eleva∣ted as many degrees above the Horizon, as their Meridian Altitude is; and whilst the Globe stands in this position, you may be confident the Pole will be Elevated to a true Latitude of the Place. As suppose you find the Suns place in the beginning of Cancer, which may be the 12 of June, and the Meridian Altitude of the sun is 62 degrees from the place where you are to make your observation, then bring
the first degree of the sign Cancer to the Me∣ridian, and Elevate the same 62 degrees a∣bove the Horizon, and you will find the Pole Elevated 51 degrees and 30 minutes. The next thing in Navigation to be con∣sidered, is the finding the Longitude, which could it be brought to perfection, sailing would be far more easy than it is, and dis∣coverys of yet unknown Countrys, Rich perhaps as either Indias; but indeed, though many have attempted it, and gone very far, they have never brought to perfection, how∣ever, for the light of the Navigator, we will consider some things herein. Suppose the Moon to be Eclipsed, observe how much sooner it begins at a place of known Longitude, for which search the E∣phemerides, then at the place where you stand, and observing your Latitude by the stars, as has been directed, the true hour of the night may be found; which done, observe the difference of time of the Moons beginning to be Eclipsed, or its middle or endings, at the place where you make your observation, which spaces convert into degrees and mi∣nutes, which added or subtracted from the hour of the beginning, middle or end of this Eclips at a place of known Longitude, these degrees and minutes in their difference be∣tween the hour at one place, and the hour at an other, added or subtracted from the de∣grees and minutes of the known Longitude,
you will find them give the required Longi∣tude. If the Moon be not Eclipsed, which E∣clips cannot be expected upon every occa∣sion, then you may observe it by the Sun and Moons motion, as thus; suppose, and it is granted, that the Moon is slower in moti∣on than the Sun 48 minutes, in 24 hours, or 360 degrees, then by the help of Mathema∣tical Instruments, find the true Meridian in any place, suppose the West-Indias, &c. you must also find the hour of the Moons com∣ing to that Meridian by the Ephemerides, or other helps; and this being calculated for London, you find by those helps, that on such a day the Moon comes to the Meridian, at four in the Afternoon, and you being the same day in the Indias aforesaid, you find her come to the Meridian 10 minutes past 4, whereupon consider by the Rule of Propor∣tion, that the Sun and Moons difference in motion, being 48 minutes in 36 degrees, what will it come to in ten minutes, or if 48 gives 360, consider what ten gives, and the fourth proportional number will be 75d. and so much is the distance of that place in India from London, and the longitude of London being subtracted from that number 20 de∣grees, and 55 Remainder again subtracted from 360, what remains produces the lon∣gitude to be 305. Some other ways are laid down to prove a knowledge of the lon∣gitude,
but the whole matter being in a man∣ner in the dark, these may suffice for an Ex∣periment. But in plain or circular Sailing, the Com∣pass is very much heeded, but sometimes there may be mistakes by the variation of the Needle, which you may Rectifie by the Globe, in this manner; let the Suns place be brought to the East side of the Horizon, and observe the Circle of Winds, and then a∣gainst the Suns place you have the point of the Compass, whereon it riseth, and so pro∣ceed to take notice upon what point it rises or sets, observe then the difference happen∣ing by the Globe, and by the Compass, and if there be any, that is the Variation, for which Variation, allowing that the Needle will ever shew the Rumb, which is the true point of the Compass, as to the steering the Ship. If you would know how much way your Ship makes in such and such spaces of time, this you may observe by the Logline, or Minute Glass, and by the first so many knots as she runs in half a minute, so many Miles is she counted to Sail in an hour, or it may be done by hanging up a Bullet in a string, which will count the Minutes by its swing∣ing, for if the string be proportioned to 38½ Inches, it will swing about 60 times in a mi∣nute, but if longer not so many, and there∣fore it is left to your discretion, to propor∣tion
it as you make observation by the half minute glass, instead of which, this (for necessity) may serve turn. If you would find the Suns Amplitude, and thereby the variation of the Compass, observe, That as the Proportion of the Co∣sine of the Latitude is to the Radius, the same you will find the sine of the declinati∣on to that of the Amplitude, as, It▪ being granted the Latitude of 31 degrees, 23 mi∣nutes, its Cosine, or Complement, is 38 de∣grees, 28 minutes, and the declination of the Sun 15 degrees, 10 minutes; the Am∣plitude then will be found 24 degrees, 52 minutes North, by reason the declination is so. As for the Circumference of the Com∣pass divided into 360 degrees, observe when the Sun rises and sets, how many de∣grees it is from the direct point of the Am∣plitude so much you will find the Needle va∣ry in the place. As for this kind of Navigation it is vul∣garly proposed in three manner of ways, or Methods, especially, as relating to private Seamen as plain Sailing, Mereators way or Instruction of Sailing, and Sailing by an Arch or great Circle, called Circular Sail∣ing. The plain way of sailing is by a plain Chart, which is the most substantial, and that on which the other are grounded, and to those that sail near the Aequinoctial, they have little or no occasion for any other
way, as having their degrees of Latitude and Longitude equal, each degree divided in to 60 minutes, and each minute put for a Mile, yet somewhat exceed the English mea∣sured miles, as containing about 6000 feet; but if you are to come far from the Aequinoctial, then though you may keep your Lati∣tude in plain sailing, yet you will be at a loss for your Longitude, and therefore to be better informed, consider that as the Radius or whole sine of 90 degrees, is to 60 Miles, so you will find the Cosine of the latitude, is to the Miles contained in one degree of longitude in that latitude, so that in the la∣titude of 60 degrees, 30 Miles make a de∣gree, as sine 90 degrees to 60 Miles 10000, so Cosine 60 degrees to 30 Miles 5000. and by this rule we find, that if your departure from the Meridian was 280 Miles, and they being divided by 60, reduced into degrees and minutes of longitude under the Aequino∣ctial, it yields 4 degrees and 4 minutes, but if these 280 Miles happen to be East or west, or your departure from the Meridian should be in the latitude of 60 degrees, where 30 Miles make a degree of longitude, then divide the 280 Miles by 30, and you will find it yields 9 degrees 10/30, or one third, which is 20 minutes for the difference of longitude in that latitude. To sail by Merca∣tors Chart, is little other than coming to a knowledge of the true latitudes, Meridians,
and Elevations of the Poles, Miles, minutes, &c. as when it so fall out that one place is under the Aequinoctial, and the other near∣er one of the Poles, then we find, the Meri∣dional minutes, answerable to that place, which hath latitude, is to be Accounted for the Meridional difference of latitude, or that latitude inlarged. Again, suppose both places are towards one of the Poles, thereupon subtract the Meridional minutes that are found answe∣ring to the lesser latitude, and the remainer will be found to be the Meridional minutes required. Again, if we find one place to have North latitude, and the other be in South latitude, then add the Meridional minutes, apper∣taining to either place together, and you will find the sum thereof to be the Meridi∣onal minutes required, &c. Circular sailing is held to be a very good way of sailing, as the best, shewing the nea∣rest way and distances between any two places, yet carrys with it some little diffi∣culty, so that the Seamen seldom keep to their course near this Arch, wherefore lea∣ving you to consider of what has been said, I proceed to other useful matters.
Horology, or the Curious Art of Dial∣ing made plain and easy in describing, and directing the positions of the Sundry sorts of Dials now in use; also to know by a Sun-dial the time of the night by the Moons shaddow. DIaling is a very Curious ART, and re∣quires much Care and Industry to come up to it in all Points; for of Dyals there are sundry sorts, varying in somewhat or other, according to their Places, Positions, and the Suns Degrees, some are movable, and may be carryed from place to place, others fixed, and are found to be Regular, or Irregular; the Regular are such as are on a Plain, di∣rectly towards one of the Eminent parts of the world, as full West, or full East, but the Irregular are those that have no direct pointing to any principal quarters of the world, but rather declines them. Of those called Regular, they have many names to distinguish them; as, The Meri∣dian East, The Meridian West, The Hoi∣zontal Dial, The Vertical Northward, and the Vertical Southward, The Aequinoctial below, The Aequinoctial above, the Polar below, and the Polar above. The Horizontal, is when it is equally di∣stant towards the Horizon.
The Vertical, is a Perpendicular erected above the Horizon, tending directly towards the Vertical point, being Parallel to the Primary Vertical Circle, and is duplex, as North Vertical looking to the other which is South Vertical. The East and West Meridians have par∣ticularly either of them their several ways, being equally distant from the Meridian Circle. The Aequinoctials mentioned are those of which either have their several ways e∣qually distant from the Aequator, the one above and the other beneath the Horizon. The Polars have likewise their different ways, the one being beneath, and the other above, they are found as Parallels to the Worlds Axis. The Irregular are either inclining, or de∣clining; the first of these is equally distant from any Vertical Circle, and from thence is often called Vertical, though declining from the Primary Vertical, properly so na∣med; and is of two sorts, there being one declining from the South to either East or West, and the other from the North to ei∣ther East or West. That which inclines falls away from the Vertical Point, having its inclination toward the Horizon, as not being equally distant from it. As for the hours which these several sorts
of Dials, are to parcel out time unto, they are Reckoned as to the days they make di∣vers, according to the distant Latitudes, the Suns ascending or declining, yet all allow 24 hours to the day and night, dividing each hour into 60 minutes, and those into seconds parts, and smaller proportion of time, till it can be discerned only by imagi∣nation. The days are held in two distincti∣ons, the one natural, and the other Artifi∣cial, the Natural day is accounted 12 hours the Artificial as many as the Sun allows ei∣ther the longer or the lesser it shines. But to be an exact Horologian, observe these methods, be sure to have the exact E∣levation of the Pole, which to find, you are directed in the treatise of Navigation, for by that your determination of the Center of hours must be had also the stile of the Dial's Altitude, and the order of it, and whate∣ver is requisite beside of that nature; you must likewise know the true Meridian line, that so the Dials-Meridian line may have its place directly under the Meridian of the place where it is posited. And he that un∣dertakes this work, must be furnished with such Mathematical and Astronomical In∣struments and Materials, as may give him a due understanding of the proportions of time, as a Rule, Compass, Astronomical Quadrant▪ divided exactly into 90 degrees, with a description of the hour line & points
and to bring this Ingenious work to perfe∣ction, you must be careful the figures of the hours are set at their proper and proporti∣onable distance to answer the moving of the stiles shaddow, and that your stile be well contrived as to its Form and Altitude, and make your observation to fix it exactly; also be very careful in the Application and Dis∣position of the Dial when it is finished. But to come to what is more curious, be sure the hours be described, and to do it there are granted to be two right lines sect∣ing each other at right Angles cross ways, one of them being the Meridian line, or the 12th hour line, the other is termed the Occult line, by which the first cross ways are cut to the right Angle, and this is generally called the line of hours, because in it the horary points are designed, but if we come to its more proper denomination, it may be called the Aequinoctial line, since it re∣presents the Aequinoctial Circle, the chief rule of all hours. Thus much being explained as to Dial∣ing, in general, we come now to more par∣ticulars. If you are desirous to have a right Dial, you must be sure to know its right Center, or the Center of the hour, to do which, be very mindful of the Elevation of the Pole, especially in the Horizontal Dial, or any of that sort, for they will not declare the hours
in any place, but under a certain Elevation, and therefore if they are removed far, you must be again proportioned to that Eleva∣tion Conjecture we then the Pole be Eleva∣ted 49 degrees in this Region, which is 41, place here the foot of your Compass in the Instruments Center, extending the other foot from that to the Aequinoctial line de∣scribed in the instrument, where in that part the 41 degrees is cut by the Radius, so num∣bering from the 12th hour line, and trans∣fer this extension of the Compass upon the Dial, having yet the Compasses foot fixed in the Meridian, and Aequinoctial lines, con∣course, and the other fix in the distant part of the Meridian line, determining, that point to be the hours Center, and so from thence, and each point in the Aequinoctial line, you are to draw all the lines, which some term, the Arches of hours. And fur∣ther a line is to be drawn through the Cen∣ter of the hours, a line Parallel to the Aequi∣noctial, and this is to be accounted the line of the sixth hour, as well in the Evening as the morning, as likewise of the hours of 4 and 5 in the Evening, are to be drawn out beyond the Center of hours, for the like hours in the morning, and so of the rest, e∣qually compeering; and thus you have an exact description of a Horizontal Dial, whose figure you may form as you please, placing the Characters of the hours at the end of the line.
If you design a Vertical Dial, it may be done upon a Regular wall, the same way as the former, yet there is some difference to be observed, not only in the Scituation, but likewise in the Vertical, in case of being cer∣tain of the Center of the hour, the Polar E∣levation degrees are to be here taken for the Altitude of the stile, allowing the degrees complement, though the Horizontal Dial is the contrary; however, there being a distinction between a Vertical to the North, and a Vertical to the South, the Vertical to the North is, as we may suppose, a Meridi∣an Inverted, having the Center of hours downwards falling short, in shewing short, in shewing the hours, for in some Adjacent Countreys, it shews but from 4 to 8 in the morning, and the like in the afternoon, and the South Vertical hath the Center of hours and its stile upwards, shewing from the six in the morning to noon. A Meridional Dial either East or West, for the first, it must have a Line Pa∣rallel drawn to the Horizon, and a slight Cir∣cle at any opening of the Compass, begin∣ning from the Horizontal line towards the right side where the Eastern Dial is to be drawn, conceiving in the Instrument such an Arch at the like opening of the Compass, in which Arch cut off the Elevation of the Ae∣quator, and carry the Interval to the Circle drawn from the point, and allow the Arch to be cut off.
To frame an Aequinoctial Dial, two lines must be drawn at right Angles, whereof one is to be the Meridian, the other that of the hour, 6 morning and evening, and from the usual section of these lines, draw a Circle as you think fit to be divided into 24 pro∣portionable and equal parts, for in this kind of Dyaling, all the Intervals must be equal as to the hours. The Polar Dial goes Parallel to the Axis of the world, lying as it were in it, and is to be Elevated above the Horizontal Plain, the same degrees as the worlds pole, the lowermost part in many places, containing not above 4 hours, yet generally the mor∣ning hours are 4 and 5, towards the left side the Evening hours 7 and 8, but the topmost shews the hours from 7 in the mor∣ning to 5 in the Evening, but not the sixth by reason the Sun then is parallel to the Dial glancing then upon its side. A Dial of Irregular Declination may be best managed by the Marriners Compass, and applying the Semi-Circle divided in the Plan to a competent number of degrees, the pin or stile placed at its Center, so that in that Meridional hour, you will perceive the degree the shaddow cuts, and the way it casts, by the which you may the better determine the species, and how it declines; by which observation, you may draw a Dial in any place, fixing your stile of
what Magnitude you please at right An∣gles. If you are desirous to find by the shining of the Moon, the hour of the night upon a Dial, suppose you have a Horizontal Sun-Dial, movable or fixed, joyn to it a Dial, by some called a Moon Dial, made up of two Concentrick Circles, where in one you will meet with the day of the Moons Age, by applying a Globule to the number 30, in the other, the 12 hours diversly set down; then knowing the Moons Age, so place your Sun-dial, that the Moon may fairly shine on it, and being placed as for the day, see what hour the Moon shaddows on, as sup∣pose the 8, then place the Globule, the hour you find set down in the Horary Circle, and then again having recourse to the Moons Age, it will give you the hour required, as suppose it be the 12 of the Moons Age, you will find the shaddow about 5 and a half, which is the time, if (as it frequently hap∣pens) the Moon Dial be composed of 3 Cen∣trical Circles, whereof the last and greatest be that of the Moons day, the next to it the hour Circle, and the inmost the Index; let the Index be applyed to the day of the Moon, and then by that Circle, observe what hour, or part of an hour the shad∣dow marks, and you will find the true con∣tent.
Planimetry, or, The most Exact and Curious Arts of Surveying Lands, &c. after the newest and most Experienced Method and Practice, &c. PLanimetry, or Surveying, is numbered among the Curious, and deserves wor∣thily here to take place; and to be exact in this, have (beside other Instruments pro∣per to the matter) a Ruler of about 7 or 8 Inches long, and an Inch and a half broad, and place two Scales, one of 12, and the o∣ther of 11, in an Inch describing a line of Cords 2 Inches long, or somewhat less than 60 or 90 degrees, the Radius of which or 60 degrees, being equal to the Semidiameter of the same Circle, and after the order of these on the other side, place several other scales which may be of 16, 20, 24, or the like in an Inch, whereby you have an In∣strument necessary for sundry occasions, and for this scale in its use you must be provi∣ded with a pair of Brass Compasses, also a curious pair of Calem Compasses, having screws to alter the points, as to draw as oc∣casion requires to the beautifying the Plats with black Lead or the like; being provid∣ed with Instruments, and all things sitting for measuring, you must consider the Mea∣sures, and reduce that which is called Sta∣tute
Measure into such measure as is Custo∣mary and Usual, for by an Act of the 23 of Edward the I. an Acre of Land was to con∣tain 160 Perches or Poles to be made out square, &c. but by Custom in divers pla∣ces of this Kingdom, this has been altered by the varying of Perches in the number of feet, as, 18, 20, 24, and sometimes 28 foot to the Perch, and this requires the Surveyers diligence to reconcile the one to the other, of which we shall give some insight. Suppose you are to Reduce 5 Acres, 2 Roods, 20 Perches measured Statute mea∣sure by 18 foot the Perch, in this case seek the least proportional terms between 18 and 16 foot and a ½, and to effect it, be∣cause the latter carries with it a fraction, reduce it into halves, and that they may be of one denomination, let the 18 foot be likewise halved, and you will find them in this manner 33/36, which you must abbrevi∣ate by 3, in saying, how many times 3 shall I find in 33, and the Answer will be 11 times 3, and the same do by 36, and you will find it 12 times 3, and thereup∣on the two proportional terms between 16½ and 18, will appear to be 11 and 12 which being done, reduce the Given Quan∣tity of 5 Acres, 2 Roods, and 20 Perches all into Perches, by which means you will find them to be 900 Perches; then observe what is the Proportion, the Square 11,
which is found 121, bears to the square 12, which is found 144, the same does the Acre containing 16 and a half feet to the Perch, bear to that that contains 18 feet to the Perch or Pole. Always observe, in this was particularly that the greater measure is to be reduced into the lesser, then multiply the Quanti∣ty Given, viz. 900 Perches by 144 the larger square, and you will find the Pro∣duct to be 129600, and that divided by 121, you will find the Quotient to be 1071 Perches, and 9/121 parts, which reduced in∣to Acres, gives us 6 Acres, 2 Roods, and 31 Perches, and 9/121 parts of a Perch, and this compeers with the Quantity of Acres Parallel with Statue measure; but on the other hand, if it had been required for the reducing Statute Measure into Custo∣mary Measure, you must then Multiply 900 perches, your given measure or quantity, by 121, which is the lesser square, because the lesser is to be reduced into the greater, and you will find the Product to be 108900, which if you divide by the greater square 144, you will have the Quotient 756 /4, which being reduced into Acres, is 4 Acres, 2 Roods, 36½ Perches; and this rule is to be taken with what ever Customary quan∣tity is proposed in their difference, and degrees, as when the Perch is 20, 24, or 28 foot, or other disproportions of num∣ber.
If in this Mensuration, you are required to reduce Perches into Acres, and so on the contrary, observe that by the Afore∣mentioned Statute, an Acre of Ground should contain 169 square perches or poles, being every Rood 4 square perches, so that if you find any number of perches, that must be done into Acres, the given number must consequently be divided by 160, and the Acres are shewed by the Quotient, but if there be remainder, and it be under 40, they are perches, but if they are found to exceed 40, divide by 40, which you will find to be the number of perches contained in a Rood, so that the Quotient will be Roods, and the Remainder Perches. But to reduce Acres into Perches, there is no great difficulty, considering it is but turning it as it were backward, for in the other to bring Perches into Acres, the di∣vision was by 160, but in this case, to turn Acres into Perches, it must be multiplied by 160, which being observed, we come now to more nearer particulars, as to the matter in hand. If the piece of ground you measure be square, having considered well that the Acre is 160 Perches, then multiply one of the sides by the other joyn∣ing to it, & you will find the sum is to be di∣vided by 160, and suppose your Ground be 40 poles one way and but 20 another, these multiplyed, make 800 Poles or Per∣ches,
which divided by 160, shews 5 Acres to be the content. In measuring a Triangular piece of Ground, you must first observe to mea∣sure the longest side of the Triangle, as also the Perpendicular opposed to the said long side, then multiplying the half of one by the whole of the other, you must di∣vide by 160. Suppose the side be 60, the Perpendicu∣lar 40; 60 must be multiply'd by 20, or 40 by 30, which so done, make 1200, which being divided by 160, renders 7 Acres and ½ for the true content. If you are to measure that which we call a Trapezia, or a double Triangle, then both the Perpendiculars must be multiply'd by the Diagonal Line, as being the usual or common Base of both the Triangles, and must be divided by 160 in this manner. Let the Diagonal Line be 40, and one of the Perpendiculars 15, the other 8, which be∣ing put together make 23, which being multiplyed by 20, which is half the Dia∣gonal Line, make 460, and that divided by 160, renders two Acres, three Roods, and 20 Poles. If the Ground be Circular, then half the Diameter must be multiplyed by half the Circumference, and the product divided by 160, whereby the Diameter of the Cir∣cle being found to be 140 poles, the Circum∣ference
is 440 poles, and the half of these two producing 220, and 70, they are to be multiplyed together, and then produce 15400 Perches, which being divided by 160 produce 96 Acres and a ¼. If the piece of Ground given, be Oval, suppose it to be 30 Perches one way, and 40 the other, to know the content, mul∣tiply the length 40 by the bredth, which as aforesaid is 30, and you will find it make 1200, which again divided by 203 7/101, and you will find it yield 5 Acres, 3 Roods, and 23 Perches, and by this last number so working, you may find the number of A∣cres contained, in a Semicircle, a quarter or sixth part, or any section or division of a Circle greater or lesser, multiplying the half Diameter. If you are to measure wood Land, which is the difficultest of all, you may fix a mark at either corner of the Wood, that 3 marks may be seen at once, then having a Quadrant in your hand, lay it flat there∣on, and take sight to two of the marks on each side▪ and then upon paper, mark the degrees of the Angle, and measure to the two marks in sight, and place them on the same paper by your line of equal parts, and do so to all other corners, till you have closed up the Plat or Wood, which then may be easily brought into Acres by the line of equal parts. And Note here, if your
Quadrant be too small, you may joyn two together, or do it by a board for want of a plain Table, so your Plat upon the paper make 3 Triangles, and to mea∣sure one of them, measure for one Tri∣angle the longest doted line, by half the middle doted line, or Perpendicular, which gives the content, and by so wor∣king the other two Triangles you have compleated it.
The Art and Mystery of Gauging Ves∣sels of Sundry Forms and Quanti∣ties, by Exact Rules laid down plain and easie: Also to Gauge and know the Burthen of any Ship, and other matters. GAuging is very necessary to be un∣derstood by all People that deal in Commodities, wherein Casks, or the like, give the Dimensions of their Measure; wherefore, for their better Instruction in this Art, there are two things principally to be considered: First, That seeing Ves∣sels are mostly of Irregular Forms, it must be the care of the Gauger, to consider how they are to be reduced to Regular Propor∣tions; and, in the Second place, to inform himself, of the true content of the Gallon in Cubick Inches, or parts of a Foot; and for the first of these, carefully Measure the Diameter of the Cask at the Bung and Head, and, by those Diameters, to find out the Area of their Circle, and so take 2 thirds of the Area at the Bung, and 1 third at the Head, which, being added, will be found to be the mean Area of the Cask; and if you multiply that Area by the length of the Vessel, it will shew how many solid Inches are contained in that
Vessel, which being divided by the num∣ber of Cubick Inches in one Gallon, the Quotient will demonstrate what number of Gallons the Cask holds. As, if we suppose that a Vessel of Wine be 18 inches Diameter at the head, and 32 Inches at the Bung, the length being 40 Inches, if you would be satisfied in the content, consider, that one third of Area at the head, is found to make in its due proportion— 85, 823 And two thirds of the Area of the Bung, make— 536, 166 And then consider the sum of the two, to be — 620, 909 When Multiply'd by the length —40. — 959 Makes Inches solid — 24839, 560. These being divided by the solid Inches in one gallon of Wine, they being 231 In∣ches for the content, yield 170 Gallons, 530 parts, which is some small matter a∣bove half a Gallon, yet some raise a di∣spute about the certain number of Inches in a Gallon, yet the Wine Gallon is gene∣rally concluded to consist of 231 Cubick, or solid Inches, and the Ale Gallon is held by many in Computation with the Wine Gal∣lon, as 4 to 5, so that in such a degree of difference, it must be 288 ½ Inches, but upon the imposition of Excise, it has been
generally Esteemed but 282 Cubick In∣ches. If you would know the content of any Wine or Beer in Ale or Beer Gallons, ob∣serve for the Beer Barrel. The diameter at the head 9 inches, 9 parts For the diameter at the Bung, 23 inch, 0 parts The length —27 inches, 4 parts The Kilderkin has for its measurings. The diameter at the head. 16 inches, 1 part Its diameter at the Bung, 18 inch. 6 parts The Length — 12 inches, 1 part And these are called the Coopers scant∣lings, and very well agree with the recei∣ved quantity of the Ale Gallon, allowing it to be 288 Inches and a half, so that the Barrel this was reckoned to be a Pint over 36 Gallons, and a Kilderkin a Pint and a half over the half of that, though as I have said, this Gallon has lately been agreed up∣on by a Committee of Excise, to hold no more than 282 Cubick inches. Now to measure Brewers Vessels, &c. whether they be Square or Round, or of any other form; First, to know their true Content, observe what has been said in Measuring such Bodies, dividing by 282 the inches in one Gallon, demonstrates the con∣tent in Gallons, and if you divide the Gal∣lons
by 36, the contents in Barrels are shewed, and so by knowing the true num∣ber of Inches, any measure is to be taken. If you would know the Burthen of a Ship, or how many Tun she will hold, or Commodiously carry: First, inform your self by measure of the length of the Keel, and take the breadth at the Mid-ship beam, and the depth of the Hold, and these three you must multiply one by the other, then the product thereof must be divided by 100, and so the Tuns of Burthen will be plainly demonstrated. As, granting the length of a Ships Keel to be 50 Foot, and at the Middle-beam her breadth 20, and the depth in the hold ten foot, then to know how many Tuns she will carry, let 50 be multiplied by 20, and it makes 1000, and that again multiplyed by 10, makes 10000, the which, when divi∣ded by 100, and cutting of the two last Fi∣gures, it shews the Ship to be 100 Tuns of Burthen; but this way is usually attributed to Men of War, but for Merchant Ships, they give no Allowance for Masts, Sails, Ordnance, and Anchors, the which, though they are a Burthen, yet are not accounted Tunnage; wherefore, as to Merchant Ships, your product must be divided by 95, and then a Merchant Ship, of the aforesaid length, breadth, and depth, will be found 105 Tuns 25/95 parts Burthen, though there
must be regard had in this case, to the mi∣dle of the Ship, for fear of Erring, and if you are doubtful whether you are right or not, if the Ship be Irregularly built, find out how many Cubick Feet it contains, and Rec∣koning that a Cubick Foot of water, weighs, as it is generally accounted, 55 Averdupois, or 16 ounces to the pound, so that consider 2000 weight being allowed to the Tun, and every hundred 112 lb. the Dimensions must be taken accordingly, and by this Rule you must take your proportion: But to come sure of this another way; Measure on the out side the Ship to her Lightmark, when she is in the Water un∣laden, and there you will find the weight or content of the Empty Vessel, so that if you take your measure from her Light∣mark to her full draught of Water, be∣ing Laden, you have the true Burthen of her Tunnage. Also, if you're desirous to know the Burthen of another Ship dou∣ble or treble of the same Mould, or a greater or lesser proportion, multiply the measure of the Length, and Breadth, and Depth Cubically, after that is done, dou∣ble or treble the Cube, and Extracting the Cube Root, your work is done, and so you may go on to other matters of this na∣ture, or any other belonging to Gauging, which your Rules and Instruments of di∣rection will furnish you, in your proce∣dure
when you are once thus far entered, and by degrees it will become easy, if you cast a Method in your mind. Exact Rules and Directions for For∣tification, Regular and Irregular for War, Offensive or Defensive, Outworks and Inward Strengths, &c. FOrtification is of great moment, and in the well observing and Regular per∣forming it for defence and offence, many times consists the Safety of Countries and Kingdoms, howevr the Scituation and Circumstances require much Variation, so that to prescribe the Models of all Fortifica∣tions would be Endless, and therefore it will be most convenient to treat of the mo∣dern, or those most generally in use. Observe then of this kind, your works require to be Flanked to keep the Enemy from a sudden Entrance, where any Breach is made by the great Guns, for if the Be∣siegers have made their approaches so near, that the Besiegeds Cannon in the Front are dismounted, then you may be assured their design is to put their Miners to pass the Ditch, and then if they perceive any place out of sight of the Besiegeds firing, they will have an opportunity to make their
Mines with little difficulty, so that a place unless the Garrison be very Large to make frequent Sallys, may be taken in 8 or 10 days, that with Flankers might hold out much Longer, so that it has been the pra∣ctice of late to turn the Antient Round Ba∣stions into sharp pointed ones, which not only upon occasion serve for Flankers to defend against any hasty approach, but to slaunt and hinder the force of the great Shot playing against the Town or Fort. Amongst other things necessary on this occasion, the great Line of defence is to be considered, or what may be found near E∣qual into it, viz. the Polygon Interiour, which ought not in mos cases to exceed 120 Fathoms, or 720 Feet, and this is found to be a point blank of the Execution of a Mus∣quet, the Cannon being here Incommodi∣ous, and therefore the defence is to be ta∣ken from the former, the latter beside the waste of Ammunition, lying much lyable to be dismounted, and not so easily again re∣mounted, as the Emergency requires, and the difficulty is likewise greater in maintai∣ning a continual Fire, and if the work be not incommoded by their over largeness, the more Capacious, the Gorges and Flanks are, the better will the Fortification be found for defence, for then the Soldiers may pass to and fro in a good front to the Bastion, when Cannon is planted on both
sides the Flank, and give no interruption to those that are at the Flanks, and if there be but a supposed necessity required, there must be a vacancy left for Retrenchments, and a place under the Bastions left fit for Mining, that if it come to extremity when you have drawn off as soon as the Enemy has possessed the Bastion, it may be blown up, & their Attacque cleared till the Besieged may know what is further to be done in the defence of the place, and draw their strengths from other parts thitherwards. Above all, the Curtain Flanks and Faces of the opposite Bastion are to be well secu∣red and guarded, as likewise the Ditch and Counterscarp being made as large as the due proportion of the Bastion will allow, for if they be too great, their Capitals will be found too long, and thereupon the de∣fence Line exceed the Port of any Musquet, or small piece— and being too little they will become blunt, and so cut off the se∣cond Flank, whilst it ought to be held con∣siderable. The degrees of the Angle of a Bastion, ought not to be less than 60, or more than 90, some small matter allowed over or under; and the reason is, if it be much under 60, it will be found too slender, or above 90 too large, or more than may be well sup∣plyed; and moreover, by that the second Flank is shortned, and it will be computed
in less Ground than the Bastion, where it is an Angle of less degrees, though built on the like Gorge and Flanks, and observe in all your works to let them be Cannon proof. If we proceed to a description of Regu∣lar Fortification, it is to be understood of such Models as are equally Angular, and founded upon Equilateral Figures, to be de∣scribed in a Circle, as it may be a Triangle, Quadrangle, or a Quartil Pentagon, or a Figure of 5 sides to a Dodecagon, or a Fi∣gure of 12 sides, and in this case the Basti∣on must be so posited, that all the points may answer in like distance from the Cen∣tre. The Curtains of Equal Length, and all the Angles and Lines to be of an equal Magnitude for Regular Models are to be computed from a Calculation of the Angle at the Centre, and that is done by divi∣ding 360, the number of the degrees that a Circle is usually divided into, and where∣in the Regular Figure is to be described by the number of any Polygons sides, or the Regular Figure, that any Fort or Work of War of this nature is to consist on, for hereby the Quotient demonstrates the An∣gle of the Centre, as may be demonstrated by a Figure of five sides, wherein by o∣peration, the Angle of the Center is cer∣tain to be 72 degrees, and the like of any other figure, then if you draw a Circle with
the Protractor, or Line of Chords, the first being a Semi circle, and the last the fourth part of a Semi-circle, or 90 degrees projected on a straight line, and the Angle beset off at the Center at 72 degrees, the Circle will thereby be divided into 5 equal proportions, or parts, and the straight line drawn to the points, produces a Penta∣gone. Besides this Model of Fortification, there are sundry Outworks required for strengthening a place, they hinder much the Besiegers from making their Lodgments if the ground happen to be low near the Counterscarp, or from suddeinly raising Batteries by the advantage of that ground, if it happen to be high; wherefore a care∣ful Enginier always provides Outworks to hinder it, and prolong the approaches to the main Fort, and these Outworks are various as the Situation of the place, or the danger requires. Ravelins, being an usual Outwork, they are usually of two kinds, one with lines, and the other wanting; the first of these are placed before long Curtains, where the two Bastions are not capable of Flanking each other within Musquet shot, and the length of the Curtain not sufficient for the erecting a Plate Bastion in its Cen∣ter, and supply the defect of a Bastion by covering and defending, and to erect these kind, the Ditch must be cut parallel with
the Curtain, and above it erect a Capital from 18 to 20 Poles, and let your Demi∣gorges be no more than from 10 to 12 Poles the Flanks, from 8 to 10, the Ditch sur∣rounding them, and the greatness of the Flanks Parallel to the face of the Ravelin till the ditch of the place of the face of the Bastion be met by it, that so the Ravelins Flanks may scowr over all the ditch that faces the Bastion. The Ravelins without lines, consist only of a Capital and two faces, the Capitals from 12 to 18 Poles the face, edging or drawing nearer to the shoulders of the Ba∣stion, that within the Ravelin may be com∣manded by the Curtain and two Flanks. The half Moon is a work ever raised be∣fore the Bastions point, being so named from the lowness of its Gorges Cavity, &c. and is to secure the two faces of the Bastion, but when the faces have but a weak defence from the Ravelin, these works are soon made useless, or ruined, and give the Besieged an opportunity of Lodgment, & may serve for Batteries and Flanks against the opposing Bastions, however, they may be retrenched by Traverses, yet they will not fail to at∣tacque entirely in the face, or where you have your last retrenchment, also, that cal∣led the Counterguard runs the like hazard. The Outworks, called the Hornworks, are placed before the Curtains, a Perpendicular
Line being drawn from it at the two Flanks about 60 pole front, towards the Campaign, their front to be 36 Poles, equal to the Curtain, to be divided into 3 Parts, one of them for the Curtain, and the other for the Demigorges, appertaining to the Hornwork, as for the Flanks, they are to be six Rods, or 72 foot each, and this work is held one of the best and strongest Outworks, if well manned and managed, especially when a Ravelin is placed before it. The Outworks called the Tenalis, is built to secure the Bridge when it is hard pressed upon their sides, containing 50 Poles, and the Fronts no more than 36, which being divided into 4 equal parts, a Perpendicu∣lar is drawn in the middle, whereon a 1/9 of the front is set off inwards towards the Town, and the Lines must be drawn from the sides, to form the face; this work is advantageous for Counter Approaches, and for receiving succours into the Town. The Crownwork is usually erected, a when heighth is so near to the place, that a Musquet shot may reach it, and then the sides of the works must be extended before the Bastion, or Curtain about 65 Poles, & the Demibastions point to be about 60 degrees, then the Ex∣tremities of the sides must be joyned, and a Perpendicular Line raised on the middle, on which six, for the Capital, 18 Rods, making an Angle of two Interiour Polygons. FINIS.
Books Sold by T. Passenger, at the Three Bibles and Star on London-Bridge. THe Elements of that Mathemati∣cal Art, commonly called Algebra; Expounded in four Books, by John Kersey. Lloyd's Poetical Dictionary, in Folio. Clark's Examples, 2d. Vol. Folio. Dr. Salmon's Polygraphice. — his Systema Medicinale. — his Select Observations. Cocker's Vulgar Arithmetick. All Mathematical Books. Dr. Newton's Art of Logick, and Rhetorick alone. Davids Repentance By Sam. Smith. Great Assize. By Sam. Smith. Davids blessed man, By Sam. Smith. Lithgows 19 Years Travels, second Edition. The Present State of England, 3d. and 4th. parts: Containing, first, an account of the Riches, Strength, Mag∣nificence,
Natural Production, Manu∣facture of this Island, with an exact Ca∣talogue of the Nobility and their Seats; Secondly, The Trade and Commerce within its self, and with all Nations Traded to by the English, as at this day established, and other matters relating to Inland, and Marine Affairs: Vseful for Natives and Foreigners. Markham's Master-piece Revived, Containing all knowledge belonging to the Smith, Farrier, or Horse-Leach, tou∣ching the Curing all Diseases in Horses: and now in this Impression is added, the Compleat Jockey, containing the method for the Training up of Horses for Racing, with their heats and courses, and man∣ner of keeping; also instructions for the Buyers to avoid Cheating Horse-Cour∣sers, and all things necessary for Gentle∣men and others. Dr. Newton's Cosmographia, or a view of the Globes, being an explanati∣on of the Principles of Geometry, apply∣ed to the Surveying and Gaugig of Casks; to which is added an introduction to Geo∣graphy.
The Mirrour of Architecture, or the ground Rules of the Art of Building, by Vincent Scamozzi; whereunto is added, the description and use of an ordinary joynt Rule, with an Addition of Stair Cases and Chimney Pieces. The whole Art of Navigation, in 5 Books, containing the Principles of Na∣vigation, Geometry, and Astronomy with a large new Sinical Quadrant, the whole delivered in a very easie and fami∣liar stile, by way of Dialogue between a Tutor and his Schollar: Approved by the Ablest Mathematicians, by Capt. Da∣niel Newhouse, Published by the Kings Command. Clavis Commercii, or the key of Com∣merce, containing an exact and most con∣cise method of Merchants Accompts, after the Italian manner, in one hundred pro∣positions, being the most material cases in proper Factorage, and Company Accompts, both Domestick and Forreign: Also a Practical Waste Book, Journal and Led∣ger, fitted for the use of Schools, the contemplation of Gentlemen, and the prac∣tice of Merchants or others, who desire
to be accomplished with the famous art of Book keeping. The marrow of the Mathematicks, con∣tracted into a small compass for the Poc∣ket, and made plain and easie to the un∣derstanding of an ordinary Capacity, con∣taining the doctrines of Arithmetick, Geometry, Astronomy, Gauging, the use of the Sector, Surveying, Dial∣ing, and the Art of Navigation, Illu∣strated with several Cuts, after a New, Compendious, easie method. Gazophylacium anglicanum, contai∣ning the derivation of English Words, proving the Dutch and Saxon to be the prime fountain, and likewise giving the Similar Words, in most Europian Lan∣guages, fitted to the Capacity of the Eng∣lish Reader, that may be curious to know the original of his Mother Tongue. Thesaurarium Trilingue publicum: Be∣ing an Introduction to English, Latin and Greek in 2 parts: the first Teaching Or∣thographia, and the exactest way of Poin∣ting yet extant. The 2d. containing a method for the more speedy attaining to to the Greek Tongue, and the truly accen∣ting thereof.
The Compleat Servant Maid, or the Young Maidens Tutor, being an excellent book of Cookery, and teaching young maidens how to qualify themselves for a∣ny Employment: Whereunto is added a Supplement, containing the choicest Receipts and rarest Secrets in Physick and Chirurgery, the 5th. Edition corre∣cted and amended. Sir Samuel Morlands vade mecum, or the necessary Companion. Physick Refined, or a little stream of Medicinal Marrow flowing from the bones of Nature, by John Yarwood Professor f Physick. The price but six pence. The Pathway to health, wherein are to e found most excellent and approved Me∣dicines of great vertue, as also notable Potions and Drinks, with the Art of Distilling divers precious Waters, for making of Oyls, and other comfortable Receipts for the health of the Body. The Famous History of the destruction f Troy in 3 parts. Thesaurus Poeticus. Anglorum Speculum, or the Worthies f England in Church and State; Al∣phabetically
digested into the several Shires and Coun∣ties therein contained, wherein are Illu∣strated the Lives and Characters of the most Eminent Men since the Conquest, to the present Age. Also an Account of the Commodities and Trade of each Re∣spective County, and the most flourishing Cities and Towns therein. The Compleat Horse-man and Expert Farrier in two Books: 1. Shewing the best manner of breeding good Horses, with heir choice, Nature, Riding and Dieting, as well for Running as Hunting, and how the Rider ought to behave himself in the breaking and riding of Colts, as also tea∣ching the Groom and Keeper his true Of∣fice, touching the Horses and Colts, ommitted to his charge. 2. Directing the most exact and approved manner, how to know and cure all maladies and dis∣eases in Horses; a work containing the secrets and best skill belonging either to Farrier or Horse Leach. Abstractum Chirurgiae Marinae, Or a abstract of Sea Chirurgery designed, for the use of such Chirurgeons who desire to serve at Sea, yet are unacquainted with
Sea Practice, in order to their restoring to health sick or wounded Seamen, in three Books; 1. Containing certain Di∣rections necessary to be observed by the Sea Chyrurgeon in his fitting out: 2. Tea∣cheth how he shall perform his Chyrurgi∣cal duty being at sea, both in an En∣gagement and other times. 3. Instru∣cteth how he must Execute the Physical Office imposed on him: By John Moyle. Thesaurus Astrologiae, or an Astrolo∣gical Treasury, containing the choicest Mysteries of that Curious but Abstruse Learning, relating to Physick, being the Collections and Experiments of a lear∣ned Physician and Astrologer deceased, whose name is not known; By John Gad∣bury Student in Astrology and Physick. Wingate's Rule of proportion in A∣rithmetick and Geometry, or Gunters Line newly rectified, fitted for all Artists for Measuring and Building, whereinto is now also inserted, the construction of the same Rule, and a farther use thereof in Questions that concern Astronomy, Di∣alling, Geography, Navigation, Gau∣ging
of Vessels, Military Orders, Interest and Annuities. At the aforesaid Shop, is sold, Pa∣per, Paper Books Ruled or Unruled: Also Bibles, and other Books, new bound and clasped: Also, Pens, Ink, Wax, Wafers, Pencils, Bonds, Relea∣ses, Letters of Attorney for the Navy, Bills of Lading, &c▪ FINIS.
