N953 R31088 11771613 48879
NEWS from COVENT-GARDEN; OR, THE Town-Gallants VINDICATION. BEING The Debates and Result of a famous Club of Wits, and Men of Humours and In∣trigues, assembled for the Damning of the late Character. LONDON, Printed for J. T. 1675.
NEWS from Covent-Garden: &c. SEveral pretended Gallantissimo's of the Town, being met (according to an Assignation for that purpose) on Thursday last, to take into their All-disposing consideration the Grand Affairs of Wit and good Breeding; After they had Raly'd each other, enquired the Health of their Res∣pective Mistresses, and briskly top'd off half a dozen Rummers of Frontinìac: An Ingenioso of the first Mag∣nitude began an Invective against the late Character of a Town-Gallant. The very naming of which abominable Pamphlet, put the whole Company into a Confusion of Rage and Clamour: Mor-bleau! quoth one, That's the most Saucy, Idle, Impertinent; flat, empty, Damn'd, Dull, Nonsensical Scribble in Nature: I thank my Stars I had more wit than to Read it, But Jack Wild told me, he run it over at the Coffee-house, and found nothing of flame or Spirit in it; No flights of daring Fancy, or Elevation of Conceit, above the Dialect of a Constable; no∣thing brisk or poinant or Charming, But an Oglio of Impudent Railings, against all that's polite and Noble, meer Blasphemy against us, that are the Hero's of the
Civiliz'd VVorld, the great Resiners of our Age The sole Dictators of Reason, and over-rulers of Common Sense. By Joves Guts cries another, I know that pittiful Ras∣cal that Wrote it, An inconsiderable Animal, of a grove∣ling Spirit, and debased Understanding. Upon my Ho∣nour Gentlemen, he is a Cobler in Grace-Church street, and was formerly Prentice to him of Glocester. His Fa∣ther was a Leveller, and his Mother shrewdly suspected to Burn down the Theatre Royal, two or three Years a∣go by Witchcraft. His Malice against good Breeding is Hereditary, which makes him continually Quarrel at all that's Jaintee, and Brave, striving to expose Misterious Arts of Heroick Grandeur, to the Scorn of Bruitish Vul∣gar, and Traversty our most Excellent and wonderful Ac∣complishments into Ridicule, Pox on him, says a Third, I knew by the Title, he had not a drop of Bloud in his Veins, nothing in him of a Gentleman, nor indeed of Sense: VVould any Fellow in his VVits, offer to abuse and Laugh at the most Glorious Imbelishments in Nature, Attainments which alone instile us to a place in the Box∣es, or Pit; which make VVomen and Children admire, and the Ladies Charm'd with our good Parts, fall down before us. Are these things to be contemn'd or under∣valued: Shall he or any body else (no not Mr. Parson himself) presume to tell us what is fit and becoming; 'tis an Insolence, deserves our Indignation and Correcti∣on; and the best way is for three or four of us to set upon him in the Dark, and Kick him into Atoms. But this a fourth Man (that had scarce Courage enough to Cock his Hat) opposed, as an Enterprize too dangerous, Al∣leadging, That he was assured by some Correspondents in the City, That the Author was a plaguy Sullen Fellow, and never walkt abroad without a good Batoon in's hand, and a Life-Guard of Tinkers to attend him.
Whereupon another rose up, a shrew'd Gentleman in∣deed, one for a Testimony to the World of his vast Abi∣lities; had made two or three Lampoons, and has been these four Years a Writing a Play (the only Dialect course now adays to make a Mans self Famous and Im∣mortal) This A-la-mode Hero, making half a dozen unto∣ward Grimaces, like an Ape going to the House of Cor∣rection, was pleas'd to deliver a Rare Harague on this important occasion; To which they all listned as devout∣ly as the Brutes at St. Andrews Wall do to the Charm∣ing Melody of a Smith field Orpheus. It is, Gentlemen! said he, the common fate of us ex∣traordinary persons, to Contract the slanders of the Igno∣rant, and the Envy of the unthinking Crow'd; 'Tis all the Interest we pay to Fortune, for those Transcendent En∣dowments which she has confer'd upon us above Common Mortals: But this should not discourage us from pursuing the Liberty of our own exalted Genius; and the lofty De∣signs and Adventures, wherewith we daily amaze the World: Tis only for great Head-pieces, Men of Birth and Education, of Prudence, and a mighty Reach that can pretend to Reputation: Tis such a Task to be considera∣ble, and of Moment in the Town, that it would Crack the Brains of those little People, but to hear repeated all the Accomplishments that are required to build up a Man of worth, To be acquainted with the true Means, and ex∣actest Garbs, the most Fashionable Expressions, the win∣ning Addresses, and all the Finenesses of Language dou∣ble Perfum'd: The Complements, Passes, and Re-pas∣ses; Parties, and Re-parties; with the vast Skill of Se∣renading, and the Mistery of tendring a Visit, with ap∣proved and Modish Accuracy. Tis only from Exact and Curious Imitation of our De∣portment, that young Gentlemen can learn these Perfecti∣ons,
and to our inestimable Principles they owe the Grounds and Elements of what must render them Great and Admirable in the World; To know with what Rap∣tures you are to take a Lady by the Hand, and how then to melt her presently with some of our Irresistable Vows, Such as— As I am a sinner before God and your Lady∣ship: As I hope to find Mercy in Heaven and your Lady∣ships Breast, &c. To know how to discar'd the Golo∣shooes in due season in their proper place: To tye the Knot of ones Muff Ribbon, to the best advantage; To walk with such a pleasing Gate that your Swinging Arm may keep true time with your Feet, which must Dance to the Musick of the Points. Ratling on your Pantaloons, and especially to provide that the Foot-Boy be observant in his distances, that he never stand just behind, but bear∣ing a respectful Point East or West from his Master. You know full well Gentlemen! tis no such easie busi∣ness, to discern how much of the Hand-kerchief ought to hang out of the Right Pocket, and how to Poise it Ma∣thematically, with the Tortoiseshell Comb on the Left: To apprehend what a boon Grace there is in some no∣table words keenly pronounced, with a neat shrug, and a becoming Lisp; to avoid the horrible absurdity of set∣ting both Feet flat on the Ground, when one should al∣ways stand tottering on the Too, as waiting in readiness for a Congee. These are notes above the Ela of a course Mechanick, or the Comprehension of ordinary Spirits. They cannot imagine how much practical Rhetorick is re∣quisite to make a Coach-man stedfastly believe he shall have half a Crown for hurrying from the Temple, to Leut∣ners Lane, waiting there and coming back; and at the same time carry on the most ingenious Intrigue of slipping down the Boot, just at Temple-Bar; and then with a stea∣dy mind to walk to the next Coffee-house Incognito. All these and many more incomparable discoveries we have made to the World; which otherwise had long be∣fore
this time been over-run with the Goth and Vandalisme of Pedants and other dull Fops, who are always poreing on troublesome Ethicks, or the more burthensome Prac∣tice of Piety. Let us then learn to know and value our own Merits, pro∣ceed in the beaten Road of Gallantry, without Clogging our Progress to Renown, with consideration of Vertue or Religion, or vain thoughts of those Chymerical Bugbears, Decent and Honest: Let's look down with Contempt on this triffling Character-Monger, as Hannibal did on Phor∣mi, when he went about to Tutor him in the Art Milita∣ry: Let us admire one another, hug one another in our Atchievements, and Laugh at all those that Envy us, the sweets, pleasant, and most delicious Extravagancy. To this they agreed, Nemine Contradicente, and so fell to Drinking of Brimmers; Dispatcht away two Draw∣ers, the one to fetch Wenches, and the other to call Fid∣lers, and are resolv'd to be jolly; Defying not only the Lashes of a Satyr, but even the Cure of a Pestle and Mortar. FINIS.
