O539 12330541 59661
ALCIBIADES. A Tragedy, Acted at the DUKE'S Theatre. Written by Tho. Otway. —Laudetur ab his Culpetur ab illis, Horat: Serm: Lib. 1st. Sat. 2. LONDON, Printed for William Cademan at the sign of the Popes Head in the Lower walk of the New-Exchange in the Strand, 1675.
To the Right Honourable CHARLES Earl of MIDDLESEX. My Lord, I Am sufficiently sensible of my own Arrogance, in that being almost a Stranger to every thing of You but your Fame, I durst obtrude so abject a Triffle as this, under the Patronage of so eminent a Person; but that generous Candour, wherewith you oblige all the World, gave me Courage to hope you might at least pardon this first offence in me. And though perhaps, the best presents of this nature may not be more than ordinary grateful; yet I have here my wishes, if the sincerity of my Zeal, may atone for the meaness of the Offer∣ing: That is the farthest prospect I look to, which whilst I have in view, I dare not (though perhaps as justly as some others have done I might) complain of the censures of the
World; for since I've heard that your Lord∣ship prov'd indulgent, I were unworthy of the favours you bestow'd, should be concern'd at the malice or petulancy of those, who (alas!) will needs think it modish to be Critical, but in the mean while forget 'tis as gentile to be civil. No my Lord, 'tis under your Vmbrage only I would court protection, to whom Heav'n has given a soul, whose endowments are as much above flat∣tery, as it self abbors it; and which are as im∣possible to be describ'd, as I am unable to com∣prehend them. But as poorest Pilgrims, when they visit shrines, will make some presents where they kneel: so I have here brought mine, by your own goodness only made worthy to be preserv'd; in whose defence I can say nothing more, than that with all my best endeavours are, and ever shall be ready to testifie how much I am, my Lord The most earnest of Your Servants, and Admirers, THO. OTWAY.
ALCIBIADES. A Tragedy. ACT First. SCENE First, a Palace. Timandra and Draxilla shouts without, Theramnes, Theramnes, Theramnes. Enter Servant. Tim. WHat mean these shouts? Serv. —Oh all your hopes are crost, The Gallant Alcibiades is lost. Tim. Hah!— Serv. —When last Night the Youth of Athens late Rose up the Orgia to Celebrate The Bacchanals all hot and Drunk with Wine, He led to the Almighty Thund'rers shrine, And there his Image seated on a Throne They violently took and tumbled down: This opportunity Theramnes got, To supplant him, and his own ends promote; For by the Senate he was doom'd to bleed, And that his Rival shou'd in all succeed; But he the threat'ning danger to evade, Is to the Spartan Camp for Refuge fled: And now by order from the Senate, all With shouts proclaim Theramnes General. Tim. But is he fled? has he so meanly done, To leave me to be wretched here alone.
Is this thy plighted Faith, is this thy Truth? Oh too unkind, false and unconstant Youth! [Exit Serv. Drax. Madam, believe not but my Brothers just, You wrong his honour by this mean distrust; Think you that distance can his Love rebate. Tim. Thy young Experience never felt the weight Of Lovers fears; if Just, he'l easily Excuse that Love that breeds this Jealousie. Drax. But Madam, for these doubts no grounds you have. Tim. Alas! goe ask of Mad-men why they Rave. What more could Fate do to Augment my Woe? I Love, am Mad, and know not what I do. I, who before had nothing in my Eyes, But Glory and Love growing to delight, Like Chymists waiting for their labours prize; My hopes are dash't and ruin'd in their height. Drax. Alas, we but with weak intelligence Read Heaven's decrees, Th'are writ in Mystick snce; For were they open lay'd to Mortal Eyes, Men would be Gods, or they no Dieties. Perhaps the wiser pow'rs thought fit this way To give your growing happiness allay, Lest should it in its high perfection come, Your soul for the Reception might want roome. Tim. Thy Reasons kind Draxilla, weakly move, What Woman e're complain'd of too much Love? No, had I naked to the World been left, Of Honour, and its gawdy Plumes berest: Yet all these I with gladness could resign, So Alcibiades had still been mine; But he remov'd, what can they give alone? What is the casket when the Jewel's gone? Drax. Madam, if he be gone, 'tis to obtain A nobler lustre, and return again: Think you his great soul could with patience see, His rifl'd Honours heap'd on's Enemy;
And not his Rage have grown to that excess, As must have ruin'd all your happiness. But he withdrew, and like a Zealous Hermit did forgoe Those little Toys, to gain a Heav'n in you. Tim. That Zeal must needs be very weak and faint, That lets the Votary forsake his Saint; No, he is happy in some other flame, And from his breast has blotted out my name: So that there nothing more remains for me, But a kind Death, or a long Misery. But Death alone's th'unhappy Lovers ease, That Seals up to us an Eternal Peace▪ By that our souls to endless pleasures move, And we enjoy an Everlasting Love. Yet e're I dye, as dye I feel I must, To Alcibiades I would be just; Fain would I let him know how I resign All in him, that his past Vows had made mine; Then to its seat in peace my soul should flye, And calmly at my Lovers feet I'd dye. Draxilla, for thy Friend, what couldst thou do? Drax. Madam, I could do any thing for you; I know not what you'd ask me I'd deny, Except that cruel thing, to see you dye. Tim. Some safe disguises for us then provide, From watchful eyes our sudden flight to hide; Hence to the Spartan Camp I'le forthwith move, Born on the wings of Jealousy and Love; For I'm resolv'd to know the worst of Fate▪ I wou'd be blest; can be unfortunate; Since 'tis the only thing of Heav'n I crave, To meet a faithful Lover, or a Grave. Theramnes at the Door. Th. —Stay kind Polyndus here Whilst I go pay my just devotion there: [Steping to Tim. See fairest Queen of Love and Beauty here, Your faithfullest & humblest Worshiper.
Distance adds to their Loves a Violence; And their souls hold from far Intelligence. Thus my mistaking Policy out-run My Fate; and I'm by my own Plots undone. Pol. Why do you let your soul be so opprest? 'Tis Patience best befits a gallant Breast. Th. Patience! Whats that? The Mistress of tame Fools, That can in nothing else employ their souls; No, since Timandra thou canst disapprove, My just flame for an absent Rivals Love, I'l find that Rival out, and snatch his breath, Though ev'ry step I tread, encounter Death. Pol. Now Sir y'are brave— Already y'ave disarm'd Timandra's charms, Me-thinks I see you Rev'ling in her Arms; Let's then o'th' Wings of Love and honour fly To th' Field, and meet th' insulting Enemy: Where through the paths of death and blood, we'l go To meet your Rival, and his Countrys Foe: There the remembrance of Timandra's charms, Shall add fresh courage to your Conq'ring Arms. But if Fate the success so order shall, That by your Rivals Sword you chance to fall: I then (as honour justly will command,) Inspir'd by Friendship and Timandra's Name, Will bravely stem him, and with this bold hand Revenge, or fall a Victim to your flame. Th. Oh noble generous Youth! whose tender years, Such gallant courage and such honour wear! How can my aymes but in my wishes end, That have so worthy and so brave a Friend? Embraces him. Come my Polyndus.— Pol. —On my Friend I'le wait, Through all the Labarinths of Love and Fate. [Exeunt. SCENE: The Tent of a Pavilion Royal; the King and Queen of Sparta, Alci∣biades, Tissaphernes, Patroclus, Guards, Ladys, &c.
K. Now must proud Athens lay her Tryumphs down, And pay her Glorys Tribute to my Crown; No more shall stupid Greece her Fetters wear, Nor make disadvantagious peace for fear; But she her self must in subjection come, And humbly at my feet expect her doom. Tiss. Yes Sir; all Glorys must when Yours break forth, Go out, and lose their Beauty, and their Worth; And like false Angels Vanish and be gone, Dreading those shapes they durst before put on. Pat. Athens, the Worlds great Mistress will not be Courted with low and vulgar Gallantry. Her Glory aymes at higher Characters, Then heavy Gown-men clad in formal Furrs: Who wins her deeds 'bove common Fate must do, And so she's only Mistress fit for you. K. Yes, and I only will enjoy her too. But noble generous Youth, thou has alone Things Worthy the Athenian honour done: To Alcibiades. Thou like a tow'ring Eagle soard'st above That lower Orb in which they faintly move; A flight too high for their dull souls to use, Which prompted 'em that honour to abuse: Thinking their baseness they might palliate, With the dark Cloud of Policy and State. But let them that black mistery pursue, By worth and honour Empires greatest grow; Which when abus'd, their glory does suppress, As revers'd prospects make the object less. Alcib. Yours Sir, like Heav'ns great soul is General; Dispensing its kind influence on all. This makes success and Victory repair, To move with you as in their proper Sphear; As fragrant dews leave the corrupter earth, Exhail'd by th'Sun from whom they had their Birth.
K. The truth of that we by your Lawrels know, Conquest your Arms, Triumph still waits your brow; By your success th' Athenian greatness rose, Your courage scatter'd their insulting Foes; And from that height to which by you th'are grown, 'Tis your success alone must throw 'em down▪ Thus have we made you Gen'ral of ou Force; And all those honours you were rob'd off there, We'll make our study to redouble here. Tiss. And I, (if that my Malice tell me true,) As diligently shall his Plagues pursue. Aside. Alcib. Of all my Courage or my Sword shall do, I the success must to your Vertue owe: The honour and the justice of your cause, So glorious are, Fate must from them take Laws: So You o're Athens this advantage have, You Fortune rule, to whom she's but a Slave. K. Enjoy my Tissaphernes now thy ease, And plant resh Lawrels in the shades of Peace. The glorys thou hast won, so num'rous are, They seem as many as thy age can bear. But if thy spacious soul thou canst confine, Within this narrow Mansion of mine: Be this the utmost of thy wishes bound, Possess his grateful heart, whose head th'ast Crown'd. Tiss. Heav'n knows my Age does feel no sharper sting, Then to want pow'r to serve so good a King. But since time tells me that my glass is run, Setting me backward where I first begun; Since no way else they can their duty show, I'le only employ my hands to Heav'n for you: And what my Sword can't, may devotion do. K. How truly he a glorious Monarch is That's Crown'd with blessings so sublime as these! How can I but in all things happy be, Propt by such Courage and such Piety?
To me with Gods similitude is giv'n: 'Tis pow'r and vertue that supports their Heav'n. Our Royal Standard to the City bear, T'Alarm it to Obedience, or to War; To Morrow must decide th' Athenian Fate, This day to joy and ease we'l Consecrate. Exeunt Om. praet. Tiss. Tiss. Ungrateful King! thy shallow aymes pursue, But my brisk Up-start Fav'rite, have at you. Was it for this my active Youth I spent In War? and knew no dwelling but a Tent! Have I for this through Invious Mountains pass't? Demolish't Cities, and lay'd Kingdoms wast▪ Still in his Cause unwearied courage shown? And almost hid his head in Crowns I won! Upon my Breast receiv'd so many Scarrs, They seem a War describ'd in Characters! And must the harvest of my toyle and blood, Upon a fawning Rebel be bestow'd? Who having false to his own Country been, Comes here to play his Treasons o're agen? Must he at last tumble my Trophies down, And Revel in the Glorys I have won? Whilst from my Honours, they me disengage With a dull Complement to feeble Age. What ayles this hardy hand, that yet it shou'd Tremble at death, or start at reeking blood? Me thinks this Dagger I as firmly hold, [Draws a Dagger. And with a strength as resolute and bold, As he who kindly would its point impart, A present to an envy'd Fav'rites heart; And I fond Youth will try to work thy fall, Though with my own I Crown thy Funeral. Envy and Malice from your Mansions flie, Resign your horrour and your Snakes to me; For I'le act mischiefs yet to you unknown; Nay, you shall all be Saints when I come down. Finis Actus Primi.
ACT Second. Scene First. A Grove adjoyning to the Spartan Camp. Timandra and Draxilla. Tim. WHat uncouth Roads Afflicted Lovers pass! How strange prepost'rous steps their Sorrows trace! Oh Alcibiades, if thou art just, Forgive th'excess of Love that bred distrust. Driven by that, disguis'd I hither came, Yet here and ev'ry where my grief's the same. But kind Draxilla's Friendship can dispel, The thickest Clouds that on sad Bosoms dwell, That does alleviate my griefs, and give My wearied soul a soft and knd Reprieve; Which ever to forget, would be as hard, And as impossible, as to Reward. Drax. The serving you, my happiness secures▪ I'm only somthing by my being yours; Since equally with yours, my hopes were crost, When in your Lover I a Brother lost; Then like an Orphan destitute and bare Of all but Misery and sad despair, Your Kindness gave my yeelding spirits rest, And rais'd me to a dwelling in your breast: Then ought I not in all my soul resign, To ease her griefs that kindly pitty'd mine? Tim. In that I did what honour urg'd me to. Drax. And honour tells me Gratitude is due. Tim. But how grows Gratitude to that degree, To be afflicted thus, and weep for me. Drax. Alas, that is the least that I could do, To our worst Enemies our Tears we owe.
Friendship to such a noble height should rise, As their devotion does in Sacrifice; Who think they shew a zeal remiss and small, Except themselves as nobler Victims fall. With as great courage could I for you dye, And my Triumphant Soul to Heav'n should fly; There I again my Friendship would renew, And lay up chiefest joyes in store for you. Tim. What vast and boundless flights does Friendship take! Beyond what search can see, or fancy track! 'Tis the improvement of the part divine, When souls in their Seraphick transports joyn; In souls united, so we friendship see, As many glorys make a Diety. Enter Alcibiades from the back part of the Scenes. Drax. Madam, yonder he comes who must retrieve Your drooping hopes, and your faint joyes revive. Tim. My Alcibiades! how I begin To think my misplac't jealousy did sin! Go meet him, seem all troubled, and in tears, And with the tale I taught thee wound his ears: Mean while I will with-draw my self this way, Nor would my swelling passion let me stay. Goes to the Door. Alcib. What ayrie Visions o're my eyes there move, Like the good genius of an absent Love! Where e're I turn me, I me-thinks espy, Timandra's Image softly gliding by. Such fond Ambition, Love his Slaves does teach, To make 'em fancy what they cannot reach. For oh Divine One!— How sickly joyes, honour and greatness grant, When thee the glory of my soul I want! Drax. My Lord!— Alcib. —Guard me, ye pow'rs Draxilla here, And weeping too! Oh my Prophetick fear! What is't your coming here would seem to tell? Relate, oh quickly, is my Princess well?
Drax. Oh Sir! In that unhappy fatal Night, When to the Spartan Camp you took your flight, When by the cruel Senae you were drove, Both to forsake your Country and your Love, Timandra, and my self, and we were sate In her Apartment, grieving for your fate: No sooner with sad Jealousies opprest, Her wearied soul in sleep sought after rest, But grief new Scenes of misery brought in, And plaid in Dreams its horrours o're agen: Sometimes her tender Arms she'd forward stretch, Then fiercely at the empty ayr would catch: Wearied with grief, she then would milder be, And in a hallow sigh send out, Ah Me! At last she rose, and 'bout the Chamber walkt; Sometimes she started, then stood still and talkt: Anon, repeat some short and pithy pray'r; Agen grow wild, and tear her pretious hair; Till having so wrought sorrow to that height. That her soul grew too tender for the weight: E're I my courage could collect to go, And give a hindrance to the fatall blow, She with her Dagger stab'd her self, and said, Thus dy'd Timandra that unhappy Maid. Alcib. Ye Gods! Is't thus your Justice you dispence▪ To lay th'reward of Guilt on Innocence? What though these Sacriledgious hands have thrown Your Images, those Pageant Glorys down! Must you revenge on her I lov'd transfer? You might have plagu'd me, so y'ad pitty'd her. But thus I'le send my soul, where it may tell She lov'd too rashly, but not lov'd too well; Oh Sister! do not hinder me my death; Sighs are the only use I've left of breath: Offers to fall on his Sword, but is hindred by Draxilla. One blow will put an end to grief and Me.
Enter Timandra. Tim. That Sir you must not do, nor must I see. [Al. stars. Why fly you back? nay, if you shun me now, I shall grow apt to think my fears too true. Alcib. Oh Heavens! does then my dear Timandra live! The Joy's too mighty for me to receive; This was the greatest bliss Heav'n had to give. How rashly did my impious rage prophane Your Goodness! oh but wash away that stain, Then I with Victims will your Altars load, And have a Sacrifice for ev'ry God. Till by those holy fires, this black offence Be purg'd and purify'd to Innocence. But dearest, how could you so cruel be, To let such bliss be drest in misery? To tell me you were dead! How could you think but th'horror of that breath, Must damp my Soul, and chill me into death. Tim. Alas, my fears could find out no relief, But thus t'assault you in the garb of grief; This tryal of your Faith my Joy secures, As Thunders usher in refreshing show'rs. Alcib. Let us no longer then to doubts give way, But hast to th'Consummation of our Joy, So with our bright united flames, dispell Those anxious mists that on our bosoms dwell, Being of no other Jealousie possess, But which shall kindest prove, and love the best. Tim. And when our faithful happy hearts shall be▪ Firmier united by that sacred tye, How in an endless Road of bliss wel move, Steering our motions by our perfect Love! There we with pleasure will recount each woe
Which we have pass't, and others undergoe. There we'll reflect o'th' various hopes and fears, The mournfulsighs and the impatient tears Of distrest Lovers, whilst we'll kindly thence, Through a strange mystical Intelligence, Give 'em Redresses by our influence: Till so by ours,— Their full-grown Joyes receive a happy birth, As Planets in their kind Conjunctions bless the Earth. Alcib. Then my Timandra to our Bliss let's fly, There's but one minute more to Extasy. [Exeunt. Enter Queen and Ardella. Queen. Oh my Ardella, whither shall I turn? I'm all o're lame, in ev'ry part I burn. Ar. Your Majesty— Queen. —Fool, Majesty! what's that? Th' Ill-natur'd pageant mockery of fate; When her ungrateful sportive pow'r she'd show, Raising us high— To barr us of the benefits below. But I'le her servile Policy despise, And make her stoop to Loves great Victories. Th' Almighty Pow'r of Heav'n came down from thence, To tast the sweets of Am'rous Excellence: Why then should Princes that are Gods below, Think that a sin which Heav'n is proud to do? Ard. But Madam, is it not a cruel thing, T'abuse a Loving Husband and kind King? Qu. Dull Girle, thou knowst no what a Husband is. Alas, they never reach the height of bliss, But ignorantly with Loves Magick play, Till they raise Spirits they want pow'r to lay. In that brave Alcibiades there swarm, So many graces, he's all over charm; Such killing Ayres in each part of him move,
His Brow darts Majesty, and his Eye Love: Oh my Ardella, I am lost in thought! I fain wou'd have thee—yet 'tis false, I'd not. Ard. Madam, your Royal pleasure but relate, I'le be as faithful, and as firm as Fate. Qu. Art thou then skilful in Loves subtle arts, Cunningly to lay Ambuscades for hearts? Canst thou express a melting kind desire, And give a feeling draught of Loves soft fire? Ard. Madam, so subt'ly I'le his heart betray, As one, who by some great Magicians pow'r, Is hurry'd through the Regions in an hour, And for return again, can find no way. Qu. My better Angel! fly then swift as time, Or thought; thou 'gainst a Queen in gaining him. But use such secresy as stoln Loves should have, Be dark as the hush't silence of the Grave. Ard. Madam, distrust not but that I shall do, Both what is to your Love and Honour due. Qu. Honour! a very word; an empty name: How dully wretched is the Slave to Fame! Give me the Soul that's large and unconfin'd; Free as the Ayr, and boundless as the Wind: Nature was then in her first excellence, When undisturb'd with puny Conscience, Mans Sacrifice was pleasure, his God, sence. Enter Tessaphernes. Tiss. Madam by th'Kings command I'm to you▪ sent, Wh'attends your Royal presence in his Tent. Qu. I go.— Exeunt. Qu. and Ardella. Tiss. —Now all is Ripe, me-thinks I see Treason walk hand in hand with Destiny, And both in a kind Aspect smile on me. Now the whole Court proceeds to solemnize The Nuptials of proud▪ Alcibiades. Where ev'ry thing does as I'd wish combine,
To give a happy end to my designe. It is the custom at a Marriage Feast, The Bridegroom— With a full Bowl presents his cheifest guest. The Cup's by my great secresy and care, With strongest potion all infected are: Which when our Alcibiades shall bring, And offer as his duty to the King, The Poyson and his sudden death will seem, Fully a Trayterous design in him. Then must the Crown descend on me, and so I feast my Rage, and my Ambition too. Let Cowards spirits start at Crueltie, Remorse has still a stranger been to me. I can look on their pains with the same eyes, As Priests behold the falling Sacrifice, Whilst they yell out the horrour of their moans, My heart shall dance to th'Musick of their groanes. [Exit. Enter Captain of the Guards. Cap. Look that your care and diligence be great, See the Guards doubled, and each Cent'nal set. [Exit. The Scene drawn, discovers the Tent of a Pavilion; in it an Al∣tar, behind which are seated the King and Queen attended by Tissaphernes, Patroclus, and the rest of the Camp; about the Al∣tar stand several Priests of Hymen. K. Each day brings some surprize of pleasure, here Love vyes his Tryumphs with the God of War. Six Priests of Hymen Dance. The Dance ended, Enter chief Priest and Priestess of Hymen; Priest leading Timandra, and the Priestess Alcibiades. Priest Sings. Distracting Jealousies and fears, Heart-breaking sobs and restless tears
Fly to the breasts that are Wrack't with despair In this, Preis. Or this. Cho. No tears but those of Joy, no paintings but of bliss. Priesess. Yes, yes, by Love alone we se On Earth the glorys of a Diety: For 'tis the greatest work above, To be innocent and Love. Those then that flame so nobly here, What Ravishing delights must they have there! Cho. Who on Earth to their honour are just, and their Love Must reap the chief blessings above. Priest. Let's then proceed, and Hymens aid implore, To joyn those hands whose hearts were link't before. Priesess. Agreed. Prest. Agreed. Pries. Agreed. Prest. Agreed. Cho. Hymen, Oh Hymen, come away, Crown the wishes of ths day. See, see these pure refin'd desires, Wait at thy Torch, wait at thy Torch to improve their fires. Whilst this Chorus is singing, Hymen enters with his Torch, and joyns their hands with a Wreath of Roses, which the Priestess strikes with her Spear and breaks, then they offer both parts up∣on the Altar. This Ceremony ended, a Dance is perform'd by four Priests and Priestesses of Hymen, all carrying in their hands short Spears muffl'd with flowers and boughs of fruit, after which a Bowl is brought in, and presented to Alcibiades, who immediately upon the receipt bows to the King, who descends with the Queen, and receives the Bowl of him, then spaks. K. To shew how strict a Reverence I have For ev'ry thing that Loyal is, and brave, Drawing near to Tissaphernes. This signal honour only due to me, Thus Tissaphernes, I confer on thee. [Presents him the Bowl
Thus Tissaphernes I confer on thee. [Presents him the Bowl. Tiss. Confusion! what means this? K. —Nay, do not start, It is the offering of a grateful heart: Come drink to such a depth as may express Thy wishes for their Joy, and Sparta's happiness. Tiss. I must obey your Majesty— Proffering to drink, lets fall the Bowl, and seems to Swoun back. Pat. Alas my Father! K. —How fares our worthy Friend? Hence quickly for our chief Physitians fend. So much this Aged Hero I esteem, I rather could part with my Crown than him. Tiss. My health Sir needs no other help than this, [faintly. That you will pardon its Infirmities. The Wine was of so strong an Excellence, Its Spirits prov'd too mighty for my sence. Alarum without. Enter Officer. Off. Dread Sir, your Camp th' Athenian Force Alarm's: Without the City Gates th'appear in Arms. And with a numerous and Warlike train, Begin their March upon the Neighb'ring Plain. Their bloody Ensignes all display'd appear, And hold an am'rous Combat with the Ayre: Loosly they flye, and with a Wanton play, Seem to sale the Sun-beams in their way: Whilst their shrill Trumpets rattle in the skye, As if with Musick they'd charm Victory. And this Triumphant Pride does higher grow, That they may make a Conquest fit for You. K. 'Tis well, ev'ry Battalia Re-inforce With my late fresh supplyes of Persian Horse: Their Fate no longer will delay endure; Prepare to fight 'em in this very hour. I'd have this day hereafter famous be, For the Renown of Love and Victory. Shous from afar▪ Enter another Officer.
2d. Off. The Enemy Sir does on the Plain appear, And with Re-ecchoing shoutings pierce the Ayr. K. So Beasts decreed for slaughter e're they fall, With their own Bell'wings ring their Funeral. Finis Actus Secundi. ACT Third. Scene First: The Camp. Tissaphernes. Tiss. CUrse on my niggard Stars, they were so poor, That my Revenge prov'd greater than their pow'r, My fury had begot so vast a Birth, Fate wanted strength enough to bring it forth. Trumpets afar▪ off sound a Charge. That sprightly sound darts fiercely through my soul, Oh that I might one minute fate Controule; Could but command one happy fatal Dart, To send it self into  Gen'rals heart. Enter King and Queen attended. K. Thus must proud States submit when Monarchs claim: They govern in a rude disorder'd frame, As Stars in a dim Senate rule the Night, But Vanquish at the Suns more Potent light. Athens now feels the fury of my heat: A pow'r like theirs, divided, can't be great: It may tumultious and num'rous show, But ne're contract to give a steady blow. Qu. In States those monstrous many-headed pow'rs Of private int'rest publick good devours.
'Tis true, when in their hands a rule they gain, They know to use that power, not maintain, Like Pyrats in a Fleet, a while they may Seem dreadful; but when by some juster force Oppos'd— Each his own safety seeks, and shrinks away. Tiss. You Sir have Vanquish'd Emp'rours, Fetter'd Kings: States are such mean and despicable things, Compar'd with other glorys y'ave subdu'd, Their Conquest seems but a soft Interlude. Trumpets from far sound a Retreat. Enter Messenger. Mess. This minute Sir, your Glorys are compleat, The routed Enemy makes a faint Retreat: Victory blushing, they no more could do, With a full wing directs her flight to You. K. Thus Dedamia are our wishes Crown'd, Love and Renown in the same Sphear go round: Our lasting Loves draw lasting Victories, Whilst Courage takes his flame from Beauties eyes. Enter another Messenger. 2d. Mess. Thus hourly Sir, fresh glorys you receive, Athens no more's your Enemy, but Slave Like the sad Ruins of a Hurricane, Their totter'd Troops are scatter'd o're the Plain, And in disorder'd Parties make away. K. Relate, how went the bus'ness of the Day? Mess. Brave Alcibiades has wonders done. Ne're greater Courage was in Sparta shown. Troops were not able to withstand his shock, Like thunder from a Cloud his fury broke On all his Enemies, and like that too, Death and Amazement did attend each blow. Long doubtful Fortune dally'd on her Wheel, And neither seem'd to move it, nor stand still, Till at the last the brave Polyndus fell.
His loss did so amaze the Enemy, That in disorder they began to fly. Yet brave Theramnes Rally'd in their head, Though to their fate was but a while delay'd, For by our Gen'ral he was Captive made. And which agen they did their flight renew, With numbers too so totter'd and so few, It had been Barbarism to pursue. Thus fair Timandra, who from far had been An anxious looker on this Tragick Scene, With all the hast Joy could, or love afford, lies to congratulate her Conqu'ring Lord; Now both in solemn Triumph this way move, To Crown your Glorys as you Crown'd their Love. Trumpets. Enter Alcibiades, Patroclus, Timandra and The∣ramnes Prisoner: Alcibiades kneels to the King. K. Sir, of your brav'ry I've already heard, So much above the power of Reward; It were but just that I should homage do, And offer up acknowledgments to you. Rise Sir, and give this Ceremony o're, The posture ill becomes a Conquerour. [Alcib. rises. Alcib. Conqu'rours that are Triumphant in the Field, Must at their Monarchs feet their Trophies yield; For all those glorys which their Conquests claim, They only have subordinate from them. Thus, though my Sword this Captive has o'recome, It is from You he must expect his Doom. Th. Yes, and in this you have o'recome him too, He cannot talk Sir half so fast as you. Curse, though I am your Prisoner, I hate To hear your pride upbraid me with my Fate. Alcib. Why Sir, was't not my favour that you live? Th. No; for I hate that Life your hand did give. Know, had your Fate been mine— I should have urg'd kind destiny more home, And there have Revell'd Rival in your room.
Alcib. Sir, for your Love, you shew but weak pretence, When all your Arguments is Insolence. Whence does it spring? The. —From whence your bliss you draw, Love, that ne're clog'd his Proselytes with Law. I lov'd this fair one first, and you must know I'l love her still; And what's all that to you? Alcib. This Rudeness Sir, my fury can't Engage, You are ill-manner'd, and beneath my Rage. The. But know, I'l follow still my hate to thee; Nor shall my Chains obstruct thy destiny: Thou did'st supplant me in Timandra's Love, For which I gave thy glorys a remove; And on thy Ruins made my self more great: But since my wishes Fate would not compleat, My Fury with my Fortune shan't decreae, I'l still pursue thy Life and happiness: By all despaires dark arts thy fall design, Till in thy blood I write Timandra mine. Alcib. Rave on; know of your threats no sence I feel, I'd laugh at 'em, wer't not to loose a smile. K. But I'l take care that he shall better know, What 'tis a Captive for his life does owe, How dare you offer here these Injuries? Know you how much this gallant man I prize? Guards, to Confinement the Offender bear, Be his Bounds narrow, and restraint severe, Since in your breast such a hot frenzy reigns, We'l try how you can brave it in your Chains. Th. So King, as Thou shalt envy what Th'as done, I have a soul can smile when Thou dost frown. Whilst I Timandras fair Idea wear, I can't want freedom, for I'l think of her. Exit Guarded. K. Thus Madam, to your Eyes must Conquest bow, Who are your Slaves no other Fetters know. Tim. If any charms in me there can appear, They only are confin'd and bounded there: No greater aymes, nor more Ambition know, Thou how Sir to obliege him that serves you.
Alcib. Your gen'rous pitty to our faithful flames, That power which it gave 'em justly claimes. Thus happy by your great indulgence made, In Joyes so perfect, nothing can Remove, Your spreading gloryes ne're shall shrink or fade; Till you forget to aspire, and we to love. But how dare I Usurp the least pretence, Who only borrow all my Lawrells hence! [pointing to Patr. This is that noble Youth, who, when I stood Beset on every side with death and blood: To my relief such gen'rous succour brought, And things so much above ev'n wonder wrought. Pat. You, Sir, that taught me friendship, taught me too, How much is to that Sacred title due. No Sir, if your Life at hazard lye, Though thousand deaths should dare me on I'l fly, And Conquer all, or bravely with you dye. Alcib. In gallanty you are so absolute, That I grow faint, and flag in the pursuit. Yet that return accept in silence here, Which is so great 'twill no expression bear, [Embraces him. Tiss. Hell! Sure my blood is grown degenerate. Can this my Son Embrace the man I hate? [Aside. K. How Tissaphernes, is thy good age blest In such a Son, of such a friend possest? Thus from thy Rev'rend Trunk fresh glories spread, And with their pious Lawrels shade thy head. Tiss. In this warm Comfort patiently I'l sit, Till Fate shall come and claim her latest debt. Sometimes my Youths past Triumphs I'l review, And please my self they are approv'd by you: Alas I've nothing else left now to do. [Ironically. Oh my dear Boy! Sir, be my Joy thus showne, Possess the Father as you've gain'd the Son. [Embraces both. K. Monarchs thus propt, the shocks of Fate defie, No bonds so firm as those which Friendship tye. [Exit King attended; Manent, Alcibiades, Timandra and Draxilla.
Alcib. Now noblest Sister, how shall be repayd Those large endearments which your love has made. Our happiness will but Imperfect prove, If midst the growing pleasures of our love, We nothing else ingratitude can do, Then only with a happiness to you. Deax. What I have done Sir, never had regard, To that Sinister thing we call Reward. Good deeds their worth and value have from hence, They their own Glory are and Recompence. Alcib. But Sister, if I might one Question move; Drax. Your pleasure Sir?— Alcib. —Could you not Madam—Love? The Friend in whom I'm happy since I came, In honour's as renown'd as in his name. He, when I to him often would Relate The sad adventures of my love and fate; So much your gallant Friendship did admire: That with your Character he grew on fire; And bears a flame so noble and sublime, As not to love agen would be a crime. Drax. Sir, that's a thing I cannot now discourse; Love rarely Conquers with a sudden force. Nor must I that acknowledge as my due, Which was perhaps a Complement to you: If any thing in me he can approve, I may believe it gallantry, not Love. Alcib. I shall no more your modesty offend. Pardon a forward Zeal to serve my Friend. But if ought add a blessing, 'twill to see You made as happy as you have made me. Exeunt. Enter Tissaphernes and Patroclus. Tiss. D'you understand, Patroclus, what y'ave done? Have you consider'd that you are my Son? Patr. Sir, 'tis a title I am proud of.— Tiss. How can you then descend to things so base, That blot my Glory, and my Name deface? Whilst thus your blinded folly so adores, The only Traytor that my soul abhorrs?
Patr. How Sir, I doat upon the man you hate! No, I had never thoughts so impious yet, By all my hopes, if any wretch there be Sunhappy to be held your enemy, Rather then in my Breast his image bear, I'd raze it from my heart, or stab it there. Tiss. Stay least you should pronounce too rash a doom: Believe it is a blow will wound you home. But I will try— What gen'rous resolution you express, Know then you must hate Alcibiades. Patr. Protect me heav'n! can you command that Should break that knot you did so lately tye! Was't not your love that did our friendship joyn? Did not your kind imbraces second mine? Tiss. Embraces! Love! and kindness! what are these? The outward varnish that our hearts disguise. Hast thou so long with Courts conversant been, The various turns of power and greatness seen, And hast thou not this mistery yet found, Always to smile in's face we mean to wound? Come you must hate him, nay and kill him too. Patr. Oh let me rather beg my death from you. Can you command me Sir to wound a heart, Whereof I do profess so great a part? In that I should prove a self-murderer: Peircing his Breast I stab m' own image there. Tiss. Come lay these idle boyish scruples down, Do as becomes your Vertue and my Son. Can you behold him rev'ling in my place, And turning all my honours to disgrace. And can you of so little value prize The honour of your blood, not to shed his? Patr. Oh Sir, no farther urge this horrid Theam, 'Twill blast your gloryes and your wreathes defame.
Do but look on that lie you would destroy, See if it ben't as spotless and erene As that which in their heav'n blest Saints enjoy, Pure and untouch't but with a thought of sin. By all th' endearments of a filial love, [kneels. And if that charm cannot your pitty move, By my dear Mothers ghost, whose dying prayr Bequeath'd me her chief treasure to your care, This unjust cruel enmity lay down, And do not in his friend destroy your Son. On the past brav'ry of your youth look back, There the bright paths of all your Triumphs track: Think what 'twill be those gloryes to exchange, For a base brutal infamous revenge. Oh Sir recal, recal the dire decree, Tis such a deed as fate will shrink to see. Tiss. Then 'tis the itter to be done by me. Give this unmanly Childish pitty o're, Or ne're presume to call me Father more. Patr. Then see how I resigne that int'rest here: [rises. Thus all the bonds of duty cancel'd are. Whilst such black horrour in your soul I see, Y'are not my Father, but my enemy. Now against me let all your vengeance come, Thus thus my breast for your revenge has room. Brave Alcibiades.— No, since such barbarous mischiefs you dare do, I'l dye for him, but scorn to live for you. Why don't you strike Sir? is your rage grown faint? Tiss. I fear I've too much trifl'd with this boy; Curse on his honour, 'twill my hopes destroy. But I'l smooth all in time. Oh my dear Son, Now art thou worthy to be cal'd my own. None but a heart that's truly noble cou'd Ever deserve a Title to my blood.
No, may ye both in your brave friendship be As truly happy, as I am in thee. That's curst.— [aside Patr. Is then my father kind? can he approve Our friendship? does he once more crown our love? Oh Sir, let thus m' acknowledgment be giv'n, As we for blessings offer thanks to heav'n. [kneels. Tiss. Rise, rise thou comfort of my Age, I now Have understood all I could wish to know. Alas, in this disguise I did but try The strength and vertue of thy constancy. 'Tis a refreshment to this heavy head, To prove that vertue which my self have bred. Thus blest in peace I'l to my Grave descend. As the declining Sun goes down at night, Pleas'd with the rising of an off-spring light. Patr. Such mystick wayes fate does our loves confirm, As rooted Trees stand faster by a storm. After this shock our friendship's more secure, As Gold try'd in the fire comes forth more pure. [Exit. Tiss. There's some foundation yet for my design; The Captiv's brave, I'l try to make him mine. Unwearied I will let my fury range, And leave no heart unsearcht to find revenge. [Exit. SCENE a dark Tent. Theramnes in Chains. The. How sweet a quietude's in fetters found! That it seems almost freedom to be bound. Though thus confin'd, my agile thoughts may fly Through all the Region of variety. Here in a trice I can the World run o're, And finish whole years labours in an hour.
But oh my Mistress! my Timandra lost! That is the only bitterness I taste. This outward fetter but my Body chains, But that the freedom of my Soul detains. Why by my Rivals Sword did I not fall; So bravely have embrac'd one death for all? Yet why should I court such an abject ate? Courage is the supporter of the great. Methinks I've something yet to do, might prove Becoming both my courage and my love. I'l—hah this does my busie thoughts prevent. [Enter Tiss. Is that old friend for a Tormenter sent? Good Sir, upon what message are your come? Am I then destin'd to some harder doom? Tiss. No, I am come to give your sorrows ease: I know you hate Sir Alcibiades: Nay and I know you love Timandra too. The. Well Sir, all this I know as well as you. Tiss. Come if you dare be brave, be't on this theam: Dare you Sir ravish her and murder him? The. For what dark ends do you this question bring? Dare! 'sdeath, old Sir, I dare do any thing. Tiss. That word then all my former doubts secures, Be only res'lute, and Timandra's yours. My stratagems so subtly I will lay, That to your arms your Mistress I'l betray. Thus then, as the first step to our design, Your guards I'l with adulterated wine Secure; so they Charm'd in a Lethargy, I'l from your bonds and prison set you free. Then when some happy moment shall present Timandra left ungarded in her tent, Both of us thither in disguise will move, To end your rival and compleat your love. For when your ill of bliss you have enjoy'd, And your full pleasures with themselves are cloy'd:
I thither will alar'm our enemy, Where by both Swords he shall be sure to dye. And the next night (the watch-word given by me) You may, scape through the Guards to liberty. The. Revenge! my love enjoy'd, and freedom too! Then in the name of Pluto be it so. What stupid ignorance the World possest, That only fury plac't i'th' youthful breast! No 'tis in age alone great Spirits are young: The Soul's but infant when the Body's strong. These hoary heads like grisly Comets are, Which always threaten ruin death and war. Tiss. Alas such ame Souls know but half a growth, I'l make my age a step to a new youth: Such murders and such cruelties maintain, I'l from the blood I shed grow young again. The. Let's in the name of horrour then go on; Methinks I long to have the bus'ness done: Something like Conscience else may all defeat, You know Sir I'm but a raw villain yet. Tiss. Conscience! a trick of State, found out by those That wanted power to support their Laws; A bug-bear name to startle fools, but we That know the weakness of the fallacie, Know better how to use what nature gave. That Soul's no Soul which to it self's a slave. Who any thing for Conscience sake deny, Do nothing else but give themselves the lye. [Exeunt. SCENE the Camp. Enter Patroclus and Draxilla. Patr. Why Madam do you fly a lovers pray'r? Is cruelty the priviledge o'th fair?
Drax. You cannot Sir i'th' Camp be beauties slave, Where honour's th' only. Mistress of the brave. Patr. But 'tis a rugged honour got in Arms, When not made soft by beauties sweeter charms. That melts our rage into a kind desire, Whlst love reines it in his purer fire. Drax. Lovers whose flights so sublime pitches choose, Oft soar too high, and so their quarry loose. But you Sir know to moderate your height, Missing your game can eas'ly slack the flight. Patr. Such faint essays may▪ fit a common flame, But my desires have a far nobler Aime, Religious honour, and a zeal that's true, Rais'd by that Deity to which I sue. Drax. Those who to deities their offerings pay, Make their addresses in an humbler way. Not in a confidence of what they give, But modest hopes of what they shall receive. Patr. I in my offerings no assurance have, Though an ambition to become your slave. Drax. Yes, but when once admitted to that place, You'l still be looking for some acts of grace. Patr. Some little favours pitty can't deny, You are too noble to use cruelty. Drax. See Sir the Queen, I beg you Sir forbear. [Exeunt. Patr. Madam this way— Enter Queen and Ardella. Qu. Did he then suffer no surprize  shew Of alteration? let's the progress know. Ard. In order Madam t'your command I went, And met him coming from the Royal Tent: Where after th' usual Ceremonies past, E're I would feast I gave him first a taste, Told him how much his courage you approv'd, That he in no mean path of glory mov'd,
Who in his Arms had so successful been, T'engage a Monarch and oblige a Queen. Then nearer came, and whisper'd something more, Began to intimate loves mighty pow'r. He briskly took the hint, and readily Began to urge some pretty things to me. By which encourag'd I to th' bus'ness drew, Told him in fine it only was his due To be admir'd by all, and lov'd by you. Qu. And did not then his alter'd looks betray Some extasie? some marks of lively joy? Ard. No Madam, he knew better policy, Talk't of your honour, and his loyalty, Fine smoothing terms to cloak a passion in. But if your Majesty— Qu. —What?— Ard. —Had but seen How much his carriage did his words deceive, When with a gentle sigh he took his leave, As if he languish'd till the minute came. Qu. Dost thou then think he entertains my flame? Lets to my Tent and wait his coming there, Such swarms of love within my Breast there are, The heat's too furious for my Soul to bear. What would I give but for a taste of bliss! Oh the choice sweets of a stol'n happiness?
Act IV. Scene I. Alcibiades Solus. Alci. UNder what fatal Planet was I born! Sure at my birth the Heavens themselves did mourn. Disjoynted nature did her course forbear, And held within her Womb a civil War. I who but now did fame and Conquest bring, And added to the glories of  King, Must see my Trophyes all thrown down agen, By the base passions of a lustful Queen. Why was I not born to a common fate, Free from the glorious troubles of the great, So in some humble Cell my years have spent, Blest with a private peaceable content. The vulgar mortal feels not fortunes harms, The highest structures still are shook with storms. See too she's here; what shall I do or speak? Fate has beset me, and I've no way to take. Enter Queen. Qu. My Lord you something discompos'd appear, Surely there's nothing that can fright you here. Alci. Majesty Madam is a thing divine. Qu. If that disturb you Sir, I'le lay by mine. Methinks I apprehend a greater pride, To view the man whose glories spread so wide. Alci. Madam you on 'em set too high a price. Qu. Perhaps I see not Sir with common eyes. They best of honour judge that honour have. I find a secret in me says y'are brave. You need not Sir unfold it, you can guess, Alci. How craftily she would her lust express, And set her ills off with a winning dress.
What's to be done, which way shall I conclude? I must abuse my King, or must be rude. I cannot speak— Qu. —My Lord! let's sit a while, Won't you vouchsafe your visitant a smile? Alci. Smiles Madam were too insolent a joy. Qu. Fye! put these formal complements away, Ardella sing that Song I heard to day. SONG. The brightest Goddess of the Sky, How did she panting sighing lye, And languishing desire to dye▪ For the Triumphant God of war, Amidst his Trophies did appear, As charming rough as she was fair. 2. Their loves were blest, they had a Son, The little Cupid, who has shown More conquest then his Sire e're won. He grew the mightiest God above, By which we him a Rebel prove To heav'n, that dares be so to Love. 3. How soft the delights, and how charming the joy, Where love and injoyment each other support! Let the Cynical fool call pleasure a toy, Who ne're fame i'th' Camp had, nor love in the Court: O so kindly the Combates each other succeed, Where 'tis Triumph to dye, and a Pleasure to bleed. Alci. The Air is charming.— Qu. —Retire. [Exit Ardella. No lively Symptoms of a growing ire! I'l urge him further—
My Lord, your Y'are ill; Cold drops upon your brows appear; I'l wipe 'em off, come Sir, your fears remove, You need not blush to tell me  you love. I'l do it for you, nay I  will do, Blush for my self  for you. Sure this will take▪  wonder mean, Is love so strange?— Alci. —Oh name that agen, Could you such wrong to royal  do? Think what's to heav'n and to your vertue due. Qu. Must I be hated then? and Sir by you? [angerly. Pish, why d'you talk of heav'n and  now? [mildly. Alci. Not new-made mothers to their infants bear A firmer passion, or a tend'rer care▪ Show me yours or your honours enemy, See with what vigour t'your revenge I'le fly. For you with life I willingly could part, But whilst that lasts, Timandra has my heart. Qu. The heavy pleasures of the marriage Bed, Dull repetition soon will  dead▪ Taste fresher joys, and when they , Then the old pleasures may seem . Alci. Could I expect to have such language heard, Where beauty and such innocence appear'd? Qu. Can you my , And is't so difficult a ? Alci. Love Madam! only As you are fair, , I'le love you as the . Qu. A Sister , So little we can hardly name what 'tis. Where is the transport, to a sharp appetite. Alci. I know y'are Your beams the lustre of a King adorn,
That King whose piety me happy made, And can I in return profane his bed? Though Madam I've liv'd free, and never se Limits to any thing we call delight, Yet raise not new rebellions in blood: Beauty hath darts too keen to be withstood. Qu. Yet all its power has no force o're you, Your cruel heart's immoveable, but know 'Twill to your honour be but ill apply'd, That for your love a Queen, neglected, dy'd. Alci. What is't you majesty would have me do? Qu. Are you so ignorant that you don't know! Alci. Death, not to have some sense were to unman My self; but I'le be conqu'rour if I can. Should I be made a captive to her charms, Er'e I am warm in my Timandra's arms? One stratagem I'le for my freedom try, Madam no longer I'le your pow'r deny. [to the Queen. For if these eyes had ne're Timandra known, You only might have call'd my heart your own. But whilst with her I enjoy love, and life, And you remain the mighty Agis wife; Know this is all I can in justice do, I'm ready on your least commands, to shew I live for her; but yet could dye for you. Qu. Must I then only border upon bliss? Rest on the confines of my happiness? As Souls that are excluded heav'n for sin, See all its glories, but can't enter in. Alci. No Madam; free from the dull clog of sense, We'l reap delights of nobler excellence. Our entwin'd Souls each other shall enjoy, Tread vertues paths, and never loose their way. But if one in his motion chance to err, Strait regulate it by the other's sphear:
—Till at the last, When the short Zodiack of this life w'ave past; With new imp't Zeal beyond the Stars wee'l fly, There meet, and mingle to a Deity. Qu. Then to all hopes of happiness adieu, Since my chief bliss I've lost in loosing you. Oh the Tyrannick cruelty of fate, That lets us know our happiness too late. Yet why shou'd I to fears and sorrows bend, If only on their fate my hopes my depend? A Rival, and a King, I may remove: There's nothing difficult to them that love. [Exit Queen. Alci. She's gone.— Greatness, thou gaudy torment of our Souls, The wise mans fetter, and the range of fools! Who is't wou'd court thee if he knew thy ills? He who the greatest heap of Honour piles, Does nothing else but build a dang'rous shelf, Or rect Mountains to o'rewhelm himself. [Exit. Scene a Grove adjoyning to the Camp. Enter Tissaphernes and Theramnes disguis'd. Tiss. Now Sir y'are free, and prosperously move, To reap the long wisht harvest of your love. One minute and y'are in Timandra's arms, New fetter'd in the power of her Charms: Methinks the thought ev'n my old blood Alarms. The. His rage sure works him to an extasie: How the old Monster hugs his villany! Good Sir dispatch, I cannot brook delay; I wast in expectation of my joy. But hear, did you not hear a murm'ring talk? Tiss. Perhaps 'tis she come in this Grove to walk: Stay here they are, by heav'n the same, 'tis she. [They go to the door. Retreat a while; blest opportunity.
Enter Timandra with a Book in her hand, and Draxilla. Tim. Methinks Draxilla when Atlanta ran, And slaughter was the only prize she wan; Her power a too cruel rigour bore, To kill those she had wounded so before. [Theramnes throws off his disguise. The. Then Madam be not guilty of her ill: Me the poor wretch y'ave wounded do not kill. Ah in your heart, if such a sence there be Of the injustice of her cruelty; How much more pitty from your breast is due To him, who ev'ry minute dyes for you! Tim. My Lord Theramnes! by what lucky hap Have you from guards and prison made escape? The. Who wears your sacred image in your breast, Is of such pure Divinity possest, And from ignoble bondage so secure, That feeble chains fall off, and loose their pow'r. Tim. Then Sir in your intended flight make haste, Least by some fatal chance y'are once more lost. The. No, I enjoy a nobler safety here; No danger dares approach when you are near. These Groves to lovers bliss are dedicate, Free from th' uncivil outrages of fate. Coe, let's to something like delight draw nigh, And loose our selves a while in extasie. [seizes roughly on her. Tim. Guard me ye powers! Draxilla help▪ my Lord! Tiss. Good gentle Madam, if you please one word. [Draxilla runs out crying help, and Tissaphernes after her. The. I cannot see my Rival blest alone; Must he reap all the sweets, and I have none? Tim. This outrage on my knees I beg forbear: See Sir it is Timandra sheds a tear. [Tiss. returns. Her whom you vowd you lov'd with noble flame, Oh do'nt by savage lust prophane that name!
If 'tis the envy of your Rivals joy, Remove, remove th' offence some other way: Save but my honour, and my life destroy. The. Such tenderness might cool anothers blood; But I am too unhappy to be good. Let vertue to dull Anchorites repair, Who ne're had Soul enough to know despair. I'le banish the encroacher from my breast, And shake him off e're he take hold too fast. Come let's retire within this covert by; I am impatient, and my blood boyls high. Tim. I will not go, I'le dye a Martyr here. The. Then I must drag you. Tim. —Barb'rous Ravisher! Oh! Oh!— Enter Alcibiades. Alci. —Did I not hear a tender cry! Oh Heavens! turn base hell-hound, turn and dye. [draw. The. That Sir will thus be better understood. [draws. Tiss. Y'ave undertook Sir more then you'l make good. [draws. [They both make at him. Enter Patroclus. Patr. How's this; assaulted! and by such base odds! Courage my freind!— After a fierce fight between Alcibiades and Theramnes, Pa∣troclus and Tissaphernes, Patroclus drives his Father off the Stage, and Alcibiades runs Theramnes through. Alci. —To the accurst abodes Of tortur'd Souls that in dark horrour dwell, Thus fly, and to thy fellow Devils tell, It was my Sword that sent thy soul to hell. The. Hold Sir, enough, I must your victim fall, Though an atonement for my sin too small. My hasty Soul can make no longer stay, Death touls his leaden Bell, and calls away. And now, like some sad trav'ler, taking view Of the long Journey that I have to go,
Whilst I my thoughts to heav'ns sweet mansions bend, Without your mercy no admittance find. Oh but one word of pardon e're I dye, Secure of that, my Souls dares boldly fly. Absolv'd by you, it must have welcome there, As incense that is offer'd up with pray'r. Tim. My pardon and my prayers too receive, More then your guilt could ask me I could give. Be happy as your penitence is true; And may kind heav'n forgive you as I do: [weeps. The. Ah! can your piety vouchsafe a tear Of pitty, on an impious Ravisher! My Soul will leave me in an extasie: And I shall want the sense to know I dye. Thus, pure Divinity, at your feet I bow, Here 'tis my Soul would make her latest stay: Nor can she— Beginning hence her journey miss the way. But I'd forgot; beware of— [Dyes. Alci. —Who can fear That is secur'd by charms so pow'rful here? Within these sphears my Guardian Angels move; These are my seats of safety, as of love. Tim. They weakly others guard, that can't defend Themselves; I fear more mischief may depend On this disaster.— Enter Patroclus. Alci. So when a storm's blown o're, And a calm Breeze has smooth'd the rugged deep, The joyful Mariners can fear no more: But thus imbrace and full their cares asleep [Embrces Welcome my lifes Protectour and only freind. Hah! what does that sad look, and sigh intend? Are you Sir wounded?— Patr. Yes too deep I fear. Aloi. Forbid it Heav'n; where is't?
Patr. —Oh here Sir, here, My Soul is pierc't, I'm tortur'd ev'ry where, Your freind! ah let that Title be no more, Behold me as a wretch forlorn, and poor. Imagine ev'ry form of misery; And when y'ave sum'd up all, then look on me. Alci. Now some blest Angel to my Soul reveal This doubt; can he be wrong'd, and I not feel? Ah kind Patroclus this sad silence break. Patr. Oh Sir you must not hear, nor must I speak. Paint out black horrour in its deepest dread, And troops of Murders hov'ring o're your head, And when that hideous Masque of Hell you see, Think if you can that they came all from me. Alci. Confusion! how my thoughts begin to start! A new unwonted heat has seiz'd my heart, Something unruly, that would fain get place, But I'le subdu't,—be free, kind friend, alas! Force me not wrong our freindship and your worth. Patr. That charm's resistless, and I feel't will forth. But oh it must not, duty does forbid: Yet what's my duty if my honour bleed? Know then,—now that this stubborn heart would break! My cruel Father—oh I dare not speak. Alci. Hah! Patr. —Led by some blind mistaking jealousie, Heaps treasons upon you and shame on me. It was by him Theramnes made escape, And 'twas he back't him in this impious rape. But oh no more, shame does my words suppress, Yet think what he will do that durst do this. I'l go and try if I his rage can stay: I may divert the stream another way. [Exit Patro. Alci. Kind youth; I cannot fear thy Fathers hate: He sells his honour at too cheap a rate. What have I done that could be call'd a wrong? No I've a guard of innocence too strong;
Whilst I unspotted that and friendship bear, No danger is so great that I need fear. Tim. Yet be not Sir regardless of my fears; Some pity have of these sad sighs, and tears. Whither oh whither, would your rashness lead; To urge a ruine level'd at your head? Let us— To some recess that's safe and humble go, Timandra can bear any thing with you. Let int'rest the unfix'd and wav'ring sway, With us— Love shall supply what fortune takes away. Alci. Sure 'tis not my Timandra's voice I hear, She ne're had cause to think that I could fear. Have I so many dangers over-past, Poorly to shrink from villany at last? No, with my innocence 'le brave his hate, And meet it in a free undaunted state; See all with smiles, as fearless, and as gay, As Infants unconcern'd at dangers, play. Tim. Then I'le perform what to my love is due; Unsteady doubts be gone, blind fears adeiu. I were unworthy of the heart you gave, Were I then you less faithful, or less brave. And of my courage too this proof I'le give, When you dare meet a death, I'le scorn to live, Nor longer be a vassal to my fear; Wee'l in each others chance a portion bear: So fate has thus at least some kindness shown, Neither can wretches be, nor blest alone. [Exeunt. Scene the Camp. Enter Tissaphernes and four Villains. Tiss. Is't done?— 1 Vil. Sir to a point your will's fulfil'd; Theramne's guards as they lay drunk we kil'd. Draxilla too, by th' ambush you had lay'd
For your retreat, was on her flight betray'd. Tiss. Next, as from me, be there a message sem, To bid my Son attend me in my Tent; In's passage thither you may seize him, so Convey him to the Cave— 1 Vil. —My Lord, we go. Tiss. Ye are the best of Rogues; but disappear: [Ex. 3. Vill. You know your bus'ness: So the King is here. Enter King and Queen Attended. K. Lead to the Grove— Tiss. Oh Sir, there's Treason in the Camp, retreat, But now the Guards I in confusion met, Who led me where Theramnes I beheld, The late Athenian Captive General kill'd. That little breath he had left h'employ'd to shew His honour, and his Gallantry to you: Treasons so strange and horrid did relate, As would seem almost Treason to repeat. But Sir you have no longer safety here: Secure yourself, and leave all to my care. K. No more, you know not what you urge me to: Secure my self! am I a King, or no? That Monarch who when danger's near, sits down, Shews but a feeble Title to a Throne. The best securities in courage are, We but subscribe to Treasons which we fear. Be free, and let me the bold Traytor know, To stem the torrent I my self will go: In state I'le meet the fond Capicous wretch, And dare him with that Crown which he would snatch. Tiss. Alas dread Sir, force me not to declare The name, would wound your sacred breast to hear. I in reviling honour should offend: He once was noble Sir, and call'd me friend. K. How Sir your friend! and Traytor to my Crown! Reveal him, or his Treasons are your own. Tiss. Alass, but must I!—'tis so foul a deed,
I  speak. K. Hell Sir; d'ye play? proceed. Tiss. Then to be short, he you so lately strove T'engage in all the firmest tyes of love, He whom you almost had from nothing rais'd, And on the highest seats of honour plac'd; Has thence this use of all your favours shown, To make 'em steps to mount into your Throne. K. Defend me! what do I hear!— Sir you have rais'd a tumult in my breast, Which will not be so suddenly appeas'd: By Heav'ns see all that you inform be true, Or may all torments which to th'damn'd are due Light on me, if inflicted not on you. The brave Athenian false! it cannot be: His Soul ne're dreamt of such impiety. Tiss. Sir y'are unkind if you suspect me false, I never yet abus'd your ears with tales. Had I such mystick Policy pursu'd, Perhaps I'd now been kindlier understood. K. Alas dear friend misconstrue not my Zeal, Weigh not my Passions in nice Reasons Scale. Who wou'd believe a King should blindly place His love so firmly, for returns so base? Wrack me no more, but the dark scruple clear: My Souls in a Convulsion till I hear. Tiss. Yes Sir, 'tis he, and thus his Plots were lay'd. Th' account I from the dying Captive had; Whom he with liberty had brib'd, to joyn With him in this his Treacherous design, This night wi'th' enemy your Camp t'envade, On promise it should be by him betray'd. Which when the Gallant Captive did disdain, He was to Combat dar'd, and by him slain. If you insist on farther evidence, Theramne's murder'd Guards enough convince:
Hence you may farther confirmation have. K. Be bold; speak what thou knowst.— 4 Vil. —When to relieve The Captives Guards, I by command was sent, I found e'm murder'd at th' door o'th Tent. In one of e'm some life did yet remain, Who told me they were by our General slain, 'Cause they Theramnes freedom had deny'd. More he had said, but at these words he dy'd. K. It was enough. Treason, how dark art thou? In shapes more various then er'e Proteus knew. By Heav'n I'le make him base, despis'd, and poor, More wretched then e're Monster was before. Naked, and stript of all his dignities, I'le lay his odious Crimes before his eyes. Then when his mind is lab'ring with regret, To make his infamy the more compleat, Some common slave shall on him justice do, And send his Soul among the damn'd below. Guard wait on him— [to Tissaphernes. Go ere' my love return, and I repent, And seize upon the Traytor in his Tent. A speedy vengeance best befits this wrong, 'Twere too much mercy to delay it long. Enter Alcibiades and Timandra. Alci. This way's the King? Tiss. He's here▪ leapt into th' net. Thus Sir the King salutes you. [Guards seize Alci. Alci. Slaves retreat. Tim. Alas my Lord! Tiss. —Sir 'tis the command. The least of 'em I never durst withstand, Tim. But Sir what meaning can this usage bear? Tiss. The King Sir quickly all your doubts will clear. K. Away with him, thou Poyson to my eyes. Alci. The basest wretch not unconvicted dyes.
Sir, let me know what 'tis that I have done, Unworthy of my honour or your Crown. If in your cause who'd spend his dearest blood, As is to be your meanest Vassal, proud, No greater welfare then in yours does know, If he be an offender, I am so. K. How cunningly he would seem innocent, And guild with flattery his foul intent! Thus Traytours in their fall are like the Sun, Who still looks fairest at his going down. 'Sdeath Sir, do you believe me Child, or fool, Whom ev'ry fawning word, or oy can rule? By Heav'n I'le let you see Sir your mistake; Hence with the Traytour quickly to the wrack. Alci. Sir, hear me speak.— K. What is't that you can say, Who would my Crown and your own trust betray? When you from Prison set the Captie free, Basely to win him to vour Treachery: Whom, when on him your plots could nothing do, You kill'd, 'cause he more honour had then you. Alci. By all above Sir I am innocent; I ne're knew what the thought of Treason meant. But know from whence this jealousie you drew, From him that hates me, and abuses you: Theramnes had his liberty from hence; [to Tissapher. And for designs so base.— Tiss. —Oh impudence! To what prodigious height will treason climb! Dare you Sir charge me with your heavy crime? Old as I am, my Sword should do me right. But— Alci. —Monster hence, and them that fear thee fright. Thinkst thou to play with the black deeds th'ast done? Were I but free, though naked and alone,
Thou too defended by a desp'rate crew, And all indeed more near being damn'd then thou; This single Arm should prove my cause is good, And Chronicle my honour in their blood. K. I'st thus Sir you would plead your innocence? Think you t'outbrave us with your impudence? Once more the Traytor to his tortures bear. Qu. But Sir your justice now is too severe. 'Twere an ill Tryumph after victories, To make the Conquerour the Sacrifice; That Gallantry some priviledge may plead. K. His treasons are too plain and open lay'd, And all his merits weigh'd against them light. Qu. Should we him guilty of worse crimes admit, And that in's death you'd worthiest justice show, Yet to forgive's the nobler of the two. K. When Deidaa pleads I can't deny, His doom's this time recal'd, he shall not dye; But (rob'd of all his joys) let him be sent To a perpetual imprisonment; His treasures rifl'd, and his Wife a slave. Alci. Here on my knees let me one favour crave. Whatever fate you have design'd for me, It is embrac't, but Sir let her be free; Let all the weight of the alleadg'd offence Light upon me; wrong not her innocence. Tim. How mean and abject is your courage now! Think you that I dare suffer less then you? No Sir; in this he has no right to plead; What e're you think either has merited, Let equally justice on us both be shown; And as we are, so let our fates be one. Alci. Thou wonder of thy Sex!— K. I'l hear no more: How dare you tempt an angry Monarchs pow'r? But since his fate so grateful you esteem: Let her be Pris'ner too, but far from him.
He must not be so happy to have her, For fetters would be blessings were she there. Go see you execute our orders strait. Tim. Thus we with smiles will entertain our fate. My dearest Lord farewel, let not a sigh Or tear proclaim we greive our parting's nigh. Were it to quit our happiness a pain, Joy were not then a blessing, but a chain. No, let us part, as dying Martyrs do, Who leave this life only to gain a new. Greif equally ignoble were as vain, Since we at least in Heav'n shall meet again. Alci. So from their Oracles the Deities Instruct the ignorant World in Misteries. But, part! that word would make a Saint despair. Obedience cannot be a vertue here. If so ye Gods ye have such precepts giv'n, That an example would confound your Heav'n▪ You duties beyond your own omnipotence enjoyn; Can you forsake your Heaven, or I leave mine? Till when thus King I'm fix't beyond remove, With all the Cements of an endless love. Kill me, thou yet shalt of thy ends despair, My Soul shall wait upon her ev'ry where, Nay I'd not fly to Heav'n till she came there! K. Shall I thus see my self out-rav'd? away, He is a Traytor that but seems to stay. [Alcibiades snatches a Sword from one of the Guards. Alci. Now I am arm'd, death to that wretch that stirs. K. Sir, do you think to look us into fears? Disarm him Guards, or kill him. [They sight and disarm him. Tiss. Push home ye Dog— Alci. —Sordid slaves. Thus ev'ry Ass the helpless Lyon braves.
Adieu divinest of thy Sex, adieu! I never thought that I could part till now. Now I deserve the worst fate has in store, That in so brave a cause should do no more. [The Guards offer to lead him off. Yet stay one look. Thus does the needle steer To his lov'd North, and fain would come more near: When in the eager prospect of his joy, He is by some rude artist snatch't away. Farewel,— Tim. Farewel, and if your memory E're trouble you with such a thing as I, Let not a sigh come from you, but beleive I'd rather be forgot, then you should grieve. Alci. Such worth shall in each Temple have a shrine; What, to regain her, would I not resign? But she's too heav'nly to be longer mine. [Exeunt several ways Guarded, and looking back t each other. K. She's gon, but oh what mighty charms there lye Couch't in the narrow circle of an eye! Had she but stay'd another minute here, I had worn chains, and been her Prisoner: And still I fear my heart is not my own; For if so bright when to a Dungeon gone, How would she shine Triumphant on a Throne! [Exit. Qu. So now or never must my love succeed, Vainly weak King hast thou his doom decreed. In this beginning of his fall th'ast shown But the imperfect figure of thy own. Few hours remain 'twixt thee and destiny, Till when grow dull in thy security. Timandra's and thy death is one design; Then if a Crown can tempt him, he is mine. [Exit.
Act. V. Scene I. Tissaphernes Solus. Tiss. NOW like a Lyon on my prey I'le feast. Revenge! thou solace to a troubled breast. Could but Theramnes in Elizium know, How would his Chost rejoyce at what I do! [Theramnes Ghost rises. Gh. Oh no— Tiss. Death, what is that I hear and see? Begon dull Ghost; if thou art damn'd, what's that to me? Gh. From deepest horrour of eternal night, Where Souls in everlasting torments groan, Where howling fiends be chain'd, and where's no light, But thickest darkness covers ev'ry one, I come to warn thee mortal of thy sin; Short time is here left for thee to remain. 'Twere fit that thy repentance soon begin, For think what 'tis to live in endless pain. Farewel— [Descnds. Tiss. —'Twas an odd speech, but be it so: Pish; Hell it self trembles at what I do; And it's ubmission better to express, Sends this Embassadour to make it's peace. Let idle fears the superstitions awe; With me my resolution is a law. Repentance now would be too late begun: Ages can't expiate what I have done. And if below for Souls such torments are, Methinks there's yet some brav'ry in despair. The easie King looks little in his State, His Crown is for his Head too great a weight: But I will ease him, and adorn this brow. Thus to my aimes no limits I'l allow.
Revenge, Ambition, all that's ill, shall be My bus'ness; so I'l baffle destiie. Hell! no,— I'l act such things whilst here I have abode, Till my own Trophyes raise me to a God. Enter Queen. Qu. Now such an Engine is it I would have, I know he is a Traytor, and is brave. I'l bait him with ambition that may move; Then if complacent to my ends he prove, In seeming to comply with his design, I'l make him but an instrument to mine: For when success me to my wishes calls, I'l shake him off, and then unpropt he falls. My Lord!— Tiss. Madam! Qu. My Father lov'd you well, I've heard him oft of your achievements tell▪ When in his Camp such gallant deeds you wroughe, And always victory and triumph brought: Tiss. Madam, your Father was all good and just. Qu. Be could, why may not I your honour trust? Tiss. You wrong it ; your Father lives in you▪ As I was his, I am your Champion too. Though old, against your Foes this Sword shall Your right; name but your Traytor, and he's dead. Qu. Nay Sir, the Traytor's not alone my Foe, His injuries extended are to you, To you to whom he owes all he enjoy▪ Yet basely him that gave him growth destroys; Whilst for his ills he would his kindness plead, To heap your honours on your Rivals head. Rally your Courage up, if you are brave, And at once mine, and your own honour save. Tiss. Your Majesty would mean the King. D ye try My resolution, or my Loyalty?
Qu. Your Courage Sir is known, your Loyalty, If you have any, you'l find due to me. Through me these honours you in Sparta bore, And 'twas my Father made you great before. Now know it is the King, whose perjurd Soul Has done me injuries so base and foul, That all that's good will blush at; his vowes past To me all in anothers love are lost. Nay, with my honour too my life must bleed, He, with the General's, has my fall decreed, To take the fair Timandra to his bed. Let's go surprize him now he's full of Wine, Revenge me on his life, his Crown is thine. Tiss. Madam, indeed the injuries you feel Cry loud; nor do I tamely see my ill. But you must swear to me you will be true, Qu. By all that's holy I'l be so to you. Tiss. I'l do't, but Madam know I undertake To hazard life and honour for your sake, Should you betray me:— Qu. Nay now you are unkinder then before. To my first Oath I'l add a million more. Tiss. And you will still be mindful of the Crown? Qu. Had he ten Thousand, they were all your own. Tiss. This then's his fate; pitty a Crime were here: He shan't have time enough to make a prayer. [draws a Dagger. Qu. Be bold; and prosper in thy brave design, And when his death's perform'd, the next is thine. [aside. Tiss. This trap was dang'rously and subtly lay'd, [Exit. But I am not so easily betrayd. Her love to Alcibiades I know, Her Woman for me did that kindness do. And since she is so good at the design, I'l to oblige her give her one of mine. My zealous urging of her Oath was done, Not to prevent her plots, but hide my own.
I'l cherish her in all that she pretends, So make her ayms but covers to my ends. For when I'm seated on the Spartan Throne, Both her and all her Treasons I'l disown: Prove both her judge and her accuser too, And on her my first act of justice do. So all my doubts and fears will be o're-past, And by her fall I fix my self more fast. [Exit. Enter a Chair of State with a Table by it, and upon that the Crown and Scepter. Enter King and Lords. K. My Lords, no more, w'ave drank too deep; I'd now A while be private. Lords. —Royal Sir, we go. K. Boy take thy Lute, and with a pleasing ayr Appease my sorrows, and delude my care. [Sits down. SONG. Princes that Rule and Empires Sway, How tranitory is their State! Sorrowes thee gloryes do allay, And richest Crowns have greatest weight. 2 The mightiest Monarch treason fears, Ambitious thoughts within him rave; His life all discontent and cares; And he at best is but a Slave. 3. Vainly we think with fond delight, To ease the burden of our cares. Lach grief a Second does invite, And sorrows are each others heirs.
4. For me my honour I'l maintain, Be gallant generous and brave; And when I Quietude would gain, At least I find it in the grave. [the King falls asleep. Enter Queen and Tissaphernes with a Dagger. Qu. He sleeps; now let the fatal deed be done. Hah! what are these, the Scepter and the Crown! So did the drousie Dragon sleep, when he Lost the rich fruits of the Hesperian Tree. First we'l secure his Crown, and then he dyes. Takes up the Crown. Thus I'm discharg'd of all my promises. [puts it on his head. Take this, and if I claim your promise too, Y'are King, and justice is your duty now. Come by his fall— This your first step to glory solemnize, I make you King, make him my Sacrifice. Tiss. I'l do't, but stay— [advances towards the King Qu. —Nay, quickly to him go, Sir he expects no Ceremony now. Tiss. Thus then I—hah! how alter'd am I grown! I stand amaz'd, and dare not venture on. There is in Majesty a secret charm, That puts a fetter on a Traytors arm; I cannot do't— Qu. Then look on her that dares. How despicable is the man that fears! Give me the fatal Instrument of death; My self will in his heart that dagger sheath; [takes his dagger from him. Then blush to think, if e're the World should know, That a frail Woman durst do more then you. Courage—he smiles,— [advances towards the King.
Some pleasing dreams his fancy entertain; Oh it were pitty he should wake again. Thus King, thy life and Empire I command: Accept this from thy Deidamia's hand. Stabs him K. Hah murder'd! Deidamia, and by you! What is't that faithless Woman will not do▪ Henceforth all Loyalty and love farewell. When after ages shall this story tell, 'Twill be a truth too sad to be receiv'd; Nor shall the World be by it self believ'd. Did I for this ev'n Crown and Empire quit, To lay all my Ambition at your feet? When at the Altars strictest vows I paid, Nor were they with less zeal perform'd then made! I lov'd you far above that life y'ave spilt, Till ev'n my passion was become my guilt: I for your sake depriv'd heav'n of its due, Took adoration thence to pay it you. And must this be th' reward for all I've done? Yet I shall have this comfort when I'm gone, That I no longer shall with thee remain▪ But dye in hopes we ne're shall meet again. [dyes. Qu. He's gon, and now my Lord,— Tiss. —Oh what is't you have done? A while lay your unruly passions down. View but the sweet Composure of that face, Where grandeur sat attended by each grace: Now there grim death his gashly Revels keeps, And pallid horrour o're each feature creeps. Weep Madam, weep, to think your rage has giv'n That blow, which robs the World to enrich heav'n. Oh my dear Lord, that er'e I liv'd to know This day! Madam I can't conceal it. Qu. —Say you so? But Sir I Scorn to be betray'd by you. [At the noise of People en∣tring, throws away the Dagger, then falls upon her knees, and layes hold of Tissaphernes; then speaks.
Treason, Treason, Treason, &c.—. Is't not enough y'ave shed my Husbands blood? Tiss. The Devil!— Qu. And rob'd the World of all that's great and good, But you must seek my life? On pitty take, If not for mine, at least for vertues sake! Tiss. Hell and Plagues!— Qu. But why do I name that? for all that e're The World had left of it, lyes murder'd there. Tiss. Very fine. Qu. Yet though you've rob'd him of his life, save mine: I'l live to ask heav'n pardon for your sin. Tiss. So now I'l stop your mouth. [Breaks from her, and takes up the Dagger. Qu. Help, murder, Treason, help. Enter Lords. 1 Lord. How, Tissaphernes arm'd against the Queen! What means this posture Sir?— Qu. —Oh noble Lord, If e're your pitty could a tear afford, Weep down an Ocean there; behold the spring Of Sparta's hopes lyes murder'd in her King. And had not I the traytors rage withstood, He with my Husbands too had mixt my blood. See where he guilty stands. Lord. —Great Agis slain! By Tissaphernes too! Qu. Yes, he to gain The Spartan Crown, this bloody deed ha done, See he already has usurpt the Crown; His hot Ambition could not bear delys, But on the Royal spoyles thus  preys; Insults in's treason. Tiss. —I am now run So far that all hopes ▪
But Madam, can you dare to lay this guilt On me? was't not by you his blood was spilt? Qu. By me! base wretch, would thy impiety Lay this inhumane regicide on me? I wound this breast? ah dearest Saint, too well I knew thy worth! [weeps. Tiss. Death, she'l be Queen of Hell: Pluto will grow in love with her for this. 1 Lord. My Lord, treason's above all pardon. Tiss. —'tis. Lord.: Then Sir to justice. Tiss. No, thus I deny. [presents his Dagger. I liv'd not by it, nor will by it dye. Was it for this my stratagems I lay'd To ruin her, to be by her betray'd? Curse on my narrow fate, but yet to shew That I love murder too as well as you, Thus perjur'd Queen. [offers to stab the Queen, but is hinder'd by the Lords. Qu. See how he'd still pursue His Treason! hence to justice with him go: Hourly let on the Rack his pains encrease, Till he the horrour of his guilt confess. Tiss. That shall not need. I'l own the deed as mine, But glory in't, it was a brave design. The King kill'd! and I ruin'd! to compleat Thy lust, all by  stratagem! was great: So great, that for its sake I can with satisfaction yild my breath, Else I should take no pleare in my death. But e're I go, be pleas'd to eertain The last kind precepts of a dying man. Be bloody, false, revengful, lust That can be found recorded on Hells Embrace, where-e're you rising vertue see, Down with it, and set up impietie.
Make that your theam, leave nothing ill undone, So copy Tissaphernes when he's gon: Who leaves this counsel as a Legacy, 'Tis my Religion, and I'l in it dye. [Exit Tiss. guarded. Qu. Hence with the wretch— Mean while to my dead Lord I'l sorrows pay, And after his sigh my own life away. So now they are gon—hah who comes there? Enter Ardella. Ard. —'Tis I. Q. Ardella, on that thing cast back an eye; 'Twas once a King, but thank these hands now none: Nay start not, Tissaphernes too is gon; [Ardella starts. His treasures all are thine as a reward. Ard. You are too kind— Qu. See strait a draught prepar'd, And Murderers, Timandra next must fall, You know our will, let it be done. Ard. —It shall. [Exeunt severally. SCENE a darkn'd Tent. [Timandra asleep upon a Couch, a Spirit comes and Sings. Merli. Come my Salla, come away, Thy Merli calls. Salla within. Whither? Merli. Hither, w'ave no bus'ness to day, And where innocence sleeps we securely may play. Salla. I come. [Enters. Merli. So welcome my dear, But first let's disperse the black Clouds that are here. Both. Round about this place we range, And it's gloomy darkness change,
To a bright delightful Grove, A proper Scene for happy love. The SCENE changes to Elizium. Merli. Next to divert this fair one, all Our wing'd Companions we'l call, And the Ayr for musick charm Whilst they their measures here perform. Both. Come all you bright forms that inhabit the Ayr, And ease with your pleasures the cares of the fair, Here frolick , oh no longer delay! But let each clap his wings and away. Several Spirits of the ayr descend and Dance. Salla. Now let us discover the mansions of rest, Where lovers with eternal joyes are blest. [A glorious Temple appears in the Ayr, where the Spirits of the happy are seated. See fair one, see, not long e're you To those glorious seats shall go. Another Spi. The lustful Queen thirsts for your blood, And you are for the World too good. Merli. Nor shall you come alone, your lovers too Must meet a Fate the same with you. Salla. But here your troubles all shall cease, 'Tis the Seat of endless bliss. Cho. Here in endless pleasures they Keep eternal Holyday. Here they Revel, Sport, and are Crown'd with joys still new and rare, Their pleasures too can never dye, But like themselves have Immortality. Merli. See the kind Spirits smile, and now They'l bless her with a nearer view. [The whole body of the Temple moves downward.
Cho. Descend oh ye gloryes descend! Who with blessings eternal are crown'd; To this Nymph your kind influence lend: Whilst all the Sphears with harmony resound. Merli. She wakes, let the apparition go, By th' damp upon my wings I know Something ill is drawing near, Come Salla, come away, Oh come away my dear. [They all vanish, and the SCENE changes again to the Tent. Tim. I've had a dream might make a lover blest, Oh th' sweet delights of everlasting rest! [Queen appears at the entrance. How this the Queen? what can her coming mean? Qu. Ardella with the Ruffians here remain; I'l in, and with soft words her temper try, If without him she'l live, she shall not dye. Madam!— [to Timandra. Tim. —Your pleasure! Qu. Oft' I've heard y'are brave, But the best proof of gallantry you gave, When of your noble Lord you were bereft, And such a bliss with so rare patience left. Tim. Madam, our flames a nobler passion rules Then fondness, th'idle guilt of wav'ring fools: Our loves knew a far higher excellence, Then the half pleasures of a minutes sense. Qu. Then you may love since you can with him part, He has made a conquest o're my tender heart: Love governs here, and since my Husband's dead, Fate and my choicest wishes have decreed, He should both in his love and throne succeed. Tim. Do you believe Empires or Crowns can make Him his Timandra and his faith forsake? Or think you I an Attome will resign Of that heart, which by holy vows is mine?
No I will keep him maugre cruelty. Qu. But Madam do you know what 'tis to dye? Tim. Yes, 'tis to lay these clogs our bodys by, And be remov'd to blest eternity. By death relief from all our griefs we gain, And by one, put an end to years of pain; By that we in one minute find out more, Then all the busie gown men study for; Who after in dull search th'ave ages spent, Learn nothing but to know th'are ignorant. Death is a blessing, and a thing so far Above that worst of all our frailties fear; It claims our joy, since by it we put on The top of happiness, perfection. Quit him! no never whilst I here have breath; He's mine in spight of cruelty or death. Qu. Then enter ye grim Ministers of fate, [Enter Murderers with Poison. Does not your stubborn courage now abate? Tim. No, my resolves more fixt and firm are grown, Bring dreadfull'st racks and tortures yet unknown, Provide one for each sense, and then do thou Tempt me my love and int'rest to forgo, Midst of my pains I'l smile, and tell thee no. Qu. But minion, soon your insolence shall cease. Come, since such resolution you express, Take this, demur not, do't,— [Gives her a bowl of poison. Tim. And is this all? I thought t'ave had a more Heroick fall, Expected to have noblest tortures met, Not by dull poison to have found my fate. But any way I can thy pow'r defie, 'Tis for my Alcibiades I dye: [offers to drink. Qu. Yet yeild, and live,— Tim. —Live! what have I to do With life, when giv'n by one so base as you?
Thus I despise it,— [Drinks. Qu. What dismal tortures strait will on her seize! [after Timandra has drank the Poison. So 'twas a health to Alcibiades. Tim. Now blush at what thy impious rage has done, My Alcibiades is still my own. And if thou him embrace when I am gon, Each night thy bed I'l haunt, and challenge there Those joys, of which thou hast bereft me here. Anxious shall be each day, disturb'd each night, A restless shade I'l still be in thy sight; And thee i'th' height of all thy pleasures fright. Heav'n what do I feel!— Qu. Oh does the draught succeed! Ard. Madam, great Alcibiades is freed, And just is entring— Qu. —Strait with straitest care Convey her in, and wait my pleasure there. [The Murderers lead in Timandra. Sweet Murder! oh no Physick is so good For th' hopeless lover as a bath of blood. But here he comes— [Enter Alcibiades. —Now to my greifs again. [veils Alci. It makes we wonder how I freedom gain, All things confus'd, and in disorder are. How's this in mourning weeds? unveil my fair. Hah not Timandra!— [Queen unveils Qu. —No Sir, though 'tis one That loves as nobly as Timandra can, Or could, did she yet live, but she is dead. Alci. How dead!— Qu. Yes, Tissaphernes that black deed did do▪ Prompted by his ignoble hate to you. But you will wonder more, when I shall tell, That by his hand the mighty Agis fell. The King is slain: both I, and Sparta, now
Have no hopes left, but what remain in you. Alci. In me! alas! I am a wretch too poor; Timandra dead! urst ever be the hour Wherein so fair an innocence was lost. Heav'n justly now may of its glories boast; For the most bright, and precious Saint that e're The World enjoy'd, is fled, and seated there. Qu. Why do you let your greifs distract your Soul? Call up your reason, and let passion cool. See here a Queen, that cours you with the charms Of Love, a Crown, and Empire, to her Arms: No longer for Timandra sorrow wear, I will supply all you have lost in her: I'l love you as she did. Alci. —Oh Madam, no To love like her's a tas'k too hard for you; Love me as she did? why each thought she had Of me, was such, might make an Angel glad: For Crowns; though Emp'rour of the World I were, I'd turn a begger to recover her. Oh Madam tempt no further, all's but vain, I ne're can have a thought of love again. Qu. Never!— Alci. No never,— Qu: —Can you then so soon Forget your promise? or will you disown That ere, if you Timandra should survive, You vow'd you only for my sake would live? You see how Heaven has decreed,— Alci: —Alas! I then the blessing knew, but not the loss, Besides I now must dye— Qu: How Sir is't thus, my profer'd love you prize? Alci. I do not hate you, may not that suffice? Qu. Ungrateful, no, but I'l reward thy pride, Draw back:— [The Scene drawn  Timandra on a Couch in the midst of her pains.
—Go dotard, in, enjoy thy bride; And know by me thy lov'd Timandra dy'd: Yes cruel man by me— Tim. —No Queen, she lives, And still to all thy rage desance give's. [spyes Alcibiades. Do I behold my dearest Lord so nigh! Shall I agen see him before I dye! Alci. Best hopes and comfort of my life! I'm here, How fares my love?— Tim. Oh come not, come not near, My blood's all fire, infection's in each vein, And tyrant death in ev'ry part does reign; But I for you could suffer much more pain. Alci. Kind heav'n! let all her pangs upon me fall, And add ten thousand more, I'l bear 'em all, Do but restore her back; Oh cursed Queen! What Devil arm'd thee to so damn'd a sin? Cou'dst thou be guilty of so foul a deed? Qu. Yes I did do't, by me the King too bled, Unworthy wretch! and all for love of you: But had I pow'r I now would kill thee too. Alci. Oh do't; I'l blot out all th'ast done before, And never call thee base, nor cruel more. Here is my breast; soon the kind work begin, Advance thy Poniard, send it boldly in. Qu. No, thou shalt live for harder destiny, But first shalt see thy dear Timandra dye. Alci. Oh misery beyond the damn'd beneath! Must I not happy be in life nor death? Tim. Alas! cease your unnecessary moan, I find my torments quickly will be gon. Though I could wish they might to years renew, So I might still be blest with feeng you. Now the black storms of fate are all blown o're, And we shall meet, and ne're be parted more. But oh farewell— [dyes
Alci. —My dear Timandra stay! Ah pretious Soul, fly not so soon away! But one look more; will death have no remorse? See, 'tis thy Alcibiades implores. But oh she's gon, seize there that Murd'ress. Qu. —No: Seize me! 'tis more then all your Camp can do: Who e're comes, here's my guard: Alas mean fool, [Presents her Dagger. My fate's a thing too great for thee to rule; There lyes your constancy: [pointing to Timandra. [Alcibiades flyes to the Queen, and snatches the Dagger from her. Alci. Infernal hag! Whose ev'ry breath infects, each look's a plague! Could not thy fury on my bosome rest▪ But thou must wreak thy vengeance on this breast? To murder her!—curse on me that I stand Thus Idle; now thy heart: [presents the Dagger to her breast. —But oh 'twould brand My Trophyes with eternal infamy, If by my hand so base a thing should dye: Her ills so many, and so odious are, They would disgrace an executioner. Yet I'd do something, oh I hav't, I'l tear [ravingly Her peicemeal:—but Timandra's gone too far: [mildly Yonder she Mounts, tryumphant Spirit stay: See where the Angels bear her Soul away! Now all the Gods will grow in love with her: And I shall meet fresh troops of Rivals there. But thus I'l haste and follow,— [Stabs himself. —Devil there,— [throws the Dagger to the Queen. Dye if thou hast courage enough to dare. But oh!— A heavy faintness does each sense surprize: Yet e're I close up these unhappy eyes,, Here their last dutious sorrows they shall pay
And at this object melt in tears away. Blest center of my hopes! in whom I plac't Too choice, too pure a happiness to last, I any lossless then thy death had greiv'd; How well could I have dy'd, so thou hadst liv'd! Damn'd fiend!— [o the Queen. But oh why do I rave at her? That have so little time to tarry here; One parting kiss, and then in peace I'l dye: [kisses Tim. Now farewel world, welcome eternity. Enter Patroclus Lords and Guards. Patr. Horrour of horrours! this was a dismal chance, Alas my freind! Alci. —Thy useless greif refrain, Farewell; we shall hereafter meet again. [dyes. Patr. Guards seize the Queen— Qu. —Seize me rude Slaves? forbear. Patr. You shall in short your accusation hear, To kill the King, my Father, first you made Your property; then basely him betray'd. Your Woman all confes't, and by the Guard Is now secur'd to a more just reward. And (though too late) this black design I knew: Yet all your stratagems are useless now▪ Hence with the Murd'ress, to Justice. Qu. —Hah! Think you that I will dye by formal law? No, when I'm dead be thus my ame suppl'd: She liv'd a murd'ress, and a murd'ress dy'd. [stabs her self. Justice would but my happiness retard: Thus I descend below to a reward. I shall be Queen of fate: the furies there For me a glorious Crown of Snakes prepare. I long to be in state; my Lords farewell: Now noble Charon! hoyse up Sayl for Hell. [dyes. Lord. Her Soul is fled,—
Patr. —With her for ever dye, Her treasons, and her odious memory. But whither is the fair Draxilla gone? Lord. Distracted at the michiefs that are done, She's fled; but whither is to all unknown. Patr. Quickly let after her be made pursuit: I'l ransack all the World to find her out. Propitious Heav'n will sure to her be kind. Enter Lord. 2 Lord. My Lord we in our votes have all combin'd To make you King, the Camp with shouts, and cryes Of joy, send their loud wishes to the Skyes. [Shouts within, Long live Patroclus King of Sparta. Patr. Go bid 'em their unwelcome noise forbear: Turn all their shouts to sighs of sorrow here. [Turns to the Bodyes. Th'are gone; and with e'm all I wish'd to keep. Now could I almost turn a boy, and weep. My Friends! my Mistress! and my Father lost! Never were growing hope more sadly crost. Now fortune has her utmost malice shown, She'd court me with the flatt'ry of a Crown: A thing so far beneath those joys I miss, 'Tis but the shadow of a happiness. For how uneasily on Thrones they sit, That must like me be wretched to be great! FINIS.
EPILOGUE Spoken by Mrs. Mary Lee. NOW who sayes Poets don't in blood delight? 'Tis true the varlets care not much to fight; But faith, they claw it off when e're they write: Are bully Rocks not of the common size; Kill ye men faster then Domitian flye. Ours made such Havock, that the silly Rogue Was forc't to make me rise for th' Epilogue. The fop damn'd me, but e're to hell I go, I'd very fain be satisfy'd, if you Think it not just that he were serv'd so too. As he hath yours, do you his hopes beguile: You'e been in Purgatory all this while. Then damn him down to Hell, and never spare, Perhaps he'l find more favour there then here. Nay of the two may chuse the much less evil, If you're but good when pleas'd, e'n so's the Devil.
ERRATA. IN the Epistle P. 1. l. 14. for look to, r. take. P. : l. 3. for should be concern'd, r. should I be con∣cern'd. P. ibid. l. 17. for with all my best endeavours, r. with it all my best endeavours. P. 7. l. 4. for disadvantagious, r. disadvantageous. P. ib. l. 35. for exhaild, r. exhal'd. P. 8. l. 13: for vertue, r. influence. P. 12. l. 13. for hallow, r. hallow. P. ib. l. 29. for plagu'd, r. damn'd. P. 13. l. 4. for oh Heavens! r. ye Gods! P. ib. l. 29. for firmier, r. . P. 14. l. ult. for Brows dart Majesty, r. Brow darts Majesty. P. 16. l. 2. for the custome, r. our custome. P. 19. l. 16. for vanuish, r. vanish. P. ib. l. 19. for Tumultions, r. Tumultus. P. 21. l. 4. for to their ate, r. so their fate. P. ib. l. 9. for thus fair, r. then fair. P. 23. l. 32. for are approv'd, r. were approv'd. P. 27. l. 12. for heavy head, r. hoary head. P. 28. l. 10. for courage, r. glory. P. ib. l. 12. for friend r. feind P. 42. l. 32. for revil∣ing, r. revealing. P. 49. l. 10. for be Chain'd. r. lye Chain'd. P. 53. l. 17. for that Dagger, r. this Dagger.
