O860 12355014 60117
DOMI¦NVS ILLV¦MINA¦TIO MEA blazon of Oxford University Advertisements from the Delegates of Convocation for his Majesties Reception for the Heads of Houses to deliver with great charge unto their Com∣panies. 1.THAT they Admonish all such as are under their Charge that they appear no where abroad during the Kings abode in the University without their Capps and Gowns suitable to their Degree and condition, and that their Hair and Apparell be such as the Statutes prescribe. 2. That no Scholar of what Condition soever shall presume to go out to meet the King, either on foot or on Horsback, or to be at, or upon the Way where the King is to come, but shall attend in that place and posture where∣in he shall be required to be, upon notice from his Superiors. 3. That no Scholar come into the presence, or neer any of the Kings Offices, as his Kitchin, But∣tery or any Places about the Court, especially about Meale times. 4. That on Saturday in the afternoon at the ringing of St. Maries great Bell, all Persons Graduats and others (that do not ride out with Mr. Vice-chancellor) forthwith repair to the Schooles Qua∣drangle, thence to go in order to the Street above Christ Church West Gate, there to stand in Ranck one by one on each side of the Street as farr as Bocardo, the Noble-Men and Doctors standing next to the Gate, and so the rest according to their Quality and Degree, and there to remain quietly till his Majestie and his Train be passed, and then every man immediatly to depart to his College or Hall. 5. That the same order be observed, mutatis mutandis, at what time his Majestie shall be pleased to Visit the Library, all being required to meet in order thereunto in Oriel College Quadrangle to receive directions from Mr. Vice-chancellor and those that have Procuratorial Power, who shall place them in convenient Stations from the Schooles South-Gate to Christ Church East-Gate, the Seniors still standing next the Schooles. And as soone as his Majestie and his Train shall have enter'd the Schooles, every one is required to depart to his own College or Hall, to be in readiness to attend upon his Majestie if he shall be pleased to visit any of the Colleges. If any shall offend against any of those Orders he shall (beside the ordinary punishment of the statutes to be inflicted upon him) be enter'd also into the Black-Booke, and so kept back from his Degree, and all Masters that are intrusted with the Procuratorial Power, are required virtute ju∣ramenti to see the Orders executed and punctually observed. The names of the Masters of Arts that have a Procuratorial Power committed to them during his Majesties abode in the University. Mr. Corbet ex Aede Christi Mr. Estwick ex Aede Christi Mr. Hunt è Coll. Magd. Mr. Cradock è Coll. Magd. Mr. Elways è Coll. Novo Mr. Pember è Coll. Om. An. Mr. Fellows è Coll. Merton Mr. Creed è C. C. C. Mr. Lowth è Coll. D. Joh. Bapt. Mr. Fielden è Coll. Aen. N. Mr. Nailer è Coll. Universit. Mr. Geer è Coll. Exon Mr. Tonstall è Coll. Reg. Mr. Lidgold è Coll. Trinit. Mr, Adams è Coll. Lincoln Mr. D'oyly è Coll. Wadh. Mr. Lancaster è Coll. Baliol Mr. Wynne è Coll, Jesu Mr. Couteur è Coll. Pembr. Mr. Randolph ex Aul.Magd. Mr. Codrington ex Aul. S. Edm. Gilb. Ironsyde Vice-Chancellor.
