o832 12254893 57352
THE REPORTS Of that late REVEREND and LEARNED JUDGE, THOMAS OWEN ESQƲIRE; One of the JUSTICES of the COMMON PLEAS. WHEREIN Are many choice CASES, most of them throughly argued by the Learned Serjeants, and after argued and resolved by the grave JUDGES of those times. WITH Many Cases wherein the differences in the Year-books are reconciled and explained With two exact Alphabeticall Tables, the one of the Cases, and the other of the Principall Matters therein contained. LONDON, Printed by T.R. for H. Twyford, T. Dring, and J. Place, and are to be sold at their Shops in Vine-Court Middle-Temple, at the George in Fleetstreet, neer Cliffords Inne, and at Furnivals Inne-Gate in Holborne, 1656.
TO THE READER: THis Learned and Reverend Judge, the Author of the Reports following, as he was highly honoured for his pro∣found knowledge in the Lawes of this Nation; and upon that account chosen one of the Queens Serjeants at Law, by that Wise Princesse, Queen Elizabeth: and not long after for his fidelity in that Service, preferred by her to be one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas; So he had the happiness to have his Name and Memory perpetua∣ted in those Excellent Parts and Abilities of that ac∣complisht Gentleman, Sir Roger Owen, his Son and Heire, an Eminent Patriot of his Countrey, who performed the office of a pious and dutifull Son, in Erecting a Monument to the Memory of his worthy Father, in the Abby-Church at Westminster; where you may see a short History of this Reverend Person. There yet remaines one Monument more, Omni aere perenniu. These excellent REPORTS drawn by his own hand in a Language then in use, and most expe∣dititious for that purpose. The paines of an Industri∣ous Gentleman hath translated them into another Language, more proper to the Meridian of this Nation; which Work thou shalt find faithfully performed, and so strickly and religiously, that even those very
things that most required alteration, Viz. Such Cases as are misplaced in respect of order of time, keep still the same place and station that the Author left them in. The Work it self is a Miscellany and Collection of choice and select Cases in the Law, and bespeaks thy acceptance and entertainment, not onely from the variety of the Subject and matter, which never∣theless is so comprehensive, that there is scarce any doubt or question in the Law can be raised, but it gives light towards the decision and resolution of it: but from the Authority of the Authors sage Wisdome and Prudence, which, like a pretious Limbeck, derives unto thee the Spirit and Quintessence of those many learned Arguments that were made in these Cases, both at the Bar and Bench. If in naturall Births and Productions it gives value and esteem to the Issue to be descended from wise and noble Parents, upon that common presumption, that Robora Parentum filii referunt. The consideration should much more take place in the Results and Emanations of the mind and braine, wherein those Tendeys and Traditions must necessarily be conceived to have the greatest authority, which are most heightned with Experience and Ob∣servation. Such are the Reports of this Reverend, Judge, from which I shall no longer detain Thee.
THE NAMES OF THE PRINCIPALL CASES A. ALmeskey a∣gainst Jack∣son, fol. 46 Arundell, Sir John fol. 49 Audleys Case fol. 17 Austin against Courtney fol. 93 Allens Case fol. 113 Ayer against Joyner fol. 141 B. BRagg against Brook fol. 4 Beverley against the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury fol. 2 Bretts Case fol. 7 Bishop of Lincolns Case fol. 5 Bucknels Case fol. 7 Bartues Case fol. 13 Bartwrights Case fol. 19 Barnards Case fol. 22 Browns Case fol. 24 Bliss against Stafford fol. 37 Bindon Viscount fol. 37 Britman against Stam∣ford fol. 41 Bond against Richardson fol. 45 Beaumonts Case fol. 46 Baldwin against Martin fol. 48 Bloss against Holman fol. 52 Brown against Brinckley fol. 58
Bagnall against Porter fol. 65 Brokesbies Case fol. 85 Bretton against Barnet fol. 86 Bishop of Lincolns case fol. 89 Bottenham against Her∣lakenden fol. 92 Beron agst. Goodwin fol. 95 Beale against Carter fol. 98 Bedford against Hall fol. 104 Brown against Harvey fol. 115 Butler against Archer fol. 152 Butler against Rudsey fol. 118 Bishop of Rochesters Case fol. 73 Bethels case fol. 132 Brooks case fol. 132 Barnes case fol. 137 Bolton against Bolton fol. 149 C. CArters case fol. 13 Clere, Sir Edward fol. 24 Cosens case fol. 29 Caltons case fol. 38 Crawleys case fol. 126 Crisps case fol. 47 Cook against Balwin fol. 52 Carter against Low fol. 56 Castleman against Hobs fol. 57 Clarentius against De∣thick fol. 61 Chandler against Grils fol. 62 Carrel against Read fol. 65 Carter against Kunstead fol. 84 Cleygate against Batche∣lor fol. 143 Cuddington against Wil∣kin fol. 150 Carew against Warren fol. 157 D. DOwninghams case fol. 17 Dutchess of Suffolks case fol. 81 Dacres, Lord fol. 23 Dabridgcourt against Smalbrooke fol. 97 Doctor Lewin against Munday fol. 41 Dorothy Michels case fol. 54 During against Kettle fol. 26 Damport against Sym∣son fol. 158 Dogrel against Perks fol. 66 Day against Fynn fol. 133 Doggets case fol. 144 Day against Austin fol. 70 Drury against Waller fol. 151 Drinmock, Sir Henry fol. 149
Dixy, Sir Walston againstSpencer fol. 81 E. EArl of Kent against Bryan fol. 54 Earl of Northumber∣lands case fol. 124 East against Harding fol. 63 Earl of Lincolns case fol. 113 Earl of Rutlands case fol. 156 Elmer against Thatcher fol. 101 Escot against Lanreny fol. 109 Ewer against Henden fol. 7 F. FUlgeambs case fol. 14 Fenners case fol. 25 Fitz-James fol. 33 Farmer, Sir George a∣gainst Brook fol. 67 Farrington against Char∣rock fol. 67 Foster against Mapps fol. 100 Ford against Helborow fol. 104 Feners against Borough fol. 116 G. GOddards case fol. 10 Gaytons case fol. 12 Greyes case fol. 20 Gibbs case fol. 27 Gorge, Sir Thomas fol. 53 Gowood against Binks fol. 56 Goosayes case fol. 146 Green against Wiseman fol. 86 Glover against Pipe fol. 92 H. HAles case fol. 6 Haveringtons case fol. 6 Haslewoods case fol. 13 Hambletons case fol. 25 Higham against Deff fol. 74 Hunts case fol. 42 Holman against Collins fol. 50 House against Grindon fol. 53 Hund against Preston fol. 58 Higham against Beast fol. 58 Holt against Lister fol. 146 Hugo against Pain fol. 61 Hone against Clerk fol. 64 Henningham against Windham fol. 68 Holborn against Rawlins fol. 111 Haddon against Arrow∣smith fol. 72 J. JElsey against Robin∣son fol. 88 Ireland against Higgins fol. 93
James against Portman fol. 102 Jordan against Atwood fol. 121 Information against West fol. 134 K. KEnt against Wichal fol. 48 Kinton against Hopton Knots against Everstead fol. 66 Kayre against Deurat fol. 91 Knowles against Powell fol. 116 Kempe against Laurence fol. 134 The King against the Bi∣shop of Canterbury fol. 755 L. LEonard against Ste∣vens fol. 1 Leigh against Burley fol. 122 Leighs case fol. 15 Lane against Cotton fol. 127 Lilly against Taylor fol. 148 Lewin against Munday fol. 153 Leyes case fol. 20 Lambert against Austin fol. 117 Lord Rich his case fol. 34 Lane against Coups fol. 64 Leek against the Bishop of Coventry fol. 131 Lassels case fol. 90 M. MIchels case fol. 8 Mosse against Read fol. 47 Mercer against Sperks fol. 51 Moyle against Moyle fol. 66 Mark Ives case fol. 108 Malloy against Jennings fol. 69 Mores against Conham fol. 123 Morris against Padget fol. 138 Mathewson against Trot fol. 141 Marsh his case fol. 147 N. NEwman against Berwood fol. 50 Norton against Jennet fol. 72
O. OWens case fol. 24 Ow seleys case fol. 23 Oldfeild against Wilmor fol. 153 P. PAlmers Case fol. 17 Palmers case fol. 18 Penn against Merivall fol. 63 Powtrels case fol. 83 Perrin against Allen fol. 97 Pelling against Langden fol. 114 Pendigate against Audley fol. 118 Pecks case fol. 129 Q. THe Queen against Allen fol. 2 R. RIchmonds case fol. 9 Rouses case fol. 27 Rawley, Sir Robert fol. 44 Rainer against Grimston fol. 62 Rotheram against Craw∣ley fol. 71 Rudd against Topsey fol. 142 S. SPittles case fol. 8 Smiths case fol. 29 Slander fol. 30 Stinkley against Cham∣berlain fol. 33 On the Statute of Recu∣sancy fol. 37 Stiles case fol. 39 Stephens against Leigh∣ton fol. 40 Sticklehornes case fol. 43 Saveries case fol. 51 Souths case fol. 145 Stephens case fol. 152 Smiths case fol. 87 Stones case fol. 94 Stantons case fol. 95 Suttons case fol. 96 Soles case fol. 99 Scarret against Tanner fol. 105 Sawyer against Hardy fol. 107 Sackford against Philips fol. 109 Stroud against Willis fol. 110 Shopland against Radlen fol. 115 Sperk against Sperk fol. 125 Shaw against Sherwood fol. 127 Swan against Gateland fol. 127 Streetman against Evers∣ley fol. 114 Smith against Jones fol. 133
T. TAuntons case fol. 14 Thurstons case fol. 16 Totten against Beding∣feild fol. 35 Trussels case fol. 69 Tanfeild against Rogers fol. 119 Townsend against Waley fol. 155 W. WAkefeilds case fol. 4 Wardfords case fol. 11 Wisdomes case fol. 18 VValters case fol. 19 Wrights case fol. 21 Webbs case fol. 26 Watkins case fol. 137 Wood against Ash fol. 139 Winter agrinst Barnham fol. 33 Winter against Loveday fol. 34 Wentworth agst. Wright fol. 144 Willis against Whitwood fol. 45 Willoughby against Gray fol. 59 Wentworth against Rus∣sell fol. 60 Woodward against Nel∣son fol. 103 Worsley against Char∣nock fol. 6 Wiseman agaidst Balwin fol. 112 VVhite against Gerish fol. 126 VValgrave against Skin∣ner fol. 120 VValler against the Dean of Norwich fol. 136 Y. YArdley against Pes∣can fol. 43 G. GOodway against Michel fol. 71 Gibson against Mutes fol. 76 Gresham against Ragg fol. 114 Goodrick against Cooper fol. 143 Goodrigde against War∣berton fol. 154 H. HUnt against King fol. 75 Hall against Wood fol. 131 Howards case fol. 138 Forrest against Ballard fol. 142 Halling against Com∣mand fol. 157
Errata. FOl. 8. for there was a remainder, read there was a demurr. fol. 10. for will deter∣mine r. will not determine, f. 12. for assessionem r. assentionem, f. 19. for in the Judgment r. in the Indictment, f. 21. for the writ of Dower r. of the writ of Error, f. 23. for Littleburies case r. Littletons case, f. 25. for issued r. issue, f. 29. for when r. wheras, f. 40. for Washley r. Walmesley, f. 41. for grant adjudged r. grant adjudged good, f. 47. for buying tythes r. buying of tythes, f. 43. for non dierunt r. non dixe∣runt, f. 45. for the house r. a horse, f. 47. for is r. are, f. 59. for here r. where, f. 63. for af∣ter a copyholder r. & after a copyholder, f. 64. for per servantes r. per presentes, f. 68. for action of error r. writ of error, f. 70. for before r. because, f. 70. for intent r. ex∣tent, f. 76. for and the same r. and he, f. 83. for inheritance r. disinheritance, f. 85. for least r. best, f 86. for baned r. barred, f. 89. for it the rent r. for if the rent, f. 90. for tenant r. tenancy, f. 92. for her r. per, f. 93. for promiseth that r. and it is covenan∣ted that, f. 96 for donas r. donees, f. 96. for per r. sur, f. 99. for may the damage r. may not the damages, fo. 111. for his band r. bound, f. 112. for Pewis r. Newis, f. 19. for also of the Mannor r. and also of the Mannor, f. 123. for Court r. Count, f. 123. for nor damages r. but damages, f. 150. for hadhad issue r. had issue, f. 158. for those in∣form r. those who inform.
THE REPORTS OF JUDGE OWEN. Termino Pasch. anno 26 Eliz. Leonard against Stephens.Rotulo. 1702. LEONARD chief Prothonotary, brought an Action of Trespasse against Stephens; who justified, &c. for that Sir Christopher Heyden Knight, was seised in Fee, and enfeoffed the Defendant, and gave colour to the Plaintiff; The Plaintiff replied, that true it was that Sir Christopher Heydon was so seised, but he being so seised, died seised of the Premisses, and that after his death, they did discend to his Son and Heire, who entred and was seised, and being so seised did enfe∣off the Plaintiff: Without that, that the said Sir Christopher Hey∣den did enfeoff the Defendant, whereupon Issue was joyned, and the Iury gave an especiall Verdict to this effect. That the said Christopher Heyden was seised as aforesaid, and made a Lease for years to the Defendant by Deed, containing these words, Dedi & concessi & confirmavi to the Defendant and his Heires, with a Letter of Attorney to make Livery. The Question was, whether this was a Feoffment, or but a Confir∣mation. Walmsley Serjeant, It is but Confirmation being by Deed, and hath the word Confirmation. Anderson, By that reason he in the Reversion cannot enfeoff his Lessee for years by Deed as he may with∣out Deed: but I conceive, that it is at the liberty and choice of the
Lessee either to take it as a Feoffment or a Confirmation. Walmsley, As soon as the Lessee hath accepted the Deed, by that he hath declared his meaning to have it as a Confirmation. Anderson, And when the Lessee doth accept the Livery, doth not that shew his expresse meaning to take it by the Livery, and shall the Livery signifie nothing? And in Bracebridges Case, where the Tenant in tail made a Bargain and Sale, and made Livery, and the Deed was inrolled within the six months: this was adjudged to be a Discontinuance, and yet the Bar∣gain and Sale makes no discontinuance, which little differs from the case in question. Walmsley, If Tenant in tail be disseised, and it is a∣greed between the Disseisor and the Disseisee, that the Disseisee shall make a Deed to the Disseisor, who makes a Deed accordingly, it is not in the election of the Disseisor to take this as a Feoffment. Anderson, The Cases differed, for the Disseisee hath no power to make a Feoff∣ment. And adjudged by the Court that it was a good Feoffment, vide 17 Ass. 20.22 H. 6.43. Scire facias by the Queen against Allen. THe Case was, A man recovers damages in an Action on the case, and he assignes parcell of his debt to the Queen before execution, and the Queen thereupon brought a Scire facias. Manwood chief Ba∣ron, and all the Court held cleerly, that parcell, or a Meyety of this debt could not be assigned over to the Queen. See 22 H. 6.47. where parcell of a debt upon an Obligation was attached by a forren Attach∣ment. Beverley against the Arch-bishop of Canterbury. Quare Impe∣dit.THomas Beverley brought a Quare Impedit against John Arch-bi∣shop of Canterbury, and Gabriel Cornwall, the case was, That the Queen being intituled to an Advowson by Lapse because that the Incumbent had two Benefices, each of them being of the value of eight pounds per annum, whereby the first by the Statute of 21 H. 8. became void, and after the said Incumbent died, and divers others were presented by the Patrons, who died also, whereby the Church be∣comes void againe. If the Queen may now take her turn to present, in regard she took not her turn when the first Lapse happened immediatly at the first avoidance, was the question. And after long and serious de∣bate, all the Iustices of the Common Pleas did resolve. That the Queen shal not now have her Presentment, but the Patron, because the Queen hath such presentment by Lapse as the Bishop had, and no other, and could present but to the present avoidance then void: and although Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, yet we must distinguish it thus, for where the King is limited to a time certaine, or to that which in its self is transitory, there the King must do it within the time limited, or in that time wherin the thing to be done hath essence or consistence, or while it remaineth, for otherwise he shall never do it. For if the Grantee of the next avoidance, or Lessee
Per auter vie be at∣taint,here the King must take his interest and advantage during the time, viz. during the life of Cestui que vie, or within the years of the next avoidance, or otherwise he shall never have it: the same Law is where a second presentment is granted to the King, and he does not present, he shall not present after. Shuttleworth, we have an Outlaw∣ry against the Plaintiff, whereupon Iudgment was staied: But af∣ter Hil. 29 Eliz. The Queens Serjeants shewing that the Plaintiff was outlawed; It was argued by Walmsley, that that could not now come into debate, for the plaintiff hath no bay in Court after judgment, and it is but a surmise that the plaintiff is the same party. Windham, In a debt upon an Obligation, the Serjeants may pray the debt for the Queen, and yet it is but a surmise. And the opinion of three Iustices was (for Anderson was absent) that the Writ to the Bishop ought to be staied; but in what manner processe should be made if the Scire facias shall issue against the Plain∣tiff, they said, they would advise concerning the Course: But Periam said, that a Scire facias might have issued against the ancient Incum∣bent, and then the Queen shall bring a Scire facias again, because she had no presentation. And the Scire facias was brought against Beverly. Walmsley, I conceive the Queen shall have no Presentation, for al∣though we have acknowledged our Presentment, yet before execution we have but a right; As if a Disseisee be outlawed he shall not forfeit the profits of his Land; also he hath brought a Scire facias, and a Scire facias lies not but by him that is party or privy. Periam, After that we have this Chattell, it is forfeit by Outlawry. Anderson, The Iudg∣ment that he shall recover, shall not remove the Incumbent, and then the Plaintiff hath but a right; to which Periam and Walmsley a∣greed: but as to the other point, that the Queen shall not have a Scire facias for default of privity, they saw no reason, for in many Cases she shall have a Scire facias upon a Record between strangers: Anderson, If I recover in debt and then I am outlawed, shall the Queen have this debt? Walmsley, If I recover in a Quare Impedit, and dye, who shall have the Presentment my Executor or my Heire? To which no answer was made: But the Court would take advice for the rarenesse of the Case. And it was said to Walmsley that he might demur in Law, if he thought the matter insufficient, to which Walmsley agreed, and did demur, &c. Annuity to a woman who marries and dies.AN Annuity is granted to a woman for life, who after marries, the Arrears of the Annuity encur, and the wife dies, whereby the An∣nuity is determined. It was adjudged that the husband shall have an Action of Debt at the Common Law: for that an Annuity is more then a Chose in Action, and may be granted over. And it was agreed by the Court in this case, That if a man grant an annuall Rent out of Land in which he hath no interest, yet this is a good Annuity to charge the person of the Grantor in a Writ of Annuity, 14 H. 4.29 A. Coke 4th. Rep. 51. A.
Bragg against Brooke. Second deli∣verance.LUcas Bragg brought a Writ of second deliverance against Robert Brook, for taking his Cattell in a place called East Burlish in the County of Surrey, the Case was. That Sir Thomas Speck was seised of a Mannor, containing in it severall Copyholds, and the place where, &c. was Copyhold. And the said Sir Thomas being so seised, married, and then died, and the wife 5 Edw. 6. demands the third part of the Mannor for her Dower. Per nomen centum Messuagium centum gardinum, tot. acr. terrae, prati, &c. And the wife had Iudgment to recover; and the Sheriff assigned to her part of the Demesnes and parcell of the Services and of the Free∣holders and Copyholders. And it was resolved clearly that the Copy∣holds did not passe by the assignment; and that she could not grant a Copyhold, for when she demanded her Dower it was at her election and liberty, to demand either a third part of the Mannor, or of the Mes∣suages, and when she demanded Per nomen Messuagiorum, &c. she cannot then have the Mannor, nor can a Mannor be claimed unlesse by his name of Corporation, as Anderson termed it, and not otherwise. And the Lands and Acres cannot be called Mannors, and then the grant of a Copyhold by one who hath no Mannor cannot be good. And so was the opinion of the Court, and yet the Sheriff had assigned to her Demesnes and Services, and all things which make a Mannor. And 29 Ed. 3.35. If a Mannor to which an Advowson is appendant be deli∣vered by the Sheriff in execution by the name of a Mannor, cum perti∣nentiis, the Advowson passeth also; but it is otherwise if it be deliver∣ed in extent, by the name of Acres, Lands, Meadow, Wood, &c. Wakefeilds Case, 28 Eliz.Rotulo 607. Replevin.WAkefeild brought a Replevin against Cassand, who avowed for Damage-feasant: And the Plaintiff prescribed that D. is an ancient Town, &c. and that all the Inhabitants within the said Town (except the Parion, Infants, and some particular houses) have used to have Common to their houses, &c. The Avowant shewed that the house to which Common was claimed, was built within thirty years last past. And whether he shall have Common to this new erected house was the question on a Demurrer? Shuttleworth, he shall have this Common by prescription, but not of common right. Gawdy, the Prescription is against common reason that he should have Common time cut of mind, &c. to that which hath not been thirty years, and he hath excepted the Parson, Infants, and such particular houses, and by the same reason may exceptall, and therefore it is not good. But it was adjudged no good Prescription, for if this be a good Prescription, then any body may create a new house, so that in long space of time there will be no Common for the ancient Inhabitants. Periam, By such Prescription the Lord shall be barred to improve the Common, which is against reason.
Anderson, The Common is intire, for if H. hath Common appendant to three Messuages, and enfeoff one of one Messuage, another of the second, andanother of the third, the Common in this case is gone: But all agreed that it is impossible to have a Common time out of mind, &c. for a house that is builded within the thirty years. Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 2299. Bishop of Lincolns Case. Quare Impe∣dit.THe Queen brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Lincoln, and Thomas Leigh, to present to the Church of Chalsenut Saint Giles in the County of Bucks. The case was thus; H. being qualified took two Benefices which were above the value of eight pounds, and after took a third Benefice above the said value, whereby the first Be∣nefice became void, and so remained for two years, whereby Title of Lapse accrued to the Queen, and (before presentment made by the Queen) the Patron did present one A. who being admitted, institu∣ted, and inducted, did refuse to pay 38 l. 2 s. ob. due to the Queen for the Tenths, which matter was certified by the Bishop into the Ex∣chequer, whereupon and by force of the Statute of the 26 H. 8. the Church is ipso facto void; wherefore the Bishop the now Defendant being Patron in right of his Bishoprick, did present Thomas Leigh the other Defendant, against whom the Queen brought her Quare Impe∣dit: And it was adjudged by the Court that the Quare Impedit very well lies; for the Recusancy to pay the Tenths was his own act, and is a Resignation, and by that reason she Church is void, and this shall not hinder the Queen of the Lapse: But if A. the Incumbent who was presented, dies, being presented by usurpation upon the Lapse to the Queen, yet afterwards the right Patron shall present again: But when A. the Incumbent doth resigne and make the Church void by his own Act, viz. by Recusancy, as in this case is done, this may be done by Collusion, and by such means the Queen may be deprived of her Li∣tle by Lapse: for if this Collusion between the Bishop and the Incum∣bent be suffered, then may a stranger present upon the Title of the Queen, and presently such Recusancy and Certificate may be made, by which the Church shall become void, and so the Queen deprived of the Lapse. Fenner, this Lapse is given to the Queen by her Preroga∣tive, but on condition that she take it in due time, for such is the na∣ture of the thing Lapsed, as is in this case adjudged, viz. That when the Queen hath Title to present by Lapse, and doth not present, but the Patron presents, and after the Church becomes void by the death of the Incumbent: In this case (adjudged by the Court also) the Queen cannot present; but in this case, the avoidance being by privation and not by death, Iudgment was entred for the Queen.
Trin. 19 Eliz. in Com. B. Hales Case. Debt on Bond.SAmuel Hales brought an Action of Debt on a Bond against Edward Bell, and the Condition of the Bond was, that if the said Bell should pay to the said Hales forty pounds within forty daies next after the re∣turn of one Russell into England from the City of Venice beyond the Seas, that then the Obligation to be void: and the Defendant pleaded in Bar that the said Russell was not in Venice, upon which the Plain∣tiff demurred: And adjudged by all the Iustices that it was no good plea; for in such cases where parcell is to be done within the Realm, and parcell out of the Realm, the tryall shall be within the Realm, 7 H: 7.9. Trin. 28 Eliz. in Com. Ban. Haveringtons Case. 1974. Debt by an Administra∣tor.HAverington and his wife as Administratrix of one Isabell Oram, brought an Action of Debt against Rudyand and his wife, Execu∣trix to one Laurence Kidnelly, the Case appeared to be thus. Farmer for thirty years did devise to his wife so long as she shall be sole and a Widow, the occupation and profits of his terme: And af∣ter her Widowhood, the Residue of the terme in the Lease and his inte∣rest in it to Reynald his Son, the Devisor dies, and the wife enters ac∣cording to the Devise: And afterwards he in the Reversion by Inden∣ture Dedit & concessit, vendidit & Barganizavit totum illud tenementum suum, to the wife and her Heires, and did also covenant to make further assurance, and to discharge the said Tenement of all former Bargains, Sales, Rights, Joyntures, Dowers, Mortgages, Statute-merchants, and of the Staple, Intrusions, Forfeitures, Condemnations, Executions, Arrearages of Rents; and of all other charges (except Rents Services which shall be hereafter due to the Lords Paramount) And then the Reversioner and his wife levied a Fine to the uses aforesaid; and after the Devisee takes husband, and thereupon the Son enters in the terme. And the Administrator of the wife brought an action of debt upon an Obligation, for the performance of the Covenants of the Indenture a∣gainst the Administrator of the Reversioner: And Judgment for the Plaintist. And it appeared by the Record that these points following were ad∣judged to be Law, although that the latter matter was onely argued. 1. That the wife of the Reversioner who had Title of Dower in the Land, is concluded of her right of Dower, by the Declaration of the uses of the Fine by the husband onely, which Fine is after levied by them joyntly, because no contradiction of the woman appears that she doth not agree to the Vses which the husband selely by his Deed of In∣denture had declared.
2. To Devise that the wife shall have the occupation and profits du∣ringher Widowhood is a good Devise of the Land it self, during such time. See Plow. 524. And that no Act which she can do in purchasing the Inheritance by which the Terme is extinct, shall bar the possibili∣ty which Reynald the Son hath to come, upon the womans marriage. 3. That a Lessee for years being in possession may take a Feoffment although it be by Deed, and may take Livery after the delivery of the Deed, and shall be deemed to be in by force of the Feoffment, as in this case is pleaded, although that the Lessee may take the Deed by way of confirmation, and then the Livery is but Surplusage and void. 4. It was resolved, that this possibility which was in Reynald the Son to have the residue of the terme upon the inter-marriage, which at the time of the Feoffment and of the Fine, was but Dormant, shall be accounted a former charge and before the Covenant, because of the will which was before the Covenant, and shall awake, and have relation before the marriage. As if Tenant in tail of a Rent, purchaseth the Land out of which the Rent issueth, and makes a Feoffment, and cove∣nants that the Land at that time is discharged of all former charges, although this charge is not in esse, but is in suspence, as it is said 3 H. 7.12, yet if the Tenant in tail dye, his Issue may distrain for this Rent, and then is the Covenant broke, for now it shall be accounted a for∣mer charge before the Feoffment. Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. in Com. Ban. Bretts Case. Debt on Bond.BRett brought an action of Debt on a Bond against Averden, and the Condition of the Bond was to stand to the Arbitrement of J.S. who did award that the Defendant should pay ten pounds to Brett, and no time was limited to pay it. The Defendant confest the Arbitrement but pleaded in Bar that the Plaintiff hath not required him to pay the money: And the Plaintiff hereupon demurred. Adjudged by the Court, that it is no good plea, for the Defendant at his perill ought to pay the money, and the Plaintiff need not make any request. wherfore Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Trin. 29 Eliz. in Com. Ban. Bucknells Case. Action for Robbery on the Statute of Winchest∣ster.BUcknell was robbed in a Hundred within the County of Bucks. and thereupon brought his Action upon the Statute of Winchester, be∣cause the Theeves were not taken: And Not guilty being pleaded by the Inhabitants, the Iury gave this speciall Verdict, viz. That he was robbed the same day alleadged in the Declaration, but in another place and within another Parish then that he hath alledged in the Declara∣tion, but that both the Parishes were within the said Hundred: Vp∣on which they prayed the Iudgment of the Court whether the Inhabi∣tants were guilty. Adjudged by the Court for the Plaintiff, for it is not materiall in what Parish he was robbed, so it were within the same Hundred.
Hil. 30 Eliz. in Com. Banc. Rot. 904. Spittles Case. Replevin.SPittle brought a Replevin against Davis, the Case was this. Turk being seised of Land in Fee, did devise parcell thereof to his youngest Son. Proviso, and it is his intent, that if any of his Sons, or any of their Issues, shall alien or demise any of the said Lands devised, before they shall attain the age of thirty years, that then the other shall have the Estate, and does not limit any Estate: And then the eldest Son made a Lease before his age of thirty years; and the youngest Son enters, and afterwards, and before the age of thirty years he aliens the Land he entred into by reason of the limitation: the elder Brother re∣enters, and demised to Spittle the Plaintiff for three years, who put a Horse into the ground, and Davis by the commandment of the youn∣ger brother entred and took the Horse Damage-feasant; and Spittle brought a Replevin. And upon the whose matter there was a Re∣mainder: It was resolved. 1. That this is a limitation, and that the Estate shall be to such use as by the Will is directed untill there be an Alienation, and upon Alie∣nation the Land shall go to the other Brother. 2. When the youngest Brother hath once entred for the Aliena∣tion, then is the Land discharged of all Limitations, for otherwise the Land shall go and come to one and the other upon every Alienati∣on ad infinitum, wherefore all the Iudges agreed, that after the one Brother hath entred by reason of the limitation, the Land is then for ever discharged of the Limitation made by the Will: And Iudgment was given accordingly. Michaells Case. Debt on a Bond:THomas Michaell brought an Action of Debt on a Bond against Stockworth and Andrews; the Iury gave this speciall Verdict: That the said Stockworth and Andrews did seale a Bond and delivered it to the Plaintiff as their Deed: and after Issue joyned, and before the Nisi prius the Seale of Andrews was taken from the Bond. Shuttleworth, The Plaintiff shall be barred, for it is one entire Deed, and the Seale of one is wanting. And admit (in case it goes against us) the Iudgment be reversed by Writ of Error, the Plain∣tiff can have no Action on such Bond: But it was adjudged to be a good Bond; and Iudgment for the Plaintiff. See the like case in Dy∣er, Trin. 36 H. 8.59. A.
Hillari 33 Eliz. in Com. Ban. Rot. 1315. Richmonds Case. Debt for rent.RIchmond brought an Action of Debt against Butcher, the case was; A man makes a Lease for years, reserving Rent to him and his Executors and Assignes, and during the terme the Lessor dies, and his Heire, who hath the Reversion, brings an Action of Debt. And it was urged, that the Rent was incident to the Reversion, and the Heire ha∣ving the Reversion shall have the Rent also as incident to it, as the case is in the 27 H. 8.16. If H. makes a Lease for years, rendring Rent, with∣out saying any more words, the Heire shall have this part, because it shall go along with the Reversion: So in the fifth of Edw. 4.4. If two Ioynt-tenants make a Lease for years, rendring Rent to one of them, yet the other shall have the Rent also, although no mention were made of him; so in the 7 H. 4.223. By the Court, If I make a Feoffment in Fee, rendring a Rent to me, my Heires may distraine: And if I grant over this Rent, my Assignees in this case may distraine and a∣vow: so in this case an Action will lye for the Heire, although he be not mentioned. But adjudged to the contrary by the Court; for when H. passeth Lands from himself, the Law gives him liverty to passe them in such way and manner as he himself will, and this liberty ought to take effect according to the expresse words, for the Law will not extend the words further, for the intent shall appeare by the words, and then it cannot be here intended that his will was that his Heire shall have the Rent, because the words are not sufficient to give it to his Heirs: And therefore note a diversity when the Law makes a Tenure, and when the party; for if the Law makes a Tenure, the Heirs shall have the Rent: but otherwise where the party makes it, unlesse there be ex∣presse words for the Heire, as in 10 Edw. 4.19. by Moile, If H. makes a Gift in T. and reserves no Rent: yet shall the Donee hold of the Do∣nor and his Heires, as the Denor holds over; but if he make a Lease for yeares, rendring Rent to the Lessor, the Heire shall not have this Rent, for it is a Tenure made by the act of the party. So in the Book of Assises 86. If a man lets two acres of Land, rendring Rent ten shil∣lings for one of them to himself by name, without naming his Heires, it is adjudged that the Heire shall not have the Rent of this acre. And this is resembled to the case of 12 Edw. 2. Where a man made a Lease for yeares, rendring Rent to the Lessor and his Assignes, here none shal have the Rent but the Lessor, and it is void by his death, for his Assig∣nee cannot be privy to the Reservation; and the words of the party shall not in any case be enlarged, unlesse there be great inconvenience to be avoided: and his intent and will is performed if he himself have the Rent. And if a man reserve such Rent to him and his Executors, this word Executors is to no purpose, for that the Rent cannot be re∣served to them, but the Rent shall be extinct by his death: And if he reserve the Rent to his Heire, and not to himself he shall not have it, but his Heire, for he shall be estopped to claime it, against his own words and reservation. And if I make a Lease for years, rendring Rent to me during the terme, if I dye without Heire during the terme, the Lord by Escheat shall not have the Rent: which case may be compa∣red to the case of Warranty, 6 H.
7.2. That without mention of theHeires, the Warranty shall not bind them: But if a Rent be reserved to his Assignes, and he grants over the Reversion, here because the As∣signes were mentioned in the Reservation, and for that now there is a privity, the Assignees shall have the Rent, for it shall be intended that when he speaks of Assignes in the Reservation, he prefixeth thereby to whom he will. Assigne the Reservation, wherefore it was adjudged for the Defendant, vide Dyer 2 Eliz. 180, 181. H. bargaines and sells Land: Proviso, that if the Vendor shall pay a hundred pounds to the Vendes his Heires or Assignes, that then the Bargaine and Sale shall be void: by two Iustices. The Tendor shall not be made to the Executors, because the Law will determine to whom the Tendor shall be made, when the parties them∣selves are expresly agreed. Mich. 33, and 34 Eliz. in Com. Ban. Goddards Case. Confirmation by the Lessor to the Assig∣nee of Tenant for years.H. makes a Lease for years of twenty acres, rendring Rent, the Les∣see grants all his Estate in one of the acres to I.S. the Lessor con∣firmes the Estate of I. S. Resolved by the Court, 1. That by this confirmation the entire Rent is gone in all the other acres, for being an entire contract and by his own act, there cannot be an occupation for part, and an extinguishment for the other part; and in this case there is no difference between a suspension in part, and an extinguishment. If A. makes a Lease for yeares of twenty acres, ren∣dring Rent, upon condition that if he does not do such a thing, that then the Lease shall be void for ten acres; if he performes not the conditi∣on, and the Lessor enters, the entire rent is gone. And it was resol∣ved that a Lease for years was not within the Statute of Quia empto∣res terrarum, for that Statute extends to an Estate in Land of Fee-sim∣ple. See the Report of Serjeant Benlowes in 14 H. 7. A Warren did extend into three Parishes. And a Lease was made for years rendring rent, and after the Reversion was granted to another of all the War∣ren in one of the Parishes, and the Lessee did attorne. The question was, if the Lessor should have any part of this rent during the terme, so that the rent may be apportioned or not. And the Iustices said in this Case, that neither the Grantor nor the Grantee shall have any rent, for the Law is, that no Contract shall be apportioned. 2. It was resolved, that no Lessor shall avow for the arrearages of rent, before the time of Confirmation and extinguishment; for H. shall not avow for the rent determined; but he may defend himselfe by way of Iustification. See where a man may justifie the taking by speciall evidence, 19 H. 6.41. by all the Court, except Askew.
Mich 33, and 34 Eliz. in Ban. Reg. Rot. 471. Wardfords Case. Error.HAddock brought a Writ of Error against Wardford upon a Iudg∣ment given in the Common Pleas; the case was thus: Two Co∣parceners of a house, one of them lets her part to a stranger, and the o∣ther lets her part to a stranger also, and then both Leases come to the hands of one H. and then one of the Coparceners bargaines and sells her reversion to the other Coparcener. The Lessee commits Wast Per∣mittendo dictum Messuagium cadere, and the grantee of the Reversion brought an action of Wast. The Errors assigned were, 1. That he brought but one action of Wast, although of severall De∣mises by severall Lessors, wheras he ought to have two actions of Wast. Godfrey, He cannot have an Action in other manner then his Grantor might have before the Grant, and when the reversion came to him, it can be in other plight then it was before. Gawdy, There is a diversity when the right is severall, and when the possession is severall; for al∣though the possession be severall, yet if the right be intire, but one action will lys, as appeares F.N.B. fol. 2. Godfrey, There is difference be∣tween the Writ of Right in F.N.B. and this action, for there he was ne∣ver intituled but onely to the action, but in our case the action was once severall, and is like the case in F.N.B. 60. where it is said, that a man may have one action of Wast, and declare upon divers Leases, but that is intended where the Leases are made by one person, and he cited the case in 21 H. 7.39. where it is agreed by all the Iustices, that if a man hold two acres of one H. by severall Services, and dies without Heire, the Lord shall not have one Writ of Escheat, but ought to have two Writs. Popham chief Iustice did agree with Gawdy, for although that at first the Lessors were intituled to severall Actions, yet by matter ex post facto, the Actions may be united: and said, that H. might have an action of Waste, and declare ex assignatione, and also ex dimissione. 2. Error was assigned, that he had assigned the Waste to be com∣mitted in the whole house, whereas he had but part of the house, and Waste may be brought for part of a house. 3. Error was, because the other Coparcener was not joyned with him in the Action. But resolved that it was good enough: And the Iustices made this diversity, viz. When both the parties have an equall Estate and Inheritance, and when one of them hath but a particular Estate, as in the 27 H. 8.13. Lessee for life, and he in the remainder shall joyne in an Action of Waste, but where they had equal estate of Inheritance, as two Coparceners, or two Tenants in Common, and one makes a Lease, and the Lessee commits Waste, there the Writ of Waste shall be brought by the Lessor only, for it is not like to a personall in∣jury done upon an Inheritance; for an action of Waste is now in the nature of the realty, although that at the Common Law (before the Sta∣tute of Glocester) there was but a Prohibition, yet the Statute gives the place wasted, and damages, and therefore it is mixt, wherefore both of them shall not joyne, and the Writ saies, to his isheritance that made the Lease, vide 22 H. 6 24. by the Court, and agreeing with this resolution.
4. Error was, that the Waste is a permissive Waste, and no such Waste lies between Coparceners, for each of them are bound to con∣tribution and reparation: but the Court would take no notice of this. 5. Error was in the entring Iudgment, for Iudgment was entred by default, whereupon a Writ of Inquiry of damages issued out to the Sheriff, and the Sheriff went to the place wasted, which he needed not have done. And the Iudgment was Quod recuparet locum vasta∣tum per visum Juratorum, which was nought, for the going to the place was Surplusage. But divers Presidents were produced to prove that, that was the course: as Hilar. Rot. 501. between the Earl of Bed∣ford and William Smith, upon a Demurrer, and a Writ of inquiry of damages, and the Iudgment was, Quod recuparet locum vastatum per visum Juratorum, and Trin. 31 H. 8. Rot, 142. and the book of Entries, fol. 620. wherefore Iudgment was affirmed. 34 Eliz. in Com. Ban. Gaytons Case. Resignation of a Benefice.RObert Gayton Parson of the Church of little Eyesingham in the County of Norfolk, did by Instrument in writing resign his Be∣nefice before Edmund Langdon publick Notary, and others, into the hands of the Bishop, and the resignation was absolute and voluntary, and to the use of Miles Mosse, and Paul Britback, or either of them: And it was further infrred in the said Instrument of Resignation, Protesta∣tione & sub conditione quod si aliqui eorum non admissi fuerant per as∣sessionē Episcop. infra sex menses, quod tunc haec present. resignatio mea vacua & pro nulla habeatur, & nunc prout tunc, & tunc prout nunc: and Cestuy que use, came within the time limited to the Bishop, and did offer to resigne to him, which the Bishop refused to except, &c. Crooke for the Plaintiff, Forasmuch as the Plaintiff may resigne on Condition as well as a particular Tenant may surrender upon con∣dition: and two Parsons may exchang, and i the estate be executed on the one part, and not on the other, that Parson whose part was not exe∣cuted may have his Benefice again, as it is adjudged in the 46 Ed. 3. But Coke Solicitor, and Godfrey were on the contrary opinion: For that the Incumbent may not transfer his Benefice to another without pre∣sentation, as appeares in the recited case of 46 Edw. 3. Also the re∣signation is not good, and the Condition void, because it is against the nature of a Resignation which must be Absolute, sponte, pure, & simpli∣citer and is not like to a Condition in Law, as in the said case of Ex∣change in 46 Edw. 3. for the Law doth annex a condition to it, but a col∣laterall condition cannot be annext by the parties themselves: Also this is an Act Iudiciall to which a condition cannot be annext, no more then an Ordinary may admit upon condition, or a Iudgment be confessed on Condition, which are judiciall Acts. But admitting the Condition good, yet a new Induction ought to be made by the Ordinary, for the Church became one time void; and is not like to the case in 2 R. 2. Quare Impedit 143. where sentence of deprivation was given, and the sentence presently reversed by Appeal, there need no new Institution, for that the Church was never void. And after in Easter Tearm, 36 Eliz. upon Argu∣ments
given in writing by the Civillians to the Iudges, the Iudgment was entred, Quod querens nihil capiat per billam. Hiliar. 35 Eliz. in the Kings Bench. Rot. 56. Carters Case. Action on the case for words.WIlliam Crow brought an Action on the Case against Warham Carter for speaking of these words; The said William is forsworn and perjured in swearing at the common place Bar upon the Deeds which he then had in his hand. Harris Serjeant did move in Arrest of Iudgment, for that the words shall be construed according to the common and vulgar sense, viz. That he is forsworne upon the Deeds. But the Court was against him: For the vulgar sense is, that men do not use to sweare but upon a Book, and the Plaintiff had Iudgment. Hil. 36 Eliz. in the Kings Bench. William Bartues Case. Prohibition.WOodroffe and Cooke brought a Prohibition against Bartue; the C se was thus. The Abbot of Langley did let Land to one Raston for ninety nine years, who let the same to Woodroff for sixty years, who granted par∣cell of the said Land to Cooke during the whole terme. And Bartue did libell against them both in the Spirituall Court for Tythes, and they joyned in a Prohibition. Godfrey, They may not joyne in a Prohibition, for by the Statute of▪ 34 H. 6.13. If two men are sued in the Court Christian for slander, bttery, &c. which are severall in themselves, there they cannot joyne in a Prohibition: but where they be sued for the finding of a Lampe, &c. by reason of their Land, there they shall joyne; but in this case the Tythes are severall. But it was resolved, 1. That their joyning in the Prohibition was good enough. 2. That the death of one of them shall not abate the Writ of Prohi∣bition, because nothing is by them to be recovered, but they are onely to be discharged of Tythes. Pasch. 33 Eliz. in the Kings Bench, Rot. 292. Haslewoods Case.
Error in A∣vowry.THe Lord of a Mannor did avow on the taking of a Gelding as an Estrey within his Mannor, and had Iudgment to have return and damage to twenty pounds: And hereupon a writ of Error was brought, and adjudged that no Damages shall be had in such case: For the A∣vowantcannot recover damages at the Common Law, and by the Sta∣tute of the 7 H. 8. and 4. no damages shall be given to the Avowant for Damage-feasant; but where he avowes for Rents, Customes, or Ser∣vices, and this is neither Rent, Custome, or Service, for that of com∣mon right the Estrey belongs to the King, and no common person may have it unlesse by grant, or by prescription, and the Statute is to be taken strickly: for the Avowant for Damage-feasant, or for Rent Charge should not recover Damage by this Statute, before the Statute of 21 H. 8.19. where the Plaintiff hath remedy, as it is holden in Dy∣er 141. B. But because divers Presidents were shewn out of the Com∣mon Pleas from time to time since the making that Statute, that da∣mages shall be recovered by the Avowant, who avowes for Amerce∣ments, &c. it was said, that it would be very difficult to controll so ma∣ny Presidents. Gawdy, no great credit is to be given to such Presidents as passe sub silentio, without any exception taken to them. Another Error was assigned, because the Iudgment was to have return averiorum predi∣ctorum, whereas there was but one Guelding: wherefore Iudgment was reversed, and the Roll markt. Trin. 36 Eliz. in B. R. Fulgeambs Case. Trespass a∣gainst the Constables of Cambridge.FUlgeambe brought an Action of Trespasse against the Constables of Cambridge; the Case was. The Plaintiffs horses estrayed into Cambridgeshire, and were thereup∣on Impounded in Cambridge, and then one A. came with a Commission from the Lord Hunsdon Captaine of Barwick, to take Horses to ride to Barwick, and the Constables delivered to him the Plaintiffs Horses, and then one of the Horses died. And the opinion of all the Iustices was, that the Action did well lye, for the Constables cannot take Horses out of the Pound to deliver them to any by vertue of such a Commission. Trin. 36 Eliz. in B. R. Tauntons Case. Lease on con∣dition.COles made a Lease to Taunton for ninety nine years, on condition hat if he demised it in other manner, then in such manner as he let the same to him, that then it should be lawfull for him to re-enter; the Lessee devises it by his Will to his youngest Son. Resolved, that Rigore Juris, this is a breach of the Condition: for a Devise is an A∣lienation, as is holden 31 H. 8 Dyer 6. and although Conditions shall be taken strickly, yet not directly against the intent of the parties, and the reasonable disposition of the words; and therefore a Devise shall be intended to be within this word, Demise; yet it was said, that it was very hard according to equity that the Estate should be lost: For he in∣tended
by this Will to prefer one of his youngest Children, and not to break the Condition, and thought not it was any breach of the condition, and for this cause some doubt was made of the Case, but Hil. 38 Eliz. Iudgment was given as aforesaid. Pasch. 36 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 41. Leighs Case. Ejectment.THe Queen being seised of lands as Dutchesse of Lancaster, did make a Lease thereof to the Plaintiff, the Lessee is outed by A. the Plain∣tiff makes a Lease to B. for years, and B. being outed brought an Eje∣ctione firmae. 1. It was resolved, that the Queen as Dutchesse of Lancaster can∣not be disseised, for although she be not seised in jure Coronae, yet is it in Seisin of the Queen, and cannot be taken away from her in respect of her person. 2. Gawdy, and Fenner held that the Lessee being outed, the terme is turned into a Right. and therefore it hath been adjudged that an Eject∣ment will lye: as the case is in Dyer 29 H. 8. It Tenant in taile, the reversion in the King suffers a Recovery, although this shall not be to the prejudice of the Kings Reversion, yet shall it bar the Estate-tail. So if a Parson makes a Lease for years, and the Patron and Ordinary confirme it, and the Parson dies, and during the Vacation the Les∣see is outed, he is hereby outed of his terme, yet is not the Frank-tene∣ment touched. Clench on the contrary, That he who is outed hath an Estate but at sufferance, for he cannot have an Estate for years without a Lease, and it is agreed he shall not have an Estate of Freehold by reason of the Re∣version in the Queen, and the possession of the Lessor, shall main∣tain the possession of the Lessee, as well as the possession of the Lessee shall keep the Freehold of the Lessor: and if he have but an Estate at sufferance, then cannot the Lease to B. he good: For if Tenant at sufferance of a common person makes a Lease for years, this is a Dis∣seisin. And Popham was of opinion with Gawdy and Fenner, wherefore Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. I have seen a Report 24 Eliz. in the Kings Bench, upon a Demurrer between Edmund Frough and Henry Dixe, where the better opinion was, That if one enters on the terme of the Queen, he shall not thereby gaine any possession; but notwithstanding the Termor may grant over his Terme: but it was agreed that he shall have an Ejectione firmae: for by Plawden an Assise will lye of a Mill, where the water is divers, for the possession of the Mill continues in him. But the Justices doubted whether it was an Ejectment, wherefore the parties did compound. In the 4. H. 6. Intrusion. If Lessee for life, the Remainder in the King be outed, he shall have an Assise.
Trin. 36 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 134. Thurstons Case. Ejectment.GOffe brought an Ejectment against Thurston, the Case was this. The Abbot of Kingswold in Wiltshire, being seised of Land in the 28th yeare of H. 8. did (with consent of the Covent) make a Lease for years by Deed indented, and then the Abby came into the hands of H. 8. and from him to Edw. 6 and from him to the present Queen. And it was pleaded that the Defendant hath the Lease, and that Henry Thinne did intrude on the Defendant, and made a Lease to the Plaintiff, who being ejected by the Defendant brought this Action, and on this matter the parties demurred. 1. It was said that the Plaintiff cannot bring this Action, inasmuch as Henry Thinne by his entry on Lessee for years, the Reversion being in the Queen cannot gaine any possession, so that nothing passeth by his Lease to the Plaintiff. But the Court was against this, for he is a sufficient Lessee to maintain an Action of Ejectment: And it was adjudged in the Exchequer Chamber, that the Queens Lessee for years being outed may have an Ejectione firmae, which proves that he is put out of possession of his terme, and this very point was in a manner a∣greed the last terme, in the case of Norris. Fenner, If H. enters on the possession of the Queen, and makes a Lease for years, nothing doth passe, and the Lessee cannot maintain an Ejectione firmae, for he gains no possession at all: but it is on the con∣trary hee when he enters on the Queens Lessee. Gawdy, That is no difference, for the Lessee for years of an Intru∣dor shall maintain at Ejectione firmae: And I have seen a Report 34 Eliz. between Badinton and Hawle in the Kings Bench, adjudged, that if the Queens Copyholder be outed, and a Lease be made for years by the Intrudor, this Lessee shall not have an Ejectment if he be outed, but he shall have an Action of Trespasse against any stranger. The second exception was taken to the pleading, because the Defen∣dant pleaded in que estate del Lessee del Abbe, without shewing how he came to the Estate. And by the Court a good exception, for he shall be compelled to shew how he came to an Estate in the terme, inasmuch as it cannot be by loyall means, vide 1. & 2 Eliz. Dyer 171. that a Que Estate of a particular Estate of a terme is not good, and 7 Eliz. Dyer 238. where the Plea was of a que Estate of a Termor, and exception taken to it; and the difference between it and a Freehold, so in the 7 H. 6.440. it was agreed that H. could not convey an Interest by a que Estate of a particular Estate, as Intail for life, or years, without shew∣ing how he came by the Estate, be it on the part of the Plaintiff or the Defendant. The third exception was, that the Defendant pleaded a Lease made by the Abbot and Covent by Indenture as it ought to be, without say∣ing Hic in curia prolat. which exception was also clearly allowed by the Court, for he is privy to it, and therefore he ought to shew it. And for these two exceptions, but especially for the former. Iudgment was gi∣ven for the Plaintiff.
Mich. 36, and 37 Eliz. in C. B. Palmers Case. Action on the case for words.PAlmer an utter Barrester of Lincolns-Inn, brought an Action on the Case against Boyer for these words; Palmer being Steward to I.S. the Defendant in discourse had with I.S. said; I marvail you will have such a paltry Lawyer for your Steward, for he hath as much Law as a Jack a Napes: And the Plaintiff shewed all the matter in the Declara∣tion, and that by reason of such words he was displaced of his Office. Williams Serjeant did move, in that the words were not, That he hath no more Law then, &c. for then those words were actionable, but, that he hath as much Law as, &c. for which words no Action will lye. But resolved by the Court that the Action will lye, for the words are standerous and prejudiciall to his credit, and by reason of them he was discharged of his Stewardship, also an Action will lye for saying. That he hath as much Law as a Jack an Apes, or my Horse, because they are unreasonable creatures, but if he had said, that he hath no more Law then I.S. that is not actionable, although I.S. be no Lawyer. And Iudg∣ment was given for the Plaintiff. Pasch. 35 Eliz. in B. R. Audleys Case. A Man brought an Action of Debt on an Obligation made by the Fa∣ther of the Defendant, in which Writ the Defendant was named Son and Heir apparent of the Obligor, & Iudgment was given against the Defendant, whereupon he brought a Writ of Error, for the Writ does imply that his Father was living, for he is his Heire in truth and in fact, if his Father be dead, and not apparent: To which was answe∣red, that that was but Surplusage which shall not abate the Writ, as appeares by the Book of the 10 Edw. 3. But the Court held that Iudg∣ment should be reverst, for he ought to be named Heire, as in debt a∣gainst Executors; he shall be named Executor. And Iudgment was reverst. Trin. 36 Eliz. in B. R. Downinghams Case. Ejectment.THe Defendant in an
Ejectione firmae pleaded that the Lord of the Mannor did enter into the Land of a Copyholder by reason of for∣feiture for Waste committed in suffering the houses to be uncovered,by which the timber is become rotten, and did not alledge in facto that the Custome of the Mannor is, that such Waste is a forfeiture, for it was said, that although other Waste by the Common Law is a forfei∣ture,yet this permissive Waste is not. Sed non allocatur: for all Waste done by a Coppholder is forfeitable. 2. It was resolved, that if a Coppholder made a Lease for yeares which is not according to the Custome of the Mannor, yet this Lease is good; so that the Lessee may maintain an Ejectione firmoe; for between the Lessor and the Lessee, and all other, except the Lord of the Man∣nor, the Lease is good, and so hath it been severall times adjudged in this Court. Trin. 36 Eliz. in B. R. Wisdomes Case. Action on the case for words.STich brought an Action on the Case for slanderous words against Wisdome, the words were, There is many a truer and honester man hanged, and that there was a Robbery committed whereof he thought him to be one, and that he thought him to be a Horse-stealer. And it was moved in Arrest of Iudgment that these words were not actionable; for it is not said in facto, that he was in the Robbery, or that he was a a horse-stealer in fact, but onely by imagination, that he thought he was such a one: but Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Trin. 36 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 815. Palmers Case. CHristopher Palmer brought an Ejectione firmae against John Hum∣phrey, and declared that one George Hanger the eighteenth day of May, in the six and thirtieth year of Eliz. by his Indenture did demise unto him a certain peece of Land called the great Ashbroke, and other peece of Land called Stocking, and also divers other peeces of Land naming the peeces, and of one Garden called Muchins Gardein, and of another peece of Meadow called Michins Meade, and of seven acres of a∣rable Land, for the terme of two years: by vertue whereof the said Christopher entred, untill the Defendant by force and armes, &c. did eject him, and did set forth in his Declaration that the Defendant e∣jected him out of the said peeces of Land, and yet did not expresse the contents thereof in certainty: And upon not-guilty pleaded it was found for the Plaintiff, and for the seven arable acres of Land and the Garden, the Court gave their Iudgment that it was certain enough, but as to the other peeces of land, the Court was divided: For Popham & Gawdy held that it was certain enough being in an Ejectione firmae, which is but in the nature of an Action of Trespasse, and the damages are the principall, and a man may bring an Action of Trespasse for a peece of land, without any other certainty: But Clench and Fenner were on the contrary, for he ought to set forth his terme in the land, and then to shew the contents thereof, as well in an Ejectment, as in a Precipe quod reddat, by which land is demanded, and a man shall have an Ejectione firmae de una visgata terrae, but shall not have a Precipe
quod reddat of one portion of land, by Skeene and Hill, 7 H. 4.40. 9 H. 6.3. 5 H. 7.9. And afterwards vide Mich. 37, & 38 Eliz. It was adjudg∣ed that this was good enough in an Ejectione firmae, for there the da∣mages are the principall; but otherwise in a Precipe, for there ought to be a certainty; but in an Assise of Novel Disseisin it is good enough, but afterwards Mich. 38, & 39 Eliz. the case was debated in the Exche∣quer Chamber by Writ of Error, and the Iudgment was reversed. Hil. 36 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 34. Walters Case. LOve brought an Action of Debt against Wotton, who pleaded the Statute of Vsury in Bar, and by reason of Mispleader, it was a∣warded by the Court, that the parties should plead De novo, and this Award was entred in this manner, viz. Et quia placitum illud in modo & forma placitat. est sufficiens in lege, the Court awarded that the par∣ties should replead; and hereupon they pleaded, and Iudgment for the Plaintiff: and the Defendant brought a Writ of Error in the Exche∣quer Chamber, which was certified accordingly. And there Gawdy moved that the Record in this point might be a∣mended, and to have the Record certified de novo into the Exchequer Chamber; for that the first Award is repugnant in it self, for it is a∣warded that they shall replead, because the Plea est sufficiens, whereas it ought to be that they shall replead, because est minus sufficiens, as the paper books are, and the opinion of the Court was that it could not be amended, because that the fault is in the Iudgement it self, which is the act of the Court, and therefore cannot be amended. Glanvill, It is no Error in the Iudgment, for the Iudgment is only that they shall replead, but the Error is in the Iudgment to the Iudg∣ment, and may be well amended, and of the same opinion was Pop∣ham. Mich. 36, and 37 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 579. Bartwrights Case BArtwright brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond against Harris, the Condition was, that if the Defendant did acquit, discharge, and save harmlesse the Plaintiff against an Obligation, in which he and the Defendant were bound to I.S. in 601 l. that then the Obligation should be void. The Defendant said, that Bartwright was sued on this Obligation by I. S. and upon default I.S. had Iudgment to recover, and that the Defendant before execution did deliver to the Plaintiff the 601 l. and hereupon the Plaintiff demurred. Humbert, It is no plea, for he confesseth that the Plaintiff was not yet taken in execution, yet inasmuch as he may be taken, therefore his body, goods, and lands are liable to the execution, and he hath not ac∣quitted nor saved him harmlesse against the Bond of I.S. vide Dyer 186. And the Plaintiff had Iudgment, &c.
Mich. 36, and 37 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 25. Greyes Case. GRey brought an action of Trespasse against Bartholmew; the Case was: A man did purchase divers Fishes, viz. Carpes, Tenches, Trouts, &c. and put them into his Pond for store, and then died. The question was, whether the Heire or the Executors should have the Fish. Popham, The Heire shall have the Deer in the Park, and by the same reason, the Fish. Clench, If the Fish be stolne it is Felony, so that it appears there is a property in them, vide 18 Ed. 4. 10 Ed. 4.14. 22 Ass. 98. that stealing of Tench out of a Pool is Felony, by which it seems they are but Chat∣tels. Popham, the Book is so, and so is the Law, but that is of stealing Fish out of a Trunk, or some narrow place where they are put to be taken at will and pleasure; but otherwise it is where they are put into a Pond. Fenner, He which hath the water shall have the Fish: And Popham ex assensu curiae gave Iudgment for the Heire. And in the principall case the Executors did take the Fish with Nets, and the Heire brought a Trespasse and adjudged maintainable. See what Chattels Executors shall have, and what not, in 21 H. 7.26, 10 H. 7.6. & 30. an account will lye for Fish in a Fish-pond, so in the 5 R. 2. Waste 97. an Action of waste did lye against Guardian in Chivalry for taking Fish out of a Pool by the Statute of Magna Charta; but quaere if it lies against a Termor or Guardian in Soage upon an Account for Fish. 36 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 767. Leighs Case. LEigh brought an Ejectione firmae for a Chamber against Shaw, the Case was; A Lease was made of the Rectory of Chingford in Es∣sex, and of the Glebe, excepting the Parsonage house, saving and allow∣ing to the Lessee a Chamber over the Parlor next the Church. It was adjudged that the Lease of the Chamber was good, for as well as a man by his exception may except part of a thing, so as it shall be intended that it was never let or granted; so in this case when he saies, except the Parsonage house, saving and allowing to the Lessee a Chamber, this saving makes the Chamber, as it were excepted out of it, as if it had been leased; so a saving out of a saving, is as much as there had been no saving at all, and then this Chamber not being ex∣cepted out of the Lease shall passe clearly by the Lease of the Rectory. And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff.
37 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 242. Wrights Case. WRight brought a Writ of Error against the Mayor and Commi∣nalty of Wickombe, to reverse a Fine levied by his Ancestor of twenty acres of Land, the Defendants in abatement of the Writ of Error did plead that the Plaintiff after the death of his Ancestor did disseise the Defendants of the Land, and made a Feoffment to a stran∣ger. Iudgment, &c. The Plaintiff replied, that they did re-enter up∣on him, without that, that he did enfeoff a stranger modo & forma. The Iury found, that there was a Fine of twenty acres, and that the Plain∣tiff being Disseisor of all, made a Feoffment of six of the acres to a stranger. Et si supra totam materiam, &c. And it was objected that the Record was intire, and the Error is a Chose in Action, and not a Chose in Droit, and therefore cannot be divided, but if it were a Chose in Droit, it is otherwise, as if a Disseisee of twenty acres releaseth all his right in five acres, this doth extinguish all his right in the five a∣cres: so upon a Feoffment of parcell, yet the right remaineth as to the remnant: But of a Chose in Action which is meerly entire, no apportionment can be, as in the 31 Eliz. in the Kings Bench, between Charnock and Wrothesley, the case was; Husband and Wife levied a Fine of the Wives Land, and after because the Wife was within age, they sued a Writ of Error to reverse the Fine. The question was, If this should be reversed as to the Wise onely, or against the Husband accor∣ding to the opinion of Belknap in the 50 Ed. 3. And after long debate it was resolved that it should be against both, for it is intire, and cannot be affirmed in part and disaffirmed in another part. And the Lord Norris case is very agreeable to this, where Tenant for life did levy an erroneous Fine, and then was attaint by Parliament, and all the right which he had to any Land was given to the Queen; and it was adjudged that there is no title of Error, nor was it given to the Queen by this word, Right, and then if it be so, the Title of Error is not of any right in the land, but onely to the Suit, and if it be a Suit, it is a Suit intire, for he cannot have severall Suits, as is agreed in Sir Ri∣chard Knightleys case. A man had judgment to recover 150 l. and did release 20 l. of it, and after sued execution, and the other brought an Audita querela upon the Releases, and defeated all the execution. But it is otherwise where such apportionment of such Suit is done by act in Law, as in 7 Ed. 4. fol. ultimo. The Sheriff levied parcell of the debt by Fieri facias, yet shall he have an Action of Debt for the Residue upon the Record: But in this case it is the act of the party himself that destroies his Suit for part of the Land, for which it shall destroy the o∣ther suit, for the Error is intire as to all the land and cannot be divided, as in the 38 Ed. 3. and 12 H 6. if a false Verdict be found, and the par∣ty greived does make a Feoffment of parcell he shall not have an at∣taint for any part: So in the 19 H.
6. and the 39 Ass. If he who hath cause to bring a Writ of Error or Attaint, does take a Lease for years of parcell, he doth suspend his Action, and if he takes in fee, it is quite gone,. But it was resolved by the Court that the Feoffment does not destroy the Title of the Writ of Dower, for more then so much as a Feoffment was made of; and thereupon they first took a difference be∣tweensuspension and extinguishment of an Action, for peradventure if he suspend his Action as to any part for any time, this is a suspension unto all, but extinguishment of part; is a Bar to that part onely; and Gawdy cited the case in 9 H. 6. where Iudgment was reverst for part only, and it is not unusuall to have a Fine reversed for part: as if a fine be levied of lands in ancient Demesne, 47 Ed. 3.9. a. there by Parsley, If there be Error in Law as to one parcell, and Error in Fact as to an∣other parcell, the Iudgment as touching the matter of Law may be reversed. Fenner; He who hath Title to reverse a Fine, or recovery by Writ of Error, hath right in the Land, and if he release all his right in the land, the Error is extinct, and the reason of the Lord Norris Case was not that the Title to the Error was an Action in privity annexed to the party to the Record and his Heires, and cannot be transferred over to another, no more then a Writ of partition between Coparceners, or a Nuper obiit. Popham, He who hath Title to have the Writ of Error hath no Ti∣tle to the Land, although that thereby he be to be restored to the Lande for if the Land discend to one who hath Title to have the Writ of Er∣ror, without doubt it shall not be accounted a remitter: But as to the matter now in question, he said, that if two men bring a Writ of Error in the Realty, and the Tenant plead the release of one, this is a good Bar against both, because the Error in the Record is released: But if one who hath Title to a Writ of Error, does make a Release of all his Right in one acre, this is a Bar but for so much, inasmuch as the Release is a Bar but as to the Restitution of the Land onely, and no Release of Errors in the Record, for by the Reversall of a Fine or Recovery, the party may annihilate the Record, and have Restitution of that which the Record before took from him, and therefore it shall bar the Plaintiff. And the opinion of all the Court was, that the Fine should be reversed for that part of the Land onely, whereof no Feoff∣ment was made, but for some defects in the Writ of Error, Iudgment was stayed. Mich. 37, and 38 Eliz. in B. R. Barnards Case. SMith brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond against Barnard, the Defendant pleaded that the Plaintiff was outlawed, and a day was given him to bring in the Record, at which day he made default. Daniel moved that the Iudgment for the Plaintiff in this case should be that the Defendant should answer, for that the plea of Outlawry was but a dilatory Plea, and no Plea in Bar, as appears 21 Ed.
4 15. but this difference was taken by the Court. In an Action of Debt upon a Bond, Vtlary of the Plaintiff is a Plea in Bar, and the reason is, because all the Debts in specialties are forfeited to the Queen by rea∣son of the Outlawry, and because the Queen is to have them, it is a good Plea in Bar: But in a Trespasse or Debt upon a Contract, the Outlawry is but to the abatement of the Writ, and the Queen shall not have Debts upon simple Contracts, but after the Outlawry pardon∣ed, the Plaintiff may have an Action for them again. And because hefailed to bring the Record at his day appointed, the Plaintiff recovered. vide Dyer 6 Eliz. 227, 228. Hil. 32 Eliz. in C. B. Lord Dacres Case. GRegory Lord Dacres was summoned to answer Richard Gawton in a Plea of Debt for 26 l. 14 s. and did declare, that the Defendant did retain the Plaintiff to be his Bayliff of his Mannor of Moreford, &c. and to receive the Defendants money for a certain time, and to do other businesses for the Defendant, and to render an account: and af∣terwards before one Launcelot Love, the Auditor assigned by the De∣fendant, the Plaintiff did account. Super quo computo praefatus Richar∣dus pro diversis costagiis & expensis quae idem Richardus circa prose∣cutionem & executionem negotiorum praefati Gregorii in surplusagiis in praedict. 26 l. 14. s. erga ipsum Gregorium, ultra omnes denariorum summas per ipsum Richardum ad ipsum dicti Gregorii recept. permansis∣set. And thereupon he brought his Action; and the Defendant pleaded Nil debet, and it was found for the Plaintiff, and yet he had not Iudg∣ment. First, because the Declaration was insufficient, because the Plain∣tiff was not in Surplusage to the Defendant, but the Defendant to the Plaintiff, and so are all the Presidents directly; and he ought to al∣ledge he was in Service, and that he had received Goods, whereof no mention is made. Secondly. Because neither day nor place is alledged where the Audi∣tor was assigned. Pasch. 33 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 409. Owseleys Case ROger Owsely brought a Replevin against Edmund Brach and o∣thers, the Defendant made Conulance as Baily to John Levison; and said, that long time before the taking, &c. one William Coup was seised of a house and eight acres of Meadow, &c. whereof the place is parcell, in his Demesne as of Fee, and did demise the same to Richard Coup for one and twenty years, reserving Rent, and the Lessee died, and the Land came to his Wife as his Executrix, who married Roger Owseley, and that William Coup did levy a Fine of the Premisses to Stephen Noke and others, to the use of Stephen and his Heires, and af∣ter Stephen entred and outed the Termor, and infeoffed John Leveson and his Heires, and then the Termor re-enters, claiming his Terme, and for Rent arreare the Defendant made Counsans as aforesaid, and it was adjudged against the Defendant, because this entry and Feoffment by Noke to Leveson, and the re-entry of the Termor is no Attornment, and this varies from Littleberries case, where the Lessor entred and made a Feoffment, and the Lessee re-entred, for
Noke the Lessor hadnot any Attornment, and can have no Distresse, and his Feoffee can∣not be in better case then he himself: And if the first Feoffee makes Feoffment to B. who enfeoffs C. and the Lessee re-enters, that is At∣tornment but to the first Feoffee, and not the other, for he may be misconusant of it, because he was outed by the Lessor, but note Iudg∣ment was not given till Trin. 36 Eliz. Pasch. 36 Eliz. in C. B. Owens Case. EDward Owen brought an Action of Waste against Peerce for land in ancient Demesne, the Defendant made defence, and pleaded to the Iurisdiction of the Court, because the land was ancient Demesne, and the Defendant was ruled to plead over, for it is but a personall Action, and the Statute is a beneficiall Statute for the Common-wealth, and (by the opinion of all the Court, except Walmsley) does extent to ancient Demesne, & 40 Ed. 3.4. Ancient Demesne is a good plea in Replevin, 2 H. 7.17.21 Ed. 4.3. it is no good plea in an action upon the Statute or Glocester. Mich. 33, and 34 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 2122. Sir Edward Cleeres Case. SIr Edward Cleere brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Norwich, Edward Peacock, and Robert Hinston Clerk, to present to an Addowson holden in Capite. Anderson. A Devise of an Addowson in grosse is void, because it is of annuall value, whereof the King shall have the third part. But Ow∣en, Beaumont, and Walmsley held the contrary, and so it it was adjudg∣ed. See the Case of the Earle of Huntington against the Lord of Mont∣joy, of a Devise of Liberties of Cramford, which were not of any an∣nuall value, and yet the opinion of Wray and Anderson Iustices was certified to some of the Councell being Arbitrators, that the Devise was not good. Trin. 36 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 2145. Brownes Case. ANthony Brown brought an Action of Trespasse against Richard Pease, the Case was this; John Warren was seised in fee of the Mannor of Warners, and of the Mannor of Cherchall, and demised his Mannor of Warners to the youngest Son of Richard Foster his Cosin in fee. at which time Richard the Father had issue George Foster and John Foster. And he demised his Mannor of Cherchall in haec verba.
I will my Mannor of Cherchall to Margery Water for her life, and if she die, and then any of my Cosin Fosters Sons then living, then I will my foresaid Mannor of Cherchall unto him that shall have my Manner of Warners, and after the Devisor died without issue, and the Reversion of the Mannor of Cherchall discended to Henry Warner as Brother and Heire of the Devisor. And after the said Henry Warner by Deed Inrolled, did bargain and sell the Mannor of Cherchall to An∣thony Browne, who devised it to the Plaintiff: And then George Fo∣ster dies without issue, and the Mannor of Warners does discend to Iohn Foster his Brother and Heire, who enters and enfeoffs the Lord Rich, and after marriage the Tenant for life of the Mannor of Cherc∣hall dies, and the Plaintiff enters, and the Defendant enters upon him as Servant to Iohn Foster, whereupon the Plaintiff brought this Action: And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff, because that the words and the intent of the Devise was, that the Mannors of Warners and Cherchall should go together, and therefore the Mannor of Warners was sold before the death of Margery, by John Foster, and after the death of Margery, John can take nothing by the Devise. Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 2325. or 2929. Hambletons Case. JOhn Hambleton had issued foure Sons, John the eldest, Robert the second, Richard the third, and Thomas the fourth, and devised to each of them a parcell of land, to them and the Heirs Males of their body be∣gotten, and if it happen that any of their Heirs dye without issue Male of his body lawfully begotten, then the Survivor to be each others Heire. If these words make a Remainder, or are void, was the que∣stion. And it was adjudged against the Plaintiff, for the Court held that all those that survived were Ioynt-tenants, and one Ioynt-Tenant cannot have a Trespasse against the other, for by the intent of the Will, it appears that the Survivors should have that part, and the survivori∣ty of each other Heire, each Survivor, that is, all that survive shall be each others Heire, and so the remainder should be to every one of them. 29 Eliz. Fenners Case, argued before the Lord Mayor of London at Guildhall. IN this Case it was adjudged, that if a man Covenants that his Son then within age, and infra annos nubiles, before such a day shall mar∣ry the Daughter of I.S. and he does marry her accordingly, and after at the age of consent he disagrees to the marriage, yet is the Covenant performed, for it is a marriage, and such a one as the Covenantee would have, untill the disagreement, vide 7 H. 6.12. Dyer 143.313. & 369.
25 Eliz. Webbe against Potter. IN an Ejectione firmae by Webbe against Potter, the Case was; Har∣ris gave Land in Frank-marriage to one White, and the Deed was Dedi & concessi Iohan. White in liberum maritagium Iohannae filiae meae habend. dictae Ioannae & heredibus in perpetuum tenend. de capitalibus Dominis feodi illius, with Warranty to Iohn White and his Heires. Periam, The usuall words in Frank-marriage shall not be destroyed, for the words of Frank-marriage are, Liberum maritagium cum Ioanna filia mea, in the Ablative case, and although here it be in the Dative case, it is good. And of the same opinion were all the Iudges. Also a Gift in Frank-marriage made after the Espousals was held good by all the Iustices, 2 H. 3. Donor 199.4 Ed 3.8. Dyer 262 B. And a Gift in Frank-marriage before the Statute was a Fee-simple, but now speciall taile, and if it be not a Frank-marriage, he shall have an Estate for life, and to prove this his opinion, he relied upon the in∣tention of the Donors which ought to be observed: For if the Haben∣dum does crosse the Premisses it shall be void, but a Remainder is good for the benefit of a stranger, but a Rent cannot be reserved upon such a Gift, during the foure degrees, but after the Reversion is good, if he do attorne to the Gntee of the Revesion. Windham, Frank-marriage is not an Estate in taile, for there wants the word, Heires, Coke lib. 1.103. So a Gift to a man & semini suo, 10 Ass. 26. and after Meade gree with Windham although the grounds of Frank-marriage were not observed, yet that it was good; for although there be no Tenure between the Donor and Donee, yet is it a good Frank-marriage.
Dyer, It is no good Frank-marriage, because the usuall words are not observed, and if the word Liberum be omitted, it is not Frank-mar∣riage, neither is it good given to a man, but it must be to a woman, for a man cannot give land to a woman Causa matrimonii praelocuti: And in this case the party ought to be of the blood of the Donor, who by pos∣sibility may be inheritable to him, and there ought to be a Tenure be∣tween them, and an acquittall, and if any faile, it is no Frank-marri∣age, and he said further, that if it once takes effect as Frank-marriage, and then the Donor grants the Reversion, or the Reversion di∣scends to the Donees, yet it shall not be destroyed, but shall re∣maine as an Estate in taile, and not for life, because it once took effect in the Donees and their issues, and if land be given to a man in Frank-marriage, the remainder in taile, yet this shall not destroy the Frank-marriage, and the Donee shall hold of the Donor, and not of him in the remainder: And if one give land in Frank-marriage, the remainders to the Donees in taile, yet is this a good Frank-marriage, and if the Donor grants over his Services, yet doth the Frank-marri∣age continue, although the Donees attorn, for they are incident to the Reversion, and therefore the Grant is void, but if the Reversion be granted the Services will passe, and he concluded that the Husband had all, and the Wife nothing, because no Estate to her is mentioned in the Premisses, and he could not construe the words to be the intent of the Donor, for here is an expresse limitation of the fee to the Husbandand his Heirs, which cannot be controlled by intendment. And after 25 Eliz. It was adjudged to be no Frank-marriage, nor gift in taile, but a Fee-simple: And the Iustices said, that the ancient Books were that where it took not effect as a Frank-marriage, it should be in espe∣ciall taile, yet those at this time are not Law: But they agreed, that this at one time took effect as Frank-marriage, and by matter ex post facto may be made an Estate in taile. Mich. 30 Eliz. Gibbs Case. GIbbs brought an Action of Trover against Basil, for a Gelding; the Case was. One Porter stole this Gelding from the Plaintiff, and sold him to the Defendant in open Market, by the name of Lister, and it was entred so in the Toll Book that Lister sold him. The question was, if this alteration of his name shall make any alte∣ration of the property, although the sale was in open Market. Windham and Rhodes Iustices, held this no good sale to bar the Plaintiff, and grounded their opinion on the Statute of the 2, and 3 Phil. and Mar. cap. 7. which provides that no property of stollen Goods shall be altered that are sold, unlesse the name and surname of the par∣ties to the sale be written in the Toll-book: And Shuttleworth moved, that it should be in the Market, and walked there for an houre together, which is not set forth by the Defendant in his Bar; but the Iustices said, that such speciall plea need not to be, but shall be intended. Rouses Case. IT was moved in this Case, that if Tenant for terme Dauter vie, does continue and hold in his Estate, after the death of Cestuy que vie: If he be a Disseisor, and whether in pleading, the plea ought to be seised and not possest, Shuttleworth, He was legally in at first, and therefore cannot be a Disseisor, 15 Ed. 4.41. A Freehold could not be gained where he came in by the agreement of the party, and 12 Ass. 22. Where the Husband and Wife were seised of a Freehold, and after were divorced by Suit, on the womans part, whereby the woman is to have all the land, yet if the Husband continue possession and dies seised, this discent shall not take away entry, because he was no Disseisor.
Gawdy, He is Tenant at sufferance and no Disseisor, and there it was moved, that if Tenant at sufferance, or a Disseisor makes Copies of Copyhold Lands, if they be good or voidable: And note that Wilde took here a diversity between a Termor that holds over, and a Tenant at sufferance; for in case of a Tenant at sufferance, there is no Free∣hold taken from the Lessor, which the continuance of possession doth not take from him, but where the Tenant holds over his terme, there the Freehold is disturbed, and therefore there is a disseisin: But at that present it seemed to the Iudges that there was no diversity. Butthe next terme Godfrey moved, that if Tenant for anothers life held o∣ver his Estate he had Feesimple, and he granted that it was other∣wise in some cases, for if he claim to be Tenant at the Will of the Lessor, he shall not gaine a Fee-simple: For Littleton in his Chapter of Releases. 108. saith, that Tenant at sufferance is where a man in his own wrong doth convey Lands and Tenements at the will of him that hath the Freehold, and such Occupyer claimeth nothing but at Will. But in this case the Tenant claimes otherwise then at Will of the Lessor, he does not claim any thing but at the Will of the Lessor; as in the case of Littleton, but claimes to hold over against the Will of the Lessor, which is no Tenant at sufferance, and 10 Ed. 4. If a man makes a Lease at Will, and the Lessor dies, and he con∣tinues possession and claims fee, the Heire shall have a Mortdancester, and 18 Ed. 4.25. If Cestuy que use dies, and the Tenant continues in, and the Tenant is impleaded, the Lessor shall not be received, and the reason is, because there is no reversion in him, but the Tenant hath it, and 22 Ed. 4.38. by Hussey Iustice, If a Termor holds over his Terme, there an Estate in fee is confest to be in him by matter of Law, but it is a deubt whether he be a Disseisor or not, but it seemeth not, for a Trespasse doth not lye against him before Regresse, and in the 7 H. 4.43. If a Guardian holds the possession at the full age of the Heir, or Tenant for years after his terme expired, the Estate shall be judged in Fee. And in our case he hath not claimed to hold at Will, for he hath done contrary, for he hath made Copies. By all the Iustices, if Tenant at will, or for years, or at sufferance, make a Lease for years, this is a Disseisin, and a Tenant at will doth thereby gaine a Freehold, and thereby doth claim a greater Estate then he ought, and so it is in this case. 2. Admitting him to be Tenant at sufferance, the question is, if he may grant Copies, and if whether they be good: and it seems he may, for no trespasse lies against him, because he is Dominus pro tempore, and it is not like a Copy made by an Abator or Disseisor, for it hath been adjudged that Copies made by them are void, but in this case his act of making Copies agrees with the Custome; as in Grisbrooks case, If an Administrator sells Goods, and paies debts with the money, and after he who is Executor proves the Will, he shall never avoid this sale, for that it was done according to the Will which the Executors were compelled to do: So in the 12 H. 6. If a Baily cuts Trees and re∣paires an ancient Pale, this is good, and 6 R. 2. if he paies quit-rents it is good. Coke, He comes in by right, and therefore is Tenant at sufferance, and like this case is Dyer 35 H. 8.57. Lord Zouches case, where Cestuy que use for life, the remainder over in taile, made a Lease for the terme of the life of the Lessee, and dies, and the Lessee continues his Estate. And the opinions of the Iustices of both Benches were, that he is but Tenant at sufferance. Popham, If a Mannor be devised to one, and the Devisee enters and makes Copies, and then the Devise is found to be void, yet the Copies of Surrender made by such Devisee are good; but contrary where new or voluntary Copies are made by him, 7 Eliz. and in the Lord Arundells case, a Feoffment in fee was made of a Mannor upon condition, the Feoffee upon Condition grants voluntary Copies, those are good.
Atkins, on the contrary: And he made a difference between a Te∣nant at will, and a Tenant at sufferance, for a Tenant at will shallhave aid, but so shall not the other, as in the 2 H. 4. and a Release to one is good, to the other not, &c. and when he holds over he doth assume an Interest which shall not be thought wrongfull, for he is neither Abator nor Disseisor, and therefore Dominus, and therefore the Copies made by him are good, 4 H. 7.3. Tenant at sufferance may justifie for Damage-feasant. And all the Iustices held for the Plaintiff, and that he that made the Copy was but Tenant at sufferance, and not Disseisor, and that he had no Fee. And the Iudgment was to be entred, unlesse the Defendant shewed better matter, Trin 28 Eliz. Rot. 329. Smiths Case. SMith assumed upon himselfe, that when I.N was indebted to I.D. in an Obligation of forty pounds, that if I.D. would not implead the said I.N. that then if the money were not paid at such a day, that then he, viz. the said Smith would pay the money: Vpon which Assumpsit af∣ter the day I.D. brought his Action on the case, and did set forth in his Declaration that he did not implead I.N. and it was moved by Kings∣mill, that he could not have this Action untill I.N. be dead, for so long as he lives I.D. hath time to implead him. As if a man promiseth ano∣ther that he will be named in his Action that he hath against a third person, and if the third person payes not the money at such a day, then he will, he cannot sue unlesse he shewes he hath discharged the other of the Obligation. Clench, It is implied that he will never implead him. Shuttleworth Iustice, not so, for if hereafter he sue him contrary to his promise, then the other who made the Assumpsit shall have his Acti∣on on the case, and recover to the value of the sunm in the Bond. And after the case was moved again, and the Plaintiff brought the Obliga∣tion in Court, and thereupon the Obligation was entred, so that now the Plaintiff could not implead I.N in posterum, for which Iudgment was entred for the Plaintiff. 29 Eliz. Cosens Case. COsen the Father had issue three Sons, John, George, and Thomas, John the eldest died in the life-time of his Father, his Wife En∣seint with a Daughter, the Father makes a Devise in these words: That if it shall please God to take to his mercy my Son Richard, be∣fore he shall have issue of his body, so that my Lands shall descend to my Son George before he shall be of the age of one and twenty years, then my Overseers shall haue my Land untill George come to the age of one and twenty years.
If Richard who is yet living had an Estate in taile by these words, was the question. And all the Iustices agreed that it was a plain im∣plication to make an Estate-taile in Richard the second Son, 13 H. 7.17. 29 Eliz. in C. B. Warrens Case. WIlliam Warren brought an Action of Debt for forty pounds, and in his Declaration confessed satisfaction of twenty pounds, and hereupon a Writ of Error was brought in the Kings Bench, and the Iudgment reversed: For by his Declaration he had abated his owne Writ, and he ought to have Iudgment according to his Writ, and not to his Count. And Error was brought upon the Outlawry; for if the first Record was reversed, the Outlawry thereupon is reversed. 4, and 5 Phil. & Mar. BEnlowes Serieant moved this case, a man seised of Lands and Te∣ements in London, devises them by these words. I will and bequeath unto my Wife Alice my livelyhood in London for terme of her life. By this Will the lands in London passe to the Wife by this word, Livelyhood. Nota, for Brook Iustice said, that it was in ancient time used in divers places of this Realm, and had been taken for an Inheritance: To which Dyer agreed. Case of Slander. BRook said, that if a man speak many slanderous words of another, he who is slandred may have an Action on the case for any one of these words, and may omit the others: But if a man write many slan∣derous things of another in a Letter to a friend, an action upon the case will not lye, for it shall not be intended that it is done to the intent to have it published. Mich. 1, and 2 Eliz. N. Arch-bishop of York, and I.B. Executors of the last Will and Testament of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, did bring a Writ of Ravishment de Guard, and then he was deprived by his own consent: The question is, if the Writ shall abate. Benlowes, It shall abate, for if a Dean and Parson of a Church bring an Action for such a Custome, and then resigne, the Writ shall abate, because it is their own Act.
Dyer, The Writ shall not abate; for the Action is not brought intheir own persons, but in their Testators, and therefore the Action shall continue. And if a man be outlawed he may bring an Action as Executor, and the Writ shall not abate. Browne, If I make I.S. my Attorney, and he (the Warrant of At∣torney still continuing) is made a Knight, yet is not the Warrant of Attorney determined, although the word Knight, which is now part of his name be not in the Warrant, therefore in this case the Writ is good. Mich. 7 Eliz. NOte, it was said by Browne, that if H. does let the Cite of his Mannor, with all his Lands to the said Mannor appurtenant, here∣by all the Demesne lands do passe; but if it were with all the Lands appertaining to the said Cite, nothing passeth but the Mannor-place. Pasch. 6 Eliz. A Man seised of the Mannor of Dale, doth let the same with all the Members and Appurtenances to the same, to have and to hold all the members of the said Mannor to the Lessee, for terme of years. Walsh and Weston were of opinion that this was a Lease for years of the Mannor onely, and that the limitation of the word, Members, be∣ing after the Habendum was void. But Dyer and Browne were of the contrary opinion: And Browne said, that when the Habendum is used by way of limitation, it shall not be void. As if he let his Mannor of Dale, to have and to hold one acre parcell thereof for a terme of years, the Lease is void for all, but if there had been no Habendum but the Lease for years had been limited in the Premisses of the Lease, that is good enough: And if the Lease had been Habendum every part thereof, that had been a good Lease of the Mannor, for all the parts comprehend all the Mannor. And Dyer said, that the word, Members, shall be ta∣ken for the Townes and Hamblets wherein the Mannor hath Iu∣risdiction. Note, it was said by Dyer, that if partition be made by the Sheriff, although the Writ be not returned, yet it is good enough, and none of the parties shall except against it, and so was the better opinion concer∣ning the Estate of Culpeper and Navall in the County of Kent. Sutton brought a Writ of Ravishment of a Ward against Robinson, wherein it was resolved by Dyer, Carus, Weston, and Benlowes, That if the Tenant enfeoff his Lord and others, all the Seigniory is extinct: also if the Tenant does infeoff the Lord but of a Moyety, yet is all the Seigniory extinct: And Dyer said, that if the Tenant does infeoff the Lord and a stranger to the use of another and his Heires, and makes Livery to the stranger, this is no extinguishment of the Seigniory, but if the Livery were made to the Lord, it is otherwise; and yet is the pos∣session instantly carried away to the stranger by the Statute of 2 H. 7.13.
A man seised of lands devises the same to his Wife, to dispose and im∣ploy them for her self and her Son, according to her will and pleasure. Dyer, Weston, and Walson held that the Wife had a Fee-simple by the Intendment of the Will, and the Estate is conditionall, for ea in∣tentione will make a Condition in a Devise, but not in Grant, vide Dy∣er 2.6. A woman Tenant in taile makes a Lease for one and thirty years, and after takes a Husband, who have issue, the Husband (being Te∣nant by the Curtesie) surrenders, the Heirs doth oust the Lessee, and the Lessee brings an Ejectment: And it was held that the Surrender was good, and that the Privity was sufficient. Mich. 40 Eliz. IN an Action of the Case for calling one Bastard; Dyer and Walsh said an Action would lye, but Browne on the contrary, because it shall be tried in the Spirituall Court. And Dyer said, That at Barwick Assises a Formedon in the Discender was brought, and one said, that his Father by whom he claimed was a Bastard, and thereupon he brought an Action against him for those words, and recovered. Catlin said, That if Lands be given to a man and to the Heires, he shall engender on the body of an English woman, and he marries a French woman, and she dies, and then he marries an English woman, that now this is a good Estate in special taile. Pasch. 7 Eliz. THe Prior and Monks of the Charter-house (before the dissolution) made a Lease for foure years, reserving the ancient rent of twen∣ty five Quarters of Wheat per annum, and then the house was surren∣dered into the hands of King Henry the eighth, and then the Lord Chan∣cellor did let the said rent of twenty five Quarters of Wheat to I.S. for foure and twenty years. And it came into question between I.S. and the Termor, if this was warranted by the 27 H 8.28 Harper and Por∣trell, it is not, for the Statute is, that they may make Leases of any Mannors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments for one and twenty years, &c. and this Wheat is neither Land, Tenement, nor Heredita∣ment, but a Chattell, and shall be demanded in an Action of debt. But the opinion of all the Court was, that the Lease was good, and they did agree that it was directly within the word Hereditaments, for it may discend or escheat, and the wife shall be endowed thereof. Also upon a Lease of Corne a Rent may be referved, for a man may reserve a Rent upon a Lease of a Rent, and the Rent is not parcell of the Re∣version, but onely incident thereunto, and the Lessor hath the same in∣heritance therein as he hath in the Reversion.
Trin. 7 Eliz. AN assurance was made to a woman, to the intent it should be for her Ioynture, but it was not so expressed in the Deed. And the opinion of the Court was, that it might be averred that it was for a Ioynture, and that such averment was not traversable; and so was it in the case between the Queen and Dame Beaumont. Winter brought an Action of the Case against Barnam for these words; viz. Thou Murtherer: Dyer and Walsh said, that the Action would lye, for there are some words that cannot be qualified, as Murtherer, Theef, Extortioner, false Knave, and in such Case an Action will lye, but con∣trary where such words are spoken in a jesting way. Note by Dyer, that the Lord Fitz-James, late Lord chief Iustice of England, did devise his land to Nicholas Fitz-James in taile, with di∣vers remainders over, and in the same devise he devised divers Iewels and peeces of Plate, viz. the use of them to the said Nicholas Fitz-James, and the Heires Males of his body. In this case it was the opinion of the Court, that the said Nicholas had no property in the said plate, but onely the use and occupation. And the same Law where the Devise was that his Wife should inhabit in one of his houses which he had for terme of years, during her life, because the Wife takes no interest in the terme, but onely an occupation and usage, out of which the Execu∣tors cannot eject her during her life, but Walsh held the contrary. Hil. 8 Eliz. IF a Bishop make a Lease for years the second of May, and the Dean and Chapter confirme it the first of May, this is a good Lease after the Bishops death by Catlin and Southcote. Wray, How can a Lease be confirmed before it be made. Catlin and Southcote, The assent before is a good confirmation after. Hil. 40 Eliz. AN Obligation wanted these words, In cujus rei Testimonium, and yet adjudged to be good, 7 H. 7.14. Dyer 19 A. It was said by Catlin in the Star Chamber, that if an Infant being a Feme Covert, or other Infant does levy a Fine by grant and render to her or him in taile, or for life, and the Husband dye, the Wife shall not have a Writ of Error, because she is Tenant of the land, and she cannot have a Writ of Error against her selfe, so that she is without remedy, so in the case of the other Infant. Cardell, Master of the Rolls, in the case between
Stinkley and Chamberlain said, that when Executors had Goods of their Testator, to dispose of to pious uses, they cannot forfeit them, for that they have them not to their own use, but their power is subject to the controle∣mentof the Ordinary, and the Ordinary may make distribution of them to pious uses. And it was said at the Bar, that the Ordinary might make the Executors account before him, and to punish them ac∣cording to the Law of the Church if they spoile the Goods, but cannot compell them to imploy them to pious uses. Hil. 28 Eliz. IN an Action of Slander, the words were, Thou art an arrant Whore and hadst the French Pox. It was moved in Arrest of Iudgment, that the words were not actionable, because part of them relate to the time past, but by the Court adjudged that the action is well brought, be∣cause it is a discredit to the woman, and thereby others will shun her company. Trin. 31 Eliz. Inter Winter and Loveday. IN this Case which was put by Coke, it was agreed, that a stranger as Cornwall in this Case was, could not tender the money to be paid upon the Mortgage, for it ought to be one who hath interest in the land: and so was it in the 28 H. 8. between Whaydon and Ashford, where the Mother ought to have made the tender for her Son within age, and be∣cause it did not appear within the Verdict what age the Infant was, whether he was of the age of fourteen years, or more, so that his Mo∣ther could be Guardian to him by reason of his Nurture or not, It was awarded that she could not make a loyall tender. In an Assumpsit for a hundred pounds, the case was; That the De∣fendant in consideration of a French Crown given him by the Plain∣tiff, did assume and promise, that if he did not such an act before such a time, that then, &c. It was moved by Godfrey, that the Plaintiff can onely recover so much as he is damnified by the French Crown: and the like case was before the Chancellor, where a Gentlewoman took the death of her Husband so heavily, that she said, she would never mar∣ry againe; and her Son comforted her, and said, God will provide a new Husband, and said, that he would give her ten pounds to pay a hundred, when she should marry, which money she accepted of, and then the Son brought an Assumpsit for the hundred pounds within half a year after she married. And the matter was brought into the Chance∣ry: And the Master of the Rolls awarded ten pounds onely, and said, he would give never a penny more, because it was unreasonable to bar a Gentlewoman from marriage. The Lord Rich was seised of Hadley Park, and of all the Tythes thereof, and payed for the Tythes but one Buck in the Summer, and a Doe in the Winter for thirty years past. The Park was disparked and turned into arrable land, and the Parson would not receive this Fee Buck and Doe, but would have tythe Corne, and thereupon
brought him into the Spirituall Court, and he brought a Prohibition. And Carus and Catlin said, that he need not pay other Tythes but Buck and Doe, for although they be not tythable, yet may they be paid by composition, and he may not take them, but they are to be delivered to him: and in like manner Partridges and Pheasants in a Garden are not tythable, yet may they be paid in lieu of Tythes, and shall be brought dead to the Parson, and although there be no Park, yet may he give a Buck out of another Park, and perhaps it may be made a Park agen. Mich. 13, and 14 Eliz. NOte▪ it was said by Dyer, that an Adminiscrator durante Minorita∣te, cannot bring an Action of debt, for he is but as a Servant or Bailiff in such cases. A Devise was made to the Major, Chamberlaine, and Governors of the Hospitall of Saint Bartholmews: whereas they were Incorpo∣rate by another name, yet the Devise held good by Dyer, Weston, and Manwood, for it shall be taken according to the intent of the Devisor: And Weston said, that a Devise to A.B. a mans eldest Son is good, al∣though his name be not B. because the other words do make a suffici∣ent certainty. It was said, That by the Grant Panagium Hoggs may eat the grasse, but if a man grant his Acrons, the Grantee must gather them; and where Panagium is granted the Grantee may put in his Hoggs in∣to the place granted. If Tenant for years hold over his terme, he is Tenant at sufferance, and his descent shall not take away entrie: But if Tenant for terme of anothers life holds over his terme, he is an Intruder, and his de∣scent shall take away entrie. Quod fuit concessum per Dyer. A Court-Baron may be holden at any place within the Mannor, but not out of the Mannor, and so a Leete may be held in any place with∣in the Liberty and Franchise, and although no Court hath time out of mind been holden within the Mannor, yet it is not thereby lost, for it is incident to a Mannor of common right, Coke L. 4.26.6.27. A. Mich. 14, and 15 Eliz. AN account was brought by Tottenham against Bedingfeild, who pleaded Ne unques son Baily pur account render. Gawdy prayed the opinion of the Court if the Action would lye. And the Case was thus. The Plaintiff had a Lease of a Parsonage, and the Defendant, not being Lessee, nor claiming any interest, took the Tythes being set forth, and carried them away. If the Lessor may have an account against such Trespassor, was the question.
Manwood Iustice, An Account will not lye because there is no pri∣vity,and wrongs are alwaies without privity, yet I will grant that if H. receive my Rents, I may have an account against him, for my assent to have him receive it makes a privity, and when he hath re∣ceived the Rent, he hath not committed any wrong against me, be∣cause it is not my money till it is paid: and therefore in this case I may resort to my Tenant, and compell him to pay the Rent to me be∣cause the receit is no wrong: But it is otherwise in the first case, for when the Tithes are set forth, they are presently in the possession of the Parson, so that when the Defendant takes them, he is a wrong Seisor of them, and therefore no account will lye against him. And so was it adjudged in a case of a Mannor in London, where one under colour of a Devise did occupy the Land for twenty years, which Will after∣wards was made void; and thereupon he to whom the right of the land belonged brought an account, and it was adjudged that it would not lye. Harper, An Account will lye against a Procter, so that the Plain∣tiff may charge him as Procter, and it is no plea for him to say he is no Procter, no more then it is for a Guardian in Socage to say, he is not Prochein amy. Dyer, there are three Actions of Account. One against a Baily, ano∣ther against a Receiver, the third against a Guardian in Socage. And if an Account be brought against a man as Receiver, he must be char∣ged with the receipt of the money: but if the Defendant pretends he is Owner of it, it is contrary to the nature of an account, and there∣fore he is not chargable in such Action, but he may plead Ne unque son Baily pur account render: for in an Account (as my Brother Man∣hood said) there must be privity: But an Abator or an Intruder shall not be charged in an Account, because they pretend to be Owners. But in this case the Lessee may have an Action of Trespasse against him, for the Tythes were immediatly upon the setting forth in the possession of the Lessee, and by the Statute of the 31 H. 8.7. he may have an Eje∣ctione firmae: but an account will not lye in this case. Mich. 14 Eliz. TEnant in Dower commits Waste, and the Waste was assigned in this Case, that the Lessee had destroyed a hundred Does of the Plaintiffs, whether this was Waste or no, was the question. Dyer, I think it no Waste, unlesse she had destroyed all the Deer. Manwood, If a Lessee of a Pigeon house destroy all the old Pigeons, except one or two, yet it is a Waste, and so is this, although all be not destroyed. Mich. 15 Eliz. A Man is indebted by Obligation in a hundred pounds to a Testa∣tor, this Obligation is not Assets in the hands of the Execu∣tors untill it be recovered by them, because it is but a Chose in Action; but if in such case the Executor release the Debt now he hath determi∣ned the Action, and hath made it Assets in his hands to the whole va∣lue of the Bond.
Bliss against Stafford. MArgaret Bliss who was in Remainder after an Estate in taile, did bring an Action on the case against Edward Strafford, for stan∣dring her Title in affirming that A. had issue one B. who is alive, and the Defendant pleaded not guilty, and the Action adjudged good by all: But did abate for an exception to the Count. Pasch. 13 Eliz. UPon the Statute of Recusancy made the 29. of Elizabeth, Thomas Salherd and Henry Evered being committed of Recusancy, for not paying twenty pounds for every month, a Commission was awarded to enquire of their Goods and Lands in Suffolk to levy the said Debt; and amongst other Lands certain Copyhold Lands were seised, and be∣ing returned, the parties came in, and by way of plea did set forth, that some of their Lands seised were Copyhold, and did pray Quod manus Dominae Reginae amoveantur, and hereupon the Queens Attorney demurred; upon which the question was, if Copyhold Lands were within the said Statute of the 29 Eliz. Snagge, The Lands and Hereditaments which the Statute speaks of, are such as are known by the Common Law, and not by Custome, for it I grant all my Lands & Hereditaments in D. my Copyhold lands will not passe: so that it seems to me Copyholds are not within the Statute. Popham contra. If Copyhold Lands are not within the Statute, some persons shall be free; and he held that Lands in ancient Demesne were within the meaning of the Statute, although not within the words: and he agreed, that where a Grant is made of all my Lands and Tenements in D. that Copyhold Lands passe not, because they can∣not passe by such assurance, and that Copyhold Lands were not with∣in the Statute of Bankrupts, if they be not particularly expressed, and a Copyhold cannot passe by grant but by surrender. But after great de∣bate it was adjudged, that Copyhold Lands are not within the Statuto by reason of the prejudice that may come thereby to the Lord, who hath not committed any Offence, and therefore shall not loose his Customes and Services. Trin. 30 Eliz. IN the Case of Viscount Bindon, it was holden that if a man hath Iudgment in Debt upon an Obligation and no execution, yet he may commence another Action upon the same Obligation, but otherwise of Contract, 9 Ed. 4.51.
A question was moved, that if a man grants Vesturam terrae what doth passe: and it was said by Clerk, that one man may have the Vesture & another the Soil. Lord chief Baron, he who hath Vesturā terrae cannot dig the Land: And if many have a Meadow together, viz. to be divided amongst them every year by lots how much every one shall have of grasse in such a place, and how many in such a place, and so to changeevery year according to the lots, they have not a Freehold, but onely vesturam terrae, Dyer 285.6.14. H. 7.4. & 6. 21 H. 7.37. Dyer 375.6. 13 H. 6.13. 14 H. 8.6. In the Case of a Dean and Chapter, the question was, that if Les∣see for years be rendring Rent with clause of re-entry for non-pay∣ment, and then the Reversion or Rent be extended by a Statute, or sei∣sed into the hands of the King for debt, if the Lessee shall pay the Rent according to the extent, and no breach of the Condition although he pay not the Lessor. And the chief Baron held it was no breach of the Condition, because he is now compellable to pay it according to the ex∣tent. Caltons Case. IT was moved by Serjeant Fenner, and agreed by all the Barons, that if the King make a Lease to A. rendring Rent, and there the Lessee lets parcell hereof, rendring Rent, in this case the second Les∣see shall not have the priviledge of the Exchequer to fly thither to be sued concerning this Land, because that by such means all the causes in England, may be brought into the Exchequer, and hereupon Fenner said, that he had demurred upon a Bill exhibited into the Exchequer Chamber by such a Lessee, and prayed the Court that he might not an∣swer, and he was thereupon dismist. Vpon not guilty pleaded, the parties joyned issue, and after evidence given, and the Iury dismist from the Bar, some of them had Apples, and Figgs, whereof the Court taking notice when they came to give their Verdict, did examine them upon their Oathes, and they who had eaten were fined five pounds, and committed to the Fleet. And some of the Iustices did doubt if the Verdict were good; and upon many Presidents had, it was adjudged good: and they relyed much on the President of the 12 H. 8. Rot. 102. where one of the Iury did eat before they were agreed, and yet the Verdict was good: And after a Writ of Error was brought, and the Iudgment affirmed, 20 H. 7.3. 13 H 4.13. Pasch. 27 Eliz. A Man gives land to I.S. in the Premisses, Habendum to him and three others for their lives, Et eorum diutius viventium successi∣ve: The question was, what Estate I.S. had, and whether there be a∣ny occupancy in the case. Coke hld, that I.S. had but an Estate for his own life, because he cannot have an Estate for his own and anothers life, where the inte∣rest of both begin at one instant, and the Habendum by no means can make a Remainder; as if a Lease be made to one for life, habendum to him and his first begotten Son, this makes no remainder to the Son, although some have held to the contrary: so of a Lease to one for years,
habendum to him and another, does not make any remainder to the o∣ther: also the word, Successive, will not make a remainder, as in the 30 H 8. Br. Joynt-tenant 53. Also one cannot have an Estate for life, andfor anothers life also in present interest, for the greater doth drowne the lesse, but if the greater be present and the other future, as a Lease to him for life, the remainder to him for anothers life, or a Lease for life and three years over, this is good; but if a Lease be made for life and for years, the Lease for years is drowned, 19 Ed. 3. Surrender 8. where Tenant for life of a Mannor did surrender to him in the Rever∣sion, &c. Gawdy, If a Lease be made to one for life, and so long as another shall live, quaere, what Estate he hath. And as to the second point, certainly there cannot be an Occupancy, for if the Estate be void, the Limitation is void; also the Occupancy is pleaded Que un tiel, and does not say, Claymant comme occupant, &c. for if a man comes a hawking on Land, he is not an Occupant, and the Book of Entries is, that he ought to plead it. Clinch Iustice, every Occupant ought to be in possession at the time of the death of the Tenant, for otherwise the Law casts the Interest upon him in the Reversion. But Gawdy and Chute denied this: and after, viz. 29 Eliz. the Case was moved again by Popham, and he made three points. 1. If the other three had a joynt Estate. 2. If they had a Remainder. 3. If there be an Occupancy. And he was of opinion that they had nothing by the habendum, for they were not named in the Premisses, & they cannot have a Remainder for the incertainty, but if those three had been named in the Premisses, habendum to them Successive, as they had been named, there they had a Remainder, for there the cer∣tainty appeared, 30 H. 8.8. Dyer 361. Also there can be no Occupan∣cy during the lives of the other three: but he agreed to the Book of the 18 Ed. 3.34. that a Lease for life, the Remainder to him for anothers life was good: And that if a Lease be made to I.S. and a Monk, it is void to the Monk, and the other hath all, and that during the life of the Monk there can be no Occupancy. And if I make a Lease to I. S. for the life of a Monk, it is a good Lease: And till the same terme Iudg∣ment was given, that they could take nothing in possession joyntly, nor by way of Remainder, and that no Occupancy could be in the Case, and that I.S. had Estate for terme of his owne life onely. Stile against Miles.
STile Parson did suggest that the Land was parcell of the Glebe of the Parsonage, and that the said Stile did let the said Glebe, be∣ing foure and twenty acres to Miles for years, rendring thirteen shil∣lings foure pence Rent; and in a Prohibition the case was, if Tythes were to be paid. And Wray said, that although it was parcell of the Glebe, yet when it was leased out Tythes ought to be paid, and if no Rent be reserved, Tythes ought to be paid without question: but there may be a doubt where the Rent is reserved to the true value of the Land; but here the Rent is of small value, wherefore Tythes shall be paid also. And the Reservation of the Rent was Pro omnibus exa∣ctionibus & demandis; yet the Iustices took no regard of those words. But Godfrey said, that those words would discharge him; but Wray on the contrary, for that this Tythe is not issuing out of the Land, but is a thing collaterall, and if a Parson do release to his Parishionersall demands in the Land, yet Tythes are not thereby released, for such generall words will not extend to such a speciall matter. And in the 15 of R. 2. Avowry 99. one held of another by ten shillings for all Services, Suits, and Demands; yet the Tenant shall pay Relief, be∣cause it is incident to the Rent, and 8 Ed. 3.26. Mich. 29 Eliz. Rot. 2574. or, 2375. Stephens against Layton. IN an Ejectione firmae upon issue joyned, the case in a speciall Verdict was, that a Lease by Indenture was made by William Beale to one William Pyle and Philip his Wife & primogenito habend. to them, & diutius eorum viventi successive for terme of their lives, and then the Husband and Wife had issue a Daughter: The question was, if the Daughter had any Estate. And three Iustices held that she had no E∣state, because she was not in being at the time of the Lease made, and a person that is not in esse cannot take any thing by Livery, for Livery ought to carry a present Estate, where the Estate is not limited by way of Remainder, 18 Ed. 3.3 17 Ed. 3.29, & 30. adjudged: but it was said at the Bar, that if the Estate had been conveyed by way of use, it is o∣therwise. And the said Iustices held clearly that the word Successive, would not alter the case: And the case was further found, that Willi∣am Beale and Sampson Beale did covenant with one Lendall, that if Tho. Beale Son of Sampson Beale, should marry Margaret the Daughter of the said Lendall (if she would assent) and also that the said Lendall did covenant that the said Margaret should marry the said Thomas (if he would assent) Pro quo quidem Maritagio sic tum postea habendo, the said William Beale covenanted, that he would make, or cause to be made an Estate to the said Thomas and Margaret, and to the Heirs of their bodies for the Ioynture of the said Margaret, and it was further found, that afterward a Fine was levied between the said Thomas and Marga∣ret Plaintiffs and Sampson Beale and William Beale Deforceants, Qui quidem finis fuit ad usus & intentiones in Indentura praedict. specifi∣cat, by force whereof the said Thomas and Margaret were seised: but the Iury found nothing of the Marriage, whether it took effect or not; and further found that William Pile and Philip his Wife had Pri∣mogenitam prolem a Daughter, and then died, and then Thomas Beale died, and his Wife inter married with one Lamock, who made a Lease to the Plaintiff, who was ousted by Layton the Lessee of Phi∣lip Pile. And hereupon it was moved by Gawdy Serjeant, that inas∣much as the Marriage took no effect between Thomas and Margaret, the uses cannot be in them, but the Fine shall be to the use of the Co∣nusor, which was opposed by Walshey Serjeant, who said, that it was not like a Covenant in consideration of marriage to stand seised of such a Mannor, for there if the considerations faile, the uses faile also, for the consideration onely is the sole and entire cause that makes the uses to arise: but in this case the consideration is not materiall, but the Fine effectuall, without consideration of money paid: and if a Fe∣offment be made to the use of I S. although no money be paid, yet I.S. shall have the Land.
Windham, The Cases differ much, for here the Fine is not exprest to be levied to the use of Thomas and Margaret, but to the uses and con∣sents contained in the Indenture: but he said, that the common course was to limit the use to the Conusor, untill the Marriage took effect, and after, as before was urged by Walmsley. And the Iury found that Thomas and Margaret, were seised accordingly. Winham, They are no Iudges to determine doubts in Law. Rhodes Iustice, Herein they have taken notice but of the matter in fact, and he affirmed the difference put by Walmsley. Windham, The case de matrimon: praelocut: is stronger then this Case, for the secret intention shall reduce the Land, if the marriage take no effect. And after (the Court being full) they all agreed to the difference put by Walmsley, and also that the sale afterwards was not good by reason of this Limitation. And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff accordingly. Hil. 26 Eliz. Britman against Stanford. UPon a speciall Verdict, the Case was. A House, Stable, and Hay∣loft were demised to one for yeares, rendring foure and twenty pounds Rent per annum, and foure and twenty pounds for an In-come, quarterly by equall portions, upon Condition that if any of the Rent, or In-come be behind at the time it ought to be paid, that then the Lease shall cease and determine. The Lessee makes a Lease of the Stable to the Lessor, and after part of the In-come is behind and unpaid, and the Lessor enters for the Condition broken, into the house: And if this was a good entry, was the question. And Iudgment was given that the Con∣dition was gone and void, by reason of the Lessors taking part of the thing demised, because a Condition is speciall and intire, and not to be severed. And in this Case Fenner said, that a Grantee of a Rever∣sion cannot take benefit of a collaterall Condition, as in case of a grosse summe, but in case of a Rent, waste, &c. it was otherwise. Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 2529. Doctor Lewin against Munday. IN a Replevin by Lewin against Munday, it was found by Verdict, That a Fine was levied the 14th. of Elizabeth, between Lowla and Rutland, Plaintiffs, and Fook and seven others Deforceants of the Mannors of Gollochall, whereby the Defendant did grant the Man∣nor to the Plaintiffs, and the Heires of one of them, who granted and rendred twenty pounds per annum to the said Fook and his Heires, with a Distresse for non-payment. Fook seised of the Rent, makes a grant to a stranger in this manner; That whereas a Fine was levied the 14. of Eliz. of the Mannor aforesaid, and divers other lands, &c. and mistook the Mannor, for he put the names of the Conusees in place
of the Conusors, and so e contra, and that it was levied of the Mannor, and divers other lands, whereas the Fine was levied of the Mannor solely; and that he did grant the said Rent granted unto him to the said stranger and his Heires: And this grant was adjudged by Anderson who said, that if one recite that he hath ten pounds of the grant of I.S. whereas it was of the grant of I.D. yet it is good. Hil. 30 Eliz. Rot. 17.32. Hunts Case. HUnt brought an Action on the Case against Torney, and declared that he being seised of lands in Swainton in Norf. in fee, Secundum consuetudinem Mannerii; the Defendant did promise to the Plaintiff, in consideration the Plaintiff would permit him to occupy the same for the space of five years, that he would pay him at the Feast of All-Saints next coming, and so yearly twenty pounds at the Feasts of the Annunciation, and All-Saints by equall Portions, during the terme a∣foresaid, and alledged that he had injoyed the lands by the space of a year and half, and so brought his Action on the Assumpsit. And An∣derson was of opinion that untill the five years were expired, no money was to be paid, because the Contract was intire. But all the other Iustices on the contrary, for the consideration was to pay a certain summe yearly, which made severall duties and so severall Actions. For by Periam, if a man be bound to pay I.S. twenty pounds in manner and forme following, viz. ten pounds at such a day, and ten pounds at such a day, in this case the Obligee cannot have an Action of Debt for the first, before the day of payment of the last ten pounds be past, because the duty in it self is an intire duty, but if a man be bound to pay I.S. ten pounds at such a day, and ten pounds at such a day, here the Obli∣gee shall have his Action for the first, because the duty was in it self se∣verall. Anderson at another day said, that if a man makes a Lease for ten years, rendring Rent, in that case he may have an Assumpsit for the Rent due every year: So if I covenant with you to build you twenty houses, the Covenantee shall have a severall action for each default. Periam, That Case of the Assumpsit is much to the purpose, for an Assumpsit is in the nature of a Covenant, and is indeed a Covenant without writing. Rhodes cited this Case. Gascoigne promised in consideration of a marriage of his Daughter with such a mans Son, to give seven hun∣dred marks, and to pay a hundred marks every year, untill all the sunun were paid, and it was held clearly in this Court, that a severall action might be brought upon every hindred pounds, but because the action was brought for all the seven hundred marks before the seven years were out, Iudgment was given against him, for if a man be bound in a Bond of a hundred pounds to pay twenty pounds for so many years, he shall not have an Action of Debt untill the last year expired. And af∣ter Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. viz. Mich. 29. Eliz. Rot. 2248.
28 Eliz. Between Sticklehorne and Hatchman. ADjudged by the Court, that if for not scouring of a Ditch or Mote, the Groundsells of the house are putrified, or Trees cut downe which are in defence of the house, whereby the house by tempests is blown down, Waste shall be assigned in Domibus pro non Scourando, &c. IN an Ejectione firmae, Broker Prothenotary said, that where the title of him in the Reversion is not disclosed in pleading, nor cometh in que∣stion, aid shall not be granted. Pasch. 28 Eliz. in C. B. Yardley against Pescan. THe Queen seised of an Advowson being void, the Ancestor of Pes∣can presented, and so gained it by usurpation, and then the Church being void, he presented again, and his Clark is now dead, and then the Queen grants the Advowson to Yardley the Plaintiff, and he brings a Quare Impedit in the name of the Queen, supposing that this usur∣pation did not put the Queen out of possession, and it was argued that the Grant could not passe without speciall words, because it is of the nature of a Chose in Action, and this was moved the last terme, and then Dyer, Meade, and Windham held that this usurpation did gaine possession out of the Queen, and that she should be put to her Writ of Right of Advowson, and now this terme Fen∣ner moved the case againe, and the opinion of Anderson that was the chief Iustice of the Common Pleas, was clearly, that the Queen was not out of possession, for he said, that it was a rule in our Books, that of a thing which is of Inheritance, the act of a common person will not put the Queen out of possession, but if she had but a Chattell, as the next Advowson, then perhaps it is otherwise: But Meade, and Windham held very earnestly the contrary, and they relied on the Book of 18 Ed. 3.15. where Shard said, that if the King had an Advowson in his owne right, and a stranger who had no right did happen to present, that put the King out of possession. And the King shall be put to his Writ of Right, as others shall. vide 47 Ed. 3.14 B. 18 Ed. 3.16. The Defendant there did alledge two Presentments in his Ancestor after the Title of the King, and demanded Iudgment if the King should have a Writ of possession, and the plea was admitted to be good; but after Pasch. 25 Eliz. Iudgment was given for the Queen, for that she might very well maintain a Quare Impedit, and the two Presentments did not put her out of possession.
31 Eliz. Rot. 211. SIr Robert Rowley made the Lord Keeper Sir Robert Catlin, and the Master of the Rols, his Executors, and did devise a terme to Sir Robert Catlin, and died: and they writ their Letters to the Ordi∣nary, certifying that they were made Executors, but that they could not attend the executing of the Executorship, and therefore they requi∣red him to commit the Administration to the next of kin, ut lex postulat. The Ordinary enters in the Register, Quia Executors praedicti per testamentum praedictum distulerunt, &c. and thereupon committed the Administration over: Afterwards the Lord Catlin received the Rent of the Farme, and after granted it to a stranger; The Administrator ousted the Lessee, and he brings an Ejectment. And if this writing was a refusall in the Executors, or not, was the question: And it was said by Ford Doctor of the Civill Law, that it was a refusall, and he said, that if Legatees being Executors do refuse to prove the Will, yet by the Civill Law they shall have their Legacies. But adjudged by the Court, that if Legatees do refuse to prove the Testament, that by the Common Law they have no remedy for their Legacies, for by the refusall there is a dying Intestate, and then nothing could be de∣vised; and also, said, that this Writing was a refusall of the Execu∣tors, so that the Ordinary might presently commit Administration, and therefore Sir Robert Catlin could take nothing as Legatee. Pasch. 31 Eliz. THe Array of a Pannell was challenged, because the Sheriff was Cosin to the Plaintiff, and upon a Traverse it was found that they were Cosins, but not in such manner as the Defendant had alled∣ged; and per curiam the Array was quasht, for the manner is not ma∣teriall, but whether he be a Cosin, or not, 18 H. 6.18. Pasch. 31 Eliz. IT was resolved in the case of Miles against Snowball, that if the She∣riff return one who hath no Freehold, yet he shall be sworne in the Iury, if he be not challenged by the parties: And after upon the evi∣dence it was moved, If a woman make a Deed of Feoffment to seve∣rall persons, of a house and land, wherein she her self inhabiteth, and is seised, and delivers the Deed to the Feoffers, without saying any thing, if this be a good Feoffment: of which Periam doubted, because she did inhabit there all the time, but if it were of other lands on which she did not dwell, and she comes there to make Libery, and delivers the Deed upon the land and saies no words, yet is this a good Feoffment, because she comes thither to malte Livery. Anderson, The Feoffment in this case is good, for if she hath an in∣tent to make Livery, the delivery of the Deed is good Livery, Quod Periam & tota Curia concesserunt, if she had intended to make Livery, vide Co. lib. 6 26. & lib. 9.136. Dyer 192.
Pasch. 31 Eliz. A Woman brought an Action of Debt as Administratrix to ano∣ther, the Defendant pleaded that the Plaintiff was an Alien born in Gaunt, under the obedience or Philip King of Spain, the Queens enemy. And Walmsley moved for the Plaintiff that this was no plea, because that the recovery is to anothers use: but the Court was against him, for the Court will not suffer that any enemy shall take advantage of our Law; and then he moved that that King was no enemy, because Wars were not proclaimed. But Anderson said, that a more open enemy then King Philip cannot be, who had conspired the death of the Queen, and had endeavoured to invade the Realm, and sub∣vert the State: which Windham granted; but Periam haerebat aliquantu∣lum whether he could be called enemy in law before such proclamation. But Walmsley said, that the plea was that the woman was born under the obedience of the Emperor, who was in amity with the Queen, and the Court replied, Plead as you will abide by it. Pasch. 13 Eliz. IN a trespasse of Assault and Battery, the Plaintiff declared to his damages of twenty pounds, and the Iury found for the Plaintiff, and gave thirty pounds damages, And by the Court the Plaintiff shall recover no more then he hath declared for, and this ought to be done of course by the Clarks, 2 H. 6.7.8 H. 6.4.42. Ed. 3.7. Mich. 30. and 31 Eliz. Rot. 610. Bond against Richardson. In Debt, the Defendant pleaded payment at the day, and gave in e∣vidence payment at another day, before the day of payment, and so was it found by the Iury in a speciall Verdict. And Anderson said, We are all agreed that Iudgment shall be given against the Plain∣tiff, for payment before the day, is payment at the day, and Iudgment was given that the Plaintiff should be barred. Willis against Whitewood. A Man was seised of lands in Socage, and made a Lease for years by Paroll, and died, & his wife was Guardian in Socage to his Son, and the Lessee accepted of a new Lease by Deed of the Guardian in Socage, and then the Guardian died, and a new Guardian entred, and outed the Lessee; and if the second Guardian could do this, was the question.
Anderson, It cannot be a surrender, for a Guardian, hath no Estate that may be surrendred, but it is an extinguishment of the Lease; andif a Woman Guardian in Socage takes Husband, and dies, the Husband shall not be Guardian in Socage. Almeskey against Johnson. JOhnson had a second deliverance returned, which was returned A∣veria eloigniata, &c. whereupon he prayed a Withernam of the Cattle of the Plaintiff, and it was granted; and then came the Plaintiff and satisfied the Defendant, his damages and charges, and praid a Writ of Restitution to have his Cattle again taken in Withernam. Fleetwood, Cattle taken in Withernam are not repleiditable, how then can you have your Cattle, and then we shall not be paid for the meat. And the Court held, that the Cattle were not repleivisable, but for satisfaction of damages he shall have restitution of the Cattle, and so is the course, which was confirmed by the Clarks. And Walmesley cited 16 H. 6. Replevi to warrant this: And as to the meat, he had the use of the Cattle, whereby it was reason he should sustain them: And a Writ of Restitution was granied. Mich. 31, and 32 Eliz. IN case of a Farmer of Dame Lineux Manwood, it was said, that the Order called the Cistrenses Order, hav a priviledge that they should pay no Tythes for the lands that Proprils manibus excolunt: but if they let it to Farmers, then they were to pay Tythes, and now comes the Statute of Monasteries 31 H. 8. If the Queen should pay Tythes, was the question. And it was said, that the Queen, and her Farmers also should hold the land discharged of Tythes, as well as the particular persons of the Order should, for the King cannot be a Husband, and therfore his Farmers shall hold the land discharged, so long as the King hath the Freehold in him, although he make a Lease thereof for years, at will, but to if the King sell the land to another, or the reversion to a∣nother, then the Farmers shall pay Tythes. Mich. 31 Eliz. IT was said by the Barons in the case of one Beaumont, that a Debt which is not naturally a Debt in it self, but a Debt onely by circum∣stance may be assigned to the Queen. As where a man is bound in a Bond to save another harmlesse, and failes thereof, the Obligation may be assigned to the Queen. But in such case a present extent shall not be awarded but the Processe shall be onely a Scire facias against the party, to see if he hath any thing to plead against it, which note well. And where a man recovers damages in an Action on the case, parcell of the damages cannot be assigned to the King before execution, for he must bring a Scire facias upon such Record. And Manwood chief Ba∣ron held clearly that a moyely hereof could not be assigned over, 22 H. 6.47.
One was indicted of Treason at S. Edmundsbury, Coram Justiciariis ad diversas felonias, &c. audiendas, and after the Indictment made men∣tion of Bury, and did not say praedict. and by the opinion of the Iustices the Iudgment was quasht. Trin. 30 Eliz. AN Action of the Case was brought against one Gilbert, for saying that the Plaintiff was a Suitor to a Widow in Southwark, and that he consened her of her money in procuring false witnesses to consen her: And a Verdict found for the Plaintiff. And in Arrest of Iudg∣ment it was said, that in the case of Kerby it was adjudged that Cou∣sener will not beare Action, and so was it adjudged in this case. Mosse against Reade. THe Defendant called him Theef, and thou forgest a Deed; and a Verdict was found for the Plaintiff: and in Arrest of Iudgment, it was said, that Theef generally, without saying of what nature spe∣cially, will not bear Action. But Wray chief Iustice denied that, and said that it had of late been adjudged to the contrary; and Gawdy a∣gainst him. But as to the words, that he had forged a Deed, adjudged that the Action will lye, although it be not specially alledged what man∣ner of Deed was forged. Pasch. 32 Eliz. COllings informed upon the Statute of buying of Tythes against Ro∣bert Davyes and Stock: And it was said by Periam, that although the words of the Statute be Pro termino diversorum annorum, yet if a Lease be made but for one year, yet is it within the penalty of the Sta∣tute. Mich. 31, and 32 Eliz. CRipps brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Canterbury, and others, and declared upon a Grant of the next avoidance, and the Defendant demanded Oyer of the Deed, and the Plaintiff shewed a Letter which was written by his Father to the true Patron, by which he had writ to his Father that he had given to his Son that was the Plaintiff the next avoidance; and upon this there was a Demur. And the whole Court for the Demur, for that such Letter was a mockery, for the Grant was not good without Deed: and Iudgment was given accordingly.
In Tymbermans Case it was said, that if a Sheriff took one in Ex∣ecution by force of a Capias, although he return not the Writ, yet an Action of Debt will lye against him upon an escape; and Periam said it had been so adjudged. Katherine Gilham brought an Ejectment as Administratrix to her Husband, Quare determino eject. & bona & catalla sua ibidem inven∣ta cepit &c. and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and it was alledged in Ar∣rest of Iudgment, that this word Sua shall not be intended her own Goods, and not the Testators. And the Court was of opinion that Sua shall be intended in such manner as Administrator, and no otherwise. And therefore Iudgment was affirmed. Mich. 31, and 32 Eliz. Baldwin against Mortin. USe to the Husband and Wife, habendum to the Husband for thir∣ty years, the Wife shall take nothing thereby, and this case was argued at the Bar and Bench, and was called the Earl of Cumber∣lands case. Fleetwood moved that an Action was brought against the Husband and his Wife, and dit declare a trover of the Goods of the Plaintiff, by the Wife, which she converted to her own use, and prayed that the A∣ction might be against the Husband onely, because that the woman could not convert them to his own use during the Coverture, but onely to the Husbands use. And the opinion of the Court was, that the Writ was good against them both, and that the conversion was in na∣ture of a Trespasse, and so the Action would well lye. Mich. 32. and 33 Eliz. Kent against Wichall. IN a Trespasse Quare clausum fregit & herbam conculcavit, the De∣fendant pleaded that he tendied sufficient amends to the Plaintiff. and he refused the same, and demanded Iudgment, &c. And upon a Demurrer, the opinion of the Court was, that this is no plea in Tres∣passe, but in a Replevin it is a good plea, Sed non dierunt causam di∣versitatis, 21 H. 7.30.9 H. 7.22. F.N.B. 69. G. 31 H. 4.17. Drew demanded of the Court, that whereas Edmund Leusage had bound himself in an Obligation by the name of Edward Leusage, if this was good or not; and it seemed to the Court Quod non est factum, and Anderson and Walmesley said expresly that it was void, 34 H. 6.19 6. Dy∣er 279, 21 H. 7.8.
Sir John Arrundell and his Wife, brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Glocester and others, who pleaded in Bar that Willi∣am Sturton was seised of a Mannor to which the Advowson was appen∣dant, and bound himself in a Statute-merchant of two hundred pounds to one Long, and the Statute was extended, and conveyed the interest of the Statute to one of the Defendants, and then the Church became void: And by the Court the Advowson may be extended, and if it be∣come void during the Conusees Estate, the Conusee may present. Note, it was said by the Iustices of the Common Pleas, that if a man promise another that he shall have a Lease in his land for eight years, or it is agreed amongst themselves that one shall have a Lease of the others land for eight yeares, that is no lease of the land, but onely a Contract and Agreement; but if one promise another that he shall have his land for eight years, or openly agree that one shall have the others land for eight years, this is a good lease for eight years by force of the agreement. A. came before the Major of Lincolne, and acknowledged a Statute-merchant, and the Seal of the Major was not put to it: and it was ad∣judged that the Statute was not good, but a man may sue upon it as an Obligation, because the Seal of the party is to it. Pasch. 36 Eliz. IN a Waste the Case was, that a Lessee for yeares purchased Trees growing upon the land, and had liberty to cut them within eighty yeares, and after the said Lessee purchased the inheritance of the land and devised it to his Wife for life, the Remainder to the Plaintiff in see, and made his Wife Executrix, and died, who after married with the Defendant, who cuts the Trees, whereupon the Action is brought. And by opinion of all the Court the Action was maintainable, for although the Trees were once Chattels, yet by the purchase of the In∣heritance they were united to the land: and Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff accordingly. Pasch. 36 Eliz. UPon an Exigent, the Sheriff returned, that after Divine Service he made proclamation, and did not say, that there was no Ser∣mon: and therefore the Iudges held that the return was not good; for by the Statute, if there be a Sermon in the Church, the Sheriff shall make his proclamations after the Sermon, and if there be no Sermon, then after Divine Service: and because it did not appeare whether there were any Sermon or not, the opinion of the Court was ut supra. It was said that a man shall not aver against a
Postea in the Kings Bench, or the Common Pleas, to say that it was contrary to the Ver∣dict, nor shall he be received to say, that the Iudges gave a Iudgment,and the Clarks have entred it contrary to their Iudgment: but other∣wise is it in Court Barons, or other base Courts, not Courts of Record, 10 Ed. 3.40. 35, and 36 Eliz. Newman against Beaumond. IF the Ordinary grants the Administration of the Goods of B. to A. and after grants the Administration to R. this second Grant is an appeale of the first, without any further sentence of repeale, for the Administrator is but a servant to the Ordinary, whom he may charge at any time. In an Action of Debt on a Bond bearing date the nineth of July, the Defendant pleaed a Release of all Actions the same day, usque diem dati ejusdem scripti, and it was adjudged that the Obligation was not discharged, because the Release does exclude the nineth day on which it was made. Mich. 37, and 38 Eliz. Rot. 211. Holman against Collins. HOlman brought a Writ of Error against Collins, upon a Iudgment given in the Court of Plymmouth, in the County of Devon, the case was; Collins was possessed of a peece of Ordnance, and in Consideration that he would tender this to Holman for to put into his Ship which was then going to Sea, and that Collins would stand to the hazard of lo∣sing it: The said Holman did assume upon himself, and did promise to give Collins certain Goods which he should gain by the Voyage, and after the said Ship did return laden with certain Goods, and for non-sa∣tisfaction the said Collins brought his Action on the Assumpsit, and had Judgment to recover. And Crook assigned these Errors; 1. That the Stile of the Court was not good, for it was Curia Do∣minae Reginae Burgi praedict. tent. coram Majori de Plymmouth, without saying, secundum consuetudinem villae praedict. and he who is Iudge of the Court, ought to be either by Patent or Prescription, and then for not expressing the stile of the Court, nor by what authority they held their Court, it is error; and he cited the case in the Lord Dyer 262. and a Iudgment, 30 Eliz. Rot. 32. given in the very point: Another Error was, that no day was prefixed for the Defendant to appear, but generally ad proximam curiam, which is Error, although it be held e∣very munday. And for these Errors Iudgment was reversed.
Trin. 28 Eliz. Rot. 948. Mercer against Sparks. MErcer had Iudgment to recover against Sparks in the Common Pleas, upon an Action of the Case for words; and Sparks brought a Writ of Error in the Kings Bench, and assigned for Error, that the Plaintiff did not expresse in the Declaration that the Defendant spake the words malitiose, but it was adjudged, that it was no Error, because the words themselves were malicious and slanderous, wherefore Iudg∣ment was affirmed. Savacres Case. IT was adjudged in the Common Pleas, that if a Baron, or others mentioned in the Statute of 21 H 8. take divers Chaplaines which have many benefices, and after they discharge their. Chaplaines from their Service, they shall retain their Benefices during their lives, and if the Baron takes others to be his Chaplaines, they cannot take many Benefices during the lives of the others, which are beneficed and discharged of their Services; for if the Law were otherwise, the Lords might make any capable of holding Benefices by admitting them to be their Chaplaines. In an Action of false Imprisonment brought against the Maior, Ci∣tizens, Sheriffs and Commonalty of Norwich; it was moved where the Issue should be tried: And by the Court the Issue shall not be tryed there; and in the same case it was moved, whether the Sheriff could summon himself, and it was answered by the Court that he could not: and Periam said that so it had been after adjudged. Mich. 29. and 30 Eliz. IN an Avowry adjudged by the Court (Anderson being absent) that in an Avowry it is sufficient for the Avowant to say, Son Franktene∣ment, but if the Plaintiff traverse it, it is no plea without he makes to him a Title, & that is the difference of pleading Son Franktenement, on the part of the Avowant, and on the part of the Plaintiff. And Welson said, that so were all the Presidents, that it is no plea to traverse the Bar in the Avowry, without making Title: And Periam said, that it is no Title to plead De son seisin demesne, but he must make out his Title Paramount, his Seisin Demesue.
Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Bloss against Holman. JOhn Bloss brought an Action of Trespasse Quare vi & armis for ta∣king of his Goods, against Holman, and the Defendant pleaded not guilty, and the Iury gave a speciall Verdict, viz. That the Plaintiff at the time of the Trespasse was of the Mystery of the Mercers, and that at that time the Defendant was his Servant, and put in trust to sell his Goods and Merchandizes in Shopa sua, ibidem de tempore in tempus, and that he took the Goods of the Plaintiff named in the De∣claration, and carried them away, and prayed the advice of the Court, if the Defendant were culpable or not; and upon the Postea returned, Shuttleworth prayed Iudgment for the Plaintiff. And the doubt was because the Declaration was Quare vi & armis, because it appeared that the Defendant had custody of the Goods: but Shuttleworth doub∣ted whether he had Custody, and cited the case of Littleton, viz. If I give my Sheep to Compasture, &c. and he kills them, an Action of tres∣passe lies: and the Iustices held that in this case the Action did well lye; and Periam said, that the Defendant had onely an authority, and not custody or possession, and Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff, 3 H. 7.12.21 H. 7.14. And Windham said, that if he had imbezelld his Masters Goods, without question it was felony. Quod fuit concessum, (Anderson absente) and the Law will not presume that the goods were out of the possession of the Plaintiff; and the next day came the Lord An∣derson and rehearsed the case, and said, that the Defendant had neither generall nor speciall property in the Goods, for it is plaine, he could have no generall property, and speciall he had not, for he could not have an action of Trespasse if they were taken away, then if he had no property, a trespasse lies against him, if he take them; so if a Shepheard steal Sheep, it is felony, for he hath no property in them, wherefore he gave Iudgment accordingly. Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 1410. Cooke against Baldwin. A Lease was mate for one and twenty years, to one Truepenny and Elizabeth, if she, and he, or any Child, or Children between them lawfully begotten, should so long live, and then they were married, and the Wise died without Issue. If the Lease be determined or not, was the question. And it was moved that it was determined, be∣cause it is conjunctive, if he and she, &c. and now one of them is dead without issue, and it is not like the case of
Chapman, where a man co∣venants to enfeoff one and his Heires, for it is impossible to enfeoff his Heires, he living, and therefore in that case it shall be taken for a dis∣junctive: and if I make a Lease for years to two, if one of them dye, the other shall have all, because they take by way of interest; but it a Lease be made to two, during the life of one of them, if one dye, theLease is gone. Quod fuit concessum: And here the meaning is, that the Lease shall be determined if one of them dye. Rhodes Iustice, The meaning is against you, for by the word (or) which comes after, it appears that they are to have their lives in it. Anderson, By the words it is plain, that after the death of one the Lease is determined, and that which moves me to think it was so in∣tended, is, because it was intended (as it seems to me) to be a Ioyn∣ture for the wife, which was made by them before marriage; and then if by the death of one it should be gone, and she have nothing, could not be the meaning; To which the other Iustices assented. And all the Iudges agreed that the Lease was not determined by the death of one; and Iudgment given accordingly. Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. IN a Quare Impedit by Sir Thomas Gorge Knight, against the Bi∣shop of Lincolne, and Dalton Incumbent, the Case was; That a Man∣nor with the Advowson appendant was in the hands of the King, and the Church became void, and the King grants the Mannor with the Advowson: If the Grantee shall have the Presentation; or the King, was the question. And all the Iustices held clearly that the avoidance would not passe, because it was a Chatiell vested. And Periam said, that in case of a common person without question an Advowson appen∣dant would not passe by such Grant; for if the Father dye, it shall go to his Executor, but if it be an Advowson in grosse in case of a common person, there is some doubt: But in the principall case all the Iudges held ut supra, and said, that so it was in 9 Ed. 3.26. Quare Impedit 31. And in Dyer in the case of the Church of Westminster, but F.N.B. is contrary, 33 N. Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 728. HOuse and Elkin brought an Action of Debt upon an Obligation made to them, against Roger Grindon, as Sheriffs of London, up∣on condition of appearance at a certain day in the Kings Bench: The Defendant pleaded that he being arrested by a Precept out of the Kings Bench appeared at the day: And upon this they were at issue to be tri∣ed by the Country: And a Repleader was awarded, because it was tri∣able by Record, for although the Sheriff do not return the Processe, yet the Defendant ought to come into the Court at the day, and there speci∣all entry shall be made of his appearance. And so was it adjudged this terme in the Case between Bret and Shepheard: But Bradford Pro∣thonotary said it was well enough, for it may be that he appeared there, and there was no Record of it, To which it was answered, that it was no apparance unlesse there were a Record: But the Case in Court was ut supra.
Hil. 30. Eliz. IN an Ejectment by Dorothy Michell against Edmund Dunton, the Case was; A woman makes a Lease for years, rendring Rent, with a Covenant that the Lessee should repaire the house, with other Cove∣nants, and then devised the same lands to the same Lessee for divers years more, yeilding the like rent, and under such Covenants as were in the first Lease, the Remainder over in fee, and dies, and then the first Lease for years does expire, and the Lessee continues in by force of the second Lease by vesture of the devise, and repaires not the houses, so that if the first Lease had been in being, he had broke the Covenant. If this shall be such condition as he in the remainder may enter, was the question. Shuttleworth, It is a Condition, for he cannot have a Covenant, and then it shall be intended that i is conditionall: But by all the Court. There appears no such intent, for it appears that he holds under like Covenants. Anderson, The nature of a Covenant is to have an Action, but not an entry, and therefore there shall be no entry. Shuttleworth, To what end then serves these words (under like Covenants) Periam, They are void. And at last it was resolved by all the Iustices, that the Will expressing that the first Lessee should have the Land observing the first Covenants, it shall not be now taken to be a Condition by any intent that may be collected out of the Will: for a Covenant and Condition are of severall natures, the one giving Action, the other entry, and here the intent of the Will was, that although the Covenants were not performed, yet the Lessee should not forfeit his terme, but is onely bound to such paine as he was at the beginning, and that was to render damages in an Action of Covenant. And Iudg∣ment was given that the Plaintiff should be barred. Mich, 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 2449. THe Earle of Kent brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond against William Bryan, which was indorsed with a Condition, That if the Defendant did permit the Plaintiff, his Executors or Assignes, not onely to thresh Corn in the Defendants Barn, but also to carry it a∣way from time to time, and at all times hereafter convenient, with free egresse and regresse, or else to pay eight pounds upon request, &c. that then, &c. And in truth the Defendant permitted the Corn to lye there two years, in which time the Mise and Rats had devoured a great part of it, and then the Defendant thresht it, and the Earle therefore brought this Action: And upon Demur it seemed to
Walmsley that there was no forfeiture of the Bond, because the Earl took not the Corn away in convenient time, for convenient time is such as shall prejudice no person (Quod fuit negatum per Justitiar.) and here is great prejudice to the Detendant, because the Plaintiff did not carry away the Corn: And he put many cases, where things ought to be done in convenient time, as in the 21 Ed. 4. where an Arbitrement ought to be performed in convenient time. But the opinion of the Court was, that he might come in covenient time, although he comes long after, andthe words are not within convenient time. Windham said, That if the words had been within convenient time, it would have made a diffe∣rence. Anderson, If the words of the Condition had been, that he should suffer the Plaintiff in time convenient to come, and thresh and take a∣way his Corn, then perhaps he ought to send within a year according to Walmsleys saying, but the words here are at all convenient times, and that day that the Servant came was a convenient day to thresh and car∣ry away; and the words, At all convenient times shall be construed, that at any time when it pleaseth the Earl he may come, unlesse it be night, or Sabboth day, and if the word, convenient, had not been mentioned, then by the words, from time to time, and at all times after, then the Earl may come at any time either in the day or night, and that a hun∣dred years after as he pleaseth, and then the word, convenient, does re∣strain him that he cannot come but in the working daies, but does not restrain any time in which he shall come, but onely in convenien∣cy of time, which is at times of labouring and watching. And so was the opinion of the Court. ut supra. An Action of Debt was brought upon a Lease for years, the Defen∣dant pleaded Nihil debet per patriam, and did intend to give in evidence an entry of the Plaintiff before any Rent behind. And by the Court he could not do it, for it is contrary to the issue. Hil. 30 Eliz. Rot. 904. Between Spittle and Davis. IN a Replevin, the case was; One Turk seised of lands in fee, devi∣sed parcell thereof to his eldest Son in taile, and the other parcell to his youngest Son in fee. Provided, and his intent was, that if any of his Sons or any of their Issues, do alien or demise any of the said lands, before any of them comes to the age of thirty years, that then the other shall have the Estate, and does not limit what Estate, and then one of the Sons makes a Lease for years before such age, whereupon the o∣ther enters, and before he comes to the age of thirty years, he aliens that part into which he made entry, and the other brother being the el∣dest enters and makes a Lease to Spittle the Plaintiff for three years, and Davies by commandment of the younger brother enters, and takes the house Damage-feasant, and Spittle brought a Replevin: And upon Demur, it seemed to the Court, that this was a limitation, and by ver∣tue of the Will the Estate devised to them untill they aliened, and upon the alienation to go to the other, & upon such alienation the land is discharged of all limitations, for otherwise the land upon one alienation shall go to one, and upon another alienation shall go back again, and so to and fro ad infinitum, vide Dyer 14. & 29. And afterwards all the Iud∣ges agreed, that after one brother had entred into the land by reason of the alienation, that land was discharged forever of the limitation by the Will; And Iudgment was given accordingly.
Trin. 27 Eliz. Rot. 190. Carter against Lowe. IN an Ejectment, the Case was; A Termor devised his terme to I.S. and made his Wife Executrix and died, the Woman enters and proves the Will, and takes Husband, who takes a Lease of the Lessor, and after the Devisee enters and grants all his Estate to the Husband and wife, and herein two questions were moved. 1. If by this acceptance of the new Lease by the Husband, the term which the woman had to another use, viz. to the use of the Testator shall be deemed a surrender: And the opinion of the Court was clear∣ly without argument, that it was a surrender. But admitting it was no surrender, but the first terme continues, then the second question is, 2. If when the Devisee enters into the terme devised to him, with∣out consent of the Executor, by which entry he is a wrongfull Seisor, and a Disseisor, and after he grants his right and interest to the Exe∣cutor; if this Grant be good or no, because he had not any terme in him, but onely a right to the terme suspended in the land, and to be re∣vived by the entry of the Executor, And adjudged that it was a good Grant, and it shall inure first as the agreement of the Executor by the acceptance of the Grant, that the Devisee had a terme in him as a Le∣gacy. And secondly the Deed shall have operation by way of Grant to passe the Estate of the Devisee to the Executor, and so no wrong, and the case was resembled to the case of surrender to the grantee of a Re∣version, which first shall inure as attornment, and after as surrender, and so was it adjudged. Trin. 37 Eliz. IN an Action on the Case for these words; Carter is a prigging pilfe∣ring Merchant, and hath pilfered away my Corne and my Goods from my Wife and my Servants, and this I will stand to: And the A∣ction was commenced in a base Court in the Country, and Iudgment given and the Record removed by Writ of Error: And it seemed to the Court that the words were not actionable, wherefore Iudgment was reverst. Sed quaere rationem. Gowood against Binkes.
A Man did assume and promise to I.S. in consideration that he would forbeare a Debt due to him untill such a time: That he would pay the Debt if A.B. did not pay it, and he that made the promise died, and the money was not paid, and therefore an Action was brought a∣gainst his Executors, who traversed the Assumpsit, and a Verdict foundagainst them; and in Arrest of Iudgment it was moved, that an Acti∣on grounded on a simple Contract. lies not against Executors unlesse upon an Assumpsit for a Debt or Duty owing by the Testator himself, and not of such a collaterall matter as the forbearance of the Debt of another: but by Gawdy, Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff; whereupon Popham said, that he believed this Iudgment would be re∣versed by Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber, and the same day at Serjeants-Inn such a case was depending in the Exchequer Cham∣ber to be argued, and reversed for the cause ut supra. And the case was between Jordan and Harvey, and entred Trin. 36 Eliz. Rot. 384. Hil. 37 Eliz. Rot. 34. Castleman against Hobbs. IN an Action of the Case for saying, Thou hast stollen half an acre of Corne, (innuendo) Corne severed, the Defendant demurred upon the Declaration. Fenner, It is not Felong to move Graine and take it away. Popham agreed to it, and that the word Innuendo would not alter the Case, unlesse the precedent words had vehement presumption, the Corne was severed; and in this case no man can think that the Corne was severed, when the words are, half an acre of Corne: on the con∣trary, if the words had been, that he had stollen so many loads, or bu∣shels of Corne; And Gawdy was of the same opinion: and Iudg∣ment against the Plaintiff, &c. Hil. 38 Eliz. IN an Account the Plaintiff declared, that he delivered Goods to the Defendant to Merchandize for him, the Defend▪ said, that the Goods with divers other of his own proper goods wer taken at Sea, where he was robbed of them. And it was moved that this was no plea in Bar of an Account, but if it be any plea, it shall be a plea before Auditors in dis∣charge: But admitting it be a good Bar, yet it is not well pleaded, for the Plaintiff as it is pleaded cannot traverse the robbing and try it, for things done super altum mare is not tryable here, wherefore the Defendant ought to have pleaded that he was robbed at London, or any other certain place upon the Land, and maintain it by proofs that he was robbed on the Sea. Gawdy, It is no good plea, for he hath confest himself to be accoun∣table by the receipt, 9 Ed. 4., and it is no plea before Auditors, no more then the Case was in 9 Ed. 4. for a Carrier to say, that he was rob∣bed. Popham, It is a good plea before Auditors, and there is a difference between Carriers and other Servants and Factors; for Carriers are paid for their carriage, and take upon them safely to carry and deliver the things received.
Gawdy, If Rebels break a Prison, whereby the Prisoners escape, yet the Goaler shall be responsible for them, as it is in the 33 H. 6. Popham. In that case the Goaler hath remedy over against the Re∣bels, but there is no remedy over in our case. Gawdy, Then the diversity is when the Factor is robbed by Pyrates, and when by enemies. Popham, There is no difference. Hil. 38 Eliz. Rot. 40. IN a Writ of Error upon a Iudgment given in Nottingham, the Er∣ror assigned was; because the Defendant had no addition, for it appeared the Action was in Debt; and the Record was, that H. Hund complained against Richard Preston of, &c. in the County of Notting∣ham, Husbandman, the which addition is not in his first name, but in the alias, and that could not be good, and therefore it was prayed that Iudgment might he reversed. But by the Court, the Court of Not∣tingham had no authority to outlaw any man, so that addition is not requisite, wherefore it is no Error: and Iudgment was affirmed. Trin. 37 Eliz. Rot. 553. Browne against Brinkley. IN an Action of the Case for words; the Declaration was, That the Plaintiff was produced as a Witnesse before the Iustices at the As∣sises at Darby, where he deposed in a certain cause, and the Defendant said, Browne was disproved before the Iustices of Assise at Darby, be∣fore Mr. Kingsley (Innuendo) that he was disproved in his Oath, that he took before the Iustices: And adjudged against the Plaintiff; for although he was disproved in his Oath, yet it is not actionable in this case, for that disproof might be in any collaterall matter, or any cir∣cumstance; but otherwise if the words had been, that he was perjured, and the (Innuendo) will not help the matter, and so was it adjudged. The chief Iustice and Fenner being onely in the Court. Trin. 36 Eliz. Higham against Beast. IN an Action of Trespasse by the Parson of Wickhambrooke in the County of Suffolk, against the Vicar of the same place, for taking of Tythes, and on the generall issue the Iury gave this speciall Verdict: That the place where, &c. was a place called B. the Freehold of I.S. and parcell of the Mannor of
Badmanshall, and found that the Pope assupream Ordinary heretofore made such an Indowment to the Vica∣ridge in these words; Volumus quod Vicarius, &c. habebit tertiam par∣tem decimarum Bladorum & Foeni quomodocunque pervenientem de maneriis de Badmanshall; and the question was, If the Vitar by this Indowment shall have the third part of the Tythes growing upon the and of the Freeholders within the Mannor, or not. And it was said, by the Court, that a Mannor cannot be without Freeholders, and in∣asmuch as they are to be charged with the payment of Tythes, one and the other together shall be said to be the Tythes of the Mannor, and so it was adjudged that the Vicar should have Tythes of the third part of the land of the Freeholders, as well of the Demesnes, and Copyhol∣ders. Trin. 37 Eliz. Rot. 438. Willoughby against Gray. A Venire facias did beare Teste out of the Terme, and also there was no place mentioned in the Writ, here the Visne should be im∣paunelled, and after the Writ said Coram Justiciariis, and did not say, apud Westmonasterium, and a tryall was had hereupon, and Iudg∣ment given which was prayed might be reversed for these causes. But it seemed to the Court, that notwithstanding all that was alledged, it was good enough, for although the Venirefacias was not good, yet if the Distringas had a certain return and place therein: And the Iury ap∣peared and gave their Verdict, so that a Verdict was had, the Statute will aide the other defects: as in the case adjudged between Marsh and Bulford, where the Venire bore Teste out of the Term. But Fenner said, that the Teste was in the Term but on the Sabboth day, which was not Dies Juridicus. Trin. 38 Eliz. Rot. 622. KInton brought an Appeal of Mayhem, against Hopton, Flam, and Williams; Hopton pleaded, not guilty; Flam pleaded that he was mis-named, and demanded Iudgment,
&c. Et quoad feloniam & mahemi∣um, not guilt, & de hoc ponit se super patriam, & praedict. Kinton simi∣liter: And Williams pleaded, no such man in rerum natura, as Flam, and demanded Iudgment of the Writ, and as to the Mayhem and Fe∣lony, not guilty, Et de hoc ponit se super patriam, &c. And as to the other two pleas to the Writ Kinton demurred, & prayed that the Writ might be awarded him, and a Venire facias to try the issue. For Tanfeild ur∣ged, that by pleading over to the felony, he waved the plea to the Writ, for there was a diversity between an appeal of Murther, and of May∣hem, for in Murther, as it is 7 Ed. 4. and 3 Ed. 6. although he plead to the Writ of appeal, yet of necessity he must plead over to the Murther, because it is in favorem vitae, or else if he will joyne in Demurrer up∣on the plea to the Writ, he doth confesse thereupon the Felony, and therefore he must plead over, not guilty. But in Mayhem it is other∣wisefor although the Declaration was for Felony, yet is a Mayhem but a Trespasse onely, and all are prucipalls, and the life of the De∣fendant is not questioned, but he shall onely render damages, and there∣fore it he plead over to the Felony that is a waver of the plea, and so a Venire facia ought to issue out, to try if he be culpable or not, and of this opinion were Popham Fenner, and Gawdy clearly, and agreed to the diversity between the appeal of Mayhem and Murther. Mich. 38, and 39 Eliz. King against Braine. A Man sells Sheep, and warrants that the yare sound, and that they shall be sound for the space of a year, upon which Warrant an A∣ction of the Case was brought, and it was moved that the Action did not lye, because the Warranty is impossible to be performed by the party, because it is onely the act of God to make them sound for a year. But Clench and Fenner on the contrary; for it is not impossible, no more then if I warrant that such a Ship shall return safe to Bruges, and it is the usuall course between Merchants to warrant the safe return of their Ships. Mich. 38, and 39 Eliz. Wentworth and Savell against Russell. IN a Writ of Parco fracto, the Plaintiffs declared that they were Tenants pro indiviso, of a Mannor in Yorkshire, and that the De∣fendant held of them certain lands as of their Mannor, rendring Rent, which Rent was behind, and for which they distrained and impounded the Distresse, and the Defendant broke the Pound and rescued the di∣stresse, and thereupon they brought this Action; and the Defendant de∣murred on the Declaration, because the Plaintiffs did not shew how they were Tenants pro indiviso, or Tenants in Common, or Coparce∣ners. But the Court ruled the Declaration to be good: And Gawdy said, that a Tenant in Common alone, without his companion, may have an Action De parco fracto. And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Hil. 39 Eliz.
POphamsaid, that in Lancashire there is a Parish called Standish, within which are many Townes, and one of the Townes is called Standish: And if a man seised of lands in the Town of Standish, andalso of land in the other Townes, do let all his land in Standish onely, his land within the Town of Standish doth passe, and not all his land within the Parish of Standish in the other Townes. For where a man speaks of Standish or of Dale, it shal be intended to be a Town and not a Parish, unlesse there be expresse mention of the Parish of Standish, or of Dale. Gawdy and Fenner on the contrary, for the Grant of every man shall be taken strongest against himself, and therefore all the land as well within the Parish of Standish, as within the Town of Standish shall passe: And Fenner said, that when Dale is mentioned in any Pre∣cipe, it shall be intended the Town of Dale, because Towns are no∣ted at the Common Law, and not Parishes, for Parishes were ordained by the Councell of Lyons, but notwithstanding in Grants, there shall be no such intendment, but the intendment shall be according to the common usage and understanding of the Country, and Country-men in favour of the Grantee: and when a man speake of Standish, or any such place, it shall as well be intended to be a Parish as a Town. Hil. 29, Eliz. Clarentius against Dethick. CLarentius brought an Action of the Case against Dethick, by the name of Dethick, alias Garter: The Defendant demanded Iudg∣ment of the Writ, for the Queen by her Letters Patents had created him King at Armes, Et quod nuncuparetur Garter principalis Rex ar∣morum, and that he should sue and be sued by such name, and because he was not sued according to his creation, he demanded Iudgment, &c. Tanfeild prayed that the Writ might abate, for this case had been here in the Court in question before, where Dethick was indided by the name of Dithick onely, and because he was not named according to his creation, he pleaded that matter, and the Indictment was quashed. Gawdy, I remember the case very well, and it was adjudged at my first coming to this Court, and in truth the Iudgment passed against my opinion, which then and still is, that when he is sued as King at armes, in such case wherein his Office or other thing belonging to his Office comes in question, then he ought to be named according to his Patent, but when he is sued as I.S. then it is sufficient to name him by his proper name. Popham, Vpon the creation of any Deanery which is ordained and granted by Patent of the King; the Dean shall sue and be sued by the name of Dean of such a place, yet if such Dean doth sue or is sued a∣bout any matter concerning his naturall capacity, it is not necessary to name him Dean. Fenner. But this is a name of dignity, and by his installation is made parcell of his name, and if a man be made a Knight, in all Actions he shall be so named; wherefore it seemed to him that the Writ ought to abate. Et Adjournetur. Hil. 37 Eliz. Hugo against Paine.
HUgo brought a Writ of Error against Paine, upon a Iudgment gi∣ven in the Common Pleas upon a Verdict, the Error assigned was,That one Tippet was returned in the Venire facias, but in the Habeas Corpus and the Distringas he was named Tipper, and so another per∣son then was named in the Venire tryed the issue. Curia, Examine what person was sworne, and what was his true name, to which it was answered that his name was Tippet according to the Venire facias, and that he was summoned to appeare to be of the Iury, and he inha∣bits in the same place where Tipper was named, and that no such man as Tipper inhabited there, and therefore it was awarded by the Court that the Habeas Corpus and Distringas should be amended, and his true name put in, and Iudgment was affirmed, &c. Hil. 38 Eliz. Rot. 944. Rainer against Grimston. RAiner brought an Action of the case against Grimston in the Kings Bench, for these words, He was perjured, and I will prove him so by two Witnesses; without speaking in what Court he was perjured, and the Plaintiff had Iudgment, and upon Error brought by the De∣fendant, it was moved that the words were not actionable: But in the Exchequer Chamber, the first Iudgment was affirmed. Hil. 39, Eliz. Rot. 859. Chandler against Grills. IN a Trespasse, the parties were at issue, and a Venire facias was a∣warded on the Roll returnable Octabis Trinitat. and the Venire was made six daies after the day of Octabis returnable at a day out of the terme, and the Distringas was made, and the Iury Impanelled, and a Verdict and Iudgment for the Plaintiff: And in a Writ of Er∣ror brought this matter was assigned. And the first Iudgment affirmed, for this is aided by the Statute, being it is the default of the Clark: and the case was cited between Thorne and Fulshaw in the Exchequer Chamber, Mich. 38, & 39 Eliz. where the Roll being viewed, and the Venire not good, it was mended and made according to the Roll, being that which warrants it and is the act of the Court, and the other matter but the mistake of the Clarks. But if the Roll were naught then it is erroneous, because the Venire is without warrant, and no Record to uphold it, and so was it held in the case of Water Hungerford and Besie. Hil. 39 Eliz. During against Kettle. DUring brought an Action against Kettle after a Tryall by Verdict in London, and in Arrest of Iudgment, it was alledged, that the Venire facias is, Regina vicecomit. London salut. praecipimus tibi quod, &c. where it should be praecipimus vobis, &c. But ruled by the Court that this Venire being as it were a Iudiciall Writ that ought to ensue the other proceedings, it was holden to be amendable, and so it was accor∣dingly.
Pasch. 39 Eliz. East against Harding. IT was moved, Whether if a Lord of a Mannor makes a Lease for years, after a Copyholder commits a Forfeiture, the Lessee for years shall take advantage hereof: and it was said by Popham, that the Feof∣fee or Lessee shall have advantage of all Forfeitures belonging to Land, as in case of Feoffment, and the like, but on the contrary for not doing of Fealty. Mich. 39 Eliz. Collins against Willes. THe Father makes a promise to Willes, that if he would marry his Daughter, to pay him 80 l. for her portion, but Willes demanded a 100 l. or else did refuse to marry her, wherupon the daughter prayed her Father to pay the 100 l. and in consideration therof she did assure him to pay him 20 l. back again. The 100 l. is paid, and the marriage took ef∣fect. And the Father brought his Action on the case against the Husband and Wife, for the 20 l. Gawdy, and Fenner said, that the Action would lye: but Popham held the consideration void. Mich. 39, and 40 Eliz. Penn against Merivall. IN an Ejectment the Case was, If a Copyholder makes a Lease for years which is a forfeiture at the Common Law, and after the Lord of a Mannor makes a Feoffment, or a Lease for years of the Freehold of this Copyhold to another; if the Feoffee or Lessee shall take advan∣tage hereof was the question. Popham, He shall not, for the lease of the Freehold made by the Lord before entry, is an assent that the Lessee of the Copyholder shall continue his Estate, and so is in nature of an affir∣mance and confirmation of the Lease: to which Clench and Fenner a∣greed; and therefore upon motion made by Yelverton Serjeant, and Speaker of the Parliament, Iudgment was given, Quod querens ni∣hil caplat per Billam. Mich. 6 Eliz. ONe enters a plaint in a base Court to pursue in the nature of a writ of entry in the Post, and had Summons against the party untill such a day, at which time, and after Sun-set, the Steward came and held the Court, and the Summons was returned served, and the party made de∣fault, and Iudgment given: the question was, If the Iudgment was good. Dyer, Welch, and Benlowes held the Iudgment good, although the Court was held at night: and Dyer said, that if it were erroneous, he could have no remedy by Writ of false Iudgment, nor otherwise, but onely by way of petition to the Lord, and he ought in such case to do right according to conscience, for he hath power as a Chancellor within his own Court.
Lane against Coups. IN an Ejectment by John Lane against Coup, and the Plaintiff decla∣red on a Lease made by William Humpheston, the Case was; Wil∣liam Humpheston being seised of land in see, suffered a common recove∣ry to the use of himself and his wife for life, the remainder Seniori pue∣ro de corpore Gulielmi Humpheston, and to the Heirs Males of the bo∣dy dicti senioris pueri. Plowden, One point is, that when a remainder is limitted Seniori puero in tail, if Puer shall be intended a Son, or a Daughter also; and methinks it shall be intended a Son onely, for so are the words in common and usuall speech, and words in Deeds ought to be expounded as they are commonly taken, and not to go to any strict construction of the words as (Heirs) in the Latine is used also for goods by the Civill Law, but we use it only for lands, and so Libra in Latine signifies a Weight; and yet if I am bound in Vigint. Libris. if I forfeit my Bond, I must pay money, and not Lead, or the like. And so the word Puer is somtimes taken for a servant Claudite jam rivos pueri, &c. and the same reason that it may be intended for a Daughter, may be for a Servant also. Gawdy. I suppose the Son shall have it and not the Daughter, for although Pueri was taken for Male and Female, yet now it is taken for Male in any Modern Author, but to omit curiosity of words, we ought to consider rather the intent of the parties, and there are many circumstances to prove that he intended this to his Son, and not to his Daughter, for he made it for setling his Inheritance, and it shall not be supposed that he intended his Daughter should have it. Also where the case may be taken two waies, the most usuall shall be inten∣ded; as in case of a reservation of a Rent at Michaelmas, that shall be intended at the chiefest Feast: also in this case it shall be intended that he would advance the most worthy of his blood, and therefore to that purpose the conveyance shall be expounded; for if there be two I. S. and I give land to I.S. it shall be intended to my next Neighbour, but if one be my Cosin, although he dwells forty miles from me, yet he shal have the land: And to this Southcote accorded. 31 Eliz. in B. R. Hone against Clerk. A Woman Lessee for life takes Husband, who by Indenture makes a Feoffment of the land to I.S. for these words; Sciant per Servan∣tes Richardum How & Katherin. uxor. ejus dedisse I.S. unum messuagi∣um habendum praedict. I.S. heredibus suis ad solum opus & usum of the said I.S. and his Heirs, during the life of Katherine. The question was, if this was a forfeiture because the wife was Tenant for life; and the Attorney argued that it was, for the words Pro termino vitae Katherin. are referred to the use only and not to the estate; for by these words ha∣bendum to him and his Heirs the estate is limited, and therefore it is a forfeiture: but after comes the limitation of the use, ad usum I.S. and his Heirs during the life of the woman, and after the death of the wo∣man the use remaines in the Feoffor: and he cited the Lord Sturtons case, in the beginning of the Queens Raign; The Lord Sturton gave land to
Clerk and his Heirs, to the use of Clerk and the Heirs of his bo∣dy, and adjudged that it was not an estate in taile, for the limitation of the estate was before in the Premises. Coke, on the contrary, andsaid, that those words, For life of the wife, are to be referred to the limita∣tion of the Estate, for if a double sense be in words, such sense shall be ta∣ken as shall avoid all wrong, and therefore it shall not be so expounded, as that the Grant shall not take effect, and that a forfeiture shall ensue, 4 Ed. 2. and see a notable case for exposition of words, and for relation of words and sentences, 34 Ed. 3. Avowry 58.28 H. 8. Dyer. Gawdy, It is a forfei∣ture. Clench said he would advise; but afterwards it was adjudged a for∣feiture: for as Wray said, the estate given was forfeit. Mich. 36, & 37 Eliz. Bagnall against Porter in B. R.Rot. 353. A Man by Indenture bargains and sells his land, and if the Bargainor pay 100 l. at such a day, that then he shall be seised to the use of the Bargainor and his heirs, and did assume to make such assurance for the security of the land as should be advised by the Councell of the Bargainor, and the Bargainee bound himself in a Recognizance to performe the said Covenants. And in debt upon the Recognizance, it was shewn that the Bar∣gainor paid the money at the day, and had tendred to the Bargainee a Deed in which was comprised an acquittance of payment of the money, and also a release of all his right, and the Bargainee refused to seale it. Coke was of clear opinion that he ought to have sealed it, for it is necessary to have the Deed to mention payment of the money, for otherwise the Bargainee and his heirs may claim the land for default of payment. Gawdy of the same opinion, and cited 19 Ed. 4. Popham, The case is not so clear, for if he had tendered an acquittance only, there is no doubt but the Bargainee might refuse to seale it, and by the same reason he may refuse when it is joyned to a thing that he is bound not to do, viz. to seal the release: but at last the matter was referred to Arbitration. Hillar. 37 Eliz. COke demanded this question, A man having two Daughters his Heires, does demise his Land to them in Fee; What estate had they by this Demise? For if a man deviseth Land to his eldest Son, it is voyd, and he is in by descent. That it was holden by the Court, that they shall hold by the Devise, because that he gives another estate to them then descended, for by the descent each of them had a distinct moyety, but by the Devise they are Joyn-renants, and the survivor shall have all. And Fenner sayd, If a man had Land in Burrow-English and Guildable Lands, and devised all his Land to his two Sons, and dyes, both of them shall take joyntly, and the younger shall not have a distinct moiety in the Burrow-English, nor the elder in the Guildable Land, but they are both Joyn-tenants. Pasch. 37 Eliz. Carrell against Read, in B. R.Rot. 270. A Lease for years was made of divers Fenny grounds in
Cambridge ss. and the Lessee covenanted to defend the ground, for being surrounded with water, and to drain the water out of other lands that were demised to him in the said County. And upon an Action of Covenant for not perform∣ing, the Defendant pleaded that the Plaintiff had entred in the land de∣mised. And adjudged no plea by the Court, because the Covenant was not in respect that the Lessee should enjoy the land, nor was it a Covenant ab∣hering to the land, but to a collaterall thing; but if it had been in respect of enjoying the land, there it is a good plea to say that the Plaintiff had en∣tredbut where the thing to be done is collaterall, it is otherwise, and also if he did plead such plea, yet it is not a bar, unlesse he holds him out of pos∣session, Coke lib. 3.221. 4 Ed. 3.29. the Lord shall not have a Cessavit after entry in parcel, 10 Ed. 4.11.35 H. 6. Bar 162.19 Ed. 4.2. Trin. 37 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 1076. Dogrell against Perks. IN an Action of Covenant, The Defendant pleaded, that it was enacted by the Major of London, and common Councel, that if any Citizen takes the Son of an Alien to be his Apprentice. that the Covenants and Obli∣gations shall be void, and he shewed that he was the Son of an Alien, and became an Apprentice to the Plaintiff who is a Citizen, and made the Covenants with him for his Apprentiship: And demanded Iudgment. And it was held no Bar; for notwithstanding the Act, the Covenant is good, for it is the Act of the Defendant, although the Act of the Common Councell be against it: but the said Act may inflict punishment on any Citizen that breakes it. And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Trin. 41 Eliz. in B. R. Knotts against Everstead. LEssee for life, the remainder for life, the remainder in taile, he in the reversion who had the fee does enter and enfooffs the Lessee for years; and adjudged that by this Feoffment Nihil operatur. Popham said, that he who hath a term cannot license another that hath nothing in the land to make a Feoffment, for he who hath the Freehold wants nothing but possession to make a good Livery: but in this case he who makes the Livery had not the Freehold, and therefore the license is void. But Tan∣feild said, that if Lessee for life gives leave to a stranger to make Livery, it is void, but if he consent that the stranger shall make a Feoffment, it shall amount to a Disseisin, and the Feoffment is good. Which was denied by the Court. And Clench said, if a Lessee for ten years makes a Lease for one year to him in reversion, there he in the reversion who hath the land for a year, may make a Feoffment to the Lessee for ten years, and it is good. Trin. 41 Eliz. Moyle against Mayle. MOyle brought an Action of Waste against Mayle, and declared that he had leased to him a Mannor and a Warren, and that he had de∣stroyed a Cony-borough and subverted it, and assigned otherwastes in cut∣ting down certain Thornes. Williams, The Action of waste will well lye, and said that a Warren consisted or two things, of a place of Game, and of liberty, and to prove that a waste did lye for a liberty, he cited the Sta∣tute of Magna Charta, Cap. 5. in which a Warren is intended, also the Statute of Marlebridge, cap.
24. and the Statute Articuli super Chartas, cap. 18. by which Statutes it is evident that a waste does lie for Warrens, and a Warren is more then a liberty, for a Writ lies Quare warrenam su∣am intravit, and by the 12 H. 8. if Lessee of a Warren does break the Pale, it is a waste, also if Lessee of a Pigeon-house stop the holes, so thatthe Pigeons cannot build, a waste doth lye, as it hath been adjudged. Also if Lessee of a Hop yard ploweth it up and sowes Graine there, it is waste, as it hath been adjudged. Also the breaking a Weare is waste, and so of the Banks of a Fish-pond, so that the water and fish run out: To all which ca∣ses the Court agreed, except to the principal. For the Court held it was not waste to destroy Cony-boroughs, for wast will not lye for Conies, be∣cause a man hath not inheritance in them, and a man can have no proper∣ty in them but only possession, and although by a speciall Law, Keepers are to preserve the land they keep, in the same plight they found it, yet thi does not bind every Lessee of land. Walmsley. The subversion of Cony-boroughs is not waste, and it was usuall to have a waste against those who made holes in land, but not against those who stop them up, because ther∣by the land is made better: And it was said, that to dig for stones was a waste, unlesse in an ancient Quarry, although the Lessee fill it up againe. And Walmsley said, that in Lancashire it is waste to dig Marle, unlesse it be imployed upon the land: And said it was not waste to cut thornes, un∣lesse they be in a Wood stubbed and digged up by the roots; but if they grow upon the land then they may be stubbed, and it is no waste: But to cut down Thorne-trees that have stood sixty or a hundred years, it is waste. Hil. 32 Eliz. in B. R. Sir George Farmer against Brook. IN an Action of the Case the Plaintiff claimeth such a Custome in the Town of B. that he and his Ancestors had a bake-house within the Town to bake white bread and houshold-bread, and that he had served all the Town, with bread, & that no other could use the Trade without his license, and that the Defendant had used the Trade without his license upon which the Defendant demu'd. Morgan, This is a good Prescription, and it is reason that a Prescription should bind a stranger, vide 11 H. 6.13. A. prescribed to have a Market, and that none should sel but in a Stall, which A. had made, and was to pay for the Stall, and held there a good Prescrip∣tion. And the Arch-bishop of Yorks Case in the Register. 186. is a good case. A man prescribed that he had a Mill, and he found a horse to carry the Corn thither, and that therfore they ought to grind there, and because they did not, he brough his Action on the case. Buckley contra. It cannot be in∣tended to have any commencement by any Tenure, 11 H 4. A. procured a Patent that none should sell any thing in London without paying him a penny, adjudged not good, and the case of the Arch-bishop was good, because he had it ratione dominii & tenuri. And adjudged the principall case, that the action will not lye. 23 Eliz. in C. B. Farrington against Charnock. KIng Henry the 8 granted Turbariam suam in D. at Farrington ren∣dring rent sur 21. years and then the Lessee imployed part of it in ar∣able land, and relinquisht part of it in Turbary: and then Q. Mary grants Totam illam Turbariā before demised to Farrington; and adjudged that that passed only which was Turbary, and the other part, that was converted into Tillage did not passe.
Mich. 18 Eliz. in B. R. SIr Arthur Henningham brought an Action of Error against Francis Windham to reverse a common recovery had against Henry Henning∣ham his brother: and the Error assigned was, that there was no warrant of Attorney of the Record. And it was agreed by the Bar and Bench, and adjudged error. But the great point was, if the Plaintiff could have a writ of Error? The Case was; Henry the Father had Henry his Son and three Daughters by one Venter, and the Plaintiff by another Venter, and died seised of the land intailed to him, and the Heirs Males of his body. Henry enters and makes a Feoffment, the Feoffee is impleaded, and voucheth Henry, who looseth by default in the recovery, and dies without issue, and whether the Daughters which are Heirs generall, or the Plaintiff which is Heir in tail shall have the Error. Gawdy and Baker for the De∣fendant, who said, that the Plaintiff could not have the Error, but the Daughters who were the Heirs to Henry, for an Action alwaies discends according to the right of land, and it seems that the Heir in Burrow En∣glish shall have Error or Attaint, and not the Heir at the Common Law, which was agreed by all on both sides: but it was said, that this varies much from the present case, for two reasons; One, because he came in as Vouchee which is to recover a Fee-simple, and he shall render a Fee-sim∣ple in value, which is discendable to the Heirs at the Common Law. Se∣condly, he hath no Estate-tail. Bromley Solicitor, and Plowden contra, and laid this ground, that in all cases where a recovery is had against one by erroneous processe, or false verdict, he which is grieved shall have re∣dresse of it, although he be not party or privy to the first Iudgment, and therefore at the Common Law if a Recovery be had against Tenant for life, he in the Reversion shall have Error of Attaint after his death, and now by the Statute of R 2. in his life, so in a Precipe, if the Tenant vou∣ches, and the Vouchee looseth by default, the Tenant shall have Error, for the Iudgment was against him, and he looseth his term: and in the 44 Ed: 4.6. in a Trespasse of Battery against two, one pleads, and it is found against him, and the plea of the other not determined, damages by the prin∣cipall Verdict is given against them both, which (if they be excessive) the other shall have an Attaint. And Bromley said, there could not be a case put, but where he that hath the losse by the recovery should have also the remedy; and Baker cited 9. H. 7.24.6. that if a Recovery be had against a man that hath land on the part of the Mother, and he dies without issue, the Heir of the part of the Father shall have the Error. But Bromley and Plowden denied this case, and that 3 H 4.9. it was adjudged to the contra∣ry: And Wray said to Baker, that he ought not much to rely on that case, for it was not Law, and said, that if Tenant for life makes a Feoffment, and a Recovery is had against the Feoffee, the first Lessor shall not avoid this. Bromley there is no use, for he may enter by forfeiture; but in our case, of whatsoever estate it be at the time of the recovery, the right of the Estate-tail is bound, and therefore it is reason that the Heir in tail shall avoid it. Jeffrey of the same opinion, and cited 17. Ass. A Conusor makes a Feoffment, and then execution is sued against the Feoffee by erroneous processe, the Feoffee shall have the Writ of Error, although he be not par∣ty to the first Record, but the reason is, because of his interest in the land. And Bromley and Plowden said further, that notwithstanding the Feoffee recovers against the Vouchee, and the Vouchee recover over the land, yet this recovery shall go to the Estate-tail. And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff.
Trin. 32 Eliz. in B. R. TRussell was attainted of Felony by Outlawry, and after an Exe∣cution is sued against him at the suit of a common person, and he is taken by force thereof, and after he takes a Habeas Corpus out of the Kings Bench, and Coke prayed that he might be discharged of this ex∣ecution, for where a man is attaint of Felony he hath neither Goods nor Lands, and his body is at the Kings disposall, and so is not subject to the execution of a common person, 4 Ed. 4. But Harris Serjeant and Glanvill on the contrary, For although he be attaint of Felony, yet may he be in execution, for his own offence shall not aid him: and so was it in Crofs case in the Common Pleas; where a man being attaint of Felony was taken in execution at the suit of a common person, and he escaped out of Prison, and an escape was brought against the Sheriffs of London, and a Recovery against him. And at last by advise of the Court, because he was indebted to many persons, and to discharge himself from his Creditors, intended to have a pardon for his life, and so deceive them, therefore he was committed to the Marshalsey upon this execution. Trin. 42 Eliz. Malloy against Jennings.Rot. 1037. IN a Replevin the Case was; A man seised of land in fee, is bound in a Recognizance of 100 l. and then bargains and sells all his land to the Plaintiff, and then the Recognizance is forfeit, and the Conu∣zee sues out a Scire facias against the Conuzor before the Deed was in∣rolled, and had Iudgment to have Execution. And the question was, if the Bargainor was a sufficient Tenant against whom the Executi∣on was sued. Williams Serjeant, The Bargainor was Tenant at the time of the Scire facias before inrolement, and although it was inrol∣led after, shall have relation to the first livery to prevent any grant or charge: And if an Action be brought against an Executor, as in his own wrong, and the Suit depending he takes Letters of Administra∣tion, this shall not abate the Writ. So▪ in our case, the Bargainor was seised of the land when the Scrie facias was brought; and if a man makes a Lease for life, rendring Rent, and then the Lessor bargains and sells the Reversion, and before the Inrolement the Rent is behind, and the Bargainer demands the Rent which was not paid, and then the Deed is inrolled, yet he cannot enter for the forfeiture, which I have seen adjudged: & in the 28 H. 8. Dyer. Disseisee of one acre makes a Release to the Disseisor of all his lands, and delivers it as an Escroll to be delivered to the Disseisor, and then he disseiseth him of another acre, and then the Deed is delivered to the Disseisor, yet the right in the second acre shall not passe. And he much rolled on Sir Richard Brochets case, 26 Eliz. who made a Recognizance to Morgan upon condition to convey unto him all his lands whereof he was seised the first day of May, and it hapned that one Corbet had sold him land by Indenture the 24. day of April, but the Deed was not inrolled untill the 24. day of May after: And the question was, if the Conuzor was bound to convey these lands, or not, and adjudged that he was not, for inasmuch as the Deed was not inrolled the ffrst day of May, he was not seised, and great mischief would ensue if the Law should be other∣wise:
for no man will know against whom to bring his Action, for a Bargain and Sale before Inrolement may be done secretly. Herne Serjeant, The Bargainee is seised before Inrolement, and by the Statute of 5 Eliz. which wills, that none shall convert land used to tillage, unlesse he puts other land to tillage within six months, yet none will say that it is a breach of the Statute, although Pasture be presently converted to tillage, and he cited Chilburns cafe, 6 Eliz. Dyer 229. that proves that before the Inrolement land passeth to the Bar∣gainee, and the Bargainee hath a Freehold in him before the Inrole∣ment, and whereof his wife shall be endowed, and if the Bargainor levies a Fine, or acknowledge of Statute, the Bargainee shall avoid them, and deased the case of Morgan, cited by the other side, and cited the case of 6 Ed 6. where were two Ioynt-tenants, and one of them bargained and sold his Moyety, and then the other Ioyntenant died, and then the Deed was inrolled, there nothing passed but a Moyety, but it seems in that case that by the Bargain and Sale the Ioynture is se∣vered before the Inrolement, so that there is no Survivorship, but the Book speaks not of it; and if a Bargainee be of lands held of the King without license of a alienation, there the forfeiture to the King shall re∣late to the first delivery of the Deed. Warberton contra. Before the Inrolement there is but a commencement of the Bargain, and before all circumstances in the Deed mentioned, are performed, it is no Bar∣gain; and I hold the Deed shall have relation to the delivery to pre∣vent all Charges, & Contracts, but as to strangers it shall not have such relation. If Tenant for life bargains and sells his land to another and his Heirs, and then makes a Feoffment in fee to another before in∣rolement, this is no forfeiture. Anderson, A release made to a Bar∣gainee before inrolement is void, then if this Scire facias be well brought, no Act of the Bargainee shall avoid it. Walmsley, If there be a Bargainee, and before the Inrolement the Bargainor enfeoffs him, he is in by the Feoffment and not by the Bargain, which proves that no estate is really in the Bargainee before Inrolement, Kingsmill, The reason of that is, because it is out of the Statute, for the Bargain and Sale was onely delivered, and he said that the wife of the Bar∣gainee in such case shall be indowed: But the Court denied that, and all agreed that the wife of the Bargainee before Inrolement shall not be indowed. Kingsmill said. that it was a usuall course in a Recovery to make the Bargainee Tenant of the Precipe. And it was said by all the Iustices, that if Tenant for life be impleaded, the Bargainee of the Reversion after Inrolement shal be received, and yet (if hanging the Writ) he purchase the Reversion, he shall not. And after many arguments it was adjudged that the Scire facias was not well awarded: And Iudgment given for the Plaintiff. 37 Eliz. in C. B. Day against Austin.
IN a Trespasse, the Defendant justified the taking of a Furnace fixt to the earth; because the Sheriff upon an intent sold it to him. And by the Court it was held a good discharge: for if a stranger takes my Horse, and sells him, a Trespasse will not lye against the Vendee, but a Detinue. But if one sells my Horse, and a stranger takes him, he is a Trespassor. Walmesley and Beaumond, Although such Furnace be fixed by the Termor, yet he may take it away within the term, butthe Sheriff cannot attach it; and the Termor may pull down a Wall made by him, and it is not waste. And at another day the case was recited to be thus. The Lessee made a Furnace for the use of a Dyer, and fixed it to the wall of his house, and the Lessee being condemned in debt, the She∣riff came to the Furnace, and put his hands upon it, and delivered it to the Defendant; and the Lessee brought a Trespasse. Glanvill, A Furnace may be delivered in execution, and the house never the worse, but otherwise of the doors, because the Lessee cannot be without them, 42 Ed. 3.6. it is not waste to take away a Furnace, 21 H. 6.26. said there that the Heir shall have such Furnace, but this does not prove that it is not a Chattell, but the cause wherefore the Heir shall have it, it is because it is annext to the land, as in the case of writings which are meer Chattels. Beaumound, It is doubly fixt, to the land and to the wall; and it is clear that the Sheriff cannot take it from the wall. Dyer, The diversity is when the Furnace is fixt to the middle of the house, and when to the wall, for the Termor may take it from the middle of the house, but not from the wall, for the wall is worse for taking it away, and therefore it is waste: And to this Owen agreed. Pasch. 35 Eliz. in B. R. Rotheram against Crawley.Rot. 332. IN debt upon a Bond, the case was; Divers questions were made between the Plaintiff Lord, and the Defendant Tenant, concerning Relief, whereupon they referred themselves to the Arbitrement of I.S. who did a∣ward, that the Plaintiff should make a Release to the Defendant (which was done) of all Actions, Duties, and Amercements: and then upon this Action brought by the Plaintiff for a collatterall thing, the Release was pleaded in Bar. Coke Attorney, The Plaintiff shall not be barred by this Release, for Deeds ought to be expounded according to the intent of the parties, and the intent of the party was to release no Duty but the Relief, which was only in question, & this word, Duties, being interposed between Reliefs and Amercements, shall be intended Duties of such nature as Re∣liefs and Amercements, and no otherwise, as it is in Dyer 23 Eliz. A man grants and to farm lets such land with wood, this is no grant of the wood, and yet there are words sufficient to passe the wood, but being conjoyned with the words, And to farm let, it shall be expounded that it was not inten∣ded to have it be an absolute Grant. But adjudged that it was a good Bar, and Iudgment was given accordingly. Hil. 37 Eliz. Goodway against Michell GOodway brought a trespasse against divers persons, Quare clausum fre∣gerunt & duas Ramas & perches of hedge, fregerunt The Defendant by way of justification said, that the place was in the Parish of Hadnam in E∣ly, and that all the Parishioners time out of mind, have used to have passage through the said Close in Rogation week, to make their Perambulation of the Parish, & because that the Plaintiff hindred the Defendants as Parishi∣oners, Ramas & sepes fregerunt, whereupon the Plaintiff demurred. Sper∣ling, The justification is not good, for although Parishioners may justifie the having a way over my ground, yet they cannot break the Hedges; Also they have broken two Perches, and two Gates, which is excessive for a foot∣path. 15 H. 9.10.6. A Commoner cannot break all the hedge upon the land where he hath Common.
Savile cont. All the Parishioners ought to go their Perambulation, and being a great number they may well enough justifie,for they are not compelled to keep the foot-path. 6 Ed. 2. F.N.B. 185. b. Pari∣shioners may pull down a wall that hinders them in their way to the Church: and in the book of Entries, there is a President where the Vicar and Parishiones did justifie an entry for this very cause, & prescribed as we do in this case; so they may prescribe in a way, or other thing of easement or pleasure, 7 Ed. 4.26 a. 15 Ed. 4.29. a. Anderson, There is no question but Parishioners may justify their going over any bodies land in their Peram∣bulation. Warberton, Parishioners shall not prescribe in an easement, as in y way to the Church. Owen, The books make a difference between things of interest, as in common, for in such things Parishioners cannot prescribe, and things of easement, as a waste, for in such things a man may prescribe. Anderson. It is plain that Parishioners cannot prescribe, for none may prescribe but those that have perpetuall continuance, and therefore Tenant for years or for life, or Parishioners cannot prescribe, but must be aided by custome. Walmsley of the said opinion, for there is no descent or succession in Parishioners. And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Trin. 37 Eliz. in B. R. Norton and Sharp against Gennet.Rot. 178. A Prohibition was sued by the Plaintiffe as Executors to I.S. who sur∣mised that the Defendant sued them in the Court Christian for a Le∣gacy of 200 l. and that the Testator had goods but to the vale of 350 l. and set forth how he was Keeper of the Prison of Ludgate, & that he was bound to A. and M. Sheriffs of London, to discharge and save harmlesse the same Sheriffs from all escapes, which bond was to the value of a 1000 l. And shewed that one Holmes was taken by a Capias utlegatum at the suit of a stranger, and how the Testator suffered him to escape, whereupon an action of debt was brought against the Sheriffs, and a Iudgment, whereby the Obligation made to them by their Testator is forfeit, and pleaded riens in∣termaines, and because the Court Christian would not allow this plea, they prayed a Prohibition, upon which Coke Attorney-generall demurred. And it was agreed by Gawdy Iustice, Coke, and Tanfeild, that if the Bond to the Sheriff be not forfeit, then is the Surmise good, and the Legacy shall be paid: But Fenner said to Coke, Quomodo probas? Who answered, The difference is when a bond is made by the Testator for payment of money in a Suit at the Court Christian for a Legacy, such a bond is a good plea, al∣though the bond be not forfeit, as in the 9 Ed. 4.12, & 13. for the Condition of the Bond is part of the Bond, and a duty, but otherwise it is where the Condition is collaterall for the performance of Covenants: but in our case the Condition is not broken as is supposed, for the Capias utlegatum issued the 25 of Eliz. and so the Arrest meerly void, for every Capias ought to be returned the next term after the Teste, 21 H. 7.16.6, & 8 Ed. 4.4. & 6. Sed alii contra. But after a Consultation was moved for, if a Recovery was after∣wards had against the Executors: And it was answered, that it was not the course to make a Bond to the party but to the Court. But Fenner said, that it such course be allowed, no Legacy would be paid. And Iudgment was gi∣ven that a Consultation should be awarded if the Legatee would enter into a Bond to the Executor to make restitution if, &c. or otherwise not. Hil. 38 Eliz. in B. R. Haddon against Arrowsmith.
IN an Ejectment, the case was; The Queen being Lady of the Mannor of Winterburne in the County of Berks, by her Steward did license a Co∣pyholder for life to make a Lease for three years, if he should so long live, the Copyholder did make a Lease generally to the plaintiff for three years, whobeing ejected brought this Action. Stephen. The Action will not lye because the Copyholder hath not pursued his licence, for license or authority must be pursued very strictly as well in form as substance, 10 H. 7. license to en∣feoff by Deed, or license to impark 300. acres, he cannot enfeoff by paroll, or impark but 100. acres, and it was resolved the last Terme in the Exche∣quer, that if the King license his Tenant to alien, he cannot alien to one in tail, the remainder to the Donor in fee: And so in our case where he makes a Lease for 3. years absolutely, he hath not performed his license. Gawdy con∣tra, for when his license is to make a Lease for yeares, if he so long live, these words (If he so long live) are but Surplusage; for the Law saies, that if Copyholder for life makes a Lease for years, and dies, the Lease is determined, and therfore the clause in the License is no more then the Law saies, and so is void. Quod suit concessum per totam curiam. Fenner, The Condition in the License is meerly void, for the Lord gives nothing by the License, but only doth dispence with the forfeiture, and the Lessee is in by the Copyholder and not by the Lord, for the Lord cannot condition with him in his License. Clench, The Lord may license on Condition, as where the Lord doth licence his Copyholder on condition that the Lessee shall re∣pair the house, or shall not cut Trees, for otherwise the Copyholder may cut them, and the Lord hath no remedy, for his License is a dispensation of the forfeiture. Popham contra, A Condition to a License is void, as a Li∣cense to make a Lease for years, on condition that he pay 20 l. the second year, this is void for the reason given by my brother Fenner, for the license does not give a right, but only executes it, as a Livery, or Attornment; but a Limitation to such License is good, as license to alien for two years, he cannot alien for three, but in our case the Condition & the Limitation made by the Lord is void: and the difference is between a Copyholder in fee, and a Copyholder for life, for if the Lord doth license his Copyholder in fee to make a Lease for three years if he so long live, and he makes a Lease abso∣lutely, this is no forfeiture, for this Lease shall be a good interest against the Heir of the Copyholder, but otherwise of a Copyholder for life. And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Pasch 38 Eliz. in C. B. Bishop of Rochesters Case. THe Bishop of Rochester brought a Writ of Annuity against the Deane and Chapter of Rochester, and declared of an Annuity by Prescription, from the Prior of S. Andrewes of Rochester, wch Priory was dissolved the 28 H. 8. & 31 H. 8. their possessions were committed by the King to the Dean & Chapter of Rochest. Anderson, The Annuity does not remain, for an Annuity chargeth the party and not the possession, and therfore when the Corpora∣tion is dissolved which is the person, the Annuity is gone. Walmesley, But in 2 H. 6 9. it is said there, If a Priory be charged with an Annuity, the An∣nuity shall continue, although it be charged to an Abby. Anderson, That is true, for there the Corporation is changed only, but here it is dissolved. Williams, But that is saved by the 3 H. 8 for Annuities are exprest in the saving. Anderson, But this is an Annuity or Rent with which the land is charged. Beaumond, If it be any thing wherewith the land is charged, it is saved, but the person is only charged with this Annuity. Walmsley, But the 21 H. 7. is, that an Annuity out of a Parsonage is not a meer personall charge, but chargeth the Parson only in respect of the land. And the Court would consider on the case.
Pasch. 38 Eliz. in B. R. The Case of the Dean and Chapter of Norwich. THe Case was, A Church in which there had been a Parson and a Vicar time out of mind, and the Parson used to have the great Tythes, and the Vicar the small, and for the space of forty years last past, it was pro∣ved that the Parson had Tythes paid him out of a feild of twenty acres of Corne, and now the feild is sowed with Saffron, and the Vicar sued for the Tythes of Saffron in the Court Christian, and the Parson had a Prohibiti∣on. Coke. I conceive the Parson shall have the Tythes, for by the Statute of 2 H. 6. it is enacted that Tythes shall be paid as hath been used the last forty years, and this hath been alwaies tythable to the Parson, and al∣though the ground be otherwise imployed, yet the Parson shall have the Tythes; and so was it in Norfolk, in the Case of a Park, where the Par∣son proscribed Pro modo decimandi, to be paid three shillings fours pence, for all Tythes rising out of the said Park, and although the Park was af∣ter converted to arable, yet no other Tythes shall be paid. Popham, It hath been adjudged otherwise in Wroths Case of the Inner Temple in the Exchequer. But the Law is clearly as hath been said; and the difference is, when the Prescription is to pay so much money for all Tythes, or when the Prescription is to pay a shoulder of every Buck, or a Doe at Christmas, for there if the Park be disparkt, Tythes shall be paid, for Tythes are not due for Venison, and therefore they are not Tythes in Specie. And I conceive that Tythes of Saffron-heads shall be compre∣hended under small Tythes, and although the Tythes of this Feild have been paid to the Parson, yet it being converted to another use, whereof no grosse Tythes do come, the Vicar shall have the tythes: and so if arable land be converted into an Orchard, the Wicar shall have tythe of the Ap∣ples; and so if the Orchard be changed to arable, the Parson shall have tythes. Quod Fenner concessit. 36 Eliz. Higham against Deff. IN a Trespasse, the Case was, That a Vicaridge by composition was in∣dowed of the third part, Omnium Bladorum decimarum, of the Mannor of D. If he shall have tythes of the Freeholders of the Mannor, was the questi∣on. Johnson, He shall not have them, for a Mannor consisteth of two things, viz. of Demesns and Services, & the Freeholders are neither parcel of the Demesnes nor the Services, and therefore no parcell of the Mannor, and this is proved in 12 Ass. 40. a Rent-charge was granted out of a Mannor, the Tenancy escheats, it shall not be charged with the Rent. Tanfeild contra, For this word, Mannor, does extend to the Precincts of the Mannor, and not to the Demesnes and Services onely, and therefore if a Venire facias be awarded De viceneto Manerii de D. the Freeholders shall be returned; also a survey of a Mannor shall be as well of the Free∣hold lands, as of the Demesnes, and if the King grants a Leet within the Mannor of D. all the Freeholders are bound to appear. Fenner, Grants ought not to be restrained to their strict words, but are to be construed according to the intent of the parties. Trin. 38 Eliz. in B. R. Ewer against Henden.Rot. 339.
IN an Ejectment the Iury found that I.S. being seised of a Capitall Mes∣suage in the County of Oxford, and also of a house and land in Walter,in the County of Hartford, makes a Lease for years of his house and land in the County of Hartford, and then by Will does demise his house in the County of Oxon, Together with all other his Lands, Meadowes, Pastures, with all and singular their Appurtenances in Walter in the County of Hartford, to John Ewer: and whether the house in Walter, in the County of Hartford does passe, or not, was the question. Tanfeild, The houses shall passe, for if a man builds a house upon Black acre, and makes a Feoffment of the acre, the house shall passe, and so if a man does devise una jugata terrae of Copyhold Land, the house of the Co∣pyhold does passe also, for so is the common phrase in the Country; and so if a man be rated in a 100 l. subsidy, that does include houses, and by the grant of a Tenement the house passeth, but if a man demand a house in a Precipe, there the house ought to be named. Whistler contra, It is true that if a man generally does devise his Land, the houses passe: but in this case the Devisee hath particularized his Land, his Meadow, and his Pasture, and if he intended to have passed, his hou∣ses he would have mentioned them as well as his Lande. Fenner, I am of the same opinion, for this speciall numbring of parti∣culars, does exclude the generall intendment; and if the Devisor had a Wood there, that would dot passe by these words. Popham contra, For if a man sells all his Lands in D. his houses and woods passe by this word, Lands, and so was it agreed in a case which was referred to Dyer and Wray chief Justice, and there reason was, because that a Warrant of Attorney in a Precipe of a House, Woods, and Land, is onely of Land, which proves that land does comprehend all of them, and therefore I conceive, if a man does devise, or bargain and sell all his lands in D. the Rents there shall passe, for they were issuing out of the land: But if a man be seised of three houses and three acres, and he deviseth all his land in D. and one of his houses, the other houses will not passe, for his expresse meaning is apparant, but here the words are in generall as to the lands in Walter, and therefore the houses do passe. But afterwards it was adjudged that the house did not passe, for by the particular mentioning of all his Lands, Meadowes and Pastures, the house is excluded. Pasch. 4 Eliz. Hunt against King. IN a Writ of Error upon a Iudgment given in the Common Pleas in a Formedon brought there; the Case was, Tenant in tail enfeoffs his Son, and then disseiseth his Son, and levies a Fine to a stranger, and before the Proclamations passe, the Son enters and makes a Feoffment to a stranger, the Father dies, and the Son dies, and the Issue brings a Formedon. The question was, Whether by the entry of the Son the Fine was so defeated that the Estate-tail was not barred. Dyer, The Estate tail is barred, and made a difference where the Fine is defeated by entry, by reason of the E∣state-tail, and where it is defeated by entry by reason of another estate-tail, as in 40 Eliz. Tenant in tail discontinues, and disseiseth the Discontinuee, and levies a Fine to a stranger, and retakes an Estate in Fee, before the Proclamations passe, the Discontinuee enters, and then the Tenant in tail dies seised, and adjudged that the Issue is not remitted, for the Statute 32 H. 8. saies, That a Fine levied of lands any way intailed by the party that levies the Fine shall bind him, and so it is not materiall whether he were seised by force of the Estate-tail, or by reason of another Estate, or whether he have no Estate.
And all the Iustices were of opinion that the Estate was barred, for although the discontinue had avoided the Fine by the possession, yet the E∣state-tail remains concluded, and the same shall not enter by force of the Estate-tail, but by force of the Fee which he had by discontinuance. Popham, Avoidance of a Fine at this day differs much from avoidance of a Fine at the Common Law, for it appears by the 16 Ed: 3. that if a Fine at the Common Law be defeated by one who hath right, it is defeated against all, but at this day the Law is contrary, for if a man be disseised, and the Disseisor die seised his Heir within age, and he is disseised by a stranger who levies a Fine, and then five years passe, the Heire shall avoid this by his nonage, yet the first Disseisee is bound for ever, for the Infant shall not avoid the Fine against all, but only to restore the possession. And therefore it was adjudged in the Lord Sturtons Case, 24 Eliz. where Lands were given to him and his Wife, and the Heires of him, and he died, and his Issue entred and levied a Fine to a stranger, and before the Procla∣mations passed, the Mother enters, it was adjudged that the Issue was barred, for the Wife shall not avoid this but for her own Estate: And so if a stranger enters to the use of him who hath right, this shall not avoid the Fine. Fenner did agree to this, and said that it had been so adjudged; but all the Iustices agreed, that the Estate-taile being barred, the entry shall go to the benefit of him who hath most right to the possession, and that is the discon∣tinue; and therefore the Plaintiff in the Formedon hath good Title to the Land, but onely to the Fee, and not to the Intaile, for that is barred by the Fine. 28 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 2130. Gibson against Mutess. IN a Replevin the Case was; John Winchfeild was seised of Lands in Fee, and by his Will did devise all his Lands and Tenements to An∣thony Winchfeild and his Heires, and before his death made a Deed of Fe∣offment of the same Lands, and when he sealed the Feoffment, he asked, If this Feoffment will not hurt this last Will, & if it will not, I will seal it? And then he sealed it, and made a Letter of Attorney to make Livery in any of the said Lands, the Attorney made Livery, but not of the Lands which were in question, and then the Testator died. And the question was, if the Devisee or Heire of the Devisor should have the Land. And it was said in behalf of the Heire, that if the Testator had said, It shall not be my Will, then it is a Revocation. Quod curia concessit: But it was the o∣poinion of the Court, that it appears that it was the intent of the Testator that his Will should stand, and if it be not a Feoffment it is not a Revoca∣tion in Law, although that the Attorney made a Livery in part, so that the Feoffment was perfect in part, yet as concerning the Land in question, whereof no Livery was made, the Will is good; and the Iury found ac∣cordingly that the Land does not descend to the Heire. Fenner cited a Case of Serjeant Jeffereys, where it was adjudged, that where one had made his Will, and being demanded if he will make his Will, doth say, he will not, that this is no Revocation.
Sir Wolston Dixy against Alderman Spencer, 20 Eliz. in C. B. IN a Writ of Errour brought upon a Iudgement given in an Assize of Fresh-force in London. The case was, Sir Wolston Dixy brought an Action of Debt for rent arrear against Spencer upon a Lease for years made to him by one Bacchus, who afterwards granted the reversion to Dixy, and the Tenant attorned, and for rent arrear Dixy brought an a∣ction, &c. The Defendant pleaded in Bar that before the Grant made to Dixy, the said Bacchus granted it to him by parole, according to the custome of London; whereupon he demanded Iudgement, if▪ &c. and the Plea was entred on Record, and hanging the suit, Dxy brought an assize of fresh force in London, and all this matter was here plea∣ded, and it was adjudged a forfeiture of the Land; and hereupon Spencer brought a Writ of Errour, and assigned this for errour, that it was no forfeiture. Shuttleworth. It is no forfeiture untill a Trial be had whether the reversion be granted, or not; as in wast: the Defendant pleads that the Plaintiff had granted over his estate, this is no forfeiture; and in the 26 Eliz. in a Quid Juris clamat, the Defendant pleaded that he had an estate Tail, and when he came to have it tryed, he acknow∣ledged he had an estate but for life, and that was no forfeiture: But the Court said, they could remember no such Case. Walmesley, It was so adjudged, and I can shew you the names of the parties. Periam Justice. If there be such a Case, we would doubt of it, for there are Authorities to the contrary, as the 8 Eliz. and 6 Rich. 2. Anderson. If the Defendant in a Trespass prayes in aid of an estranger, this is a forfeiture; and if it be counter-pleaded, it is a for∣feiture, and the denial alters not the Case. Walmesley. The Books in 15 Ed. 2. Judgement 237. and 15 Ed. 1. that Iudgement in a Quid Juris clamat, shall be given before the for∣feiture. Andrson. In my opinion he may take advantage before Iudge∣ment as well as after, if the Plea be upon Record. And so was the o∣pinion of the Court. The Dutchess of Suffolks Case. Pasch. 4 & 5 Ph. & Mary, in C. B. IN a Quare impedit against the Bishop of Exeter, the Writ was ad respondendum Andrew Stoke & Dennisae Franciscae de Suffolk Uxori eu. Benlowes demanded Iudgement of the Writ, &c. because she lost her name of dignity by marriage with a base man, as it was adjudged, 7 Ed. 6. Dyer 79. where Madam Powes and her husband brought a Writ of Dower, and the Writ abated, because she called her self Dame Powes, whereas she had lost her dignity by marrying with her husband. Stanford agreed, for Mulier nobilis, si nupserit ignobili, desinit esse nobilis.
Brookes. There is a difference where a noble woman marries a noble man of less noble degree than she is, and when she marries one that is not at all noble; for in the first case the shall hold the dignity of her second husband, but in the last case she shall retain her antient di∣gnity. And so it was observed, where the Marquis of Dore had two daughters, the elder was married to the Lord Audley, and the young∣est to a Gentleman, and the eldest took place alwayes, as wife to a Baron, but the youngest kept her place as a Marquisses daughter. Dyer. I was a Counsel in the Case of the Lady Powes already mentioned, and she would by no means lose her dignity, and an He∣rauld was brought into Court, that said she had such dignity, although it was held clearly on the contrary by our Law by Montague and Hales, and the Writ did abate. Stanford. A noble man loseth his honour by his own act, as by at∣taint, and so hath the woman here by taking such husband, and the no∣bility of such woman is lost also by attainder. Brookes said, That he knew where the sons of a Duke and Marquiz had a trespass brought against them for hunting a Park by the name of Squires, and it was good; wherefore it was said to Benlows, that he must plead to the Writ. Pasch. 4 & 5 Ph. & Mary in C. B. A Feme sole having the custody of the land, and body of an In∣fant took husband, and she and her husband did tender conve∣nient marriage to the Infant, which he refused, and married himself elsewhere, and at his full age entred into the land; if it be necessary that both shall joyn in a Writ of forfeiture upon the marriage, or that the husband alone shall have it, was the question. Brown Justice. Both shall joyn, and so is it ruled in a Book. Dyer contr. The husband alone shall have this Writ, for he may discharge it, or release it; and by the 5 Ed. 3.14 & 6. the husband a∣lone may have a Writ of Trespass; and if the wife have an advouson, and a stranger present, the husband alone shall have a Quare impedit; and the same Law is, where the woman hath a Rent, and the hus∣band distreyns, and Rescous is made, the husband alone shall have a Rescous. Prideaux. The Wardship of a Ward and Land is a thing real, and the Survivor shall have it, and not the Executors of the Baron; and if an Action be accrued before marriage, as if a Bond be made to her before marriage, she shall joyn with her husband in the Action upon the Bond: but if a right to an Action does accrew after marriage, there she shall not joyn, as here the right of the husband does not ac∣crew untill marriage: for the Action is not in respect of the Wardship, but of the tender and refusal, and his marriage elsewhere, all which do accrew after the Coverture. Stanford. If a man bring a Quare impedit for an Advowson which he hath in right of his wife, and hath Iudgement to recover, and dyes, the wife shall present, and not the Executors of the husband; so if he recover in a Trespass, the wife shall have execution for the damages.
Prideaux. If a Lease be made to a woman, and a Rent reserved mine poenae, and she takes husband, and the Rent is behind, bothshall joyn in the Action for the pain. Dyer. This Action is ground∣ed upon a real Covenant. Stanford. Damages recovered in a Tre∣spass are not real, yet the wife shall have them, if the husband dye be∣fore Execution. Dyer. The Trespass is done to the inheritance of the wife, and therefore she shall have damages; and in 43 Ed. 1. Statham. The husband alone brought a ravishment of a Ward, for a Ward he had in right of his wife and the Writ held to be good; but there it is said, that otherwise it is in right of a Ward; and if they joyn in a Writ of ravishment of Ward, and recover, and the husband dye before Execution, his Executors shall have Execution, and not the wife: but it is said there (Quaere) and at last it was agreed that the Action should be allowed: but the surest way is to have bosh joyn. Pasch. 6 Eliz. Powtrells Case in C. B. IN an Ejectment the case was, a woman-tenant in Tail did make a Lease for 31 years, and took husband, and had issue; the wife dyes, and the husband is tenant by the curtesy, and surrenders to the heir, who puts out the Lessee, who brings this Action. Dyer. I doubt whether this surrender be good, for tenant by the curtesy is but in reversion, and hath nothing in possession, and it is du∣bious how he can surrender. Weston and Brown. He may surrender for a term▪ or frank∣tenement may be surrendred to him that hath the estate in reversion or remainder, if it be not a mean estate, as tenant for life, the remainder for life, the remainder in fee, the first tenant for life cannot surrender to him that hath the fee. But the great point of the Case was, if the issue could avoyd the Lease during the life of the tenant by curtesy; and the Court held he could not, for the tenant is in as a purchaser. And by Walsh and Carus. If tenant by the curtesy grants over his estate, and then enters into religion, the Grantee shall have his estate during the tenants natural life, Quod omnes concesserunt; and it was said also, that if the heir had been impleaded during the life of the tenant by cur∣tesy, he shall not have his age, quod fuit concessum. Mich. 14 & 15 Eliz. Tottenham against Bedingfield. IN an Account the Defendant pleaded he was never his Baily for to render account. Gawdy prayed the opinion of the Court if the Action would lye, for otherwise he would not trouble the Court. The Case was, the Plaintiff had a Lease of a Parsonage, and the Defendant being no Lessee, nor claiming any interest, takes the Tithes being set forth, and carries them away, if the Plaintiff could have this Action was the question. Manwood. It will not lye; for an account lyes where there is pri∣vity, but wrongs are alwayes without privity; but I agree, that it
one receive my rents, I shall have an account against him, for by my consent afterwards I do make a privity; for although that he hath re∣ceived the Rent, he hath not done wrong to me inasmuch as it is not my money untill it be paid to me▪ but otherwise it is where a man dis∣seiseth me of land, for that is meerly a wrong, and so is it in this case; for when the Tithes were set forth by the Parishioners, the Law sayes they are in the possession of the Parson; and therefore when the Defendant took them away, he does it wrongfully, and therefore no account will lye against him; and so was it adjudged in Lond in the Case of one Monax, who under colour of a Devise, did occupy land for 20 years, and after the Devise was adjudged voyd, he that had right to the land, brought an account against him, and adjudged that it does not lye. Harper contr. For an account does lye against a Proctor, and the Plaintiff may charge him as Proctor, and it is no Plea for him to say that he did not occupy as Proctor, no more than it is a Plea for him who occupies as Guardian, to say he was not the prochein amy. Dyer. There are three Actions of Account. 1. Against a Baily. 2. Against a Receiver. 3. Against a Guardian in socage; and if an Account be brought against one as Receiver, he ought to charge him with the receipt of money, and I conceive that there ought to be a pri∣vity to charge one with the receipt of money: but if one claim as Baily▪ or as Guardian in socage, he is chargeable in account: but an Abator or a Disseisor is not, because they pretend to be owners and in this case, because by the setting forth the Tithes the property is in the Parson, therefore he being Lessee for years, he shall have an ejectione firma, and not an Account. Hillar. 32 & 34 Eliz. Carter against Kungstead, in C. B.Rotulo 120. IN a Trespass the Iury gave this special Verdict. John Berry was seizin of the Mannour of Stapeley in Odiam, and of other lands in Odiam, and the 32 H. 8. suffered a common recovery of all his lands in Odiam, Stapeley and Winkfield, to the use of himself and his wife for life, the remainder to the heirs males of his body, & quod lterius starent of the Mannour of Stapeley, with the appurtenances, to the use of himself for life, the remainder to the heirs males of his body, whereby they were seized prout Lex postulat. The husband dyes, the wife makes a Lease for 19 years, and whether the Mannour of Stape∣ley were conveyed or not, was the question. Harris. She shall have all; for when the whole estate is limited at the beginning of a Deed, it shall not be abridged afterwards. Periam. The estate is by way of use, which shall be expounded ac∣cording to the intent and will of the Limiter; and if this had been done by will, it is clear the woman should not have the Mannour of Stapeley. Anderson. If I devise my land to J.S. and afterwards by the same Will I devise it to J.D. now J.S. shall have nothing, because it was my last Will that J.D. should have it: But otherwise it is of a use; for if I do limit an estate to the use of J.S. and in the last clause do li∣mit the same estate to J.D. the limitation to J.D. is voyd for the re∣pugnancy.
Periam. As to the case of the Will, I conceive it is voyd to both, because it cannot be known who shall have it. Anderson. I am sure the Law hath been taken as I have said; and there was a Case in the Vpper Bench, where a man one day made part of his Will, and another day made another part, which was repugnant to the first part, and adjudged that the last was good, and the first voyd. Periam. I agree to this Case, for here is a difference in time. Anderson. So is there in my Case; for when I am writing my Will, I am thinking how I shall dispose of my estate, and it shall be intended that I have least advised concerning that which I have done last. Walmesley. A Vse is not to be compared to a Will, for the Sta∣tute of 27 H. 8. hath made it an estate and then by the 19 of Edw. 3. If a man limits an estate at the beginning of a Deed, he cannot after abridge it. Periam. I put this Case: If a man covenants upon consideration to be seized to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of his son: but he further sayes, that his meaning is, his wife shall have it for her life, this is not a voyd Clause, but good to the wife; and the Case was adjourned till next Term. And Harris argued again, and said, that a Vse was but matter of trust, and for that it is apparent that the in∣tention was that the wife should have nothing, there is no reason that another construction should be made. Walmesley. The limitation of the Vse is but a declaration how the Vse shall be, and does not give any thing; and the opinion of the Court was against the Plaintiff who was Lessee of the woman, and that the last Clause does countermand the first, as to the Mannour of Stapeley. Michael. 31 & 32 Eliz. Brokesbyes Case, in C. B.Rot. 18.15. BArtholomew Brokesby brought a Quare impedit, and it ap∣peared by his Declaration, that the next avoydance was granted to him, and one Humphrey Brokesby, and then the Church became voyd, and Humphrey did release to Bartho∣lomew totum statum & titulum, &c. and then Bartholomew being disturbed, brought a Quare impedit in his name alone. Harris. The Plaintiff shall be barred, for the other shall be named with him, for the Release is voyd; for when the Church becomes voyd, it is a thing in action, and of privity and confidence, and cannot be released nor transferred. Dyer 283. a. 28 H. 8.26. a. Where it is said, that it cannot be granted over, no more than an Executor may release his Executorship to his companion. Beaumont. In my opinion it is not a Chose in action, but an in∣terest which the Executors have; and by the 14 H.
4. and 14 H. 6. If a man be seized of an Advowson in the right of his wife, and the Church is voyd, and the wife dyes, yet the husband shall present, which proves it is not a Chose in action; for in the 49 Edw. 3.23. the husband shall not have an obligation that was made to his wife;and in our case by this avoydance the Church is become an interest and a Chattell: and therefore one Ioyntenant may release to another by reason of their privity: although they have no possession. Fenner. The release is Totum Statum jus & titulum, but here he hath no estate nor possession, and therefore the release is void. And to prove that there is no estate nor possession, it is proved by the pleadings of the grant of the next avoydance, for he shews that the Church be∣came voyd, and that ea ratione pertinet ad ipsum presentare, and not by force, whereof he was possest, and if none hath the advowson which becomes voyd, and the Lord claymes the advowson, yet he shall not have the present avoydance, and as to the case of the Ioyntenants, one cannot release to the other for default of possession for the release inanes by reason of their joynt, possession which is out of them, but release of the Demandant to the Vouchee is good by reason of the privity of Law that is betwixt them; and in 11 H. 4. He who hath right after the In∣cumbent is instituted and inducted, may confirme his estate, and there∣fore the Release here is good. Anderson. We are all agreed that the Release is void, and gave Iudgment that the Plaintiff should be baned. Bretton against Barnet. Mich. 41. & 42. Eliz. A Man delivers money to J.S. to be redelivered to him when he should be required: which J.S. refused, and therefore an action of debt was brought, and the defendant demurred, for that an action of debt would not lie, but an account, as in the 41 Ed. 3.31. & 33. Walmesley. An action of debt will very well lie. And he took a dif∣ference between goods and money: for if a horse be delivered to be re∣delivered, there the property is not altered, and therefore a De∣tinue lies, for they are goods known: but if money be delivered, it can∣not be known, and therefore the property is alterd, and therefore a Debt will lie. And if Portugalls or other money that may be known be deliverd to be redelivered, a Detinue lies. Owen and Glanvill agreed to this, and Glanvill cited a Iudg∣ment given in Hilary Term, wherein he was of Councell, which was that a man delivers money to another to buy certain things for him, and he does not buy them, the party may bring an action of debt, but he said that the Plaintiff ought to aver that the Defendant had not redeliverd them. And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Mich. 41. & 42. Eliz. Green against Wiseman. in C. B. IN an Ejectment. The Defendant pleaded, that a Feoffment was made to the use of J.S. the Lessor of the Defendant, who by force thereof, and of the Statute, was seised, and made a lease to the Defen∣dant; and that one Green entred and made a Lease to the Plaintiff, and did not say that he entred upon J.S. And all the Question was, whither when a feoffment is made to the use of another, if he have such a seisin before his entry, whereof he may be disseised.
Glanvill. He hath no freehold, neither in Deed nor in Law before entry. Walmesley. This is contrary to all the Books: for a possession in Law is so translated from the Feoffee to Cestuy que use, that the wife of the feoffee shall not be endowed. Owen. He ought to have alledged a Disseisin. Anderson. As he might have possession by force of a Devise at Common Law, so he shall have possession of the land here by force of the Statute, and it is in Cestuy que use, before agreement or entry, but if he disagree, then it shall be out of him presently, but not before he disagree. And after viz. Hillar. 42. Eliz. Williams moved the case again, and Walmesley said then, that he might be disseised before his entrie or agreement, and the pleading shall be that he did enter, and did disseise him, but he shall not have a trespass without actuall entrie, for that is grounded on a possession: Glanvill a∣greed to this, and advised Williams to adventure the case thereupon. Hillar. 41 Eliza. Smiths Case in C. B. THe Patron of an advouson before the Statute of 31 Eliz. For Sy∣mony, doth sell Proximam advocationem, for a sum of money, to one Smith, and he sells this to Smith the Incumbent: After which comes the generall pardon of the Queen, whereby the punishment of Smith the Incumbent is pardon'd, and of Smith the Patron also. If the In∣cumbent may be removed was the Question: Williams said, that the Doctors of the Civill Law informed him, that the Law Spirituall was that for Symony the Patron lost his presentment, and the Ordinary shall present, and if he present not within six months, then the Metro∣politan, and then the King. Spurling Serjeant. This punishment cannot discharge the forfeiture, although it dischargeth the punishment. Glanvill contra. And said that this point was in question, when the Lord Keeper was Atturney, and then both of them consulted thereupon, and they made this diversity viz. between a thing void and voidable, and for Symony the Church is not void untill sentence declaratory, and therfore they held, that by the pardon before the sentence all is pardon'd, as where a man committs Felony, and before conviction the King par∣dons him, by this pardon the Lord shall lose his Escheate, for the Lord can have no Escheate before there be an attaindor, but that is preven∣ted before by the pardon, and so here this pardon prevents the sentence Declaratory, and so no title can accrue to the Ordinary. Walmesley cont. If the patron be charged by the sentence, he may plead the pardon. But if a Quare Impedit be brought by a third per∣son, the pardon of the King shall be no bar to him, for the title appeares not to him, but only the punishment. Anderson. They may proceed to sentence Declaratory, notwith∣standing the pardon; for the pardon is of the punishment, but the sen∣tence does not extend to that, but only to declare that the Church is void. Glanvill in 16 Eliz. a man was deprived of his Benefice for in∣continency, and after he was pardond and restor'd. Walmsley. I doubt much whither the King can pardon Symony:
And Williams said, that the Doctors of Civill Law said, that neither the Pope nor the King could pardon Symony, quoad culpam, but only quoad poenam they may. And the Court at last said that if the parties would not demur, they would hear the Doctors upon this matter. Jelsey against Robinson. Trinit. 25. Eliz. continued untill Pasch. 28 Eliz. in C. B.Rot. 704. & 1544. UPon a speciall verdict upon an Ejectment, the Iury gave this spe∣ciall verdict. That the King was seised of the Mannor of Free∣mington, and of the hundred there, and granted this to Hpton to hold of the Mannor of East-Greenwich by fealty, and 13 l. Rent, and then the King being seised of the Mannor of Crankford, of which the place in Question was parcell, does grant his Mannor of Crankford, and his Mannor of Freemington, to the Marquess of Exceter and his heirs, who by his Will does devise Legacies to his servants, and does devise that all his Legacies shall be payd out of the Mannors of Freem ngton Uplaing and Crankford. All which Mannors I give to my Cosen Blunt and his heires. And the Defendant, as servant to Baker who was heir to the Marquess, did eject the Plaintiff; the question was, if by the De∣vise of the Mannor of Freemington the Rent of 13 l. did passe or not. if it does not passe, then by the Statute of 32 H. 8. the 3. part of the Mannor of Crankford does not go to the deuisee, but descends to the heire at the Common Law. Shuttleworth for the Plaintiffe. The seigniory does not passe by the devise of the Mannor, for the intent thereof shall be collected, by the words of the Will. 15 H. 7.12. a. 19 H. 8.9. & 6. but here he limits a distresse out of a Lordship, which cannot be 3 H. 6. Also it is doubtfull if the seignory being entire, may be divided by force of the Statute of the 32 H. 8. And I thinke not; for when the Statute sayes that the lands devised shall be devised into three parts, and that is to be understood of such an estate as may be divided, but so cannot a Seig∣niory: For put the case that the Lord held by a Hauke, the whole Mannor shall descend and cannot be divided, and so de catalla Fello∣num. Fenner contra. For it seems to me that the seignory passeth, and so it shall be, if he held but a mesualty 7 Ed. 4. A man held by Frank∣almoigne, he shall say, infra feodum suum, and in reputation amongst men, a seigniory is a Mannor: for if a man makes a feoffment of a Mannor, with livery where he hath no Mannor, yet shall it passe, 7 E. 3. Where a Mannor passeth by the name of Knights Fee. And as to the intirenes of the seigniory it is easily answered for although the rent were entire, yet it may be severed, for a Rent Charge is entire, yet a proportionment may be made thereof 44 Ed. 3. To which the Court agreed that the Rent without doubt might be severed. Walmesley. For the Plaintiff, the Question is if the Rent passeth by the name of a Mannor to the Devisees. If a Grandmother deviseth land to her daughter J.S. Whereas she is her daughters daughter, yet this is good, because in common speaking she is so called, but here the words are not apt, nor used in common speaking, viz. That Rent should be taken for a Mannor, and therefore it is voyd, as a gift to the right heirs of J.S. who is attaint 19 H.
8. And he concluded with this difference: that where the words have any affinity or likelihoodto the Mannor, then it will passe by the name of a Mannor. As if a man deviseth his house and land by the name of a Mannor it shall passe. But here being but a service, it is otherwise. Gawdy cont. For if it the Rent passe not nothing shall passe, which is a hard construction on a Will. For 21 Rich. 2. Devise 27. a De∣vise Ecclesiae sancti Andreae is a good devise to the Parson of the Church. And in Brett and Rigdens Casea man devised a Mannor in which he had nothing, and after purchased the Mannor, the devise is good. And in 26 H. 6. feoffment 12. Land will not passe by deed by the name of a house, but land will passe by the name of a Carue, and a Carue by the name of a Mannor, and I hold that the Rent in this case will passe by the name of the Mannor, for a Mannor does consist of Demesnes services, and rent may be called a Mannor aswell as a Carue, and and the King gives it by the name of a Mannor to the Devisor, and that is the reason that the Devisor calls it a Mannor: And if you grant to me an Advowson by the name of the Church and Rectory, and I devise the Rectory, the Advowson and the Church will passe by the name of Rectory: And in Plouden. 194. A man did let his house and great demesnes rendring Rent, and did devise to another all his Farme; there the Devisee shall have all the Rent and the Reversion also. Michaelm. 29. & 30. Bishop of Lincolnes Case.Rot. 1528. & 2200. IN a quare impedit, brought by the King, against the Bishop of Lin∣coln and Leigh, the Incumbent: The Case was. The Bishop had an Advowson in gross, and presented J.S. who took a second Benefice with cure, whereby the first became void, and continued so untill Lapse fallen to the Queen, and after the title of Lapse fallen to the Queen, the Bishop presented one J. who was inducted, and by reason of Recusancy to pay Tythes, was deprived, and by the Statute 26 H. 8. the Church became void ipso facto, whereupon the Bishop presen∣ted one Leigh within six months, and now the Queen would pre∣sent. Fenner. This Case is the same with Bosherulls, lately adjudged. But the Court said, that here was a privation for Recusancy; and therefore it would make a difference. And afterwards Pasch. 30 Eliz.
Walmesley. For the Queen said. That if a Lapse be fallen to the Or∣dinary, if the Patron doth present before the Bishop hath Collated, he ought to receive his Clerk, but where it is divolved to the King, the Pa∣tron by no means can defeate the King, but he may remove his Clerke at his pleasure, but if such Incumbent be present after such Lapse, and die, then the title of the King is gone, and his time passed by the act of God: but in our Case the avoydance which does oust the King from his Lapse, is avoidance by reason of Recusancy to pay Tithes, which is the proper act of the Incumbent, as is a resignation, and no such avoy∣dance being by the act of the party himself shall oust the King of his Pre∣sentation. for in the 2 H. 9. In annuitie against an Abbot, who resigns the Writ shall not abate, for then the Plaintiff shall never have a good Writ. So in our case, if the King be outed of his Lapse by such devises, he shall never have a Lapse, for every one will usurp upon the KingsLapse, and will presently resign or misdemesn himself whereby to avoid the Lapse. And in the 18 Ed. 4. the 19. By Pigot. A writ brought against a Prior shall not abate, although the Prior be not deposed, for it is his own fault. Fenner. This Lapse is given the King by his prerogative, but on this Condition, that he take it in due time: for so is the nature of things lapsed, for if after a title accrued to the King he suffer usurpation, and the Incumbent die, his Lapse is lost, for the nature of the Lapse is such that it must be taken at its time, and where the title of the King is limi∣ted to a time, there he shall not have his prerogative: for a prerogative cannot alter estates. As if the King grant a seigniory in gross ren∣dring Rent, and the Tenant to the Lord dies without heir, whereby the tenant escheates, the seigniory is extinct, and the Rent of the King is gone, aswell as it is in the case of a Common person. And so if the King have a Rent feck for life out of my land, if I die he cannot di∣streine in my land for the arrerages as he may in my life time. And so where the Statute gives Annum diem & vastum to the King, yet he shall not have it after the death of the Tenant for life, so if the King re∣serve a Rent upon a Lease to an Estranger, and the stranger enters in respect of the land, whereby his entire rent is suspended, now the conditi∣on as to the King also is suspended during that time, for the nature there∣of is to be attendant upon the rent 22 H. 3. If a man grant a Rent upon condition to cease during the minority of his heir, and after this Rent comes to the King, and the Grantee dies, the Rent shall cease during the minority of his heir: so that by all these cases the reason appears that the nature of the Lapse is to be taken hac vice, and the King must take it then, or not at all: and where it is objected that by this means every Lapse may be taken from the King: I conceive that far greater inconvenience will be to the Patrons on the other side: for when a Lapse is devolded to the King, and a stranger presents, if then the true Patron may not present untill the death of such Incumbent, perhaps the Incumbent will resign, or be deprived, and a stranger shall be pre∣sented again and again in like manner, and so by this means the Pa∣tron shall never continue his advowson, for by the Couin between the stranger, and the neglect of the King to take his Lapse, the Incmbent shall never die. And afterwards in this term, it was adjudged that such usurpation shall not take away the Lapse from the King, because the a∣voydance accrued by the act of the Incumbent. Cook ib. 7.27. a. Hillary. 29 Eliz. Lassell's Case. LAssell brought an action of debt upon an obligation, the Defendant pleads, that the condition was, that he should personally appear be∣fore the Iustices, and set forth, how he was taken by a Latitat by the Plaintiff who was Shiriff, who took this obligation up∣on his deliverance: and urged the Statute of 23 H. 6. and said that the obligation was not according to the Statute. And by the Opinion of three Iustices (Anderson being absent) If it were in such an action wherein a man may appear by Atturney, then it is void. And the Plain∣tiff shewed a Iudgment given in the Kings Bench, wherein in such case Iudgment was given for the Sheriffs, and it was between Seekford and Cutts 27. & 28. Eliz. Rot. 373. And the next Terme it was mo∣ved again.
Anderson. The Obligation is voyd; for when an express form is limited by the Statute, no variance ought to be from it. But the other three Iustices were against him, for they held that he ought to appear in his proper person in case of a Latitat. Anderson. I deny that, for Latitats have not been of above 60 years continuance; Vid. Cook, lib. 10. Beufages Case; and his first Insti∣tutes, 225. a. Pasch. 25 Eliz. Kayre against Deurat, in C. B.Rot. 603. IN a Waste, the Plaintiff declared how the Defendant was seized in Fee, and made a Feoffment to the use of himself for life, the remainder to the Plaintiff in Fee, after which he committed waste. The Tenant said, that he was seized in Fee, without that he made a Feoffment as the Plaintiff declared; and upon issue joyned, it was found that the Defendant was seized in Fee, and that he made a Feoffment to the use of himself for life of J.S. without impeachment of waste, the remainder ut supra; and whether this was the Feoff∣ment which the Plaintiff alledged, they prayed the advice of the Court. Anderson, Chief Justice. If the impeachment of waste be not part of their issue, then the Verdict is voyd for that point, and that which is found more than their issue is voyd, 33 H. 6. the Defendant pleaded that he was not Tenant of the Free-hold, and the Iury found that he held joyntly with another there the Plaintiff shall recover. And then at another day it was said by the Iustices, that the Iury had found such an estate as was alledged by the Plaintiff; and although that they further found this priviledge to be dispunisht of waste, which upon the matter proves that the Plaintiff hath no cause of action, yet be∣cause the Tenant may choose whether he would take hold of this privi∣ledge or not, the Iury cannot finde a thing that is out of their Verdict, and whereof the Defendant will not take advantage by pleading, and for this cause their Verdict was voyd. 7 H. 6.33. 21 H. 7.12. where one pleaded in Bar a Feoffment, and traversed the Feoffment, and hereupon they were at issue, and the Iury found that he had enfeof∣fed the Tenant after the Fine levyed to the Plaintiff: this cannot be found because it is out of their issue, 31 Assi. 12. and Iudgement was given for the Demandant. Hillar. 29 Eliz. Michell against Donton, in C. B.Rot, 639.
IN an Ejectment a man makes a Lease, rendring Rent, with a Co∣venant that the Lessee shall repair the houses, with other Cove∣nants and Conditions of re-entry for not performance, and then he devised the same land to the same Lessee for divers years after the first years expired, yielding the same Rent, and under the same Cove∣nants, as in the former Lease, and he devised the remainder in fee to the Plaintiff, and the first Lease expires, and the Defendant being possestby force of his second Lease, doth not repair the houses; and if the Plaintiff might enter, was the question. Shuttleworth. In as much as he devised the land under the same Covenants as the first Lease was, and the first was with Covenants and Conditions, the second shall be so also, the rather because he devi∣seth the remainder over, so that the Devisee cannot take advantage of the Covenants, but of the Conditions he may, and the second Lease is conditional. But the whole Court was against him. Shuttleworth. To what purpose then are these words in the De∣vise, Under the same Covenants. Periam. They shall be voyd. And by all the Iustices the intent of the Will was not that the Lease should be conditional, for Covenants and Conditions differ much, for the one gives an action, but not the other; but the intent was, that he should perform the Covenants upon pain to render damages in a Writ of Covenant. Bottenham against Herlakenden, 29 & 30 Eliz. in C. B.Rot. 1620. HErlakenden was seized of land, and devised the same to the Plaintiff for years, the remainder to his wife for life, Proviso, that the Plaintiff should pay to the woman 20 l. per annum; and if he failed of his payment, &c. where∣fore the woman entred, and if this shall be called reservation or re∣version, was the question. Anderson. A man cannot make a Reservation on a Devise. Periam. A man may to himself and his heirs, but not to a stranger. Anderson. Every Devisee is in, in the sier by the Devisor, and why shall not this then be a reservation to the Devisor, and a grant of the reversion to the woman. Gawdy. Wherefore cannot a man devise land, reserving rent, when by the Statute 32 H. 8. he may devise at his pleasure? Periam. Because his pleasure must correspond with the Law. Anderson. If I devise land to another, reserving rent to me and my heirs and then devise the reversion, he shall have the rent as incident to the reversion, and the Iudges were divided, wherefore, &c. 29 Eliz. Glover against Pipe, in B. R.Rot. 838. IN debt upon a Bond the Condition was, that where Glover the Plaintiff had a Copyhold of inheritance, and had leased it to the Defendant, if the Defendant should not commit any manner of waste, and should do no other thing that should be forfeiture of the Copyhold, that then, &c. The Defendant pleaded conditions per∣formed; the Plaintiff replyed, and alledged waste committed in a shop that fell down during the term for want of reparation: but the Defendant in rejoynder alledged, that the shop was ruinous at the time of the Lease, and by reason thereof fell down.
Tanfield. It is no waste, as the Books are, 42 Ed. 3. 19 Ed. 3. 2 H. 7.3. a. 12 H. 8.11. a. If a house be ruinous at the time of theLease, and fall during the term, it is no waste: yet the Book in 7 H. 6. is otherwise. And in the 12 H. 4. a man lets his house, promiseth that the Lessee shall not suffer any voluntary waste, if the timber be so good as it will endure the whole term, although it be not covered, yet is the Lessee bound to reserve it during the term. Godfrey for the Plaintiff, and agreed to all the cases aforesaid. But here the Defendant is bound by his obligation, and therefore it differs from the case in 42 Ed. 3.6. and of Perkins 142. where a di∣versity is between a waste and a covenant; for if a man makes a Lease for years, and by sudden chance waste is committed, this shall excuse the Lessee: but if he covenant to leave the house in as good a condition as he found it, if the house fall down by tempest, yet he ought to re-edify it. Also in this case it is a waste in Law, although the house were ruinous at the beginning of the Lease; for in a waste brought in such case, if he pleads nul waste fait, he shall not give such matter in evidence, but it is onely to excuse him. And with him agreed all the Court, and Iudgement was given for the Plaintiff. Austin against Courtney, 30 Eliz. in B. R.Rot. 165. AUstin and his wife, as daughter and heir of one Webb, brought a Writ of Errour against Thomas Courtney to reverse a Fine leavied in a base Court by the said Webb to himself. Cook assigned these errours, 1. Because the Fine was levied de uno tenemento, which is not good for the generality, for it may be land, or common, or rent. And in 3 Ed. 4. a Plea in Bar was rejected, because it was pleaded that one was seized de uno tenemento, for this is uncertain. And in 38 H. 6. an Action is brought upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. for entry into certain tenements, that is not good, for it ought to be brought of so many acres. The second errour was, because Webb the Conusor did acknowledge the land to be his right, whereas it ought to be the right of Courtney the Conusee. The third errour was, be∣cause the Fine was levied in a base Court, which prescribes to hold Pleas but they cannot levy Fines there, for then the King shall lose his silver 50. Assi. And so was it adjudged between Bambury and Pe∣res, that a Fine levied in Chester which had such prescription, is not good; wherefore Iudgement was given that the Fine should be reverst. Trinit. 30 Eliz. Ireland against Higgins.Rot. 403, vel 43. IN an Action of the Case the Plaintiff declared, that whereas a dog came to the hands of the Defendant which belonged to the Plain∣tiff, the Defendant did assume to deliver the said dog to the Plain∣tiff upon request, and that the Plaintiff had requested him, and he did not deliver the dog, ad damnum, &c. and hereupon the Defendant demurred.
Leigh for the Defendant. Here is no consideration; for when the Plaintiff is out of the possession of his dog, he hath lost his interest inhim, for a dog is ferae naturae, and therefore when he is out of possessi∣on, he hath no remedy. 22 H. 6. 10 H. 7..6 Ed. 4. and he cited Fyne and Sir Joh Spencers Case in Dyer, where a Trespass will not lye for a hawk. Also, by the Grant of omnia bona & catalla, dogs do not pass, nor are tithable nor are Assets. Tfield contra. Horses, cows, and all cattel which are most pro∣fitable for service of man, were at first ferae naturae, and so were dogs also: but since by use nothing is so familiar and domestick to man than is a dog, and then he cannot be ferae naturae; and therefore a Trespass will lye for a dog, if he declare his dog, for that word does imply it is his domestick dog; and he much relyed on a Book, the Roll where∣of he had seen, Trnt. 15 H. 7. R. 35. where a man justified in a Trespass of Battery in defence of his dog. And in 2 Ed. 2. Avowry 182. a Replevin was brought of a Ferret. And in 23 Elz. Leeks Case, where one had Iudgement to recover great damages for a blood∣hound And as to the Case of Fne and Sece the reason why the Plaintiff had not Iudgement was, because he did not shew that the hawk was reclaimed, but after he brought a new Action, and had great damages. And at last it was adjudged by all the Court that the Action is maintainable, and Iudgement commanded to be entred, nisi, &c. Trinit. 30 Eliz. Stone against Withepoole, in B. R.Rot. 771. IN an Action of the Case the Plaintiff declared, that J. S. wan indebted to him for velvet and other things to such a value, and was bound in a Bond to pay money for them, and that after∣wards the Defendant (being his Executor) did assume and promise to pay the money. The Defendant pleaded that the Testator was within age at the time of the making the Bond, and hereupon the Plaintiff demurred. Egerton S ll citor for the Plaintiff. A Contract made by an Infant is not voyd, but voydable; and if the Infant at his full age had assu∣med as the Defendant hath, it had been good, and by the same reason the Executors assumsion is good, 9 Eliz. 13. where the Lord Gra, be∣ing heir to the former Lord Gray, although he was not bound to pay the debts of his father upon simple contract, yet in regard he did assume to pay them, he was made chargeable. And in 15 and 16 E iz. it is a good consideration where an Administrator undertakes to pay debts upon a simple contract: but admitting the Executor be not chargeable by Law, yet in equity and conscience he is chargeable in Chancery; and when he promiseth in consideration that the Plaintiff will not sue him, that is a good consideration.
Cooke. The consideration is the ground of every Action on the Case, and it ought to be either a charge to the Plaintiff▪ or a benefit to the Defendant, 17 E. 4 5. where a man promised and assumed to a Chyrurgean money for curing a poor man: that was a good conside∣ration; for although it is no benefit to the Defendant, yet it is a charge to the Plaintiff▪ and where there is no consideration▪ there can be no good action; as where a man promiseth a debt that he never owed, this is voyd. And after, viz. 31 Eliz. It seemed to all the Iu∣stices,that the consideration was not good, and therefore the contract voyd: But if goods he delivered to an Infant to be re-delivered, if Afterwards his Executor assumeth to re-deliver them, this is good. Gawdy, in the 13 H. 6. If a man be indebted in a simple Contract, and dye, and his Executors assume to pay the debt, it is good: but his seems to be contrary to the Law, for it is contrary to that which hath been lately adjudged in the Common Pleas. And Egerton cited a Cae, 10 H 6. where an Infant brought an Action of Trespass, and submitted himself to an arbitrement, this shall binde him at his full age; and this was agreed by the Court, but differs much from the Case at Bar; for when an Infant commits a Trespass, he is chargeable in an Action of Trespass, and shall lose damages: but it is not so here. Wherefore Iudgement was given, that the Plaintiff should be barred. Mich. 30 Eliz. Stanton against Chamberlain.Rot. IN an Action of Debt upon a Bond, upon non est factum plea∣ded, the Iury found, that the Defendant sealed the Bond, and cast it on the Table, and the Plaintiff came and took up the Bond, and carried it away without saying any thing; and if this shall amount to a Delivery by the Defendant to the Plaintiff, was the que∣stion. And it was resolved by all the Iustices, that if the Iury had found that he had sealed the Bond, and cast it on the table towards the Plaintiff, to the intent that the Plaintiff should take it as his Deed, who took the Bond and went away, that had been a good delivery; or that the Plaintiff, after the sealing and casting on the table, had ta∣ken it by the commandment or consent of the Defendant: but because it is found that the Defendant onely sealed it, and cast it on the table, and the Plaintiff took it and went away with it, this is not a sufficient delivery, for it may be that he sealed it to the intent to reserve it to himself untill other things were agreed, and then if the Plaintiff take it, and go away with it without the Defendants consent, that will not make it the Descendants Deed. But it was said, that it might be ac∣counted to be the Defendants Deed, because it is found that he sealed it, and cast it on the table, and the Plaintiff took it, &c. and it is not found that the Defendant said any thing, and therefore because he did not say any thing, it will amount to his consent, Nam qui tacet consen∣tire videtur. But to this it was answered, that it is not found that the Defendant was present when the Plaintiff took it; and if the De∣fendant had sealed, and cast the Bond on the Table when the Plaintiff was not there, and then the Defendant went away, and then the Plaintiff came and took it away, then clearly it is not the Deed of the Defendant. Hill. 31 Eliz. Beron against Goodyne. IN an Ejectment the Case was, the King was seized of lands in Fee, and a stranger intruded, and the King grants this land to J. S. in Fee, and the Intruder continues possession, and dyes seized: The question was, if this descent shall take away the entry of I.S.
Johnson. It shall not; for none will affirm that an Intruder shall gain any thing out of the King, but that the land shall pass to the Pa∣tentee, and the continuance of the Intruder in possession, and his dying seized, shall not take away the entry; for he cannot be a Disseisor. be∣cause he gained no estate at the beginning; as if a Guardian continues possession after the heir is of full age, he is no Disseisor, nor shall gain any estate. And 10 Ed. 3.2. where a tenant of the King dyes, his heir within age, and a stranger enters, and after the heir is of full age dyes seized, this shall not take away the entry of the heir. Cook contr. By his continuance of possession he shall be accounted a Disseisor, and the Free-hold out of the Patentee, for another estate he cannot have, for tenant at sufferance be is not, for he comes in at first by a title, as in the 12 Assi. The Dona's in Frank-marriage are divorced, and the husband continues the possession; and so where a Lessee continues possession after the death of the tenant for life, these are tenants at sufferance; and the Patentee hath a Free-hold in Law, which is taken away by descent, and denyed there was any such case as was vouched in the 10 Ed. 3. but compared the case to the 21 Ed. 3.2. where a Fine was levyed per conusans de droit come ceo, &c. if be∣fore the Conusee enters, a stranger enters, and dyes seized, the entry of the Conusee is barr'd. So is it where an Advowson is granted to J.S. and his heirs, and a stranger usurps, the Grantee hath no re∣medy. And if a man deviseth land to J.S. and before he enters, a stranger doth enter, and dyes seized, the entry of the Disseisee is taken away; and so it is in our case. But a further day was given Cook to shew cause why Iudgement should not be given against him. Hillar. 31 Eliz. Suttons Case, in C. B.Rot. 533. IN an Ejectment, the Iury gave a special Verdict, that the De∣fendant (nihil habens in terra) did make a Lease thereof to the Plaintiff by Indenture, according as the Plaintiff had declared, and then the Defendant entred on the Plaintiff; and whether this entry be good, was the question. Walmesley for the Defendant. Iurors are sworn ad veritatem di∣cendum, and therefore they shall not enquire of Estoppels, because it is not in evidence. But the whole Court was against him, who held that the Iury might finde a matter that is not shewed in evidence; for by Anderson, in an Assize they may finde a Release, although it be not given in evidence; and he and Periam held, that the Plaintiff ought to have Iudgement, for that there was a good Lease between the parties, and if Rent were reserved, an Action of Debt would lye. Windham contr. For it is onely an Estoppell between the parties: but the Court is at liberty, and are not estopped, when the truth appears to them; and it is a Maxim in Law, that he who hath nothing in the land cannot make a Lease. and then the Plaintiff hath no cause of Action. And afterwards, viz. 32 Eliz. Anderson and Periam were expresly for the Plaintiff; for whereas it hath been said that it was a Lease by Estop∣pell, they held it was not so, for that in Debt the Rent should be reco∣vered. And Anderson said, If I levy a Fine of your land to you for years, if you be put out, I shall have an Assize: but Windham was of opinion with Walmesley: wherefore Periam said, we will have the opi∣nion of the other Iustices in the Exchequer Chamber; wherefore, &c.
Trinit 30 Eliz. Perryn against Allen in C. B.Rot. 611. & 612. IN a debt upon a Lease for years, It was found that on Gibson was seised of Land in Lease for thirty years, and he let the Land to Perryn for 19. years rendring 10. l. rent, and that afterwards, it was articled and agreed between Gibson and one J.S. that Prryn should have and hold the Lands which he had, and also other lands which he had, for terme of 3. years rendring a greater rent, to which Articles Perryn at another time and place afterwards agreed, but the in∣tent of the articles and agreement betwixt them, was not that the first Terme to Perryn should be extinct. That afterwards Perryn letted this Land to the Defendant Allen for 17. years rendring Rent, and then the three years expired, and Gibson grants his term to J.S. who en∣ters, &c. If this agreement amounts to a surrender, was the question. Hanam, for the Plaintiff. It is not: for to a surrender three things are incident. First, an actuall possession in him who surrenders. Second∣ly, an actuall remainder or reversion in him, to whom the surrender is made. Thirdly, consent and agreement between the parties: But to all these, the Plaintiff was a stranger, and therefore no surrender. For if I let land to you for so many years as J.S. shall name, if he names the years, it shall be good from that time, and not before: but if I let land for so many years as my Executors shall name, this is not good, for I cannot have Executors in my life time, and when I am dead I cannot assent, so in this case there ought to be a mutuall assent between the Lessor and Lessee. Hi Cont. It is a surrender, for if he concluded and agreed at another time, or accepted a new Lease, it is a surrender. 37 H. 6. 22 Ed. 4. 14 H 7. and then when a stranger does agree that he shall have other lands and pay a greater Rent, this is a surrender. Anderson. If I covenant with you that J.S. shall have my land for ten years, this is only a Covenant and no Lease, quod Wamsly concessit. And so if I covenant that your Executors shall have my land for a term of years after your death, this is no Lease. And all the Court held, that this was not a good Lease, for the act of a stranger cannot make a surrender of the Terme. Peryam. You at the Bar have forgotten to argue one point ma∣teriall in the Case, videlicet. If Lessee for 20. years makes a Lease for ten years if the Lessee for ten years may surrender to the Lessee for 20. years. And Hanam said privately, that he could not surrender, for one Term cannot merge in the other. And Anderson said, that by opinion of them all, that the Lessee for 10. years cannot surrender. But to the other point. All the Iudges agreed that it was no surrender. And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Dabridgecourt against Smallbrooke.
IN an action of the Case, the Plaintiff declared that he was Sheriff of the County of Warwick, and that a writ came down to him to arrest J.S. at the suit of the Defendant, who requested the Plaintiff to make Russell, who was the Defendants friend, his speciall Baily, in conside∣ration of which the Defendant did assume, that if the said J.S. did es∣cape, that he would take no advantage against the Plaintiff, where∣uponhe made Russell his Bailiff, who arrested the said J.S. who after∣wards escapt from him, and that notwithstanding the Defendant had charged the Plaintiff for this. And a verdict was found for the Plaintiff. And in this case it was agreed, that where a Sheriff did make a Bailiff upon request of any one, it is reason that the party should not charge the Sheriff for an escape, by reason of the negligence of such Bailiff: for the Sheriff hath security from every one of his Bailiffs to save him harmeless: wherefore it is great reason that if upon request he makes a speciall Bailiff, that the party should not take advantage of such an escape, but that the Sheriff may have his action against him again, upon his promise. And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Hillar. 31 Eliz. Beale. against Carter.Rot. 331. IN an action of false imprisonment. The Defendant justified the im∣prisonment for two hours, because the Plaintiff brought a little infant with him to the Church intending to leave it there, and to have the Pa∣rish keep it: and the Defendant (being Constable of the Parish) because the Plaintiff would not carry the child away with him again, carryed the Defendant to prison, all the said time, untill he took the child away with him. And hereupon the Plaintiff demurred. And it seemed to the Iustices that it was no good plea: for although the Constable at the Common Law is keeper of the Peace, yet this does not belong to his Office, but if he had justified as Officer, then perhaps it had been good. And afterwards, viz. Hillar. 33 Eliz. the Case was argued a∣gain, and then Glanvill said. That it was a good justification, for any person may do it. For if I see A. ready to kill B. I ought to hin∣der him of his purpose. And in the 22 Ass. 50. the Defendant justified because the Plaintiff was madd and did a great deale of mischief, where∣fore he imprisoned him. And in 10 Eliz. which case I have heard in this Court. The Constable took a madd man, and put him in prison. where he dyed, and the Constable was indicted of this, but was dischar∣ged: for the act was legall, and so here in this Case, if the infant had dyed for want of meat, it had been murder in the Plaintiff. For it was held in 20 Eliz. at Winchester before the Lord Bacon, if one brings an infant to a desert place, where it dyes for want of nourishment, it is murder. Gawdy. It was ill done of the Plaintiff, but that ought to be re∣formed by due course of Law, for a Constable cannot imprison at his pleasure, but he may stay the party, and carry him to a Iustice of Peace to be examin'd. Wray. Then such matter ought to be pleaded. Quod Gaudie con∣cessit. Fenner. If he had pleaded that he refused to carry the infant away, then it had been a good justification, for a Constable is Conservator of the peace, but because it was not so pleaded the Plea is naught; But the Iudges would not give Iudgment, for the ill Examples sake, and therefore they moved the parties to compound.
Pasch. 31 Eliz. Sale against the Bishop of Lichfield in C. B. SAle Executor of J.S. who was Grantee of the nomination and pre∣sentation to the Archdeaconary in the County of Derby, brought a Quare impedit against the Bishop of Lichfield, and declared of a pre∣sentment and disturbance in vita Testatoris, & quod Ecclesia vacavit & adhuc vacata est. The Defendant pleaded Plein d'Incumbent, before the writ purchased, and Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. And it was moved, If a Quare Impedit does lye of an Archdeaconary, for it is but a function or dignity, and therefore a Quare Impedit will not lie of an office of a Commissary, but the 24 Ed. 3.42. is express in the point. And 30 Edw. 3.21. a Qure Impedit did lye of a Priory. And therefore notwithstanding this exception, Iudgement was given for the the Plaintiff. But there were two other doubts in the Case. First, If a Quare Impedit will lie for an Executor for disturbance done in vita Te∣statoris, and that by the Statute of 4 Ed. 3.7. Snigge. The action will lye by the Executors, for in all Cases where damages are to be recovered, they shall have an action by that Statute. 11 H. 7.2. An action of trespass was brought for taking of goods in the life of the Testator, but no action will lie for entrie into land in the life of the Testator, for it ought to be such an action as will survive in damages, and may be a damage to the Executor 7 H. 42. An ejectement lies for Executors, upon an ejectment in the life of the Testator. And if an ejectment be maintenable in which a Terme shall be recover'd, it shall be also maintenable in a Quare Impedit, in which a presentment may be recovered. Drew cont. At the Common Law Executors have no remedy for a personall wrong, quia moritur cum persona: for upon the death of the Testator, Executors have no remedy for arrears of Rent at the Com∣mon Law, but only the Statute of 32 H. 8. And it cannot be that the Executors in this case are within the Statute of 4 Ed. 3. For that Statute intends onely to remedy such things as are avaylable to the Testator, and are assets to pay debts: and although Executors may have a Quare Impedit, that is intended of a disturbance, fait al eux, but contra, if it be done in vita Testatoris. Walmesley. I conceive no actions will lie. For the Statute gives an action for the taking of goods and such like things, but here is no taking, but only a disturbance, which may be done by Parol. Perryam Justice cont. For the Statute, says that they shall have an action of trespass for a trespass done to their Testator, and not for taking goods, so that the taking of goods is but by way of resem∣blance, and not that they shall have an action of trespass for taking of goods onely. Windham, and Anderson. agreed with Perryam, and whereas it hath been said, that this cannot be Assetts. Put the case that the Te∣stator had judgment to recover damages, shall not that be Assetts? and why may the damages here recovered be Assetts, and why shall not the grant of the Advowson be Assetts in the hands of the Executor aswell as in the hands of the issue. And so was the opinion of the Court.
32 Eliz. Foster and Wilson against Mapps. in B. R.Rot. 71. THe Case on a speciall verdict was thus, Mapps the Defen∣dant made a Lease of the Parsonage of Broncaster by Inden∣ture, and Covenanted by the same Deed, to save the Plain∣tiff harmless and indemnified: and also all the proffits there∣of and premisses, against Philip Blount, the Parson of Broncaster; and hereupon a writ of Covenant was brought against Mapps, and the breach assigned was, that Blount had entred and ejected the Plaintiff. And one point was, if this shall be accounted the Deed of the Defen∣dant, because the Defedant delivered his part of the Indenture to the Plaintiff as his Deed, but the Plaintiff did not deliver the counterpart to him. But the opinion of the Court was, that this was a good Deed of the Defendants, and Gawdy said, that the safest way had been to deliver his part as an Escroll to be his Deed, when the Plaintiff delive∣red the Counterpaine: But a great doubt was made in this case, because it was not shewed that Blount entred by a Title, and then he shall be taken to have entred by wrong, and so the Covenant not broken, for to save harmeless is only from legall harmes, as it is in Swettenhams Case Dyer 306. Where the Warden of the Fleet suffered a prisoner to escape, and took a bond of him to save him harmeless, and then the Warden was sued upon an escape, and thereupon he sued the Obliga∣tion, and adiudged that the bond was not forfeit, because the partie was not legally in execution, and therefore the Warden could not be dam∣nified for the escape. Padsy cont. The Diversitie is where the Covenant is generall, and where it is speciall, for in this case it being speciall to save harmeless from Blount, he ought to defend against him his entry, be it by good title or by wrong, and so is Catesbies Ease. Dyer. 3.28. Where the Lessor covenanted, that the Lessee should injoy his terme sine ejectione vel in∣terruptione alicujus, the Lessee brought an action of Covenant because a stranger entred, and did not say he had any title, and Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Gawdy. The Covenant is broke. For if Blount disturbe him so that he cannot take the proffits, this is a breach of the Covenant, for hereby the Plaintiff is damnified. 2 Ed. 4.15. where the Condition of a Bond was, that the Obliger should warrant and defend the Obli∣ged for ever, and against all, and the Defendant pleaded, that he had such a Warrant, and there it was held by Danby to be no plea, because he cannot warrant unless the other be impleaded. And there it was said by Danby and Needham, that if the obligee be outed by a stranger, who hath no title, the Obligation is forfeit by reason of this word de∣fend. Wray agreed, and said, that this case was not like to the Ease of 26 H. 8.3. where the Lessor Covenanted to warrant the land to the Lessee, for there he shall not have a Covenant, if he be wrongfully outed; but our case is to save harmeless, which is of greater force than to warrant, for to warrant Land is only upon the title, but here, be the Lessee outed by wrong or by title, yet is the Covenant broken, to which the other Iustices agreed.
Fenner Vouchf. 18 Ed. 4.27. where a man is obliged to save J.S.harmless against me, if I doe arrest J.S. although wrongfully, the obli∣gation is forfeit, which the other Iustice denied, And at last Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Pasch. 33 Eliz. Elmer and his wife against Thatcher in C. B.Rot. 1125. And Cooks 1. Inst. 355. IN a Quod ei deforceat of a third part of an acre of Land whereof the wife was tenant in Dower: The defendant confesed she was tenant in Dower, but shewed how she committed waste, Statut Westm. 2. cap. 4. wherefore he brought his action of waste, to which she appeared and pleaded nothing, for which he had Iudgment to recover. The Plaintiff said that no waste was committed, and the Defendant Demurred. Owen for the Defendant. a Quod ei deforceat, lies not in this case, for such Writ is grounded upon a recovery by default in a reall action, but a waste is a meere personall action. And therefore in the 2 H. 4. in a waste against the husband and wife, the wife shall not be received: also it will not lie in this case, because here is no default within the intent of the Statute, for the Statute intends to relieve defaults after appearance, and therefore all the Iudgment in this Writ is that the recovery was by default, and if there was a default in pleading, it is a default, but not within the Statute. Glanvill cont. No waste is committed, and so the recovery shall not bind, for it appears in the 8 Ed. 4. by West. That this action was pro∣vided instead of a Writ of right, and there is no question but a Writ of right will lie here, and this Writ is of the same nature. And Mr Plowden in his Reading said, that this action will lie upon a recovery upon a Writ of waste, aswell as in other actions, for the recovery is not upon the Inquiry of the Iury, but upon default. And it is also a reall action 7 Ed. 3. 28 Ed. 3.30. If the husband make default herein, the wife shall be received. Anderson. There is no question but this action lies upon a recovery in waste, but if this be a default within the Statute is a doubt, for if this should be suffer d, it were very mischievous: for then contempts shall be favoured, which was never the intention of the Statute, and therefore it will not lie where there is a default after appearance. Walmesley. of the same opinion, for this case differs much from the Statute of Glocester, for this Statute gives remedy to a third person upon default of the particular Tenant, and therefore upon this Sta∣tute, the intent of the partie, who makes default, is more regarded, than the manner of the default, and therefore it shall be taken largely. But here is default in the party himself, and he shall have no favour against his willfull default, for every nihil dicit, is a confession of it self, for thereupon it is supposed that nothing can be said. Windham. I hold that a Quod ei deforceat will not lie in a Writ of waste, for the inquiry of the Iury is the cause of the Iudgment. But he agreed that default within the Statute is intended such default, that in it self is the cause of the Iudgment, but here the Iudgment is given upon contempt and refusall of the party and therefore no favour.
Perryam. This action cannot be compar'd to a writ of right which is grounded upon the right, and not on the Iudgment, but the form in the Quod ei deforceat is set down in the Statute which ought to be obser∣ved, and the Statute gives this action upon a default, and here is nodefault, for it cannot be a default where the partie appears and hath no day in Court, but he doubted much if it lay in awrit of waste, because the damages are the principall: but as the case is here, it will not lie. And to prove that a nihil dicit is a confession he cited Pepyss Ease in the Comentaries 438. And at last Iudgment was given that the Writ would not lye. Pasch. 35 Elizab. James against Portman. WIlliam James and Thomas James Ioyntenants for life of a lease made by Portman, William James doth assent, covenant and agree that Thomas James occupy all the land alone, and sow it with his own Corn: After the land is sowed Thomas James dyes, William James the survivor grants the Corne to Portman, who takes it, and the Plain∣tiff as executor to Thomas brought an action of trespass. Ewens, for the Defendant, one Ioyntenant cannot make a Lease to his companion, no more than one may infeof the other, by reason they have joynt possession 10 Ed. 4.3. 2 R. 2. Extinguishment 3. Also the words here are not sufficient to make a Lease, but admitting this, yet the survivor shall have the corn of that part which belongs to him, for by this Lease the Ioynture is severed, and then the Survivor shall have that which grows on his part: For it two Ioyntenants sowe their land, and one of them letts his moytie for years; and he, who did not let, dyes, the other shall have the corn as Survivor. Pyne cont. Although one Ioyntenant cannot inteof another, because he cannot make livery, because he hath possession before, yet may he Re∣lease to his companion, and so may he make a Lease for years, for there is no need of any livery, and by the 22 H. 6.43. If one Ioyntenant in∣feofs another, this shall enure by way of confirmation. And 14 H. 6.10. One Ioyntenant may put out his companion by this means, for he may clayme a Lease from him, and then a Release, and if it be a good Lease, then the Executors shall have it. Popham. The action is good, for one Ioyntenant may make a Lease to the other, although he cannot infeof, for a Lease is but a contract. And 11 H. 6.33. one Ioyntenant commanded the other to occapy all, and in a trespass he was compelled to plead this as a Lease, and then if one Ioyntenant does sow all and dyes, the other shall have the Corne by Survivor: and it is not as in case where a man hath an estate deter∣minable upon uncertainty, for there his Executors shall have the Corn, but in our case, the Survivor had contracted with his companion, and thereby had bound himself not to meddle with the land, and the other bestowed great costs in manuring and sowing the Land, and therefore the Executors shall have the Corn. Fenner agreed, but doubted whether one Ioyntenant could make a Lease to the other: but said, that by the contract he had excluded him∣self from the proffits; and by the 39 Ed. 3.27. one Ioyntenant may have an account against the other. And he said, that if I agree that you shall sow my Land with me, you shall gain no interest in the land, and yet you shall have the corne. And one Ioyntenant may distreyn for himself, and as Bayly for the other. And the Cause was adjourned: and afterwards viz. Hillary 36 Eliz. the case was repeated.
And Gawdy said. That if there be two Ioyntenants, and one grants to the other that he may sow the Land, yet may the other occupie with him, for these words do not transfer any sole interest, but if he sayes that he shall occupy all the Land, and shall sow it solely, this does ex∣clude him from having any interest with him. Popham. Agreed, because this is but a contract, and so of a Lease for years. Gawdy. If one Ioyntenant sayes to the other, that he will not occu∣pie the Land with him, or that he will not put in his Cattle, this does not transfer any interest, but that he may occupie with him, and so in this case, if it had not been said that he should occupy solely. Popham of the same opinion: for where he sayes he will not occupy, the words are in the negative, which will not exclude him of his interest, but in the Case at Bar they will, because they are in the affirmative so. That he shall occupy the Land solely. And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Pasch. 3. Eliz. Woodward against Nelson in B. R. WOodward, Parson of Wotton in consideration, of 120 l. payd by Bretman, one of his Parishioners, did accord and agree with him, that he and his assignes should be discharged of Tythes during the time that he should be Parson. Bretman made a Lease to Nelson, Woodward did libell against him for Tythes and Nelson prayed a prohibition upon the said contract. And it this was sufficient matter for a prohibition was the Question, because it was by word only, and without writing, which amounts only to a cause of action upon a promise for Bretman, but no action for his lessees, neither can this amount to a Release of Tythes, for as Tythes cannot be leased without Deed, so they cannot be released or discharged without Deed. Gawdy Justice. Tythes cannot be discharg'd without Deed, unless by way of contract for a sum of money, and he cited the 21 H. 6.43. Fenner: for that year in which the discharge was made, it was good by way of discharge without Deed, because the Parson for that year had as it were an Interest, but such discharge can have no conti∣nuance for another year, for default of a Deed; and so a promise being no discharge, it is no cause of a prohibition. But Gawdy, held as afore. And about this time Wray Chief Iustice dyed, and Popham succeeded, and the same day he was sworn, Cook moved this Case a∣gain. And the Court held that the agreement being by parol was not good: And Fenner, then, said that without writing the agreement could not be good between the parties but for one year. And the Court awarded a consultation. But upon search made, no Iudgment was entred in the Roll.
Trinit. 35 Eliz. Dr. Foord against Holborrow, in B. R.Rot. 367. IN an Action of Debt upon a Bond, the case was, Dr. Drury (to whom the Plaintiff was Executor) made a Lease to Holborrow of the Mannour of Golding for years, and Holborrow the Lessee entred into a Bond, that if he, his Executors or Assigns, did pay to Anne Goldingham, widow, the sum of 20 l. for 17 years, if the said Goldingham should so long live, and so long as Holborrow the Lessee, or any claiming by or under the said Holborrow shall or may occupy or enjoy the said Mannour of Goldingham; and then Holborrow surreu∣dred his Lease to the Obliges, praecextu cujus the Defendant plead∣ed, quod non occupavit, nec potuit occupare, &c. wherefore he did not pay the said sum to Anne Goldingham, and the Executor of the Ob∣ligee brought an Action of Debt upon this Obligation. Johnson for the Defendant. The term is gone, for he cannot occupy after the surrender, and also the Obligee is a party to the cause why it is not performed, and therefore he shall take no advantage, 4 . 7.2. But the whole Court was against him, for he to whom the surrender is made, cometh in quodammodo by him, and is his Assignee, for he shall be subject to the charge that was before the surrender; and also the Defendant shall be bound by these words in the Obligation, viz. so long as he shall or may: and although these words were not inserted, yet he shall pay the annuity: for where the first Cause does commence in himself, he shall not have advantage thereby: but otherwise, where he is not party to the first Cause. As if two Ioynt-tenants with Warranty make a partition, the Warranty is gone, because they are parties to the act which made the extinguishment: but if one makes a Feoffment of his part, the Warranty as to the other remains, 11 Ed. 4.8. and in the Case at Bar, the Obligor made the surrender, and therefore he is party, and the first cause: and there is a diversity when the thing to be done is collateral, and when not: for if a Lessee does oblige himself to do a collateral thing, as payment of money, there he ought to do it, although that he surrender: for although the Obligee do accept of the surrender, yet no act is done by him to hinder the per∣formance of the condition: but where the Obligee does any act to hinder the performance of the Condition, the Condition is saved: as if the Lessee be bound to the Lessor to suffer J.S. to enter into a Cham∣ber during the Lease, and he surrenders to the Obligee, who will not suffer J.S. to enter, the Obligation is saved, and Iudgement was gi∣ven for the Plaintiff. 36 Eliz. Bedford against Hall, in B. R. IN an Action of Covenant, wherein the Plaintiff declared, that the Defendant did devise and grant to him certain land, with all his goods contained in a certain Inventory for 20 years, and said, that in the Inventory, amongst other things, were five Cows, which the De∣fendant
seized and that one J.S. took them away as his proper goods, as indeed they were, and hereupon he brought this Action. Fenner The Action will not lye, for no interest in the Cows doth pass to the Lessee by this Lease▪ neither was there any right to them in the Lessor: As if I demise to you the land of J. S. by these words, Dem si & concessi and you enter, and J S. re-enters, no Covenant lyes against me. And so in the 11 H. 4. a Prebend made a Lease for years, and resigned, now is the term of the Lessee quite destroyed; and if after he be outed by a new Prebend, yet he shall have no Action of Covenant. And so is it, 9 Eliz. Dyer 57. Lessee for life makes a Lease for years, and dyes, the Lessee shall not have a Covenant if he be outed by him in the reversion, because he is not in as a Termor at the time of the disturbance. But if in the principal Case the Lessor had been possest of the goods although by a wrong title and the Owner had seized them, then a Covenant would lye. And so if a Disseisor makes a Lease, and the Disseisee re-enters, the Lessee shall have a Covenant. Gawdy. If a man lets lands wherein he hath no estate together with his goods although the land will not pass, yet the goods do and if a man lets goods for a year, and re takes them within the year, no Covenant will lye, for the property was never in the Lessee Cc. If a man lets anothers goods to me by Deed if I seize them and the Owner re-takes them a Covenant will lye and so will an Action on the Case, if it be without Deed, 42 Assi. 8. If I be in possession of anothers goods, and sell them, a deceit lyes against me by the Vendee; and so is the Book of Ass. 42.8. conra, where the Vendor hath not possession at the time of the sale. And if I sell goods by Deed which are in my possession, and they are evicted by the right Owner a Covenant will lye: contra if I have not possession at the time of the letting them, and if I let land and J.S. enter before the Lessee, the Lessee cannot have a Covenant, Quod nota. Et ad jour∣neur. 35 Eliz. Scarret against Tanner, in C. B.Rot 1458. IN a false Imprisonment, the Defendant justified, that he was High Constable of the Hundred of E. in the County of p, and that the Plaintiff made an affray within the said Hundred upon one Walm, who came presently to the Defendant, and told him of it, and took his oath that he was in fear of his life: whereupon the Defendant came to the Plaintiff, and arrested him and carried him to Prison untill he could finde sufficient Sureties of peace. Glanvill A Constable cannot arrest one to finde surety of the peace upon a complaint made to him, unless he himself sees the peace broken, 7 Ed. 4. Kingsmill contr. For he is at Common Law Conservator pacis, 12 H. 7.18. And how can he keep the peace, if he may not compell them to finde surety. 44 Ed. 3. Barr. 22. If a man that is threatned complain to the Constable, he may compell the party to finde surety for his good behaviour, and may justifie the imprisoning him, or putting him in the Stocks, 22 Ed. 4.35. 10 Ed. 4.18. where a Constable in such case may take a Bond.
Anderson. I grant that Constables are keepers of the peace at the Common Law, and are to keep the peace as much as in them lyes; and that is, to take men that they finde breaking the peace, and to carry them to a Iustice of peace to finde surety: but the Constable cannot take security, nor recognizance, nor bail, for he is not an Officer upon Record; and if he do take a Bond, how shall he certifie it, and unto what Court? Walmesley contr. Who said, that the Constable might take security by bond, although not by recognizance or bail. Beaumond. A Constable may put him that breaks the peace within the Stocks, but it must be where the breach of peace is committed in his view, for he hath no authority to take an oath that a man is in fear of his life, and then the foundation of his justification doth fail. Owen. The oath is not material; for although he cannot take such oath, yet his taking of surety is good; and before Iustices of peace were made, the peace was preserved by Constables; and the Statute that creates Iustices, does not take away the power of Con∣stables, and therefore he may justifie. Sed adjournatur. Pasch. 38 Eliz. Worsley against Charnock, in C. B. IN an audita quaerela the Case was thus, The father and son were bound in a Statute-Merchant to Charnock, who sued out an Exe∣cution against them, and their lands were severally extended; and they supposing that the Statute was not good, because it was not sealed with both their seals, according to the Statute, they both brought a joynt audita querela; and whether they could joyn in this Action, or not, was the question. Warburton. They shall not joyn; for in all cases a man must make his complaint according to his grief; and here their grief is several, as it two men be imprisoned, they shall not joyn in a false imprisonment. The same Law in a Battery, 8 Ed. 4. 18 H. 6. 10 Ed. 4. It J.S. hath goods of divers men, they shall not joyn in a Replevin; and 33 H. 6. two men shall not joyn in an audita quaerela, unless the land in execution is in them joyntly; and 29 Ed. 3. two Ioynt-tenants Infants alien, they shall have several Writs of Cum fuit infra aeatem: But he confessed the Case in 30 Ed. 3. Fitzherbert, audita quaerela, where two men were in Execution, and the Conusor did release to one, and then to another by another Release, yet both shall joyn in an au∣dita quaerela: but this is not Law: and besides, they cannot recover damages joyntly, by reason of their several vexations; and this Action being personal, damages cannot be severed. Vid. 2 Ed. 3. Execution 45. 9 Ed. 4.31. 12 Ed. 4.6. Harris contra. And as to the last reason, the Book in the 20 of Eli∣zabeth is, that no damages shall be recovered in an audita quaerela, which (if it be Law) then is the doubt at an end. And whereas it hath been said, that they shall not joyn because their griefs are several, methinks there is no reason, but that if he that survives shall be charged with the whole, that they shall joyn also in their discharge; for if their charge be joynt, their discharge shall be joynt also. And in the 34 H. 6. and 30 Ed. 3. where an audita quaerela may be brought joyntly; and he resembled this to the Case of a Monstraverunt, where if a Tenant
in antient demesn be distreyned, all the Tenants shall joyn, because the grievance to one may be a grievance to all the rest. Yelverton of the same opinion. Tho suing of the Execution was the cause of the audita quaerela, but not the ground, for the ground was the Statute-merchant, and therefore it is here brought according to the Statute. Anderson. If two men do me several Trespasses, yet I may have a joynt Action against them, and the death of one of them shall not abate the Writ: but if two are Plaintiffs in a personal Action, the non-suit of one shall be the non-suit of the other; and in our case the Statute was joynt, and also the Execution: then if all the Writs are so, the audita quaerela which is to discharge them, shall be joynt also, especially in this Writ where they are as it were Defendants; and therefore he resembled this Case to a Writ of Errour, or an Attaint brought by two joyntly, and one is non-sued, yet this shall not abate the Writ, be∣cause they are in a manner Defendants. Walmesley contr. The Action ought to be brought according to the cause of the wrong, and the wrong begun in suing the Execution, and that was several, and therefore the audita quaerela ought to be several also: but if this Statute had been good, and had been discharged by release or defeasance, then the audita quaerela might be brought joyntly, for then the ground of the execution was joynt: but here is but a colourable Statute, and the cause of the Action is not begun be∣fore the Execution sued. Owen and Beaumond agreed: and after by assent of Anderson, Iudgement was given that they ought to have several Writs. Note, Pasch. 36 Eliz. in B. R. & Rot. 323. or 521. between Cur∣teise and Overscot. If A. did recover against B. by two several Iudge∣ments, whereby B. is in Execution, it was adjudged that he shall not have one audita quaerela, but two several Writs. Pasch. 37 Eliz. Sawer against Hardy, in B. R.Rot. 254. IN an Ejectment, the Case was this; A woman was Lessee for forty years, sub hac conditione, si vixerit vidua & inhabitaret super prm ssos: the woman dyed before the Lease expired, and her Exe∣cutors entred, and being outed, they brought this Action; and the question was, if the Lease were determined by the death of the woman, by limitation, or by condition, or if it yet remain. Gawdy. It cannot be a condition, because the sentence is imperfect; for if a man makes a Lease for life, rendring rent, sub hac conditione, that if the rent be behind, without any further words, this cannot be a condition, by reason of the imperfection of the sentence; and without doubt, if a Lease for years be made to a woman, if she so long live, and inhabit the premisses, this is a limitation, so that the term is ended by her death. Clench. It is neither condition nor limitation; for a condition ought alwayes to be a full and perfect sentence, and not uncertain. As a Lease for years, upon condition that the Lessee shall pay
181. at the house of the Lessor, this is a full sentence: but a Lease made, rendring rent, and if it be behind, (and no more said) this is no condition. And in all cases where these words, quod si, do make a condition, it is re∣quisitethat these words, quod tunc, do ensue. Neither can it be a li∣mitation, because the words, quod si, spoyl the sentence. And Popham was also of opinion, that it was neither condition nor limitation: but if the words had been sub conditione quod tamdiu vixerit & inhabita∣ret, &c. this is a perfect sentence, and by her death, or not inhabiting, the estate might be determined; and he put this difference, that if a Lease had been for 20 years, si tamdiu vixerit super praemissos, the Lease had been determined by her death: but if a Lease had been for 20 years, si tamdiu inhabitaret, quamdiu vixerit, vel durante vita super praemissos; there if she dyes within the term, yet the term continues, for in the first case the limitation goes to the interest, and in the other to the time; and Iudgement was given, that the Plaintiff should recover, for that the term continued. Michaelm. 37 & 38 Eliz. Mark Ives Case, in B. R. IN a Debt upon a Bond the Condition was, that if the Obligee should go to Rome, and return from thence again before the 5. of July after the date of the Bond, that the Obligor should pay to him 20 l. upon the 20. day of July at Pauls. And it was moved by Williams Serjeant, that if the Obligee returned within the time, whether he ought to give notice of his return to the Obligor, for o∣therwise by his secret return he may make a forfeiture of the Obliga∣tion; for if the Obligor of necessity be to tender this money without notice of his return, inconvenience would ensue; for perhaps the Ob∣ligee is not returned at the time the money is due, and then the tender is in vain, and the Law will not compell a man to make a tender, un∣less it be to some purpose, and therefore the Obligee ought to give no∣tice, to the intent that the Obligor may know whether the money he due to him or not. And it is like a Mortgage upon condition, that if the Mortgager does pay 20 l. before Michaelmas at Pauls, that the, &c. here the Mortgager ought to give notice at what day before Mi∣chaelmas he will tender the money, or otherwise he cannot enter for the time that the Law prescribes to make the tender, is the last instant before Michaelmas; and if the Mortgager will make his election to tender it before the day, he ought to give the Mortgagee notice thereof. And the Case of one Gurney was cited by Cook, Adjudge 27 Eliz. where a Lease was made for years, and the Lessor made another Lease for years, to commence after the surrender, determination, &c. of the first Lease, and then a private surrender is made to the Lessor of the first Lease, the second Lease shall not begin untill the Lessee hath no∣tice of the surrender of the first Lease. But Tanfield said, that the Case was ruled contrary, and that the Lease did begin presently without notice. (ideo quaere) and as to the principal point, the Court was divided. But Fenner said, that if the Obliges should give notice, perhaps the Obligor will not be found, and therefore good reason that the Obligor should make tender to the Obligee at his peril.
Trinit 36 Eliz. Escot against Lanreny. in B. R. IN an action on the Case the Plaintiff declared that the Lord Barkley by his Indenture, dimisit & ad firmam tradidit totam firmam suam tol∣netum & proficuum nundinarum & dierum Faerialium infra manerium & Bergum de Thetbury. for 21. years, and that the Defendant had di∣sturbed and hindred him, from taking of divers pieces of Wool infra manerium & Burgum, praedict. &c. and after Issue joyned, exception was taken to the Declaration: because he declared of a demise made by the Lord Barkley, and did not set forth, that the Lord Barkley was seised at the time of the Demise 7 H. 7.3.34 H. 6.48. But the exception disallowed by all the Court, because the Plaintiff in this action is to re∣cover damages only, and the right or title of Land does not come in de∣bate, but contra, if it were in such action where the right of the Toll did come in debate, and to prove this Glanvill cited 20 A sis. 3.47 E. 3. and 33 H. 6. and upon this reason he said that the Plaintiff of necessity is not bound to set forth the Market day▪ nor the quantity of the Toll. 34 H. 6.48. Where it was pleaded that J.S. made a Lease to him and did not shew that he was seised, and yet held good. Clench took another exception, because he did not set forth that Toll was to be payd by common usage for no Toll is due for Hens or Geese, or for many other things of such nature, and so it might be that Toll was not due for wooll. Fenner was of the same opinion, but Popham Contra, who said that the Plaintiff had declared that the Defendant had disturbed him from the Toll of divers pieces of Wooll, and by that is implyed, that Toll ought to be payd for Wooll. And at another day Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff. Pasch. 36 Eliz. Sackford against Philipps. in Camera Scaccarii.Rot. 484. IN a debt, this Case was moved by Williams Serjeant. A. is in∣debted to B. in 10 l. upon a Bond, and R. did promise to B. that if he would forbear A, that if A. did not pay him, he would, B. for non-payment by A. does recover so much in damages upon the as∣sumpsit against R. If in Debt upon this obligation against A, A. may plead this recovery in Bar. Walmsley, he cannot, for he is a stranger to the recovery (ideo Quae∣re:) And it was assign'd for errour that it was alledged in the Decla∣ration, that the Defendant did promise to pay the 10 l. before Michael∣mass, in consideration the Plaintiff would forbeare to sue A. and that he hath forborn
& adhuc abstiet, and does not say that he made re∣quest as he ought to have done▪ But the Court held it was well enough, and there is a difference when the Defendant does promise to pay ge∣nerally and at a certain day named, there the Plaintiff ought precisely to alledge a request made in certain: but when the Defendant promiseth to pay at a day certain, he is bound to pay it at his perill without request, and therefore to alledge quod saepius requisitus, is sufficient without al∣ledging a speciall request, otherwise it is if the Defendant assume to pay it upon request, for there it ought to be specially pleaded. Another errour was because the consideration was that the Plaintiff should for∣beare to sue A. and does not set forth for how long time, for perhaps the forbearance was but for a quarter of an houre. Peryam. The consideration upon which an assumpsit is grounded ought to be of value, but of what value is it, where the forbearance is but for half an houre? Fleming. By his promising not to sue, he is ingaged never to sue. Peryam. There is great difference between a promise not to sue, and a promise to forbeare to sue, for a promise not to sue excludes him from suing at all, but a promise to forbeare to sue, is only to forbeare for a time; so that notwithstanding such promise he may sue after; and it being not here exprest how long he will forbeare, there is no conside∣ration. Walmesley. There is a difference when the Defendant seaks the words, and when the Plaintiff. For if the Plaintiff sayes I will for∣beare to sue you, so you will promise to pay me▪ and upon this the Defendant makes a promise accordingly, the Plaintiff in this Case ought to forbear to sue him for ever: But if the Defendant only speaks the words, as here he does. If you will forbeace to sue, I will promise to pay you, and the Plaintiff agrees and forbeares a certain time, yet he may have his action afterward, sed adjournatur. Pasch. 38. Eliz. Stroud against Willis in B. R.Rot. 66. IN Debt upon a Bond, the Condition was: If the Obligor shall well and truly pay the Rent, or sum of 37 l. yearly at two feasts according to the tenure and true intent of certain articles of agree∣ment indented and made between the Obligor and Obligee du∣ring the terme therein mentioned, that then &c. The Defend inteded that these articles ut supra, contain that the said Stroud the Obligee, Dumisit & ad firmam tradidit to the Defendant, Omnia talia dos te∣nementa & terras in Parochia de Petminster, de & in quibus, the sayd Stroud hath an estate for life by Copy according to the Customs of the Mannor. Habendum to the Defendant for 21 years, if Stroud should so long live, rendring to the said Stroud during the said terme 37 . to be paid at the Castle of Canton; and pleaded further that at the time of the making the said Articles, the said Stroud had not any estate in any Lands, houses &c. in Petminster aforesaid▪ for the term of his life or by Co∣py. And upon this plea the Plaintiff demurred, and Iudgment was given for the Plaintif in the Common Pleas and now was removed by Vrit of Errour. And in this Case were two questions. First If nothing passe by these Articles, and so the reservation of the Rent is also voyd. Se∣condly, If the Obligation for payment of the said sum be also voyd; and it was said, that this could not be payable as a Rent upon the 14 H.
4. & 4. 20 Ed. 4. 20 H. 6.23. for no Rent is reserved, because there is no land out of which it can come, and then the obligation is also dischar∣ged. 2. Admitting the Rent is not vayable as Rent, then whether it be an stoppell to plead (as here is done) against the Articles, and therefore, they took a difference where the recitall is generall, andwhere not; as if A. be bound to infeof me of all his lands of the part of his Mother, and he hath no lands of the part of his Mother: but other∣wise if it were to infeof me of Black acre, for he shall be estopped to say that he had not Black acre, and so here he shall be estopped to say, that there are no Articles: but he may plead that he hath no land by Copie: Cook 2. Rep. 33.6. Fenner. When a man makes a voyd Lease, rendring Rent, the Reservation is also voyd, because the land is the consideration and re∣compence for the Rent: but where a man reserves Rent upon a grant or Lease, which grant and Lease are good, but the thing out of which the Rent is issuing cannot be charged with the Rent, there the reserva∣tion is good, as where a Rent is reserved out of an advowson or me∣naltie, but in the Case at Bar the Lease did never begin, and therefore Rent shall not, then is it to be considered whether the Rent is to be payd by reason of the bond, as a sum in gross or not, and as to that matter the condition of the bond is to pay the Rent according to the true meaning of the Articles, which is, that if the Lessee have not the Land, the Lessor shall not have the Rent, therefore it shall not be paid as a sum in gross. Popham cont. But he agreed that the reservation was voyd, for if no Land do pass, no Rent is reserved, and the reservation only does not make any estoppell, and he took a difference upon the 14 Ed. 4. A man makes a Lease generally, and the Lessee is bound to pay the Rent in such manner as it was reserved, there such Rent ought to be deman∣ded, otherwise the Obligation is not forfeit, and the demand ought to be upon the Land; but if such Lessee for years do oblige himself to pay the Rent at a Collaterall place out of the land, there he ought to pay it at his perill without any demand, for now he payes it in another nature than as Rent; so here if the payment had been limited at a place out of the Land, the Obligor is bound to pay it, although nothing were de∣mised to him, for by the bond he hath made it a sum in gross. And it is altered from the nature of Rent upon the first reservation, and he is bound also to pay the Rent or sum, and if this be any of them, he must pay it: As to the second point: he made this difference. A his bound to J.S. to Release to him all his right which he hath in the Land descended to him, on the part of his Mother; there, in Debt upon this bond, the Obli∣gee cannot plead that he hath no right descended to him on the part of his mother, but must Release at his perill. But if he binds himself to infeof the Obligee of all the Land which he hath by descent of his Fa∣ther, there he may plead that he hath no Land from his Father: for all may be Released, although the Releasor hath no right: but a feof∣ment cannot be made of land which a man hath not. Pasch. 38 Elizab. Holcombe against Rawlins. in B. R.Rot. 401. IN a trespass Quare Clausum fregit, with a continuando from the 31 Elizab. to the 36. the Defendant pleaded that J.S. was seised in Fee and made a Lease to him &c. The Plaintiff replyed, that long time be∣fore J.S. was seised, he himself was seised, untill the said J.S. did dis∣seise him; and J.S. being so seised did make the Lease to the Defendant for years, whereupon the Plaintiff reentred.
Tanfield. It appears by the Plaintiffs Replication that the Defen∣dant was in under the title of J.S. viz. the Lessee of the Disseisor of the Plaintif, and therefore he cannot be a Trespassor to the Plaintiff, not∣withstanding his regress. 34 H. 6, 30. 37 H. 6, 35. 2 Edw. 4, 17. 13 H. 7.15. Atkinson contra. At the Common Law the Disseisee being out of possession shall not recover any damages, but only against the Disseisor, and not against any other that comes to the land afterwards, and for this cause the Statute of Gloceste was made. But at the Common Law when the Disseisee re-enters, he is remitted, as if he had not been out of possession at all, and he shall have a trespass against the meane occupiers as in the 4 H. 7. A man was restored to his land by Parlia∣ment, as if he had never been out of possession at all, and he shall have a trespass against the occupiers that are in by title, aswell as here he had against the Kings Patentee. Gwdy. If a Disseisor be disseised, and the first disseisee enter, he shall have a trespass against the second Disseisor. And Popham and Fenner agreed, but Clench cont. But at last adjud∣ged for the Plaintiff. vid. Cook. 11. Rep. fol. 57. Lyfords Case, to the contrary. Pasch. 37. Eliza. VViseman against Baldwin. in B. R.Rot. 341. IN a writ of errour to reverse a judgment given in the Common Pleas, the Case was thus. Rchard Baldwin did demise his land in Taile upon condition, that the Devisee, should pay to J.S. 20. l. and if he fai∣led of the payment, that then the land should remain to J.S. and his heires for ever, and whether this be a Condition in Law, that the heir shall take advantage of, or a limitation of the estate, so that J.S. shall take advantage, was the Question. Gawdy. It is a limitation and not a condition as is apparent in Dyer, Wilfods Case 7.128 and Pewis and Scholasticas Case in the Comenta∣ries, and there is great diversity between an estate in Law, and a de∣vise, in which the intent of the Devisor is to be observed, and here if this shall be taken for a condition, the intent of the Devisor is defrauded. Clench agreed. For this should be as a new devise to J.S. and not as a remainder, as a devise to a Monk, the remainder to J.S. the remain∣der is not good, as a remainder, but as a new devise. Fenner of the same opinion, and said, it had been so adjudged in this Court in an Attournies Case of Devonshire, and also in Sir Edward Cleeres Case. Gawdy. The received opinion of all learned Lawyers hath been such as hath been said, viz. that to the end the intent of the Devisor should be observed, it shall be a limitation. Then I put this Case. A man deviseth his Land to J.S. upon condition, and for non-payment, be devises that his Executors shall sell the Land, if J.S. faile of the pay∣ment, it is cleere that the Executors may sell the Land. Godfrey. I agree, because the Executors have nothing devised to them, but only an authority given them by the Will to sell.
Gawdy. But when the Executors have sold, the Vendee is in by the Devisor, and then it is no other than a devise to one in Fee on conditionof payment, &c. and if he fail, then to another. And the three Iustices agreed; but because the Chief Iustice was absent, it was adjourned to another day, at which time Fenner said, that he had spoken with wen, one of the Iustices of the Common Pleas, who said, he never agreed to the Iudgment, but in case of a perpetuity. And therefore the Iudg∣ment in the Common Pleas was reverst. The Earl of Lincolne against Fisher. THe Steward of the Leete being in Court, did say in Fisher who was resident within the precinct of the Leet, that he must be sworn for the Queen to make presentments at the said Court. To which Fi∣sher replyed, in saying I ought to be sworn, you lie. For which Fisher was fined at the Court 20 l. And the Earl who had the Leet brought his action for the same. Yelverton. The action will not lie, for he is not finable for such words, for they are no disturbance to the Court, nor hindrance of Iustice: for this word, you lie in ancient speaking is no more than to say, you do not say true. Gawdy agreed that the action would not lie. But Fenner, Clench, and Popham cont. For this is a misdemeanor for which the defendant is finable: for every Leet is the Queens Court, and a Court of Iustice, to which respect and reverence ought to he given, and these words are in great contempt to the Court, and the authority thereof, which is su∣preme: And Posito, that he should here say to the Iudge of a Court when he delivered his opinion in any Case. Mr. Iudge, you lie, without question he may be fined and imprisoned; and as it is of a Iudge here, so is it of a Iudge of any inferiour Court, because it is a Court of Iustice. And Popham said, That if any misdemeaned himself in the Leet in any outragious manner, the Steward may commit him. And Gawy changed his opinion, Wherefore the Plaintiff had judge∣ment to recover. Pasch. 36. Eliz. Allens Case. A Scire facias issued out in the name of the Queen, to shew cause why execution of a debt which is come to the Queen by the attainder of J.S. should not be had: The Defendant pleaded that the Queen had granted over this debt by the name of a debt which came to her by the attainder of J.S. and all actions & demands, &c. upon which the Plaintiff demurr'd. And the question was, if the Patentee might sue for this in the name of the Queen, without speciall words. And two presidents were cited, that he may. 1 Pasch. 30 Eliz. rot. 191. in the Exchequer, where Greene to whom a debt was due, was attainted and the Queen granted over this debt, and all actions and demands, and a cre facias was sued for him in the name of the Queen; also in the 32 Elz. rot. 219. Mabb of London was indebted by bond, and the debt came to the Qu. by the attainder, and she granted it to Bones, and all actions & demands, and a scire facias was issued out in the name of the Queen. And the prin∣cipall case was adjourned: but the Patentee had express words to sue in the name of the Queen, although it was not so pleaded.
43 Eliz. Pelling against Langden. in B. R.Rot. 438. IN a trespass for breaking his Close, and killing 100 Conies. The De∣fendant justified, because he had common time out of mind, and because the Conies were damage Feasant in the place where he killed them. The Plaintiff demurr'd, and judgment given for the Plaintiff: for Conies are beasts of Warren, and profitable as Deer, and are not to be compar'd to Foxes and vermine which may be kill'd, but the Owner of the soil may keep Conies where the Common is aswell as other cattle, also he may make Fish-ponds in the Common, and the Commoner cannot destroy them Cook 5. Rep. 104. 22 H. 6.59. & so it was adjudgd. Trinit. 43 Eliz. Gresham against Ragge. in B. R.Rot. 1295. IN trepass for entring into a house. The Defendant pleaded that the Plaintiff was indebted to the Defendant in 100 l. and that he by the permission of the Plaintiffs servant, (the doores being open) did enter to demand his debt: Vpon which the Plaintiff demurred. And ad∣judged for the Plaintiff. For the servant of the Plaintiff could not li∣cence any to enter into the house of his Mr. also a man cannot enter in∣to anothers house to demand money, unless the debtor be within the house. Gawdy. If it had been averred, that the Plaintiff had been then in the house, the Plea had been good. Hillar. 44. Eliz. Streetman against Eversley. in B. R. IN an ejectment, the Case was, a Lessee for 80. years upon condi∣tion, that if the Lessee his Executors or Assignes did not repairo the house within six weeks after warning, that the Lease should be void the Lessee made a Lease for ten years, who suffered J.S. to occupie the house, and then the Lessor came to the said occupation of the house, and at the house gave notice, and said, that the house was defective in repa∣rations and did shew in what, and so gave warning to have it repaired, and after for default of reparations he entred, and the Defendant as ser∣vant to the Lessee re-entred: And his entry adjudged lawfull, for notice given to J.S. who was but an Occupier of the house, and not Lessee or Assignee of any interest of the terme, was not sufficient; but it ought to be to the person interessed in the terme, who is liable to repa∣rations. Vid. Cooks 6. Rep. Greens case. Also the notice at the house is not sufficient, but it ought to be to the person of the Lessee, and Popham agreed to this.
Trinit. 1 Jacobi. Shopland against Radlen, in C. B.Rot. 853. IN a Replevin the question was, when a Guardian in socage holds a Court in his own name, and does grant Copies in reversion; if this be a good Grant or not, and adjudged to be good against the Heir. Walmesley. Dominus pro tempore of a Mannour may hold a Court, and make a Grant of Copyholds, but this is to be understood of per∣fect Lords, which a Guardian is not, but onely ad commodum haereis, and is rather a servant to the Lord, than Dominus pro tempore: and he cannot be called Dominus, because he can neither grant nor forfeit his estate, and hath nothing to do to meddle in the Mannour, but to ac∣count for the profits: and a Writ of Ward does not lye for the land, but onely for the body. Gawdy chief Justice. Warburton and Daniel Justices to the con∣trary. Who held, that a Guardian in socage is Dominus pro tempore, and that he hath interest in the land, and may make a Lease thereof for years, Commentar. 293. and may avow in his own name, 29 Ed. 3. Avowry 298. But a Guardian in socage cannot present to an Ad∣vowson, because he cannot be accountable. But Daniel Iustice said, that the Guardian may present where the heir is not of years of dis∣cretion, and a Guardian in socage shall have a Trespass, and a ravish∣ment of Ward, 24 Ed. 3.52. and he hath the Ward by reason of look∣ing to him, and therefore he hath interest sufficient to keep Court, and admit Copyholders, who are not in by him, but by the custome, But a Bailiff of a Mannour hath no interest, and therefore cannot make Grants and Copies: but a Guardian hath interest provisione legis, although it be such interest as cannot be forfeit, and the heir cannot be at any prejudice, for he shall have an account made to him of such Fines; for the heir himself cannot grant them, and the Law cannot compell the Guardian to occupy them; neither can the Court be held in the name of the heir, but the Guardian, and therefore he may grant Co∣pies. And if a Guardian in socage hath such interest that he can make a Lease for years and his Lessee shall maintain an Ejectment a fr oti, he may grant Copies. Neither is it any argument at all to say that a Guardian in socage hath no interest, because he cannot grant or forfeit his estase; for the reason is, because these things are annexed to his person. And after, Mich. 3 Jacob. it was adjudged, that the Grant was good, and shall binde the heir. Vid. Keloway, 46.6. 37 Eliz. Brown against Hercey, in C. B.Rot. 620. IT was found by office, that J.S. who held the Mannour of D. of the King, did dye without heir; whereupon W.S. as heir to him, did traverse the said Office, and hereupon was at issue with the Queen, if he were heir or not: (and depending this suit) he made a Feoffment in Fee, with a Letter of Attorney to make Livery, and after it was found for him against the Queen, and Iudgement given
against the Queen: but before the Writ of Amoveas manum, the At∣torney made Livery, and adjudged good, for it cannot be said that the heir at the time of the Feoffment had nothing, or that the Queen at the time of the Livery was in possession, for by the Iudgement given, the possession of the Queen was utterly defeated, and possession in the party before any amoveas manum sued out, for that serves but to com∣pell the Eschaetor to avoyd the possession, it he hold the land after Iudgement. Vid. Stanford, praerogat. 78. 10 Ass. 2. 10 Ed. 3. and the difference is where the King is seized by title, and where without title; for when the King is seized by title, and his title is determined, he ought to make Livery to him that hath right: but when he is seized without title, and he who hath right hath Iudgement against him, he may enter without Livery, 5 Ed. 5. Quare impedit 34. But it was here said by Owen Iustice, that if a man makes a Feoffment of White-acre, with a Letter of Attorney to make Livery, and then he purchase White-acre, this is not a good Feoffment for White-acre. Michaelm. 29. & 30. Eliz. Knowles against Powell, in Scaccario. THe Queen seized in Fee, made a Lease for years to one who was out-lawed at the time of the Lease, rendring rent; and after he was out-lawed again, and before seizure, comes out the general pardon of all Goods and Chattels forfeited; and in this Case it was agreed, that a man out-lawed was capable of a Lease from the Queen, as Farmer to the Queen. And Manwood said, that the pardon with restitution is sufficient to revive the term forfeited by the second out-lawry; and it was also agreed, that a man out-lawed and pardoned, had property in his goods. Egerton Sollicitor said, that in the 4 Eliz. it was adjudged in the Common Pleas, that if the Queen made a Lease under the Exchequer-seal to begin immediatly after forfeiture, surrender, or expiration of a former term, and the Lessee is out-lawed, shat the second Lease shall not commence, for it is a Royal forfeiture. Trinit. 41 Elizab. Ferrers against Borough, in B. R.Rot. 185. UPon a special Verdict the Case was thus, A man makes a Lease for years, upon condition that if he paid 10 l. before Mi∣chaelmas, that it should be lawfull for him to re-enter; and be∣fore Michaelmas, he lets the land to another by Indenture for years, and then performed the Condition, and entred; the first Lessee brought a Trespass, and it was adjudged that it does not lye.
Trinit. 35 Elizab. Lambert against Austen, in B. R.Rot. 185. IN a Replevin the Case was thus; A man seized of land in Fee, grants a Rent-charge out of it to A. for life, with a Clause of Di∣stress, and then makes a Lease to B. for years, and grants the rever∣sion for life to J.S. the Rent becomes behind the 15 of Eliz. untill the 18 of Eliz. and the Grantee makes the Defendant his Executor, and dyes, the term of B. ends in the 33 Eliz. and then J.S. enters, and makes a Lease to the Plaintiff; the Executor of A. distreyns for the arrearages, and the Plaintiff brings a Replevin. Gawdy and Fenner. This Distress is well taken for the arreara∣ges upon the Statute of the 32 H. 8. cap. 37. for the Rent doth not issue out of the term for years, but out of the Free-hold; and upon grant thereof, as Littleton saith, the Tenant of the Free-hold ought to attorn, and not the Termor; and so is it, 9 H. 6. and if an Assize be brought for this Rent, it ought to be brought against the Tenant of the Free-hold, and all the Tenants of the Free-hold ought to be named in a Rent-charge, by Cook, 6 Rep. 58. but otherwise for a Rent-service, for that is against the Termor onely, and a Termor cannot give seizin of the Rent to maintain an Assize, by Cook, 6 Rep. 57. and for the same reason Executors shall have an Action of Debt at the Common Law for arrearages, because the estate is determined, Cook, 4 Rep. 49. but an Avowry is given by this Statute, Onely so long as the land shall continue in the seisin and possession of the said Tenant in demesn And they much relyed on this word (demesn) which ought to be intended of a Free-hold; and of a Reversion upon a Lease for years, it is pleaded, quod seisitus in dominico suo, &c. and so cannot a Tenant for years say; for which reasons it seemed to them that the Distress was well taken. Clench contr. For the Termor ought to pay it, for he takes the profits of the land: as if a Lease be made to a woman, rendring Rent, who takes husband, and dyes, the husband shall pay the Rent, by the 10 H. 6. for he hath taken the profits; and by the words of the Statute, they are (in the possession or seisin) and seisin refers to the Te∣nant of the Free-hold, and possession to the Tenant for years; and the words are, (which ought immediatly to pay the Rent) and so ought the Termor in our Case, who is chargeable to the Distress of the Testator. Popham chief Iustice, of the same opinion. The Distress is not well taken; for he who hath the profits of the land, ought to answer for the Rent. Gawdy. Although the Cattel of the Lessee be distreynable by the Testator, that is onely because they are upon his land; as a strangers Cattel may be so distreyned, and therefore this proves not that the Lessee should pay the Rent. And if a man grants a Rent-charge, and lets the land at will afterwards, the Rent is behind, and the Grantee dyes, and the Lease at will determines, without question in that Case the Lessor is subject to the Distress of the Executor. And in our Case, if the Grantee had released to the Tenant for life, this had ex∣tinguisht the Rent, otherwise of a Release to Tenant for years.
Fenner. If Tenant in Tail granta a Rent-charge, and aftermakes a Lease for 21 years according to the Statute, and dyes, the Rent by the death of the Tenant in Tail is determined. To which Gawdy agreed; which proves, that the Rent issues out of the Free∣hold. Vid. Cook, 5 Rep. 118. Hillar. 37 Eliz. Butler against Ruddisley. IN a Trespass, the Defendant pleaded the Free-hold of Edward Devereux, and so justified as his Bailiff, without saying (at his commandment) the Plaintiff replyed, that the said Edward was seized in Fee, and made a Lease to him, by vertue whereof he was possest absque hoc, that the Lessor made the Defendant his Bailiff post dimissionem; and hereupon the Defendant demurred. Crook. By this Lease a Free-hold passeth to the Plaintiff, and then the Plaintiffs traverse is naught, for he hath now traverst that the Defendant is Bailiff, whereas he ought to traverse the Free-hold in the Lessor, for that would have destroyed the justification of the De∣fendant. And to prove that the Free-hold doth pass, he cited the Case of Littleton, where if a Lease be made to the husband and wife during Coverture, they are Ioynt-tenants for life. So in the 30 H. 6. a Lease to a woman, dum sola vixert. And 14 Ed. 2. a Grant to a man till he be promoted to such a Benefice, or dummodo se bene gesserit, all these are Free-holds. And it is clear, that a Tenant at will cannot as∣sign over. And also an estate at will is an estate at the will of both parties: but here it is at the will of the Lessor onely, when he will make a Bailiff. Haughton contr. An estate at will doth pass, and not a Free-hold; for here he hath not pleaded that Livery was made; and Livery shall not be intended in this case, unless it be specially alledged: but if Li∣very had been made, then he agreed that a Free-hold conditional had past; and for the pleading of a Livery, he took a difference, that where an express estate either in fee or for life be pleaded, there Livery shall be intended: but where a Free-hold passeth by implication or operation of Law, and not by express words, there Livery ought to be pleaded, as a Lease to one for years, the remainder to another for life, there Li∣very ought to be pleaded. So in the 21 Assi. If a man pleads a Feoff∣ment and Livery within the view, he must plead Livery within the view expresly; and so upon Grant of a reversion, attornment ought to be pleaded. And whereas it was said, that it cannot be an e∣state by will, because it was not the will of both parties. Vid. 9 Ed. 4.1. and 15 Ed. 4. But Gawdy and Fenner denyed the diversity put by Haughton, for in pleading of an estate for life, all necessary circum∣stances in pleading shall be intended. And so it was agreed, that an estate for life should pass, for Livery shall be intended. Sed adjour∣natur.
Pasch. 35 Eliz. Pendigate against Audley, in B. R.Rot. 242. IN a Writ of Errour upon recovery of a Debt, the Errour was assigned, because the Action of Debt upon the Obligation was brought against the Father of the Plaintiff, and in the Writ he was named the Son and Heir apparent of the Obligor, for this implyes that the Father was alive; for if he were dead, then is the Plaintiff Heir in facto, and not apparent. Gawdy. It is but Surplusage; and in the 11 Ed. 3. the Writ was good, although he was not named Son and Heir omnino. But this was denyed, and agreed, that he ought to be named Heir; and Iudge∣ment was reverst. Hillary 37 Eliz. Tanfield against Rogers, in B. R. IN a Replevin, the Case was thus; Tenant in Tail seized of a Mannour with 3 Acres thereof in Demesn, makes a Lease of the three Acres also of the Mannour, habendum the three Acres, and the Mannour for 21 years, rendring Rent for the 3 Acres, and all other the premisses, therewith demised 5 l. The question was, if this be a good Lease within the Statute of the 32 H. 8. Stephens. This Lease is not within the Statute, for this Lease of 3 Acres, and of the Mannour whereof they are parcel, is an entire Demise, and not several, as in 13 H. 4. Grants 88. A man seized of a Mannour, with an Advowson appendant, makes Feoffment of one Acre of the Mannour; and then in the same Deed he grants the Ad∣vowson appendant, and not in gross, and yet they are in several clauses. Vid. 48 Ed. 3.41. 33 H. 8. Dyer 48. Gawdy and Clench. When the Lease is of three Acres, and of the Mannour, although the Mannour comprehends the three Acres, yet in construction of Law they shall be taken as several Demises. Fenner. I am of the fame opinion; and as I remember, in the 10 Assis. is this Case; A Lease is made of the Grist, and also of the Mill, reserving by the year 5 s. and for the other 10 s. they are several Leases; and so is it here. Note, that Popham was absent. But after in the same term he declared, that he agreed with the other Iustices; and Iudgement was given, that the Lease was good for the three Acres.
Pasch. 37 Eliz. Carus Case. PEter Carus was indicted for drawing his Sword in West∣minster-hall, the Court then sitting, in resisting the Sheriff who was making an Arrest; and being found guilty upon his Arraignment, it did appear that this fact was done upon the stairs of the Court of requests, out of the view of the Courts; yet it was held, that being in the Hall, it was as much as if it had been in view of the Court. But because the Indictment was not good, for it was not coram Regina. as it ought to be, the Iudgement was only to have perpetual Imprisonment, and to pay 1000 l. Fine to the Queen. But if the Indictment had been as we have seen a president in 1 Ed. 4. then the Iudgement ought to be, to have his hand cut off, and to for∣feit all his lands and goods, and to have perpetual Imprisonment. 22 Ed. 3.13. Cromptons Justice, 246. Mich. 3 Jacob. Walgrave against Skinner, in B. R.Rot. 174; IN a Trespass, the Plaintiff declared that he was robbed of 20 l. and that he pursued the Felon with hue and cry to such a Town, where he discovered the Felon to the Defendant, who was Con∣stable of the said Town; wherefore he apprehended the Felon, and found the 20 l. about him, which sum the Defendant fook, and de∣tained in his own possession. The Defendant confest the taking the 20 l. ut supra: but because the Town was of no strength, he carried the 20 l. to the next Town, and as he was going upon the High-way, he was robb'd of it; and so he concluded that he ought not to be char∣ged in this Action. Johnson for the Plaintiff. It appears in 4 H. 7. that the Thief hath no property in the money which is found in his possession: and in the 15 Ed. 4. it is resolved, that if A robs B, and C robs A, yet C hath not gained any property; and if the Constable takes this out of his pos∣session, he cannot seize it to any other use than to the use of the King; and therefore if he takes Felons goods, and does not keep them safe, the first Owner shall have a Trespass against him; for by the 21 H. 7. If a man does carry the Parsons tithe to the Parsons barn because it is like to perish, yet the Parson may have a Trespass a∣gainst him. And by the opinion of Stanford, 44 Assi. If goods are ta∣ken from a Felon, and he will give sufficient surety, he himself shall have the keeping of them, or else the Town, and therefore the o∣stable hath no authority to meddle with them. Erby contr. For a Constable is Conservator acis, and the peace does consist as much in keeping of goods, as of  a Felon. And here the Constable doubting of the Town by reason of the Inhabitants who were riotous,
he thought it the best course to carry them to the next Town, and so no default was in him, for his taking and meoling with them was lawfull. And 22 Assi. 96. If a Felon flying be taken in any Village, the Bai∣liff thereof may take the custody of the goods; and I suppose that a Constable may keep goods as well as a Bailiff, for he is a Minister of the Law; and if they be taken from him, he is no more chargeable than if goods were taken out of the possession of my servant. Williams Iustice, Pasch. 2 H. 7. Common same is enough to appre∣hend any man; but if you arrest a person who is possest of money, and he dye, you are chargeable with the money. And so here, although the taking of the Felon by the Constable be justiciable, yet he is to keep safe the money at his peril; and because he hath not, he is liable to this Action. Popham. He might have pleaded not guilty; for he said, that if a Town hath the possession of my goods a Detinue lyes, und not a Trespass; but if a stranger takes them out of their possession, there a Trespass lyes; and therefore he conceived in this Case, that the Plaintiff should have brought a Trover and Conversion, and not a Trespass, quod li Justicia con esserun; and therefore the Case was deferred till next term, to be argued upon the general issue. Mich. 3 Jacob. Jorden against Atwood, in B. R.Rot. 561. THe Case upon the whole pleading appeared to be thus, A sei∣zed of a Messuage called Bodswen, had a way appendant to it in the land of J.S. in a Close called Bace; after A pur∣chased the said Close, and infeoffed the Plaintiff thereof; and this Action was brought by the Feoffee against the Feoffor for using the said way; and the question was, if the way were extinguisht, or not; and it was argued at the Bar, that unity of possession doth make no extinguishment 3 H. 6.31. where  prescribed to have a way to a Wood in a place called England; against which was pleaded, that time out of minde . S. was seized of the said place, and of the said Wood, and held no plea. 2 Ed. 3.2. 11 H. 7.25. it was argued on the other side, that the Case of 31 H. 6. was a quaere; and because the Feoffor had not reserved a way it did pass by the Feoffment. Tanfield Iustice. Vnity of possession does not confound a way; and he cited 19 Ed. 2. 21 Ed. 3.2. A way was appendant to a Mill which was alotted to one partner, who assigned over her interest, and the Assignee brought an Assize of nasance, and unity of possession was pleaded in Bar, but not allowed. Yelverton Iustice conr. For the 21 Ed. 3.2. confirms my opinion; for Brook in his abridgement of the Case saith, that the partners have that as in case of ane o Brant, which proves if they had it as heir, it should be gone. And the Case of Gutter in 1 H. 7. is onely by reason of the Custome. But here the Feoffor might have reserved his way upon the Feoffment, and it was his folly he did not.
Williams of the same opinion. And he took a difference between the Case of Gutter which is preserved by Custome, and the Case of away or Common which are extinguisht by way of unity of possession, according to the 35 H. 6. Fenner contr. For the case of a Way differs from the case of a Common, for unity will extinguish a Common, but not a Way, for then he shall lose the profit of all the land to which the Way is appur∣tenant, for without the Way he cannot use the Close, and therefore there is no reason that the Law should extinguish it. Popham accorded and took a difference between a Common appen∣dant, which is of necessity, and a Common in gross; for in case of a Common appendant, if one Tenant of the Mannour doth purchase the Seigniory, and then grants over the Tenancy, the Common which he had before shall be still appendant, for it is not extinguisht by the unity, but shall pass with the Tenancy: but otherwise of a Com∣mon in gross: and so he said was the same difference in this Case; for if the way be a way of ease or pleasure, there it shall be extinguisht by unity: but if it be a way of necessity there it is otherwise, for without it a man shall lose the benefit of his land or house. And he compared this ad viam Regiam, which lyes by my house: yet if I do make a Feoffment of the land. I shall have a passage also. And he said, that if a man had three Fields adjoyning, and makes a Feoffment of the middle Field, the Feoffee shall have a way to this through the other Close. where it shall be most easy and beneficial for him. And at last, because the two Iustices agreed, although others were of the contrary opinion, Iudgement was given, Quod quaerens il capiat per billam, and that the way is not extinguisht. Vid. 11 H. 4, 5. Michaelm. 7 Jacob. Leigh against Burley. LEigh sued Burley and Cradock in the Court of Admiralty, whereupon a Prohibition was prayed. The Case was thus: Burley, Master of a Ship, gave money to Cradock to buy Sailors Cloaths for him; Cradock bought such Cloaths for him of Leigh in the Parish of Saint Katherines near the Tower in London, whereby Leigh delivered the Cloaths to Burley in his ip that was in the hames adjoyning to Saint Katherines; and because the money was not paid, he sued Burley in the Admiralty Court; and a Prohibition was awarded for two causes; 1. because the Contract was made on land, and infra corpus comitatus, and therefore the Ad∣miral can have no jurisdiction; for the Statutes of the 13 and 15 of Rich. 2. and 2 H. 4. cap. 11. are, that the Admiral shall not have conu∣sance but of things done super altum mare. Vd. Cook, 5 Re. 107. And so was it resolved by the Iustices; and then said, that the 15 of Richard the
2. is mis-printed, viz. that the Admiral shall have Iuris∣diction to the Bridges: for the Translator mistook Bridges for Points, that is to say, the Lande-end. And Cook said, that the Ad∣miral should have no Iurisiction where a man may see from one side to the other: but the Coroner of the County shall enquire of Felonies committed there; which was held to be good by all the other Iustices; And he gave this difference, that where the place was covered over with saltwater and out of any County or Town, there est altum mare: but where it is within any County, there it is not altum mare, but the Tryall shall be par vicenetum of the Town; Doderidge ser∣jeant demanded this Question. The Isle of Lunday is de Corpore Co∣mitatus of Devonshire and lyes twenty miles within the Sea. Whether is that within the County. Foster. If the Sea there be not of any County, the Admirall hath Iu∣risdiction or els not. And note Cook and Foster said, that the Statute 25 H. 8. cap. 15. for criminall offences upon the Sea is to be intended if Felony be super altum Mare, for if it be committed in a Creek or a place where the Admirall hath not Iurisdiction, the Commissioners have nothing to do to meddle with it. And the Prohibition was granted. Michaelm. 7 Jacob. Mores against Conham in C. B. IN an action on the Case upon an assumpsit, the Plaintiff declared that Lover was indebted to him in a certain sum, for which he pawnd to the Plaintiff certain goods to the value of 100 l. and the Defendant promised the Plaintiff to pay the debt, if he would deliver the pawn, and hereupon the Defendant demurred. And two points were moved, one to the forme, and the other to the matter. First, the Plaintif declared that the assumpsi: was pro diversis bonis & Catallis delivered to Lover with∣out shewing what goods or of what kinde, for this is the consideration of the contract, and therefore ought to be pleaded in certainty. But re∣solved by the Court that the plea was good: for the goods themselves are not to be recovered in this action nor damages for them, and so they are but collaterall to the action, as in 10 Edw. 3.30. In a Rescous: the Court was for taking of Cattle, without shewing what Cattle, and the Iury found them to be two horses; and the Plaintiff had judgment; where note that a verdict did help an insufficient Court, and 22 Asi 21 Ed. 3. a trespass was brought for taking away of Writings concer∣ning land, without shewing what they were, or the quality of the land: But otherwise in a detinue for Charters, for there the Writings them∣selves are to be recovered. The second and great doubt was, when a man doth promise to another that if he will deliver the pawn, he will pay the debt, if this be a sufficient consideration to maintain an Assump∣sit. Foster Justice, It is not: for he that hath the pawne hath not such an interest in it as he may deliver it over to another, or make a legall contract for it, and that his delivery being illegall, he cannot by his own wrong raise an action to himself, and a man shall never maintain any action, where the consideration is illegall and not valuable.
9 Ed. 4. In an action on the Case the Defendant pleaded an accord, and that he delivered the writing to the Plaintiff which concern'd the land, and it was held no plea, because the Plaintiff having land, the writtings belon∣ged to it. And cited Reynolds Case: where a man promised another 100 l. to solicite his business, and it was holden that no action would lie forthe money, because the soliciting his business was illegall, he being no man of Law. Dier 355, 356. Cook, Warburton and Daniell cont. Who said, that the considera∣tion was good, legall and profitable, and sufficient to maintain an as∣sumpsit: for he who hath goods at pawn hath a speciall property in them, so that he may work such pawn, if it be a Horse or Oxe, or may take the Cowes milk, and may use it in such manner as the owner would: but if he misuseth the pawn, an action lyes, also he hath such interest in the pawn as he may assign over, and the assignee shall be subiect to a detinue, if he detaines it upon payment of the money by the owner as in the 2. assise. Land was leased untill he had raised 100 l. he hath such interest as is grantable over. And Foster agreed to this, because he had power to satisfie himself out of the profits. And it was agreed by the Court, that if a man takes a distress, he cannot work the distress, for it is only the act of the Law that gives power to the distress, for he hath no propertie in the distress, nor possession in jure as in the 21 H. 7. Re∣plevin. A man hath returne Irreplevisable, he cannot worke them, for the Iudgment is to remit them to the pound, ibid. remansurum. vid. 13 R. 2 Brook. 20 H. 7, 1, a. 34 H. 8. B. pledges 28.22 Edw. 4, 11. goods pawned shall not be put into execution untill the debt be satisfied. And it was agreed by Cook and Warburton, that when a man hath a speciall interest in a thing by act in Law, that he cannot work it, or otherwise use it: but contrary upon a speciall interest by the act of the partie as in case of a pawn. Daniell. There is difference between pawns, which are chargeable to the parties as Cowes and Horses, and things that are not charge∣able, and also there is a difference between pawnes that will be the worse by usage as Clothes, &c. For if the pawn be the worse by usage an action of the Case will lie against him that hath them pawned to him: But contra of goods that are not the worse for usage. Cook. If I deliver goods to you, untill you are promoted to a bene∣fice, you may use them, which Foster denied. And Iudgment was given for the Plaintiff, and that they may be granted over, and so a good assumpsit will lie. 26 Eliz. Earl of Northumber∣lands Case. THis case was privately argued before the Lord Treasurer, because the parties agreed to refer themselves to the opinion of Wray and Anderson. And the case was this, the Earl of
Northumberland devised by his will, his Iewells to his wife. And dyed possessed of a Collar of Esses, and of a Garter of gold and of a Buckle annexed to his bonnet, and also of many other buttons of gold and pretious stones annexed to his robes, and of many other chains, bracelets and rings of gold and pretious stones. The question was if all these should passe by the devise, under the name of Iewells. And both Iustices did Resolve that the Garter and Collar of Esses did not pass, because they were not pro∣perly Iewells but ensignes of Honour and State, and that the Buckle in his bonnet, and the buttons did not pass, because they were annexed tohis Robes, and were therfore no Iewells. But for all the other chaines, rings, braceletts and Iewells, they passed by vertue of the said Will. Michaelm. 40 & 41 Eliz. Sperke against Sperke. in C. R.Rot. 2215. IN an ejectment, the Case was this. M. Sperke made a Lease of the land in question to William Sperke for 89. years if William should so long live, the remainder after his death to the Executors or Assignes of the said William for 40. years: afterwards Wil∣liam dyes Intestate and administration is committed to Grace Sperke his wife, who entred clayming the 40. years, and the Defendant clay∣ming by another Lease entred upon him and he brought this action. Adon. Executor is as good a name of purchase as Heire is. And I conceive the points in this case are two. First, if the Administrator be an assignee. Secondly, If the lease for 40. years, be a Chattell vested in the Intestate in his life, for if it be, then his Administrator shall have it. And as to the first. I conceive that she is not assignee to take these 40 years. For in the 19 Ed. 3. It is there said that Administra∣tors are not assignees, for administration is appointed by the ordinary and assignees must be in by the party himself and not by a stranger, and therefore an Administrator cannot be an assignee, as an Executor that comes in by the partie, or as a husband for his wife. Walmesley and Glany accorded. But Kingsmill cont. for he said, that although one could not be assignee in Deed without the act of the partie, yet one may be assignee in Law by the act of the law. And so the opinion of the . Iustices to the first point was, that the Admini∣strator could not have it as assignee, and as to the second point. An∣derson said, that it could not vest: for if a man have a Lease for life, the remainder for 40. years, the remainder is voyd, because there is no per∣son named to whom it is limited: but if a man make a Lease for life, and after his death to his lessee for 21. years, that is good, and the Exe∣cutor shall have it as in right of his Testator. But where a man makes a Lease for years or life, the remainder after his death for 40. years to his Executors, the Executors shall have it as purchasors, for this word remainder divides it from the Testator, and makes the Execu∣tors purchasors. Walmesley, Glanvill and Kingsmill cont. And their chief reason was from the intent of the parties, and their intent was that the Lessee should have an estate during life, for it is to him for 89. years, if he so long live, and because by common intendment he cannot survive those years, their intent was that his Executors should have it after his death, and that the certainty of the time might be known it was limited for 40. years. And W lmsley said, that the Administrator could not have this by purchase, for when a man takes by purchase, he must be named by an apt name of purchase by which he may be known; as if there be tenant for life, the remainder to the right heirs males of J.S. and
J.S. hath issue two sons, and the eldest hath issue a daughter, and J.S. dies, this daughter shall never take any estate, because she is not heir male, shehath no name of purchase; and therefore here the Administrator can∣not take by purchase, for the Administrator comes in by the ordinary, and therefore cannot be an assignee. And at last. Iudgment was given. That the Administrator should hold it, as a thing vested in the Intestate. Michaelm. 41 & 42 Eliza. VVhite against Gerish. in C. B.Rot. 366. IN a Replevin the Defendant avowd for Rent. The case was this. Two persons did joyne in leavying a fine to J.S in Fee ur cons de droit come ceo, &c. J.S. by the same Fine renders the Lands to one of the Conusors in taile, reserving Rent and further would quod tene∣menta precta remanerent to the other who is the avovee. Walmesley. The Rent shall passe: as if a man grants land for life, and also grants quod tenementa predicta remaneunt to another, these words (Quod tenementa predicta) do make a grant of the reversion: and also these renders are as severall Fines, and so it shall be taken as a grant in Taile rendring Rent, and after a grant of the reversion. Glanvill accorded. Warburton. If a man makes a gift in Taile ren∣dring rent, the remainder over in Fee, the Donor shall have the Rent and not he in the remainder. Walmesley. That is true in a grant, but not in a Fine. Anderson. If a man makes a gift in Taile rendring rent, and at the same instant grants the Reversion, and the Deeds are delivered, accordingly, this shall passe as a reversion. And after it was ad∣judged to be a grant of the reversion, and that the rent passeth. Crawleys Case. IN Replevin the case was thus. A Rent is granted to two during the life of J.S. to the use of J.S. the grantee dieth, and if the Rent were determined was the Question. Walmsley. The rent remains to J.S. for the grantees have an estate during the life of J.S. and by the Statute of the 27. l. 8. the use is rai∣sed and conjoynd with the possession, whereby the Rent it self is carryed to J.S. whereby J.S. hath an absolute estate for his life, and the life of the grantees is not materiall: as if Rent be granted to two for the life of J.S. if he does not grant over the rent, their lives are not materiall. And if they grant over and dse, the Rent shall not cease, but the grantee shall have it during the life of J.S. And here the Statute 27 l. 8. vests this in cestuy que vie, otherwise if it were before the Statute of use. quod fuit concessum per curiam.
Pasch. 41 Eliz. Shaw against Sherwood.Rot. 2504. THe Executors of Shaw brought an Action of Debt for 20 l. upon a Bill, and the Bill was thus, I William Shaw have received of Thomas Pret 40 l. to the use of Robert Shaw and Elizbeth Shaw, equally to be divided: which said sum I acknowledge my self to have received to the use aforesaid, and the same to re deliver again at such time as shall be most fit for the profit and commodity of the said Robert Shaw and Ezabeth. Walmesley. Two points are here; First, if this be a Debt to cestuy que use, or to him who gave it. Secondly, if it be divided, so that each of them shall have an Action for 20 l. And as to the first, he held, that it was a debt to him for whose use the money was delivered; and as to the second that they shall have a debt as of several debts, by reason of these words equally to be divided. Kgm. Here is no Obligation, for the words are not obligatory, but onely an acknowledgement of the receipt. Glanyll accorded. Walmesley. When he acknowledged the receipt to both their uses, without question such Receiver is a Debtor. And agreed by the Court, that admitting it was a Debt, that then it shall be a divided Debt, and not joynt. Quod nota. Lane against Cotton. IN Debt upon a Bond, on condition to pay 20 l. within a month after, the Obligee had a son, that did or could speak the Lords Per in English, that he could be understood; the Plaintiff pleaded, that he had a son, qui loqui potui praecationem Domini, uintellig po∣tuerit; and the Defendant demurr'd, because it was pleaded that he had a son qui loqui potui, for that is a secret ability that cannot be known. Kingsmill. The plea is good, and shall be tryed, as in case of a Writ of non coms mentis. Glanvill accorded: for it may be proved by the testimony of those who have heard him speak; and if he ever spoke it, it is good evidence that he had ability to speak. Walmesley contr. Because it is a secret thing it cannot be tryed. Kingsmill. A man is bound in a Bond to give me 20 l. when the River of Var is novigable, it is a good plea to say that the River is navigable, without saying that some have navigated upon it. Her Serjeant cited a Case adjudged in a Quare impedit by the Patron against the Bishop, who had pleaded that the Parishioners were Welshmen, and that they could not understand English, and
that the Clerk he presented could not understand Welsh; and the Pa∣tron pleaded, that the Clerk could speak Welsh; and upon Demurr it was adjudged a good issue, and that such matter might be tryed. Anderson. The issue is good, and it is at the election of the party to plead quod loqui potuit, vel loquutus est. And if I am obliged to you to give you a 100 l. when I am able to go to Pauls, this may e tryed, although in facto I never went to Pauls; and if I am able, I shall pay the money. And he cited Broughtons Case, where in Main∣tenance the Defendant pleaded that he was peritus in legibus Angliae, and that he was retained to he of Councel, and adjudged no good plea, for he should alledge that he was Student for a certain time, and was elected by the Benchers to be a Barrester. And Iudgement was gi∣ven for the Plaintiff. Michaelm. 41 & 42 Eliz. Swan against Gateland.Rot. 3267, or 3667. IN a ravishment of Ward, the Plaintiff demurred, that T. B. was seized of land in socage, and dyed, and J B his son is of the age of two years, and that the Guardianship belongs to him, be∣cause he is next friend  par mas J.B. viz. the brother of E.B. the infants mother. The Defendant pleaded, that E.B. the in∣fants mother was his mother also, and that he was begotten by one Gateland on the said E.B. and the said Gatelae dyed, and the said E.B. did marry the said T.B. and had issue the infant▪ and so conclu∣ded, quod erat propinquior am cus absque hoc, that the Plaintiff is propinquior amicus; and upon this was a Demurr. Hern for the Plaintiff. The question is, whether the uncle shall be Guardian in socage, or the brother of the half blood▪ and he said, the uncle should have the Wardship because there is a more natural affe∣ction between the uncle and the infant, than between the infant and the brother of the half blood; and if there be not love, he cannot be the procheme amy, although in judgement of Law he be the next of kin. 31 Ed. 3. Gawdy 157. In a Writ of Ward, the Plaintiff declared that he was next of kin of the Plaintiff the mother of the infant, and it was pleaded against him, that the infants mother was alive; but he replyed, that the mother had made a Charter of Feoffment to the dis∣herison of the infant, and that she was attaint of Treason. And in 15 Eliz. the brother who claimed the Wardship of his younger bro∣ther, was also within age, and therefore it was ruled that the uncle should have the Wardship, because alterum qur rege qui sepsum nequit. And 5 Ed. 6. the brother of the half blood is next of kin, to whom administration shall be given before the mother; for the Sta∣tute of 27 H. 8.15 sayes, that the next of kin shall have it, and the brother of the half blood is the next of in: but Guardianship shall be given by the Law to the nearest friend and that is the uncle Williams contr. For although the brother be but o the half blood. yet he shall have the Wardship▪ for the brother is the next of kin, to whom the inheritance cannot descend; and the 31 Ed. 1. does not
gainsay this, for the mother was denyed the Wardship, because she was attaint of Treason: for the Law will not suffer that the infant shall be in Ward to any, who may be suspected to do wrong to the in∣fants land, or to his person, and therefore he shall not be in Ward to any that may inherit him, for there is a suspicion that he may kill the infant. And 5 Ed. 6. Brook, Administration 47. it is agreed that the brother of the half blood is next of kin, and that is the cause of the nearness of love; and it cannot be intended that there should not be love between persons so nearly allyed. And 30 Assi. 47. a remainder was limited propinquioribus de sanguine, and there it is agreed that the brother is next of blood. Warburton contr. The uncle shall have the Wardship for two causes, for there is not such natural love between two brothers of the half blood, as is between the uncle and the infant of the whole blood. Also, the Statute sayes, that he shall be in custody parentum haeredis, and therefore he ought to be in custody of those who are of most antient degree, who are the parents: but one brother cannot be parent to the other. Walmesley contr. For the brother is the procheine amy; and so hath it been ruled in the time of the Lord Dyer, in 7 Eliz. in C. B. for he ought to be in Ward to him that is next of blood, and most remote in succession. And the 5 Ed. 6. proves, that he is next of kin, and such nearness must needs procure love: and although it sometimes happens that there is not such love, yet this cannot alter the Law that alwayes intends amity; and although the Statute of Mariebirdge speaks of pa∣rents, that is intended of such as are of full age, and of sound memory; for if he be not, then some other that is the next of kin shall have the Wardship; and he told Warburton, that he would shew him a report of such a Case, where it was ruled accordingly before the Lord Dyer. Hillar. 43 Eliz. Peck against Charnell, in C. B.Rot. 1703. IN an Ejectment upon a special Verdict, the Case was this; John Burly seized in Fee of land, doth devise it to his wife for life, the remainder to William Burly in tail, the remainder to his next heir∣male, being of his sirname, in Fee, and dyes, and then his wife does intermarry with William Burly, who had the remainder in Tail, and then they levyed a Fine come ceo, &c. to J.S. and by the same Fine J.S. rendred to the wife for life, the remainder to the husband in Fee, and then a common recovery was had against the husband and wife, and that was to the uses contained in the Fine: then the wife dyes, and the husband dyes without issue, and the right heir male of the sirname of the Devisor enters, and makes a Lease to the Plain∣tiff, who being outed by the Lessee of William Burly, brought the Action.
Williams. Here are two points; first, if this be a discontinuance y the wife; secondly, if the recovery barrs him in the remainder.And as to the first point, when woman tenant for life, and he in the remainder in Tail being her husband, do joyn in a Fine, this shall not be a discontinuance of the estate Tail; for by Littleton, discontinuance cannot be by way of grant, although it be in case of a Fine, but ought to be by Livery. And as to the second point, Knivetons Case, B. 252. is express in the point, that notwithstanding the common recovery, yet the entry of him in the remainder is legal; for as to the point of re∣covery, a base Fee doth pass to the Conusee of the Fine, which is ren∣dred back again to the woman for life, and her husband in Fee; and by the Common Law there was no remedy for him in the reversion against a recovery had against Tenant for life, 7 H. 7.12. 5 Ed. 4.2. untill the Statute of Westminster the 2. which gives to him a Writ of ad terminum qui praeteriit, and by the Statute of the 23 of H. 8. he may enter: but now the question is, whether this recovery will bar him in the remainder of his entry, because the recovery was of another estate, and not against his Tenant for life. But I conceive that the wife is not in her former or antient estate, but takes hereby a new e∣state; for if Tenant for life grants his estate to J.S. and his heirs, and J.S. grants a Rent, and then re-grants an estate to the Tenant for life, the Tenant for life shall be liable for the Rent, Dyer 252. Harris contr. For by the rendring of the estate by the Fine, she shall be in her antient state; and he cited the Case of Peter Cary here adjudged, who being Tenant in T. the remainder to the Earl of Devonshire, was attainted, and then the King pardon'd him, and gave him his land again, and then he suffered a common recovery, and thereby barred the remainder in the Earl of Devonshire. But Anderson was against this Case, and said, that by the render the woman was in her antient estate, and so the remainder discontinu∣ed, and the entry of him in the remainder taken away. Warburton. The Fine does make no discontinuance, for they give away but that which they may lawfully do; and so is Bredons Case, Cook, 1 Rep. 67. and as to the common recovery, it is out of the Sta∣tute of the 32 H. 8. because she remains party to the Fine; and by the render upon the Fine, they shall be as in by a new estate, and then the recompence shall not be to the antient estate, and therefore he in the re∣mainder is not barred nor impeached by this Fine, but he may enter within five years. Kingsmill accorded; for it is plain, that by the render to the husband and wife, they are in a new estate, and the recompence shall go as to that, and not to the antient estate: but contr. if it had been by way of voucher. Walmesley accorded: but notwithstanding the Fine, and recovery, the entry of him in the remainder is good; and as to the woman, it is clear, that there is no discontinuance to him in the remainder in Fee, for he in the remainder in Tail cannot discontinue, because he is seized by force of the estate Tail; as the 4 H. 7.17. Tenant in Dower, and he in the reversion in Tail, joyn in a Fine, this is no discontinu∣ance of the estate Tail, because he was never seized, and therefore it is a forfeiture in the Tenant for life, although he in the remainder joyn'd with him, by the 41 Ed. 3. but otherwise if Tenant for life, and he in remainder in Fee, joyn in a Fine. Vid. Bredons Case, 1 Rep. 76.
Anderson. I conceive he in the remainder may enter, for all passeth from the Tenant for life, and it is her Feoffment, and the confirma∣tion of the other, and so the estate Tail being spent, he in the remaindershall enter for forfeiture, and the recovery shall be no bar, because it was of another estate: and also this title of entry for forfeiture shall not be barr'd by the common recovery, no more than if a Feoffee upon condition does suffer a common recovery, yet may the Feoffor enter for the condition broken: and Iudgement was given for the Plain∣tiff: so that his remainder was neither discontinued by the Fine, nor his entry taken away by the Recovery. 43 Eliz. Hall against VVood, in C. B. IN an Action on the Case for a Trover, and conversion of 40 l. on not guilty pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff. Walmesley. How can an Action lye for a Trover of money, if it be not within a bag? for this Writ supposeth a loss; and when the money was lost, how doth it appear that the money found is the same money that was lost? Davies. There are many presidents in the Kings Bench to prove that this Action will well lye for corn and money, and I have been of Counsel in many of those Cases. Warburton. If the money were lost in view of a third person, upon such Trover the Action will lye, for there it may be proved that it was the money of the Plaintiff. And Walmesley agreed. And note, that a president was shewn, tempore 40 & 41 Eliz. inter Holloway and Higgs, which was thus; a master delivered to his servant 30 quar∣ters of corn to be sold, and the servant sold them, and converted the money, and the master brought his Action on the Case for the Trover and conversion against the servant, who pleaded, not guilty, and it was sound against him; and two things were moved in arrest of Iudgement; first, that the master was never possessed of the money, and therefore could not lose it; secondly, because the money cannot be known, and so non constat whether it was the money of the masters, or no. But notwithstanding this Case, Iudgement was given for the Plaintiff, because the possession of the servant was the possession of the master; and when the servant converts this to his own use, by this the master loseth the property, and is also a conversion in the servant. Mich. 42 & 43 Eliz. Leeke against the Bishop of Coventry, in C. B.Rot. 3579. IN a Quare impedit the Case was thus; Langford and Bussy were Patrons of an Advowson, to which they and their Ministers use to present by turn. Langford presented according to his turn, and his Clerk dyed, and then Bussy presented in his turn also, and his Clerk was deprived, after which Langford grants his Advowson in Fee to Leeke the Plaintiff, and then the Bishop without any notice does col∣late Dr. Babington, who dyes; after whose death the question was, if Leeke should present, or Bussy; and Iudgement was given for the Plaintiff, because that notwithstanding the Church was voyd by de∣privation, yet the Patron may transpose his Advowson over.
Bethell against Sir Edward Stanhop. IN Debt against Sir Edward Stanhop, as Executor to Francis Vaughan, he pleaded that he is not Administrator; and the said Vaughan gave 40 l. to his daughter within age, with power of revo∣cation upon the payment of 20 s. and it was found that this was done to defraud Creditors, and then he dyed possest of the goods, and the Defendant sold these goods, which made him Executor in his own wrong, and afterwards takes Letters of Administration. Walburton. I conceive the Plaintiff ought to have Iudgement, for the Statute of 21 Eliz. of fraudulent conveyances, annuls this gift of the Intestate, because he did it to defraud his Creditors, and then when he dyed it was assets in the hands of the Administrator. And if a Testator have goods wrongfully taken from him out of his possession, these are not Assets to the Executors or Administrators: but if they be taken out of the possession of the Administrators or Executors, they shall be Assets, for they may take them again: but for goods taken from the Testator, they have but an Action. But here the Admi∣nistrator may take the goods which were given by the Intestate to de∣fraud Creditors, for the gift was voyd, and therefore they shall be ac∣counted Assets. And as to the Action, it is well brought; for when a man does administer as Executor, and then takes Letters of Admi∣nistration, it is at the election of the Plaintiff to sue him as Executor or Administrator, 9 Ed. 4.33. 21 H. 6.8. 2 Rich. 2.20. 18 Ed. 4. Walmesley agreed; for the Statute of the 27 Eliz. hath made voyd the Testators gift, and subata causa toll ur effectus, and the gift being taken away, the property is also taken away from the Donee, and setled in the Donor, as to any Creditor: To which the other Iu∣stices agreed; and Iudgement was given for the Plaintiff. Trinit. 43 Eliz. George Brooks Case, in C. B.Rot. 1822. GIbson recovered in a Debt against Brok, as Executor to J.S. 60 l. and 6 l. damages, and upon a scire facias to the Sheriff, he returns no Assets, and then upon the estate which was in Lndon, which the Defendant had wasted and sod, a fieri facas was awarded to the Sheriff of Ldon, with a Commission to the Sheriff of London, to enquire if he had Assets at the day of the Writ, &c and by the inquest it was found that he had Assets at the day of the Writ purchased, &c. and that he had wasted the estate, which was thus return'd by the Sheriff, against which the Defendant took issue that he had not Assets; and upon this was a a Demurr. Walmesley. A man may avert against the return of a Sheriff, if the return be a matter collateral; as if upon a Caias the Sheriff re∣turns a Rescous, there may be an averment against this, 4 Eliz. 212. a. But if it be in pursuance of the Writ, as non est inventus, there no averment shall be taken against this: but here the return is the saying of the Inquest, and not his own saying.
Warburton. I conceive he shall have an averment and traverse, or else he shall be without remedy, for he cannot have an Action on the Case against the Sheriff, because he returns that which was found by the Inquest, and so not like where the Sheriff returns falsly without such Inquest; and no attachment lyes, because it is but an Inquest of office; and after it was moved at another day, and a president shewn, 33 Eliz. in B. R. between Westner and Whitenore, and there it was adjudged that such return of the Sheriff was traversable: and Ander∣son and Kingsmill agreed to it; wherefore Iudgement was given for the Defendant, and that the issue was well taken. Day against Fynn. IN an Ejectment, the Plaintiff declared of a Lease for years of a house and 30 acres of land in D. and that J. S. did let to him the said Messuage, and 30 acres by the name of his house in B. and ten acres of land there, sive plus, sive minus, it was moved in arrest of Iudgement, because that 30 acres cannot pass by the name of 10 a∣cres, sive plus, sive minus, and so the Plaintiff hath not conveyed to him 30 acres; for when 10 acres are leased to him, sive plus, sive minus, these words ought to have a reasonable construction to pass a reasonable quantity, either more or less, and not twenty or thirty acres more. Yelverton agreed, for the word 10 acres, sive plus, sive minus, ought to be intended of a reasonable quantity, more or less by a quarter of an acre, or two or three at the most: but if it be 3 acres less than 10. the Lessee must be content with it. Quod Fenner & Crook con∣cesserunt; and Iudgement was staid. Smith against Jones. IN an Action of the Case upon an Assumpsit, the Case was; that the wise of Jones was Executrix to J.S. and had Assets to satisfie all Debts and Legacies. The woman dyes, and the goods remained in the hand of her husband, who was the Defendant; and Smith the Plaintiff being a Legatee, demanded his debt of the husband, who said to him, Forbear tll Michaelmas, and I will pay you; and if this was sufficient cause of Action, was the question on a Demurrer. Davies. The promise is voyd, because it is after the death of the wife. Yelverton. The Action will lye, because he hath the oods in his possession, and therefore is chargeable, and must answer for them, and therefore there is a good consideration. And he cited Godfreys Case, who laid claim to a Copyhold, and the Copyholder in possession said to him. If the opinion of the Lord Cook be, that Godfrey hath a good title to it, I will surrender it to him; and because he did not surrender to him, Godfrey brought an Action on the Case, and it was adjudged that the staying of the suit was a sufficient consideration to have an Action on the Case.
Yelverton. If the promise had been to pay this Legacy in conside∣ration he would not sue him, then it had been good. Williams. If there be no cause of suit, there is no assumpsit, and here is no just cause, for he cannot be sued for Legacies. Flemming of the same opinion, for the husband cannot be sued by the Plaintiff, and although perhaps the Legatee may sue him in the spi∣rituall Court, yet that is only for the temporall administration. And afterwards Iudgment was given for the Defendant. Michaelm. 9. Jacob. Kempe and James against Laurence in C. B.Rot. 3648. IN a scire facias the case was thus, Gant having two daughters made his wife Executrix, untill his daughters came to the age of 21. years, or should be married, and then the Executorship should cease, and that then his daughters should be his Executors; and the woman did recover a debt upon a bond made to the Testator, after which the daughters marryed the Plaintiffs, and they brought the scire facias upon the said Judgment against the Defendants as terre-tenants, and the Sheriff return'd the Defendants terre-tenants, and no others, and upon Oyer of the scire facias the Defendants pleaded, that H. was sesed of those lands die Judicii reddit, and made a Lease for years to them: Iudgment, &c. Nichols. The daughters shall have this judgment as Executors, for they are in privity and in by the Testator, and are not like an Admini∣strator who comes in by the Ordinary after the death of the Executor. 6 H. 8.7. Cook. 5. Rep. Brudnells Case: and the daughters are Exe∣cutors and subject to debts of the Testator. And as to the plea he said▪ that forasmuch as the Defendants are returned terre-tenants, they cannot plead that they are but tenants for years, and that their Lessor is not warned: for the scire facias is a personall action to have execu∣tion, but of the goods: but in a reall action it is a good plea, because the lessor himself cannot plead in discharge of such action 8 H. 6.32. And note that Michaelm. 43 & 44. Eliz. Rot. 834. Iudgment in the very same point was given accordingly. Trinit. 9 Jacob. Information against West. in C. B.Rot. 1246. IN an Information upon the Statute of the 5 of Ed. 6. cap. 14. for buying of wheate-meale, and converting it into starch. It was resolved by three of the Iustices (Cook being against it) that this is not within the Statute: but they agreed, that if one bought corn and thereof made meale or oat-meale, and sold it, that this was within the Statute, for that is usuall, and is no alteration, and therefore re∣maines the same corn, but starch is altered by a trade or science, which
is a mysterie, and so it is not the same thing that was sold. But Cook Chief Iustice contra. And cited one Franklinghams Cass Michaelm. 39 & 40 Eliza. in B. R. where one bought Barley, and because it was of such Quantity that he could not make Malt of it in his own house, he made Malt thereof in anothers house by his own servants. And it was resolved. First, That the conversion of corn into Malt, in his own house, with an intent to sell it was within the Statute, unless there be a saving for it. Secondly, Forasmuch as it was in anothers house, he is out of the proviso, and so within the penalty of the Statute. And in Pasch. 42 Eliz. between Reynolds and Gerret. That if a Miller buyes corne, and grinds it and sells it within his house, this is within the Statute. And in the Checquer Chamber in a writ of Errour there between Baron and Brise, adjudged there, that a Coster-monger, who buyes Pippins to sell them again was out of this Statute, because they are necessary victuall. And divers exceptions were taken to the Information: viz. where he saith Ligamen anglicè Starch, whereas there is no such word, but it is Ligumen, and the anglicè will not help this mistake. Cook 10. Rep. 134. and this exception was taken by Iustice Winch. But Warburton Iustice cont. for Starch is a thing newly devised, and there is no Latin word for it, and therefore the anglice there is good. Foster Iustice took an exception, because the information conclu∣ded contra formam Statuti, whereas it ought to have been contra for∣mam Statutorum. For this Statute was of force untill the 8 Elizab. and then was determined untill the 13th of Elizabeth, and then it was re∣vived, so there are two Statutes; but 'twas agreed, that where a Sta∣tute continued de tempore in Tempus, and was never discontinued, nor determined, there it shall be said contra formam Statuti, and this diver∣sity hath been twice adjudged upon this very Statute. viz. 9 Eliz. in Palmers Case, and in the 35 Eliz. Warburton. cont. for the Information doth intend only the Statute of 5 Ed. 6, and 14. and he did recite the words thereof in his Informa∣tion: also this Statute only makes the offence and declares the man∣ner of it, and no other Statute makes any addition to it, or increaseth the penalty, but only revives it to endure in perpetuum. But if a Statute doth prohibit a thing, and another Statute gives a penalty, there, upon Information upon the penalty, both Statutes ought to be recited and to conclude contra formam Statutorum, vid. Commentar. 206. Morgans Case. And so the Statute of Vsury, 37 H. 8. is revived the 13th Eliz. and an addition made to it, there such inclusion ought to be contra for∣mam Statutorum, but where the Statute is only revived, it is other∣wise: as the Statute of Perjury 5 Eliz. was continued untill the 14 Eliz. and then it was determined, and 27 Eliz. was revived, yet all in∣formations upon that Statute, are contra formam Statuti 5 Elizab. Cook. This is no good exception and cited Talbot and Sheldens Case. Hillar. 33 Eliz. who were indited for Recusancy contra formam Statu∣ti 23 Eliz. and in a writ of Error, the Iudgment was reversed, because the penalty was demanded: for the 10th Eliz. made the Offence, and the 23 Eliz. gave the penalty, but if the Information be for the offence only, there it had been good. See the new Book of Entries 182. but if there be divers Statutes in the point of Information contra formam Statuti is good, because the best shall be taken for the King. Vid. 5 H. 7. 17. 8 Ed. 3.47..
Pasch. 10 Jacob. VValler against the Deane and Chapter of Norwich. IN an action of Covenant the Plaintiff declared on a Lease made from the Deane, the Case was thus. The Deane in the 38 Eliz. had made a Lease for 99. years, to one Themilthorpe, and then in the 42 Eliz. made a Lease to the Plaintiff for three lives, ren∣dring Rent, with a Letter of Attorney to make livery, and a Covenant to save the Plaintiff harmelesse against Themilthorpe, afterwards the Attorney makes livery sc. after Michaelmass which was a Rent day, and he being disturbed by Themilthorpe, brought this Covenant. And two points were moved in the Case. First, Inasmuch as the Lease was voyd to Walter, whether that the Covenant was voyd also. Secondly, If the livery made after the Rent day be voyd. Hoghton Serjeant, If the Covenant depended on the interest of the Lease, as a Covenant to repay the thing devised, or to pay rent, these had been voyd, because the Lease it self is voyd, for they do immediat∣ly depend upon the Lease, but where the Covenant is for a thing colla∣terall, as a Covenant that the Lessor is owner at the time of the Lease, or that the Lessee shall enjoy it, or shall be discharged and saved harme∣less, these Covenants being collaterall to the Lease and interest are good, although the Lease be voyd, and the 43 Ed. 3. proves this: where a Lease was made by a Baron and Feme, a Covenant by them shall not binde the wife, contra where the Covenant concernes the inte∣rest, as payment of Rent, &c. Also the Covenant was broken imme∣diatly upon the sealing of the Lease to the Plaintiff. And as to the se∣cond point, he held it was a good livery, because no time was limited in the Letter of Attorney. Dodderidge Serjeant; The Covenant is voyd, because the Lease is voyd, but contra, if it had been a Covenant to enjoy for three lives, and he relyed much on the difference between tempus annorum and terminum annorum in Cook 1. Rep. 124. Nichols cont. The Covenant is good, and yet in force, for when an estate is created in which is implyed a Covenant in Law, there if the estate be voyd, the Covenant is voyd also, but when there is an ex∣press Covenant in Deed, there it is otherwise, although the Lease be voyd or voydable, as if he Covenant that the Lessee shall enjoy during the terme, and the lessee resign, yet is the Covenant good although the terme is gone. And as to the second point. The livery is good, for untill the livery be made, the lessor shall retaine his land, and no Rent is due. vid. Commentat. 423. for by intendment the possession is better than the Rent. And Cook agreed to this. And the Iustices agreed with Nicholls.
Trinit. 10 Jacob Barnes Case. TEnant for life the Reversion in the Lessor, a Formedon is brought against the tenant for life, who prays in ayde of him in the remainder for life, without him in the Reversion. Warburton. I conceive he shall have the Ayde 7 H. 4.2. where ayde is prayed against him in the Remainder and Reversion, and and he cited a Manuscript 11 R. 2. direct in the point that the ayde would lye. But the other Iustices cont. for the Tenant for life hath as high an estate as he in the remainder, and may plead all that the other may, but if there be Tenant for life, the remainder in Taile, there he shall have ayde of the Tenant in Taile. 23 H. 6.6. 11 Edw. 3.16. If there be Tenant for life, the remainder for life the remainder in Fee, tenant for life shall have ayde of them both, for else he in the remainder shall not come in to plead. 11 E. 3. ayde 32. Where it is resolved, that tenant for life shall have ayde of the Reversioner for life. Hillar. 28 Eliz. VVatkins against Astwick. A Man makes a feofment on condition that if he, his heirs or Executors do pay the Rent of 100 l. before such a day, that he may re-enter. the Feoffer dyes, his heire within age, the mother (without any notice of the son) requests J.S. that he would pay the money for her son. And all this was found by speciall verdict, but it was not found of what age the son was. Clinch. If the Iury had found that the son was of the age of 17 years, the payment had been good. Wray. If a Bond be upon condition that the Obligor or his heirs should pay 100 l. and the Obligor dyes, his heire within age, I conceive payment by the Guardion, or by some other friend is good. And after∣wards all the Iustices agreed. That if the Infant were within the age of 14. years, the tender of the money by his mother had been good, but contra, if he had been more than 14 years, and because no age was pro∣ved here, but that he was within age, it shall not be intended that he was within the age of 14. years. and therefore they advised the party to be∣gin de novo, and that it may be found that the Infant was within the age of 14. years.
Trinit. 25. Eliz. Moris against Paget. in C. B.Rot. 2215. IN a Replevin, a speciall Verdict was found, that Sir Francis As∣cough was seised of the Mannor of Castor in Lincolne, which Mannor extended it self into four Towns v z. Castor, North Kelsey, Dale, & ale: and that there were demesne lands and Freeholders in each of the said Towns, and that Moris the Plaintiff held the land where &c by Fealty and suit of Court to the Mannor of Castor, and the lands did lie in one of the Towns viz. in Norch Kelsey: And Ascough being so seised, sold to the Defendant Totum illud Manerium sive Dominium de North Kelsey cum pertinentiis in North Kelsey, ac omnia ac singula Messuagia, redditus, Herriot, and all other things used or reputed as parcell thereof, with all Courts &c. To have and to hold to the Vendee and his heires: and Moris the Plaintiff and other freeholders in North Kelsey, did attorne to the Vendee. The Question was, if the Vendee had the Mannor of North Kelsey, or not. Peryam, He has not; yet by the feofment and attornment all the Te∣nants and services are conveyed to him: but not as a Mannor: for a Mannor is made and incorporate by continuance of time, and this en∣tire Mannor of Castor cannot be divided no more than other liberties; as if the King grant to three partners, who have three Mannors, a Leet or Warren, and one of them makes a feofment, the Feofee shall not have the Leet, and hetted Dyer 362. a. and he sayd, if I grant my Mannor of except certain Demesn lands and services, the feofee shall have the Mannor, and I shall have the Lands and services in grosse: and so if I have a Mannor that extends into two Towns, and I grant my Mannour to you in one Town, you shall have no Mannor, but the lands and services in gross. Windham Iustice cont. For where he grants his Mannor of North Kelsey in North Kelsey, there it shall be construed his Mannor in re∣putation. Ander on agreed, for although a Mannor cannot be created at this day, yet is it not so intire but it may be divided. Hillar. 30. Elizab. Sir Thomas Howards Case. A Man makes a Lease for years the 10th of May, and then the Les∣sor bargains and sells this to another by Deed enroll'd, bearing date the 10th of Aprill, and it was entred to be conveyed the 10th of Aprill before, but in truth it was delivered and acknowledged and en∣rolled afterwards: And it was held that the bargaine was without re∣medy at the Common Law, for he cannot plead that it was acknowled∣ged or delivered after the date of the day of acknowledging it, and so was the opinion of Rhodes.
Peryam and Windham, Anderson being absent: for he cannot aver, that it was inrolled or acknowledged at another day then it is recodr∣ed,because it is contrary to the Record, for it is entred, that it was ac∣knowledged the 10 of Aprill, and then if such a plea should be admit∣ted, it would shake most of the Assurances in England. Note, Shuttleworth put this case. A man makes a Lease, rendring Rent at two Feasts, and if the Rent be behind at any of the said Feasts or 40. dayes after, and no distress to be found, that the Lessor shall re-enter, the Lessor comes upon the ground the last day of the 40. and demands his Rent, and because no distress was sound on the land at the time of his demand, he entred. But it was averred that always before this day there was sufficient distress, and the question was, if his entry were good. Fenner and Rhodes said they had seen a Report of the same Ease. 8 Eliz. That the distress ought to be on the Land on the last day, yea at the last instant of the day, which is a legall time to make a demand, or else the Lessor may enter. Walmsley. The same Ease was resolved a year agoe in the Kings Bench between Ward and VVare. But if it were, (and no distress to be found at any time within forty dayes) there if there be a distress found at any time, it is sufficient. Vid. 1. Inst. 202. a. 28 Eliz. VVood against Ash. IN a Replevin, the Ease was thus. Puttenham made a Lease of Land with a Stock of Sheep for 20. years rendring Rent, and the Lessee doth Covenant to render back to him at the expiration of the Lease 1000 Sheepe of the age of three or four years, and that the Lessor grants all his Chattells, and this stock of Sheepe to Elizabeth Vavafor the Defendants now wife: but in Truth, the Sheepe of the old stock were all spent, and others supplyed, part by increase, and part by buying of other Sheepe. Walmesley, for the Defendant. The grant made by the Lessor is good; for the generall propertie does remain in him, although that the Lessee hath a speciall propertie. To which it was answered, that if the ancient stock of Sheepe were still, it had been godd; but it was not, and therefore the grant is voyd. Walmesley. Although the first stock was changed, yet the new stock does supply it, and is in place thereof, and shall be in the same condition as the other stock is, and therefore the Lessor shall have propertie in it. But the whole Court was against him: for they said, that the increase of the stock of Sheepe should be to the Lessee, and the Lessor shall never have them at the end of the terme: but they agreed, that if the lease were of the stock with Lambs, Calves, and Piggs, there the increase belongs to the Lessor. And all the Court took this diffe∣rence, sc. when a lease is made of dead goods, and when of living; for when the lease is of dead goods, and any thing is added to them for re∣parations or otherwise, the Lessor shall have this addition at the end of the terme, because it belongs to the principle: but in case of a stock of Cattle, which hath an increase, as Calves and Lambs, there these things are severed from the principle, and Lessor shall never have them, for then the Lessor shall have the Rent, and the Lessee shall have no profit.
Trinit. 29 VViseman against Rolfe. in in C. B.Rot. 1454. IN a Writ of right the Case was thus. A man selfed of Land in Fee makes his will, and gives to D. his wife such Land for life, the remainder to T. his son and heires of his body, and also gives to T. his son his Land in B. and also his Land in C. and al∣so he gives his Land called Odyum to the seed of his son habendum all the demised premisses to his T. son and the heires males of his body. The Question was it T. should have an estate in Taile in B. and C. or if the last words shall relate only to that which was last named. Fenner for the Plaintiff. For the last Clause is a new Clause, and shall not be preferred to the first, for it begins with a verbe viz. I give my Land called Odyum, and therefore the limitation afterward shall be referred only to this. And 10 H. 7.8. There was a grant by Dedi custo∣diam. Parci & Arbores vento prostrat. The Grantee shall have the trees by this Clause, and 14 Eliz. A man deviseth thus. I give my Man∣nour of C. to my second son: Item I give my Mannor of S. to my se∣cond son to have and to hold to him, and to his heirs. And by Dyer, Welsh and Weston he had an estate but for life; but Brown cont. for if a Lease be made to A. B. and C. successively, it is adjudged that they are Ioyntenants, but if it be to them as they are named, they shall have it one after the other: and if a devise be to one and his heirs, and after to another for life, the Law will conster that the estate for life is to procede, for that words of Relation in Wills shall be taken stricttly, as if a de∣vise be to A. and his heirs of his body, and he does devise other land in Forma praedicta, this shall be but for life. Walmesley cont. and said that this limitation did go to all, whereof no limitation was made before; for the rules of reason are uncertain, and therefore such matters shall be expounded according to the best sense that may be, and here the sense is most naturall to refer it to all, and the word all imports this▪ and the Case of the fourth of Elizabeth (under favour) accords with this viz. that the Devisee shall have Fee in both. But if the Devise had been, I devise D. to my son Thomas, and also to him and his heirs the Mannor of S. there he shall have D. but for life. And if a man devise to his 4. sons, A. B. C. and D. to have to the per∣sons last named to them and their heirs, there all shall have Fee. 19 Ed. 4. In a precipe of a house and an acre of land in three severall Towns, and that the Defendant Ibidem ingressus est, and did not say into the house and land, and yet it was held good. Periam and Rhodes. He shall have an estate Taile in all, and the re∣lation shall be to all. Anderson doubted at first, but agreed afterwards and Iudgement was given accordingly.
32 & 33 Eliz. Mathewson against Trott. in C. B.Rot. 1904. UPon a speciall verduit, the Case was this. A man seised of land in soccage devised it to his yonger son, and died seised, the elder son enters and dies seised, and his heir enters, and the yonger son enters upon him, the Question was, if his entry be taken away by this descent. VValmesley. It is not, and he compar'd this case, to a title of entry for a condition broken, or a Conusee of a Fine upon grant and render &c. in which Cases no descent shall take away entry. Anderson. The Devisee hath interest presently, and the land does not descend; for the devise prevents the descent, and the Freehold is pre∣sently in the Devisee, and the Statute 32 H. 8. which gives power to Devise lands, does make a Title in the Devisee as a Title of entry for condition of Mortmaine, and the Devisee shall not have an ex gravi que∣rela upon this Statute, but he must enter. Walmesley. The Devisee hath not a Freehold presently, for if it were so, the Devisee at the Common Law ought not to sue an Ex gravi Que∣rela: but certainly if the freehold be in the Devisee, his entry is taken away. And afterwards Iudgment was given by Anderson that descent does not take away the entry of the Devisee, but delivered no reason for it. Hillar. 33 Eliz. Mosgrave against Agden.Rot. 2529. IN an action of the Case on a Trover and conversion of six barrells of Butter. The count was that they came to the hands of the Defen∣dant, and after the trover they were impared, and decayed, ratione ne∣gligentis custodiae. And the Court held cleerly that the action would not lie, for he who finds goods, is not bound to preserve them from putre∣faction, but it was agreed, that if the goods were used, and by usage made worse, the action would lie. 44 Eliz. Ayer against Joyner, in C. B.Rot. 2529. IN a second Deliverance, it was said by the Court, that if Lessee for years does assign over his terme, and yet continues possession, that he hath but a naked possession, and no interest nor estate, but the estate and interest does remain in the grantee, so that he may grant it over. And Walmesley said, that if the Lessee makes waste, the Lessor may have an action of waste against him: and there is a cas, that if a man makes a Lease, and the Lessee waves the possession, and a stranger commits waste, the Lessor shall have an action of waste a∣gainst the Lessee, but the principall question was upon the pleading.
Taylor being Lessee for years, 9 Elizabeth did grant and assigne this to Ayer the Plaintiff. The Defendant pleaded, that before the grant made to Ayer sc. 8 Elizabeth Taylor did grant and assigne his estate to the Defendant, without traversing the gift made to the Plain∣tiff. Williams. There needs no traverse, for being granted the 8 Elizab. it is impossible it should be granted 9 Eliz. 2 Edw. 6. and 1 H. 5. Anderson. He ought to travers, for it is impossible to confesse and avoyd a grant by confession that was granted to another before, for if it were so, the second grant is voyd, and so being so, confest, here ought to be a travers. Walmesley cont in 32 H. 6. it is sufficient to say, that at another day, &c. there was another arbitrement, &c. for by that the first arbitrement is voyd in Law. And it is a good plea in a Will, that after that, there was another Will made, without Traversing, and there is difference be∣tween Lands and Chattells: for land may be gotten out of a man by wrong, and therefore it may be that after the feoffment the Feoffor en∣tred and it disseised the Feoffee, and did infeoffe another, but it cannot b so here of a terme for years for no man can take it away from the Lessee by wrong. Glanvill and Kingsmill cont. There must be a Traverie, for there ought to be a confession before there can be an avoydance, but here he does not confess the grant, but pleads matter that denies it being gran∣ted. And at last Anderson gave Iudgment that he ought to Travers. 42 Eliz. Rudd. against Topsey. in C. B.Rot. 135. IN a Quare Impedit. The Iury found that Edward Capell was sei∣sed of an Advowson in Fee, and did let it to the Defendant for years and during the Lease he presented the Defendant, and the doubt was whether this were a surrender or an Extinguishment. And it was held by all the Iustices, that this could not be a surrender, but is cleerly an ex∣tinguishment: For if a man does present to his own Church as Proctor to another, by this he looseth his advowson. Nat. Br. 25.17 Ed. 33.24. H. 6. Hillar. 42 & 43 Eliz. Forrest against Ballard.Rot. 2480. AN Audita querela was brought upon a Statute, which was ac∣knowledged before a Maior, who had no power to take it. Anderson. An Audita querela will not lie upon a voyd Statute. But Kingsmill, Walmesley and Warburton cont. and Walmesley cited Br. 102. where an Audita querela was brougt upon a forg'd Statute, and there it would lie upon a Statute made by Duress: 20 Ed. 3.28.
Trinit. 40. Eliz. Goodrick against Cooper. in C. B.Rot. 1259. IN a Replevin the Defendant justified for Rent granted to the Master and Schollers of Emanuell Colledge in Cambridge. And the Iury found, that one Spendelose being seised of the land where &c. by his Deed did grant to the said Master and Fellowes, a Rent Ch. of 40 l. per annum for ever: and that Spendlose did seale his part of the Indenture, and delivered it to the use of the Master and Fellowes to one J.S. to deliver it accordingly, but there was no dead to shew their receit thereof: and then they sealed the other part but they made no Attorney to deliver it, and it was ound that the Rent was payd for divers years after. VValmesley. Although no Letter of Attorney were made, yet it is good, for by their sealing of the Counterpart there is a sufficient agreement to the grant. As it a Reversion be granted to a Cor∣poration by Deed, although they cannot accept of this, but by Attorney, yet if they bring a waste, this is a sufficient agree∣ment to vest it in them. Quod assi Justiciarii concesserunt, And judgment was given for the Avowant. Michaelm. 43 & 44. Eliz. Claygate against Batchelor. in C. B.Rot. 3217. IN debt upon a Bond of thirty pound, the Condition was, that if Robert Batchelor, son to the Defendant, did use the Trade of Haberdasher as Iourneyman servant, or Appren∣tice, or as a Master, within the County of Kent, within the Cities of Canterbury and Rochester, within four years after the date, that then, if he pay twenty pound upon request, the Obli∣gation to be voyd. And all the Iustices agreed that the condition was against Law, and then all is voyd, for it is against the li∣berty of a Free-man, and against the Statute of Magna Carta cap. 20. and is against the Commonwealth. 2 H 5. & 5. And An∣derson said, that he might aswell bind himself, that he would not go to Church. And Iudgment was given against the Plain∣tiff.
Michaelm. 43 & 44 Eliz. Dogget against Dowell. in C. B.Rot. 65. IN an action on the Case upon an Assumpsit, The Plaintiff declared, that at the request of the Defendant he had lent to him 30 l. the 10th day of May 5 Eliz. and the Defendant in consideration there∣of, viz. the second day of May aforesaid did promise and assume upon himself, that he at the end of the yeare would lend the Plaintiff other thirty pounds for a year, or give to him five pound. It was said, that the consideration is good, for although the promise was made at another day, yet is it in pursuance thereof, so that in Law it shall be accounted all at one time, and is not like to the case in Dyer 372. where the Master promised one who was bayle for his ser∣vant, that he would save him harmless, this is no consideration, for the Ballment was of his own will, and was executed before the Assum∣psit, but if the Master had first requested, and afterwards assumed, there it is good; and so was it adjudged in the case of one Sydenham against Worthington, Trinit. 27 Eliz. Rot. 748. Where the request was be∣fore, and the promise after, and there it was a good Assumpsit. VVarburton agreed. And it is like as if I should say to you, do such a thing, and I will give you five pound, this is no good con∣tract. But all the Iustices on the contrary; for when at the first day the Plaintiff did lend to the Defendant thirty pound that was absolute, and the speaking on the second day cannot have such reference to the first a∣greement, that it shall be accounted all one. Anderson. If I say to one: In consideration you will serve me, for a year, I will give you five pound, here is no cause of action, for the consideration is precedent and not mutuall, and so judgment was entred for the Defendant. Hillar 41 Eliz. VVentworth against VVright.Rot. 2529. IN a Quare impedit, two points were moved 1. If the Parson be made Bishop, whether the Patron should present or the King by his prerogative. VVilliams. The King shall, for before the Statute the Pope should present, and the reason was, because the Bishop had received his presentment gratis from the Pope: and by the same reason the King now shall present, for there is no reason the patron should, for by his pre∣cedent presentment he hath dismist himself untill resignation or death, as if a man lets land for another mans life, he shall not have the land during the life of Cestuy que vie, & great mischief would be, if it should not be so, for els all the presentments, that the King hath made, shalbe usurpations.
The second matter was, that no presentment is pleaded against the King by the Patron, for it is pleaded that the Parson was admitted and instituted, but not that he was inducted (but the Court held it good notwithstanding that omission) But as to the first point, the Court asked Williams, if he could shew presidents that the King should have such presentment, for they said, that the usage by the Pope is no argument at all, for that he used to usurpe many things. Walmesley, I conceive this custome began by the Popes usurpation, but he said, there is a Book in the time of Ed. 2. where this point is argued and adjudged, that the Patron shall present and not the King. VVilliams shewed eight or nine Presidents in the time of H. 8. that the King used to present in such case, but all of them were between spirituall persons. And the Court said, they did not regard those presi∣dents, for all spirituall persons were the Popes servants vid. 6 Elizab. 72.8. South against Whitewit. IN a prohibition, the case was thus, the wife of VVhitewit had spoken scandalous words of South, and therefore the was excom∣municated by the high Commissioners, and by Letters Missive a Pursevant came at twelve of the clock at night, and broke the house of VVotewit and tooke the body of VVhi ew wife, who was rescued: wherefore VVhitewit her husband was called before the Commissioners, and hereupon VVhitew t prayed a prohibition. And the question was, if a Pursevant could break a house by such Commis∣sion or not. And it was agreed, that by the Common Law, neither the Pope, nor any other spirituall Iudge had any thing to do with the body and goods of any one, for only the sword spirituall belongs unto them. VValmesley: At the Common Law, after Excommunication a Capias Excommunicaum was awarded, and I conceive this writ is of force at this day, and is not taken away by the Statute of 5 Ez. Kingsmll agreed, for this Statute gives power onely to correct the spirituall law, and to take away the authority of the Pope, but gives the same means to execute it as before, and he further said, that the Statute that did erect the Court of Wards, doth appoint a Seale be∣longing to it, and other process according to the course of the Com∣mon Law: and therefore by the same reason, if this Statute of  Eliz. intended to give them such authoritie, they would have appointed a Seale also, and a course according to the Common Law, but as the course is here used, a man may be robb'd in his house by a beggerly Pur∣sevant which is no Officer known by the Law. And so was the opi∣nion of the Iustices.
Pasch. 40 Eliz. Goosey against Pot, in C. B. IN a Replevin the Case was thus; two Hundreds were adjoyning together to two several Mannoure of two several persons, and the avowant was seized of one of them, and he prescribed that all the Tenants of the other Hundred have used to make suit to the Leet within his Hundred; and also that the Lord of the other Hundred used to appear, or to pay him 4 s. pro anno futuro; and if it were not paid, the Defendant prescribed, that he and all those, whose estates he hath, have used to distreyn any Inhabitant within the Hundred for the same; and therefore for 4 s. not paid, he did avow the Distress whithin the Mannour of the Plaintiff, who was one of the Inhabitants. Williams. A man may prescribe by a que estate in a Hundred, for a man may have it by disseisin, and there are divers presidents which the Prothonotaries have shewed me to warrant this in a Replevin, for the seisin is the matter of the title. And to this Littletons rule may be added, that of all things which lye in grant, and whereof a man cannot be disseised against his will, a man shall not plead a que estate, Kingsmall. A que estate cannot be pleaded of a Hundred, unless if be appendant to the Mannour; and a second matter was moved in this Case, viz. that he prescribed to distreyn the Cattle of a stranger for the essence of the Lord. Williams. It is not good, by the 41 Ed. 3. but by the 47 Ed. 3. for suit and service, the Cattle of the Lord may be distreyned on any land within the Hundred. Anderson. I do agree to the Case of my Lord Dyer, that the Cattle of a stranger cannot be taken for a Herriot. Walmesley. In the 12 of H. 7. it is said by Fineux, that a Lord of a Mannour may inlarge his services by prescription, and so the Cattle of a stranger may be taken: but for a personal matter, as for amerce∣ment in default of suit, no stranger may be distreyned. And afterwards agreed by all the Iustices, that the strangers Cattle could not be distreyned. Holt against Lister. IN a Replevin the Case was thus, he in the reversion after Te∣nant in Dower, grants it over to the use of himself for life, the remainder to his nert son in Tail, the remainder to the use of him∣self in Fee, and after this he levyes a Fine to the Plaintiff and his heirs of land which he claimeth de haered tate sua, after the death of the Tenant in Dower. The Plaintiff brought a Quid Juris clamat against the Tenant in Dower, and upon non sum informatus, Iudge∣ment was given that the Tenant should attorn, and now he prayed that she should not attorn, for if she atterns, she will torfeit her estate. Walmesley. If he in the remainder for life grants over by Fine, it is no forfeiture, for he gives no more right than he hath; and so hath it been adjudged in the time of my Lord Dyer.
Glanvill. I agree to that: but in this Case he grants that which he hath de haereditate sua, and this recital will make a forfeiture; and then if the Tenant in Dower attorn, this is a forfeiture. Anderson. This attornment is no forfeiture, because it is by judge∣ment of the Court. Walmesley. I agree, for the Grant it self is no forfeiture, unless it be by reason of the recital, but the Attornment shall have relation onely to the substance of the Grant. And it was much disputed between Walm∣sley and Glanvill, If Lessee for life of a Rent grants this in Fee by Fine, if this be a forfeiture; and Walmesley vouched a Iudgement, that it was no forfeiture; and Glanvill voucht 31 Ed. 3. Grant 60. to the contrary, and 15 Ed. 4.9. by Littleton. If Lessee for life of a Rent grants this by Fine in Fee it is a forfeiture, by reason of the Estoppell, otherwise if it were by Deed. Vid. 1 H. 7.12. Mich. 32 & 33 Eliz. Marshes Case, in B. R.Rot. 1011. MArsh and his wife brought a Writ of Errour as Executors to Nicholson to reverse an Outlawry upon an Indictment of Felony pronounc'd against the Testator. Altham of Grayes-Inne. The sole point was, whether the Executors may have a Writ of Errour, and I hold that they may; for if there be no heir, it is great reason that the Executors should have it, for otherwise the erroneous judgement cannot be at all reverst; and every one shall have a Writ of Errour that is damaged by the erroneous judgement, and Executors have right to the personal estate to have Errour: For if a man recovers damages in a Writ of Co∣senage, and the land also, and dyes, his heir shall have Execution for the land, and the Executors Execution for the damages, by the 19 Ed. 4.5. 43 E. 3. 13 Ed. 4.2. If a man does recover my villain by a false Verdict, the heir shall have an attaint for the villany, and the Exe∣cutors for the damages, and a Writ of Errour shall be given to him to whom the right of the thing lost doth descend, as it was adjudged in the Case of Sir Arthur Henningham, and he cited two presidents in the point, 1 Tity, 11 H. 8. Rot. 3. where an Administrator brought a Writ of Errour to reverse a Iudgement given in an exigent. Vid. 2 Rep. 41. a. Cook contr. In Natura Brevium, 21 M. he sayes, an Executor shall have a Writ of Errour upon a Iudgement given in Debt against the Testator and the heir shall have Error to reverse Outlawry in Felony, and to restore him in his blood, and he said that it was part of the pu∣nishment in Felony to have the blood corrupted, & sic filius portat ini∣quitatem patris; and by reason of the attainder, he cannot inherit any Ancestor; wherefore he having the damage, it is reason that he should reverse it. And although Executors shall have a Writ of Errour for Chattels personal, yet they shall not have one when they are mixt with things real, 5 H. 7.15.18 Ed. 4. If Writings be in a Box, the heir shall have the Box, because real things are more regarded than personal.
Nevertheless in this Case the Writ of Errour is in a real Action, for the Law sayes, that it is in the same nature as in original action, where∣upon it is brought; as if Errour be brought to reverse a Iudgement given in a personal action, the Writ of Errour is personal; and so in like manner is it real, if the first action be real, 47 Ed. 3.35. 35 H. 6.19, & 23. and although the first action be mixt, yet the Law does rather respect the reality, 30 H. 6. Barr. 59. where two brought an assize, and one did release, and there it was said, that although this were a mixt action, yet it shall be according to the most worthy, and that is the reality: and 16 Assi. 14. divers Disseisors being barr'd in an assize, did bring a Writ of attaint for the damages, and summons and severance was suffered, for damages were joyned with the reality: and Stanford, 184. If a man be indicted before a Coroner, quod fugam fecit, if he after reverse the Indictment, yet he shall have his goods, for de mini∣mis non curat Lex: But note, that the Iustices said, that the fugam fecit was the cause of forfeiture of the goods, and not the Felony. And as to the presidents, he agreed to the Case of the 18 H. 7. for an Exe∣cutor shall have a Writ of Errour to reverse Iudgement given in an exigent, for there nothing but the goods are forfeit, 30 H. 6. Forfeiture 31. and for the president in 11 H. 8. it cannot be proved that the Out∣lawry was for Felony. Vid. Rep. fol. 3. 33 Eliz. Lilly against Taylor, in B. R.Rot. 467. MArsh seized of the land in question, did devise this to Rose Lilly for life; and if she fortun'd to marry, and after her de∣cease should have any heirs of her body lawfully begotten, then that heir should have the land, and the heirs of the body of such heir; and for default of such issue, the land shall revert to Phi∣lip Marsh, his son and his heirs, and the question was, if the husband of Rose shall be Tenant by the curtesy, or not; and so if Rose had estate Tail, or for life onely. Godfrey. She hath estate but for life; and he cited a Case adjudged in Benlowes Reports, 40 Eliz. where lands are devised to A for life, and after his decease to the male children of his body, and it was ad∣judged that the male children have an estate Tail by purchase, and no∣thing by descent, and so A had nothing but for life. Gawdy agreed, for she hath but for life, and when she dyes, her issue shall have it. Popham agreed, if the words were, that if she had issue, that he should have it. But Clench held, that she had an estate in Tail executed, and that her husband shall be Tenant by the curtesy. Fenner. The issue is as a Purchaser, for the Devisor intended that Rose should not have a greater estate than for life. And also it was a∣greed by all the Iustices, that a Devise to a man and his heir shall be accounted a Foe-simple, for that the word,
heir, is collective: and so is the 29 Assi. where land was given to a man, and to the heir of hisbody, & uno haeredi ejusdem haeredis, this is an estate Tail. Popham. He shall be Tenant by the curtesy; and he agreed, that heir of the body was a good name of purchase: but if a Frank-tene∣ment be limited to his Ancestor, and by the same Deed it is also li∣mited to his heir, the heir shall be in by descent. But Fenner on the contrary. Pasch. 38 Eliz. Bolton against Bolton.Rot. 882. & 582. TEnant for life being impleaded, doth pray in aid of him in the Reversion, who joyn and lose, &c. and the Tenant for life brings a Writ of Errour, and the Record is removed, and he in the remainder brings a Writ of Errour also, De Recordo quod coram vobis residet; and the question was, upon which Writ of Errour the Iudgement should be reverst: and it was objected, that if it should be reverst by the Tenant for life, that he in the remain∣der should be restored. But Gawdy, Fenner, and Clench contr. Who held, that it should be reverst at his suit who first brings the Writ, as in case of Inter∣pleader, it shall be alwayes upon the first Writ. And notwithstanding the removing of the Record by the Tenant for life at the next term, the Court said, it was at their discretion to reverse this at suit of an of the parties, as they pleased: and because they observed some in∣direct practices by him in the remainder, it was reverst at suit of Te∣nant for life. Pasch. 5 Jacob. Sir Henry Dimmocks Case, in the Court of Wards. TEnant of the King by Knights service, bargains and sells his land to Sir Henry Dimmock and his heirs, and Sir Henry Dimmock dyes, his heir within age, and then the Deed is inrolled; the question was, if the King should have premier seisin. Trist. The King shall not, because Sir Henry did not dye within his homage, but the land was in the Bargainor; as if there be a Bar∣gainee of the reversion, and the Tenant makes waste, the Bargainee shall not have waste, unless the Deed be introlled before the waste committed, 3 Jacobi. Bellingham against
Alsop. Bargainee before inrolment sells the land over, and it was adjudged that the second bar∣gain was voyd, 10 Eliz. Mockets case. Disseisee releaseth to the Bar∣gainee of the Disseisor before inrolment, and adjudged voyd. 5 Eliz. in Pophams Case it was said, that the Statute of inrolments had altered the Common Law; for now by the delivery of the Deed, no use is raised untill it be inrolled, But all the Iustices held, that the heirshould be in Ward, and pray premier seisin if he were of full age; for the Statute sayes, that no use shall be, unless the Deed be inrolled: but if it be inrolled, it passeth ab initio, and then the Bargainee shall be Tenant ab initio. But it was also agreed by all the Iustices, that the wife of Sir Henry shall not be indowed, and that Rent paid to the Bargainor at the Rent-day incurr'd after the bargain is good, and the Bargainee hath no remedy, because it is a thing executed. Trinit. 12 Jacobi. Cuddington against VVilkin, in C. B.Rot. 924. IN an Action of the Case for calling the Plaintiff Thief, the De∣fendant justified, because the Plaintiff had stollen Sheep, 37 Eliz. the Plaintiff replyed protestando, that he had not stollen Sheep, and pleaded the General Pardon, 7 Jacobi, upon which the De∣fendant demurred, and adjudged for the Plaintiff, for the Pardon had so purged and abolished the Offence, that now he was no Thief, 1 Ed. 3. Corone 15. 2 Ed. 3. Corone 81. 1 Assi. 3. So if one call another Villain after he is infranchised. And in one Baxters Case, in Banco Regis, it was adjudged, that where a man was accused for Perjury, and acquitted by Trial, if he be afterwards called perjur'd, he shall have his Action on the Case. And Iudgement was given for the Plain∣tiff. Seaman against Cuppledick. IN a Trespass of Assault and Battery, the Defendant justified in defence of his servant, scil. that the Plaintiff had assaulted his servant, and would have beaten him, &c. and the Plaintiff de∣murr'd. Yelverton. The bar is good, for the master may defend his servant, or otherwise he may lose his service, 19 H. 6.60. a. Crook Iustice. The Lord may justifie in defence of his villain, for he is his inheritance. Williams contr. The master cannot justifie, but the servant may Justifie in defence of his master, for he owes duty to his master, 9 Ed. 4.48. Yelverton. The master may maintain a plea personal for his ser∣vant, 21 H. 7. and shall have an Action for beating his servant; and also a man may justifie in defence of his cattle.
Cook. A man may use force in defence of his goods, if another will take them; and so if a man will strike your cattle, you may ju∣stifie in defence of them; and so a man may defend his son or servant, but he cannot break the peace for them: but if another does assault theservant, the Master may defend him and strike the other, if he will not let him alone. Williams. It hath been adiudged in Banhams Case, that a man can∣not justifie a batterie in Defence of his soil, a fortiori he cannot in de∣fence of his servant. vid. 19 H. 6.31. 9 Ed. 4.48. Trinit. 12. Jacob. Drury against VValler. IN an action on the Case upon a trover and conversion of 200 l. deli∣vered by the Plaintiff to the Defendant; and upon not guilty plea∣ded, the Question was, if denyall by the Defendant to pay it upon re∣quest, would beare this action. And the case of Isaac was urged, who brought an action of Trover, &c. for 200 l. in a bag, and by verdict it was found that demand was made thereof, and a deniall to pay it. And by Dodderidge it was a Conversion. Crooke accorded, but Haughton doubted the case. And Man Pro∣thonotarie said, that he remembred a president in the Case, where it was resolved, that in such case deniall of a horse was a conversion. Haughton. I remember an action of Trover was brought for a Trunk, and it was ruled there, that if one hath Timber in my land, and he demands liberty, to carry it off my Land, and I deny it, this is not a sufficient conversion. Dodridge, there is great difference in the Cases, for a Horse or mo∣ney cannot be known, if they be used, but Timber may. Et adjour∣natur. Michaelm. 8 Jacobi. Alfo and Dennis against Henning. in B. R.Rot. 969. IN an action of Covenant, the Case was thus. Thomas Tavener by Indenture primo Jacobi, did demise land to one Salisburie for 7. years: and by the same Indenture Salisburie did Covenant, grant, condescend and agree with Taverner his heirs and assignes, that he, his Executors and Administrators should pay to Taverner his heirs and assigne 75 l. per annum. And after Taverner demised the same land, to Mary Taver∣ner for life, and he demised the reversion for 40. years to the Plaintiff, if he so long lived, and the tenant attorned, and for rent due at the Feast of St Michaell he brought his action of Covenant. And the first question was, if this were a sum in gross, because the Lessee covenanted to pay this as a Rent. And resolved by Cook Chief Iustice, and the Court, that this is a good reservation of Rent, for it is by Indenture, and their intention was to have it as a Rent, and the words of the Indenture shall be accounted to be his, who may most properly speak them. 26 H. 8.2. 10 Eliz. 275. 22 H.
6.58. 28 H. 8.6. And the Case betweenWhitchett and Fox in Replevin this terme, where a man made a Lease for 99. years rendring rent, and the Lessee covenanted by the same deed with the Lessor, that he would not alien without his assent upon paine of forfeiture, and after he aliened, and the Lessor entred. And it was held by the Court that this was a condition, although the Plain∣tiff did covenant: for being by Indenture, they shall be the words of both, and the words sub paena orisfacturae are the words of the Lessor. The second point was, if the assignee for 40 years, may have a Covenant, and it was held he might; for it is for payment of rent, and if the Lessee covenants to do any thing upon the land, as to build or repaire a house, there a covenant will lie for the assignee, by the com∣mon Law, but if it do not by the Common Law, yet it is cleere that it will lie by the Statue of the 32 H. 8. And the Court held, that an Assig∣nee of part of the reversion might take advantage of the condition or covenants, so that he hath part of the reversion of all the thing demised. And Cook, Chief Iustice said, that the opinion of Mourson 14 Eliz. 309. a. is good Law. Pasch. 36 Eliz. Butler against. Archer. IF two Ioyntenants be of land holden by Herriot service, and one dies, the other shall not pay Herriot service, for there is no change of the tenant, but the survivor continues tenant of the whole land. But if a man seised of land in Fee, makes a feofment to the use of himself and his wife, and the heires of their two bodyes begotten, the remain∣der to the right heires of the husband, and the husband dyes, a Herriot shall be paid, for the ancient use of the reversion was never out of the husband Michaelm. 29 & 30 Elizab. Stephens Case. in C. B. IN an Ejectment, the Case was, Sir William Beale made a Lease by Indenture to William Pile and Philip his wife, et primogenito proli Habendum to them and the longer liver of them successive∣ly during their lives, and then the husband and wife had issue a daughter. And it was holden by three of the Iustices, that the daugh∣ter had no estate, for that she was not in esse, at the time of the grant.
Michaelm. 30 & 31. Eliz. Lewin against Mandy. in C. B.Rot. 2529. IN a Replevin the Defendant avowed for 20 l. Rent, which was pleaded to be granted by Lovelace and Rutland by Fine to Stuke∣ley and his heires, who being seized thereof, did recite that he with 7 others were Plaintiffs in a Writ of Covenant against Love∣lace and Rutland, upon which a Fine was levyed, by which Fine the said Lovelace and Rutland amongst other things, did grant a rent of 20 l. out of the Mannor of D. and other Lands to the said Stukely, who granted it to Hoveden, under whom the Defendant claymes in Taile. The Question was if this were a good grant, because, there are many misrecitalls in the Indenture: for whereas he recited that in the Writ of Covenant for the fine Lovelace and Rutland were Defendants, in truth they were Plaintiffs, and Stukely and the others Defendants, and whereas he recited that the said grant was made to him, it was made to him and his heires, also he said, that the said Rent Charge amongst other things was granted whereas nothing but the 20 l. Rent was granted, and that only out of the Mannor of D. and not out of other Lands. Anderson. If a man recites that he hath a Rent of 10 l. of the grant of J.S. whereas he hath this of the grant of J.D. yet is the grant good. And at last it was adjudged that the grant was good. Note that Fenner at this time said, that it had been resolved by An∣derson and Gawdy and other Iustices very lately. That if the Kings Tenant dies, his heir within age, yet the heir at full age before livery sued may bargain and sell by Deed inrolled, or make a Lease for years and it is good: but if he makes a feofment or leavie a fine ur conusance de droit come ceo, &c. this is voyd, because it cannot be without in∣trusion upon the King. Trinit. 39 Eliz. Oldfeild against VVilmore. in C. BRot. 2715. IN Debt upon a Bond to performe the award of J.S. who did award that the Defendant should pay 10 l. or cause two strangers to be bound for the payment thereof, the Defendant pleaded performance, the Plaintiff replyed that he had not payed the money, and the De∣fendant demurred. Walmesley for the Plaintiff. For although the award be in the disjun∣ctive, yet forasmuch as it is voyd as to one part, now upon the matter it is single, and on the non payment of the ten pound is forfeit 17 Ed. 4.5.
Windham and Rhodes, held that the Plaintiff should have pleaded so much of the award as was for it is a thing intire, and the Law willadjudge that one is only to be done, because the other is contrary to the Law. Anderson and Peryam. The plea is good, for a man shall not be com∣pelled to shew a voyd matter, and although the Defendant had caused the two strangers to be bound, the obligation is broken, for as to this arbitrement, it is meerely voyd, and at another day the Plaintiff had judgment. Goodridge against VVarburton. IN an Ejectment. The Iury gave a speciall verdict, that Francis was seised of the land in Tayle, and suffered a Recovery to the use of him and his heirs, and afterwards did devise the same lands to his wife Margery untill his daughter Prudence came to the age of 19. years, and then that Prudence should have the Land to her and the heirs of her bo∣dy, upon condition to pay twelve pound per annum to the said Margaret during her life in recompence of her dower, and if she failed of payment, then Margaret should enter, and hold the Land during her life, and af∣terwards, it shall go to Prudence as before. And after this John Fran∣cis the heire did reverse this recovery, by a Writ of Errour, and entred upon Margaret, and she brought her Writ of Dower, and was indowed of the third part, and then she levyed a Fine of that third part to the said John Francis, and he infeoft Tyndall, who made the Lease to Goldsing, and then Margaret marryed Warburton, and Prudence came to the age of 19. years, the Rent of twelve pound is not payd, and Warburton and his wife entred, and Goldsing brought this action. VValmesley. By the recovery of the third part in the Writ of Dow∣er, the Rent of twelve pound, which was in recompence thereof is gone. For at the Common Law, if a woman recover in Dower, she hath waived that which was assigned to her in lien of her Dower, as in case of Dower ad ostium Ecclesiae, and 10 Edw. 4. If the husband dis∣continues the Land of his wise, and she brings a Writ of Dower, she is concluded to have a Cui in vita. Shuttleworth cont. By this recovery the estate taile is revived, yet as this case it is is, not materiall, for because he entred without a sult, he is a Disseisor, and that was agreed by all at the Bar and the Bench. And he cited 26 H. 8. 3d. 4th H. 7.11. And I conceive that the Dower will not conclude her of the twelve pound per annum, for it is not a Rent, and the title to have the Land for her Ioynture for non-payment the Rent was not in esse at the time of the recovery of her Dower, but afterwards, as if a Lease he made to a woman who marries the Lessor, who dies within the terme, and the wise enters, this shall not conclude her Dower, after the Lease is expired by the eleventh of H. 4. Also the twelve pound is not appointed to be issuing out of the Land, and so it cannot be a Ioynture, and therefore, the wife is at large to have the twelve pound, and her Dower also. But the Court held, that she could not have her joynture, for by the recovery of the Dower her joynture is barred, for the Rent was given her in recompence of her Dower, so that it cannot be intended that she shall have Rent & Dower also, where∣fore it was adjudged that her entry on the Land was not good.
30 & 31 Eliz. The King against the Bishop of Canterbury and Hudson.Rot. 1832. IN a Quare impedit, Hudson the Incumbent did plead, that King Edw. the 4th did grant the Rape of Hastings, Et bona & catalla Fellonum Fugitivorum & ategat of all Residents and non-resi∣dents within the said Rape to the Earl of Huntington. And pleaded that John Ashborne was seized of the Mannor of Ashborne, and of the advowson appending to it, and held the same of the Earl of Huntington as of his Rape of Hastings, and that the said John Ashborn, was outlawed, during which, the Incumbent of the said Church dyed, and the Earl presented the said Hudson. Shut. I conceive this avoydance does not belong to the Earl, by rea∣son of this grant, for by the same Patent libertie is given to the said Earl & his heirs to put himself into possession, and of such things as he cannot put himself into possession, they will not passe, and here this is a thing in action, which by these words will not passe. 19 H. 6.42. by the grant, de Catalla Fellonum obligations do not passe. VValmesley, Stanford in his prerogative, saith, that by the words, Bona & catalla the King shall have the presentation to the Church of him that is outlawed or Attaint, and by the same reason he may grant it by such a name, and although the party cannot seise such a thing, yet it shall passe 39 H. 3.35. Rent for years shall passe by the grant of bo∣na & Catalla. Periam. It will passe by these words, for it is an ancient grant, for in that time the Patents, of the King were not so specially penned, as now they are. Anderson. I conceive the avoydance will not passe by thse words, for within this word bona moveables are contained both dead and living, and Avoydance is no Chattell nor right of Chattell. Quod Peryam ne∣gavit, &c. Mich. 37 & 38 Eliz. Townsend against VVhales.
IN an Ejectment, the Iury found that J.S. was seized of land in possession, and also in reversion for terme of life, and made a De∣vise by these words, That his Executors take the profit of all his Lands and tenements Free and Copy, for ten years for the payment of his debts, and Legacies, and after the end of the said ten years, that all the aforesaid lands and tenements with their ap∣purtenances, should be sold by his Executors or one of them, and the silver to be bestowed in the performance of his Will, or by the Exe∣cutors of his Executors, or any of them, and then one of the Executors dyed within the ten years, and the two surviving Executors did grant all, aswell in possession as in reversion to House, who made a Lease to the Plaintiff. And two points were resolved. 1. That the Executors may grant the reversion (34 H. 6.) for by these words (Free and Copy) his intent appears, that all should be granted. 2. That although one of the Executors died, yet the other two Exe∣cutors may sell. Anderson. If such bevise had been at the Common Law, and one Executor had refused, the two others could not sell, but if one die, the survidors may sell the land; for there the authority doth survive. Which difference the other Iustices agreed to. And at another day Anderson said, there was difference, where the Devise is, that Executors should sell his and the money divided between them, there if one die, the others shall not sell, but otherwise here, because the money is the per∣formance of his will. Walmesley. The sale by the two Executors is good, for it is said; the Executors or any of them, &c. And Beaumond agreed, Wherefore judg∣ment was given for the Plaintiff. Note that there were two verdicts in this case, and the first only found, that the Executors shoull sell after the ten years, and that one dyed, and the other two did sell within the ten years, and the opinion of the Court was that the sale was voyd, but in the 39 and 40 Eliz. all the whole will was found and Iudgment given ut supra. The Earle of Rutlands Case. Roger Earl of Rudand, and John Maners and others Executors to John late Earl of Rudand Executor to Edward Earl of Rutland, brought an action on the case against Isabell Countess of Rutland. And Declared for divers Iewells and goods, &c. that came to the hands of John Earl of Rudand as Executor to the said Edward, and the said John the 10th of July 29 Eliz. did casually loose them, which after came to the hands of the Defendant, & licet saepius requisita, she would not de∣liver them to the said John in his life time, nor to the said Plaintiffs after his death, but knowing the goods did belong to the Plaintiffs in D. in the County of Notingham converted them to her proper use. And a verdict for the Plaintiff. And it was moved often in arrest of Iudg∣ment, but all the Iustices agreed, that the action of Trover and conver∣version would lie by the Executors upon the Satute of the 4 Ed. 3. up∣on a conversion in vita Testatoris, and so hath it been adjudged in the Kings Bench, and although the Statute mentions onely a Writ of trespass, that is only put for example. Also they all agreed, that the sole cause of action to the Conversion, for it there were no conversion, they shall be put to their Detinue, therefore the great doubt did arise be∣cause the day and time of the conversion was not shewed, for perhaps it was after the Writ and before the Declaration: And also if it was in vita Testatoris they should have this action by the 4th of Ed. 3d. But at length Walmesley said, That all Iustices of the Common Pleas, and of Ser∣jeants Inne in Fleet-street (besides Peryam Chief Baron) were of opi∣nion that Iudgment should be given for the Plaintiffs, for that some of them held, that the day of the Conversion is not materiall to be shewn, and others, that of necessity as this case is, it shall be intended that the conversion was in the Plaintiffs time, wherefore Iudgment was en∣tredfor the Plaintiffs, but a Writ of Errour was brought, and the Case much debated.
Michaelm. 38 & 39 Eliz. Carew against Warren. in C. B.Rot. 1945. GUnter Tenant in Tasle of Lands in antient Demesn made a Lease for 60. years to J.S. and for security thereof levied a Fine to Lee and Loveland, who rendred to Gunter in Fee, who devised the reversion to his wife for life the remainder in Fee and dyed. And then the Lord of Andover, (which is an ancient Mannor) by an Ostensum est nobis, returned in the Common Bench against Lee and Lovelace, upon a scire Facias awarded against them. and two Nihils return'd, the Fine was reversed. Anderson. The scire Facias is not well awarded, for it ought to be brought as well against those in possession, as the Conufors, and this ap∣pears by the 21 Ed. 3.56 by which they in possession and those in re∣mainder ought to be made privy. Walmesley agreed, for the Freehold, which is in me shall not be taken from me without making me privie, no lesse, then if A. bring a Precipe against B. of my land and recover, for I shall have an Assise upon this. Also another matter is in the Case. For the land now in question is al∣ledged to be parcell of the Mannor of Andover, and therefore cannot be ancient Demesne. But no Iudgment was at this time given, because there were but two Iustices. Halling against Comand. IN an action of Covenant, the case was thus. Comand the Defen∣dant did covenant with the Plaintiff, that at the Costs and charges of the Plaintiff be would assure certaine land for the Ioynture of the Plaintiffs wise before Mche mas. And the Plaintiff declared that no assurance was made, nor tender before the said Michaelmas. And hereupon the Defendant demurred, for that the charges should have been offered before the assurance, 3 H. 74.23 Eliz. Dyer. Anderson in the 35 & 36 Eliz. Fste did covenant with Franke to make an assu∣rance at the costs and charges of Franke, and Franke brought a Cove∣nant and Foster Demurred because no charges were tendred to him, & it was adjudge against Fester, for Franke could not have cognizance what manner of assurance should be made, and so could not tell what charges to tender, and therefore he ought first to shew him what manner of assu∣rance he should make, and according to that he ought to tender reasonable Charges. Walmesley. But the charges ought to precede the assurance, but the declaring of what manner of assurance should be made ought first to be done, Beaumond of the same opinion.
Michaelm. 38 Eliz. Damport against Sympson. IN an action on the Case, the Plaintiff declared that he had gi∣ven to one Spilman certain Iewells to Traffique with them be∣yond the Seas, and that he had not fold them. but had delivered them to the Defendant, who had spoild them, whereupon the Plaintiff brought an action against the said Spilman, and upon not guilty pleaded they were at issue: and the now Defendant at that evidence did Depose upon his oath, that the Iewells were worth but 200 l. whereas they were worth 800 l. by reason whereof the Iury gave indeed but 200 l. damages, and for this false oath he brought this action: and the Iury upon not guilty pleaded, found for the Plaintiff, and assessed 300 l. da∣mages. And now it was moved in arrest of Iudgment that the action would not lie, no more than against those informe a Iustice of Peace of Fellony upon his oath against J. S. 20 H. 7.11. Also the party grieved hath his remedy in the Star-Chamber. And Walmesley said that for perjury there was no remedy, and so is it in the 7th Eliza. Dyer 243. a. for it is not to be thought that a Christian would be perjur'd, and in the 2d H. 6.5. a Conspiracy will not lye against Indictors, who informe their company of their oath. Wherefore, It was adjudg'd that this action did not lie. Note that Anderson was against this Iudgment: but Walmesley Owen and Beumond were against him. FINIS.
The Table of the principall matters contained in this Book. Abatement. WHere the Resignation of a Bi∣shop, Dean, or Parson, shall abate the writ, and where not 30, 31 Where the writ shall abate for not na∣ming the party according to his Dig∣nity or Office, and where not 61 In trespass against two, the writ shall not abate for the death of one 107 Admirall. Where he hath Jurisdiction, and where not 122, 123 Action, and what words will beare Action. Slanderous words of several kinds 13, 17, 18. vide Slander where the Lessee for years by intrusion shal have an Eject∣ment, and so in case of the King 18 What Action the Lessee of an Intruder or Copyholder of the King shall have if he be outed 16 Where an Action will lye for slanderous words spoken, or for any of them, and of a slander in writing 30 Action of Trover good against the Hus∣band onely; though the wife made the conversion 48 Action of debt by an Administrator, du∣rante minoritate, not good 35 VVhere a second Action for the same matter shall be brought, and where not, 37 For warranting sheep sound 60 VVhere a Trespass or Detinue shall lye for Goods taken and sold 70 VVhat Action for a Dogg, Ferret, or Hawk 94 VVhere two shall joyn in the action, and where not 106 Non-suit of one Non-sult of both in a personall action 107 For a Fine in the Leet brought by the Lord 113 VVhere an action of Trover will lye for money 113 Account. For fish in a Pond 19 Account will not lye where is no privity 35, 36 Against a Receiver 36 Severall actions of Account 36 Administrator vide Executors Advowson. VVhere by the presentment of another the King shall be said to be out of possession 43 Grant of the next avoidance by a Letter 47 Advowson appendant to a Mannor, and the Mannor is granted, yet the Ad∣vowson will not pass 53 VVhere the Patron shall dispose of the Advowson, though thre be a depriva∣tion 151 Age. The Heir of the Tenant in tail that is impleaded during life of the Tenant by Curtesie, shall not have his age 33 Aide. Difference between Tenant at wil, and Tenant at sufferance, in case of pray∣ing aide 29 By him in reversion 43 Where the Tenant praies in aide of a stranger, it shall be a forfeiture 81 Alien. Debt by an Administrator alien Born 45 Who shall be accounted an alien enemy 45 Amendment. Where the Habeas Corpus & distringas shall be amended, though the Venire be well returned 62 Amends, vide payment. Annuity. Where the husband shall have an action of debt for the arrears of an Annuity granted to the wife before marriage 3 Granted by him that hath no Estate, what remedy for the Grantee 3 From a Corporation 75
No Dower to the Bargainees wife be∣fore inrolement 70 Where the suing or recovering of Dow∣er, shall be accounted the waving of the Assignment of Dower 150 Entry. WHere the Entry of the Lessor on the Lessee, shall not avoid the Covenant of the Lessee 65 The Lord shall not have a Cessavit after entry in parcell 66 Where the entry of the Discontinuee shall avoid the fine of the Tenant in tail 75, 76 VVhere the discent of the Intruder on the King shall not take away the en∣try of the Kings Feoffee 45 Entry into a house to demand money, where good 114 Error. Error in Judgment whether amendable 19 VVhere a writ of Error by the husband and wife within age, shall reverse a fine levies by them against both 21 VVhere two persons bring a writ of Er∣ror, and the Tenant pleads the re∣lease of one, it shall bind both 22 Against the stile of a Court, for not say∣ing. secundm consuetudinem 50 For want of the addition of the Defen∣dants name 58 VVho shall have a writ of Error to a-avoid a recovery, and whether the heir generall or speciall shall have it 68 VVhere the heire shall have this writ, and where the Executors 147 Escheat. No Escheat to the Lord where the Felo∣ny is pardoned before attainder 87 Estovers. Turbary leased, and the Lessee converts half to arrable, and then grants totum turbarium 67 Execution. VVhere the Sheriff delivers a Mannor cum pertinentiis in execution, what passeth thereby 4 VVhere a writ of execution is good a∣gainst one attaint of felony 69 Executors. Where an action grounded on a simple Contract will be against Executors 57 VVhere the second administration shall repeal the first 50 In what case Executors shall have an a∣ction for things done in the life of the Testator 99 VVhere Executors shall be said to be Assignees 125 Where an Administrator or Executor shall be said to take by purchase 125 Extent. VVhere the Sheriff extends a Mannor by the name of acres, land, Meadow, and wood, what passeth 4 Felony and Felons. FElony of a Shepheard, to steal Sheep 52 VVhat persons shall keep felons goods 121 Fine VVhere the husband and wife shall bring a writ of Error to reverse a fine levied by them 21. in error. Where in a mistake in a fine shall be re∣medied 42 Fish. Whether the Heire or Executors shall have the fish in a Pond 20 Where waste will lye for taking fish 19 Forfeiture. Executors cannot forfeit goods to char∣ritable uses 33 Frankmarriage. The necessity of the word Frankmariage in the gift, and the nature and quali∣ty of the estate 26 Gift in Frankmarriage after the Espou∣sall, good 26 Where a gift in Frankmarriage shall be by matter ex post facto, be made an estate in tail, or other estate 27 Grants. WHat passeth by this grant, Pana∣giū & by the grant of acorns 35 What passeth by the grant of pastura terrae 37 Grant to I.S. and there be many of that name to whom it shal be intended 64 Habendum. LEase of a Mannor habendum with all the members, what passeth 31 Lease to one habendum to three others for their lives, and the longer liver successively, what estate 38, 39 Lease to husband and wife & primoge∣nito, what estate 40 Heire.
Where the heir shall have the rent re∣servedin a Lease for years 9 Where the Heir Tenant of the King in So∣cage shall enter without livery 116 Inditement. FOr drawing a Sword in Westminster-hall, the Courts then sitting 120 Infant. Where payment or tender of money for an Infant is good, and at what age, 137 Inrolement. Where the Bargainee shall be accounted Tenant of the land before the Inrolment 69 When the use passeth by the Inrolm. 149 Joynt-tenants and Tenants in Common. Lease made by them, rendring rent to one of them, both shall have the rent 9 Many cases declaring what acts are good by one Joynt-tenant to another, and what not 102 Joynture. Where an assurance made to a woman for her Joynt-ture, shall be good by aver∣ment, although not expressed in the Deed 33 Judgment. Reverst in an action of debt, for declaring less then is alledged in the writ 35 Jury. Jury eat before verdict, the verdict good 38 Jury finding out of their Issue 91 Jury-man returned that is no freeholder 44 Leases. LEase to a man by these words, Dedi concessi & confirmavi. 9 Of a house excepting one Chamber 20 Of him that hath nothing in the land 96 Sub hac conditione si vixerit vidua & habi∣taret super pramiss. the Lessee dies, how the term continues 107.108 Of three acres, and of the Mannor habend. three acres, and the Mannor for 21. years severall Demises 119 Lessee assigns over, and continues possessi∣on 142 Lord and Tenant. Feoffment of the Tenant to the Lord 31 Where the Tenant enfeoffs the Lord of a Moyety, and the Seigniory is extinct, how to be observed 37.73 Mannor. WHat passeth by this word, Cite of a Mannor 31 Lease of a Mannor habend. all the Mem∣bers, what passeth 31.138 How a Mannor may be divided 138 Grant of a Mannor in one Town that ex∣tends it self into two Towns 138 Master and Servants. Where the Master may justify for the man, and where the man for the Master 151 Nobility. VVHere the woman shall lose her No∣bility or Dignity by marriage 81 By what act a man shal lose his Nobility 82 Obligation, Statute-merchant, and Staple, Recognizance. WHere tryall on a Bond shall be within the Realm, though the Condition to be performed without 6 Two bound in a Bond, and the Seale of one taken away. yet the Bond good 8 Action brought againg the Heir of the Ob∣ligor, as heir apparent, the Father being dead, not good 17.119 Obligation wants in cujus rei testimonium, good 33 Where an action of debt on a bond for money to be paid at severall times, shall be sued before the last payment, and where not 42 One bound by a wrong name 48 What shall be said to be no delivery of a bond, althoug the Defendant seal it, and layes it on the Table, and the Obli∣gee takes it up 95 In what case the Obligee shall be accounted a party to the cause, why the Obligation cannot be performed 104 Where two shall joyn in Audita quaerela, on a Statute, and where not 106 Where Conditions on Bonds shall be void in Law 143 Outlawry. A Disseisee outlawed shall not forfeit his Lands 3 Where an Outlawry pleaded shall be ta∣ken for a Dilatory plea, where not 22 Pious uses. GOods given to pious uses not forfeita∣ble by Executors, and what remedy gainst the Executors 33, & 34 Pawne. He that hath a Pawn hath no interest ther∣in to deliver it one to another 123 How a man may make use of Goods or Cattell pawned to him 124 Parceners, and Partition.
Where they shal joyn in waste 11 The writ of Partition returned, how good 31 Payment, Demand, Tender, Amends. Where request to pay money must be made and where not 7 Where the Law will expound to whom a tender must be made 10 Who shal tender for the heir within age 34 Where payment of rent to him that ex∣tends the land, shall save the Condition against the Lessor 38 Where severall actions for payment shal be brought on a Bond or Contract, at the severall dies, and where not, till all the da es are past 42 Payment in debt, on a bond pleaded at the day, and given in evidence before the day good 45 Tender in trespass not good, otherwise in Replevin 48 Where the Obligor shall give the Obligee notice, when he will tender the money, and where not 108 Where on Bon given for payment of rent, the Lessee shall demand the rent, where not 111 Pleas and pleading. By the Lessee of an Intrudor 16 Where a Lease must be pleaded, hic in cu∣ria praelat. 16 By the Obligor on a bond to save harmless, plea that he was not taken in execution, &c. 19 Where ancient Demesne is a good plea 24 Where in an Avowry a man shall plead for Frank-tenement 51 Difference in plea between appeal of May∣hem and Murther 59 Where a man shall be bound to set forth Seisin of him who made the Devise, and where not 103 Prescription. For a Common 4, & 5 To buy and sell, &c. 6, & 7 Who shall prescribe to a way, and who not 72 Presentation. Where the King shall be limited in time to present by Lapse, and where not 2.89.90 Where Recusancy of the incumbent shall cast the Lapse on the King 5 Where the King shall not lose his Present∣ment by Lapse, though he do not present in time 5 The Church, how void for Symony 87 Prohibition vid. Writs. Promise vid. Assumption. Proviso vid. Condition. Property. Where the property of stollen Goods shall be altered according to the Statute of 2, and 3. Phil. & Mar. 27 A man outlawed hath property in his goods 116 What property the Constable shall be said to have of Felons goods 120 Quare Impedit. IN what cases it lies, and what not 99 Releases DIfference of a Release to Tenant at suf∣ferance and Tenant at wil 29 Of a Bond, the Release bearing date the same day, not good 50 Of the avoydance of a Church, why void 86 Remainder. Lease for years with Remainder to the said persons, where good, and where not 38, 39 Seniori puero, whether a Female shall take 64 Reparations. Notice to the Astignee of a Lease to repair, not good 114 Rents. Where the Confirmation to the Assignee of the Lessee of part of the land shall ex∣tinguish the Rent of the whole 10 Where an entry for breach of the Conditi∣on in part of the Land, shall extinguish the Rent for the whole 10 Rent granted out of Land not chargeable therewith, how good 111 Where the Tenant of the Freehold shall be charged with the Rent-charge, and where the Termor 117 Reservation. Rent reserved to his Executors or Assignees where good, and where not 9, & 10 Reserved at Michaelmas, what time of Mi∣chaelmas shall be intended 64 Resignation. Of a Benefice without presentation, or on Condition 12 The Nature of a Resignation 12 Sheriff. WHere an action of debt lies against him for an escape, though the Ca∣pias be not returned 43
No escape against the Sheriff when es∣peciall bails are requested 98 Where a man shall aver or traverse a∣gainst the return of a Sheriff 132 Slander, and slanderous words, vide Actions Calsing one Bastard 92 Calling one Whore, and that she had the French-pox 34 For saying, Thou Murtherer, good 33 By him in remainder, for saying the im∣mediate Tenant was alive 33 For the word Cousener 47 Thief, and thou hast forged a Deed 47 For pilfering 56 Thou hast stollen half an acre of Corn, innuendo, Corn sowed 57 He was disproved before the Justices 58 He was perjured, and I will prove him so 62 Statutes. Mistaking the Parish, on an action for Robbery on the Statute of Winche∣ster 7 Lease for years, not within the Statute of Quia emptores 10 Lease on the Statuce of 27 H. 8.28.32. Who are within the Statute of Monaste∣ries, 31 H. 8.56 Lease for one year within the penalty of the Statute of buying of Tythes 57 21 H. 8. for Noblemens Chaplains 51 In the 8. of H. 6. how to plead the en∣try 93 Exposition of the Statute 5 Ed. 6.14.135. Where a man shall plead Contra for∣mam statuti, though there be more Statutes of the same matter 135 Traverse by Executors on the 4. of Ed. 3. good 156 Surrender. By the Husband, Lessee for years of his wives estate, how good 32 What, and how may things belong to a Surrender 97 Tenure. NO Tenure between Donor and Donee in Frankmarriage 26 Tenant at jufferance, Will, D'auter vie, &c: Where such Tenants holding over shall gain a Feesimple, or make a Disseisin, and where not 27.28 Tenant at sufferance shall justifie Da∣mage-feasant 29 Difference where a Tenant at sufferance holds over, and where a Tenant at Will 35 Tythes. Where Tythes by composition shall be paid, according to agreement, al∣though they be not tyhable 34, 35 Where they shall be paid of the Glebe land 39 By the Parsons release of all Demands, Tythes are not released 40 Where altering the Crop of the Land, shall alter the Tythes from grosse to small Tythes 74 Where a discharge to pay Tythes without Deed is good, and where not 103 Tryall. Where the tryall shall be on the land, though the cause or matter were on the Sea 54 Ʋses, and Cestui que use. USe to the husband and wife, haben∣dum to the husband for three years 48 How Cestui que itse shall be said to be seised before entry 86 Wardship. WHere the husband alone shall have a writ of Ravishment of Ward, without the wife 82, & 83 Whether the brother of the half blood or the Uncle of the whole blood shal have the Wardship in Socage 128 Warranty. The exposition of the word, To war∣rant Land 100 Two Joynt-tenants with Warranty make partition, the Warranty is gone 104. Otherwise of a Feoffment 104 Warren. VVhat it is, and whereof it consists 66
Of VVaste committed there 66 VVarren in a Common is good, and the Commoners cannot kill the Conies Damage-feasant 184 Waste. VVhere a man shall have but one acti∣on of waste on severall Leases, and where not 11 The form of entring Judgment in a writ of waste 12 For taking Fish out of a Pool 19 VVaste in the house for not scouring a Ditch 43 In Pigeon houses, Hop-grounds, and Fish ponds 66 VVhere the Lease is ruinous at the en∣try of the Lessee, and falls down af∣terwards, the Lessee is excused, and where not 93 Way. How extinguisht by unity of possession 127 Wills, and Testaments, Executors, Ad∣ministrators, and Legacies. VVhere a man deviseth that his wife shal have the occupation and profits during her widowhood 6, & 7 Where a Devise shall be intended with∣in the word Demise 14 VVhere a Devise shal be taken as a De∣mise for breach of a Condition 14 VVhere a Devise of severall parcels of Land to several persons, and the Sur∣vivors to be each others heir, what Estate passeth 25 VVhere an Administrator paies debts, and there a Will is found, yet the payment good 28 VVhere a Devise shall make an Estate tail by implication 29, 30 VVhat passeth by this word, Lively∣hood, in a Will, according to the cu∣stome of London 30 VVhere Ex intentione shall make a Condition in a Devise 32 VVhere an uncertain Devise shall be construed good, as to a certain in∣tent 35 Legatees refusing to prove the Will, shall lose their Legacies 44 Devise of a Tenant in Borough-english to his two Sons 65 Devise to his two Daughters, his Heirs 65 Devise of all Lands, Meadows, and Pa∣stures, whether the house passeth 75 VVill made, and the party sayes he will not make his VVill, no Revoca∣tion 76 VVhat passeth by the Devise of a Man∣nor 88, 89 Devise of Jewels, what shall remain to the Heir, and will not pass by the VVill 124 Writs. VVhere a Scire facias lies, and where not 3 VVhere certainty in a writ of Eject∣ment is requisite, and where not, and difference between such writ, and a writ of Novel Disseisin 18, & 19 Quod ei deforceat, how it will lye in waste 102 FINIS.
